The Confusing Caste System
==========================

The confusion in the caste system begins by the use of the word caste.
The Indians in their different languages use the word 'Jat' for any
community who have something common like religion, language, origin,

![](http://alhassanain.org/english/books/0852-a_caste_system_of_india/images/image002.jpg)

similar geographical background and so on. The Indians also use the word
'Jat' for Varna. The Portuguese who were the first European power to
arrive in India distorted the word 'Jat' into caste. The British who
arrived to India much later after the Portuguese also used the word
caste. The British used the word Caste instead of Jat and Varna. And so
sometimes in English the caste system is explained in a confusing way
according to which, the caste system consists of four castes which are
divided into many castes. Sometimes in English the word caste is used
for Varna and the word sub-caste for Jat. In this section to prevent
confusion we will use the words Varna and Jat.

And now we will see the complication in the caste system itself.

**Each Varna consists of many communities called Jats** . Each Varna
does consist of different Jats but many of these Jats break up into more
communities and each such community refers to itself as different or
unique Jat. There are different reasons for these different communities
within each Jat. One reason can be the different occupations each
community within the Jat professes. Other reasons can be inter-Jat
political reasons. Many Jats consists of millions of people and it also
causes break up of the larger community into smaller communities. There
are also Jats which originate from different parts of India and profess
the same profession and therefore get a common name, even though they
are not one single community. For example the Jats that profess cloth
washing are called collectively as Dhobi. For non- Dhobis the Dhobis are
one Jat but within them they are not one community.

**The hierarchy between the Varnas** . All the Jats accept that the
Brahman Varna is the highest Varna in the hierarchy and the untouchables
are outcast and lowest in the hierarchy. But most of the Jats in
different Varnas claim to be superior and higher than other Jats. Some
of the Jats as stated earlier break up into smaller communities or Jats.
In these Jats that break up into different communities, there are
communities that look at themselves as superior or higher in hierarchy
than other communities. Among the Brahman Varna, there are Jats that
consider themselves as superior than other Brahman Jats. Some of the
Brahman Jats break up into smaller communities, and between these
communities within the Jat there also exist a hierarchy.

Among the other Varnas there also exists hierarchy phenomenon. Different
Jats claim to be superior than the other Jats in their Varna. Some Jats
in the Vaisia and Sudra Varnas also claim to be closer or equal in
hierarchy to the Brahman Varna. These Jats that claim this status
adopted Brahman customs like vegetarian diet and strict observance of
purity and cleanliness. Some Jats claim to be closer to Kshatria, which
is the warrior class of the Indian society. The Marathas in west India
and Reddys in south India were among the Jats which claimed Kshatria
status.

Among the outcast there was also the superior status phenomenon in which
one outcast Jat considered itself as superior and did not have
physically contact with other outcast Jats which it considered as
inferior. For example the Mahars in west India considered themselves
superior than Dhed and they did not mingle with the Dheds.

**Each Jat professes an occupation worthy of its Varna status** . In
most of the cases there was a connection between a persons profession
and his Varna. Among the different Varnas there also developed guilds
based on Jat lines, professing specific professions. In west India the
Jat that professed oil pressing were called Somwar Teli. Another Jat
members were the shepherds of the society and they were called Dhangar.
Another Jat members were the cowherds of the society and they were
called Gaoli. The Kunbis were the peasants of the society.

But some of the professions had different status in different parts of
India and they were located at different levels in the caste hierarchy.
For example Dhobis (washers) in north India were seen as untouchables.
While in west India they had Sudra status. The oil pressers in east
India were seen as untouchables, in central India they had a high status
while in west India they had Sudra status.

There were also many cases where the Jat members did not profess
occupation worthy of their Varna. Many Brahmans, who are supposed to be
the priest and learned of the society, did not find jobs as priests or
did not manage to feed their families as priests and therefore worked as
simple farmers. On the other hand there were many Brahmans who were
landlords and businessmen, professions supposed to belong to the Vaisia
Varna.

Also among the other Varnas not all professed the occupations worthy of
their Varna. In west India the Maratha were the warriors and the
aristocracy. Originally the Marathas belonged to the different Jats in
west India. Most of these Jats were in Sudra level. But the Marathas who
became the aristocracy of west India claimed and acquired the Kshatria
status. In the 17th and the 18th century the Marathas even established
an empire which ruled large parts of India. During the Maratha reign
members of a Brahman Jat, Konkanash Brahman, were ministers. From 1750
these Brahmans became the rulers of the Maratha Empire.

Like the Marathas there were other communities which, religiously did
not belong to the Kshatria status but acquired this status. The Reddy in
Andra Pradesh and Nayar in Kerala are such two examples.

**Religiously marriage occurs within the Jat** . The different Jats
members almost always respected this rule and people who dared break
this rule were outcasted. But this rule also had exceptions. Usually the
higher Varnas were very strict about this custom. But in some of the
higher level Jats of the society, they used to have polygamy. In these
cases, because of scarcity of women, men use to marry women from the
lower levels of the society.

In some Indian societies between-jat marriage was even an acceptable
feature. One such example of marriages existed in Kerala, in south
India. In Kerala, Nayar women (aristocracy community) married men from
Numbodiri Brahman community.

Another problem considering the Jat marriage was the internal structure
of the Jats. As stated earlier some Jats break up into smaller
communities. In most of the cases each such community members marry only
with members of their own community and not with other community members
within the Jat. In some cases there is a hierarchy between the different
communities of the same Jat. In such cases a daughter from the lower
community could marry a son from the higher community but not vice
versa.

**Each Varna had different diet** . Hinduism has many strict dietary
rules. In general the higher Jats are more strict about their dietary
customs than the lower Jats. The Brahman Jats have the most strict
dietary customs. They will not eat in lower Jats homes or even with
lower Jats (because of this reason many restaurants hired Brahman
cooks). The Brahman diet is supposed to include only vegetarian food.
Jats who claimed Brahman status also adopted vegetarian diet of the
Brahmans. But there are some Brahman Jats who traditionally eat meat,
fish, chicken and egg (which is considered non-vegetarian). Some Brahman
Jats in Kashmir, Orissa, Bengal and Maharashtra traditionally eat meat.
But this meat was never cattle meat.

**Jat is determined by birth and it cannot be changed** . In the
beginning the caste system was not a strict system and people could move
from one Varna to another. Indologists give different dates to this
period of change. Some claim the change occurred around 500 B. C. and
other claim 500 A. D. Until then, communities and even singular person
moved from one Varna to another Varna, because of their desire to adopt
different occupations. There were some kings who belonged the Kshatria
(warrior castes) and changed their status to become religious Brahmans.
There were also who changed their status to become warriors. And even
after the caste system was organized in a strict manner there were many
communities who did not always follow their status occupations. There
was a case of a Jat that lost its high status because they did not
profess the profession worthy of their Varna. The Kayastha of east and
north east India originally belonged to the Kshatria Varna (warrior
caste). Some time in the past among warriors communities, there
developed a bureaucratic unit whose job was writing and listing war
events and they were called Kayasthas. Because these unit members were
not warriors, they were excluded from the Kshatria status and were given
a lower status. But the Kayasthas even today claim Kshatria status.

**The Jat status** . Jats like Kayastha, Reddy, Maratha, Nayar and
others changed the basic four-fold hierarchy caste system. These Jats
had high status but their exact status is not clear and different
communities give different interpretations to their status of different
Jats. As stated earlier different Jats claim theirs to be the superior
than the other Jats and therefore the caste system even today is not
always interpreted objectively by Indians but subjectively. For example
the Kayastha claim themselves to be Kshatria while others do not always
agree with this claim. Among the Marathas the confusion is even greater.
In the narrow sense the Jat of Maratha applies to 96 clans who ruled and
governed the parts of west India. Originally the Maratha clans belonged
to different levels of Indian hierarchy. They mostly belonged to
different Jats of Sudra. But many Jats of west Maharashtra claim that
they are Marathas too. Sometimes the Konkanash Brahmans (who were
ministers of Maratha empire in 18th century and later on continued the
Maratha Empire and their reign) are also introduced as Marathas causing
a greater confusion in Maratha definition.

The reasons stated above are among the few reasons that causes confusion
in caste system.


