Untouchables
============

The untouchablity feature in the caste system is one of the cruelest
features of the caste system. It is seen by many as one of the strongest
racist phenomenon in the world.

In the Indian society people who worked in ignominious, polluting and
unclean occupations were seen as polluting peoples and were therefore
considered as untouchables. The untouchables had almost no rights in the
society. In different parts of India they were treated in different
ways. In some regions the attitude towards the untouchables was harsh
and strict. In other regions it was less strict.

In regions where the attitude was less strict the untouchables were seen
as polluting people and their dwellings were at a distance from the
settlements of the four Varna communities. The untouchables were not
allowed to touch people from the four Varnas. They were not allowed to
enter houses of the higher Varnas. They were not allowed to enter the
temples. They were not allowed to use the same wells used by the Varnas.
In public occasions they were compelled to sit at a distance from the
four Varnas. In regions where the attitude towards the untouchables were
more severe, not only touching them was seen polluting, but also even a
contact with their shadow was seen as polluting.

If, because of any reason, there was a contact between an untouchable
and a member of the Varnas, the Varna member became defiled and had to
immerse or wash himself with water to be purified. In strict societies,
especially among the 'Twice Born' (the three top Varnas) the touched
'Twice Born' also had to pass through some religious ceremonies to
purify himself from the pollution. If the untouchable entered a house
and touched things of a Varna member, the Varna members used to wash or
clean the places where the untouchable touched and stepped.

In some incidences the untouchables who associated with the Varna
members were beaten and even murdered for that reason. Some higher
hierarchy Jats also had servants whose job was to go or walk before the
high Jats members and announce their coming to the streets and to see to
it that the streets would be clear of untouchable people.

The orthodox Hindus treated anyone who worked in any kind of polluting
job as untouchable and did not have any contact with them. According to
orthodox rules any one who does not belong to the four Varnas, meaning
foreigners, are untouchables.


