The Non-Hindus in Caste System
==============================

Religiously anyone who does not belong to the four Varnas is an outcast
and untouchable. It means, all foreigners and non-Hindus are all
supposed to be untouchables. But in reality neither all foreigners nor
non-Hindus were treated as untouchables. Foreigners and non-Hindus were
treated differently in different parts of India. Some of the foreigners
adopted Hinduism and integrated in the upper level of the Hindu
hierarchy.

The Rajputs of Rajasthan belong to the Kshatria Varna (warrior castes).
The Rajputs, more than any other Indian Jat, represent the warrior
castes of India. Almost any Indian community which claims to be a
warrior community, claims a Rajput ancestry. But it is believed that
many foreign invaders of ancient India, like Scythians; Huns; Greeks and
others, who adopted Hinduism, integrated in the Rajput community and
acquired a Kshatria status.

The Konkanash Brahmans of west India are also believed to have non-
Indian descent. According to a Hindu legend, an incarnation of Lord
Vishnu, Parsuram, found on the Konkan beach some dead bodies which were
washed to the shore. In order to cremate them Parsuram gathered them on
a pyre. These dead bodies woke up on pyre, probably because they were
not dead in the first place but were only unconscious. Parsuram
converted these people to Hinduism and made them Brahmans. There are
other theories about the origins of these Konkanash Brahmans. Many of
these Brahmans have gray-green eyes. Some claim them to be Vikings or of
other European origin. In the Konkan coast there is Jewish community
called Bene Israel. Some claim that these Jews are from the 'Lost
Tribes'. These Jews who arrived in India after their ship-wrecked near
the Konkan coast claim that they and the Konkanash Brahmans are
descendants of the survivals from the same ship. And in their version,
it was not an incarnation of Lord Vishnu who converted the Konkanash
Brahmans but a local Brahman. Anyway these Jews do not have gray-green
eyes like the Konkanash Brahmans.

Different religion followers got different status in different parts of
India. The Jews of west India (called Bene Israel) had a different
status from Jews of south India (Cochini Jews). In general the Bene
Israel had low status. The Bene Israels professed oil pressing and they
had a status equal to a Hindu Jat called Somvar Teli, which also
professed oil pressing and were part of Sudra Varna. Some orthodox
Hindus treated anyone who was a non-Hindu or doing any type as polluting
job as untouchable and therefore treated the Jews as untouchables. But
even though the Jews in west India had low status there were among them
some who were landlords, businessmen and high rank officers in local
armies.

Comparing to the Bene Israels, the Jews in south India had higher
status. The Jews in Kerala were the business community of Kerala. They
even ruled a small kingdom. They had aristocratic rights, such as use of
elephants and sedans. They even had servants whose job was to announce
their coming to the streets so that the low castes could move away from
their way.

The relations between the Jewish communities of India are sometimes
explained as affected by the Indian caste system but these relations can
also be explained according to Jewish religious laws. There were three
main Jewish communities in India. The Baghdadis, the Bene Israels and
Cochinis. The Baghdadi Jews were much strict about religious laws than
the Bene Israel Jews. The Baghdadis did not mingle with Bene Israel
Jews. The Baghdadis did not allow marriages between their children and
the children of Bene Israel. They did not eat food prepared by Bene
Israel and they refused to count the Bene Israel as part of the Minyan
(the ten necessary to start a Jewish prayer). Many explain these
relations as an influence of the Indian caste system on the Jewish
communities. According to this explanation, the Baghdadi Jews referred
to themselves as higher caste than the Bene Israel Jews and therefore
did not mingle with them. But these relations between the Jewish
communities can also be explained according to the Jewish Halacha laws.
The Baghdadi Jews who were much strict about Jewish laws and diet did
not mingle with the Bene Israels because the Bene Israels were secular
Jews and they perceived in Bene Israel Jews as impure Jews.

The Muslims who arrived in India were strong and powerful to be treated
as untouchables. Not only were they strong in the military sense, they
also tried to enforce their religion on the Indians. The Indians who
converted to Islam in most of the cases remained in the same social
status as they had before their conversion to Islam. Hindus from the
higher Varnas remained at the higher levels of Indian society. Hindus
from the lower levels of the hierarchy thought that by converting to
Islam they would come out from the Hindu hierarchy system, but in most
of the cases they remained in the same hierarchy level after they
converted. Among the Muslims of India there has developed a two-tier
hierarchy. The upper class, called Sharif Jat, includes Muslims who
belonged to the higher levels in caste hierarchy and also Muslims who
arrived to India from foreign countries. The lower class, called Ajlaf
Jat, includes Muslim converts from lower castes. As in the world, the
upper classes do not have close social relations with lower classes, the
same way the Sharif Jat do not normally have close social relations with
Ajlaf Jat.

The different*Christian* communities of India were treated in different
ways in different parts of India. The Syrian Christians of Kerala had a
high status. Along with the Jews, they were the business communities of
Kerala and they too had aristocratic rights. The Indians who were
baptized from the 16th century by Christian missionaries remained mostly
in the same status they had before. As in the Muslim community of India,
the Christians also have a two-tier social hierarchy. Many untouchables
who converted to Christianity are still treated as untouchables,
sometimes by other Christians.

The European Christians are also supposed to be untouchables to Hindus.
Some Europeans in the 17th and 18th century even claimed that they were
treated as untouchables. But later on with British rule over India it
were the upper level Hindu castes, specially the Brahmans, who adopted
the European democratic philosophy according to which all are equal and
they introduced it to other Indians.

Other religions which were established in India - Buddhism, Jainism and
Sikhism - also have some marks of caste system, even though they oppose
caste system. Sikhism rejects caste system. But different Jats who
adopted Sikhism act according to traditional Jat lines. The different
Jats normally marry within caste lines. The Jats which were the elite of
the Punjab and converted to Sikhism do not give equal respect to Sikhs
who belong to the lower levels of Indian hierarchy. The Jains also have
separate communities who marry within the community lines. The Buddhist
in India have a two-tier hierarchy and just like in the cases of
Christians and Muslims it is also related to the status of the community
to whom the person belongs. On the other hand the Mahar community of
west India, who were untouchables and converted mostly to Buddhism,
prefer, because of different political reasons to recognize themselves
as Mahars and not always as Buddhists.

Not all residents of India were part of the caste system. About 7% of
India's population are referred to as tribes and not as castes or Jats.
These tribes are scattered all around India and they are descendants of
communities who were not interested in the Varna hierarchy. They
preferred to live away from the main societies deep in the jungles,
forests and mountains of India. They survived mostly on fishing, hunting
or simple agriculture, and also from stealing, robbing and plundering.
These tribes had different religious beliefs and different gods. Some of
them had simple beliefs, but others use to sacrifice human beings in
their ceremonies. One such tribe, called Gond, had a strong kingdom in
central India. Most of the tribes adopted Hinduism, others adopted Islam
or Christianity. Some tribes in East India claim to Jewish origin.


