A Former Practice: Sati - The burning of the widow
==================================================

Sati is described as a Hindu custom in India in which the widow was
burnt to ashes on her dead husband's pyre. Basically the custom of Sati
was believed to be a voluntary Hindu act in which the woman voluntary
decides to end her life with her husband after his death. But there were
many incidences in which the women were forced to commit Sati, sometimes
even dragged against her wish to the lighted pyre.

Though Sati is considered a Hindu custom, the women, known as Sati in
Hindu religious literature, did not commit suicide on their dead
husband's pyre. The first woman known as Sati was the consort of Lord
Shiva. She burnt herself in fire as protest against her father who did
not give her consort Shiva the respect she thought he deserved, while
burning herself she prayed to reborn again as the new consort of Shiva,
which she became and her name in the new incarnation was Parvati.

Other famous woman in Hindu literature titled Sati was Savitri. When
Savitri's husband Satyavan died, the Lord of death, Yama arrived to take
his soul. Savitri begged Yama to restore Satyavan and take her life
instead, which he could not do. So Savitri followed Lord Yama a long
way. After a long way in which Yama noticed that Savitri was losing
strength but was still following him and her dead husband, Yama offered
Savitri a boon, anything other than her husband's life. Savitri asked to
have children from Satyavan. In order to give Savitri her boon, Lord
Yama had no choice but to restore Satyavan to life and so Savitri gained
her husband back.

These two women along with other women in Hindu mythology who were
exceptionally devoted to their husbands symbolized the truthful Indian
wife who would do everything for their husband and they were named Sati.
The meaning of the word sati is righteous. But as written earlier the
women named Sati, in Hindu religious literature, did not commit suicide
on their dead husband's pyre. Therefore the custom of burning the widow
on her dead husband's pyre probably did not evolve from religious
background but from social background.

There are different theories about the origins of Sati. One theory says
that Sati was introduced to prevent wives from poisoning their wealthy
husbands and marry their real lovers. Other theory says that Sati began
with a jealous queen who heard that dead kings were welcomed in heaven
by hundreds of beautiful women, called Apsaras. And therefore when her
husband died, she demanded to be burnt on her dead husband's pyre and so
to arrive with him to heaven and this way to prevent the Apsaras from
consorting with her husband. There are also other theories about the
origins of Sati.

Even though Sati is considered an Indian custom or a Hindu custom it was
not practiced all over India by all Hindus but only among certain
communities of India. On the other hand, sacrificing the widow in her
dead husband's funeral or pyre was not unique only to India. In many
ancient communities it was an acceptable feature. This custom was
prevalent among Egyptians, Greek, Goths, Scythians and others. Among
these communities it was a custom to bury the dead king with his
mistresses or wives, servants and other things so that they could
continue to serve him in the next world.

Another theory claims that Sati was probably brought to India by the
Scythians invaders of India. When these Scythians arrived in India, they
adopted the Indian system of funeral, which was cremating the dead. And
so instead of burying their kings and his servers they started cremating
their dead with his surviving lovers. The Scythians were warrior tribes
and they were given a status of warrior castes in Hindu religious
hierarchy. Many of the Rajput clans are believed to originate from the
Scythians. Later on other castes who claimed warrior status or higher
also adopted this custom.

This custom was more dominant among the warrior communities in north
India, especially in Rajasthan and also among the higher castes in
Bengal in east India. Among the Rajputs of Rajasthan, who gave lot of
importance to valor and self sacrifice, wives and concubines of the
nobles even committed suicide, when they came to know that their beloved
died in battlefield. In other parts of India it was comparatively low.
And among the majority of Indian communities it did not exist at all.

A few rulers of India tried to ban this custom. The Mughals tried to ban
it. The British, due to the efforts of Hindu reformers like Raja Ram
Mohan Roy outlawed this custom in 1829.

There aren't exact figures about the number of Sati incidences. In
general, before this custom was outlawed in 1829, there were a few
hundred officially recorded incidences each year. Even after the custom
was outlawed, this custom did not vanish completely. It took few decades
before this custom almost vanished. But still there are rare incidences
in which the widow demands to voluntary commit Sati. In 1987 an eighteen
years old widow committed Sati in a village of Rajasthan with the
blessing of her family members. In this incidence the villagers took
part in the ceremony, praising and supporting the widow for her act. In
October 1999 a woman hysterically jumped on her husband's pyre
surprising everyone. But this incidence was declared suicide and not
Sati, because this woman was not compelled, forced or praised to commit
this act.

In different communities of India, Sati was performed for different
reasons and different manners. In communities where the man was married
to one wife, the wife put an end to her life on the pyre. But even in
these communities not all widows committed Sati. Those women who
committed Sati were highly honored and their families were given lot of
respect. It was believed that the woman who committed Sati blessed her
family for seven generations after her. Temples or other religious
shrines were built to honor the Sati.

In communities were the ruler was married to more than one wife; in some
cases only one wife was allowed to commit Sati. This wife was normally
the preferred wife of the husband. This was some kind of honor for the
chosen wife and some kind of disgrace for the other wives. In other
communities some or all of the wives and mistresses were immolated with
the husband. And in some cases even male servants were immolated with
the kings. This kind of Sati in which the wives and servants were
treated as the ruler's property intensifies the theory that Sati was
introduced to India by the Scythian invaders of India.

In some very rare incidences mothers committed Sati on their son's pyre
and in even more rare cases husbands committed Sati on their wives
pyres.


