Caste System in Modern India
============================

The leaders of independent India decided that India will be democratic,
socialist and secular country. According to this policy there is a
separation between religion and state. Practicing untouchability or
discriminating a person based on his caste is legally forbidden. Along
with this law the government allows positive discrimination of the
depressed classes of India.

The Indians have also become more flexible in their caste system
customs. In general the urban people in India are less strict about the
caste system than the rural. In cities one can see different caste
people mingling with each other, while in some rural areas there is
still discrimination based on castes and sometimes also on
untouchability. Sometimes in villages or in the cities there are violent
clashes which, are connected to caste tensions. Sometimes the high
castes strike the lower castes who dare to uplift their status.
Sometimes the lower caste get back on the higher castes.

In modern India the term caste is used for Jat and also for Varna. The
term, caste was used by the British who ruled India until 1947. The
British who wanted to rule India efficiently made lists of Indian
communities. They used two terms to describe Indian communities. Castes
and Tribes. The term caste was used for Jats and also for Varnas. Tribes
were those communities who lived deep in jungles, forests and mountains
far away from the main population and also communities who were hard to
be defined as castes for example communities who made a living from
stealing or robbery. These lists, which the British made, were used
later on by the Indian governments to create lists of communities who
were entitled for positive discrimination.

The castes, which were the elite of the Indian society, were classified
as high castes. The other communities were classified as lower castes or
lower classes. The lower classes were listed in three categories. The
first category is called Scheduled Castes. This category includes in it
communities who were untouchables. In modern India, untouchability
exists at a very low extent. The untouchables call themselves Dalit,
meaning depressed. Until the late 1980s they were called Harijan,
meaning children of God. This title was given to them by Mahatma Gandhi
who wanted the society to accept untouchables within them.

The second category is Scheduled Tribes. This category includes in it
those communities who did not accept the caste system and preferred to
reside deep in the jungles, forests and mountains of India, away from
the main population. The Scheduled Tribes are also called Adivasi,
meaning aboriginals.

The third category is called sometimes Other Backward Classes or
Backward Classes. This category includes in it castes who belong to
Sudra Varna and also former untouchables who converted from Hinduism to
other religions. This category also includes in it nomads and tribes who
made a living from criminal acts.

According to the central government policy these three categories are
entitled for positive discrimination. Sometimes these three categories
are defined together as Backward Classes. 15% of India's population are
Scheduled Castes. According to central government policy 15% of the
government jobs and 15% of the students admitted to universities must be
from Scheduled Castes. For the Scheduled Tribes about 7.5% places are
reserved which is their proportion in Indian population. The Other
Backwards Classes are about 50% of India's population, but only 27% of
government jobs are reserved for them.

Along with the central government, the state governments of India also
follow a positive discrimination policy. Different states have different
figures of communities entitled for positive discrimination based on the
population of each state. Different state governments have different
lists of communities entitled for positive discrimination. Sometimes a
specific community is entitled for rights in a particular state but not
in another state of India.

In modern India new tensions were created because of these positive
discrimination policies. The high caste communities feel discriminated
by the government policy to reserve positions for the Backward Classes.
In many cases a large number of high caste members compete for a few
places reserved for them. While the Backward Classes members do not have
to compete at all because of the large number of reserved places for
them compared to the candidates. Sometimes in order to fill the quota,
candidates from the lower classes are accepted even though they are not
suitable. Sometimes some reserved positions remain unmanned because
there were few candidates from the lower classes causing more tension
between the castes. Between the lower castes there are also tensions
over reservation.

In the order of priority for a reserved place of the Backward Classes,
candidate from the Scheduled castes is preferred over a candidate from
the Scheduled Tribes who is preferred over a candidate from the other
Backward Classes. As stated earlier Other Backward Classes are about 50%
of India's population but only 27% of the Other Backward Classes are
entitled for positive discrimination according to central government
policy. Some Other Backward Classes communities are organizing
politically to be recognized as Backward Classes entitled for positive
discrimination.

The Scheduled Tribes who are seen as the aborigins of India got
ownership and certain rights over Indian land. Many communities in India
claim also to be aborigins of India and they are claiming the same
rights as the Scheduled Tribes.

The caste identity has become a subject of political, social and legal
interpretation. Communities who get listed as entitled for positive
discrimination do not get out of this list even if their social and
political conditions get better. In many cases the legal system is
involved to decide if a certain person is entitled for positive
discrimination.

But with all this positive discrimination policy, most of the
communities who were low in the caste hierarchy remain low in the social
order even today. And communities who were high in the social hierarchy
remain even today high in the social hierarchy. Most of the degrading
jobs are even today done by the Dalits, while the Brahmans remain at the
top of the hierarchy by being the doctors, engineers and lawyers of
India.


