Introduction
============

(This part gives) an account of the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, the first of the Imams of the believers, of the rulers (wulat)
of the Muslims and of God's (appointed) successors in religion after the
Apostle of God, the truthful one and the trusted one, Muhammad b. 'Abd
Allah, the seal of the Prophets, blessings on him and his pure family.
(He was) the brother of the Apostle of God and his paternal cousin, and
his helper (wazir) in his affair, his son-in-law (being married) to his
daughter, Fatima the chaste, mistress of the women of the universe. (The
full name of) the Commander of the faithful is 'Ali b. Abi Talib b. 'Abd
al-Muttalib b. Hashim b. 'Abd Manaf. (He was) the Lord of the
testamentary trustees of authority (wasiyyin), the best of blessing and
peace be on him. His kunya was Abu al-Hasan.

He was born in the Sacred House (i.e. the Ka'ba) in Mecca on Friday,
the thirteenth day of the month of Rajab, thirty years after the Year of
the Elephant (c.570). Nobody before or after him has ever been born in
the House of God, the Most High. (It was a mark) of him being honoured
by God, the Most High, may His name be exalted, and of his position
being dignified in its greatness.

His mother was Fatima, daughter of Asad b. Hashim b. 'Abd Manaf, may
God be pleased with her. She was like a mother to the Apostle of God,
may God bless him and his family, and he (the Apostle) was brought up
under her care.

He was grateful for her kindness and she was among the first to believe
in him and she emigrated with him in the group of the emigrants. When
she died, the Prophet shrouded her with his own shirt in order to
protect her from the insects of the earth, and he laid her to rest in
her grave in order that, through that, she might be protected from (the
crushing pressure of) the narrow space within the grave. He dictated to
her her last words (which were) the statement of the authority (wilaya)
of her son, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, so that at
the examination after burial, she would be able to reply with those
words. He singled her out with this great favour because of her position
with God, may He be magnified and exalted, and with him, peace be on
him. The report of that is well known.

The Commander of the faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, and
his brothers were among the leading members of the second generation of
descendants of Hashim. In this way he gained two marks of nobility,
through his growing up under the care and education of the Apostle of
God, may God bless him and his family. He was the first of the family of
the House and of the Companions to believe in God and His Apostle. He
was the first male whom the Prophet, may God bless him and his family,
summoned to Islam and who answered. He never ceased to support the
religion and to strive against the polytheists. He constantly defended
the faith and fought against those who supported deviation (from the
truth) and despotism. He spread the teachings of the sunna (the practice
of the Prophet) and the Qur'an, judged with justice and enjoined
(people) to do good.

He was with the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family,
twenty-three years after the (coming) of the (prophetic) mission. Of
these, thirteen years were in Mecca before the emigration when he shared
with him all the persecutions and bore most of his hardships. Then there
were ten years in Medina after the emigration when he defended him
against the polytheists and strove with him against the unbelievers. He
protected him with his own life from the enemies of religion until the
time God, the Exalted, took (the Prophet) to His heaven, raised him to
the highest place in heaven and bestowed His blessings and peace on him
and his family. On that day the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, was thirty-three years of age.

On the day of the death of the Prophet, may God bless him and his
family, the community differed over his Imamate. His Shi'a who were all
the Banu Hashim, Salman, 'Ammar, Abu Dharr, al-Miqdad, Khuzayma b.
Thabit - the man who is known as the possessor of two testimonies - Abu
Ayyub al-Ansari, Jabir b. 'Abd Allah al-Ansari, Abu Said al-Khudri and
people like them among the important emigrants and Ansar, (all these)
maintained that he was the successor (khalifa) after the Apostle of God,
may God bless him and his family, and the Imam. (They did this) because
of his outstanding merit (fadl) above all mankind, through the fact that
there were gathered in him the qualities of outstanding merit, judgement
and perfection, such as him being the first of the community to enter
the faith, his superiority over them in knowledge of the laws, his
precedence over them in fighting (jihad) and the distinction which set
him apart from them in the extent of his piety, asceticism and
righteousness.

Furthermore he had been specially singled out by the Prophet from among
(all) his relations because of (the qualities) which no other relation,
apart from him, shared with the Prophet and because of the nomination
(nass) of his authority (wilaya) by God, may God be magnified and
exalted, in the Qur'an where He, may His name be exalted, says: Your
authority (wali) is God and His Apostle and those believers who perform
the prayer and pay alms (zakat) while they are bowing (in prayer). (v
55) It is known that no one except him paid alms while bowing (in
prayer).

It has been established in language that wali means "the most
appropriate for authority" (awla), without there being any opposition
(to this definition). If the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
was, by the stipulation of the Qur'an, more appropriate for authority
among the people than themselves because of his being their war
according to the textual nomination (nass) in the Clear Explanation
(i.e. the Qur'an, tibyan). it was obviously necessary for all of them to
obey him, just as obedience to God, the Most High, and obedience to His
Apostle, peace be on him and his family, was required because of the
information about their authority (wilaya) over creatures which is given
in this verse with clear proof.

(Another reason for their support for the Commander of the faithful
was) because of what the Prophet, may God bless him and his family, said
on the day (of the assembly) at his house. He had especially gathered
the Banu 'Abd al-Muttalib there in order to make the (following) solemn
pledge: "Whoever helps me in this matter will be my brother, my
testamentary trustee (wasi), my helper (wazir), my heir and my successor
after me." Then the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, stood up
before him among all the gathering of them, and on that day he was the
youngest of them, and he said: "O Apostle of God, I will help you."

Then the Prophet, may God bless him and his family, said: "Sit down,
you are my brother, my trustee, my helper, my inheritor and successor
after me." This is a clear statement about the succession (after the
Prophet).

In addition, there is also what (the Prophet), peace be on him and his
family, said on the day of Ghadir Khumm. The community had gathered to
listen to the sermon (in which he asked): "Am I not more appropriate for
authority (awla) over you than yourselves?"

"Yes," they answered.

Then he spoke to them in an ordered manner without any interruption in
his speech: "Whomsoever I am the authority over (mawla), 'Ali is also
the authority over."

Thus he (the Prophet) required for him (Ali), through laying down
obedience to him and his authority (over them), the same authority as he
had over them, and which he made them acknowledge and which they did not
deny. This is clear (evidence) of the nomination (nass) of him for the
Imamate and for succession to his position.

Furthermore there is (the Prophet's), peace be on him and his family,
statement to him at the time of setting out to Tabuk: "You are in the
same position with respect to me as Aaron (Harun) was to Moses (Musa)
except that there is no prophet after me." Thus he required him (to
have) the office of helping (i.e. administering) and to be characterised
by love and outstanding merit over everyone. (He also required) his
deputising for him both during his life and after his death. The Qur'an
gives evidence for all that coming to Aaron (Harun) from Moses, peace be
on them, when God, may He be magnified and exalted, said in giving a
report of what Moses, peace be on him, said: "Make Aaron, my brother, a
helper for me from my family. Give me support through him and make him
participate in my affair so that we may glorify You much and we may
remember You frequently in that You have been a watcher over us. " (XX
29- 35) God, the Most Exalted said: "Your request is granted, Moses. "
(XX 36) This (verse) confirmed that Aaron had a share with Moses in
prophecy, and in helping in delivering the message and his support was
strengthened through him by his aid. (Moses) also told him of deputising
for him (when he said): "....Deputise for me among my people. Act for
(their) benefit and do not follow the path of the corrupters. " (VII
142) This confirms his succession by the precise statement of
revelation. Therefore when the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family, gave all the ranks which Aaron had from Moses to the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, in the same extent, except for
prophecy, (all such things) were required of him as helping the Apostle,
giving him support, outstanding merit and love, because these qualities
were definitely required by that. Then by the clear statement there is
his deputising for him during his life and "after the prophethood" which
(gives evidence of his succession) by specification of the exception,
(of Prophethood) when he excludes him from it by mentioning "after".

Proofs similar to these are so numerous that it would make the book
unduly long to mention them all, (especially) as we have examined
thoroughly the statement of the evidence for them in other places in our
books. Praise be to God.

The Imamate of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, was for
thirty years after the Prophet, may God bless him and his family. For
twenty-four years and six months of these he was prevented from
administering the laws (of the office) (and had to) exercise
precautionary dissimulation (taqiyya) and withdrawal. For five years and
six months of these, he was troubled by wars against the hypocrites,
those who broke their pledges, the unjust and those who deviated (from
the religion) and he was plagued by the seditions of those who had gone
astray. In the same way the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family, had been prevented from(administering) the laws (of his office)
through fear and through being spied upon, and through being a fugitive
and through being exiled, so that he had no power to fight the
unbelievers and no means of defending the believers. Then he emigrated
and for ten years after the emigration he remained making war on the
unbelievers and being troubled by the hypocrites until the time that
God, may His name be exalted, took him unto Himself and made him dwell
in. the gardens of Paradise.

The death of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him occurred
before dawn of Friday, the twenty-first of the month of Ramadan, in the
year 40 A.H. He was a victim of the sword. Ibn Muljam al-Muradi, may God
curse him, killed him at the mosque of Kufa, which he had come out to in
order to wake the people for the dawn prayer on the night of the
nineteenth of the month of Ramadan. He had been lying in wait for him
from the beginning of the night. When he (the Commander of the faithful)
passed by him while the latter was hiding his design by feigning sleep
amid a group of people who were asleep, he (Ibn Muljam) sprang out and
struck him on the top of his head with his sword which was poisoned. He
lingered through the day of the nineteenth and the night and day of the
twentieth and the first third of the night of the twenty-first. Then he,
peace be on him, died a martyr and met his Lord, Most High, as one who
has been wronged. He, peace be on him, knew of that before its time and
he told the people of it before its time. His two sons, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn, peace be on them, performed (the tasks) of washing him and
shrouding him according to his bequest. Then they carried him to
al-Ghari at Najaf in Kufa and they buried him there. They removed the
traces of the place of his burial according to his bequest which was
made about that to both of them by him, because of what he, peace be on
him, knew about the regime of the Umayyads (which would come) after him,
and their hostile attitude towards him. (For he knew) the evil action
and abuse to which they would be led by their wicked intentions if they
had been able to know that (place). His grave, peace be on him, remained
hidden until al-Sadiq Ja'far b. Muhammad, peace be on them, pointed it
out during the 'Abbasid regime. For he visited it when he came to visit
Abu Ja'far (al-Mansur) while the latter was in al-Hira. Then the Shi'a
knew of it and they began from that time to make visitation to his
(grave), peace be on him and on his pure offspring.

On the day of his death he was 63 years of age.


**Reports of him, Peace be on him, Mentioning and Knowing about the
Event (of his Death) before its Occurrence
**


[It is reported on the authority of 'Ali b. al-Mundhir al-Tariqi, on
the authority of Abu al-Fadl al-'Abdi, on the authority of Fitr, on the
authority of Abu Tufayl 'Amir b. Wathila, may God be pleased with him,'
who said:]1

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, gathered the people for
the pledge of allegiance. 'Abd al-Rahman b. Muljam al-Muradi, may God
curse him, came but he (i.e. 'Ali) refused to accept his (pledge of
allegiance) twice or three times. Then he (let him) make his pledge of
allegiance to him. When he did so, he (i.e. 'All) said to him: "What
prevents the most wretched person of the community (from doing his
wicked deed now)? For I swear by Him in Whose hand is my life, you will
colour this (with blood) from this." And he put his hand on his beard
and his head.

When Ibn Muljam withdrew and left him, he, peace be on him, recited the
following:

Stiffen your breast for death. Indeed death will meet you. Do not show
grief at death, when it arrives in your valley.

[It is related from al-Hasan b. Mahbub, on the authority of

Abu Hamza al-Thumali, on the authority of Abu Ishaq al-Sabi'i, on the
authority of al-Asbagh b. Nubata, who said:]

Ibn Muljam came to the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, and
pledged allegiance to him with the (others) who pledged their
allegiance, and withdrew from him. Then the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, called him back and warned him to be trustworthy and to
be sure that he was not treacherous and did not break his oath. He did
that (i.e. promised to keep his word). Then he withdrew. A second time
the Commander of the faithful called him (back) and warned him to be
trustworthy and to be sure that he was not treacherous and did not break
his oath. Ibn Muljam, may God curse him, said: "By God, O Commander of
the faithful, I have not seen you do this with anyone else except me."

Then the Commander of the faithful said:

I want his friendship and he wants my death. The one who makes excuses
to you is one of your bosom friends from (the tribe of) Murad.2

(Then the Commander of the faithful continued): "Go, Ibn Muljam, I do
not think that you will keep your word."

[It is related from Ja'far b. Sulayman al-Dab'i, on the authority of
al-Mu'alla b. Ziyad, who said:]

'Abd al-Rahman b. Muljam, may God curse him, came to the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, to ask to be provided with a horse.

"O Commander of the faithful," he said, "provide me with a horse." The
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, turned toward him and then
said to him, "You are 'Abd al-Rahman b. Muljam al-Muradi?" '

"Yes," he replied.

"Ghazwan," called (the Commander of the faithful), "provide him with
the roan."

That man came with a roan horse and Ibn Muljam, may God curse him,
mounted it and took its reins. When he had gone away, the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him said:

I want his friendship and he wants my death. The one who makes excuses
to you is one of your bosom friends from (the tribe of) Murad.

When he did what he did and struck the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, he was captured after he came out of the mosque and then
brought to the Commander of the faithful. The latter said to him: "I
have treated you as I have done, even though I knew that you would be my
murderer. Yet, I treated you that way in order to seek God's support
against you."

There are other reports in which he, peace be on him, announces his own
death to his family and companions before his murder.

[Abu Zayd al-Ahwal reported on the authority of al-Ajlah, on the
authority of the shaykhs of Kinda whom al-Ajlah said he heard say more
than twenty times:]

'Ali said on the pulpit: "What prevents the most wretched person of the
community dyeing this red with blood from above it? And he, peace be on
him, put his hand on his beard.

['Ali b. al-Hazawwar on the authority of al-Asbagh b. Nubata, who
said:]

'Ali preached in the month in which he was killed and he said: "The
month of Ramadan has come to you. It is the lord of the months, and
foremost of the year. In it the mill of authority makes a (new) turn and
you will make the pilgrimage of the (new) year in one rank (i.e. without
an Imam to lead you). The sign of that will be that I will no longer be
among you."

[A1-Asbagh added:] He was announcing his own death but we did not
understand.

[It is related from al-Fadl b. Dukayn, on the authority of Hayyan b.
al-Abbas, on the authority of 'Uthman b. al-Mughira who said:]

When the month of Ramadan began, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, had supper one evening with al-Hasan, one evening with
al-Husayn, peace be on them, and one evening with 'Abd Allah b. al-
Abbas. He never had more than three mouthfuls (of food). One of those
nights he was asked about that, he replied: "(I would rather) the
decision of God come to me while I was hungry." It was only a night of
two nights later when he, peace be on him, was struck towards the end of
the night.

[Isma'il b. Ziyad reported, on the authority of Umm Musa, a woman
servant of 'Ali, peace be on him, and the wet-nurse of his daughter,
peace be on her, who told me:]

'Ali, peace be on him, said to his daughter, Umm Kulthum,: "O my little
daughter, little time is left for me to be with you."

"Why is that, father?" she asked.

"I have seen the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, in
my sleep," he replied. "He was rubbing the dust from my face and saying:
' O 'Ali, do not be concerned, you have accomplished what you had to.'
"

Only three days later he was struck by that blow. Umm Kulthum cried
aloud (with sorrow).

"Don't do that, my daughter," he said. "For I see the Apostle of God,
may God bless him and his family, pointing to me with his hand and
saying: 'O 'Ali, come to us, for what we have is better for you.' "

[Ammar al-Duhni reported on the authority of Abu Salih al-Hanafi, who
said:]

I heard 'Ali, peace be on him, saying: "I saw the Prophet, may God
bless him and his family, in my sleep and I complained to him about the
trouble and quarrelling which I had met from his community. Then I wept.
He said:. Don't weep, 'Ali, but turn around.' I turned around. Behold,
there were two fettered men, and then their heads were crushed by
stones."3

[Abu Salih added:] I went to him in the morning as I had done every
morning, and when I got to the (area of) the butchers I met the people
who were saying: "The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, has
been killed."

[Abd Allah b. Musa related, on the authority of al-Hasan b. Dinar, on
the authority of al-Hasan al-Basri, who said:]

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, stayed up awake during
the night on the morning of which he was killed and he did not go out to
the mosque for the night prayer as was his custom. His daughter, Umm
Kulthum, the mercy of God be on her, asked him: "What has kept you
awake?"

"I will be killed, if I go out in the morning," he replied.

Then Ibn al-Nabbah came to him and summoned him to the prayer. He
walked out a little way then returned. Umm Kulthum said to him: "Tell
Ja'da to pray with the people."

"Yes, tell Ja'da to perform the prayer with the people," he answered.
But then he said: "There is no escape from the appointed time."

He went out to the mosque and there was the man who had spent

the whole night lying in wait for him. However, when it had become cold
in the early morning before dawn, he had fallen asleep. Now, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, moved him with his foot and
said to him: "The prayer."

The man got up and struck him.

[In another account:]

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, spent that night awake
and he frequently went out and looked up to the sky, saying: "By God, I
have not lied nor have I been lied to. It is the night which I was
promised."

Then he went back to his bed. When dawn rose, he put on his waistcloth
(izar) and went out saying:

Stiffen your breast for death. Indeed death will meet you. Do not show
grief at death when it arrives in your valley.

When he reached the courtyard of his house, the geese met him and
hooted in his face. (The people) began to drive them away but he said:
"Leave them, they are those who wail (for my death)."

He, peace be on him, went out and was struck down.


Reports which have come down of the Motive for his Murder and how the
Event occurred

[What is reported by a group of historians (ahl al-siyar),including Abu
Mikhnaf, Isma'il b. Rashid, Abu Hashim al-Rifa'i, Abu 'Amr al-Thaqafi
and others who relate:]4

A group of the Kharijites gathered at Mecca and they mentioned the
leaders (of the people) and blamed them and their actions. They
mentioned the people of al-Nahrawan and they asked God's mercy for them.
Then they said to each other: "If (only) we devoted ourselves to God,
and went to the leaders (Imams) of error (dalal) and sought a moment
when they were inattentive and then rid the country and men of them for
the sake of God, and also avenged our brothers, the martyrs of
al-Nahrawan."

They made a compact to do that after performing the pilgrimage. 'Abd
al-Rahman b. Muljam, may God curse him, said: "I'll take care of
(killing) 'Ali for you."

Al-Burak b. 'Abd Allah al-Tamimi said: "I will take care of (killing)
Mu'awiya for you."

'Amr b. Bakr al-Tamimi said: "I will take care of (killing) 'Amr b.
al-'As for you."

They made a compact to do that and bound themselves to its fulfilment.
They agreed (to carry it out) on the night of the nineteenth of the
month of Ramadan. On that they separated.

Ibn Muljam, may God curse him, set out - he was numbered among Kinda -
until he came to Kufa. There he met his colleagues. But he kept his task
secret from them out of fear that something of it might get spread
around. The situation was like this when one day he visited one of his
colleagues from Taym al-Rabab. At this man's house he met by chance
Qatam, daughter of al-Akhdar of Taym. The Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, had killed her father and brother at al-Nahrawan. She
was (also) one of the most beautiful of the women of her time. When Ibn
Muljam, may God curse him, saw her, he fell in love with her and his
admiration of her became very intense. He asked to marry her and became
engaged to her. Then she said to him: "What dowry do you suggest for
me?"

"Make your decision on that," he answered.

"I have decided," she said, "that you should (give me three thousand
dirhams, a young serving boy, a servant and the murder of 'Ali b. Abi
Talib."

"You can have all you asked for," he replied. "But as for the murder of
'Alf b. Abi Talib, how can I do that?"

"You should look (for a time) when he is careless," she said. "If you
kill him, I will cure myself (of my obsession against him) and life with
me will be a pleasure for you. If you are killed, God has nothing in
this world which is better for you (than such a death)."

"The only thing which has brought me to this town (misr), "he said,
"when I was a fugitive from it and could find no protection with its
inhabitants, was to kill 'Ali b. Abi Talib, which you have asked me for.
So you will have what you have asked for."

"I have been looking for someone to help you and strengthen you in that
(undertaking)," she said. Then she went to Wardan b. Mujalid (another)
from Taym al-Rabab. She gave him the information and asked help for Ibn
Muljam, may God curse him. He undertook to share responsibility for that
for her.

Then Ibn Muljam, may God curse him, went out and came to a man from
Ashja' called Shabib b. Bajura and said to him: "Shabib, would you like
nobility (sharaf) in this world and the next life?"

"What is that?" he asked.

"Will you help me to kill 'Ali b. Abi Talib?"

Shabib was one who held the view of the Kharijites, so he said to Ibn
Muljam: "May a wailing woman wail for you (at your death), Ibn Muljam.
For you have come to something which is horrific. How will you be able
to do it?"

"We will lie in wait for him in the great mosque," Ibn Muljam, may God
curse him, replied. "Then when he comes to the dawn prayer, we will
attack him. If we kill him, we will satisfy ourselves and attain our
vengeance."

He insisted until he agreed and went with him into the great mosque to
Qatam, while she was performing the rite of i'tikaf 5 there and put up a
tent. They both said to her: "We have reached agreement on killing this
man."

"When you want (to do) that," she said, "come to me in this place."

Then they left her and waited for several days. They came to her
finally on the night of Wednesday, the nineteenth of the month of
Ramadan in the year 40 A.H. She ordered some silk which she tied around
their chests. They put on their swords, and went out and sat opposite at
the door from which the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
would come out to the prayer. However before that, they had told
al-Ash'ath b. Qays of the resolution in their spirits to kill the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Al-Ash'ath b. Qays, may God
curse him, agreed with them in what they had agreed upon.

Hujr b. 'Adi, may God have mercy on him, was (also) spending that night
in the mosque. He overheard al-Ash'ath saying to Ibn Muljam:

"Hurry, hurry to your task, for dawn is beginning to appear."

Hujr perceived the intention of al-Ash'ath and said to him: "You are
going to kill him, you one-eyed man."

He left directly to go to the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, and tell him the news to warn him about the group. However, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, missed him on the way and
went into the mosque. Ibn Muljam came to him first and struck him. Hujr
approached as the people were crying: "The Commander of the faithful has
been killed!"

['Abd Allah b. Muhammad al-Azdi has reported:]6

On that night I was praying in the great mosque with men who were
inhabitants of the town. During that month they used to pray from the
beginning of the night to the end of it. I looked towards the men who
were praying near the door and 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, came
out for the dawn prayer. He began to call out: "The prayer, the
prayer."

I was hardly aware of the call before I saw the flashing of swords and
I heard someone saying: "Judgement belongs to God, 'Ali, not to you and
your companions."

Then I heard 'Ali, peace be on him, saying: "Don't let the man escape
from you."

Then 'Ali, peace be on him, was struck and Shabib b. Bajura came to
strike him but he missed him, and his blow fell on air. The group fled
towards the gates of the mosque and the people rushed to seize them.

A man caught Shabib b. Bajura, knocked him down and sat on his chest
and took his sword to kill him with it. When he saw the people rushing
towards him, he was afraid that they would act precipitately against him
without listening to him. Therefore he jumped off him and let him go and
threw the sword from his hand. Shabib made his escape to his house-Then
his paternal cousin came to him. He saw him untying the silk cloth from
his breast and said: "What is that? Perhaps (it was) you (who) killed
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him." (Shabib) meant to say
'no' but he said "yes". His cousin went away and put on his sword. Then
he went to (Shabib) (again) and struck him with it until he killed
him.

One of the men from Hamdan followed Ibn Muljam, may God curse him. He
flung his cloak over what was in Ibn Muljam's hand and took his sword
from him. Then he took him to the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. In the meantime the third had escaped and dodged among the
people.

When Ibn Muljam, may God curse him, was brought before the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, the latter looked at him and said: "A
life for a life. If I die, kill him as he killed me. If I live, I will
consider my judgement on him."

"By God", said Ibn Muljam, may God curse him, "I have bought his life
for a thousand lives. I have plotted against him for a thousand lives.
If he has betrayed me, then may God destroy him."

"Enemy of God," cried out Umm Kulthum, "you have killed the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him."

"I have killed only your father," he retorted.

"Enemy of God," she cried, "I hope that there is no danger for him."

"I think you are only crying for 'Ali," he replied. "Indeed, by God, I
struck him. If I had been divided among the people of the land, I should
have destroyed them."

Then he was taken from his presence, peace be on him, while the people
(wanted) to tear his flesh with their teeth as if they were wild beasts.
They were crying out: "O enemy of God, what have you done? You have
destroyed the community of Muhammad, may God bless him and his family.
You have killed the best of people."

He was silent and did not speak. He was taken to the prison.7 Then the
people went to the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, and said:
"Commander of the faithful, give us your order about the enemy of God.
For he has destroyed the community, and corrupted the faith."

"If I live," answered the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
"then I will consider my judgement on him. But if I die then do to him
what the Prophet did with a murderer. Kill him and after that burn him
in a fire."

When the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, died (the people)
wept for him. (After) his family had finished his burial, al-Hasan,
peace be on him, sat in council and ordered Ibn Muljam to be brought to
him. He was brought to him and when he stood before him (al-Hasan) said:
"O enemy of God, you have killed the Commander of the faithful and you
have increased corruption in religion."

Then he ordered him to be beheaded. Umm al-Haytham, daughter of
al-Aswad of al-Nakha'a asked to be given his corpse so that she could be
in charge of burning it. He gave it to her and he made her burn it in a
fire.8

The poet said about the affair of Qatam and the killing of the
Commander of the faithful peace be upon him:

I have never seen a dowry, given by a generous man, like the dowry of
Qatam (whether the man was) rich or needy.

(It was) three thousand (dirhams), a slave and a young servant, and the
striking of 'Ali with a sharp piercing sword.

(There has been) no dowry more precious - and no violence except that
it was less than the violence of Ibn Muljam.9

As for the two men who were in agreement with Ibn Muljam to kill
Mu'awiya and 'Amr b. al.'As, the one struck Mu'awiya while he was
bending (in prayer). However his blow was delivered weakly and he was
saved from its consequences. The man was seized and killed immediately.
As for the other he went (to carry out) his mission that night. However
'Amr had felt sick and had put a man in his place to pray with the
people; the man was called Kharija b. Abi Habiba al-'Amiri. He struck
with his sword when he thought that it was 'Amr. He was seized and taken
to 'Amr who has him killed. kharija died on the second day!10


Reports about the Place of the Grave of the Commander of the Faithful,
Peace be on him, and an Explanation of the Circumstances of his Burial


['Abbad b. Ya'qub al-Rawajini related: Hayyan b. 'Ali al-'Anazi told
us: A retainer of 'Ali b. Abi Talib told me:]

When death was close to the Commander of the faithful he said to
al-Hasan and al-Husayn, peace be on them: "When I die, you two put me on
my bier. Then take me out and carry (me) in the back of the bier. You
two will protect the front of it. Then bring me to al-Ghariyyayn. You
will see a white rock shining with light. Dig there and you will find a
shield and bury me at it."

When he died, we took him out and began to carry him on the back of the
bier while we guarded the front of it. We began to hear a rustling and
whistling of the wind until we came to al-Ghariyyayn. Behold! There was
a white rock whose light was shining. We dug there and behold, there was
a shield on which was written: "This is one of the things which Noah has
stored for 'Ali b. Abi Talib." We buried him there and went away. We
were happy at God's mark of honour to the Commander of the faithful. A
group of the Shi'a followed us but they had not witnessed the prayer
performed for him. We told them about what had happened and about God's
mark of honour to the Commander of the faithful.

Then they said: "We would like to see what you have seen of his
affair."

"Traces of the place have been removed according to his bequest," we
told them.

They kept coming back and forth to us and they told us that they had
dug but could not find anything.

[Muhammad b. 'Umara related: Jabir b. Yazid al-Ju'fi told me:]

I asked Abu Ja'far Muhammad b. 'Ali al-Baqir where the Commander of the
faithful was buried.

"He is buried," he answered, "in the region of al-Ghariyyayn. He was
buried before the dawn rose and al-Hasan, al-Husayn, peace be on them,
and Muhammad, the sons of 'Ali, and 'Abd Allah b. Ja'far, may God be
pleased with him, went into his grave."

[Ya'qub b. Yazid reported on the authority of Ibn Abi 'Umayr, on the
authority of his men:]11

AI-Husayn b. 'Ali, peace be on them, was asked: "Where did you bury the
Commander of the faithful?" He answered: "We went out with him at night
past the Mosque of al-Ash'ath until we brought him out on the upper
ground beside al-Ghariyyayn. We buried him there."

[Muhammad b. Zakariyya reported: Abd Allah b. Muhammad told us on the
authority of Ibn 'A'isha, who said: 'Abd Allah b. Hazim told me:]

. We went out from Kufa one day with (Harun) al-Rashid to hunt. We came
to the region of al-Ghariyyayn and al-Thawiyya. Then we saw some
gazelle. We sent the falcons and dogs after them. They raced after them
for an hour but then the gazelle took refuge in a hill. They stopped
chasing them; the falcons flew down to the ground and the dogs came
back. Al-Rashid was amazed at that. Then the gazelles came down from the
hill, and the falcons and dogs descended towards them. The gazelle
returned to the hill, and the falcons and dogs came away from them. That
happened three times.

Then Harun al-Rashid said: "Hurry and bring me whoever you meet."

We brought him an old man (shaykh) of the Banu Asad. Harun asked him:
"Tell me what this hill is."

"I will tell you, if you grant me a pledge of security," he replied.

"You may have the compact of God and His guarantee that I will not be
roused against you and harm you," said Harun.

"My father reported to me from his father," said the old man, "that
they used to say that in this hill was the grave of 'Ali b. Abi Talib,
and that God has made it a sanctuary (haram) so that whatever seeks
refuge there will be safe."

Harun got down and called for water. Then he made ritual ablutions and
performed the prayer at the hill. He rolled in the ground there and
began to weep. Then we left.

My mind could not accept that. Some days later I made the pilgrimage to
Mecca. I saw there Yasir, one of al-Rashid's men. He used to sit with
us. When we had made the tawwaf (circumambulation of the Ka'ba), the-
conversation went on until he said:

Al-Rashid said to me one night when we had come from Mecca and stopped
at Kufa: "Tell 'Isa b. Ja'far to come riding with me."

I rode with them both until we came to al-Ghariyyayn. 'Isa threw
himself down and slept. But al-Rashid went to the hill and prayed there.
Whenever he performed two rak'as he called out, wept and rolled in the
ground of the hill. Then he said: "O cousin, I know your outstanding
merit (fadl), and your precedence (in Islam). By God, you have sat in my
majlis (council) while I was there and you were what you were: but your
descendants are harming me and revolting against me."

After this he stood and prayed two rak'as, then he began speaking
again, calling out and weeping until it was daybreak. Then he said:
"Yasir, wake 'Isa." I woke him and he said to him: "Isa, wake up and
pray at the grave of your cousin."

"What cousin of mine is this?" asked 'Isa.

"This is the grave of 'Ali b. 'Abi Talib," he replied.

Then 'Isa made his ritual ablutions and stood up to pray. He did not
stop doing that until the dawn arose. Then I said: "O Commander of the
faithful, morning has come." So we rode off and returned to Kufa.

**NOTES
**
1. Cf. Maqatil al-Talibiyyin. 31.The tradition is cited by Ibn Sa'd on
the authority of al-Fadl b. Dukayn, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra (Beirut, 1978),
III, 33; al-Baladhuri has the same tradition on the authority of Ibn
Sa'd, Ansab al-Ashraf (Beirut, 1974), II, 500. The text of al-Irshad had
Abu Fadl al-'Abdi. This has been corrected.

2. This verse is also reported by Maqatil al-Talibiyyin. 31, Ibn Sa'd,
op. cit., 34, with a different isnad. It is given in a slightly
different story in the next report. The verse is also cited by Ibn Ziyad
in his confrontation with Hani b. 'Urwa cf.

3. Reference to the punishment Ibn Muljam and Shabib b. Bajura will
receive from God.

4. The following account agrees with Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, 31-33. It
is slightly rearranged and there are occasional small differences in
words. Al-Mufid even accepts Abu al-Faraj's collected isnad and cites
his three principal authorities.

5. I'tikaf a ritual usually performed in Ramadan where a person cuts
himself off from ordinary life by staying in a tent in a mosque.

6. The following account is almost identical with Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin. 34-37. But the isnads have been omitted and the order
slightly rearranged. There is one brief addition concerning the people
going to 'Ali and details about al-Ash'ath are omitted.

7. See above. The account, which follows, of the people visiting the
dying 'Ali is not in Maqatil al-Talibiyyin.

8. Cf.ibid., 41.

9. Cf.ibid., 37.

10. Summary of ibid., 30.

11. Ibid., 42.

(This Chapter includes) a sample of the reports about the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him (including) his virtues and his eminent
qualities, together with (some of) what has been preserved of his wise
sayings and sermons, and (some of) what is told of his miracles, legal
judgements and explanations.1


