Some of the Miracles of the Commander of the Faithful
=====================================================

(The following are) some of the signs of God, the Exalted, and His
clear proof of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, which
indicate his position with regard to God, the Mighty and High, and his
special endowment with miracles by which he was set apart from everyone
else through the call for obedience to him, to remain steadfast in
respecting his authority and closeness to God (wilaya), to recognise his
rights and the certainty of His Imamate, and to be aware of his
protection (from error), perfection and the demonstration of the proof
of him.,


**The Miracle of his Wisdom while still a Boy
**
Among these are some qualities which make him equal to two of the
prophets, apostles and proofs of God to His creatures and about the
authenticity and correctness of which there can be no doubt. God, the
Mighty and High, said in mentioning Jesus, son of Mary, the spirit (ruh)
and word of God, and the prophet and apostle of God to His creatures,
when He mentioned the story of his mother's conceiving and giving birth
to him and the miraculous nature of that:

She said: How can I have a son when no man has ever touched me and I
have not been adulterous. He answered: As it (shall be), for your Lord
said: That will be easy for Me and We will make him a sign to the people
and a mercy from us. It is a matter which is decreed (XIX 21).

Among the signs of God, the Blessed and Exalted, concerning the
Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, peace be on him, was his speaking in the
cradle. By that normal human behaviour was transcended and in it there
was great wonder and an illustrious miracle to the minds of men.

Among the signs of God concerning the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, was the perfection of his intellect, dignity and knowledge of
God and His Apostle, His blessing and peace be on him and his family,
despite his youth and his being in outward form still only a child when
the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, summoned him to
believe in him and acknowledge him, and made him responsible for knowing
his rights, and recognising his Creator and His unity. (He also)
entrusted him with the secrets of His religion, the defence and
preservation of it, and the fulfilment of the trust in it. At that time,
he, peace be on him, was according to some statements a boy of seven
years of age, according to others a boy of nine but according to the
majority he was a boy of ten. The perfection of his intellect, peace be
on him, (at that age) and the occurrence (in a boy of that age) of the
ability to acknowledge God and His Apostle, may God bless him and his
family, is an illustrious sign from God which transcends normal human
behaviour, and thus indicates his position with Him, his special
endowment and his being worthy for what he was nurtured for the Imamate
of the Muslims, and the proof (of God) to all mankind. In this
transcendence of ordinary human behaviour which we have mentioned there
is a similarity with Jesus and John the Baptist as we have described. If
it was not for the fact that at that (time) he was perfect, complete and
(capable of) acknowledging God, the Exalted, the Apostle of God, may God
bless him and his family, would not have made him responsible to
acknowledge his prophethood, nor would he have bound him to believe in
himself and to accept his mission, nor would he have summoned him to
accept his rights, nor would he have begun his mission with him before
every other person except his wife, Khadija, peace be on her.

Because the Prophet of God, may God bless him and his family, entrusted
him with his secret which he ordered him to protect and because he set
him apart by that from all the other children of his time and endowed
him apart from all others as we have mentioned, that indicates that he,
peace be on him, was perfect despite his youth, (capable of)
acknowledging God, the Exalted and His Prophet, may God bless him and
his family, before adolescence. This is the meaning of the words of God,
the Exalted concerning John the Baptist, peace be on him: We gave him
wisdom while still a boy (XIX 12). There is no wisdom dearer than
knowledge of God, nor more obvious than the knowledge of the prophethood
of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, nor more
celebrated than the ability of rational deduction, nor more discerning
than the understanding of speculation (nazar) and consideration and the
knowledge of the aspects of elucidation, by which one is able to arrive
at the realities of the unknown. If the matter is as we have explained
it, it confirms that God, the Exalted, caused ordinary human behaviour
to be transcended in the case of the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, by an illustrious sign which is equivalent to His two prophets
whom the Qur'an speaks of in its great verses as we have explained.


The Miracle of his Military Prowess


Among the signs of God, the Exalted, concerning the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, which transcend ordinary human behaviour is
that He never endowed anyone else, with regard to fighting in single
combat against one's rivals and against heroes, with what is known about
him, peace be on him, in terms of the vast amount of (fighting) which he
had to engage in during the course of time. Among those who have engaged
in warfare there can only be found men to whom it brings disgrace and
who acquire wounds and deformities through it except the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him. Despite the length of time which he
fought against his enemies, he acquired no ugly wound nor was anyone
able to do him any harm until there occurred what happened at his
assassination by Ibn Muljam, may God curse him. This is a marvel by
which God set him apart through this sign and endowed him with
illustrious knowledge of its meaning. By that He indicated his position
with regard to Him and his being characterised by miracles, the favour
of which set him apart from all other men.

Among the signs of God, the Exalted, concerning him, peace be on him,
is the fact that there is not mentioned a single contestant during the
battles whom he met as an opponent, whom he did not overcome at one time
and did not overcome at another time. He did not give any of his enemies
a wound unless that man died of it immediately or recovered after a
time. No rival escaped from him in battle, no one could escape his blow.
For that it is appropriate that there was no doubt about his victory
over every rival who came against him and his killing of every hero who
fought. This is also among the things by which he, peace be on him, was
set apart from all other men and by which God caused ordinary human
behaviour to be transcended at every time and occasion. It is among the
clear indications of his (position).

Among the signs of God, the Exalted, concerning him is the fact that
despite the long period in which he was engaged and occupied in warfare
and in which he was tested by the bravery of his enemies and their
leaders, and by all the efforts which they made to gather against him
and to bring about his death through deceit, he never turned his back
and fled from one of them, nor did he weaken in his position or show
fear to any of his rivals. He never met any opponent in battle without
transfixing him at one time or turning aside from him (to another part
of the battle) at another time. He would advance against him immediately
and attack him at that time. Since his conduct was as we have described,
it confirms what we have mentioned about his being set apart by an
illustrious sign and a clear miracle transcending ordinary human
behaviour by which God indicated his Imamate and revealed the duty to
obey him. By that He set him apart from all mankind.


The Miracle of the Survival of his Reputation and his Family despite
Suppression and Oppression

Among the signs and indications of him, peace be on him, by which he
was set apart from those who opposed him is the clear appearance of his
outstanding qualities to both the Shi'a (khassa) and the general
populace ('amma). (This has been sufficient) to force the people to
transmit reports of his merits and his qualities endowed by God and for
them to be admitted to even by opponents of the proof that there is in
them. It has occurred despite the great number who have attempted to
deviate from him and oppose him and the great number of occasions they
have been prompted to suppress his merit and deny his rights. (It has
occurred when) the (control of the) world has been in possession of his
rivals and has been turned aside from his friends(awliya ). (Despite
this) his opponents who possess authority over the world and the
narrators of the people, have not been able to put out his light and to
deny his career (amr). God has caused ordinary human behaviour to be
transcended by spreading his merit and revealing his outstanding
qualities, by forcing everyone to recognize that and to admit its truth,
and to refute the deceitful attempts of his enemies to conceal his
outstanding qualities and to deny his rights so that the proof of him
may be brought about and the justification of his rights may be
revealed. Because the normal view among those who agree to render his
career obscure continues to oppose what we have mentioned, and yet it
has not been able to bring that about with regard to the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, and the normal view has been transcended,
that indicates his being apart from the rest of men through the
illustriousness of the sign which we have described.

The report is well-known and widespread on the authority of al-Sha'bi
that he used to say:

"I (i.e. al-Sha'bi) used to hear the preachers of the Umayyads curse
the Commander of the faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, on
their pulpits." He would raise his finger to the sky and (go on): "I
used to hear them praising their ancestors on their pulpits as if they
could reveal their corpses."

One day al-Walid b. 'Abd al-Malik said to his sons: "My sons, your duty
is to religion. I do not see that religion has built anything which the
world has destroyed. I see that the world has built a building which
religion has destroyed. I still hear our followers and the members of
our family curse 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, suppress his merits
and urge the people to hate him. Yet that does not bring the people's
hearts anything but closeness (to him). They strive to bring the spirits
of the people closer to themselves. Yet that does not bring their hearts
anything except (to make the people) more distant from them."

The manner of suppressing the merits of the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, of the deception practised by the religious scholars
and of their spreading of what seemed authentic to a rational being
reached the extent that when a man wanted to report a tradition on the
authority of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, he was not
able to refer to him either by mentioning his name or his family
background. Necessity required him to say: "A man from the Companions of
the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, told me." Or he
might say: "A man from Quraysh told me." Some used to say: "Abu Zaynab
told me."

'Ikrima reported on the authority of 'Aisha in her account of the
sickness and death of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family, that she said in a sentence of it: "The Apostle came out,
leaning on two men from his House, one of whom was al-Fadl b.
al-'Abbas." When he (i.e. 'Ikrima) reported that on her authority to
'Abd Allah b. al-'Abbas, the later asked: "Do you know the other man?"

"No," he replied, "she did not name him."

"That was 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him," he told him. "'Our
mother' would not mention any good of him while she could (avoid
it)."1

The tyrannical governors would flog anyone who mentioned any good of
him. Indeed their heads were cut off for doing that and exposed to the
people to make them disassociate themselves from him. The normal course
(of events) followed this pattern for it to become accepted that no good
should be mentioned of him in any way much less his outstanding merits
be mentioned, his qualities be reported and proof of his rights be set
out. Yet since the appearance of his merits and the spreading of his
qualities has taken place as we have mentioned its being widespread both
among the Shi'a (khassa) and the general populace ('amma), and since the
compulsion of both enemy and friend to report it is now established,
(this) has transcended the normal course of events as far as he is
concerned and the nature of the proof of this idea is explained by the
illustrious sign (of God) as we have said before.

Another of the signs of God, the Exalted, concerning him, peace be on
him, is that no one has suffered such tribulation with regard to his
sons and his offspring as he, peace be on him, suffered with regard to
his sons and offspring. The fact is that no terror is known to have
encompassed the group of children of any prophet, of any Imam, of the
king of any period whether pious or profligate like the terror which
encompassed the offspring of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. Nor were any so much subjected to being killed, to being pursued
from their houses and lands, and to being terrorised as the offspring
and sons of the Commander of the faithful were subjected to. The
different kinds of severity meted out to them did not occur for any
other group of people. They were killed by murderous treachery, by
treason and by deception. It was done to most of them during their
lifetimes as an example. They were tormented by hunger and thirst until
their lives were taken by death. This required them to scatter
throughout the land and to become separated from their houses, their
families and their countries. (It required) their family background to
be kept secret from the majority of the people. The fear surrounding
them extended to keeping themselves hidden from those who loved them in
addition to their enemies. Their flight extended from their lands to the
furthest east and west, to places which lacked civilisation and where
the majority of the people were without knowledge of them. They avoided
bringing such people close to them and mixing with them, out of fear for
their own lives and their offsprings' from the tyrants of those times.
All of these are the reasons which should bring about the disruption of
their organisation, the pulling out of their roots, and the paucity of
their numbers. Yet they, despite everything we have described, are the
most numerous offspring of any one of the prophets, the righteous men
and the friends (of God). Indeed they are more numerous than the
offspring of anyone else among the people. They have extended across the
lands through their great number and have become more numerous than the
offspring of most men. They have done this despite their marriages
within their (family circles) to the exclusion of those outside them and
by limiting them to those possessing their own genealogies of the nearer
members of the relations. In that the normal practice has been
transcended as we have explained. It is proof of the illustrious sign
concerning the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, as we have
already described and explained.

This is something about which there can be no doubt. Praise be to God,
Lord of the Worlds.


**The Prophecies and Inner Knowledge of the Commander of the Faithful
**
Among the illustrious signs of God concerning him, peace be on him, and
the special characteristic by which he has been set apart, the
miraculous nature of which is evidence for his Imamate, for the duty to
obey him, and for the confirmation of his proof, are the group of
arguments by which God, the Exalted, makes known prophets and apostles,
peace be on them, and which He gives as signs of their truthfulness. Of
these are the widespread reports of him, peace be on him, concerning the
unknown and (foretelling) things which will happen before they happen.
He never asserted anything of that without his statement agreeing with
the report of the event so that in this way his truthfulness was
established. This is one of the most illustrious of the miracles of
prophets, peace be on them. Will you not look at the words of God, the
Exalted, in which He makes manifest Jesus, son of Mary, peace be on him,
through illustrious miracles and signs which indicate his prophethood? I
will tell you what you will eat and what you will store in your houses
(III 49). He, may His name be mighty, made similar miraculous signs for
the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, when he said at
the defeat of the Romans' (i.e. Byzantines) horsemen: Alif Lam mim, Rome
has been conquered in the lower lands (of its empire) but in a few years
after their defeat they will conquer (XXX 1-4). The matter turned out
just as God, the Mighty and High, had said. He, may His name be mighty,
said of those who took part in the Battle of Badr before the battle
(occurred): The groups (of the enemy) will be defeated and they will
turn their backs (in flight) (LIV 45). The matter occurred just as God,
the Exalted, had said without there being any difference in it. He, the
Mighty and High, said: Indeed you will enter the Sacred Mosque in
safety, if God wills, with your heads shaved or shortened, without fear
(XLVIII 27). The matter took place as God, the Exalted said. He, may He
be praised, said: When the help of God comes and victory, you will see
the people entering the religion of God in parties (CX 1-3). The event
occurred as He, the Exalted, described. He, may He be praised, said,
giving information about the inner feelings of the Hypocrites: They say
within themselves: If it was not for the fact that God would punish us
for what we say (LVIII 8). Thus He gave information about the inner
feelings and the secrets which they kept hidden. He, may the mention of
Him be extolled, said concerning the story of the Jews: Say: O those who
have been guided, if you claim that you are friends of God apart from
other people, then you should seek death if you are truthful. Yet they
do not seek it in an attempt to escape from (the crimes) which their
hands have committed. Indeed God is aware of the wrongdoers (LXII 5-7).
The matter happened as God, the Exalted, had said and not one of them
dared to seek it. That established (the reliability of the prophet's)
reports and by it He made clear his truthfulness. He gave evidence of
his prophethood, peace be on him, with similar examples, which, to
present in this book, would make it too long.

(The evidence for) this kind (of miracle) by the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, is such that it can only be denied through
stupidity, ignorance, slander and obstinacy. Can you not see what the
reports have made public knowledge, what traditions have been widespread
and what everybody hands down about him, peace be on him?

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*


He said before fighting against the three groups after the pledge of
allegiance had been made to him: "I have been ordered to fight against
those who break their pledges, those who are unjust and those who
deviate (from the truth)."

He, peace be on him, fought against them and the matter was just as he
had predicted.

He, peace be on him, said to Talha and al-Zubayr, when they asked
permission to leave to go on the lesser pilgrimage: "By God, you are not
going to make the lesser pilgrimage, you are going to Basra."

The matter was as he had said.

He, peace be on him, also said to Ibn 'Abbas when informing him about
their asking for permission to go on the lesser pilgrimage: "I have
given them permission despite knowing of the treachery they harboured
within themselves. I have appealed for the help of God against them.
Indeed God, the Exalted, will rebuff their plotting and give me victory
against them."

The matter happened as he predicted.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

At Dhu Qar, he said while sitting to receive the pledge of allegiance:
"Exactly a thousand men will come from the direction of Kufa to pledge
themselves to me until death."

[Ibn 'Abbas commented:]

I (i.e. Ibn 'Abbas) was disturbed at that and was afraid that if the
number of the people was less or more, the matter would bring failure on
us. The anxiety to count them continued to trouble me so that when the
first of them came, I began to count them. Their number reached nine
hundred and ninety-nine and then the people stopped coming. I said: "We
belong to God and to Him we will return. What is the interpretation of
what he said!"

As I was thinking that I saw a person coming towards us. He was a man
wearing a woollen cloak and he had a sword with him, a shield and
(other) weapons. He went up to the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, and said: "Stretch out your hand so that I may pledge allegiance
to you."

"On what conditions do you make the pledge of allegiance to me?" the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, asked him.

"To hear and to obey and to fight before you until I die or God grants
you victory," he replied.

"What is your name?" he asked.

"Uways," he answered.

"You are Uways al-Qarani," he said.

"Yes," he replied.

"God is greater (Allahu akbar)," he said. "My dear friend, the Apostle
of God, may God bless him and his family, told me that I would meet a
man from his community called Uways al-Qarani who would be of the party
of God and His Apostle, who would die in martyrdom and the number who
would gain his intercession was like the number of the tribes of Mudar
and Rabi'a."

[Ibn 'Abbas reported:]

Then, by God, (my anxiety) left me.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Another example of that is what he, peace be on him, said when the
Syrians raised copies of the Qur'an and a group of his followers began
to have doubts (about their position) and insisted (that he agree) to
making a truce: "Shame on you, this is a deceitful trick. Those people
do not really mean (to settle the issue by) the Qur'an because they are
not people (who accept) the Qur'an. Fear God and carry out your decision
to fight against them. If you do not, you will be separated into
(different) groups and you will regret it when regret will not bring any
advantage."

The matter turned out just as he had predicted. This group of people
fell into disbelief after the arbitration (between 'Ali and Mu'awiya)
and they regretted the action which they had previously hastily embarked
on and made him accept. They were separated into different groups and
destruction came to them soon after.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

He, peace be on him, said as he was setting out to fight against the
Kharijites: "If it was not for the fact that I am afraid that you would
just carry on discussions and abandon (all other) action, I would tell
you the decision God has made through the words of His Prophet, peace be
on him, concerning those who fight against these people (i.e. against
the Kharijites) as a result of seeing them to be misguided. Indeed,
among them is a man with a stunted arm who has breasts like the breasts
of a woman. They are the wickedest of creatures and the one who fights
against them is the closest in relationship to God among His
creatures."

The malformation of the man (mukhdaj) had not been known to the people.
After the battle, he, peace be on him, caused a search to be made for
him among those killed saying: "By God, I have not lied nor have I been
lied to."

Eventually (his body) was found among those people and his shirt was
torn open, On his shoulder there was a swelling like the breast of a
woman, on which were hairs. When the hairs were pulled, his shoulder
came forward with it. When they were left, his shoulder went back to its
position. When he was found, he said: "God is greater. In this there is
a warning for anyone who reflects."2

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[The historians (ashab al-sira) report in their account on the
authority of Jundub b.'Abd Allah al-Azdi, who said:]

I (i.e. Jundub b.'Abd Allah) took part with 'Ali in the battles of the
Camel and Siffin. I never had any doubts about fighting against those
who fought him until I took part in the battle of al-Nahrawan (against
the Kharijites). Then doubts came to me about fighting against these
people. I said: "It is our reciters of the Qur'an and our choice men
whom we are killing. This matter is dreadful."

In the morning I went for a walk, (taking) some vessels of water with
me, until I left the lines (of the army). Then I fixed my spear in the
ground, fitted my shield on it and shaded myself from the sun. While I
was sitting, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, came along.
He said to me: "Brother from (the tribe of) al-Azd, do you have water
for ritual purification with you?"

"Yes," I answered and I gave him a vessel.

He went aside so that I could not see him. Then he came back after he
had purified himself. He sat down in the shade of the spear. Suddenly a
horseman appeared asking for him. I said: "Commander of the faithful,
there is a horseman who wants you."

"Make a sign to him (to come here)," he told me.

I made a sign and he came. He said: "Commander of the faithful, the
people have crossed the river."

"No," he retorted, "they have not crossed."

"Yes, by God, they have crossed," (the man) insisted.

"You are lying," he said.

Then another man came. He said: "Commander of the faithful, the people
have crossed."

"No," he replied, "they have not crossed."

"By God," (the man) said, "I did not come to you until I saw the
standards and the baggage on that side."

"By God," he declared, "they have not done so. (What you want) is to
kill them and shed their blood."

Then he arose and I arose with him. I said to myself: "Praise be to
God, who has given me insight into this man and enabled me to recognise
his affair. He is one of two men: he is either a thoroughgoing liar or
(one given) evidence (for his authority) by his Lord and a covenant by
his Prophet. O God, I give You a solemn undertaking which You can ask me
about on the Day of Resurrection. If I find that the people have
crossed, I will be the first to fight against him, the first to thrust
my spear into his eye. If the people have not crossed, then I will go
forth with him and fight alongside him."

We returned to the lines (of the army) and we found that the standards
and baggage were as they had been (before).

He took me by the scruff of the neck and pushed me. Then he said:
"Brother of (the tribe of) al-Azd, has the matter become clear to
you?"

"Yes, Commander of the faithful," I replied.

"Your business is with your enemy," he said.

I killed one man from those people (i.e. the Kharijites) and then I
killed another. I and another of them were exchanging blows. I struck
him and he struck me. We both fell together. My comrades carried me
back. By the time I recovered consciousness, there were none of the
people (i.e. the Kharijites) left (there).

This is a famous account which has a wide circulation among the
reporters of historical traditions (athar). In it the man tells of his
own solemn undertaking towards the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, and (what happened) after that. There is no way that it can be
rejected or its truthfulness denied. In it (the Commander of the
faithful) provides information about the unknown, gives clear evidence
of his knowledge of the inner conscience (of man) and his knowledge of
what is in men's souls. The evidence in it is outstanding which could
only be equalled by evidence of a similar nature in terms of the
greatness of the miracle and its clear proof.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Of a similar kind are the narrations which have been reported on a wide
scale (tawatur) about him, peace be on him, announcing his own death
before it took place and giving information about the event and the fact
that he would leave the world as a martyr through a blow on the head,
the blood from which would colour his beard. The event came to happen
exactly as he described.

Among the expressions which the reporters report concerning that are
his words, peace be on him: "By God, this will be coloured by this." He
put his hand on his head and his beard.

(Similarly) there are his words, peace be on him: "By God, it will
colour it from above." He indicated his white hair. "The most wretched
of the community will not be prevented from colouring it with blood from
above."

(Other) of his words, peace be on him are: "The most wretched (of the
community) will not be prevented from colouring it with blood from
above."

He, peace be on him, (also) said: "The month of Ramadan has come to
you. It is the lord of the months and the beginning of the year. In it
the mill of authority will change. (Next) year, you will make the
pilgrimage in one rank (i.e. there will be no Imam). The sign of that
will be that I will not be among you."

His followers began to say that he was announcing his own death. He,
peace be on him, was struck down on the night of the 19th of the month
of Ramadan and he died on the night of the 21st of that month.

On the same (subject) is what trustworthy men report about him, peace
be on him. During this month he used to break his fast one night with
al-Hasan, one night with al-Husayn, peace be on them, and one night with
'Abd Allah b. Ja'far, may God be pleased with him. He never used to have
more than three mouthfuls. One of his two sons, al-Hasan and al-Husayn,
peace be on them, commented on that. He replied: "My son, God's command
(to leave the world) is coming and I am enduring hunger (in preparation
for it)."

It was only one night or two later when he was struck down.

[The historians (ashab al-athar) also report:]

Ja'd b. Ba'ja, one of the Kharijites, said to the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him: "Fear God, 'Ali, for you will die."

"By God," said the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. "Rather
I will be killed by a blow on this which will colour this." He put his
hand on his head and his beard. "It is a promise which will be
fulfilled. Let anyone who lies despair."

(Similarly) there are his words, peace be on him, on the night at the
end of which the wretched man struck him. He had set out for the mosque
and the geese screeched in his face. The people drove them away from him
but he said: "Leave them, they are wailing at death."

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

In a similar vein is the account which al-Walid b. al-Harith and others
report on the authority of the men (whom they cite):

When the Commander of the faithful learnt what Busr b. Arta'a had done
in Yemen, he said: "O God, Busr has sold his religion for the world, so
take his reason away. Do not let there remain to him in his religion
anything by which he would merit Your mercy. May Busr survive until his
mind becomes disordered."

(Later) Busr used to ask for a sword and a sword of wood would be
brought to him. He would strike with it until he became unconscious.
When he recovered consciousness, he would say: "The sword, the sword."
It would be given to him and he would strike with it. He continued like
that until he died.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The report of these words of his is also well-known: "After I (am gone)
you will be exposed to my being cursed. For they will curse me. If they
give you the opportunity to disassociate yourselves from me, do not do
so, for I was born for (the service of) Islam. Whoever is given the
opportunity to disassociate himself from me, let him (rather) stretch
out his neck (for his head to be cut off). The man who does disassociate
himself from me will gain neither this world or the next."

That matter turned out as he, peace be on him, described.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

There is another report of his words, peace be on him, with the same
implication: "People, I have called you to the truth and you turned your
backs away from me. I have flogged you and you have made me tired. After
me rulers will rule you. They will not be satisfied with this (attitude)
from you so that they will torment you with whips and iron. Whoever
torments people in this world will be tormented by God in the next. The
sign of that will be that the ruler of Yemen will come against you to
settle in your midst. A man called Yusuf b.'Umar will seize the
tax-collectors and those who collect the taxes of the tax-collectors."

That happened as he, peace be on him, predicted.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Then there is the report which the religious scholars recount:

Juwayriyya b. Mishar stood at the gate of the palace.

"Where is the Commander of the faithful?" he asked.

"Sleeping." was the reply.

"You who are sleeping wake up," he shouted. "For by Him in Whose hands
is my soul, a blow will be struck on your head from which your beard
will be coloured with blood, as you have told us before."

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, heard that. He called
out: "Come, Juwayriyya so that I can discuss with you what you are
saying."

He came and (the Commander of the faithful) said to him: "By Him in
Whose hands is my soul, you will be pulled before a rough harsh man. He
will cut off your hand and your leg. Then you will be crucified below
the tree trunk where an unbeliever (has already been crucified)."

Time went by after that until in the days of Mu'awiya, Ziyad became
governor. He cut off his hand and his leg, then he crucified him on the
tree trunk where Ibn Muka'bir (was crucified). It was a long trunk and
he was under him.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

There is in addition this report:

Maytham al-Tammar was a slave of a woman from (the tribe of) Banu Asad.
The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, bought him from her and
then gave him his freedom.

"What is your name?" he asked him.

"Salim," he replied.

"The Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, told me that the
name which your father gave you in Persian was Maytham," he said.

"God and His Apostle are true and you are true, Commander of the
faithful," he said. "By God that is my name."

"Go back to the name by which the Apostle of God referred to you and
leave (the name) Salim," he told him.

He returned to (the name) Maytham and was given the kunya Abu Salim. On
the same day, 'Ali, peace be on him, told him: "After me, you will be
seized and crucified and stabbed by a spear. On the third day your
nostrils and mouth will flow with blood which will colour your beard. So
wait for that colour (to come). You will be crucified on the gate of the
house of 'Amr b. Hurayth. You will be the tenth one of ten (crucified)
men. You will have the shortest timber among them but you will be the
nearest of them to the place for washing. Come so that I may show you
the palm-tree on (the timber of) whose trunk you will be crucified."

He showed it to him. Maytham used to go there and pray at it. He used
to say: "What a blessed palm-tree you are. I am created for you and you
grew up for me."

He continued to frequent it until it was cut down and he knew the place
in Kufa where he would be crucified. He used to meet 'Amr b. Hurayth and
say to him: "I will be your neighbour, so show neighbourliness to me."

"You want to buy the house of Ibn Mas'ud or the house of Ibn Hakim,"
'Amr used to say, because he did not understand what he meant.

In the year in which he was killed he made a pilgrimage. He visited Umm
Salama, may God be pleased with her.

"Who are you?" she asked.

"I am Maytham," he said.

"By God, how often I heard the Apostle of God, may God bless him and
his family, mention you," she said. "He used to commend you to 'Ali in
the middle of the night."

Then he asked her about al-Husayn, peace be on him.

"He is at an estate of his," she said.

"Tell him that I would have liked to greet him and that we will meet
before the Lord of the Worlds, if God, the Exalted, wills," he told
her.

Umm Salama called for some perfume and she perfumed his beard.

"Soon it will be coloured by blood," she said.

He went to Kufa and 'Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad, may God curse him, had him
arrested and brought to him. He had been told that that man was one of
the closest people to 'Ali, peace be on him.

"For shame, is he not a Persian?" he said.

"Yes," he was told.

"Where is your master?" he asked him.

"He is looking down on every wrongdoer and you are one of the
wrongdoers," he answered.

"Despite your foreign accent you say what you mean," he said. "What has
your leader told you that I will do to you?"

"He told me that you would crucify me as the tenth one of ten men," he
answered. "I will have the shortest timber among them but will be the
nearest of them to the place for washing."

"We will oppose him" ('Ubayd Allah) declared.

"How could you oppose him?" he retorted. "He did nothing but give me
information on the authority of the Prophet, may God bless him and his
family, on the authority of Gabriel, peace be on him, on the authority
of God, the Exalted. How could you oppose these? I know the place in
Kufa where I will be crucified. I am the first of God's creatures to be
bridled in Islam."

He imprisoned him and he imprisoned al-Mukhtar b. Abi 'Ubayda with
him.

"You will escape," Maytham told him, "and you will rebel to avenge the
blood of al-Husayn, peace be on him. Then you will kill this man who is
going to kill us."

When 'Ubayd Allah called for al-Mukhtar to kill him, a messenger
(barid) arrived with a letter for 'Ubayd Allah from Yazid, ordering him
to free (al-Mukhtar). He freed him and ordered Maytham to be
crucified.

A man who met (Maytham) said to him: "Would not something satisfy you
rather than this, Maytham?"

He smiled and said, pointing to the palm tree: "I was created for it
and it has grown for me.".

When he was put on the wood, the people gathered around him at the gate
of 'Amr b. Hurayth.

"By God he used to say: I will be your neighbour," 'Amr said. After he
had been crucified, he ordered a maidservant to sweep under the wood, to
sprinkle it with water and to fumigate it.

Maytham began to speak of the virtues of Banu Hashim and it was
reported to lbn Ziyad: "That slave has insulted you."

"Bridle him," he ordered.

He was the first of God's creatures to be bridled in Islam. Maytham,
may God have mercy on him, was killed ten days before al-Husayn came to
Iraq. On the third day after his crucifixion, he was stabbed with a
spear, and He declared the greatness of God. At the end of that day
blood flowed from his mouth and his nose. This is one of the group of
reports about the unknown which have been preserved concerning the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Its reputation is extensive
and the narration of it is widespread among the religious scholars
('ulama).

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[Another such report has been related by Ibn 'Abbas. It has been
reported on the authority of Mujalid, on the authority of al-Sha'bi, on
the authority of Ziyad b. al-Nadr al-Harithi, who said:]

I was with Ziyad when Rushayd al-Hijri was brought to him. Ziyad said
to him: "What did your leader say to you?" -meaning 'Ali, peace be on
him - "For we will do that to you."

"You will cut off my hands and my legs and then you will crucify me,"
he answered.

"By God, I will make his word false," declared Ziyad. "Free him."

When he was about to leave, Ziyad said: "By God, we do not find
anything wrong with what his leader told him. Therefore cut off his
hands and legs and crucify him"

"Wait a moment," Rushayd said to him, "I still have something (to tell)
you which the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, told me."

"Cut out his tongue," ordered Ziyad.

"Now, by God, is the verification of the words of the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him," declared Rushayd.

This report has also been handed down by those friendly and those
hostile on the authority of men they regard as trustworthy, on the
authority of those persons whom we have named. Its content is well known
to all the religious scholars. It is one of the group already mentioned
of (his) miracles and giving information about the unknown.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[A further account is reported by 'Abd al-Aziz b. Suhayb on the
authority of Abu al-'Aliyya, who said: Mazra' b. 'Abd Allah told me:]

I (i.e. Mazra' b.'Abd Allah) heard the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, say: "By God, an army will advance so that when it is at
al-Bayda' it will be swallowed up."

"You are telling me about the unknown," I said.

"Remember what I tell you," he said. "By God, what the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, tells you, will happen. A man will be taken.
He will be killed and crucified between the two sides of the walls of
the mosque."

"You are telling me about the unknown," I said.

"The trustworthy, the one protected by God, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be
on him, told me," he replied:

[Abu \`Aliyya reported:]

Friday had not come when Mazra' was seized, killed and crucified
between the two sides of the wall.

[(Abu 'Aliyya) said: He used to tell me about a third thing but I have
forgotten it.]

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Yet a further example is reported by Jarir on the authority of
al-Mughira, who said:]

When al-Hajjaj, may God curse him, became governor, he sought for
Kumayl b. Ziyad. The latter fled from him. (al-Hajjaj) deprived his
people of their allowances ('ata\`). When Kumayl saw that, he said: "I
am an old man and my life is nearly finished. It is not right for me to
deprive my people of their allowances."

So he went and offered his hand to al-Hajjaj. When the latter saw him,
he said: "I would have liked to have found a way to get you, myself."

"Don't gnash your teeth at me and don't threaten me," Kumayl replied.
"What is left of my life is like mere specks of dust. Therefore give
judgement as long as you are a judge. For there is an appointed time to
be with God and after death there is the reckoning. The Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, told me that you would kill me."

"Then that is evidence against yourself," al-Hajjaj said to him.

"But the judgement is yours," answered Kumayl.

"Indeed," he retorted, "you were among those who killed 'Uthman
b.'Affan. Strike off his head."

Then he was executed.

This report is also recorded by the non-Shi'a ('amma) which they report
on the authority of men whom they regard as trustworthy. The Shi'a
(khassa) participate in reporting it. Hence it has been included in this
section where we mention miracles, proofs and evidence (concerning
him).

