Supplement
==========

There is, in addition, the account recorded by the historians (ashab
al-sira) on various authorities:

One day al-Hajjaj b. Yusuf al-Thaqafi said: "I would like to strike
down one of the followers of Abu Turab (derogatory name of 'Ali).
Through his blood, I would get closer to God."

"We know of no one who was a companion of Abu Turab for a longer time
than Qanbar, his retainer," he was told.

He sent in search of him and he was brought.

"Are you Qanbar?" he asked.

"Yes," he replied

"(Your kunya) is Abu Hamdan?" he asked.

"Yes," he replied

"Is your master 'Ali b. Abi Talib?"

"God is my Master," he replied, "and the Commander of the faithful 'Ali
is the master of my provisions."

"Disassociate yourself, from his religion," he ordered him.

"If I disassociate myself from his religion, will you show me another
better than it?" he asked.

"I will kill you," he answered. "So choose what sort of death you
prefer."

"I leave that to you," he responded.

"Why?" he asked.

"Because in whatever way you kill me, you will be killed in the same
way," he said. "The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, told me
that my fate would be to be slaughtered unjustly and without right."

Then he ordered him to be slaughtered.

This is also one of the reports which is established with regard to the
Commander of the faithful, speaking about the unknown. It has been
included in the section concerning the compelling miracles and
outstanding evidence and the knowledge which God specially endowed to
His proof among His prophets, apostles and chosen ones, peace be on
them. Therefore it follows on from what has been presented before.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*


[Of a similar kind is the account reported by al-Hasan b. Mahbub on the
authority of Thabit al-Thumali, on the authority of Abu Ishaq al-Sabi'i,
on the authority of Suwayd b. Ghafla, (who said):]

A man came to the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. He said:
"Commander of the faithful, I have passed through Wadi al-Qarni and I
saw that Khalid b. 'Arfata had died there. I asked forgiveness for
him."

"Nonsense!" declared the Commander of the faithful. "He has not died
and he will not die until he leads an army of error whose
standard-bearer will be- Habib b. Himaz."

A man from below the pulpit said: "Commander of the faithful, I belong
to your Shi'a and I am one who loves you."

"Who are you?" he asked.

"I am Habib b. Himaz," he replied.

"Beware," he said, "you will carry (that standard). Indeed you will
carry it and you will enter from this gate." He pointed with his hand to
the Gate of al-Fil.

After the death of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,,.
and al-Hasan, peace be on him, after that, and the events concerning
al-Husayn and his revolt, Ibn Ziyad sent 'Umar b. Sa'd against
al-Husayn, peace be upon him. He put Khalid b.'Arfata in command of the
vanguard and he made Habib b. Himaz the standard-bearer. He went there
until he entered the mosque through the gate of al-Fil.

This is also a widespread report which the traditionists (ahl al-'ilm)
and the narrators of historical reports (athar) have not refused to
acknowledge. It is widespread among the Kufans and well known in their
circles. Not even two of them have denied it. It belongs to the class of
miraculous (knowledge) which we have mentioned.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[Another example is the report of Zakariyya b. Yahya al-Qattan, on the
authority of Fadl b. al-Zubayr, on the authority of Abu al-Hakam, who
said: I heard our shaykhs and our religious scholars say:]

'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, preached. In his sermon, he said:

"Ask me before you lose me. But, by God, do not ask me about a group
who will lead a hundred astray and which will guide a hundred, otherwise
I will tell you about the screecher of that group and the driver of it
until the day of Resurrection."

A man rose before him and said: "Tell me how many pieces of hair there
are on my head and my beard?"

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, said: "By God, my bosom
friend, the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, told me
about what you have asked. For every piece of hair on your beard there
is an angel who curses you and for every piece of hair on your beard
there is a devil who provokes you. In your house there is a worthless
(child) who will kill the (grand)son of the Apostle of God. That will be
the proof of the truthfulness of what I have told you. If it was not for
the fact that it is difficult to prove what you asked about, I would
(simply) have informed you of it. However the proof of (my answer to)
that (question) lies in the information I have given about your curse
and your cursed worthless (child)."

At that time his son was a small boy still crawling. When the (tragic)
events in the affair of al-Husayn, peace be on him, occurred, he took
part in killing him. So the event occurred as the Commander of the
faithful had described.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[In the same way Isma'il b. Sabih reported on the authority of Yahya b.
al-Musawir al-'Abdi, on the authority of Isma'il b. Ziyad, who said;

One day 'Ali, peace be on him, said to al-Bara' b. 'Azib: "Bara', my
son al-Husayn, peace be on him, will be killed while you are alive and
you will not help him."

After al-Husayn, peace be on him, was killed, al-Bara' b. 'Azib used to
say: "By God, 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, spoke the truth about
al-Husayn being killed and my not helping him."

He showed (much) grief and regret about that.

This belongs to what we have mentioned about him giving information
about the unknown and the prevailing attitudes of men's hearts.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[Another account is reported by 'Uthman b. 'Isa al-'Amiri on the
authority of Jabir b. al-Hurr, on the authority of Juwayriyya b Mishar
al-'Abdi, who said:]

When we set out with the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, to
Siffin. We reached the plains of Karbala'. He stood at the side of the
camp and looked right and left. He cried and he said: "By God, this is
the place where the camels will kneel for their riders. This is the
place of their fate."

"Commander of the faithful, what is this place?" he was asked.

"This is Karbala'," he said. "Here people will be killed who will enter
heaven without any reckoning (against them)."

Then he went on and the people did not understand the explanation of
what he had said until the tragedy of al-Husayn b.'Ali, peace be on
them, and his followers took place on the plain. Then those who had
heard his words recognised the truthfulness of what he had told them.

This has been (a summary) of his knowledge of the unknown and his
telling what would happen before it happened. It is clearly miraculous
in nature and wonderful knowledge as we have mentioned. Reports
conveying the same sense are so numerous that their explanation would
make the book unduly long. What we have presented is sufficient for our
intention.


**His Miraculous Strength at Khaybar
**
Among his wonderful signs is the ability by which God set him apart and
the strength which he specially endowed to him, and the transcendence of
normal events through miracles.

Of that kind is that which has been handed down in the historical
reports and has become well-known through accounts. The religious
scholars have agreed on it and both opponents and friends accept it,
(namely) the story of Khaybar and of the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, removing the gate of the fortress with his own hand,
and laying it on the ground with, his own hand, while it was of such a
weight that (it took) not less than fifty men to carry it.

['Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Hanbal has mentioned that in what he reports on
the authority of his transmitter. The latter reported: Isma'il b. Ishaq,
the qadi, told us: Ibrahim b. Hamza told us: 'Abd al-'Aziz b. Muhammad
told us on the authority of Hizam, on the authority of Abu 'Atiq on the
authority of Jabir:]

At the battle of Khaybar, the Prophet, may God bless him and his
family, gave the standard to 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him. After
he had prayed for him, 'Ali, peace be on him, began to rush forward
while his comrades were telling him to go slowly. He came to the
fortress, and pulled away its gate throwing it to the ground. Then
seventy of us gathered around it. It was only as a result of their
(combined) effort that they could lift the door.3

This is an example of the special strength with which God endowed him.
Through it the normal (human) qualities were transcended and it became a
miraculous sign as we have said before.


**The Miracle of Moving the Rock and the Water under it
**


Another example is reported by the historians (ashab al-siyar) and the
account of it is widespread among both the non-Shi'a ('amma) and the
Shi'a (khassa) so that poets have written verses about it; rhetoricians
have compiled sermons on it and men of understanding and learning have
reported it. (It is) the story of the monk in the area of Karbala' and
the stone. Its reputation (is such) that it does not need the
presentation of its chain of authorities (isnad).

[It is that the whole group (of scholars) report.]

When the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, headed toward
Siffin, a terrible thirst came on his followers. The water with them had
been used up. They began to search for water to right and left but they
did not find any trace of it. The Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, turned off the main road with them and went a little way. A
hermitage appeared before them in the middle of the desert. He went with
them towards it. When he reached its courtyard, he ordered those (with
him) to call for its occupant to come before them. They called him and
he came. The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, asked him: "Is
this residence of yours near water, which will quench the thirst of
these people?"

"There is more than six miles between me and water," he answered.

"There is no water nearer than that to me. If it was not for the fact
that I am brought enough water for each month to sustain me, I would be
destroyed by thirst."

"Did you hear what the monk said?" the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, asked.

"Yes," they answered. "Order us to go to the place which he indicated.
Perhaps we will reach water while we still have strength."

"There is no need for you to do that," the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, told them. He turned the neck of his mule in the
direction of the qibla (i.e. towards Mecca) and he directed them to a
place near the hermitage. "Uncover the ground in this place," he ordered
them.

A group of them went straight to the place and uncovered it with iron
shovels. A great shiny rock appeared. They said: "Commander of the
faithful, here is a great rock on which the shovels are useless."

"This rock is over water," he told them. "If it moves. from its
position, you will find the water."

They struggled to remove it. All the people gathered together and tried
to move it but they could find no way to do that. It was too difficult
for them. When he, peace be on him, saw that they had gathered together
and striven to remove the rock but it was too difficult for them, he put
his leg over his saddle until it reached the ground. Then he rolled up
his sleeves. He put his fingers under the side of the rock and he moved
it. He removed it with his hand and pushed it many yards away. When it
had moved from its position, the white (glitter) of water appeared
before them. They hurried to it and drank from it. It was the sweetest,
coldest and purest water that they had ever drunk from on their
journey.

"Get supplies and quench your thirst," he told them.

They did that. Then he went to the rock and took it with his hand and
put it back where it had been. He ordered that its traces be removed
with earth. The hermit had been watching from on top of his hermitage.
When he realised what had happened, he called out: "People, help me
down, help me down."

They helped him to get down. He stood in front of the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him and said: "Man, are you a prophet sent (by
God)?"

"No," he replied.

"(Then are you) an angel who is close to God?" he asked.

"No," was the answer.

"Then who are you?" asked (the hermit).

"I am the testamentary trustee of the Apostle of God, Muhammad b. 'Abd
Allah, the seal of the prophets, may God bless him and his family," he
replied.

"Stretch out your hand," said the hermit, "so that I may submit to God,
the Blessed and Exalted, at your hands."

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, stretched out his hand
and told him: "Make the twofold testimony."

He said: "I testify that there is no god but God alone without any
partner. I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His Apostle. I
testify that you are the testamentary trustee of the Apostle of God, the
one with most right among the people to authority after him."

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, made him understand the
conditions of being a Muslim and then asked him: "What is it that has
prompted you to enter Islam after your long residence in this hermitage
in opposition to it?"

"I will tell you, Commander of the faithful," he said. -"This hermitage
was built to seek out the one who would remove that rock and then water
would come from underneath it. Scholars before me died and they did not
attain that (knowledge) but God, the Mighty and High, has provided me
with it. We find in one of our books and a prose writer of our scholars
that in this land there is a spring with a rock over it. No one knows
its place except a prophet or the testamentary trustee of a prophet. He
must be a friend of God who calls (men) to truth, whose sign is the
knowledge of the place of this rock and his ability to remove it. When I
saw you do that, I realised what we had been waiting for. The object of
desire had been attained. Today I am a Muslim (converted) at your hands,
a believer in your right and your servant (mawla)."

When he heard that, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
wept until his beard became moist with tears. He said: "Praise be to
God, by Whom I have not been forgotten. Praise be to God in Whose books
I have been mentioned."

Then he summoned the people and told them: "Listen to what your brother
Muslim says."

They listened to his words. Then they gave much praise to God and
thanks for the blessing which he had bestowed upon them in giving them
knowledge of the right of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. Then they went on and the hermit went before him amid a group of
his followers until he met the Syrians. The hermit was among a group of
those who were martyred there. He, peace be upon him, carried out the
prayer over him. He buried him and sought much forgiveness for him.
Whenever he was mentioned, ('Ali) would say: "That was my servant
(mawla)."

In this report there are (several) kinds of miracle. One of them is
knowledge of the unknown, a second is the strength by which normal human
capabilities were transcended, and (another) is the distinction (of him)
from other men through the confirmation of the message about him in the
first Books of God. This is validated by the words of God, the Exalted:
That is their example in the Torah and their example in the Gospels
(XLVII 29).

Al-Sayyid Isma'il b. Muhammad al-Himyari, may God have mercy on him,
speaks of the same thing in his glorious golden ode:

During his journey he went by night after the evening prayer to
Karbala' in a procession.

Until he came to one who devoted himself to God on a piece of raised
ground. He made his camp on inhospitable land.

O wilderness, it is not (a place) where he meets a living soul other
than the wild animals and the balding white haired man (i.e.'Ali).

He approaches and cries out at it. (The holy man) looks down as he
stands, like the defender (looks down) over his bow from a watchtower.

Is there water which can be attained near the position which you have
settled at. He answers: There is nothing to drink,

Except at a distance of six miles and the water I have with me (here)
between the sandy hill and the vast desert.

He turns the reins towards the flat ground. He uncovers a smooth rock
which shines like golden leaf-paste for camels.

He says: Turn it around. If you turn it around, you will see. You; will
not see if it is not turned around.

They gang together to remove it. It is impossible for them. It is a
difficult impossible task which cannot be performed.

When it had weakened them, he stretched a hand towards it when the
conqueror comes, it is conquered.

It was as if it was a ball of fallen cotton in a skein, which he pushed
in a playground.

He gave them sweet delicious water to drink from under it, which was
better than the most delicious, the sweetest.

Then when they had all drunk, he put it back and went away. Its
position is left alone. It cannot be approached.


Ibn Maymun added these words concerning that:

The signs for the monk were a miraculous secret there and he believed
in the noble born testamentary trustee of authority (wasi).

He died a martyr, truthful in his (statement of) support, most noble of
monks who have become fearful (of God).

I mean that the son of Fatima is the testamentary trustee of authority.
Whoever declares (their belief in) his outstanding merit and his
(illustrious) actions does not lie.

He is a man both of whose sides are (descended) from Shem, without any
father from Ham, nor a father of a father.

He is one who does not flee and in battle only the striking of his
sword dyed red (with blood) can be seen.


**His Miraculous Victory over the Jinn
**


Another example is the tradition which has become well-known about the
Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, sending him to the
valley of the jinn. Gabriel, peace be on him, had told him that groups
of them had gathered to plot against him. (The Commander of the
faithful) took the place of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and
his family, and through God was sufficient for the believers against the
plotting (of the jinn). He repelled them from the believers through his
strength by which he was set apart from the rest of them.

[Muhammad b. Abi al-Sirri al-Tamimi reported on the authority of Ahmad
b. al-Faraj, on the authority of al-Hasan b. Musa al-Nahdi, on the
authority of his father, on the authority of Wabira b. al-Harith, on the
authority of Ibn al-'Abbas, may God have mercy on him, who said:]

When the Prophet, may God bless him and his family, set out against the
Banu al-Mustaliq, he avoided the road. Night came and he stopped near a
rugged valley. Towards the end of the night, Gabriel, peace be on him,
came down to tell him that a group of unbelieving jinn had gone into the
valley with the intention of plotting against him, peace be on him, and
causing harm to his Companions. He called for the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, and told him: "Go to this valley, those of
the jinn who are enemies of God, who want (to attack) you, will come
against you. Repel them with the strength which God, the Mighty and
High, has given you. You will be protected by the names of God, the
Mighty and High, which He has specially endowed you with knowledge
of."

He sent with him a hundred men from different groups among the people.
He told them: "Stay with him and obey his orders."

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, set out for the valley.
When he was near the side of the valley, he ordered the hundred men who
had accompanied him to stand close to the side and not to do anything
until he gave them permission. He went forward and stood at the edge of
the valley. He sought refuge with God from his enemies and he named God,
may His name be magnified. He signalled to the people who had followed
him to come closer. They came closer and there was a gap between him and
them of the distance of a bow-shot. Then he began to go down into the
valley when a hurricane arose, which almost made the people fall on
their faces because of its violence. They could not keep their feet on
the ground because of terror of opposition and terror of what would come
upon them. The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him shouted: "I am
'Ali b. Abi Talib b.'Abd al-Muttalib, the testamentary trustee of
authority (wasi) of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family, and his cousin. Defy (us) is if you want to." Persons in the
form of gipsies appeared before the people who seemed to have torches of
fire in their hands and they dried up (all) the sides of the valley. The
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, penetrated deep into the
valley, while reciting the Qur'an and signalling to right and left with
his sword. It was not long before the persons became like black smoke.
The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, magnified God. Then he
climbed back the way he had come down. He stood with the people who had
accompanied him. The place became yellow as a result of what had
happened to it. The Companions of the Apostle of God, may God bless him
and his family, said to him: "Abu al-Hasan ('Ali), we almost died of
fear and anxiety for you because of what you met. It was worse than
(anything else) that has happened to us."

"When the enemy showed themselves to me," he told them, "and I shouted
the names of God, the Exalted, among them, they became smaller and I
knew the terror which had come upon them. Therefore I went into the
valley without any fear of them. If they had remained in substantial
forms, I would have attacked them to the last one. God was sufficient
(protection) against their plotting and He was sufficient (help) for the
Muslims against their wickedness. The rest of them will go ahead of me
to the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, in order to
(confess that they) believe in him."

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, returned with those who
had been with him to the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family. He gave him the news. (The Apostle) was delighted with him and
prayed for his well-being. Then he said to him: "'Ali, those whom God
filled with fear through you have come ahead of you to me. They
submitted to Islam and I accepted their submission."

Then he continued the journey with all the Muslims and they passed
through the valley in safety and without fear.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

The non-Shi'a ('amma) report that account as well as the Shi'a (khassa)
and they do not refuse to accept it. However, the Mu'tazila because of
their inclination to the beliefs of the Brahmins reject it. In addition
to that they deny it because of their understanding of traditional
reports. However, they are following the methods of atheism in imputing
error to the Qur'an and the reports which it includes about the jinn,
their believing in God and His Apostle and the information about them
which God gives in the Qur'an in the Surat al-Jinn (LXXII) where they
say: We heard a wonderful recitation (qur'an) which gave guidance to
righteousness and we believed in it (LXXII 1-2) to the end of the
contents of the sura which gives information about them. Since the
opposition of the atheists to that is invalidated by the possibility of
minds (conceiving) the existence of jinn and of their being made
responsible (for their action) and the proof of this is through the
Qur'an and the glorious wonder in it. In the same way it demonstrates
the invalidity of the accusation of the Mu'tazila against the report
which we have given, (when they accuse it) of being impossible to be
sustained by (human) intellects. Insofar as it is reported by two
different chains of authority and by two groups to give evidence for two
dissimilar attitudes, that is proof of its validity. There is no
substance in its rejection by those who deviate from true justice like
the Mu'tazila and the determinists (mujabbara), nor in the denigration
of the necessity of using it which we have mentioned, just as there is
no substance in the denial by the atheists, and varieties of agnostics,
the Jews, the Christians, the Zoroastrians and the Sabians of the
validity of the reports of the miracles of the Prophet, may God bless
him and his family, such as: the splitting of the moon, the bending of
the palm trunk, stones speaking in his hand, the camel complaining, wild
calves speaking, the tree moving (to him), water coming from his hands
at the place for ritual ablution and feeding great crowds of people.
(There are indeed no grounds for them) to denigrate the validity, the
truthfulness of their narration and the establishment of the proof of
them. Indeed their error in rejecting that, even in finding it weak, is
much greater than the error of those who deny the miracles of the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, and their proof. Since such
things are not hidden to people capable of considering them, there is no
need for us to explain their arguments in this place. Since the special
nature of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, apart from
(the rest of) the people has been established by what we have described
as has his being separate from all others in the knowledge which we have
explained, (this) has made clear the statement of his right to
precedence over (the rest of) the community with regard to the position
of the Imamate and his right to precedence over them in the place of
leadership. (It is further confirmed) by what the Wise Words (i.e. the
Qur'an) contain concerning the story of David and Talut where He, may
His name be exalted, says: Their prophet said to them: God has sent
Talut to you as a king. They asked: Shall he have (the right of)
kingship over us while we are more entitled to kingship than he is? He
has not brought any extent of wealth. He replied: God has chosen him to
be over you and increased him extensively in knowledge and substance.
God bestows His kingship on whom He wishes. God is (all) embracing, one
who knows (II 247). God, the Exalted, gives the proof for Talut's
precedence over the community of his people. (Similarly) He gave him a
proof of (being) His friend and the brother of His Prophet in having
precedence of the rest of the community through choosing (him to be)
over them and adding to him a (great) extent knowledge and substance.
That is corroborated by similar things which have corroborated the right
of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, through his wonderful
miraculous nature, in addition to him being separate from the people
through the addition of the great extent of his knowledge and substance.
God, may He be praised and exalted, said: The sign of his kingship is
that he will bring you the ark in which there is assurance from your
Lord and the rest of what the family of Moses and the family of Aaron
left, which the angels brought. In that there is a sign for you if you
would believe (II 248).

The transcendence of ordinary human behaviour by the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, lies in the knowledge which we have recounted
and other things similar to the transcendency of ordinary human
behaviour by Talut in bringing the ark. This is clear. May God be the
bringer of success.

I still find the ignorant and the obstinate among the anti-Shi'a
(nasiba) showing surprise at the report of the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, meeting the jinn, and keeping their evil away
from the Prophet, may God bless him, his family, and his Companions.
They laugh at that and attribute the story to such useless nonsense.
They diminish such things concerning reports of similar miracles by him,
peace be on him, and say these are forgeries by the Shi'a, and those of
them who forge have forged them in order to acquire (prestige) and in
order to defend desperately (their beliefs). This is exactly what all
the atheists (zanadiqa) and the enemies of Islam say about what the
Qur'an mentions with regard to the report of the jinn and their
submission to Islam in its words: We have heard a wondrous Qur'an which
leads to guidance (LXXII I-2). (They take a similar attitude) about the
report of Ibn Mas'ud concerning the story of the night of the jinn and
him seeing them like gipsies. (They also have the same view) of the
miracles of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family-They
show surprise at all of these and laugh when they hear the account of
them, dispute their authenticity, mock and talk nonsense in a slanderous
way in which they conduct themselves against Islam and its followers,
regarding as stupid those who believe in it and support it, accusing the
followers of Islam of deficiency and ignorance, and forging false
stories. Let the people examine the crime which they have committed
against Islam by their hostility to the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, and their relying on removing his virtues, noble actions and
signs by which they resemble the classes of the atheists (zanadiqa) and
unbelievers through their departure from the roads of (true) proofs into
the gates of deviation and ignorance. In God do we seek help.


**His Sending back the Sun
**
Among the wonderful signs which God, the Exalted, has brought forth
through the hands of the Commander of the faithful, 'Ali b. Abi Talib,
is one, the reports of which have become widespread among the
biographers and historians ('ulama' al-siyar wa al-athar) and about
which the poets have composed verses (namely) when he, peace be on him,
sent back the sun (to its earlier position) on two occasions, once
during the life of the Prophet and another time after his death.

The account of it being sent back on the first occasion has been
reported by Asma' daughter of 'Umays, Umm Salama, the wife of the
Prophet, may God bless him and his family, Jabir b. 'Abd Allah
al-Ansari, Abu Sa'id al-Khudri and a group of the Companions.

One day the Prophet, may God bless him and his family, was in his house
and 'Ali, peace be on him, was in front of him when Gabriel, peace be on
him, came to him to speak privately to him about God. When inspiration
closed in upon him, he used the thigh of the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, as a pillow. He did not raise his head from it until
the sun had set. Thus he compelled the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, (to remain) in that position. So he prayed the afternoon
prayer sitting, giving a nod (with his head) for his bowing and
prostration. When (the Apostle) awoke" from his trance, he said to the
Commander of the faithful: "Have you missed the afternoon prayer?"

"I could not pray it standing because of your position, Apostle of God,
and the circumstances of hearing inspiration which I was in," he
answered.

"Ask God to send the sun back for you so that you may pray it standing
at its proper time just as (it was) when you missed being able to do
it," he told him. "God, the Exalted, will answer you because of your
obedience to God and to His Apostle."

The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, asked God to send back
the sun. It was sent back for him so that it came into its position in
the sky at the time for the afternoon prayer. The Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, prayed the afternoon prayer at its proper
time. Then it set. [Asma' reported:]

By God we heard it at its setting, screeching like the screech of the
saw in wood.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Its being sent back for him after the Prophet, may God bless him and
his family, was when he wanted to cross the Euphrates at Babylon, many
of his followers were occupied in taking their animals and baggage
across. He, peace be on him, prayed the afternoon prayer himself with a
group who were with him. The people did not finish their crossing and
many of them missed the time of the prayer. The people recalled the
merit of being together for that (prayer) and they spoke about that.
When he heard their talk about it, he asked God to send back the sun so
that all his followers might be together to perform the afternoon prayer
at its proper time. God, the Exalted, answered him by sending back the
sun for him. The horizons became such as they are for the time of the
afternoon prayer. When the people had said the final greeting (at the
end of the prayer), the sun disappeared and a violent throbbing was
heard from it which terrified the people. They became profuse in their
glorification of God, in their declarations of His uniqueness, and in
seeking forgiveness from him, and in praising God for the favour which
he had shown to them.

The reports of that have reached the (distant) horizons and its account
is widespread among the people. Concerning that al-Sayyid b. Muhammad
al-Himyari, may God have mercy on him, recited:

The sun was sent back for him when he missed the time of the afternoon
prayer and sunset had drawn near.

So that its light shone (the same as) at its time for the afternoon.
Then it fell like a shooting star.

For him it was sent back another time at Babylon. It has not been sent
back for any Arab creature,

Only so that his first (view of it) may be mixed with his later (view
of it) and so that it being sent back may be an explanation of a
wondrous matter.


**The Miracle of Speaking to the Fish
**
Similar to that is (the account) which the historians (ahl al-athar)
report and which has become famous among the Kufans because of it being
widespread among them. Hence the report has spread to other people in
other places. The scholars also confirm it. (It is) that the fish talked
to him at the Euphrates by Kufa.

[They report:]

The waters of the Euphrates overflowed and grew so big that the people
of Kufa became anxious about drowning. They resorted to the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him. He rode out on the mule of the Apostle of
God, may God bless him and his family, and the people went with him
until he reached the banks of the Euphrates. He, peace be on him,
dismounted and performed the ritual ablution and prayed alone, by
himself, while the people watched him. Then he called on God with
prayers which most of them heard. He went towards the Euphrates, leaning
on a stick which was in his hand. He struck the surface of the water
with it and said: "Abate, with God's permission and His will."

The waters sank so that the fish at the bottom (of the flood) appeared.
Many of them greeted him with title of the Commander of the faithful.
However some kinds of fish did not speak. They were eels, a scaleless
fish (marmaliq)and mud fish (zumar). The people were amazed at that and
they asked for the reason that the ones who spoke spoke and the ones who
were silent were silent. He said: "God made those fish which were
ritually pure speak to me and he kept those silent towards me which were
forbidden, impure and worse."

This is a widespread report, the fame of which is, through its
transmission and narration, like the fame of the wolves speaking to the
Prophet, the stones praising God in the palm of his hand, the trunk of
the tree bending towards him and the feeding of many with little food.
Whoever continues to find fault with ('Ali's miracles) is one who can
only find the doubts about it in what the denigrators depend upon, in
what we have enumerated of the miracles of the Apostle.


**The Commander of the Faithful and the Jinn
**


The historians (hamalat al-athar wa ruwat al-akhbar) have also reported
the story of the snake and the sign and miraculous nature of it which is
like the story of the fishes and the abating of the waters of the
Euphrates.

[They reported:]

One day the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, was making a
speech on the pulpit at Kufa, when a snake appeared at the side of the
pulpit and began to climb up until it was near the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him. The people shook with fear at that and were
worried about its purpose and about driving it away from the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him. He signalled to them to keep away from
it. When it reached the raised platform on which the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, was standing, he bent down towards the snake
and the snake spread itself up towards him so that it could gobble his
ear.

The people fell silent and became distraught at that. It made a
croaking sound which many of them heard. Then it went down from its
position. The Commander of the faithful moved his lips in a whisper and
the snake acted as if it was listening to him. Then it glided away. The
ground had swallowed it up. The Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, went on with his speech and brought it to a close.

When he had finished it and gone down, the people gathered around him,
questioning him about the circumstances of the snake and the wonder of
it. He told them: "That was not as you had thought. It was only one of
the judges of the jinn, whom a case had confused. He came to me to find
out from me about it. I informed him about it. He wished me well and
departed."

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Often the ignorant among the people regard the appearance of jinn in
the form of animals which cannot speak as impossible. However, that was
well-known by the Arabs, before the mission (of the Prophet) and after
it, and reports from people belonging to Islam corroborate it. Nor is it
more unlikely than the report which is agreed on by Muslims (ahl
al-qibla) of the appearance of the Devil to the people in the assembly
building in the form of an old man from Najd, and his agreement with
them to deceive the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family,
and of his appearing to the polytheists at the Battle of Badr in the
form of Saraqa b. Ja'sham al-Madliji. He, the Exalted, said: There will
be no conqueror of you among the people today. I am one who grants you
neighbourly protection (VIII 48). God, the Mighty and High, said: When
the two groups looked at each other, he turned on his heels and said: I
am innocent of you. I see what you do not see. I fear God. God is
violent in His punishment (VIII 48).

All who continue to find fault with the signs which we have mentioned
only say about them the same as the atheists and unbelievers among the
opponents of religion, say. They find fault with them in the same way as
they find fault with the signs of the Prophet in confirmation of his
prophethood, and with the validity of the miracles of the Apostle of
God, may God bless him and his family.


**Some other Miracles of the Commander of the Faithful
**


[Another example is reported by 'Abd al-Qahir b.'Abd al-Malik b.'Ata\`
al-Ashja'i on the authority of al-Walid b.'Imran al-Bajali, on the
authority of Jami' b.'Umayr, who said:]

'Ali, peace be on him, suspected a man called al-Ghayzar of giving
information to Mu'awiya. He denied that and disputed it. The Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, said: "Do you swear by God that you
have not done so?"

"Yes," he answered and he hurried forward and took the oath.

"If you are a liar," the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
told him, "God will blind you."

The Friday had not come when he was brought out blind, being led. God
had taken away his sight.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[Of the same kind is what is reported by Isma'il b.'Umayr, who said:
Mis'ar b. Kidam told me: Talha b.'Umayra told us:]

'Ali, peace be on him, recited the words of the Prophet to the people:
To whomsoever I am his master (mawla),'Ali is his master. Twelve men
from the Ansar testified to that but Anas b. Malik was among the people
who did not give testimony to it. The Commander of the faithful, said to
him: "Anas."

"At your service," he replied

"What stopped you from testifying?" he asked. "You have heard what they
heard."

"Commander of the faithful," he replied, "I have grown old and I have
forgotten."

"O God," the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, prayed, "if he
is a liar, strike him with leprosy" [or he said a word for it which is
understood by the ordinary people].

[Talha reported:]

"I testify before God, I saw a whiteness (of leprosy) between his
eyes."

[Similarly Abu Isra'il has reported on the authority of al-Hakam b. Abi
Salman, the mu'adhdhin, on the authority of Zayd b. Arqam, who said:]

'Ali, peace be on him, recited before the people in the mosque and
said: "May God adjure to arise any man who heard the Prophet, may God
bless him and his family, say: To whomsoever I am his master
(mawla),'Ali is his master. O God, be a friend to those who befriend him
and an enemy to those who are hostile to him."

Twelve men, who fought at Badr, stood up, six on the right and six on
the left, and they testified to that.

[Zayd b. Arqam added:]

I was among those who heard that but I kept it hidden. Then God took
away my sight.

He used to regret failing to give testimony and he used to seek
forgiveness from God.

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

[Another example is what is reported by 'Ali b. Mushir on the authority
of al-A'mash, on the authority of Musa b. Tarif, on the authority of
'Abaya and (also it is reported on the authority of) Musa b. Ukayl
al-Numayri, on the authority of 'Imran b. Maytham on the authority of
'Abaya. (It is further reported on the authority of) Musa al-Wajihi, on
the authority of al-Minhal b. 'Umar, and on the authority of 'Abd Allah
b. al-Harith, 'Uthman b. Sa'id, and 'Abd Allah b. Bukayr, on the
authority of Hakim b. Jubayr: They (all) said:]

We witnessed 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, on
the pulpit saying: "I am the servant of God, the brother of the Apostle
of God. I have inherited the blessing from the Apostle. I have married
the mistress of the women of Heaven. I am the master of the testamentary
trustees of authority, and those who are the last trustees of the
Prophet. No one except me can claim that without God striking him with
evil."

A man from (the tribe of) 'Abs who was sitting in front of the people
said: "Who is not good enough to say this. I am the servant of God, the
brother of the Apostle of God."

He had not left his place when the Devil caught hold of him and dragged
him by his leg to the door of the mosque. His people asked us about him
and we said: "Did you know him to be a man of (stupid) risks before
this?"

"O God, no," they answered.

[Al-Shaykh al-Mufid, may God be pleased with him, says:]

The reports about similar things to what we have mentioned are (such)
that the book would become too long as a result of them. We have put
forward in this book of ours sufficiency in its outline to do without
what is similar to them. We ask God for success and we seek help from
Him along the path of guidance.


NOTES

1. Same tradition reported in al-Tabari, I, 1800-1, but 'Ikrima is not
the authority. 'Abd Allah b. al-'Abbas explains 'Aisha's omission to
'Ubayd Allah b. 'Abd Allah.

2. Cf. al-Tabari, I, 3383-4.

3. This has already been presented, cf 83-88.

