The Circumstances of the Last Illness and Death of the Prophet3
===============================================================

Among the circumstances which were given new significance by the
Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, and the events which
occurred through the decree and ordinance of God, which confirm his
outstanding merit and characterise his exalted rank, are those which
occurred after the Farewell Pilgrimage. That was when the (Prophet),
peace be on him, realised through the nearness of (the end of) his
allotted span (the need to put into effect) what he had already told his
community. He, peace be on him, began to make speech after speech among
the Muslims, warning them against discord after him and opposition to
him. He confirmed his injunction to them to cleave to his sunna and
those (matters) on which there was agreement and conformity. He urged
them to follow his family, to obey them, to support, guard and hold fast
to them in religion. He warned them against opposition and apostasy.

Among the things which were mentioned by him, peace be on him, is one
which the reporters (of tradition and history) report with agreement and
unanimity, that he, peace be on him, said: "People, I am a way-mark for
you. You will come to meat the (heavenly) waters. Then indeed I will ask
you about the two important things (which I left behind). Take care how
you follow me with regard to them, for the Good and Knowing (God) has
informed me that they will never scatter (from you) until they meet me.
I asked my Lord for that and He granted it to me. Indeed I have left
among you the Book of God and the offspring of my family (ahl al-bayt).
Do not try to outdo them, for then you will be destroyed. Do not try to
teach them, for they are more knowledgeable than you. People, may I not
find you, after I (have gone), returning to being unbelievers with some
of you striking down others, for then you will meet me with a host like
a sea of flowing soldiers. Indeed 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, is
my brother, my trustee (wasi). After me he will fight for the (true)
interpretation of the Qur'an just like I fought for its revelation."

He, may God bless him and his family, used to address meeting after
meeting with words like these.

Then he commissioned Usama b. Zayd b. Haritha. He ordered and urged him
to leave with many members of the community for where his father had
been killed in the Byzantine (empire). He, peace be on him, decided to
send out the foremost of the Emigrants and Ansar in his army, so that at
his death there would not be anyone in Medina who differed about the
leadership and who had ambitions to become the leader of the people. In
this way he (hoped to) set in order the situation for the man who was to
succeed him and to prevent any opponent from opposing him in his right.
He gave (Usama) the command on the condition which we have mentioned and
he endeavoured to send them out. He ordered Usama to leave Medina with
his army for al-Jurf, and he urged the people to go out to him and to go
with him. He warned them against lingering and dilatoriness in (doing)
it.4

While matters were in that situation, the illness came upon him of
which he (later) died. When he felt the sickness which had befallen him,
he took the hand of 'Ali, peace be on him. A group of the people
followed him and he headed for (the cemetery of) al-Baqi'. He told those
who followed him: "I have been commanded to seek forgiveness for (the
souls of) the people of (the cemetery of) al-Baqi'."

They went with him until he stopped in front of them. He, peace be on
him, said: "People of the graves, let there be comfort for you in your
situation (as opposed to the situation) in which discords have come upon
the people like the cutting of the dark night when the first of them
will follow the last."

Then he (spent) a long time seeking forgiveness for (the souls of) the
people of (the cemetery of) al-Baqi'. (After this), he approached the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, and told him: "Gabriel,
peace be on him, used to revise the Qur'an with me once each year. This
year he has revised it with me twice. I can only consider that it is
because (the end of) my allotted span of life is at hand." Then he said:
"'Ali, I was given the choice between remaining forever amid the
treasuries of the world or of (going to) heaven. I have chosen to meet
my Lord and (to go to) heaven. When I die, wash me. Cover my nakedness
so that no one but a blind man could see it."5

He returned to his house and remained there for three days in a weak
condition. Then he went out to the mosque, wearing a turban on his head
and leaning on the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, on his
right hand and on al-Fadl b. al-'Abbas on his other hand. He went up on
the pulpit and sat there. Then he said: "People, the time of my
departure from you has come. Whoever has any goods with me, let him come
to me so that I may give them to him. Whoever has a debt which I owe
him, let him inform me of it. People, between God and any man there is
nothing by which (God) will give him better or by which God will keep
away from him evil, except works (al-'amal). People, by Him who sent me
as a prophet with truth, let no one claim nor anyone desire that there
should be salvation without works through (God's) mercy. If I had
disobeyed, I would have been hurled down (to damnation). O God, have I
conveyed (the message)?"

He went down and led the people in a short prayer. He returned to his
house. At that time, he was in the house of Umm Salama, may God be
pleased with her. He remained there for a day or two. Then 'Aisha came
to her to ask her to move him to her house so that she might undertake
to nurse him. She had asked the wives of the Prophet about that and they
had given her their permission. Thus he, may God bless him and his
family, was moved to the house in which 'Aisha lived. The illness
remained with him for several days and grew more serious.

At the time of the morning prayer, Bilal came while the Apostle of God,
may God bless him and his family, was overcome by sickness. (He asked:)
"Do I call the prayer, may God have mercy on you?"

The Apostle of God gave him permission to make his call and said: "Let
one of the people pray before them, for I am too distracted by (the
final hours of) my life."

"Order Abu Bakr," 'Aisha said.

"Order 'Umar," intervened Hafsa.

When the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, heard their
words and saw the eagerness of each of them to exalt her own father and
their discord about that, he said: "Have you put the shroud on the
Apostle of God while he is still alive? Indeed you are like the
mistresses of Joseph."

Then he, peace be on him, rose hurriedly fearing that one of the two
men would go forward (to lead the prayers). He had ordered them to go
with Usama and he had had no idea that they would be disobedient.
However when he heard what he heard from 'Aisha and Hafsa, he knew that
they had delayed in (obeying) his command. He hurried to prevent discord
and remove doubt. He, blessings and peace be on him, arose despite the
fact that he could barely lift himself off the ground through weakness.
'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, took his hand and al-Fadl b.
al-'Abbas took the other. He leaned on them both and his feet dragged a
trail along the ground because of his weakness.

When he came out into the mosque, he found that Abu Bakr had already
got to the mihrab. He indicated with his hand that he should withdraw
and Abu Bakr withdrew. The Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family, took up his place. He said the "takbir" and began the prayer
which Abu Bakr had begun before without taking any account of what had
already been performed.

After he had said the final greeting of the prayer, he returned to his
house. He summoned Abu Bakr, 'Umar and a group of the Muslims who had
been present at the mosque. He said: "Did I not order you to go with the
army of Usama?"

"Yes, Apostle of God," they replied.

"Why have you delayed from (carrying out) my order?"

"I had gone out but then I returned so that I might renew my covenant
with you," Abu Bakr said.

"Apostle of God, I did not go out because I did not want to ask
travellers about you," 'Umar answered.

"Despatch the army of Usama, despatch the army of Usama," commanded the
Prophet, may God bless him and his family. He repeated it three times
and then he fainted from the fatigue which had come upon him and the
sorrow which possessed him.

He remained unconscious for a short time while the Muslims wept and his
wives and the women and children of the Muslims, and all those present
raised great cries of lamentation. The Apostle of God, may God bless him
and his family, recovered consciousness and looked at them. Then he
said: "Bring me ink and parchment so that I may write a document for
you, after which you will never go astray."

Again he fainted and one of those present rose to look for ink and
parchment.

"Go back," 'Umar ordered him. "He is delirious."

The man went back. (Later) those present regretted the dilatoriness
(they had shown) in bringing ink and parchment and rebuked each other.
They used to say: "We belong to God and to Him we will return, but we
have become anxious about our disobedience to the Apostle of God, may
God bless him and his family.6

When he, peace be on him, recovered consciousness, one of them said:
"We will not bring you ink and parchment, Apostle of God."

"May God remove him who made you say 'no'," he said. "However, I will
appoint a trustee over you in a better way through my family."

Then he turned his head away from the people. They rose to leave but
al-'Abbas, al-Fadl b. al-'Abbas and 'Ali b. Abi Talib and his family, in
particular, remained with him.

"If this matter is to be settled upon us after you, then tell us,"
al-'Abbas asked him. "If you know that we are to be overcome, then give
us the decision."

"You are those who will be found weak after me," he answered and then
was silent.

The people (rose to leave), weeping with despair at (losing) the
Prophet, may God bless him and his family. When they had left, he, peace
be on him, said: "Send back to me my brother and my uncle (i.e. 'Ali and
al-'Abbas)."

They sent for someone to call them and he brought them. When he had
them sitting close, he, blessings and peace be on him, said: "Uncle of
the Apostle of God, will you accept my testamentary bequest (wasi),
fulfil my promise and carry out my religion?"

"Apostle of God, your uncle is an old man with the responsibilities of
a large family," answered al-'Abbas. "You vie with the wind n liberality
and generosity. You have made promises which your uncle could never
fulfil."

Then he turned to 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him, and said:
"Brother, will you accept my testamentary bequest, fulfil my promises,
carry out my religion on my behalf and look after the affairs of my
family after me?"

"Yes, Apostle of God," he replied.

"Come near me," he told him.

He went near to him and he embraced him. He took his ring from his
finger and said: "Take this and put it on your finger."

Then he called for his sword, his breastplate and all his weapons and
gave those to him. He looked for a turban which he used to wear around
his stomach when he put on his weapons and went out to battle. It was
brought to him and he gave it to the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him. Then he said to him: "Go, 'Ali, in the name of God, to your
house."

On the next day, the people were denied access to him as he was
seriously ill in bed. The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
did not leave him except to (fulfil) some necessities. Then he had to go
to attend to some of his affairs. The Apostle of God, may God bless him
and his family, recovered consciousness and he missed 'Ali. His wives
were around him and he said: "Call my brother and my companion." The
weakness returned to him and he fell silent.

"Call Abu Bakr," 'Aisha said.

Abu Bakr was summoned. He came and sat by his head. When he opened his
eyes, he looked at him and then turned his head away from him. Abu Bakr
arose and said: "If he had any need of me, he would have communicated it
to me."

When he had gone, the Apostle of God repeated his words a second time
and said: "Call my brother and my companion."

"Call 'Umar for him," Hafsa said.

'Umar was summoned. When he came and the Apostle of God, may God bless
him and his family, saw him, he turned his head away from him. So he
went away. Then he said: "Call my brother and companion."

"Call 'Ali," said Umm Salama, may God be pleased with her, "for he does
not mean anyone else."

The Commander of the faithful was summoned. When he was close to him,
he indicated to him to bend down to him. Then the Apostle of God, may
God bless him and his family, spoke privately to him for a long time.
Then he rose and sat down beside him until the Apostle of God, may God
bless him and his family, fell asleep.

When he had fallen asleep, ('Ali) went out.

"What did he entrust to you, Abu al-Hasan?" the people asked him.

"He taught me of a thousand doors of knowledge and each door opened for
me (another) thousand doors," he answered. "He made a bequest to me of
what I will undertake (qa'im) if God, the Exalted, wishes."

He became critically ill and death was at hand. The Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, was present with him. When his soul was about
to depart, he said: "'Ali, put my head in your lap, for the order of God
(for my death) has come. When my soul departs, take it with your hand
and rub your face with it. Then point me in the direction of the qibla.
Carry out my command and pray over me as the first of the people. Do not
leave me until you have buried me in my grave. Seek the help of God, the
Exalted."

'Ali-, peace be on him, took his head and put it in his lap. Then he
lost consciousness. Fatima, peace be on her, bent down to look into his
face. She was weeping and calling to him, saying:

May he be watered by the white clouds (pouring water) on his face. (He
was) the one who cared for orphans and the one who protected widows.

Then the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family, opened his
eyes and said in a weak voice: "These are words for your uncle, Abu
Talib. Do not recite them. Rather recite: What is Muhammad except a
Messenger by whom messages have been delivered. If he dies or is killed,
you will be turned on your heels (III 144). "

She wept for a long time. He indicated to her to come close. She went
close to him and he whispered something to her which lit up her face.
Then he, blessings and peace be on him, died. The right hand of the
Commander of the faithful was under his jaw and his soul passed into it.
He raised it to his face and rubbed it with it. Then he put him in the
direction (of the qibla), closed his eyes, and laid him out on his
waist-cloth (izar).

The report has been handed down that Fatima, peace be on her, was
asked: "What did the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family,
whisper to you so that by it he made the grief and worry of his death
leave you?"

She replied: "He told me that I would be the first of his family (ahl
al-bayt) to join him and that it would not be a long time for me after
him before I would be with him. That made (the grief) go from me."

When the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, wanted to wash
him, he summoned al-Fadl b. al-'Abbas and told him to get water for him
to wash him after he had put a cover over his eyes. Then he split open
his shirt from before the pocket to the midriff. He washed him, perfumed
(his body) and shrouded him, while al-Fadl passed him the water and
helped him. When he had finished washing and preparing his body, he went
forward and prayed alone. No one shared in the prayer with him. The
Muslims in the mosque were talking about who would lead them in the
prayer over him and where he would be buried. The Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, came out to them and said: "The Apostle of
God, may God bless him and his family, is our Imam, both alive and dead.
Therefore let group after group of you come in and let them pray over
him without an Imam and then let them depart. God only took the soul of
the Prophet in one place and it would please him for his grave to be
there. I will bury him in the room in which he died."

The people accepted that and were pleased with it.

When the Muslims had prayed over him, al-Abbas b. 'Abd al-Muttalib sent
a man to Abu 'Ubayda b. al-Jarrah. He used to dig graves for the
Meccans. That was the custom of the Meccans. He also sent to Zayd b.
Sahl, who used to dig graves for the Medinans and make a niche in the
side of the grave. He summoned them both and said: "O God, choose (one
of them) for your Prophet."

The man was found to be Abu Talha Zayd b. Sahl and he was told to dig a
grave for the Apostle of God, may God bless him and grant him peace. He
dug a tomb for him. The Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
entered it (as did) al-'Abbas b. 'Abd al-Muttalib, al-Fadl b. al-'Abbas
and Usama b. Zayd, so that they might carry out the burial of the
Apostle.

At this, the Ansar called out from behind the house: "'Ali, we remind
you of God and our right today with regard to the Apostle of God lest it
should go (from us). Let a man from among us come in so that we may have
a share in the burial of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family."

"Let Aws b. Khawali come in," he answered.

He was an excellent man, who had taken part in Badr, from the Banu 'Awf
of Khazraj. When he came in, 'Ali, peace be on him, told him: "Go down
into the grave."

He went down. The Commander of the faithful put the (body of) the
Apostle of God, blessings and peace be on them both, into his hands and
lowered it into his grave. When it reached the earth, he told him to
come out. He came out and 'Ali, peace be on him, went down into the
grave. He uncovered the face of the Apostle of God, may God bless him
and his family, and put his cheek on the earth in the direction of the
qibla towards his right. Then he put clay soil on him and then poured
the earth over him.

That was on Monday with two days remaining in (the month of) Safar in
the eleventh year after his emigration, the blessings and peace of God
be on him. He was sixty-three years of age.

Most of the people did not attend the burial of the Apostle of God, may
God bless him and his family, because of the dispute which was taking
place between the Emigrants and the Ansar over the matter of succession
(khilafa). Most of them also missed the (funeral) prayer over him on
that account as well. Fatima began to call out: "How evil has this
morning become for him!"

Abu Bakr heard her and said: "Your morning is an evil morning." The
people seized the opportunity of 'Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him,
being occupied with the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his
family, and the isolation of the Banu Hashim from them because of the
tragedy which had befallen them with regard to the Apostle of God, may
God bless him and his family. So they hurried to take control of the
affair. What was agreed on was agreed in favour of Abu Bakr because of
the dislike of the newly-converted Meccans (tulaqa) and (the dislike of)
those whose hearts had been reconciled, of delaying the matter until
Banu Hashim had finished.

Thus was the matter settled and (the people) pledged allegiance to Abu
Bakr because of his presence at the place. Well-known factors motivated
the people to accept this. Among them were their own desires. This book
is not the place to mention them and we will explain in detail the
discussion about them (elsewhere).

The report is handed down that when what had taken place for Abu Bakr
had taken place and those who pledged allegiance to him, had pledged
allegiance, a man came to the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, while he was arranging the grave of the Apostle of God, may God
bless him and his family, with a shovel in his hand. He said to him:
"The people have pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr. The Ansar have given up
because of their differences and the new Meccan converts (tulaqa )have
hurried to make their covenant to the man out of fear of your attaining
authority."

He put the tip of the shovel on the ground with his hand still on it
and answered: In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Do
the people reckon that they will abandon saying: 'We believe,' without
being guilty of deceit? We have tested those before them. God knows
those who are truthful and He knows the liar. Do those who do evil deeds
consider that they can outdo us? How wrong is their judgement (XXIX
1-4)

Abu Sufyan came to the door of the Apostle of God, may God bless him
and his family, while 'Ali and al-'Abbas were zealously attending to the
arrangements for him, and he called out:

Banu Hashim, the people have no desire for you. Special (to them) are
(the clans of) Taym b. Murra and 'Adi.

Yet authority should only be among you and belong to you. Only Abu
al-Hasan ('Ali) has (a right) to it.

Abu al-Hasan, take hold of it with a resolute hand. You are being
deprived of the authority which you expected.

Then he called out at the top of his voice : "Banu Hashim, Banu 'Abd
Manaf, are you content that the despicable father of a young camel, the
son of a despicable man, should have authority over you? No, by God, if
you wish, let me provide horses and men (who will be sufficient) for
it."

"Go back, Abu Sufyan," shouted the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him. "By God, you do not seek God in what you are suggesting. You are
still plotting against Islam and those who believe in it. We are busy
with the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family. Each person
gets what he has earned and he is (only) responsible for (wali) the
crime he has committed."

Abu Sufyan went to the mosque. There he found the Banu Umayya gathered.
He urged them (to take action) in the matter but they did not respond to
him.

Discord was general and affliction was everywhere. Evil events had
taken place by which Satan gained (greater) power and in which lying and
hostile people co-operated. Through their denunciation of it, the people
of (true) belief were abandoned. This is the interpretation of God's
words: Beware of discord which especially, strikes against those of you
who oppress (VIII 25).

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*


In the outstanding virtues of the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, which we have enumerated after what we have already mentioned
with regard to the Farewell Pilgrimage, there is evidence which
indicates that he, peace be on him, was especially characterised by them
in a way that nobody else of mankind shared. Each one of them was a
special category (of virtue) which stood in its own right without
needing anything else to (explain) its significance.

Surely you realise that his special distinction during the illness of
the Prophet, may God bless him and his family, up to the time that God,
the Exalted, took him, required merit in religion and affinity to the
Prophet, may God bless him and his family? (This can be seen) through
the good deeds which made (the Prophet) rely and depend on him, and set
him apart from all the people in order to look after him at (the end of)
his life. (Thus you should realise) the special distinction of his love
for him which no one else shared with him. (Then there is also) the
testamentary bequest (wasiyya) which he made to him after it had been
offered to someone else and refused because the burdens of the duties
involved in it, and the responsibility of carrying it out and fulfilling
the trust (were too heavy) for that other person to carry out. He was
characterised by having been brothered with the Apostle of God, may God
bless him and his family, and by being with him during his illness when
he summoned him. In him was deposited the knowledge of religion by which
he made him separate from anyone else. He carried out the washing and
preparation of his body for (his journey to) God. He said the (funeral)
prayer over him before any one else, and he had precedence over them in
that through his rank with (the Apostle) and with God, the Exalted. He
guided the community as to the manner of the (funeral) prayer over him
when the matter was doubtful to them. He showed them the place to bury
him despite the difference of opinion that they had had concerning that.
They submitted to what he told them to do and considered him (right) in
that. Thus through all of that he must be regarded as unique in his
merit. Through it he brought to completion the outstanding action for
Islam which he had begun at its beginning (and continued) to the death
of the Apostle of God, may God bless him and his family. As a result of
it there occurred for him a consecutive chain of virtues. No blemish
entered any of his actions in religion. No aspect of his merit, as we
have recorded it, puts any limitation on the ultimate in qualities of
faith and in the virtues of Islam. This should also be associated with
his marvellous miracles which confounded nature. He is such that there
cannot be found an equal to him except for a prophet who has been sent
(with a message) and an angel who has been brought into close proximity
(with God), and such as are associated with them in the degree of their
virtues in the eyes of God, may He be praised. With regard to those who
oppose these three categories, traditional knowledge ('ada) follows a
contrary (path to them) with the agreement of those who have reason (to
think), tongues (to speak) and are aware of the traditions ('adaat). We
ask God for success and by Him we will be protected from error.

**NOTES
**
1. The account concurs with that of Ibn Ishaq though according to him
'Ali does not bring any sacrificial offering. Nor is 'Umar mentioned by
Ibn Ishaq, cf. Ibn Hisham, Sira, 966-968.

2. For a collection of the traditions supporting the account of Ghadir
Khumm, cf. al-Baladhuri, Ansab al-Ashraf, II, 108-111.

3. The crucial events around the Prophet's death represent an important
feature of the Shi'ite polemic. The following account gives a clear
picture of the Shi'ite position.

4. Cf. Ibn Hisham, Sira, 1006-7 without mentioning Abu Bakr and 'Umar's
involvement.

5. Cf. ibid., 1001, without mentioning 'Ali.

6. Cf. al-Tabari, I, 1807.

