Lesson 20 : Conditions For Dress During Prayers
===============================================

The clothes worn by a person during prayers must fulfill six
conditions.: I. Taharat (Cleanliness). If anyone intentionally says his
prayers with clothes that are najis, his prayer will be automatically
invalid.

Situation 1:

If someone prays while with najis clothing, his prayer will be void.
This is true even if he does not know that praying with najis clothes
makes salaat batil. When he learns this, he must repay his salaat.

Situation 2:

If a person does not know that his clothes are najis and after
completing his prayers, he discovers this, then his prayer is
accepted.

Situation 3:

If a person forgets that his clothes are najis and remembers this while
praying or after completing his prayers, he has to repeat his salaat
again. If the time of prayer has passed, then he must pray qadha. If he
doubts whether his clothes were najis, then his pray will be valid only
if this doubt arose after he completed his prayers.

Situation 4:

If a person wears clean and taahir clothes and then realizes after
prayers that there was some najasat on it, his prayer will be valid.

II. Mubah (Permissible). If one intentionally uses another's clothes
without the owner's permission, his prayer will be batil. If he uses
another's clothes, knowing that the owner would not agree if asked then
his prayer will be baatil even if the clothes are only a part of his
whole outfit e.g. a shirt.

Situation 1:

If a person does not know or forgets that his clothes are borrowed then
his prayer is acceptable.

III. Clothes worn in prayers should not be made from the dead body of
animals whose blood does not gush when slaughtered.

IV. The clothes worn by a person during salaat should not be made from
parts of animal whose meat is haraam - even if it is only the hair of
the animal - as this would make his prayer invalid.

V. If the person offering prayers is male, his clothes should not have
gold embroidery on them.

Situation 1:

If a man prays while wearing jewellry or a watch made of gold, his
prayers become invalid. For women however, this is allowed.

Situation 2: Golden rings, earrings, chain, watches, and ribbons are
all haram for men to wear, whether in prayer or not. For women, it is
proper to wear such articles .

VI. The clothes of a man who is praying should not be made of silk.
Silk, like gold, is haram for men to wear even under other
circumstances. For women, this condition does not apply Note: Special
condition for women A woman who is praying must cover all her body
except for her face and hands - up to the wrists. This rule must be
followed even if there is no na-mahram present. Exceptional cases

1. Blood stains from a wound.

Situation 1

If either the body or clothes of a person is stained with blood from a
wound or through a blister, he can pray with it as long as the wound has
healed. The same applies to any pus that flows out with the
blood. \*\*internally

Situation 2

If the najasat comes out from the wound and reaches an external area
e.g. the skin, then the person in question cannot pray salaat in that
state. If the najasat (blood) is only on the wound and surrounding
areas, then the salaat becomes acceptable.

Situation 3

If the wound or its bandage is najis but it is possible to wash out the
najasat then one can wash the area and pray. But salaat will become void
if one does not wash in such a case.

2. If blood of a quantity equal to or less than the size of a thumb
stains ones clothes, then one can pray with those clothes. This is only
valid if the blood is that of a human being or a halal animal whose
blood comes out with a gush.

3. Small articles of clothing like socks, caps or a watch-band that
have come in contact with najasat do not nullify salaat.

**Think And Answer**

1. What are the conditions for the clothes of prayers?

2. If a person prays with najasat on either his clothes or body and
does not know this, is his salaat valid or invalid?

3. What is the law concerning salaat if a person realizes after his
prayers that his body or clothes were najis?

4. What if the person realizes that his najis state during salaat, then
what?

5. Is it permissible to wear ghasbi clothes in salaat?

case?

Is our Salaat valid in this 6. What is the Islamic ruling about silk
clothes and gold?

7. Mention in detail some exceptions that exist in the conditions of
salaat mentioned in No. 6 above?

8. How should a woman dress while performing salaat?


