Lesson 6 : the First Pledhes To the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
===========================================================

The season of Hajj always provided a very good opportunity to the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) to meet with pilgrims and other travelers
and talk to them about the message of Islam. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
explained Islam to them and invited them to bring Imaan on it while they
were away from the Mushrikeen (Idol-Worshippers).

It was during one such season that the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) held
discussions with six people from the tribe of Khazraj in Medina. It all
began when they heard the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.w.) read out some
verses from the Holy Qur'an that spoke about Tawheed and rejected Shirk
and idol-worship. He was speaking to the public about performing good
deeds, and reminding them about the hereafter and the next life.

His actions are supported in the Qur'an in Sura Nahl, Verses 64 to 69
as follows: "And We have not revealed to you the book except that you
may make it clear to them and that about which they differ, and as a
guidance and a mercy for a people who believe…"

The words of Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) attracted the six people mentioned
above and the love of Islam embedded itself in their hearts. They knew
that according to the Jewish texts, Musa (a.s.) had predicted the advent
of a prophet who would be based in Arabia and would invite people
towards the oneness of God.

From their observation of the noble light that shone from the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s face and his eloquent words, they knew that they
had found that prophet. Thus, they gladly and wholeheartedly accepted
Islam.

When the time came for them to depart and head back home, they told the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.), "Now we are going back to our own town, Yathrib and
we will spread the message of Islam there."

It was the effort of these people that led to the foundation and spread
of Islam in Yathrib. The people there had heard of the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) and through the description and encouragement of these six,
many accepted Islam. A short while later, twelve leaders from Yathrib
headed to Mecca and pledged their commitment to Islam. They made an
agreement with the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) offering full support in spreading
his deen.

Meeting with these 12 people was not easy task for the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) due to the fact that he was under the constant supervision of
the Kuffar (idol- worshippers). At that time, the city of Mecca was a
place of fear and darkness for the Muslims. Thus, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
decided to meet them outside the town at a place under the mountain
called AQABA. The meeting took place after midnight to escape the notice
of the enemy.

**The First Pledge Of Aqaba**

It was past the middle of the night when Asad Ibn Zararah and Ibadat
Ibn Samat, with ten others, walked silently down the rough road to the
agreed meeting place. They found the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) waiting
with a few Muslims who had braved the dangerous journey from Mecca. This
meeting was in held in total secrecy and their aim was to complete the
business before sunrise so that the Muslims could return to the city
without the knowledge of the Mushrikeen.

When the pact was agreed upon, the twelve representatives went back to
Yathrib, and told the people: "We have taken an oath on the absolute
belief in the Oneness of Allah (S.W.T.). We will not steal, kill our
children or insult one another and perform good actions in obedience to
Him and His Commands."

**The Propagation Of Islam In Medina**

As the days passed, the leaders wrote a letter to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) requesting him to send a person who could teach them Islam
and educate them about the Holy Qur'an. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) sent them
a man by the name of Mus'ab.

Mus'ab was a very good Qur'an reciter, with a melodious voice. He also
gave excellent speeches. He made it his habit to stand on the outskirts
of Yathrib (present day Medina) under the shade of a tree and begin
reciting the Holy Qur'an. His voice would attract people who would
gather around him and listen to his sweet tone. When he had a crowd
around him, Mus'ab would begin his speech about Islam. By then, most of
the crowd would be receptive and keen to hear what he had to say.

However, this made some leaders of Yathrib angry and finally one of
them threatened to throw him out of Medina. He rushed up to him with his
sword and shouted aloud: "Stop what you are doing and get out of our
town!" Mus'ab did not let the anger of the man effect him and asked him
to sit down and talk with him. He said, "Listen to what I have to say to
you and if you find it is not acceptable, then I shall stop propagating
and go back to where I came from."

The man replied, "You are right. Let me first listen to you and your
invitation, then I will make my decision."

He put the sword aside, and Mus'ab began to recite ayats from the Holy
Qur'an. The akhlaq and patience of the reciter, together with the beauty
and wisdom of the verses woke the man's sleeping spirit. He asked Mus'ab
to explain Islam to him and how he could embrace it. In reply to this,
Mus'ab said: "It is very simple and easy. In order to become a Muslim,
you need only bear witness that there is no God except Allah (S.W.T.)
and Muhammad is His Messenger."

**The Second Pledge Of Aqaba**

Over the period of that year, the people of Medina slowly began to
appreciate the teachings of Islam. By the time, the Hajj season dawned,
they were anxious to go meet the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) himself and
give their allegiance to him personally. Thus, when the pilgrims set out
for the journey, 500 people headed to Mecca from Medina and from these
70 were Muslims.

Upon reaching Mecca, they arranged for a meeting with the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) similar to the one that had taken place the year before. The
meeting was held on the night of 13th Dhul-Hajj behind a mountain near
Mina.

After speaking to them and encouraging them to continue living their
lives in the way of Islam. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) then spoke of his
interest in migrating to Medina. He told them that he wanted to set up
the base of Islam there, if he had their support.

The people were delighted to hear this and immediately pledged their
loyalty to him and Islam. They promised to protect him and uphold the
Laws of Islam even if it cost them their lives. One of them stood up
saying, "We are men of war and jehad. We have grown up in the war front
and are ready to sacrifice our lives for your protection and in defense
of Islam…"

These Muslims then silently signed an agreement with the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) and pledged themselves to him. All this was done in great
secrecy, as they were afraid that the Mushrikeen might have sent a spy
to watch their movements. By sunrise, everyone had dispersed, eager and
hopeful of the success of their aims.

Unfortunately, the fears of the Muslims were realized and the
Mushrikeen of Mecca found out about the meetings and the pledges. They
also heard about the plan of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to establish
his base in Medina where the people fully supported him. Knowing that
this would strengthen Islam, the Mushrikeen decided to meet in
Daarul-Nadwa and plan their next steps in dealing with this threat.

"Surely those who say: 'Our Lord is Allah!', then they continue on the
right way, they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve" Sura Ahqaaf,
Verse 12

A Holy Verse
**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT…**

1. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) first met with six people from the tribe
of Khazraj and explained Islam to them. His words and manners impressed
them so much that they embraced Islam before going back to Yathrib.

2. After this, more people in Yathrib became Muslims and a group came
back to Medina to pledge their allegiance to the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.). In the first pledge of Aqaba, the people made an oath that
they would not steal, not perform bad actions and refrain from killing
their children (a practice amongst the Jahil Arabs).

3. In the second agreement of Aqaba, 70 Muslims from Yathrib met with
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and signed an agreement with him. They made
a covenant that they would defend the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and fight
in defense of Islam even if it cost them their lives. This is what led
to the migration of the Prophet of Islam to Medina some time later.

**Think And Answer**

1. When these six people from the tribe of Khazraj left Mecca, what did
they say to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)?

2. What was the outcome of the efforts of this group?
3. Who was the person sent by the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to Yathrib to
teach Islam?
4. Describe the method of da'awah (invitation) used by this person.
5. Who met with the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) during the second pledge of
Aqaba?
And what was the result of that pledge?


**Lesson 7 : The Plot Of The Mushrikeen**

After learning of the meeting at Aqaba between the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
and the people of Yathrib, the Mushrikeen were very worried. They did
not know exactly what had happened at the meeting and their fear led
them to increase their tortures on the Muslims in Mecca.

When the Muslims saw this, they asked the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to help
them and to ease their suffering. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) asked them
to be patient and told them that they would soon find a solution to
their problems.

**Muslims Migrate To Medina**

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) ordered the Muslims to migrate towards
Yathrib. He told them that they would receive great rewards for the
patience they had shown in all their sufferings at the hands of the
Kuffar and that Allah (S.W.T.) was extremely pleased with them. In
placing their Trust in Him, they had performed the greatest worship and
now Allah (S.W.T.) was providing a means for their salvation.

Can you imagine what the Muslims must have felt when they realized that
they would have to leave their homes and properties and move to a
strange town with no knowledge of how they were to live or earn any
income there?

However, their Tawwakul was great and they relied totally on the
promise of Allah (S.W.T.). Gradually, groups of Muslims started
migrating towards Medina.

When the Mushrikeen realized that a large number of Muslims had already
left Mecca they tightened their surveillance and made sure that there
are no more were allowed to leave. The Muslims did not give up and made
use of every opportunity to migrate. They would leave in the middle of
the night, to escape while the Kuffar slept and then trek along the long
and difficult paths. Many days later, with injured legs, tired bodies
and burnt faces, they would reach Medina.

**The Plan**

When the Mushrikeen saw that their attempts to stop the Muslims
migrating were not working, they met together and discussed the issue,
wondering what to do about it. It worried them that the Islam would grow
stronger with a firm base and that the Muslims would then attack them.

The Mushrikeen argued about the meeting at Aqaba and its importance.
Many said that the base at Yathrib was growing stronger by the day and
their main fear was that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) would soon join them and
find a supportive environment from which to spread Islam.

One of them stood up and suggested, " Why don't we find a man amongst
us who is willing to kill Muhammad and then offer the Bani Hashim blood
money for him. This should get rid of the problem and allow us to live
in peace."

An old man who was sitting amongst them told him that the plan would
never work. "The Bani Hashim will never accept the money and they will
not rest until they identify, capture and execute the killer," he said.
"Besides, who amongst you is willing to carry out this task?" The crowd
was silent at this last question. They all knew that his words were true
and that the Bani Hashim were a very powerful tribe not to played
with.

"Well, then let us capture Muhammad and put him into prison," another
one of the Kuffar said. "We will not let any one meet him and in this
way, we can cut his connection with his people. With time they will
forget his call and mission." The old man refuted this idea too. "Do you
think the Bani Hashim will just keep quiet and let you imprison
Muhammad? Even if you manage to capture him, they will fight you and
free him."

A third person spoke up, "Let us catch Muhammad and banish him to a
very far place from here. We can tie him to a camel and let the animal
free in the desert. Muhammad will die in the desert and if another tribe
finds him, he will not be able to come back."

Again the old man protested. "This is not a practical plan," he said to
those gathered around. "Firstly, you will not be able to capture
Muhammad so easily and secondly, if he is found by another tribe, they
may become attracted to his words and accept his message thus giving him
the strong base we are trying to prevent!"

By this time, the crowd was getting restless. "If you know so much, why
don't you tell us what to do!" they cried.

The old man thought for a while and then he told them. "The best plan
is if we choose one man from every tribe and send a group to the house
of Muhammad at night. These men can catch him and kill him. The Bani
Hashim will not be able to fight us all and will have no choice but to
accept the blood money we offer and leave it at that."

The Mushrikeen discussed the plan, found it to be practical and
accepted it. They swore to put it in action and set about making the
arrangements for the murder. But, the Great Lord was aware of their plan
and knew what they had plotted.

A Holy Verse " And they planned and Allah (also) planned, and Allah is
the best of planners." Sura Aale-Imran, Verse 54

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUT…**

1. A group of Muslims migrated to Yathrib with the permission of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) in order to be free from the torture they were
facing in Mecca at the hands of the Mushrikeen. When the Mushrikeen
realized that Muslims were firm in their decision, they became afraid
that a strong base would be established in Medina and they would be
attacked. For this reason they gathered and decided to kill the
Messenger of God.

**Think And Answer**

1. When the Muslims asked the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to find them a
solution to their problems, what did he say?
2. What problems did the Muslims face in their migration to Medina?
3. What did the Mushrikeen think when they realized that the Muslims
were determined to migrate to Medina?
4. The Kuffar had a meeting to discuss what issue? What decision did
they make in this meeting?


