Lesson 14 : the Treasure of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
=======================================================

The Family of the Holy Prophet i.e. the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), are the
Treasure of Prophethood. Allah (S.W.T.) is the source of all the
Teachings and Ahkam in Islam. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) received these
ahkam through Wahy (Revelation) and it was his duty is to pass the
knowledge on to the people. He was ordered to teach the people at a pace
they could follow and ensure that they understood everything that they
were being told to do.

The most basic problem he faced was trying to explain these teaching to
the people at their level. Because they had lived all their lives in
ignorance, many found it difficult to understand philosophical and
spiritual matters.

Even learning the basic laws took time and effort. In addition to this,
the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was constantly being distracted from his main aim
by the various plots of the Kuffar. From the beginning, he was never
allowed to freely preach to the people. When Allah (S.W.T.) first
commanded him to declare his Message, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had to
approach a few people in secret.

Later, he and the Muslims were boycotted by the Mushrikeen and had to
live in the Valley of Abu Talib like prisoners. This together with the
tortures that the Muslims faced daily, did not allow them to spend much
time of the actual learning of akham.

The Muslims had to deal with this persecution for thirteen years in
Mecca before Allah (S.W.T.) commanded the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) to migrate
to Medina. In the thirteenth year of Be'that, Hijrat took place. This
might have provided the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) with the stable base he
needed except that the Muskrikeen were not willing to leave him in
peace.

They prepared armies to attack Medina and the Muslims found themselves
constantly at war, with one battle barely ending before the next began.
With all these problems, they again did not have the time to devote to
learning more about the teachings of Islam and Ahkam. The Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) knew this and he realized that if he wanted to pass the
treasures of knowledge at his disposal to all the Muslims, coming
generations included, then he would have to make some kind of provision
for this.

The tactic he used was to leave the knowledge in the hands of a chosen
few who could grasp it easily. These few could then make it available to
others as and when the people had the time and ability to study it. The
person he selected to head this group was Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.).

Since, Ali (a.s.) was under the care and guidance of the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) from his infancy, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) brought him up to a
level of maturity, Taqwa, and understanding that allowed him to accept
the knowledge of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and become a source of it for
the people. His pure spirit accepted and absorbed the divine light as it
was given to him.

When Imam Ali (a.s.) was still a young boy, the people of Mecca were
affected by drought. Abu Talib - the father of Imam Ali (a.s.) - was a
very respected personality. At the time of the drought, he had great
difficulty in looking after his family because of their large numbers.

At this time, the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) discussed the issue with his
uncle, Abbas, and they decided that they should offer to look after one
of the children of Abu Talib so as to ease his burden. Abu Talib (a.s.)
accepted their offer and gave Ali (a.s.) to the Prophet (s.a.w.w.).

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) loved the boy and gave him the best
education and training. Imam Ali (a.s.) himself says, "I was with the
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) since my childhood. Every day, he would open for me
the door of his knowledge, give me some of his excellent akhlaq and
discipline me in the best way. He used to care for everything I needed
and gave me the order to follow him in whatever he did.

" The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) told me that Allah (S.W.T.) ordered him to
feed me with his knowledge and my ruh (spirit) would be ready to accept
and understand it." In the years to come,

Imam Ali (a.s.) proved to be the best and most knowledgeable companion
of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.). So much so that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) said,
"I am the city of knowledge and Ali is the gate of that city." Whoever
wants to attend and go to the city he has no choice other than to pass
through the gate and to the door of that city.

Imam Ali (a.s.) was appointed as the source of all Knowledge. He was in
direct contact with the Unseen One. Despite this, the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) ordered him to write down all the verses and ahadith that he
learnt from him.

Imam Ali (a.s.) asked him, "O Prophet! Are you afraid that I may forget
them?" The Prophet (s.a.w.w.) replied, "No, I am not afraid of that. It
is not possible for you to forget, while Allah (S.W.T.) wants you to
remember and protect the ahkam of deen. But, I want to leave a written
record that will be passed on to the Aimmah (a.s.) who are going to
succeed you." Then the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) pointed at Imam Hassan
(a.s.) and said, "He is going to be the first one of them."

After that he turned towards his younger grandson and said, "The second
one of them is Hussayn. The rest of the Aimmah (a.s) will be from his
descendants."

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) repeatedly spoke of Imam Ali (a.s.) as his
successor and when he received knowledge that he was soon to leave this
world, he left a definite decree regarding the issue. This was at
Ghadeer where we have seen the famous Hadith of Thaqalayn was spoken. In
it the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) told the people,

"I am leaving with you two valuable things. If you hold on to them, you
will never lose the right path. One of them is the book of Allah
(S.W.T.), which serves as a chain connecting the Heavens and earth. The
other is my pure family. These two will never separate from each other
till the Day of Judgment when they will both come to me at the spring of
Kauther."

From this hadith, we understand that that the Qur'an and the Aimmah
(a.s.) together will provide us with the direct path to salvation. It is
not possible to be successful if we take either one independently
because they were created to complement each other.

The other Aimmah (a.s.) are included in the progeny that the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) referred to in this hadith.They followed in the footsteps of
Imam Ali (a.s.) and like him, were the sources of divine knowledge in
their times. These Aimmah (a.s.) guided the people, giving them the
deeper information that the Muslims of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.)'s time
were unable to fully absorb.

Our sixth Imam, al-Sadiq (a.s.) says, "My ahadith are the ahadith of my
father, and my father's sayings are the same as those of my grandfather
and the sayings of my grandfather are the sayings of Imam Hussayn (a.s.)
and the sayings of Imam Hussayn (a.s.) are the sayings of Imam Hassan
(a.s.) and the sayings of Imam Hassan (a.s.) are the sayings of his own
father Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) which are the sayings of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.w.) and the sayings of Rasullah (s.a.w.w.) are
the sayings of Allah (S.W.T.)."

Thus the knowledge that we derive from the ahadith of the Aimmah (a.s.)
and use in our studies of Akhlaq and Fiqh, is directly linked with the
treasure of Wisdom that is with Allah (S.W.T.). Utilizing this wealth
leads us to success in this world and the hereafter and turning away
from it destroys us.

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUTâ€¦**

1. The Holy Prophet of Islam (s.a.w.w.) received the laws and
regulations of Islam directly from Allah (S.W.T.). He then conveyed them
to the people but because of the many problems that were facing him - in
regards to politics and the intellectual level of the people - he could
not give all his knowledge and had to teach them according to their own
ability and power of understanding. He shared with them all that they
could accept but could do no more than that.

2. To ensure that the knowledge did not leave the world with him, the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) was commanded to choose Imam Ali (a.s.) as
receiver and preserver of this divine wisdom. The Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
took Imam Ali (a.s.)

under his care from infancy and supervised his upbringing to ensure
that he would be perfect for the responsibility that he was to take.

3. Imam Ali (a.s.) and the other Aimmah (a.s.) after him, were
appointed by the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) as bearers of the treasure of
knowledge. It is the duty of all Muslims to follow them in order to
achieve success in this world and the hereafter.

**Think And Answer**

1. Explain in your own words what the difficulties and problems were
that the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) faced in his own mission.

2. What did Imam Ali (a.s.) say about his upbringing in the house of
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)?

3. What was the order of Allah (S.W.T.) to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)
regarding the teaching of Imam Ali (a.s.)?

4. What did the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) say about the Aimmah (a.s.) who
were to come after Imam Ali (a.s.)?

5. Mention two important pieces of advice given to us by the Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) in Hadith - e - Thaqalayn.

6. The knowledge of Fiqh in the Shia Ja'fari Faith is based on four
main sources. What are those sources?


**"Lesson 15 : The Aimmah (A.S.) Vs. The Opperessor**

During his lifetime and prophethood, the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had
two main responsibilities to fulfill:

1. Receiving the divine Laws (ahkam) and commands about Islam from the
Almighty and conveying the message to the people.

2. Establishing an Islamic government i.e. one based on Islamic
principles. After the demise of the Prophet (s.a.w.w.), Imam Ali (a.s.)
was given these duties. We have seen that he was chosen by Allah
(S.W.T.) and appointed by the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.).

Imam Ali (a.s.) was to ensure that the existing laws were practiced and
upheld. There was no further revelation descending from the Almighty and
the information that he used was what the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had
brought. This is true of all the Aimmah (a.s.).

Ideally, it was the duty of the Ummah to follow each of the Aimmah
(a.s.) as their leader. No doubt the Islamic society would have
flourished if this had been the case. However, this was not so. The
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had just passed away when the struggle for power and
Caliphate began amongst the hypocrites. Despite the fact that the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.w.) had left clear instruction that Imam Ali (a.s.) was
to take over leadership after him, the majority of the Muslims did not
allow this to happen.

Infact, history shows us that of all twelve Aimmah (a.s.), only Imam
Ali (a.s.) managed to rule (for approximately 4 years and 9 months).
Imam Hassan (a.s.) also came to power after his father's martyrdom but
for a very short while. While our Aimmah (a.s.) struggled to uphold the
Islamic System of Justice, the power-hungry were willing to stoop to the
lowest levels to gain the Caliphate. They bribed,

threatened and murdered where necessary and took over the ruling of the
Ummah. However, their evil ways were greatly overshadowed by the purity
and excellence of the Imam (a.s.) alive at that time. Thus, at some time
or the other, an oppressor would feel so greatly threatened by the
popularity of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) that he would plot to murder the
Ma'soom leader. Eleven of the twelve Aimmah (a.s.) were martyred in this
way.

Keeping in mind that the times and circumstances of each Imam was
uniquely different, let us look very briefly at what happened in each of
their lifetimes. We will study the Imamat of Imam Ali (a.s.) in detail
in our next lesson so let us begin with the second Imam.

**2. Imam Hassan (a.s.)**

Our second Imam (a.s.) initially succeeded his father as Caliph of the
Muslim Ummah but within a little while, the majority turned against him
and joined the oppressors. He was forced to agree to a treaty in order
to prevent widespread bloodshed. After him, no Imam was given his right
to govern.

**3. Imam Hussayn (a.s.)**

During the Imamat of our third Imam, Islam was being attacked and
mutilated by the tyranny of the Banu Ummayyad. Imam Hussayn (a.s.) thus
had to openly protest against the oppressor so that people would not
forget the true message of Islam.

The tragic event of Karbala in which Imam (a.s.) sacrificed the lives
of his family members - including his six month old son - and his own
acted as both a re-awakening and a catalyst for the Muslims and the
whole world. When the shock and horror of what Yazid had done sank in,
the people began to follow the example of Imam (a.s.) and fight against
oppression and injustice. Islam was saved and never again did it face
the danger of extinction because as long as there were tyrants and
dictators, the story of Karbala offered strength to the oppressed to
stand up for their rights.

**4. Imam Sajjad (a.s.)**

Our fourth Imam (a.s.) lived in very difficult times. He survived the
event of Karbala and had to bear the imprisonment and mistreatment of
Yazid from the moment his Imamat began.

Even after Yazid died, the Banu Ummayad were so wary of another
revolution of the kind that Imam Hussayn (a.s.) had begun that they
watched every move that Imam Sajjad (a.s.). They were on the lookout for
a chance to arrest or even execute him. For this reason, Imam (a.s.)
could not preach directly and had to rely on du'a (Supplication) and
munaajat (prayers) to pass on the word of Islam.

His poems penetrate the hearts of those who read them and ignite a
spark of light in the spirit. These du'as have been compiled into a
famous book Sahifa- e-Sajjadiya which is used even today both as a guide
for communicating with Allah (S.W.T.) and as a source of rules for
akhlaq and spiritual enlightenment. 5. Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) and 6.
Imam Jaffer Sadiq (a.s.)

Our fifth and sixth Holy Imams (a.s.) had a chance during their
lifetime to educate many Muslims and they led the way in furthering all
areas of science. They both prepared the society to fight against and
destroy Kufr. History tells us that the Caliphs tried many times to stop
people from meeting with our Holy Imams (a.s.) but were unsuccessful in
their attempts.The Muslims, once inspired, came up with a variety of
plans and strategies to meet the Imam's (a.s.) in secret.

The times were far from easy and many companions were arrested,
tortured and imprisoned. Many others were martyred because of their love
for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) but none of this discouraged them and they
continued to meet with and learn from their leaders.

This made the tyrants turn their attention towards the Imam's (a.s)
themselves. Imam Muhammad Baqir (a.s.) was arrested and put in jail for
some time but the Caliph had to release him because he had no reason for
his actions. When this did not affect the popularity of Imam Baqir
(a.s.), he was poisoned and murdered.

Imam Al-Sadiq (a.s.) faced similar problems with the oppressors raiding
his house at night and constantly arresting him. It was during his
Imamat that the Caliphate of the Banu Ummayyads was overthrown and taken
over by the Banu Abbas who turned out to be even greater enemies of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s). Our sixth Imam (a.s.) was murdered by these new
tyrants.

**7. Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.)**

Our seventh Holy Imam (a.s.) spent long periods of his lifetime in the
brutal prisons of the Bani Abbas. A few of the Caliphs during his Imamat
were Mahdi Al-Abbasi, Ahadi and Haroun Rashid. It was this last tyrant
who poisoned and killed Imam (a.s.) in his prison.

**8. Imam Ali al-Ridha (a.s.)**

The Caliphs during the Imamat of the eighth Imam (a.s.) were extremely
cunning. On seeing that the people were not turning away from the Ahlu
Bayt (a.s.) under any circumstance, Mamoon (the ruler of the time)
decided to pretend to be on the side of Imam (a.s.).

He forced him to move from Medina where his family was to Khorasan,
which was far away. Although, he outwardly declared respect for Imam
(a.s.) in reality he only wanted to monitor the movements and actions of
Imam (a.s.). When he saw that Imam Ridha (a.s.) had won the love and
admiration of the public, he began to fear that his power would be
overthrown and thus poisoned Imam (a.s.)

**9. Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) and 10. Imam al-Hadi (a.s.)**

The ninth and tenth Imam's (a.s.) were both under close and constant
surveillance of the rulers of their times. They were denied any contact
with people and were neither allowed to spread Islam nor perform any
kind of Tabligh. Their close companions hardly ever saw them or met with
them. After suffering the raids and tortures of the tyrants, each Imam
(a.s.) was finally poisoned.

**11.Imam Hassan al-Askari (a.s.)**

Our eleventh Imam (a.s) spent all his life in the town of Samarra and
most of it in military barracks. By this time, the people and the rulers
knew that the birth of the promised saviour - the Mahdi - was nearing.
That is why they were extra careful in their watch over the eleventh
Imam (a.s.) and his family. Finally, believing themselves successful in
having prevented the birth of the twelfth Imam (a.s.), the tyrants
killed the eleventh Imam (a.s.). However, the promise of Allah (S.W.T.)
always comes to pass and the twelfth Imam (a.s.) had already been born
and was five years of age when his father was martyred.

**12.Imam Muhammad Mahdi (a.s.)**

Our twelfth Imam (a.s.), who is the Imam of our times, was taken away
from public sight by the Almighty, because the tyrants were intent on
killing him and finishing off the line of Imamat.

He continues carrying the responsibilities of Imamat but does so away
from our view. The religious scholars act as the representatives of Imam
(a.s.) and lead us under his guidance.

After glancing at the way our Aimmah (a.s.) have been treated, it is
natural to wonder why they were subjected to torture, imprisonment and
finally murder. Was it only because they were teaching the Laws of Allah
(S.W.T.)? Was it because they used to call Muslims to pray to and
worship only Allah (S.W.T.)? Or is there a deeper meaning to their
sacrifices?

The late spiritual leader of the Islamic Revolution of Iran - Imam
Khomeni (may the Almighty be pleased with his soul) said:

" The martyrdom of Imam Ameerul Mo'mineen (a.s.) and the grand uprising
of Imam Hussayn (a.s), the imprisonment, torture and killing of our
Aimmah (a.s) was all because of their effort to establish divine
political movements. Due to this important action, the followers of
Imams emulated their holy path both in speech and actions. The political
movement is one of the most important duties of Muslim religious
leaders."

We can easily see that the Aimmah (a.s.) worked hard to establish an
Islamic government and this was what scared the oppressors of their
times. Just as those Muslims supported the Imam (a.s.) of their time and
were willing to sacrifice their lives for them, we too should be willing
to stand up against the oppressors of our times and be prepared to back
our Imam (a.s.) anytime he should need us.

One of the victories that Islam has gained in recent times is the
Revolution led by the great spiritual leader, Ayatullah Al-Udhma Imam
Khomeini (May Allah (S.W.T.) be pleased with his soul). His struggle
against the Kuffar began a movement that continues even today in the
whole world. Islam gained a new reputation from his words and actions
and people even today take lessons from the manner in which he handled
the situations he faced.

Taking this victory as a stepping-stone, we must now concentrate on
encouraging each other to do good and forbid evil. In this way, we will
be preparing the ground for the re-appearance of our twelfth Imam (a.s.)
and the establishment of a Universal Islamic Government, Insha Allah
Ta'ala.

**SOMETHING TO THINK ABOUTâ€¦**

1. The administration and leadership of the Muslim society and its
protection after him, was given to Imam Ali (a.s.), by the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.).

2. The Aimmah (a.s.) spent their entire lives persevering and trying to
fulfill their God-given duties. They stood firmly and fearlessly against
the unjust Caliphs who had usurped their rights as leaders of the
Islamic society.

3. It is the duty of all Muslims to know the Imam of their time and
accept his leadership. Each one of them must support him wholeheartedly
and be willing to sacrifice everything for him and his cause (Islam).

4. During Ghaybah, struggle against Kufr and injustice continues under
the leadership of the Fuqaha and Religious authorities, until the advent
of Imam Al-Mahdi (a.s.).

**Think And Answer**

1. Explain the two major responsibilities that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.w.) had.

2. What proofs can you present that an Imam was needed to take
responsibility after the demise of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.w.)? What is
the difference between the Prophet (s.a.w.w.) and an Imam (a.s.)?

3. Which one of our Aimmah (a.s.) managed to lead the Muslim Ummah and
was able to establish an Islamic government? How long did his reign
last?

4. Why did our Aimmah (a.s.) use different ways and means to fulfill
their duties and goals?

5. What were the ways in which the fourth Imam, al-Sajjad (a.s.)
explained the Islamic beliefs and created awareness within the
society?

6. During the Imamat of our Holy Imams al-Baqir (a.s.) and al-Sadiq
(a.s.), what system did they use to teach people and educate them about
the religious tenets? Why did they choose that particular system of
inviting people to Islam?

7. How did the seventh Imam (a.s.) spend most of his Imamat and how was
he martyred?

8. The eighth Imam (a.s.) left his home and family and travelled to
Khorasan. What was the reason for this? What was the aim of that
journey?

9. Mention some of the extreme precautions the unjust Caliphs took when
dealing with the ninth, tenth and eleventh Imam's (a.s.).

10. During this time of ghaybah of the twelfth Imam (a.s.), how do the
religious scholars take the responsibility in combating and resisting
Kufr and injustice? When and how do you think this fight will end?


