Lecture 10: Ghadeer in the Bible
================================

The word ghadeer in the Bible appears as the Hebrew word for wall or
fence. As such, it is generally proper to translate it. However, the
wall or fence is often used is a most suggestive and even clearly
symbolic way, and with only three or four exceptions seems highly
significant to the events known as Al-Ghadeer in Islamic tradition.

The first occurrence of the word is in the story of Balaam, the ancient
Persian prophet, in Numbers 22. This prophet was asked to curse the
people of God, and instead of refusing to do so, he inquired of God
whether he might do so or not, hoping that God would give him permission
of take the reward offered for doing so. He set out against God’s
command, at which point Numbers 22:24 says “the angel of YHWH stood in a
path of the vineyards, a wall (ghadeer) on this side, and a wall
(ghadeer) on that side.”

Balaam did not see the angel, but his donkey, in seeking to turn aside,
crushed his foot against the wall. Since that occasion, ghadeer has been
a symbol of the wall by which God reveals the right way, and the wall
against which those who choose not to be rightly guided bruise their
ankles. Another text using the word as a fence or wall to show the right
path is Job 19:8.

The word is used again in reference to the descendants of Simeon, who
destroyed the last of the Amelekites at the command of God. It says in 1
Chronicles 4:39,40 that “they went to the entrance of Gedor, even unto
the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks. 40 And
they found fat pasture and good, and the land was wide, and quiet, and
peaceable; for they of Ham had dwelt there of old.”

The Massoretic scribes have arbitrarily vocalized the word as Ghedor,
but the word in the original text is precisely the same as that of
Numbers 22. This passage suggests a further symbolism for the word
Ghadeer. It is an unexpected source of well-being and felicity. Pasture
for the flocks is already well-known in the Hebrew Scriptures in
connection with divine guidance, as seen in the famous Psalm 23.

The word Ghadeer is vocalized as such in Ezra 9:9. “For we were bondmen;
yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage, but hath extended mercy
unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to
set up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and
to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.”

The building of a wall in this text has its literal sense, but the
expressions, especially here, are heavily weighted with symbolism. This
is intimated by the use of the expression “to give.”

The literal wall of Jerusalem was build with human hands, but the
ghadeer itself was something given by God. What was given was a
re-establishing of the center of faith and authority. It must be noted
that the ghadeer in this situation was contested by the Samaritans. From
an Islamic point of view, although in some aspects there is more in
common with Samaritanism than Judaism, this ghadeer appears to be
correct and justified.

The Samaritans did not accept some of the prophets mentioned in the
Qur’an, whom the Jews of the time did accept. It was this ghadeer in
Jerusalem and Judah that differentiated between the divinely established
authority and the unacceptable authority of the Samaritans. There is
thus a perfect parallel between the ghadeer of Ezra and that known from
Islamic tradition. This text also mentions the Persian connection
already noted in Numbers 22.

There are two prophetic passages of import in regard to the word
ghadeer. The first is in the context of fasting in Isaiah 58:12. The
relevant expression is “repairer of the breach.” The word is pointed as
godeer, that is, a participle, thus meaning “the one who is fencing up
the breach.” It might just as well be a construct of ghadeer, thus
meaning “the fencing up of the breach.” In any case, it refers to a
human figure.

Up to verse five, the prophet’s words apply to the people, who fail to
serve God properly by fulfilling the forms of fasting but continue to
act unjustly. The pronoun “you” changes to the singular in verse 7,
after which the human figure of the ghadeer is described. These words
apply most specifically to Imam Ali (as), who was appointed at
Al-Ghadeer.

Isaiah 58:7 “Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou
bring the poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the
naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine
own flesh? 8 Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine
health shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go
before thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward.

9 Then shalt thou call, and the LORD shall answer; thou shalt cry, and
he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee the
yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity; 10 And if
thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul;
then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the
noonday:

11 And the LORD shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered
garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not. 12 And they
that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise
up the foundations of many generations; and thou shalt be called, The
repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.”

The many expressions of this passage all fit the character and actions
of Imam Ali very well. There are many narrations referring to the Imam
(as) feeding the hungry. He also functioned to lift the burdens of the
people, and dispelling backbiting and falsehood. But the text emphasizes
the direct divine guidance that was given to the Imam.

The two passages in Ezekiel give quite a different message. They focus
on the failure of Israel to fulfill their God-given role of leadership
in propagating monotheism in the world. Ezekiel 13:5 “Ye have not gone
up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for the house of Israel to
stand in the battle in the day of the LORD.”

This brings up the context of the need for the proclamation of
Al-Ghadeer. Both Jews and Christians eventually failed to carry out the
divine mandate. Therefore it was necessary to correct their failures
through the revelation of the Qur’an, and the establishment of a “fence”
or ghadeer to preserve divine law for the world. The text notes that the
house of Israel will have to answer for the failure in the day of
judgement.

This failure is even more clearly pinpointed in Ezekiel 22:30 “And I
sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in
the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it: but I
found none.” The Imamate comes into its own specifically with Imam Ali
at the proclamation of Al-Ghadeer.

Psalm 62 is one of the Imamic Psalms, having twelve verses. The word
ghadeer appears in the third verse, the one in any series of twelve
usually evoking the experiences of Imam Husayn (as). The entire Psalm
dears with the issue of divine authority.

But verse 3 touches on the question of accepting, or in this case, not
accepting the man established by God to represent His authority on
earth. Psalm 62:3(4) “How long will ye imagine mischief against a man?
ye shall be slain all of you: as a bowing wall shall ye be, and as a
tottering fence.”

Here ghadeer is translated as “fence.” The word “ish” or “man” as used
in the Psalms often has Imamic implications, as is clearly seen in Psalm
1:1. The implication is that those who should imagine mischief against
“a man” or the Imam and who should kill him, will in the same way also
be slain themselves. The Imam is equated directly here with the ghadeer
or fence that indicates the right path.

This warning against those who break the covenant of ghadeer is repeated
in Ecclesiastes 10:8 ”He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and
whoso breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.” The prophet promises
that whoever breaks ghadeer will be bitten by a serpent. The preceding
reference to a pit of course primarily means the setting of a trap for
another. However, the whole verse has an eschatological tone, suggesting
either punishment in the grave for failure to recognize the Imam or
punishment in the judgement.


