Lecture 2: The Fragrance of Islam
=================================

Islam and Christianity have had a mottled history of confrontation. They
are sister faiths having roots in Middle Eastern monotheism and still
have a great deal in common. Yet they have been pitted against each
other throughout the history of Islam since the appearance of the
prophet Muhammad (upon whom be peace) in the beginning of the eighth
century CE.

The two faiths have been associated with opposing cultural, social and
political systems for over fourteen hundred years, and yet Muslims and
Christians have had enormous influences one on the other.

Although Islam can be more truthfully said to have been spread by the
caravan than by the sword, neither faith has been a stranger to
violence. Yet the word Islam comes from the same root as peace. Surely
anyone claiming to be a Muslim who does not foster peace is making a
false claim.

Much has been made of violent acts in recent times, but it should be
remembered that all of these are in the context of quarrels among
wealthy oil families, both Western and Middle Eastern. At times they are
able to agree, despite their differences of religion, and when they do
not, religion is only a pretext.

Christianity and Islam share a belief in a figure known to the former as
antichrist and to the latter as dajjal. In Islamic belief, this figure
has only one eye. Those who have only one eye, an eye for oil, and no
eye for social justice, morality and ethics other than to appeal to them
as a pretext for their own agenda, surely betray both Islam and
Christianity.

The incident of the woman anointing the feet of Jesus (as) with fine
perfume brings to mind a certain tradition often quoted by orientalists.
It is said that the Prophet (as) once said that he had loved women, and
that he had loved sweet odors, but that the solace of his soul had been
prayer.

It is my purpose to open a few of the perfume bottles of Islam from the
Christian Scriptures themselves, so that the Christian can enjoy both
the savour of Christ who accepted the sinful woman and her gift as well
as the faith of the last of the prophets. At the same time, it should be
remembered that Islam is not based on the Bible, but on the holy Qur’an
and the traditions of the prophet and his family (as).

Tawheed or the Unity of God
---------------------------

“Say, He, God, is one (alone). God, the needless, He does not beget nor
is He begotten, and there is none like Him, no not one.” Qur’an 112.
This text is used by millions of Muslims daily as a part of their
prayers. It expresses the first and foremost principle of Islam, the
unity and uniqueness of God. In this matter, Islam contrasts with
Christianity, which acknowledges a trinity, or one god in three persons.

We find the Christian Scriptures wholly agreeing with this basic Islamic
principle of faith. In Deuteronomy 32:39 we find God Himself speaking
“See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me.” In his
prayer Nehemiah (9:6) confessed “Thou, even thou, art Lord alone, thou
hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth,
and all things that are therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and
thou preservest them all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee.”

Jesus agrees that this is the first principle of faith when he says in
Mark 12:29 “The first of all the commandments is Hear, O Israel; The
Lord our God is one Lord.” St. Paul, apostle beloved of Christians says
in 1 Corinthians 8:6 “But to us there is but one God, the Father, of
whom are all things.”

The Justice of God
------------------

The second great principle of Islamic faith is the assurance that God is
not arbitrary, but essentially just. The justice of God is expressed in
Qur’an 3:17 “God (Himself) witnesses that there is no god but He, and
(so do) the angels and those possessed of knowledge, standing firm for
justice, (there is) no god but He, the Mighty the Wise.”

The same great attribute is mentioned many times in the Bible. In
Deuteronomy 32:4 we read “He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all
his ways are judgement: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and
right is he.”

Muslims understand that God’s justice is essential and intrinsic.
Justice is not a separable attribute, nor even a part of God, but God’s
very being. The unity of God implies to the Muslim that God has no
limits nor parts. Having no limits, there is no limit to God’s
perception and knowledge. Having no parts, God must be impartial. The
unity of God implies His intrinsic justice. He has all knowledge of
every situation, and being impartial, He is perfectly just.

The Apostleship
---------------

The third great principle of Islamic faith is apostleship. This is
expressed in the holy Qur’an 10:47. “And for every people (was sent) an
apostle; and when came their apostle, the matter between them was
decided with equity and they shall not (in the least) be done (any)
injustice.” This text of the Qur’an notes that the justice of God
requires Him to reveal His will to all humankind.

Therefore He has sent prophets to all nations. Islam requires belief in
all true prophets, both the prophet mentioned in the Bible and those
mentioned in the Qur’an. Muhammad (as) is the last of the prophets sent
by God. Thus Qur’an 33:40 says “Muhammad is not the father of any of
your men, but an Apostle of God and the last of the prophets: And God is
of all things ever the Knower.”

In the Christian Scriptures we find the same principles. In Amos 3:7 it
says “Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto
his servants the prophets.” The question arises whether or not Muhammad
(as) is mentioned in the Bible. Many texts might be applied to him, but
several mention him by name. One of the most important of these is Psalm
106:24, which says “They despise the land of Muhammad (Hebrew Hamda),
they believe not his word.”  
 This is a Biblical prophecy indicating that when Muhammad (as) should
come, many would find an excuse not to believe in him because of his
country of origin. Indeed, we find this to be the case.

Divine Guidance
---------------

The fourth great principle of Islamic faith is divine guidance. It is
also a logical deduction from the principle of the unity of God. The
unity of God implies His justice. God’s justice implies verbal
revelation of His will, otherwise He would be unjust in holding people
accountable for their actions. But verbal revelation, the word of the
prophets, implies further guidance, guidance in action, guidance in
flesh and blood.

A good illustration of this is an assembly kit. When you buy something
that needs to be assembled, there is always a printed instruction
manual. Most of us have experienced how confusing such manuals can be.
If there is someone who has done it before to show us how, we find the
task much easier. The divine guide is one appointed by God to show us
how to implement the revealed will of God.

In any practical situation, there are matters about which we might have
questions that recourse to the Scriptures is insufficient. Even after
reading the Bible and the Qur’an, we are unsure what to do. The role of
the divine guide is to show us what to do. The Arabic word for the
divine guide is Imam, although this is often used merely to refer to a
simple leader of prayer.

The word leader in referring to the divine guide is much more than that,
however. The holy Qur’an mentions that God made Abraham (as) not only a
prophet, but a leader or Imam for humankind, in Qur’an 2:125 “And
remember when his Lord tried Abraham with certain words then he
fulfilled them: He said, Truly I make you an Imam for humankind…”

The principle of divine guidance runs like a golden thread throughout
the Christian Scriptures as well. The necessity of divine guidance is
expressed very neatly in the story of Philip in Acts 8:30-31 “Philip ran
thither to him, and heard him read the prophet Esaias, and said,
Understandest thou what thou readest? And he said, How can I, except
some man should guide me?”

The statement of the Ethiopian shows clearly that the writings of the
prophets are not enough. There must also be a divine guide to implement
them in practice.

The leadership of Abraham (as) continued through his descendants,
finally coming to the holy Prophet Muhammad (as), who passed it on to
his cousin and son-in-law Ali ibn abi Taleb (as). This was done publicly
after the event of the Prophet’s (as) last pilgrimage to Mecca. The
greater portion of the Muslims at the time were witnesses to the fact.

At that time Ali (as) was appointed, and the appointment has gone down
to eleven of his descendants, the last of which is believed to be still
living and ruling. The Bible also shows a number of series of twelve
leaders, such as the twelve patriarchal reigns in Genesis, the twelve
sons of Ishmael, the twelve sons of Jacob, the twelve judges of Israel,
the twelve righteous kings of Judah, and the twelve disciples of Christ
(as).

The Day of Judgement
--------------------

The differences between the Islamic and Christian concepts of the Day of
Judgement are difficult to find, and hardly to be understood by any but
the specialist, so close are the two faiths in this regard.  
 This is the final great principle of Islamic faith, and it is mentioned
in many passages of the holy Qur’an, such as 99:6-8 “On that day people
will come out (from their graves) in (scattered) groups, to be shown
their own deeds. Then he who has done an atom-weight of good shall see
it. And he who has done an atom-weight of evil shall see it.” Jesus
makes the same point in Matthew 12:36 “But I say unto you, That ever
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the
day of judgement.”

Thus there are five great principles of Islam. The unity of God implies
His justice. The justice of God implies the necessity of revelation.
Revelation implies someone to implement it. Finally, human beings are
held responsible for how they relate to the revelation of God’s will.
Besides the five great principles of Islamic faith there are many
practices that logically proceed from them, as well as being expressed
in revelation.

Ten of these are traditionally considered to be basic. These are daily
prayer in prostration, fasting during the month of Ramadhan, pilgrimage
to the house of God in Mecca, charity taken from one’s assets, charity
taken from one’s profits, jihad or endeavour in the way of God,
enjoining good, opposing evil, respect for godly people, and avoidance
of wicked people.

Prayer in Prostration
---------------------

Muslims are known particularly for their daily prayer in prostration.
Therefore the holy Qur’an (6:163) states “Say: Truly my prayer and my
sacrifice, my life and my death, (are all only) for God, the Lord of the
worlds.” Actually Islamic prayer is better described in the Bible than
in the Qur’an. Every time and gesture of Islamic prayer in prostration
is mentioned in the Bible. Nearly every common phrase of the prayer is
to be found in the Psalms of David.

It is one of the incongruities of reality that Muslims follow the Bible
so closely in their prayer, while Christians and Jews have developed
extra-Biblical practices of prayer. Yet the latter claim to base their
practice on the Bible, whereas Muslims do not. Muslims base their
practice on the Qur’an and tradition. If anything can be said about
humankind, it is that we are irrational.

The example of Jesus praying in prostration is mentioned in Matthew
26:39 “And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed.”
Prayer as specific times in the day is also mentioned in the Bible,
Psalm 32:6 “For this shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a
time when thou mayest be found.” Also Psalm 69:13 “But as for me, my
prayer is unto thee, O Lord, in an acceptable time.”  
 The cry “Allahu akbar” is mentioned as belonging to prayer in Psalm
35:27; 18:5,6; 30:8; 34:3; and 55:16. Standing, bowing, kneeling, and
prostrating are all gestures of prayer in the Psalms. Prayer towards the
house of God is commended in Psalm 5:7 “But as for me, I will come into
thy house in the multitude of thy mercy; and in thy fear will I worship
toward thy holy temple.”

Islamic prayer brings the individual into paradise itself. When I began
dialogue with Muslims, one of the first things I was told was “If you
only knew how sweet is prayer in prostration, you would fight us to get
it.” That is entirely true.

Fasting
-------

In Qur’an 2:183 it says “O you who believe! Fasting has been ordained to
you as it was ordained to those before you so that you might guard
yourself (against evil).” Interestingly enough, fasting is not mentioned
in the books of Moses (as) except for the forty day fast of Moses (as)
himself. A similar fast was performed by Jesus (as) upon receiving the
Gospel, and by Muhammad (as) as well.

Yet we know that fasting in the ninth lunar month, the month of
Ramadhan, was practiced from early times, as the Qur’an indicates.
Evidence of this is in Jeremiah 36:9 “And it came to pass in the fifth
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month,
that they proclaimed a fast before the Lord to all the people in
Jerusalem, and to all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto
Jerusalem.” We know that this was a common religious practice from the
fact that this king was not a righteous one. He did not proclaim
anything good unless it was an established practice.

The reason for fasting is to help us to guard ourselves against evil.
That is, it fosters doing the right thing. It makes us stop to
reevaluate our lives and redetermine to act in ethical, moral, and just
ways.

Pilgrimage
----------

It is incumbent on every Muslim to go to the house of God in Mecca at
least once in a lifetime if possible. It says in the Qur’an (22:27) “And
proclaim to the people the Pilgrimage! They will come to you on foot and
on lean camel, coming from every remote (high) way.”

Pilgrimage to Jerusalem is mentioned often in the Gospel in relation to
Jesus (as). But Jesus (as) prophesies in John 4:21 that the time will
come “when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
worship the Father.” Muslims believe that the Pilgrimage to Mecca refers
back to the experience of Abraham, who rebuilt the house of God there,
making it a holy place down to our days as well.  
 At the beginning of his ministry, Muhammad (as) continued the direction
of prayer towards Jerusalem. It was only later that the prophecy of
Jesus (as) was fulfilled, and Mecca rather than Mount Gerazim or
Jerusalem, became the proper place of pilgrimage and the right direction
of prayer.

Charity
-------

Charity is enjoined on Muslims in the holy Qur’an 2:43 “Establish the
prayer and give away the poor-rate and bow down (praying).” In the
sermon on the mount Jesus (as) begins Matthew six with four verses
enjoining charity. Charity has always been a primary Christian duty, and
in this the two faiths of Islam and Christianity are very much agreed.
In some sense we can take Matthew six as a summary of the teaching of
Jesus (as). In Matthew five Jesus merely establishes his adherence to
the law.

In Matthew seven he describes the day of judgement. The meat of this
sandwich is Matthew six, and the first principle of Matthew six is alms
in charity. It is interesting to note that the rest of the chapter deals
with prayer in prostration, fasting, and, in the last half, probably
with pilgrimage.

Holy War
--------

There are four kinds of holy war in Islam: striving with the self,
striving with one’s wealth, striving with knowledge, and striving with
the sword. These may well be in order of importance, the last being the
least. Therefore the Qur’an (9:41) says “Go forth (with) light and heavy
equipment and strive in the way of God with your property and your
selves, this is better for you, if you knew (it).”

Thus the principle of Islam is to struggle or strive, first of all with
oneself to maintain right, then with one’s wealth, intellectual
capacity, and arms. Islam is not a pacifist religion, but military
action is carefully circumscribed. Unfortunately most of the military
action down through history has not been justifiable on Islamic
principles.

War to enhance territory and wealth is not justifiable, and this is the
general situation. “Jehad should be exclusively in the way of the Lord
and never for any territorial ambition.” (Introduction to the Holy
Qur’an, S. V. Mir Ahmed Ali, page 123a).

Recent research suggests that Jesus (as) was not the sweet and
effeminate saviour that many believe him to be, but a Zealot,
establishing himself as the divinely appointed leader in the face of the
Roman occupation. Whether or not that be the case, Christianity was
spread throughout Europe by the sword and later throughout the world
through colonial occupation.

The greatest holocaust, insofar as the numbers of victims is concerned,
was not the Jews in Europe in the 1940s, but the Indians in Mexico, of
whom more than twice as many died in only half the time, during the
first few years of Christian conquest, many of them being baptized
against their will before being killed.

Islam is the faith of peace, and Muslims should invite Christians to
join them in walking the middle line, not declining war when it is
necessary to defend peace and justice, but fearlessly condemning the
terrorism, violence, and oppression that is so visible in the present
world as a result of politico-economic conflict.

Enjoining the good and opposing evil
------------------------------------

This practice of Islam is expressed in the holy Qur’an 3:109 “You are
the best group that has been brought forth for mankind: you enjoin
goodness and you forbid evil, and you believe in God; and if the people
of the Book had (also) believed (similarly) it had surely been better
for them; of them (only some) are believers and most of them are
perverse.”

The same principle is reiterated in Psalm 45:7 “Thou lovest
righteousness, and hatest wickedness: therefore God, thy God, hath
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.” It is said
that all are responsible to foster good and oppose evil to the best of
their ability, if not by actions, then by words, and if not by words,
then by thoughts. According to Islam good is whatever is in accordance
with revealed divine law, and evil is anything that opposes it.

Respect for the godly and avoidance of the wicked
-------------------------------------------------

This Islamic principle is mentioned in the holy Qur’an 42:23 “That is of
which God gives the glad tidings to His servants who believe and do good
deeds; Say: I demand not of you any recompense for it (the toils of
apostleship) but the love of (my) relatives, and whosoever earns good,
We increase for him good therein, truly God is Oft-Forgiving the most
Grateful (One).”

Attachment to the godly refers to two groups: firstly to the worthy
descendants of the Prophet (as) and specifically the divinely appointed
guides, and secondly to those who earn good, or by their behaviour show
their attachment to the will of God.

The same principle is found in the Bible as well, for example, in
Malachi 3:18 “Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous
and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that serveth him
not.” The idea is to put a distinction between those who do right and
those who do not.  
 This is the basic criterion of distinguishing between people, and it
implies that other criteria are wrong. Thus we should not distinguish
between people on the basis of their wealth, race, appearance, or mental
or physical capacity. We should respect people uniquely for the degree
to which they show evidence of adherence to divine law and foster it.
Attraction to celebrities is thus un-Islamic.

Down through the centuries Islam has been taught with the fingers of the
hand, to make things simple and easy to remember. There are five basic
principles and ten basic practices. These constitute the basics of
Islam, but there are many other matters of grave importance, such as the
many practices of purity, modesty, and justice. But these are all
implicit in the one great principle that God is one.


