Lecture 5: Daniel (as): A Young Muslim Refugee and How He Coped
===============================================================

It is not an anachronism to call Daniel (as) as Muslim. This is not
merely true because the holy Qur’an refers to Biblical figures as
Muslims. Nor is it merely a recognition of the fact that Daniel’s (as)
tomb continues to exist in Iran and is still the site of devotional
visits by Muslims. I use the word to refer to someone who intends to
submit entirely to the will of God, and this is, in my opinion, the only
valid usage of the word.

All people, no matter what religious community or organization lays
claim to their allegience, are Muslims, if their intention is to submit
their lives, belief, and behaviour to the will of the one true God,
Creator of all things.

The experience of Daniel (as) as described in the book of the Bible that
bears his name is surely a prime example of such submission. On more
than one occasion he and his companions are reported to have risked
their lives by disobeying the king in order to be faithful to their
commitment to the will of God. I shall examine three of those occasions
here, since they particularly deal with issues of interest to Muslims.

1. The Permitted Diet
---------------------

The first narrative is found in Daniel 1:1-20.

1 ¶ In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon unto Jerusalem, and besieged it. 2 And
the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the
vessels of the house of God: which he carried into the land of Shinar to
the house of his god; and he brought the vessels into the treasure house
of his god. 3 And the king spake unto Ashpenaz the master of his
eunuchs, that he should bring certain of the children of Israel, and of
the king's seed, and of the princes;

4 Children in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in all
wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding science, and such as
had ability in them to stand in the king's palace, and whom they might
teach the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.

5 And the king appointed them a daily provision of the king's meat, and
of the wine which he drank: so nourishing them three years, that at the
end thereof they might stand before the king.

6 Now among these were of the children of Judah, Daniel, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah: 7 Unto whom the prince of the eunuchs gave names:
for he gave unto Daniel the name of Belteshazzar; and to Hananiah, of
Shadrach; and to Mishael, of Meshach; and to Azariah, of Abednego.

8 ¶ But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself
with the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank:
therefore he requested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not
defile himself. 9 Now God had brought Daniel into favour and tender love
with the prince of the eunuchs.

10 And the prince of the eunuchs said unto Daniel, I fear my lord the
king, who hath appointed your meat and your drink: for why should he see
your faces worse liking than the children which are of your sort? then
shall ye make me endanger my head to the king.

11 Then said Daniel to Melzar, whom the prince of the eunuchs had set
over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, 12 Prove thy servants, I
beseech thee, ten days; and let them give us pulse to eat, and water to
drink. 13 Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the
countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the king's meat:
and as thou seest, deal with thy servants.

14 So he consented to them in this matter, and proved them ten days. 15
And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared fairer and fatter
in flesh than all the children which did eat the portion of the king's
meat. 16 Thus Melzar took away the portion of their meat, and the wine
that they should drink; and gave them pulse.

17 ¶ As for these four children, God gave them knowledge and skill in
all learning and wisdom: and Daniel had understanding in all visions and
dreams. 18 Now at the end of the days that the king had said he should
bring them in, then the prince of the eunuchs brought them in before
Nebuchadnezzar. 19 And the king communed with them; and among them all
was found none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah: therefore
stood they before the king.

20 And in all matters of wisdom and understanding, that the king
enquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians
and astrologers that were in all his realm.

The first thing to note about this story is that the young people were
captives. They were separated from their families, whose fate is unknown
to us and perhaps to the young people themselves. There is every
possibility that they had died in the siege or in the battle of
Jerusalem. So the young people were not only captives, but possibly
orphans as well.

Furthermore, they had gone through the ordeal of becoming eunuchs, which
was not only humiliating to the highest degree, but definitely
life-threatening. It had been impressed upon them that the reason they
had suffered all of these things was because their religion and culture
were inferior to those of their captors.

On the other hand, these young people were selected for the highest
possible honours. Their success in the reconditioning and education
being offered them depended on strict submission, but was potentially a
road to the greatest honours. So both their suffering and the honours
placed before them provided the highest possible incentives for
relinquishing the principles of their childhood faith.

The story describes their refusal to eat food that was forbidden by
divine law. The divine law of Leviticus 11 and Deuteronomy 14 is
essentially the same as that of Shi’ite Islam. Sunni Islam differs from
it in admitting all sea creatures, and Judaism differs from it in
forbidding the mixing of milk and meat. This is the law to which Daniel
and his friends were faithful.

The four young men were most diplomatic in approaching the matter. The
text, however, notes that Daniel purposed in his heart. This means that
he would refuse to eat forbidden foods at any cost, even at the cost of
his life.

The officer himself even feared for his life. The text seems to indicate
a miraculous intervention in favour of the young men, although the
debilitating effects of rich foods and alcohol on the other students may
have contributed to the relative excellence of the four young men as
well.

Whatever the cause, the text clearly fosters absolute faithfulness.
Liberal scholars indeed place its writing in the post-exilic period,
which was an era of profound contemplation of these issues in the face
of Hellenizing persecution of faithful Jews.

The word “pulse” here refers to a bland, meatless diet, apparently the
simple peasant diet that was generally available, probably made up of
coarse barley bread and lentils. It was certainly not interesting,
varied, or attractive to young people. But it was the only alternative
to the court diet, which consisted of fine foods containing flesh from
animals that were slaughtered without draining the blood according to
divine law, and species of animals that were forbidden by divine law.

Some have considered Daniel to represent a vegetarian faction within
Israelite religion at the time, but this is not justifiable. The reason
they were reduced to eating the simplest vegetarian food was because
acceptable flesh foods were unavailable. There was no one even qualified
to slaughter them properly.

The position of the four young men is an extreme example of what Muslim
immigrants as well as those born in non-Muslim societies have to face.
There is suffering on one hand, the punishment dealt out by society for
non-conformity to non-Islamic customs. On the other hand, there is every
inducement to seduce Muslim children to be unfaithful to Islamic (and
thereby Biblical) principles by reaching for achievements offered in
non-Muslim societies.

Although it is not likely that any Muslims in non-Muslim countries
actually face death for refusing to eat non-halal meat, still the
pressures to do so are sufficient to induce many to conform. A review of
the experiences of Daniel might make such people pause to think about
their behaviour and the reasons for it.

2. Idolatry
-----------

The second story is found in Daniel 3:1-27.

1 Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was
threescore cubits, and the breadth thereof six cubits: he set it up in
the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon. 2 Then Nebuchadnezzar the
king sent to gather together the princes, the governors, and the
captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and
all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image
which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

3 Then the princes, the governors, and captains, the judges, the
treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the
provinces, were gathered together unto the dedication of the image that
Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and they stood before the image that
Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 4 Then an herald cried aloud, To you it is
commanded, O people, nations, and languages, 5 That at what time ye hear
the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and
all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image that
Nebuchadnezzar the king hath set up:

6 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth shall the same hour be cast
into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. 7 Therefore at that time,
when all the people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut,
psaltery, and all kinds of musick, all the people, the nations, and the
languages, fell down and worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar
the king had set up.

8 Wherefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and accused the
Jews. 9 They spake and said to the king Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for
ever. 10 Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that every man that shall
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and worship the
golden image:

11 And whoso falleth not down and worshippeth, that he should be cast
into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. 12 There are certain Jews
whom thou hast set over the affairs of the province of Babylon,
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; these men, O king, have not regarded
thee: they serve not thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou
hast set up. 13 Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to
bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men
before the king.

14 Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto them, Is it true, O Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve my gods, nor worship the golden
image which I have set up? 15 Now if ye be ready that at what time ye
hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image
which I have made; well: but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who is that God
that shall deliver you out of my hands?

16 Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, answered and said to the king, O
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter. 17 If
it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning
fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O king. 18 But
if not, be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods,
nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

19 Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was
changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego: therefore he spake, and
commanded that they should heat the furnace one seven times more than it
was wont to be heated. 20 And he commanded the most mighty men that were
in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them
into the burning fiery furnace. 21 Then these men were bound in their
coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their other garments, and were
cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

22 Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and the furnace
exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that took up
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. 23 And these three men, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning
fiery furnace.

24 Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste, and
spake, and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound
into the midst of the fire? They answered and said unto the king, True,
O king.

25 He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst
of the fire, and they have no hurt; and the form of the fourth is like
the Son of God. 26 Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the
burning fiery furnace, and spake, and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and come hither.
Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the midst of the
fire.

27 And the princes, governors, and captains, and the king's counsellors,
being gathered together, saw these men, upon whose bodies the fire had
no power, nor was an hair of their head singed, neither were their coats
changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them.

This story refers to a time when the companions of Daniel were no longer
youths, but mature functionaries in Babylon. The significance of the
story lies in the fact that they are clearly able to survive in the
pagan or secular state and still be true to their childhood faith. This
one exceptional event merely confirms this. The story states the
deliverance to be miraculous, however, indicating that their success was
dependant on more than mere luck, diplomacy and skill.

The first think that will strike the Muslim reader is the king’s
reference to one like the Son of God. It is interesting that this is the
only reference to the Son of God in the Hebrew Scriptures, although the
Greek New Testament includes it a number of times in a number of ways.
It is notable that the concept of the Son of God, insofar as Scripture
goes, was invented by a pagan king while engaging in idolatrous worship.
That ought to give pause for reflection.

The most obvious issue in this story is the issue of prostration in
worship to the image of an idol. There is a secondary issue that is not
quite so obvious, and that is the role of music. Music is almost
universally a vehicle for worship. There are many reasons for this.

One is that music creates unified action, making concerted
congregational liturgy possible with a minimum of directions. Another
reason is that music transmits a common emotion or purpose to the group
directly without appeal to reason and the act of decision. In this case
it is clear that music is being used for even more sinister purposes and
in even more manipulative ways.

An examination of the musical terms found in Daniel three gives
indication of this misuse of music. The word translated “psaltery” in
verses 5, 7, and 15 above is sumponyah and appears to be based on the
Greek word meaning “to sound together” from which we also have the
English symphony. The ancient use of sounding tones together to produce
certain effects by their intervals is widespread and well-known to
musicologists.

The art was highly developed by the Sumerians, from whom it was
inherited by the Babylonians. It is conceivable that the Babylonians
could produce intervals of sound that effected prostration on the crowds
of people. In other words, they were forced to fall down by the sound of
the music itself.

In that case, we are justified in seeing the intention of the text to
report a miracle in that the three men were able to resist the effects
of the music and remain upright before the golden image. It is very
possible that this miracle was seen to have reinforced their intention
to faithfulness even in the face of threatened death.

The connection between idolatry and music is one often overlooked, but
one that is clearly consonant with Islamic thought. Music in non-Islamic
societies that has the reputation of being secular is not thereby
divorced from idolatry.

It is not the repute of the music that is significant, but the very
character of the music. Mass contemporary concerts are characterized by
stereotyped bahviour particular to those events, behaviour that is a
forced form of idolatry in the guise of swaying, raising the hands,
hysterical shouting, and swooning.

None of these behaviour patterns occur normally without the stimulation
of the required music. Research has shown such music to be not only
associated with chemical addiction, but to be an addiction in itself.
But research is hardly needed to demonstrate the fact, as every observer
and every participant is able to satisfy him or herself of the fact
directly.

The story of Daniel’s three friends is a vivid reminder not only of the
Islamic principle of avoiding idolatry in all forms, but of the Islamic
warning against the misuse of music. Muslims living both in supposed
Muslim societies and those living in other societies are all susceptible
to the detrimental effects of music. The witness of the book of Daniel
is that such music in itself constitutes idolatry, and as such in
Islamic terms is shirk.

3. Prayer in Prostration
------------------------

The third story of the book of Daniel that is highly relevant to Muslim
life is the famous story of Daniel (as) in the lions’ den as reported in
Daniel 6.

1 ¶ It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom an hundred and twenty
princes, which should be over the whole kingdom; 2 And over these three
presidents; of whom Daniel was first: that the princes might give
accounts unto them, and the king should have no damage. 3 Then this
Daniel was preferred above the presidents and princes, because an
excellent spirit was in him; and the king thought to set him over the
whole realm.

4 Then the presidents and princes sought to find occasion against Daniel
concerning the kingdom; but they could find none occasion nor fault;
forasmuch as he was faithful, neither was there any error or fault found
in him. 5 Then said these men, We shall not find any occasion against
this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning the law of his
God.

6 ¶ Then these presidents and princes assembled together to the king,
and said thus unto him, King Darius, live for ever. 7 All the presidents
of the kingdom, the governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the
captains, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to
make a firm decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or
man for thirty days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den
of lions. 8 Now, O king, establish the decree, and sign the writing,
that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians,
which altereth not.

9 Wherefore king Darius signed the writing and the decree. 10 Now when
Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house; and his
windows being open in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his
knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as
he did aforetime.

11 ¶ Then these men assembled, and found Daniel praying and making
supplication before his God. 12 Then they came near, and spake before
the king concerning the king's decree; Hast thou not signed a decree,
that every man that shall ask a petition of any God or man within thirty
days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The
king answered and said, The thing is true, according to the law of the
Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

13 Then answered they and said before the king, That Daniel, which is of
the children of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor
the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition three times a
day.

14 Then the king, when he heard these words, was sore displeased with
himself, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured
till the going down of the sun to deliver him. 15 Then these men
assembled unto the king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the
law of the Medes and Persians is, That no decree nor statute which the
king establisheth may be changed.

16 Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into
the den of lions. Now the king spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom
thou servest continually, he will deliver thee. 17 And a stone was
brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with
his own signet, and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might
not be changed concerning Daniel.

18 ¶ Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting:
neither were instruments of musick brought before him: and his sleep
went from him. 19 Then the king arose very early in the morning, and
went in haste unto the den of lions. 20 And when he came to the den, he
cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: and the king spake and said
to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou
servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions? 21 Then said
Daniel unto the king, O king, live for ever.

22 My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the lions' mouths, that
they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before him innocency was found in
me; and also before thee, O king, have I done no hurt.

The story is of a time far later than our first meeting with Daniel (as)
as a youth. This is significant, for it shows that Daniel (as) retained
the forms of worship and the principles of faith that he had attained as
a child throughout a long and brilliant diplomatic career in a heathen
court. Even if he had retained these as a fresh youth, one might have
expected him to conform over time and with maturity. But we find that he
has not done so.

There are several points of particular significance here. The first is
Daniel’s (as) obvious belief that public prayer in prostration towards
the holy city three times a day was obligatory. If he had not thought it
obligatory, he would certainly have discontinued it for the mere thirty
days of the prohibition. It was thus more than his stated custom. It was
the expression of his deep religious belief.

Besides the obligation of the prayer, we need to note the obligatory
elements of the prayer as well. First, it is addressed to God alone.
Secondly, it takes place at regular daily intervals, which are
specifically early morning, afternoon, and evening. Thirdly, it includes
the physical posture of prostration.

Fourthly, it takes place in a specific direction, that is, the city of
Jerusalem. The place of sacrifice and worship was moved to Jerusalem at
the time of David (as) where it remained until the time of Muhammad
(as). Jerusalem was the focus of prayer or the kibla of Daniel’s time.

It is necessary to note that the temple of Jerusalem had been destroyed
probably at the time when Daniel (as) was taken captive. We thus find
Daniel (as) praying in the direction of a pile of rubble for seventy
years or so. We find him doing so even at the risk of his life.

One is overcome with awe before faith of this magnitude, but the
implications are devastating for contemporary behaviour. One wonders by
what right have the people of any religious tradition paying lipservice
to the Bible relinquished the practice of daily, regular prayer in
prostration towards the holy city. This one narrative alone identifies
the Bible as the book of those who pray daily in prostration and of no
other people.

Although all three of these narratives from the book of Daniel make
strong appeal to miraculous divine intervention, they also raise a very
relevant issue. That issue is the possibility of maintaining a pure and
active faith and practice within a hostile environment. This is
precisely what Muslims are called upon to do, not only in Western
societies but oftentimes under the neo-colonial regimes of the Middle
East and other parts of the world. The book of Daniel is a strong
witness that this is not only possible, but that it is the only right
alternative.

Two factors are involved in the process, and it is not my intention to
proclaim them as the right way for Muslims to go. Nevertheless, they
arise naturally from the text. The first is the attitude of courtesy and
diplomacy on the part of the four men in every situation. That is, the
do not rise up in rebellion. They do not start revolutions in Iraq or
Iran. They deal with the existing powers in ways that are open to them.
Secondly, they make no compromise whatsoever with their belief and
practice. The result is polite insubordination. It is effective because
they are willing to lay their lives on the line.

It appears clear that the book of Daniel is a Biblical text containing
issues of the highest relevance specifically to Muslims. It thus shows
the Bible to be much the property of Muslims, much more so than the
property of the religious traditions that actually claim it, but which
deny in practice the sacred duties expressed in its pages.

Beyond this, the book of Daniel appears to be worthy of further, more
detailed study for the contemplation of strategies for dealing with
these issues that continue to be relevant in the contemporary world. A
two-pronged approach, on one hand using valid means of action and
avoiding violence, and on the other absolute adherence to Islamic
principle and practice, might be far more productive than the
perpetration of such tragedies as the events of 11 September 2001.


