Part 1 : Foreword
=================

The present series contains a lecture given on Islam by Shaheed
Ayatollah Dr. Beheshti on October 14, 1965 to the Epiphany Community
Hamburg, where he was the Imam of "Islamic Centre of Hamburg" at that
time. For those who don't have recourse to the more detailed Islamic
text, the present articles offer an opportunity to understand the
principles of Islamic beliefs and laws.

The lectures have been selected here on account of the possibility of
acquaintance with the fundamentals of Islamic teachings without
demanding much of the reader's time and its simplicity. It is written in
a relatively simple language, presents a summary of the teachings of
Islamic beliefs and provides some information for those who are not able
to examine Islamic matters deeply in a specialised manner. I believe
that one of the most valuable styles for promotion of culture, sciences
and religion is through simple writings.

The present lectures are a part of the invaluable legacy of the martyr
Ayatollah Dr. Beheshti. Despite its briefness, it successfully presents
the principles and outlines of the ISLAMIC CODE OF BEHAIVIOUR. The
attractive comprehensiveness of the book together with the need to
illuminate the high station of that great Islamic figure, impelled the
Islamic Propagation Organisation (IPO) to present a re-edition of the
work which was first published by The Islamic Centre of Hamburg.

**1: Introduction**

Dear Ladies and gentlemen: Let me greet first those who - free from
arrogance and prejudice - seek the truth, those who humble themselves in
its presence regardless of what the truth may be, those who do not
blindly oppose it when it requires apprehension and when it ought to be
embraced, those who carefully and wisely investigate each problem and
having in good conscience evaluated it follow nothing but the best.

The Holy Qur'an says:

"And thus preach joy to My servants. Those who listen to the word and
follow the best of it. Those are the ones whom Allah has guided and they
are the wise people."

Sura 39: Verses 17-18.

You have invited me to talk to you about Islam today. The actual reason
seems to be that you have heard of "Islam" and thereby have been urged
to seek further knowledge and learn of its truth. Let me give you good
tidings: should you set out on this highway with sincerity and thus
follow it, the gateway of a true understanding of Islam will be opened
up to you and you shall pursue your course smoothly. I shall attempt in
short a talk to explain the cornerstone of Islamic teachings and some of
its fundamental features. It will be your turn to consider matters
carefully and if you come across anything you would like to understand
more thoroughly, do not hesitate to set forth your questions. The
subject will be much clarified in the process of question and answer. In
order to banish any lingering restraint you may have at question time,
let me tell you that I am as keen to hear you as you are at the moment
to hear me. May I finally add that what I may relate about Islam is
confined to the results of my personal inquiries, and I have not relied
upon inherited beliefs and dogmas or upon the ideas of other thinkers.

I have primarily relied upon the Qur'an which is the sacred text of all
Muslims, a book revealed to Mohammed (SAW) so that it may be available
to all men at all times and is the most fundamental source of
acquaintance with Islam. A book which in myriads of copies has been
available to all peoples throughout the centuries. The question results,
if one can rely on a better and more trustworthy source to get
acquainted with Islam.

If we are of the opinion that Qur'an can be considered the most
important Islamic source, it does not mean that sources, for example
Hadith (statements or actions of the Prophet (SAW), handed down to us),
are absolutely of no value. There is no doubt that a remarkable portion
of Islamic teachings ought to be understood by means of these sources.
But Hadith and similar sources are only valuable, if they report truly
on statements or actions of the Prophet Mohammed(SAW).

Doubtful traditions are therefore no acceptable source to us. In order
that the false and doubtful traditions exercise no disadvantageous
influence on Islam, the principles of this religion demand all
traditions- Hadith, etc.- be first compared with Qur'an, thus
eliminating such relevant points which do not comply. Therefore,
everybody who wants to realise a true investigation of Islam and its
principles must consequently first thoroughly know Qur'an in each and
every respect and compare each and every theme in tradition, history and
similar fields with the same.

**2: Only One God**

The cornerstone of Islam is "Tawheed", i.e. Monotheism. "Tawheed" means
belief in only one God and that existence in general - among other
things the order of nature--is a manifestation of His grand design, as
well as turning to God in prayer and glorification, away from
worshipping any other.

The first article of faith is: "La ilaha, illa-llah" - "There is no God
but Allah." And the first step towards Islam: "Ashhadu an la ilaha
illa-llah" - "I testify that there is no God beside Allah."

Not only my tongue but also my heart and inner light all proclaim that
there is no other than the Creator of the world who is worthy of
adoration. All the other teachings of Islam are founded upon this and
have their sources here. Accordingly Islam proclaimed monotheism to be
the path to salvation: "Qulu la ilaha illa-llah, tuflihu" - "Say: There
is no God but Allah, and thereby you will attain salvation."

This means: Say and act sincerely, and believe with all your heart that
apart from the only Creator of the world there is nothing worthy of
adoration and this shall be your path to salvation.

**3: Correct Knowledge of God**

Islam has attached importance, more than anything else, to the proper
knowledge of God, free from any aberration. It is chiefly here that
Islam is outstanding. Consequently, in the course of my talk will have
to be a basis for your future acquaintance with Islam, I shall attend to
this feature.

**4: The Invisible God**

The only God to whom Islam invites everyone is inaccessible to the
senses. He is beyond the reach of eyesight nor is He open to touch.
Qur'an says in this respect:

"No vision can grasp Him but His grasp is over all vision. He is above
all comprehension yet Omniscient." Sura 6: verse 103

Vision does not penetrate beyond colour and figure but God has neither
one nor the other. His glory is beyond the reach of vision and other
senses in general.


