Part 4 : 22: Fate and Free Will
===============================

The teaching of Islam concerning free will, predestination and
immortality lays great stress on strengthening man's will to work and
try correctly against a background of correct thinking, using up his
immense capacity for knowledge, correct judgement and initiative which
God had endowed in him , on the one hand and increase his capacity of
endurance and resistance against difficulties and tribulations, normally
occurring in life on the other hand. Such teachings are opposed to all
manner of indolence, and fatalism when man is faced with natural and
social difficulties, and frowns upon those who are not robust and
possess no self-assurance when faced with the bitter facts of life.

**23: Islam, Modern Science, And Technology**

From what has already been discussed it is quite clear that Islam is
not only not opposed to scientific and technological progress, on the
contrary, it encourages it, laying stress only on two points:

1. Scientific, technological and social progress shall not result in
man waxing proud and thereby disregarding his Creator.

2. This endeavour and progress shall be utilised to better the
condition of men and never be used in propagating sin or to buttress the
foundations of cruelty and oppression.

**24: Prophecy**

Man's thought soars above the clouds in problems concerning nature and
he can expect increasing progress of his faculties. It is precisely for
this reason that God's messengers have had no special functions there.
But in order to solve problems beyond the realm of nature, and to gain
an insight into the after life and man's ultimate goal , he is surely in
need of guidance from God.

The God gives men and the guidance He sends down upon them is through
men to whom He makes revelation, ordaining them to guide their fellows
and to teach men what has been revealed to them. They are the prophets.
The teachings of the prophets are neither the result of scientific
research nor that of personal experience, but God's teachings which are
sent down to them through revelation.

"And He does not speak out of caprice. It is nought but a revelation
revealed, taught him by one terrible in power."

Sura 53: verses 3-5.

**25: Right Estimation of The Prophets**

The Qur'an from time to time reminds us that the prophets are men in
their substance and they are distinct from others owing to their ability
to receive and pass on revelations in order to lead men. In other
aspects they do not differ from other human beings. Exactly like others,
they are born, eat, drink, sleep, procreate, rear children, and live
their span of life, and then pass away. The Qur'an says of Mohammed
(pbuh&hf):

"Say, I am only a man the like of you, it is revealed to me that your
God is the only God, so whoever, he hopes for encounter with his Lord,
shall work righteously, and in the worship of his Lord admit no one as
His partner."

--Sura 18: verse 110.

Islamic teaching concerning all messengers of God, among them Adam,
Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus is the same. They are all men raised to
the station of prophecy and their only distinction is that they receive
God's revelations to hand over to their fellowmen.

**26: Miracles by Prophets**

Qur'an speaks, too, of miracles worked by the prophets , but in many
verses it is stressed that to work miracles is not left at their
discretion. They do not possess an extra faculty to those we own, thus
working miracles on request.

Those opposed to Islam constantly requested miracles from the Prophet.
They would say that if he was truly a prophet of God he ought to be able
to do extraordinary things without further ado. The Prophet would reply:
"It is not left to me to perform miracles at your caprice."

The miracles you have heard of God's prophets are God's works performed
exceptionally when conditions have rendered them necessary, regardless
of the personal inclination of the prophet concerned. Accordingly,
miracles do not raise a prophet above the station of other men. See
Qur'an, Sura 6, verse 109, Sura 17, verses 90-93 and many other
verses.

**27: Science, Reason And Revelation**

Before coming to know the prophets of God we have only one source of
knowledge, experiment and thought, science and reason. Once we have
known the messengers of God and got sure that they utter nothing but
from God we have gained a new source to realise the truth, i.e. the
teachings of the prophets which originate from the revelation. Man has
no better source of acquainting himself with God, the problems of the
hereafter and a way of life both pleasing his God and resulting in
eternal happiness.

