Chapter 1 : an Islamic Perspective of Political Economy
=======================================================

With the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and in its heartland,
the Soviet Union, the world is yet again dominated by the practices and
laws of capitalism. Today's world econo­my is shaped according to Adam
Smith. No other alternative routes for economic development are
envisaged but to let "the laws of the market" play their course in the
marketplace.

The "invisible hand" of the market is more visible now than at anytime
as the determining and decisive factor in the lives of nations and men.
Consequently, the self­-interest of members of society is to be the
driving force of econo­my, and the law of supply and demand the
regulating mechanism of profiteers in society. Even economists in what
used to be the Marxist bloc are subscribing to such economic behaviour
as the only alternative to remedy the ills of the economies of their
nations.

Not quite true, say many Muslim thinkers and political activists. They
believe that Islam provides humanity with solutions to problems created
by imperfect man-made political systems and moral values.

Islam, according to them, is a divinely ordained social framework that
should guide humanity to peace and tranquillity in all aspects of life,
physical and metaphysical. One of these thinkers and political activists
was Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr of Iraq. Sadr was executed because he led a
revolutionary movement against the Ba'thist regime in Iraq in 1980. He
had conceived an Islamic political system to replace the existing
regimes in the Muslim world, which he considered corrupt.

His programme for the future is to create a new socioeconomic order
that would replace the capitalist and socialist orders which are the
dominating systems in the Muslim world. This paper intends to focus on
his views and the basic principles of the Islamic economic system, which
he believes is more capable of solving the contradictions of the
capitalist system and, therefore, more able to satisfy human needs; more
importantly, it has the capacity to develop and progress in accordance
with human potentials.

As an Islamic jurist, Sadr derives his basis of argument from Islamic
tenets and sacred sources. Here our purpose is to present his conceptual
argument and economic engineering of society and to see how applicable
these views and programmes are to reality. The aim of the study here is
to highlight his argument and try to understand the structure of the
Islamic economic system. His views in economics are part of his general
political theory designed for the establishment of a complete Islamic
social system.

The behaviour of the Islamic economic system should be judged after the
creation of an Islamic State, where the whole realm of socioeconomic
human behaviour is determined according to Islam. Sadr's major work in
economics was written in 1960-61, and aside from the pamphlet that he
wrote later in his life, the main argument of his thought is contained
in one work, Iqtisaduna(\`Our Economics').

The economy of the Islamic State, according to Sadr, is divided between
that of the individual as the vicar of God (khalifah), and the ruler as
the witness (shahid) who presides over the application of the laws of
God. The economic structure of the Islamic State thus consist of private
property and public property. However, one should not think that the
economic structure of the Islamic State is some sort of combination of
capitalism and socialism. Sadr strongly rejects this misconception.

He argues that the juxtaposition of private and public right of
ownership stems from the fundamental beliefs of Islam. [^1] This is
similar to the way that private ownership is advocated in the capitalist
system, or public ownership by socialist: as the logical conclusion of
their ideological and philosophical beliefs. To justify private
ownership and public ownership in Islam, one must understand the right
and obliga­tions of the individual and the State in Islam. Sadr's
detailed descrip­tion of economic relationships in the Islamic State and
it economic structure represent the best available argument for the
notion of Islamic economics.

**Notes:**

[^1]. Al-Sadr, "al-Janib al-'iqtisadi min al-nizam al-'Islami," (The
Economic Perspective of Islamic System) in Ikhtarnalak, 112-113.

Chapter 2 : Economic Relationships

Man's behaviour, according to Sadr, is categorized into three types of
relationships: social, economic and religious. They stem from man's
basic relationship to other men, to the environment, and to God. The
economic relations, however, are outcome of his inner instinct of
self-love that "always drives him to seek good thins for himself, to
secure his interest, and satisfy his needs. [^2] Accordingly, man, in his
relationship with the environment, was predisposed to utilize all
possi­ble resources to satisfy his needs and increase his pleasure. In
due time, he was willing to use animals and plant to help him in his
struggle against the environment.

Although his essential needs were simple in the early period of
history, his mental capacities enabled him to devel­op new means to help
him utilize the resources of the environment. Thus his needs are always
expanding due to the complexity of utilizing the resources of the
environment.

Man's relationship with others of his kind was the natural outcome of
his need to satisfy his desires. The complexity of life, arising from
his relationship with the environment, made it difficult for him to cope
adequately with his needs. Cooperation with others made the effort to
satisfy his needs manageable. Cooperation with others result in a
shar­ing of benefit with all participant in the community. [^3] The inner
instinct of self-love that drove man to create the first community are
evident. These instinct gave rise to man's exploitation of his
brother.

Because people were not equal in their physical and mental capacities,
they obviously differed in their utilization of the resources of the
environment. Such differentiation of capabilities is part of the divine
plan for bringing about cohesion through the division of labour to the
human community. People of different capabilities function in different
tasks within the social order.

[^4] However, man's desire to maximize his interest drove some men to
exploit the situation for their benefit. Human needs were growing due to
man's mental and economic development. His experience broadened his
capacities to utilize the resources of his environment. His passion to
acquire more of the environmental resources for himself became
prevalent. Consequent­ly, some men were willing to oppress others to
satisfy their greed and egos (both outcome of self-love). It was then
that the human com­munity faced oppression in the form of economic
exploitation.

This conflict between social peace and individual instinct of
maximizing interest was persistent throughout history. This historical
conflict, Sadr argues, is between two classes: those individuals who
control the environmental resources (economic and social) and endeavour
to protect their interest, and the rest of the society which strives to
live in peace and cooperation. Marxist believe the problem originated
with a few people controlling economic resources.

The only way to bring about peace to the social order is through the
revolution of the oppressed class to destroy the special interest of the
privileged class. Capitalist, on the other hand, believe such social
conflict to be the result of limited natural resources of the
environment, which are not sufficient to satisfy the needs of all
people. [^5] Thus, social conflict will always be prevalent. Only through
incremental and gradual reforms can society hope to manage social
conflict from overtaking human progress. On this basis, capitalists
oppose any type of social revolution. However, Islam disagrees with both
the views and considers environ­mental resources to be sufficient to
satisfy all people's needs.

According to Sadr, the proem rests with the channelling of human
nature: how can the instinct of self-love be directed in a proper
manner? Unless a solution emerges to control human desires and deflect
the potential for exploitation of others, social order rests on shaky
foundations. Therefore, clearly states that the socioeconomic problem is
the result of the misconduct of man. He specifies two reasons for the
socioeconomic problems: (1) the oppressive character of man, arising
from his self-love; and (2) man's inefficiency in the utilization of
economic resources.

According to Sadr's interpretation, the ills stemming from man's
oppressiveness in the economic realm of life persist in the form of
inequitable distribution of economic resources on the one hand and from
inefficient utilization of these resources, which result in
under­development of economic resources and their waste. A solution must
overcome these two basic ills of the economic behaviour of man. Sadr
specifies three components of the Islamic solution: (1) cessation of the
various forms of oppression manifest in the unjust distribution of
economic resources; (2) disciplining of "human nature to achieve control
of the instinct of self-love; and (3) utilization of economic resources
to satisfy the needs of all humanity.

**Notes:**

[^2]. Al-Sadr, "Al-Nizam al-'Islami muqaranan bil-nizam al-ra'smali wa
al-Markisi" (The Islamic System Compared with the Capitalist and the
Marxist Systems) in Ikhtarnalak, 160.
[^3]. Ibid., 161
[4.] Al-Sadr, Iqtisaduna (Our Economics) (Beirut: Dir al-Ta'aruf,
1982), 311­313.
[^5]. Here Sadr seems to mention the view of Thomas Robert Malthus. He
dis­regards other capitalist economic thinkers who believe that the
source of economic problem is the distribution of economic wealth.


