Chapter 5 : Distribution of Produced Wealth
===========================================

Sadr, furthermore, develops an Islamic theory of distribution of
produced commodities. Produced wealth is classified into: (1) primary
commodities, such as agricultural produce and raw materials; and (2)
secondary commodities, which are the primary commodities manufactured
into different products.

In both of these stages of pro­duction, capital generated from previous
economic endeavour as well as the means of production (tools and
machineries) take part in the production process in these advanced
economic activities. However, contrary to the capitalist theory, each of
these components has no share of the product but they gain special
rights for their use and their wear-and-tear in the production
process.

As mentioned under the previous principle, Islam gives the worker the
sole right of ownership of produced goods. However, Sadr realizes that
human labour is but one of the components in the production of primary
commodities. The other components are the natural environ­ment and the
tools which help man in the process of production. The tools, or means
of production, according to Sadr, "contain stored up work of previous
stages of production that will be exhausted and depleted during their
use in the process of production.

" [^14] In this case, if the tools are not property of the worker who
benefits from their use during the process of production, then the
legitimate owner of these tools must get paid for the use of his tools,
i.e., the depleted stored up work in the tools. [^15] According to Sadr,
herein lies one of the major 'ideological differences between capitalism
and Islam.

The former regards the owner of the means of production as the sole
owner of the produced commodities, whereas Islam considers only the
labourer to have the legitimate claim to the commodities produced. In
capitalism, tools get a share of the product because their use, like
human labour, represents expenditure of a certain amount of work in the
production process. In Islam, tools only assist and aid man to
facilitate the process of production; thus, they must be compensated for
in rent, not in profit sharing. [^16]

Accordingly, only the labourer has the legitimate claim to the products
of his effort. Therefore, it is unthinkable in Islamic economics, states
Sadr, for someone to employ others and provide them with rent and tools
so that he alone owns the products of their labour. [^17] Likewise,
industries and production units that employ many workers can function in
an Islamic State only if they are owned publically.

In Sadr's theoretical vision industrial capitalist production can no
way evolve in an Islamic economic system except through State's direct
involvement and control in economic development. The State, on behalf of
society, which is the sole owner of economic resources, can employ
people and pay them only wages for their work and not give them share of
the produced commodities.

Furthermore, since the utilization of the economic wealth of the
environment is the responsibility of society as a whole-the sole
proprietor and beneficiary of natural resources-it gets a share of the
produce of primary commodities. The State, in this stage of produc­tion,
has the right to collect what is known as tasq (income tax) from
producers to finance social welfare expenditures and meet the eco­nomic
needs of the people. [^18]

As for the production of secondary commodities, Islam gives the owner
of primary commodities the right to establish his claim to final
products. The legitimacy of his ownership does not cease because someone
aids him in transforming his commodity into different forms. An
individual, if he/she owns the raw materials, has the right to
manu­factured commodities produced out of that material.

To put it plainly, the worker, in this case, does not only own the
product of the natural resources but also the produced commodities in
latter stages of pro­duction. If the State, for example, extracts or
mines certain natural resources through its publically owned
enterprises, then it also has the right of ownership of all the finished
goods extracted from those natural resources. People who participate in
the production would get paid for their labour. Industries that develop
natural resources, such as oil and minerals, theoretically speaking,
cannot be owned privately in an Islamic economic system. It is because
the State is the primary owner of natural resources, which gives it the
right to own the pro­duced product.

However, there is a theoretical loophole to make capitalists flourish
in an Islamic economic system, which is through the obtaining of natural
resources from the State on lease by private enterprises, where the
latter can claim legitimate ownership of the produced commodities.

In any case, ownership is not affected by the use of the means of
production belonging to someone else. The owners of tools and ma­chines
get paid for the use of these in the production process. By the same
token, the owner of primary commodities may also hire someone else to
manufacture his goods. The worker, this case, gets the salary for his
labour, which should be specified in the job contract. The worker,
consequently, has no claim on the final product he produces. [^19]

Islam specifies two means of payment for a hired worker: the first one
is through wages, where he is paid for the amount of work he performs in
accomplishing a task; the second is by sharing in the profit of the
final product. In this case, the worker gets only a per­centage of the
profit specified in the agreement between him and the owner of the
primary commodities. The general principle, in Islam, for earning is:

...that earning is only based on contribution of labour during the
process (of production), so the contributed labour is the only
legitimate means for some­ one to get paid by the owner of the
process...and without such contribution, there is no legitimacy for his
earning. [^20]

Based on this economic principle, the owner of capital will not receive
fixed payment from the owner of primary goods, i.e., it is usury, which
is prohibited. Monetary capital will not be considered as contributing
any amount of labour at all.

[^21] Fixed payment is allowed in Islam only in one case, where there is
a consumption of labour, either directly through a worker, or indirectly
(accumulated work) through the means of production. As for monetary
capital, no such work is exhausted or depleted. In this matter, the
owner of the capital is allowed to share the profit and the loss with
the owner of primary commodities. The legitimacy of earning in this
situation is based on his help in facilitating the process of
production, for which he deserves to be rewarded in the form of profit
sharing.

**Notes:**

[^14]. Iqtisaduna, 619.
[^15]. Iqtisaduna, 584.
[^16]. Al-Khutat al-tafsiliyyah, 97.
[^17]. Ibid., 99.
[^18]. Al-Khutat, 561.
[^19]. Iqtisaduna, 605.
[^20]. Iqtisaduna, 618.
[^21]. Ibid., 625-627.

Chapter 6 : Channelling Human Nature

The first task of the Islamic political system is to eliminate all
forms of oppression within economic relationships and to lay the ground
for the establishment of a just system of distribution of eco­nomic
resources. However, the source of the injustice, according to Sadr, is
neither social settings nor the means of production, but rather human
nature itself, the inner instincts of self-love that drive man to secure
survival for himself only. Such an instinct is essential for the
survival of human life on earth. Profit, which is the economic
manifes­tation of self-love and is generated from private investment, is
the great engine of human economic accomplishment.

It gives the individ­ual the personal incentive to work hard and to
overcome difficulties and challenges. However, when left without moral
control it will manifest itself in different forms of oppression. Man
will be concerned only with securing his own interests to the point of
abusing the interests of others. Unless a solution to the problem of
human nature is found, man will find escape routes to abuse even in a
just system of distribu­tion.

In fact, the social contradiction stems from the individual instinct of
self-love. In the capitalist system, it manifests itself in the form of
economic exploitation of others. In the communist system, where private
property is eliminated, man's self-love manifests itself in politi­cal
oppression, such as the struggle for power and the securing of special
social privileges. [^22]

Religion, according to Sadr, gives humanity the only solution to this
basic and deep-rooted problem of human nature. Religion over­comes the
problem of human nature by specifying many channels of self-control that
properly regulate or direct- man's instincts into appro­priate social
behaviour. In other words, it will end the contradiction between social
and private interests.

The first of these mechanisms for self-control is a spiritual one, the
psychological power that makes man control his behaviour. Man is the
vicar of God, which means that he is the representative of the Almighty
on earth. In an economic sense, he is the trustee of God for the wealth
created for mankind. This sense of vicarage implies that man is
respon­sible for his economic deeds before God. Vicarage also means
controlling personal behaviour and directing the use of natural
resources according to God's will.

[^23] Improper behaviour and the waste of God-given wealth will make man
accountable for his deeds and bring severe punishment. In the same
manner, abiding by God's will guarantees a good reward and Divine
approval It is He Who has appointed you viceroys in the earth, and has
raised some of you in rank above others, that He may try you in what He
has given you. Surely thy Lord is swift in retribution; and surely He is
All-forgiving, All­compassionate. (6:165)

Accordingly, man is expected to receive guidance as to how God­given
wealth should be distributed and treated. It is this link between the
here and now and the hereafter that brings accommodation be­tween social
and private interests. Anyone who sacrifices for the sake of others is
rewarded. The religious solution, then, is not materialistic, but
spiritual and trains man to serve others and to sacrifice private
interest for the sake of social benefit.

In doing so, he serves and benefits himself as well. In Islam, it is
the fear of God and the desire to seek His good pleasure that replaces
the competitive, greed of human nature. Once religion succeeds in
bringing up men who have control over their inner instincts and
passions, the social order can be saved from con­tradictions and
individual abuses and manipulations.

Since this goal is utopian in its outlook, Islam has derived a social
mechanism to secure peace and harmony in human society. God has assigned
the vicarage role not to the individual per se, but rather to mankind It
is the community that is the trustee of God over eco­nomical wealth. It,
as a group, holds the responsibilities of managing natural resources and
human wealth to the benefit and welfare of the group. The following
Qur'anic verse refers to such social responsibility.

But do not give to fools their property that God has assigned to you to
manage. (4:5)

According to Sadr's interpretation of the above verse, God considers
the financial wealth of the mentally incapable as the wealth of the
community. The whole society is then responsible for not allowing any
misappropriation of the fool's wealth. Such social control over
eco­nomic wealth makes the individual accountable not only before God,
but before his own people.

Islam also disavows any values that a society attaches to the
possession of economic wealth. Affluence and economic prosperity of the
individual are not signs of social prestige. Islam wants the individual
to consider wear as burdensome and places a responsibility on the
shoulders of the wealthy individual to serve both himself and others.

It is a means to achieve the goals of humanity. [^24] Affluence should
not be the goal for the individual to achieve in his life, as in a
capitalist society which makes man use all possible means to increase
his posses­sion of wealth even if it brings harm avid oppresses others'
interests.

However, if one thinks of wealth as the means to realize the good
pleasure of God, then helping others, not oppressing them, becomes the
social norm of the rich and wealthy. In other words, Islam is
deter­mined to change the social values related to the possession of
wealth and private property. There is no need to abolish ownership of
private property as suggested by Marxism. The social policy of
elimination of private property, according to Sadr, will not be
successful because it goes against human nature. The only solution is to
reform the social ethos in such a way that wealth is changed from an
individual goal to a social means to achieve a higher moral goal.

**Notes:**

[^22]. "Al-Nizam al-Islami muqaranan," 170.
[^23]. Iqtisaduna, 536-537.
[^24]. Iqtisaduna, 568.


