Chapter 7 : Economic Development
================================

The third part of the Islamic solution to the economic problem,
according to Sadr, deals with "fostering production and utilization of
natural resources of the environment to their fullest extent." [^25] God
has created an abundance of resources in nature to satisfy human needs
on earth. Man, accordingly, is encouraged to use the abundance of God's
bounties to his benefit. According to Sadr, "Islam, ideologically
speaking, has set the development of economic wealth and the
utiliza­tion of natural resources to the greatest possible extent as a
goal for society." [^26] Islam is similar to capitalism in affirming this
economic objective; however, they differ in their approach to achieving
it.

While capitalism "rejects any means of development of production or
increase of wealth that hinders the principle of economic freedom,
Islam, on the other hand, rejects those means which are contrary to its
theories of distribution (of the economic resources) and its principle
of jus­tice." [^27]

Notwithstanding, Islam, as mentioned before, discourages individuals
from pursuing strictly materialistic objectives, downgrading the passing
gains of this transitory existence. Sadr regards economic pros­perity as
the goal of a virtuous society, not of the individual. God, after all,
has created everything on earth and the heavens to serve the existence
of man.

[^28] Islam only rejects materialistic gain as the ultimate ambition of
man, which leads him to the oppression of others. Islam encourages zuhd
(austerity) as a value which trains man not to consider materialistic
wealth as his final goal in life. [^29] Zuhd is man's mechanism for
self-regulation which he utilizes to fight his desires and direct his
objectives toward God. However, it is not the goal of the social order
of the faithful.

Suffice it to mention that affluence and a high standard of living help
mankind in its journey to God. Suffering can hinder such move­ment. In
fact, there is a direct relation between man's relationship to God and
his relationship to nature. The more men strive for God, the more
bountiful nature will be in providing for man's needs. Social affluence
is the sign of God's satisfaction with man. On the other hand, man's
thankless attitude to God, of which social injustice is the out-ward
expression or symptom, results in the ruin of economic resources and
productivity as well as degeneration of man's social existence. [^30]

Islam also expedites the social drive toward production in its
religious regulations. Under die Islamic economic system, earning is
exclusively linked to working. All other means of earning and owner­ship
are abolished. The possession of natural resources is not considered
legitimate without continuous human efforts to develop it. Any type of
earning that does not require any human labour, in commerce as well as
in production, is forbidden.

For this reason, the use of financial capital to generate earning is
abolished-The only legitimate way to make use of capital is to invest it
in production and share the risk of profit and loss. To insure the
utilization of capital in economic develop­ment, Islam strongly forbids
the hoarding of money and initiates a yearly tax to downgrade any wealth
that is not enrolled in the produc­tion process. Additionally, any type
of useless economic activities, such as gaming, magic and jugglery, are
forbidden in Islam. [^31]

Furthermore, Islam makes it a requirement for Muslims to explore all
fields of knowledge and seek any efficient means of production in order
to utilize to maximum benefit the natural resources of the environment.
[^32] The economic strength of Muslims is analogous to their military
strength. The power of the Islamic State is judged on the merit of its
economic progress and social prosperity. For this reason, Islam places a
heavy emphasis on the role of political leadership to regulate social
economic activities to enhance economic development and eliminate
waste.

**Notes:**

[^25]. Iqtisaduna, 649.
[^26]. Iqtisaduna, 650.
[^27]. Ibid., 649.

[^28]. Sadr, in support of his argument, cites a letter of Imam \`All
(A) to the governor of Egypt that exemplifies the social order of the
believers as one that encompassed the affluence of the world and the
hereafter. See Iqtisaduna, 651.

[^29]. Here Sadr gives his interpretation of two sets of apparently
contradictory prophetic traditions of which some exhort austerity and
reject materialistic gains, and others invite man to make use of wealth
for his benefit. He sees no contradic­tion between the two when the
former is looked at as discouraging man from making economic wealth as
the final objective of his life. See Iqtisaduna 669-672.

30. Al-Sadr, Muqaddimah fl al- tafsir(Kuwait:al-Dir al-'Islimiyyah,
1982), 104-107.

[^31]. Iqtisaduna, 670.

[^32]. Ibid, 671.

Chapter 8 : The Role of the State

As indicated in the theory of distribution, the Islamic State possesses
the sole right of ownership of natural resources. Consequently, it has
absolute control over all aspects of economic activities. The owner of
natural resources or, primary commodities, according to Sadr, is the
sole owner of the secondary commodities. Basically, the govern­ment of
the Islamic State can determine the flow of wealth in society and define
the economic process. The major objective of the Islamic State is to set
up policies to develop the natural resources to the fullest extent to
benefit the entire society.

To achieve such an economic objective, the State has the right to
distribute social economic resources to attain the maximum amount of
production that brings prosperity to all people. The State has the
responsibility to provide for the minimum essential needs of society and
ensure the economic welfare of the people. It is unlike the capital­ist
State, which leaves that function to the fluctuations of the market.

Nor it is like the Marxist-Leninist theory that advocates State control
of all aspects of economic activities. The Islamic State sets the
direction of economic activities, while giving individuals the right of
private ownership to achieve the social goal. The government's role is
to over­see and regulate economic activities. Accordingly, Islam has
left the government with a high degree of flexibility in developing new
regula­tions to meet any emergent economic circumstances. Sadr called
the absence of restrictions in the Shari'ah as manatiq al-faragh (the
dis­cretionary sphere of the law), where the jurist; has the authority
to make judgements and rulings according to the principles of
jurispru­dence.

[^33] He considers this area of legislation on the part of the lawgiver
as a realistic approach to ensure the development of economic activities
and the means of production. The leadership of the Islamic State then
could initiate any new legislation and regulations that it sees as
appro­priate to the new emergent circumstances in order to meet the
eco­nomic needs of the people and secure maximum utilization of
eco­nomic resources.

In other words, the Islamic government is free to adopt a wide range of
economic policies from full control of the economy to free-enterprise in
order to achieve its social goals. In this case, the government must
depend on the economists and experts to watch for tile best possible
alternative policies to set the direction of the State economy (provided
that it will not overrule tile theory of distribution.)

Such an unlimited role of government in the economy of the Islamic
State is justified because of its substantial social involvement. The
State is responsible for the social welfare of all people. [^34] The
economic resources in the Islamic State are distributed not only
accord­ing to work and ability to produce, but also according to needs.
Not all people in society are able to work, and some of those who do are
not able to satisfy their needs. Sadr identifies three economic classes
in society:

(1) those who have the mental and/or the physical power to produce more
titan their needs; (2) those who are able to work, but only to the
extent of meeting their essential needs; and (3) those who do not have
the mental or physical power to work productively. The government's
responsibility is to provide for the needs of the latter two classes,
which are not limited to essential human needs. The people in the
Islamic State must live in dignity, i.e., their economic status must be
raised to an acceptable general level. Therefore, the State must have
the economic resources to be able to finance the social welfare
programme.

Whatsoever spoils of war God has given to His Messenger from the people
of the cities belong to God, and His Messenger, and the near kinsman,
orphans the needy and the traveller, so that it be not a thing taken in
turns among the rich of you. (59:7)

The verse, according to Sadr, indicates two things: first, the
allocation of economic resources between the government and the needy
people; second, die distribution of wealth in such a way as to prevent
the rich from controlling the economy. Based on the above
interpretation, Sadr argues that the main principles of Islamic
economics are:

(1) public (i.e., State) ownership of the means of production and
dis­tribution, and (2) centralized economic planning. It is only through
the control of all the community's resources by society that the common
need of social security is guaranteed and the essential economic rights
of the individual are insured. Accordingly, the legitimate Islamic
government has the responsibility to make longterm plans for serving the
common good and overcoming instabilities of the market.

Islam recognizes differences of income between people, but strives to
create an equitable standard of living. To realize such a socio-economic
condition, Islam, although it specifies fixed taxes to be collected from
prosperous people, establishes a social and moral mechanism. A lavish
and extravagant style of living is totally dis­couraged in Islam.

Islam also forbids waste in production and consump­tion in order to
direct the resources of the economy to produce com­modities that satisfy
the needs of all people and bring about social equity. The State also
has the authority to regulate wages and prices so as to overcome the
selfishness and greed of those who possess economic wealth and insure an
equitable standard of living for all people. In sum, the major goal of
the Islamic State is the prosperity of all citizens.

**Notes:**

[^33]. The jurist, according to Sadr, shall not change any of the
primary princi­ples of Islam, i.e., the sphere of halal and haram, that
which is obligatory and prohibited, respectively; but he may act within
the realm of “secondary” matters, i.e the mandub and makruh, that which
is ‘desirable’ and ‘reprehensible’, respectively. The jurst may forbid
any mandub action, or encourage any makruh ones.

[^34]. Iqtisaduna, 607


