Chapter 1: Contemporary Religious Movements
===========================================

Contemporary Religious Movements
--------------------------------

In the last decade, the Muslim world has been the most restless part of
the world and most of the news has been related to it. This has included
not only Iran but the entire Muslim world, although Iran has been the
center or, rather, the source of inspiration for this movement and
restlessness.

What is nowadays construed as the revival of Islam and Islamic
fundamentalism encompasses the westernmost part of the Muslim world,
i.e. Tunisia and the Arabic Morocco to its easternmost part, i.e.
Indonesia and parts of the Philippines settled by Muslims. No doubt, all
these countries and other places where Muslims, whether natives or not,
constitute a minority compared to the entire population, are affected by
this new wave although the degree to which they are affected is
different throughout and varies according to the conditions.

Such developments and restlessness did not begin in the recent decade.
Most likely, the restlessness in the Muslim world in the recent century
has been elevated and more serious compared to the other parts of the
world. At least one can say that, from among all the faiths that exist
today, Islam as a religion and also as a civilization and culture—the
civilization and culture that it has created and the protection of which
it has undertaken—has witnessed more movements, struggle and conflicts
than any other faith.

No other religion has reacted to such an extent against the full-fledged
hegemony of the new culture. Although they may have conflicted or
struggled with it positively or negatively, in the end they submitted to
it and settled for a peaceful coexistence with it, i.e. they adapted
themselves to the status quo at the cost of giving up their own
principles and fundamentals since, contrary to doing so, they could not
survive and could not stop their children and followers from
abandonment.[^1]

Among all religions, only Islam was firm on its principles and identity,
was not absorbed into the modern civilization and supported a
face-to-face conflict so as to maintain its sovereignty at least within
its own territory, a sovereignty that had been denied or at least
limited by the modern civilization and its advocates. The story of the
struggles and conflicts of this religion in the last decade and even the
last century is nothing but the sociopolitical realization of the
insistence, conflict and confrontation; and this goes back to the very
essence of this religion. The internal structure of this religion is so
that it calls its believers to a constant attempt for realizing their
own identity and rejecting all that is not part of this.

A Muslim, as long as he is a Muslim, is bound to abide by his/her own
fundamentals and principles. This is an essential element of his/her
belief and essential for his/her eternal salvation and worldly pride and
dignity. This is a necessary religious and ideological necessity and an
unchangeable, non-negotiable duty. Although, in practice, for a short or
long period of time this duty may not be fulfilled for certain reasons,
such as weak faith or inappropriate social conditions, it cannot be
completely forgotten. As long as there is Islam or Muslimhood, this duty
is to be performed and the religion is likely to adopt a position
according to the present circumstances and based on the claim of
coordinating itself with the same.

To put it in a few words, the conflict of this religion with whatever
that is unknown goes back to its nature and essence rather than being a
temporary or emotional condition that will soon go away and end.
Although the entire external conditions have a basic role in its
emergence and in the quality of the emergence, the main factor is from
within and the external factors only provide the proper conditions. The
history of Islam is the history of an endless constant fight between
‘tradition’ and ‘heresy’. History is a constant attempt for reinforcing
the tradition and rejecting heresy.[^2]

No matter what the form and dimensions of the heresy are, the fight will
persist as long as it exists. Indeed, there has been no time without
such heresy and, consequently, there will be no time without such
struggle, although it may not have a severe political form. The form of
the struggle determines the conditions but the substance is determined
by religion. [^3]

Throughout the history of Islam and especially in the recent decades we
have witnessed the struggle and strife between Shi‘ism and Sunnism. The
struggle by the Shi‘ites and by Sunnis to consolidate and stabilize the
laws and precepts of Islam and to reject anything other than these is
similarly motivated while it originates in the very substance of Islam
and cannot be two-pronged. This is why the story of religious struggles
in a country like Iran is not essentially different from those in other
countries such as Syria, Egypt and Pakistan. The contemporary history
has narrated these stories in the same way.[^4]

Despite all these, however, one should admit that there are differences
and failing to take them into account may entail problems and
misunderstandings. Unitive tendencies have prevented a proper
understanding and evaluation of the differences. This is a great problem
and can be solved only if dealt with impartially and bravely.

The differences relate to the different socioeconomic, political and
historical conditions in Shi‘ite and Sunni territories on the one hand
and to the ideological features of the two schools and the role that
such features have played in forming the social, psychological and
belief structure of their followers on the other. This is important
point that should not be ignored. The problem is not just that these two
differ from each other.

More important than this is that, in the light of their way of
understanding and beliefs in the course of history, they have grown into
two differing series of features. They have lived in two different
social, political and cultural backgrounds and, therefore, they have two
different psychologies, religious characters, religious thoughts and
sensitivities.[^5]

In order to study the ideological features that contribute to a better
and deeper understanding of the present situation of the Islamic
movement, a study of the political thought of these two schools are of
the utmost importance, therefore we will first deal with there.[^6]

Fundamentals of Shi‘ite and Sunni Political Thought
---------------------------------------------------

First, one has to see how these principles and factors, whether they are
historical, jurisprudential or theological, have formed the religious
political understanding of the Shi‘ites and Sunnis, why so and what
reflections this way of thinking had on their religious political
developments in the past and in the present. There is also the question
of whether the courses of sociopolitical and even cultural developments
of these two, when coming into conflict with religion, were the same or
different and, if they were different, how far were they affected by
their theoretical fundamentals in religion and the quality of such a
relation; also, how did this understanding affect the psychosocial
structures of the followers of these two schools.

It is important to carefully study this subject not because the past of
the Shi‘ites and Sunnis would be better understood in the light of it.
But rather, because, without paying due consideration to it, the present
condition of the Islamic movement cannot be well understood. Although it
may be said that the present Islamic movement has similarly covered the
Shi‘ite and Sunni territories, it would be a mistake to presume that the
movement was formed and went on based on similar theoretical backgrounds
and fundamentals. The effect of the sociopolitical and economic
conditions as well as the historical background and the more or less
common colonial experience of the believers in these two schools were so
strong and critical in forming the present conditions that it would be
difficult in the beginning to evaluate the importance of the belief
characteristics and the religious, political structures of the two based
on two different realizations of the Islamic movement.

This indeed should not be interpreted as ignoring the numerous common
grounds of the two in various fields such as the political thought. The
problem is that there are important distinctive differences despite all
the similarities and even the common grounds. Such differences have
emerged because of the complex conditions that exist today. A proper
impartial understanding of these misleading differences would help
understand more deeply the other party and remove any problem and
suspicion. Therefore, they have to be set forth for discussion rather
than be hidden.

The fact is that the Shi‘ites and Sunnis have two different ways,
especially in their political outlook, and religious political movements
in their societies have occurred in two different ways. Is it not a fact
that any sociopolitical movement is formed by the psychosocial facts and
the historical experiences and beliefs in its territory? Now, if the
facts become different, the movement will surely be affected. The
psychologies of a typical Shi‘ite and a typical Sunni differ as their
religious social structures do. When it is so, the results, inspired by
the difference, will unavoidably be different as well.[^7]

For example, there is a general tendency in Iran to consider the lack of
a religious political leadership among the Sunnis as a great weak point
in the contemporary Islamic movement. Such a belief is based on an undue
comparison between the Shi‘ites and Sunnis, ignoring the fact that this
arises from the jurisprudential and theological structure, the
historical tradition and the psychosocial structure of their society and
do not have to exist among the Sunnis as well.

The Shi‘ites, because they are the Shi‘ites and not because they are
Iranians or live in the present time, have a tendency towards being
guided by a leader and even being leader-makers, which is based on
religious requirements while such requirements do not necessarily exist
among Sunnis; neither the theoretical foundations nor the historical
experience exist for it; neither their psychological structure has grown
and been formed so that they would refer to a religious authority for
any problem nor their religious social structure is so as to put such a
person at the apex of the decision-making power.

Different Views
---------------

Because of the importance of this discussion, it would be better to
quote part of the intelligent criticisms of the author of the book
*Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i* from Muhammad Jawad Mughniyah. In his book
*ash-Shi‘ah wa’l-Hakimun,* Mughniyah says,

“The majority of the Sunnis necessitate obeying a tyrant sovereign and
being patient upon his tyranny while denying the right to revolt against
him. Shi‘ism, however, necessitates encounter and revolution against
tyranny and corruption. In this respect, Shi‘ism opposes Sunnism and
stands against it. According to the majority of Sunnis, revolting
against the oppressive sovereign is revolting against the faith and
against Islam while Shi‘ism provides that such revolt would be within
the context of the faith and being patient with oppression is revolting
against the faith. Here lies the basic reason and the true
interpretation of what Ahmad Amin and others say, to the effect that,
“Shi‘ism is an umbrella for he who seeks the destruction of Islam.”,
because in the logic of Amin and his descendants, Islam is manifested by
and personified in the person sovereign, no matter if he is an oppressor
or a just person. Therefore, whoever stands against him has deserted
Islam. However, in the logic of Shi‘ism, it is the tyrant who has
deserted Islam… and, therefore, it is not surprising if he calls Shi‘ism
‘the destroyer’; true, but the destroyer of aberration and corruption.”

“It was Hasan Baṣri who said, “It is necessary to obey the Umayyad
although they may be oppressors… I swear by God what they make good is
more than their corruption.” Then, he adds, “The Shi‘ite Imams, *faqih*s
(jurisprudents) and literary scholars have always stood against
oppressive sovereigns and refused to cooperate with them, as they deemed
this a sin to do so. Shi‘ism by nature advises standing up against the
falsehood and altruism for achieving the truth. It would have not been
wise for those in power to ignore this point, which is why they always
kept the Shi‘ites followed and persecuted them anywhere. They bribed the
wrongdoing clerics and these two united to kill the pure believers in
God and the Prophet and the Ahl al-Bayt (the Prophet’s Household). They
welcomed the slaughter and issued a *fatwa* that the believers had
deserted the faith.”[^8]

What Mughniyah says is the general perception that the Shi‘ites have of
their school as well as of the Sunni school and their clerics. Although
this is in turn a right theory, it is not yet an inclusive one. It is
part rather than all of the reality. One has to see why these are so and
those are like that. Is all this due to personal and moral matters or is
it far from these? To evaluate the position of each of these two groups,
in the first place one has to take a look at the doctrinal,
intellectual, social and historical backgrounds in which they have acted
and figure out what the obligations and limitations of each of them have
been.

They could, however, not go beyond their doctrinal, jurisprudential and
theological frameworks. One who follows his/her doctrinal rules and
obligations not only cannot be blamed but also has to be praised if he
or she does it sincerely and with goodwill. If there is a criticism, it
has to be directed towards the choices rather than towards commitment to
the accepted principles and standards. Accordingly, expecting things
beyond the principles and obligations is a vain, unreasonable
expectation.

The critic, after quoting Mughniyah, says, “Without wanting to arouse
prejudice in this respect and while appreciating Mughniyah, we have to
say that we cannot agree with him in this analysis without considering
his special romantic approach. One feels that he has a double standard
when it comes to the attitudes of the Shi‘ites and the Sunnis towards
the sovereigns. These two groups lived under different circumstances
after the Prophet died and under the rule of the sovereigns.”

Then he adds, “The opinions issued by Islamic jurisprudents were
personal as well as public. *Fatwa*s issued were not limited to the
issuing jurisprudent. They covered his followers, disciples and
advocates as well. Therefore, no issue has to be considered in this way
although it contains some traces of the truth as well. It is true that
we have to be brave and straightforward in our stances, but we should
not forget the limits and boundaries. It is a means rather than an end.
Otherwise, the end will be the victim of the means. Nevertheless, the
position of the Shi‘ites before the tyrant is based on some deep
fundamentals, which are rooted in the attitude of the Infallible Imams
towards the sovereigns, which is followed by the Shi‘ites.”[^9]

Again, this is one side of the matter. The other side is the people. It
is not that the jurisprudential and theological structures as well as
the historical experience and consensus of the Sunnis have somehow
entailed limitations for the sociopolitical activities of their clerics.

A cleric among the Sunnis is a pious believer who specializes in Islamic
sciences and, therefore, referred to concerning religious problems.[^10]

According to Shi‘ism, a cleric is far from this. He is a safe shelter
for people. They refer to him in religious as well personal matters.
They even ask his advice in various sociopolitical matters. The answer
is not to be sought in the social environment. An important part of it,
which is the source of the different social environment, has ideological
reasons. One of the most important of such reasons is that Shi‘ism is
open to interpretation by jurisprudents (‘*ijtihad*’ is open to further
analysis) and Shi‘ites are bound to follow (imitate) a jurisprudent,
which is quite contrary to Sunnism.

The natural and logical consequence of this is that the people have to
update themselves with the religious obligation as to ‘incidents’ and
whatever that happens for the first time in any matter, by seeking the
Islamic legist’s (*mutjahid*’s) response and his personal opinion
because that is valid and has to be obeyed. A Sunni cleric is at its
best a speaker of the *fatwa*, and a *fatwa* of that which is older than
a thousand years.

A Shi‘ite cleric either expresses his own opinion or that of a living
Islamic legist. Both the psychological structure and the personality
structure of one who has reached the level of the legist (*ijtihad*) or
issuing *fatwa* are different from those who relate the *fatwa* at the
highest level while also the psychological structure and the personality
structure of those who refer to these also differ.

If in the past, because of the closed Islamic societies, especially the
religious communities within Islamic countries and the slow pace of
social, cultural and economic developments, this difference could not be
dealt with, but it has now emerged. The point is that the difference is
not new. It is a difference more or less as old as the two religious
schools, but it has recently emerged from sociopolitical dormancy.

Apart from these, many affairs that the Sunnis think of as deserving to
be dealt with only by the rulers and refer to the latter are referred in
Shi‘ism to the *faqih* (Islamic jurisprudent). This is not merely for
political reasons. Its social aspect is quite stronger and more
important. Because of this, on the one hand the Shi‘ite cleric thinks of
himself as having the necessary powers and, on the other hand, the
people refer to him in their own affairs. Therefore, the cleric expects
to be obeyed while the people also accept it as their religious duty to
obey him. Such things have never been and could never be experienced by
the Sunni society in history and also seem very unlikely to be
experienced in the future.[^11]

Religious Leadership
--------------------

The concept of religious leadership and the need to follow the
full-fledged religious legist [*mujtahid jami‘ ash-shara’it*] is one of
the fundamentals of Shi‘ite jurisprudence and theology. These
fundamentals, as they put the Shi‘ite legists at a top position, makes
the people obey them as well. This is not just to say that the Shi‘ites
refer to religious legists in their own problems. Basically, the Shi‘ite
school is so that it can educate such legists. Again, the problem is not
that, for example, the Shi‘ite clergies have throughout history been
more struggling and braver than their Sunni counterparts; rather, it is
that the theoretical fundamentals of Shi‘ism reinforces and even creates
such characteristics.[^12]

Emphasizing his beliefs, a Shi‘ite cleric can stand up, without any
doubt or fear, against the ruling system in cases in which he thinks fit
and proper while also calling the people to join him. However, based on
what part of his beliefs can a Sunni scholar do so? It is true that the
collection of Sunni jurisprudence and theology provides examples of
struggles in which standing up against the oppressive Sultan is advised
and even necessitated.

However, firstly these examples are not typical, i.e. there are more and
more valid cases in opposition to such thought.[^13] Secondly, it can at
least be said that the texts on Sunni jurisprudence and theology do not
show such an attitude so clearly and explicitly as the texts in Shi‘ite
jurisprudence and theology do, and this is the point. In such a
background, how can one expect the emergence of clerics who have a
defiant attitude and at the same time be committed to the
jurisprudential, theological and ideological fundamentals?

Looked at from this angle, it is not a personal matter anymore and
cannot be attributed only to the personal characteristics of Shi‘ite or
Sunni clerics. It is the jurisprudential and theological structures of
these two schools that nurture their clerics and followers in two
different ways in terms of their stance in important political issues.
Accordingly, these theoretical fundamentals have, throughout the
history, resulted in the formation of psycho-sociopolitical foundations
appropriate to their own characteristics and in practice put the
Shi‘ites, the Sunnis and the clerics of these two schools on two
historically, socially, intellectually and ideologically different
paths.[^14]

It would be a gross mistake if we want to compare these two without
considering their differences. Indeed, a number of committed dynamic
young Sunnis may gather together in such groups as Islamic parties and
choose an individual as the political and religious leader. Yet, such an
action can hardly succeed and last without any religious foundation or
obligation and without it collapsing in confrontation with hard
realities. Apart from this, such a limited action cannot be generalized
to the entire society. Each society goes forward according to its own
specifications rather than according to what a certain group
desires.[^15]

Nevertheless, it is not expected to fully explain the goal here. Rather,
it should be considered that these differences exist and they have roots
as deep as the history itself in the two schools. They have to be
studied scientifically and without prejudice so that each can be studied
better and we will not expect anything beyond the ideological capacities
and characteristics of each other. The failure to do so has been the
source of some problems, especially in recent years.

In order to find out what the effect of the political thought of the
Shi‘ites and the Sunnis are on the Islamic movement, the characteristics
of this movement have to be clarified. Much indeed has been said and
written in this respect. Without a doubt, in the recent decade, nothing
in the world has gained more attention than this movement. This book is
not for repeating or evaluating these analyses. Rather, it is a study by
considering the historical and social aspects in contemporary history
throughout the Third World, part of which is the Muslim world.

From a more inclusive and comprehensive perspective, the present Islamic
movement is the dawn of a new era in the history that has covered almost
the entire Third World. Although the manifestations of this era are not
the same throughout the Third World, they still exist anywhere and, for
certain reasons, they have emerged in the Muslim World more strongly,
but the strength with which they have emerged in the Muslim World varies
depending on the historical conditions, the depth of religious
influence, the degree of creativity brought about by Islam in that
region throughout the history, and the volume of economic, industrial,
social and political developments. It cannot be denied, however, that
its scope has expanded to cover every where and has had a comprehensive
influence. Now let’s see what the story is.

Since the Third World countries entered the modern era, while their
entry varied depending on which part of the world they were in, a new
historical period began that more or less continued to the late 1960’s
and early 1970’s. This was the time that marked the beginning of a new
period (both in terms of culture and sociopolitical tendencies) that
differed from the previous period in some significant ways. It is quite
natural if the latter period does not have the same origin in all
countries. It begins earlier or later, strongly or weekly, depending on
the historical, economic and political characteristics of the country.

From the early 1960’s to the late 1970’s and the early 1980’s, the new
period is politically marked with unrest in the Third World and
especially the Muslim World[^16] as the political manifestation of this
new period, which is either entirely formed by the historical period or
is under the influence of its characteristics.

The modern period for the Third Worlders began when they first came into
contact with the modern civilization and history, whether through
colonialism or by ordinary non-colonial contacts. Before such contacts
took place, they lived their own way of life, from China and Japan to
India, Iran, Egypt and other African countries—Latin American countries
are outside the present discussion because of historical and demographic
reasons. This discussion is about those countries that had a
civilization and culture and lived according to them while they suddenly
evolved by coming across the modern world, without the historical course
to be suddenly cut off by massive immigration, as it happened to Latin
America, where the immigrants had a sharply different culture with that
of the native inhabitants, thus imposing the developments.[^17]

Before contacts, changes and developments in such countries were limited
to their historical and cultural characteristics. However, when contacts
occurred and gradually expanded and deepened, the modern period began.
This period had characteristics that will be mentioned as far as they
relate to the present discussion.

The Reign of the Elite
----------------------

The important characteristic of this period has been the influence of
modern culture on the educated powerful elite of these countries.
Despite this influence, which was occasionally very deep and sometimes
reached a degree of being fond of it or alienation, the masses of people
until the early 1960’s and 1970’s, depending on the pace of the
socioeconomic developments or their society being open or closed, had
not yet been directly, effectively and comprehensively influenced by
this culture. They lived in a traditional environment and in special
conditions dating from the old times. The values and their lifestyles
were those of the old times as well as their aspirations and ideals.

Although some elements of modern culture had penetrated their lives
whether through the educated elite or through daily living necessities,
which were constantly under pressure of technology, this was not yet an
evolving influence. The social, cultural and economic foundations either
survived in their traditional forms or the new developments were not so
extensive as to cause a general metamorphosis.[^18]

This historical period in the Third World and in Islamic countries has
two important characteristics. One is the same as was said, i.e. the
deep influence of modern culture on the powerful educated elite of these
societies and the latter’s being more or less alienated from the native
culture—which indeed varied depending on the individuals, conditions and
regions—and the continuation of the past culture and heritage by the
masses of the people. The second characteristic is the unrivaled and
forceful domination of modern culture and its value system on the
decision-making system and general planning of the society, which was
indeed manifested by the same elite that were influenced by modern
culture.

This hegemony was, on the one hand, due to the dogmatic belief of the
elite of absolute superiority of modern culture[^19] and, on the other
hand, to some form of implicit admission of the masses to the effect
that, although they kept living in the traditional atmosphere of their
own society, they somehow admitted such superiority. The admission was
made at least by making no permanent explicit objection to it. Although
there were occasionally objections, these were occasional, unsystematic
and temporary. Undoubtedly, the colonial powers also had a critical role
in making modern culture and its value system dominant.[^20]

Briefly, this is the nature of the period of the contemporary history of
Third World countries in general and Islamic countries in particular.
The mass of the people and their culture was marginalized in the active
sociopolitical and cultural life. The modern-class elite reigned
absolutely as the pre-modern dictators had reigned, the difference being
that they had a modern appearance and, by the way, it was this
appearance that further consolidated their position. The goal was to
lead the society towards values and characteristics promoted by modern
culture while all this was done thanks to the apparent consent or at
least the silence of the children and protectors of the old
heritage.[^21]

Indeed, this did not mean that the past culture and heritage was
entirely forgotten and the modernist elite that were in power did not
pay any attention to it. It was not so, rather it was also emphasized.
However, the problem was that the past was looked at and judged from
beyond the value system and attitude of modern civilization. Therefore,
it was less similar or conforming to the reality the way it was and the
way it existed among the masses. Such an image was in harmony with the
identity, needs, inclinations and goals of the same ruling culture and
the ruling class.[^22]

This is exactly why the people were marginalized from the active
sociopolitical life. They were usually working for those in power or
those fond of power in the society, both of these groups either had
modernist tendencies or were modernists. They did not have any opinion
of their own and looked at the events indifferently or probably with
some sort of fear or worry. They neither had reached a certain degree of
intellectual or cultural maturity that they could adopt new viewpoints
nor could say something against the unrivaled hegemony of modern culture
over their society. The dazzle of the civilization and its heralds and
supporters had captured the eyes of all. It is against for this reason
that the sociopolitical developments in this historical period are
mainly formed by statesmen or elite thinking differently from the ruling
system.

It should be borne in mind, however, that there was no difference in the
essence of these two. Both those in powers and their political
opposition, who were entirely or partially from the modernist elite, had
already considered modernism and the new civilization as the ideals.
Their difference was about who should rule or about variety of tastes,
quite contrarily to the subsequent period, in which the developments are
formed by the youth rather than by this group.[^23]

As we mentioned, the sociopolitical and even the intellectual and
cultural developments of this period were formed by the modernist
westernized elite. The mass of the people are in the margin of the
active social developments and life and are either indifferent witnesses
or the means for the realization of the same. During this period, both
the power and the leadership of the opposition political currents were
in the hands of the elite. It was as if the sociopolitical interactions
took place in a space beyond that of the practical life of the mass of
the people.

The Youth Come on the Scene
---------------------------

As the socioeconomic developments accelerated and the political and
cultural pressures increased, from early 1950’s onwards, the ground was
prepared for the emergence of another historical period, which will now
be discussed. This is a period which is different from the previous one
in terms of its intellectual and cultural tendencies, social origin,
political claims and leadership system. The accelerated economic and
industrial developments penetrate the more or less traditional and
introverted societies of the masses of the people.

The opened society exposes them to new intellectual, philosophical and
scientific currents while also sensitizes and outrages them by directly
or indirectly insulting and humiliating their heritage, culture and
religion. Population concentration around big cities, expansion of the
mass media, universal education, widened class gap, loosening and even
destruction of institutions and factors that determined an individual’s
position in a society result in a new situation that finally entails the
loosening of the apparently unshakable position of the ruling modernist
elite and their thoughts and ideals.[^24]

Nevertheless, such questions as ‘How did the creeping transition take
place?’, ‘How did the next period begin?’, ‘How was the social and
cultural ground for the absolute domination removed?’ and, principally,
‘Why such a tendency was formed?’, and ‘Where in the society was such
tendency stronger?’, can be answered by providing further elaboration
separately. What is important is that this period began two to three
decades ago. It has had ups and downs and its signs appeared sooner or
later in different regions. Its important characteristic is ‘seeking
original values (radicalism)’ and ‘individualism’. In other words, its
goal is going back to the true tribal, national, religious, racial,
linguistic, cultural origins, and the historical distinctions, even if
it requires some form of disintegration.[^25]

The signs of the formation of this period can be seen in many Third
World countries. Sociopolitical unrests in many Third World states,
where they relate to their social, cultural and political conditions,
are mainly caused by the formation of this new period. The Islamic
movement of the last century can also be traced within the same
classification.[^26]

The new period has significant differences with the previous one whether
in terms of its nature or its sociocultural background, goals or trends.
The formation of the new period is a consequence of the clash with the
modern culture, deviating from the past historical policy and attempting
to adapt the society to the modern culture, at least where it related to
those in power and the planners, while here, it is a reaction to such a
passive attitude which deems unconditionally following and adaptation.
It seeks to return to its origins although it may be ready to pay a
heavy price to achieve the same. There, the power lied in the hands of
the westernized elite and the people were practically pushed to the
brink and were simple observers while here the power lies in the hands
of the young people who have turned away from the modern standards, and
the mass of the people have entered the sociopolitical life more
actively.

Despite the numerous differences of these two historical phases, the
formation of the second phase is a natural and logical consequence of
the rule of the first one. The modern civilization, when entering the
Third World territory, was too dazzling to resist. A small group was
attracted to it while the mass of the people stayed watching it without
any strong reaction and chose to be silent before it. However, this did
not imply their final submission, especially in regions inheriting a
bright culture and civilization. They somehow entered a period of
latency, which they did not come out of until the last two or three
decades. Their leaving this condition assured the second phase.

At any rate, time had to pass for developments to take place and
experiences to be acquired, along which a morale for fighting the
undesirable reality and the courage to stand against the ruling current
be formed for such a great development to take place. However, the fact
is that the heavy socioeconomic developments in many Third World
countries provided the best ground for the appearance of the second
historical phase. The youth, having emerged out of the traditional
society, lacked the necessary characteristics to challenge the ruling
power, culture and power system. His faith and belief might simulate him
to take an action but such action could not be turned into a course to
bring about a new historical period.

An example is the movement of the Sikhs, who have risen against and
fought the central government since the early 1980’s. More than anything
else, this movement is indebted to the great developments of the Indian
society in recent decades and the quality of programming of those in
power there. Certainly, if all the factors other than the last one
existed, such a movement would either basically not exist or at least it
would not be on such a scale and would not have such solidity.[^27]

The present Islamic movement can also be analyzed according to the
above-mentioned points. It is the political-religious manifestation of
this second historical period in the Muslim world although this movement
is deeper and more inclusive than the similar political movements in the
non-Muslim part of the Third World and, indeed, such characteristics
relate to Islam and the Islamic civilization.

As the religion of the Islamic civilization, Islam, a glorious heritage
to be proud of, which at the same time made up the historical and the
present identity of the Muslims, has been constantly criticized,
attacked and even violated since the Muslim societies met with the
modern civilization. Although Muslims showed reactions to the attacks
according to the present requirements, these reactions did not go so far
as to deny the rule of thought and the westernized policy reigning in
the Muslim societies. If there were such cases, they were limited and
insignificant and were mainly fed by religious dogmatism rather than by
intellectual, cultural or social maturity at an optimum level. It is
interesting to know that, in the meanwhile, the West had such
uncontested hegemony that even defending Islam was done with its help.
The content of the arguments was that Islam is right and true since it
agrees with the standards of the modern civilization and is even the
same as the latter. Meanwhile, almost all attempts were dedicated to
proving the similarity of Islam and the modern civilization so as to
prove the truth of the former.[^28]

Such conditions persisted nearly into the 60’s. Yet, a set of factors,
which it would be too lengthy to mention, made the Muslims and
especially the young people and the students to rebel in a similar
fashion to their counterparts in the Third World although more strongly
and at a faster pace. The second phase thus began. This phase emerged
sooner in countries where the socioeconomic as well as the intellectual
and cultural developments were faster, more forceful and deeper and the
Islamic faith and culture were attacked more frequently and under more
pressure. Through these countries, the other regions were influenced
depending on how much they were aware of the new phase based on their
social, intellectual, religious and psychological background.[^29]

The Developments in the Eastern Bloc
------------------------------------

It would be appropriate here to mention the present developments in the
Eastern Bloc, which is influenced by the cultural, tribal and religious
realities and claims and by the nations residing therein. Although this
Bloc has been led towards its origins for reasons different from those
leading the Third World towards its national, cultural and religious
origins, it cannot be denied that right now these two are pursuing more
or less similar goals and, most likely, the success of each of them in
achieving their goals stimulates and motivates the other. The
individualistic and autonomous claims of some tribal and racial groups
residing in this Bloc, which sometimes goes as far as separatism and
seeking independence, certainly will further encourage radicalism and
individualism by Third Worlders. Now we will exaime the problem and how
it began.

As the changes and developments within the Third World are mainly caused
by the formation of the new historical period in these countries, the
rapid deep developments of recent years in the Eastern Bloc is also one
of the manifestations of the new history that has begun for some time
and will continue. The basic difference between these two is that the
first historical period belongs to the Third World and its history and,
for various reasons that are mainly rooted in its industrial, political
and military weakness, will remain within the same limits, while the
recent historical period, although it is presently within the borders of
the Eastern Bloc, will have results that will go far beyond its borders
to turn into a vast deep development in the entire contemporary history
because, firstly, some of the causes of its formation are globally
motivated and relate to the rapid industrial and ultra-industrial\>
developments-whether in military or non-military technology—in the
1970’s and 1980’s in developed countries[^30] and, secondly, because
this Bloc is one of the two big stakeholders in international politics.

At any rate, what is important is to find out about the characteristics
of this period and why and how they appeared. As we have already said,
numerous factors were involved in the formation of this period. Here we
intend to study them where and so far as they relate to the cultural
realities and culture in its general sense.

In order to know what the characteristics are and what were the causes
of their formation were one has to clarify how the modern civilization
and history began and how it penetrated into countries—i.e. countries
later forming the Eastern Bloc—that had no share in its development, how
it was absorbed and functioned there and what changes it underwent. Also
how it encountered the traditional cultures and civilizations and
tribal, linguistic and religious heritages and, in general, what
constitutes the historical, national and tribal identity of the people
in these countries. More importantly, what was the position that the
ruling power of the society adopted and how it dealt with the
industrial, economic and social development and renovation. Finally, did
it entirely ignore the traditional culture and did it cater to nothing
but the modern culture and its necessities or did it leave some space
for the living and flourishing of the native culture rather than looking
at it as a rival and enemy.[^31]

The study of this point clarifies the root of many developments of the
present and future. Although the developments in the Eastern Bloc began
for more tangible reasons that were mainly political, economic and
industrial, the problem is that these developments and principally the
potential to seek change and development, which is somehow a cause of
those developments, had to be led to its natural path, and one of the
best paths indeed was radicalism. It is mainly under the cover of this
claim that the developments, where they relate to the people, are
manifested and, most likely, this cover, which has an effective share in
the present sociopolitical developments, will retain its importance in
the future as well.

Let’s put it more clearly. The modern civilization first developed and
thrived in Southern Europe and later in Western Europe. This
civilization was the natural product of the diverse developments that
encompassed Western European nations in the post-Renaissance centuries.
Therefore, apart from the fact that in these regions it had undergone
various phases of its history, it had not only adapted itself to the
historical, social and political conditions of these lands, but also
adapted itself the new conditions. This civilization was the fruit of
that tree and both of these two were actively in full harmony with each
other.

Noncreative Inharmonious Development
------------------------------------

On the other hand, this proportion and harmony and the various phases
did not exist in the other regions, including Eastern Europe and the
Soviet Union, the way it existed in Western Europe, although some
Eastern European nations, such as Czechoslovakia, Eastern Germany, to
some extent Hungary, and Poland belonged to Western Europe, were within
its cultural domain or were directly and gradually influenced by it in
the last and the present century or before the domination of the
Communists. However, the fact is that the other Eastern European nations
neither belonged to this geographical domain nor to this cultural
domain.

This is truer about the Soviet Union. This country is like a continent
of its own by encompassing a major part of the two continents of Europe
and Asia and including diverse nations, tribes and cultures. The
non-Russian western parts of this country have culture and
characteristics similar to Western Europeans and the Balkans while the
people in the Asiatic parts have characteristics to the Central Asian,
far Asian or even Western Asian people.[^32]

Although the entry of the modern civilization into these lands was not
as problematic as it was coming into the Third World countries,
particularly nations with the capable, long-standing living cultures.
However, the entry of this culture and especially the way it entered
were not without complications. More than being rooted in the
contradiction between the value and the nature of the culture prevailing
in these regions and those of the modern culture and civilization, these
complications were rooted in the nature of renovation and reconstruction
of the society in various industrial, economic and social backgrounds
for achieving the new civilization.

The Marxist regimes ruling over these countries took responsibility for
industrially developing and renovating and for modernizing their
societies as pioneers of the new civilization. Their being armed to the
modern values, which, in their view, were fully crystallized and
manifested in Marxism, and their centralized military, political and
economic power prevented the emergence of the reality of the local,
tribal and religious cultures the way they were. The latter either had
no chance of expressing themselves or, ultimately, if they were given a
chance, it would be for providing an interpretation of their culture
that would be in agreement with the Marxist dialectic logic, so as to
accept such interpretation as the truest possible and to act upon the
same, i.e. considering Marxism as absolute and setting it as the
criterion for knowing the reality while at the same time deeming it the
best and the ultimate solution and publicizing and enforcing it with
threats and force, moving the present living cultures to a state of
latency by using force without defeating them absolutely or even
weakening them.[^33]

The feel that some Eastern Bloc nations had not had a general active,
creative share in the development and prosperity of the modern
civilization, their probably being alien and contradictory to this
culture, lack of any useful constructive experience in this respect and
that this culture was made dominant in the form of Marxism—which is
itself a manifestation of the modern culture in a form that the
conditions in Western Europe in the mid-1900’s required or rather
necessitated[^34]—by the military and political dictatorships made the
regional and native cultures choose to be or forced them to be silent
without having a chance to express themselves or to find out about the
present conditions to adapt themselves to it.

Sensitivity to the Heritage
---------------------------

The pressure of the central governments on one hand sensitized the
members of these cultures to their heritage and, on the other hand, the
present industrial and economic developments provided and encouraged the
background for thinking about themselves and their identity, which were
manifested in such sensitivities—As we have already mentioned, the
industrial and economic developments, contrary to what is often
considered, in many causes make the people more interested in their
heritage, be it religious, historical or cultural, in the long run.

Before these countries, generally, could experience modern history in
the light of the modern civilization and to learn coexistence and
thinking about the national interests in a healthy open environment
without the pressures of the ruling dictators who were armed with an
ideology that claimed to create the promised paradise on earth, were
forced to reconstruct themselves, and do this on the basis of an
ideology with Marxist characteristics. Their economic and industrial
development was not in line with some sociocultural development that
could further strengthen the tribal heritage and the national
understanding and unity.[^35] This problem indeed did not find an outlet
so long as the iron fist continued to exist. However, once the pressure
was reduced, reality showed its face.

This is one of the most important reasons that accounts for the lack of
tribal unrests in the more developed and industrialized countries in
Eastern Europe. The development and industrial nature of these countries
are indebted to the pre-Marxist era. This means that they experienced
the modern civilization in the freer pre-Marxist environment and
achieved a desirable national and social unity in the process of this
experience. This indeed does not mean that we should ignore the role of
the other factors. Rather, what we are saying is that their industrial
and economic growth is more deeply rooted and more significant since it
was realized in a freer and healthier environment and could bring about
a more powerful social and national unity and coherence.

The reverse of this current can be seen in the separatist tendencies of
the Soviet republics, the Yugoslav states and the tribal unrests in
Romania and Bulgaria. The tendencies in the southern Soviet republics
are subject to the same rule. Although the mechanism of action in the
tendencies in these republics, since their residents are generally
Muslims, is different from that of the Baltic republics, this difference
is, on one hand, due to Islam as a religion with values different from
or rather contradictory to the values of the modern culture and the
Marxist heritage and, on the other hand, to the cultural essence that
has been created and developed by this religion.[^36]

The present Baltic culture has grown and been formed under the influence
of Christianity, mainly Catholic Christianity and partly Orthodox and
Protestant Christianity. Therefore, it is more similar to the modern
culture than the culture prevailing in the southern republics. Despite
the fact that the separatist and independence-seeking developments in
the southern republics are more of a tribal and cultural nature than
religious, they are still different in certain ways from the
radicalistic and individualistic trends in the Baltic region since they
are Islamic rather than Christian culture.

What was said does not mean that such other factors as the political,
international, economic or other factors such as seeking freedom and
welfare at the same level as that of the Westerners did not have or
hardly have a role in this respect. Rather, it means that one of the
most important and sensitive ways through which the changing and
epoch-making developments are manifested should be considered and that
one has to know the causes and quality of its formation and what
differences it had with the causes and quality of emergence of similar
tendencies in the Third World. Now let’s return to the main discussion.

Towards the Original Values
---------------------------

Thus, the tendencies towards the original values (radicalism) or, rather
to say, rushing towards them began and, since this thought was the most
progressive, the best justified and the most supported sociopolitical
thought in this historical phase, many other persons who were somehow
incompatible with the political ruling were attracted to it. It is
exactly because of this reason that presently various forces have
gathered around this sort of thought that have revolting and adventurous
attitudes. These attitudes are commonly found in societies that have
been rapidly modernized and lack an ethical, upbringing and familial
consistency. Such problems are well to be expected when the volume of
economic, industrial and social developments are beyond the capacity of
a society.[^37]

In order to properly understand the present situation of the political
movements across the Third World as well as the Islamic movements, it is
necessary to consider the abovementioned point. It is not so that all
the forces within these movements believe or are committed to their
goals. They have joined the movements because they did not find a more
appropriate way to respond to their internal needs, the core of which is
fighting the present conditions.

This current has numerous causes. However, all of them return to Islam
itself or its exceptional characteristics. In the contemporary era,
Islam was attacked and violated not only as a religion but also as the
creator of the Islamic civilization, culture and identity. Therefore,
the modern Islamic movement not only seeks to return to Islam as an
ideology and a value system, but also emphasizes the Islamic heritage.
The Third World radicalism and individualism in the contemporary history
has manifested itself in the form of returning to the Islamic heritage,
characteristics and identity.

Throughout its history, Islam was never under so much pressure so as to
withdraw from the active social, political and cultural life. However,
such pressure existed in the new period. This pressure not only was new
and unprecedented, it was also contradictory to its inherent and
internal characteristics. As other religions are not as extensive and
radicalist as Islam is, they can better cope with the pressures of the
new era and adapt themselves to it. However, this religion cannot and
will not be able to do so. The great mistake of the Westernized Muslim
analysts or the Westerners observing the events in the Muslim world was
that they attributed the Islamic resistance of the last century only to
blind dogmatism and blind religion, which would gradually fade away.
They were unaware of the very essence and substance of this religion and
had failed to note that what is incompatible with the pressures of the
modern era is the very essence and substance of this religion rather
than their so-called reactionary dogmatism.[^38]

What misled these Westerners and Westernized Muslims was the reformist
path that Christianity had gone and the other religions to a certain
extent as well. They assumed that Islam as a religion would have to go
on more or less the same path. Islam had an identity different from that
of Christianity and had expectations from its followers that were
appropriate for such nature. The condition of faith was faith in this
religion and its entirety while it was an important point that this
entirety could not be decomposed as in Christianity. Also, the time or
the consensus of the followers at any period of time would not have any
effect on its principles and limits as in Christianity. As this is an
important issue, let’s briefly examine it.

Islam, Christianity and the Modern Civilization
-----------------------------------------------

Concerning the clash of Islam and Christianity with the modern
civilization, the problem is not just that this civilization was formed
and grew within the Christian territory and, therefore, has been and is
more compatible with it than with Islam. The basic thing to be
considered is that Christianity as a religion could somehow adapt itself
to the developments that arose out of the growth of this civilization
and the new necessities that it had created in the various scientific,
social, political and cultural and even moral and educational grounds.
This adaptation was initially indebted to the inherent characteristics
of this religion.[^39]

Christianity consisted of a core, i.e. the message and verdicts of Jesus
and the Bible and the Old Testament, which was later recognized as part
of Christianity and its peripheral parts that had been developed and
added thereto by the Church authorities and the ecclesiastical scholars
so as to make Christianity a perfect and comprehensive religion that
would take charge in all the material, spiritual, individual and
collective affairs of the followers throughout the Middle Ages.

The Christian society governing Europe in the Middle Ages was like Islam
governing the Muslims in that time. The two similarly responded to the
various needs of their followers and actively participated in the
various dimensions of their individual and collective lives, the
difference being that the entirety of Islam originated from its
substance, i.e. the Qur’an and the tradition, while only part of the
nature of Christianity at that time related to the pure original
Christianity. In fact, it was the consensus of the Church authorities
and the ecclesiastical scholars that compensated for the gaps and
shortages to make it a perfect and comprehensive religion.

Naturally, these two religions reacted in two different ways to the
pressures that sought to fight them and force them to retreat. Here, it
was religion itself that defined its principles, fundamentals and limits
while, elsewhere, part of this whole was explained and determined by the
prime religious legislator rather than by the others who, although they
were sacred and reliable, but yet could not be as important as the prime
religious legislator. A more important point is that the validity and
authority of such people, more than rising from within the religion,
rose from the consensus of the believers. It was the consensus of the
Church authorities that put the saints and the clerics in such a
position as to be deemed part of the law and of the religion.

In practice, these two reacted in two different ways to the modern
civilization, which were in fact their competitor and even opponent.
Christianity resisted for a while but it was a resistance that was
against the natural course of the history and in vain, while finally it
collapsed due to various causes. Undoubtedly, however, the most
important cause was its vulnerability. It was this characteristic that
gave rise to Luther, Calvin and the other founders of Protestantism.
They provided a different interpretation and, despite all hardships and
difficulties, they penetrated and went forward.

Is it not true to say that what they claimed was returning the pure
original Christianity and truncate everything that had been gradually
added by the Church authorities and ecclesiastical scholars? They
stepped on the scene with this claim while the conditions were
appropriate for the progress of such a thought. Therefore, it expanded
rapidly and bypassed all the barriers. Such a phenomenon could not be
formed and progress within the Islamic territory.

Although there have been many within the Muslim World that have followed
more or less the same goals in the last century while directly following
Christian Protestantism or without considering it, they failed from the
very beginning or they did not end up being successful.[^40] As we said,
the main cause was the differing natures of the two religions. Religious
reform in the sense of rejecting part of the beliefs and even the
fundamentals of Christianity could occur in Christianity but not in
Islam. A Christian could be a devout believer while putting aside the
additions on the grounds that they were not from the prime religious
legislator. This would not contradict his faith and purity of belief but
a devout Muslim could not do so because the entirety of what existed and
he believed in and committed to was from Islam rather than from Islamic
scholars having reached a consensus thereon.

Islam, like any other school of thought during its history, had acquired
many additions and there were many common interpretations of its
principles and concepts that differed from what Islam itself had defined
and provided. Many people rose to remove these additions and to reform
these false interpretations in order to introduce it the way it had
originally existed. However, this is different from the reforms that
took place in Christianity or the other religions and was required by
modern history and civilization.

This civilization sought the decomposition and retreat of religions more
than it required their reform and modification. It wanted religion to
put aside all its non-personal claims and to submit. This was its goal
and Christianity and the other religions responded to it, to a great
extent, positively. However, Islam could not and the reformist Muslims
who had, as they claimed, worked for such a goal, failed. The present
radicalist movement is itself the reason that reformist movements with
such a claim and goal failed and their failure was more for ideological
than political reasons.[^41]

The difference in Islam and Christianity and their specific attitudes
towards the modern civilization is not simply because, for example,
Christianity can have Luthers and Islam cannot or because a movement
such as Protestantism can occur within Christianity and be victorious
while it cannot be in Islam. Even the more radicalist branches of
Christianity have a different attitude towards the modern civilization
than that of Islam and this is all because of the internal natures and
structures of the two. The comprehensiveness of Islam and its emphasis
on the necessity of full and precise implementation of its orders and
that the otherworldly salvation and even the worldly respect of the
Muslims are subject to implementing the orders, unlike other religions
or at least unlike their present interpretation, maintains its
authenticity against the increasing and crushing pressures of the modern
history.

This is explained by Johnson from another angle, “Nowadays, Islam and
the Western world have begun to clash with each other and are opposing
each other. No other great religions have entered into such a struggle.
Neither Christianity, which is part of the Western world and has been
exhausted by modernism nor Hinduism or Buddhism, which are deeply
spiritual and think of spiritual salvation nor Judaism, which is a small
tribal religion. None of these religion leaders had such an effect on
the West that could be compared with the influence of the caliph, Mahdi
or the Ayatullah. The reason for this is that Islam has been clashing
militarily with the West for 1500 years and the present situation is the
continuation of the same.”[^42]

Although his analysis and interpretation relate to the political and
military clashes of Islam and the West, it is still clear that this is a
clash of Islam as a religion that emphasizes its original values and the
modern civilization that requires its adjustment and even withdrawal.

Further Return
--------------

Therefore, considering the inherent characteristics of this religion,
one has to ask why it left the scene of history for such a long period
or rather why it has actively come on the scene today. What we are
witnessing today is in agreement and harmony with its inherent
characteristics and what we used to see was an unstable, temporary
complication, especially because no religion permeates the society and
history so extensively and deeply and is capable of mobilizing the force
of its followers for realizing its goals as Islam, and is, while its
opposition to the West and to the outside of itself is, deeper and more
serious than any other religion or school.[^43]

The present Islamic movement is in fact a manifestation of the
resistance of this religion against the globalization of the modern
civilization. Its first goal is to reject this globalization within its
borders. This is a natural current. Lack of such a current would be
unnatural and questionable. If the other religions and cultures did not
have such a move, or theirs was not so deep and strong, it is because
they have not inherently opposed the globalization of the modern
civilization or because they did not have binding values and standards
for their territory or because they could coordinate their values and
standards with the value system of the modern civilization.[^44]

Indeed, one has to add that the internal developments of the Islamic
society within the last century were so as to provide the necessary
material force for realizing such a conflict. The events of the recent
periods and the constant blows that the Muslims received from the modern
civilization formed their thoughts, beliefs and personality so that they
could employ themselves for such a huge movement.

The best way to investigate this is the study of Islamic thought in the
recent era. In the first decades of the confrontation of Islam and the
modern civilization, the Muslims were so terrified that, in order to
defend their religion, they did not think of anything other than proving
its similarity to the modern civilization. By the apologetic approach
these people wanted to prove the existence of that similarity. The next
generation expressed its beliefs more confidently. Its goal was not
defending Islam by proving its similarity to the standards of the modern
civilization, the way its ancestors had done. Its goal was to explain it
independently. The understanding and expression of today’s generation is
principally different and does not consider and is not satisfied with
anything less than the full-fledged rule of its ideal and religion. In
its view, it is Islam which is the criterion for truth or falsehood and
it is the others that have to be compared to it rather than the
opposite.[^45]

This development itself indicates a development in the mentality and
psychology of Muslims, especially the Muslim youth and students. The
important thing is that this set of intellectual and ideological
developments was simultaneous and even in harmony with the social,
economic and political developments of Islamic countries and, therefore,
they increasingly reinforced each other until late ‘70’s, when it
reached the point of explosion and created a fresh current that
continues to date. As we said, this movement is the politico-religious
and sociocultural manifestation of the new period that encompasses the
entire non-industrial world other than Latin America. The new period is
mainly the product of its previous period, i.e. the period in which the
dazzle, power and technology of the modern civilization terrified and
threatened the civilizations in non-European regions and made them
retreat while gaining a full-fledged hegemony. The new situation, which
was accompanied by the hegemony of the modern civilization, was
adventitious and unstable rather than natural and stable. The stability
was due to the fact that the old heritage had been forgotten without any
reason and its inheritors had been forced to remain silent.

This state of being forgotten, which was often accompanied by
humiliation, could not last for long. Yet, its termination required some
backgrounds to be prepared. The backgrounds were prepared in the last
century and matured and culminated in the recent two or three decades,
thus the enterence of the Third World into a new historical period. This
new period encompassed the Muslim World as well, but more intenesely.

Now, it is another problem what factors and forces the new period is
influenced by and what its strong and weak points are, and how far it
can maintain its stability, creativity and growth. If the radicalist
ideology of the new period, of which the new period is a creation, can
respond to the various needs of the Third World, especially within the
Muslim World, in a way that radicalism, modernism and respecting the
original values, while seeking reform, none is sacrificed for the other,
it can then be said with certainty that this ideology will emerge the
victor. Resorting to the original values without considering the various
needs of the fast developing world today cannot guarantee such victory
on its own. This is truer of our period, i.e. the ‘80’s and the next
decade, than of any other period in the past. Considering this principle
not only guarantees victory for radicalist ideologies in the battle they
have entered into, it can also be said that the stability and
continuation of the new period is indebted to the same success. The
failure of these ideologies and their inability to respond to the needs
and necessities of the new period will more or less coincide with the
end of this period.[^46]

The discussion that will be dealt with in the coming parts of the book
has to do with the study of the political thought of the Shi‘ites and
the Sunnis. One must understand both these schools and what their
characteristics and differences are.

Roots of the Ideological Differences
------------------------------------

The basic problem in this respect is that the difference in these two
religious branches is considered to be limited only to the caliphate of
Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*). It is not the problem whether ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib was
the immediate substitute of the Prophet (S) or being the fourth caliph.
The difference goes beyond this.

Basically, the argument is not about a person and who he was. It is
about stature and about what the stature is and who can be given such a
status. In other words, rather than being about applications, the
argument is about concepts. The discussion is primarily what Imamate is
rather than who the Imam is. It would be a mistake to reduce the problem
to a set of historical events. The truth is that this concept affects
all the dimensions and angles of religious Shi‘ite and Sunni thought.

To put it more straightforwardly, the ideological, jurisprudential and
theological structure of the Shi‘ites and, consequently, their
historical experience and psychological and social structure on one
hand, and those of the Sunnis on the other hand, have been formed and
grown under the effect of two different series of factors. The main
cause of this difference is that the Sunnis understand, view and
interpret Islam according to the version of Islam that was realized at
the time of the Senior Caliphs [*khulafa-ye rashidin*], the Companions
[*sahabah*] and the Followers [*tabi‘in*] while the Shi‘ites determine
Islam according to the recommendations of the Prophet (S) concerning his
substitution. One considers Islam based on the early Islam while the
other evaluates early Islam according to the Islamic criteria and rules.

In the one place, religion is looked at and understood according to
history while in the other place according to religion. These are two
absolutely different attitudes and understandings. It can be said that
the main differences between the Shi‘ites and Sunnis and the
distinctions of these two as two jurisprudential and theological schools
result from the same current.[^47]

When the early Islam history, especially the history of the Senior
Caliphs is attached an importance equal to that of Islam itself, such
Islam would indeed be different with the version of Islam provided by
another group who, not only do not believe in such importance and value,
but also have a critical attitude towards it. Now we see that the issue
is more serious than it seems at first glance. The difference of these
two is the difference in the interpretation of Islam.

In one place, Imamate, caliphate, the Imam and the caliph are understood
different from the way they are understood in the other. In one place,
the stature and characteristics of the Prophet (S) is lowered to the
level of the following caliphs while, in another place, the stature and
characteristics of the Imam are raised to the level of the Prophet
(S)—which is indeed natural except in the issue of revelation and
prophethood. These two attitudes entail other issues that are mainly
manifested in political thought. In other words, the political thought
of these two sects more than any other discussion are influenced by
their varying attitudes in their understanding of Islam.

Here it should be said that such discussions should not result in
misunderstandings such as ‘What does Islamic unity mean when there are
such differences?’, or ‘Unity is a principle and, therefore, one has to
avoid setting forth such discussions.’ Firstly, these two sects and the
general public within the Islamic sects, despite all the differences,
have some essential commonalities due to the potential and the stable
fundamentals of Islam, which makes it possible to stand in unity.
Secondly, the religion itself has emphasized unity as a duty. Therefore,
such doubts cannot be raised in the first place.

The problem is that, in order to have a proper analytical understanding
of the past history of these two religions and their present conditions,
one has to examine them very carefully and to systematize their diverse
elements and factors in order to develop and determine their political
thoughts. What was and will be said will be in the employment of and
will be targeted in this important task.

[^1]: For what Christians did in this respect, see Vatican Council II,
the Conciliar and Post-Conciliar Documents, pp. 903-911.

[^2]: For further explanation, see Al-‘Aqidah wa’sh-Shari‘ah fi’l-Islam
(The Belief and the Shari‘ah in Islam), pp. 250-260; Al-Bid‘ah:
Tahdiduha wa Mawqif al-Islam minha (Heresy: Its Limits and Stance of
Islam on It).

[^3]: Further explanation can be found in chapters 3, 4.

[^4]: For example, see Islamic Movements in Egypt, Pakistan and Iran,
Asaf Hussain.

[^5]: To clarify the discussion, one has to study the effect of Islam on
the society and history and its role in social and historical
developments as well as its other features as a faith. In this regard,
see Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 111-149;
Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i (Shi‘ite Political Thought), pp. 37-115;
Al-‘Aqidah wa’sh-Shari‘ah fi’l-Islam (Belief and Shari‘ah in Islam), pp.
133-177.

[^6]: To find out about the differences in the mutual impact of Shi‘ite
and Sunni ideologies on the Shi‘ite and Sunni society throughout the
history and in the contemporary era, see Faith and Power, pp. 31-55, and
Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i (Shi‘ite Political Thought), pp. 37-180. The
latter is one of the few best sources on the subject.

[^7]: One of the best sources according to which one can find out about
the differences in the intellectual, psychological and religious
structures, the motivations and emotional sensitivities of Shi‘ites and
Sunnis and their attitude towards history and especially the early
history of Islam, are the books written by Sunnis who converted to
Shi‘ism. An example is Muhakimeh-ye Tarikh-e Al Muhammad (Trial of the
History of Muhammad’s Dynasty) by Qadi Bihjat Afandi, Li-Madha Ikhtartu
Madhhab ash-Shi‘ah, by Amin al-Antaki, and especially Thumma Ihtadayta,
by Muhammad at-Tijan as-Samawi, a Tunisian intellectual converted to
Shi‘ism. Also see Nazariyyah al-Imamah ash-Shi‘ah al-Imamiyyah, by Ahmad
Mahmud Subhi, pp. 15-68.

[^8]: Ash-Shi‘ah wa’l-Ḥakimun (Shi‘ah and Rulers), pp. 26-7.

[^9]: Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i (Shi‘ite Political Thought), pp. 64-5.

[^10]: This is well explained by ‘Abdu’l-Karim al-Khatib in his Sadd Bab
al-Ijtihad wa ma tarattaba ‘alayh, especially pp. 3-8.

[^11]: The fact is that the clerics in both Sunnism and Shi‘ism develop
under the influence of two different types of ideological, historical,
intellectual and sociopolitical conditions. This is especially true of
the last two centuries, particularly the contemporary period. The
clerical institution in Shi‘ism is an independent institution. Some have
said that, throughout the history, this institution has been recognized
both by the people as well as the state as an independent institution
and this is believed by the institution itself as well as the Shi‘ite
society. At least in the Iranian society, this cannot be ignored. The
Iranian society, at least from the Qajarid era onwards, especially where
it relates to the mass of the people, has been formed as if it were
constantly required to refer to this institution. One can go so far as
to say that the people, for different reasons, needed this institution
more than the latter needed the people. It would not be an exaggeration
to say that the clergy as an institution is in fact the material
realization of the affective, psychological and religious needs of our
people. This is why the relation has endured to date, despite the many
domestic and international problems. This institution has been the
affective and moral support of the people for at least the last two or
three centuries. Not only were the people willing to refer to them for
matters relating to their personal and private lives, but also they
referred to them to seek solutions for their problems in times of
hardship and disaster. A complete study of these issues would be
lengthy. However, when it comes to the Shi‘ite clergy and leadership,
the aforementioned is true. Nevertheless, none of such facts and
experiences can be and perhaps could not be seen amongst the Sunnites.
They had other ideological fundamentals and different individual,
collective and historical experiences. A cleric among them means a
specialist in Islamic and jurisprudential issues, like with any other
job in the society. Others had their own jobs and the clergy are busy
with regular prayers and Friday communal prayers, and studied religious
and jurisprudential issues, for which they could be referred.
Unfortunately, the recent developments and the reforms in their
educational system have given them a more official governmental position
and have westernized them and, consequently, the people. In one of his
sermons (on 19 April 1981), Shaykh Kashk, the most famous and the most
popular preacher in the Arab World, thus addressed the clergy at
al-Azhar: “In 1961, al-Azhar received such a strong blow under the name
of ‘reforms’ that it was actually destroyed. O’, the members of
al-Azhar, tell me, which part of the Qur’an and how many surahs can you
quote verbatim when you graduate with your degree? Nowadays, al-Azhar
graduates cannot even read the Qur’an. Al-Azhar has been hit so hard
that its shaykh was a specialist in philosophy. When was it decided that
the al-Azhar shaykh should be a specialist in philosophy? One shaykh had
a PhD from Germany and his predecessor had one from France. Are Muslims
so inefficient that they have to go to France to get a doctorate degree?
I don’t know who is going to be the next shaykh. Perhaps an army general
will take over al-Azhar. Who knows? However, I know that, since the
reforms, the al-Azhar leadership has abandoned serving Islam.” He adds,
“The new approach of the parvenu thinkers is acquiring knowledge without
an educator or shaykh. They directly refer to books but do not
understand anything. Pious preachers who are typically of an old age of
about 70 have now been substituted by adult boys who have read a couple
of pages of Ibn Taymiyyah or ibn ‘Abdu’l-Wahhab and can protect the
faith. What a funny show! Oh you, the Shaykh of al-Azhar and all those
who have sunken into a deep sleep and turned Islam into a pasture where
everyone can graze.” Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh),
pp. 219-222. Despite all such criticisms and the other criticisms that
have been and are being made, however, one has to say that they have
unintentionally distanced themselves from the sociopolitical life, and
this has brought about numerous problems, especially in Sunni religious
societies and thus, being the main cause of the deviation of Islamic
movements in these societies. Indeed, it must be emphasized that such
distancing has been the inevitable natural consequence of their previous
position rather than their conscious or irresponsible will. This is an
issue of their history rather than their present and is rooted in
distant pasts rather than in recent history. It is interesting to know
that a person like Rashid Riḍa, who has strong anti-Shi‘ite tendencies,
openly appreciates the effective, active role of the Shi‘ite clergy and
their efforts in maintaining the line of Islamism in the society. He
even emphasizes to his fellow clergy on having a role similar to that of
the Shi‘ite clergy. See Andisheh-ye Siyasi dar Islam-e Mu‘asir
(Political Thought in the Contemporary Islam), pp. 141-2. Concerning the
position of the Sunni clergy and their role throughout the history of
Islam, see the article ‘Ulama’ (the Clergy), in the book Islamic Society
and the West, by Gibb and Bowen, pp. 81-113. Also see Al-Islam bayn
al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun (Islam among the Clergy and the Sovereigns), by
‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz al-Badri. For criticisms by modernists and progressivists
against the clergy, for example take a look at the criticisms by one of
the most influential religious thinkers in the Arab World, Khalid
Muhammad Khalid, in the book Ash-Shi‘ah fi’l-Mizan (Shi‘ah in al-Mizan),
by al-Mughniyah, pp. 375-8, and also those by one of the most accredited
non-religious Arab thinkers in Al-Islam wa’l-Khilafah fi’l-‘Asr
al-Ḥadith (Islam and Caliphate at the Age of Hadith), by Aḥmad
Baha’uddin, pp. 18-34. For a more impartial and empathetic examination
of the role of the clergy and especially their effective share in the
protection of the Arab literary heritage, see Min Ḥaḍir al-Lughah
al-‘Arabiyyah, pp. 24-5.

[^12]: A clear example of what was just said can be witnessed in the
relations of Shaykh Ja‘far Kashif al-Ghata’ and Fath ‘Ali Shah. See
Nokhostin Ruyaruyiha-ye Andisheh-garan-e Iran ba do Rawiyyeh-ye
Tamaddun-e Burzhuwazi-ye Gharb (The First Encounters of Iranian Thinkers
with the Two Sides of the Western Bourgeoisie Civilization), pp. 329-32.
Numerous other examples are provided by Cole in Roots of North Indian
Shi‘ism in Iran and Iraq, pp. 113-204.

[^13]: See Ma‘alim al-Khilafah fi’l-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami (Worlds of
Caliphate in the Islamic Political Thought), pp. 125-6, and also
An-Nazariyyat as-Siyasiyyah al-Islamiyyah (Islamic Political Theories),
pp. 71-2.

[^14]: McDonald thus quotes from Goldziher, “Among the Shi‘ites,
absolute legists exist today. This is because they are considered to
represent the Absent Imam [Imam-e Gha’ib]. Therefore, their position is
completely different from that of the Sunni clerics among the Sunnis.
They freely criticize and even control the Shah. However, the Sunni
clerics in general are considered as individuals who follow the
government.” Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam, p. 158.

[^15]: In the absence of such an institution, the clergy and other
institutions such as religious communities and missions, which have been
protecting Islam in such countries as Iran, some religious Sunni
intellectuals have suggested establishing Islamic political parties.
Their primary goal in the first days of the formation of such an idea is
to create legal and social institutions for protecting Islamic values
and laws rather than resorting to political activities. In the Iranian
society, what controlled the central governments against the unbridled
Western modernism, antireligious and antinationalist actions was the
clergy as well as the socio-religious institutions and even the
traditional economic institutions in the bazaar. However, these
institutions either did not exist in other Islamic countries or they
lacked sufficient ability and independence. In such countries, what
controlled the regimes, or what the latter, was afraid of was the public
opinion. However, this factor, firstly, could not react promptly and,
secondly, was easily affected by propaganda and threats of the ruling
regimes. Therefore, committed religious intellectuals and clerics
thought of establishing Islamic political parties. For Example, the
author of Ma‘alim al-Khilafah fi’l-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami (Worlds of
Caliphate in the Islamic Political Thought), thinks that the formation
of political parties that “call to the goodness and prohibit the evil”
is obligatory, saying, “Then, if a political party acts according to
what has been mentioned in the verse, the remaining Muslims will not
face the sin of omitting the action because it is an obligation for the
community and the religion does not allow impeding the formation of
other political parties. This would be impeding the action according to
obligation and is unlawful according to the shari‘ah.” He then adds, “As
acting according to obligation does not require the ruler’s permission
and, rather, subjecting such action to the ruler’s permission is
unlawful according to the shari‘ah, therefore, for the Muslims to form
political parties, it is not necessary to obtain the ruler’s
permission.” ibid., pp. 273-4. According to another author, “The right
to criticize is among the rights recognized by Islam for the citizens of
the Islamic society. Therefore, if some people want to call the public
to their thoughts and opinions by this means, they can form political
parties and communities.” Nizam al-Hukm fi’l-Islam (System of Order in
Islam), p. 92. For further explanation, see Al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun
wa’l-Jama‘at al-Islamiyyah al-Ḥayat as-Siyasiyyah al-Misriyyah (Muslim
Brotherhood and Islamic Communities of the Egiptian Political Life), pp.
19-48, 31-132; and also Ma‘alim fi’t-Tariq (Worlds on the Way), p. 173.

[^16]: See Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp. 283-95.

[^17]: As to Latin American revolutionary thought and how much its
characteristics are different from those of the revolutionary thoughts
in many Third World countries and especially the Muslim World, see Fidel
and Religion, by Ferri Betto, and especially the collection of views and
speeches Che Guevara in Che Guevara and the Cuban Revolutionz to learn
about Che Ghuevara’s left thought and, for example, its twin left
thought in Iran, which is the policy of Fada’iyan-e Khalq (the People’s
Devotees) before the Islamic Revolution of Iran. Compare this book with
the greatest books of the latter group’s theoretician, Bizhan Joz’i. For
further explanation, see Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and
Revolution), pp. 214-20 and Iran, Dictaturi wa Pishraft (Iran:
Dictatorship and Progress), pp. 37-243; also Islam and the Search for
Social Order in Modern Egypt, which studies the intellectual and
sociopolitical developments of the Egyptian society in the light of the
biography of one of the most important and most effective early
20th-century intellectuals, Muhammad Husayn Heykal.

[^18]: For example, see An Ruz-ha (Those Days) translated by Husayn
Khadivjam.

[^19]: For example, see the views of Taha Husayn in his controversial
book Mustaqbil ath-Thiqafah fi Misr (Future of the Revolution in Egypt),
which was written in early 1940’s, in which he says, “The path of the
movement is clear and direct and there is no doubt or deviation in it.
The path that we have to follow is that of the Europeans and go their
way so as to be like them and be their partners in the modern
civilization, whether in the good or in the evil, in the sweet or in the
bitter, in the obligations or in the undesirable, in the advantages or
in the disadvantages. One who thinks otherwise is either deceitful or
deceived.” Quoted from Mu’allifat fi’l-Mizan, p. 19. You can find a
summary of his views and their critique in E. Von Grunebaum, Islam, pp.
208-16.

[^20]: See Al-‘Alam al-Islami wa’l-Isti‘mar as-Siyasi wa’l-Ijtima‘i
wa’l-Thaqafi (Muslim World and the Socio-political Revolutionary
Colonialism), especially pp. 158-9.

[^21]: Muhammad al-Mubarak provides a description of this period in his
birthplace Syria in the elaborate introduction to his book Al-Fikr
al-Islami al-Hadith fi Muwajihah al-Afkar al-Gharbiyyah (Islamic Thought
of Hadith in Confrontation with Western Thoughts), a description which
is full of pain and suffering caused by the aggressions towards this
culture, language, customs and all their religious and cultural
manifestations. Specially refer to Islam in the Modern World, Kant and
Smith, pp. 114-61, which provides a sympathetic account of the wounded
religious feelings of Arabs and Muslims in the modern era. In the
International Journal of the Middle East Studies, no. 4, 1981.

[^22]: Examples of such an understanding can be seen in Turkish
Nationalism and the Western Civilization, by Diya’ Gukalep, the
spiritual leader of modern Turkey. Also, see the scholarly introduction
to ‘Ilm wa Tamaddun dar Islam (Science and Civilization in Islam), by
Sayyid Husayn Nasr, which criticizes such an outlook and interpretation.
And also Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 64-93.

[^23]: To find out about the intellectual and ideal characteristics of
Muslim intellectuals in this part of history, especially see G.E. von
Grunebaum, Islam, 1949, pp. 185-6, which also provides a critique of it.

[^24]: Unfortunately, there is little serious study about how religious
societies in Islamic countries responded to modernism and what the
psychological consequences were on Muslim youth. In this respect, see
Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 169-78, Payambar wa
Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp. 273-95, and researches by
Sa‘duddin Ibrahim, the well-known Egyptian sociologist, who mainly
worked on the social backgrounds of religious movements in Egypt. For a
summary of his article and introduction to the author and his
activities, especially see his article An Anatomy of Egypt Militant
Islamic Groups, in International Journal of the Middle East Studies,
1981.

[^25]: Concerning the effect of the socioeconomic developments on
radicalistic and individualistic tendencies of the youth in the Third
World, see Hind wa Pakistan (India and Pakistan), pp. 141-91, and also
Sa‘duddin Ibrahim’s book The New Arab Social Order.

[^26]: For further explanation, see Islamic Future, the Shape of Ideas
to Come, pp. 47-59.

[^27]: See Hind wa Pakistan (India and Pakistan), pp. 91-141.

[^28]: This and its complications are well explained by Hamilton Gibb in
Modern Trends in Islam, pp. 124-7.

[^29]: For example, see Inside the Iranian Revolution, pp. 39-58; also,
Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 150-84.

[^30]: For further explanation, see Mawj-e Sewwom (The Third Wave),
especially pp. 3-27, 431-53, 574-611.

[^31]: The fundamentals and structure of Marxist ideology was so that
its advocates would call its advocates to forcibly reject anything that
was contrary to the fundamentals. Their history is full of violent
actions and pressure against those that did not think the way they did.
For example, see Dar Zirzamini-ye Khoda (In God’s Basement), and also
Qadiyyah-ye Turkistan ash-Sharqiyyah (The East Turkistan Affair), which
gives an account of the crackdown on the Muslims in the Turkistan region
by Chinese and Russian communists. For a better example, see Qiyam-e
Basmachiyan (The Basmachiyan Rise), especially pp. 51-131.

[^32]: What maintained the stability and unity in this country was in
fact the iron fist of the central government, the concrete and steel
civilization and the Stalinist period, the October Revolution generation
and the World War II generation, the bonds between the anti-suppressive
idealist elements of the existing tribal cultures and the similar
elements in the Marxist thought, which brought Marxism close to them,
failure to realize huge industrial and economic and, consequently, the
political and intellectual developments that mainly occurred in the late
1970’s and the 1980’s, all of which have undergone changes in the
persent days. For example, see Goftogu ba Estalin (Talk to Stalin),
especially pp. 243-87.

[^33]: Especially see Impiraturi-ye Forupashideh (The Collapsed Empire),
pp. 247-95.

[^34]: See Farasu-ye Marxism (Beyond Marxism), pp. 30-49.

[^35]: See Tabaqeh-ye Jadid (The New Class), pp. 130-2.

[^36]: On the subject of harmonizing Islam and Marxism by Muslim
propagandists in the Soviet Union and its short- and long-term results,
see Impiraturi-ye Forupashideh (The Collapsed Empire), pp. 261-78.

[^37]: This problem is the one of all ideologies that goes on for
reasons other than being understood or loved. Marxism faced such
problems in many Third World countries. For further explanation, see
Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 215-6.

[^38]: See the final chapter of the precisely written small book
Muhammedanism by Hamilton Gibb, who, a long time ago, expressed the
impossibility of the absolute retreat of Islam in the new period.

[^39]: The best example of such correspondence can be found in Vatican
Council II, pp. 903-1014. The difference in Islam and Christianity
before the modern civilization had its effect on their followers as
well. In this respect, especially see Rowshanfikran-e ‘Arab wa Gharb
(Arab and Western Intellectuals), pp. 14-7.

[^40]: In his book The Future of Islam, London, 1882, Blunt believed
that the future belongs to liberal Muslims; Islamic Futures, p. 25.

[^41]: In the last century, the problem was not only that progressive
and modern thinking individuals rose while being inspired by or without
considering the Protestantism movement so as to take a similar action.
The more important problem was that some of these individuals were
introduced by a group of people as being like Luther and said that they,
like him, would achieve victory while we saw that this did not happen.
One of the best examples was ‘Abd ar-Razzaq. Although his book Al-Islam
wa Usul al-Hukm (Islam and Fundamentals of Order) is mainly based on
historical and scientific facts, he could not find a proper position
because of contradicting the fundamentals of Sunnism, as these
fundamentals were not so as to fade away and be forgotten through time.
It would be appropriate if I quote one of the best-known and most
reputable periodicals of that time, i.e. the magazine Al-Muqtataf, on
his book and the position of its author, “… The fury that this book
aroused against its author, who is an al-Azhar cleric and a religious
court judge, reminds us of the fury against Luther, the leader of
religious reformation in Christianity, one whose deeds had the most
effect on the religious, literary and material progress of Christian
countries. In our opinion, what ‘Abdu’r-Razzaq has written will face the
same that Luther’s writings faced, not because Luther and his companions
were right in all that they said and did and again, not because we
believe that what ‘Abd ar-Razzaq and his likes have said are right and
devoid of any error, rather because the critical and skeptical position
of some thinkers results in discussion and research, will draw the
curtain aside and reveal the truth. We have not forgotten how they rose
against Muhammad ‘Abduh, but they gradually calmed down until he was
entitled an Imam and everyone followed him on his path.” Al-Muqtataf,
October 1925, p. 332, quoting the introduction by Muhammad ‘Ammarah to
Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm (Islam and Fundamentals of Order), p. 24.

[^42]: Johnsen, International Islam, The Economist, 3 Jan. 1980, quoting
Asaf Husayn, Islamic Movements, p. XII.

[^43]: These facts have been hostilely and vindictively said by many
Westerners. See Islamic Futures, pp. 43-4; The Dagger of Islam, pp. 4-9,
69-82, and ibid., pp. 27-35, in which the author gives a good account of
the difference in Christian Westernists and Muslim materialists in the
Arab World in the encounter with the modern civilization. Also see The
Dagger of Islam, pp. 27-35.

[^44]: Concerning the encounter of Christianity with the industrial
civilization and what message this religion has and can have for today’s
humankind see the book of one of the greatest Christian scholars of the
present time , i.e. On Being a Christian, pp. 25-51, 89-112, 554-601.

[^45]: The best example of this is the book Ma‘alim fi’t-Tariq (Worlds
on the Way) by Sayyid Qutb. One of the primary important goals of this
book is the final and at the same time bold and powerful rejection of
those who, according to the author, are the weak-kneed failures trying
to ruin the epical spirit of Islam by depicting it as modern and
fashionable. Although the book was written as instructions for a
pioneering group that was responsible for creating an Islamic
society—pp. 50-1—its main mission appears to be a serious full-fledged
opposition to whatever that seeks to ignore Islamic radicalism. Also see
the introduction to the fourth edition of Al-Fikr al-Islami al-Hadith
Wasalathu bi’l-Afkar al-Gharbi (Islamic Thought of Hadith and its
Connection with Western Thoughts), whose author explicitly says, “The
attempt by orientalists when they advise Muslims to adjust their
religion to be compatible to the modern civilization is indeed no less
dangerous than Marxism. It is interesting to know that the author says
this when Marxism haunted everywhere. To find lively and more
revolutionary examples, see the various issues of Ad-Da‘wah wa’n-Nadhir,
by the Organ of Ikhwan al-Muslimin in Egypt and Syria, and especially
the Organ of An-Nadhir.

[^46]: It is necessary to mention an important, although brief, point
about the future of the present Islamic movement. Unfortunately, little
has been said about this in a serious or realistic manner, which is one
of the weak points of this movement. At any rates, we will try to
elaborate on some points. One of the basic problems with the present
Islamic movement is that it seeks to solve all the problems in the light
of mere faith and devotion while almost ignoring the inevitable
necessities of living in today’s world and often fails to separate these
necessities from the Western culture and civilization. The Western
culture—it would be better to say the modern culture because it does not
just belong to the West anymore, it is a global civilization and all
have a share in it and its developments—is one thing and the means of
living in today’s world something else. No devout Muslim or any other
devout person believing in the One God can support this civilization in
its full form. This is too clear to require any discussion or argument.
However, one has to bear in mind that living in the world today requires
the consideration of certain principles without which one cannot live or
live a respectable life. Order and precision, hard work and
perseverance, sense of responsibility and disciplinability, working
conscientiously, manageability and obeying the law and not justifying
it, taking responsibility and not irresponsibly interfering in others’
affairs, being content with one’s limits and not expecting beyond one’s
capability and capacity, adaptability and collective working and,
finally, thinking based on science and reason and deciding based on
calculations—indeed where one has to use science, reason and
calculation—are among such means. If it was possible in the past to run
a scoeity without these, it is not possible anymore. It is strange that
Islam has clear explicit orders in all these respects. However, Muslims
have lived in the past centuries in a way that shows that they are
committed to them less than any other people or nation. This lack of
commitment has many historical, social, moral, educational and
psychological reasons that have to be studied. One of the most important
reasons is a deeply individualistic interpretation of Islam by Muslims.
A good person according to the past customs was one who, apart from
regular worships, would do benevolent things as well. He would build a
mosque, school, water reservoir, bridge and the like and endowed them to
the public. Presently, having been influenced by social and
revolutionary trends, people think of a good person as one who
perseveres in the various fields of fighting the irreligious, the
violators and the oppressors. Undoubtedly, these are indications of a
true faith. However, the problem is that, other than such indications,
the other manifestations of religious faith are basically not taken into
consideration. According to them, criteria of being good is not, for
example, doing one’s duty carefully and patiently, with perseverance or
trust or closely cooperating with one’s colleagues in collective
cooperation, which is a requirement of today’s industrial life, and
listening to one’s superior or not avoiding doing one’s work with
different excuses and avoiding the interference in affairs that are not
one’s business. The fact is that such concepts are unknown among us and
have nothing to do with religion or religious duty. One can even say
that not only they are unknown, but, in practice, their opposites
prevail and are considered as values. For example, if the concept of
“cleverness” in our customs is analyzed as well as who its applications
are and what and who are the opposite concept and applications, it will
clearly be seen how far the concepts prevailing in the minds, thoughts
and spirits, whether individual or collective, are contradictory to the
means required for living in the world today. Worse than this is that
these applications have found religious positions for themselves and
there are few people who would see them as contradicting the religion,
faith and religious purity. Unless these problems are solved
satisfactorily, the society will not be on the path of progress. As it
was mentioned earlier, this is not just our problem. It is more or less
a problem in all Islamic societies and for the present Islamic movement.
Our problems will not be solved only by individually motivated devotion
in the sense that is common today. No doubt, this is a necessary but not
a sufficient condition. The devotion needs somehow to be related to the
principles and values required by living in this part of history. In
order for us and the Islamic nation to have a proud future, this
relation is necessary, in a way that neither the religious fundamentals
are distorted nor the concepts are degraded so much that any
law-breaking, lack of sense of duty, disorder, laziness, carelessness,
lack of knowledge and aimlessness is justified or legalized by any
person. In the vast realm of the Muslim World, one can almost say that
Islamic countries to the east of Iran suffer less from this problem and
the more we go towards the east, this problem will be less noticeable.
For certain reasons, Turkey and principally the Turks face this problem
less seriously whether in Iran or outside Iran. In the Arab World, this
problem is serious, complex and deep, as in Iran although this problem
may be weaker or stronger in each of these countries, depending on their
situation in the past, the solidity of their national unity, colonial
experience and type of the present government. For further explanation,
see Africa: the Past Heritage and the Future Situation, pp. 81-6, and
also two books, one by the most prominent specialist in social, economic
and cultural issues in the Muslim World, i.e. Diya’ ad-Din Sardar,
enitled The Future of Muslim Civilization and Islamic Futures.

[^47]: Some scholars in the past and some writers today have
intentionally paid attention to this difference. From among the past
ones, refer to Al-Fasl fi’l-Milal wa’l-Ahawa’ wa’n-Nahl, Ayn Hazm, J.E.,
p. 94. He says somewhere, “It is not right to argue with them—the
Shi‘ites—by relying on our own stories because our stories are not
acceptable to them and they cannot rely on their stories to argue with
us because we do not think they are true. Both parties have to argue
based on something else which is acceptable to both sides whether the
one who argues accepts it or not…” From among the new writings, see
Ma‘alim al-Khilafah fi’l-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami (Worlds of Caliphate
in the Islamic Political Thought), pp. 131-8; and Al-Fikr as-Siyasi
ash-Shi‘i (Shi‘ite Political Thought), pp. 116-80.


