Chapter 4:  Power And Justice
=============================

Power and Justice
-----------------

In the previous chapters, we talked about two important principles of
Sunni and Shi‘ite political thought and the theoretical differences
between the two and the way they formed in practice the history and the
psychological and social structures of their followers. In this Chapter,
we study the third principle and then go back to the main discussion,
i.e. the political movements within the Shi‘ite and Sunni territories in
the contemporary history and their differences.

As we said in the previous chapter, the third basic factor in the
development of Sunni political thought is that they are sensitive to
power and security and the power that can provide and maintain security
while Shi‘ites are sensitive to justice and the strict implementation of
the Prophet’s (S) tradition the way it was at the time of the Prophet
himself, rather than the way it was later interpreted. To them, what is
important, obligatory, and sacred consists of a grand strong power in
whose light security is provided either against the internal rebels or
against the foreign threats and invaders.

Although this is approved by Shi‘ism to a certain extent, it has not
attached a full value to be absolutely true. This neither agrees with
their jurisprudential or theological foundations nor is approved by the
practice of the Infallible Imams. Now let’s see why and how this
principle appeared among Sunnis and what the factors by which it was
affected are?

It shall be said in brief that three important factors were involved.
The first factor is the concept of justice, which is unlike that of the
concept of justice with Shi‘ites, both in jurisprudential and in
theological and philosophical terms. The second factor is the concept
and duties of the government in old times. Finally, the third factor
relates to the historical realities and necessities, each of which will
be discussed.

The Concept of Justice
----------------------

The difference in the Shi‘ite and Sunni perception of justice is too
clear to require any explanation here. Although the Mu‘tazilite
perception and interpretation of justice were close to and in some cases
similar to those of Shi‘ites, the Ash‘arite interpretation was far
different. It was this school that was later dominant and influenced the
development and organization of Sunni jurisprudential and theological
foundations.

The important thing in the meantime was that the Ash‘arite
interpretation of justice principally had a form that made it
unimportant. The point was not that they considered it to be important
and critical but offered another interpretation, rather, it was that
they provided a meaning for it that made it loose its significance,
which was perhaps desirable to them.

When they denied rational agreeableness or disagreeableness of
something, in fact they reduced the concept of justice to a level that
it would be compatible with any oppressive and tyrannical action. In
other words, the thought and ideal of justice was reduced to reality and
whatever that existed while the existing reality was made the criterion
of judgment rather than a superior concept to be so. Because of this, it
would not make sense anymore to evaluate and judge this reality based on
its compatibility and incompatibility with that superior concept. When
rational agreeableness or disagreeableness is ignored, in fact the
concept and nature of justice has been ignored rather than that a new
definition has been provided based on such denial.[^1]

Such an interpretation of justice naturally provides the best ground for
rejecting any ideal beyond the present reality, and it actually did so.
Here, it is not a discussion of justice or whether it has been done or
not. Principally, there is no situation superior to the present one,
based on now to define justice and to evaluate the present
situation.[^2]

The author of the well-known book *Al-Mawaqif*, who is one of the
greatest and most rationalist Ash‘arite theologians, concerning
agreeableness or disagreeableness says, “Disagreeableness is what is
prohibited by the *shari‘ah* and agreeable is contrary thereto. To the
reason, nothing is judged as agreeable or disagreeable. These two do not
return to another real and true matter within one’s action so that the
*shari‘ah* would reveal it. Rather, it is the *shari‘ah* that creates
agreeableness or disagreeableness and defines them. If it becomes the
other way round and what it considers as offensive, it considers as good
and what it considers to be good, it considers as offensive, this will
be possible and the result would be reversed.

However, the Mu‘tazilites say, “The criterion for recognizing the
agreeableness or disagreeableness of something is reason and one’s
action is per se either good or bad while the *shari‘ah* only discovers
and clarifies this reality. Then, it makes on sense to reverse the
matter because goodness and badness relate to real things and are not
contractual.”[^3]

As we said, such an interpretation of good and bad and its criteria will
leave no room for the concept of justice and basic reason. More
importantly, the rational criteria of recognizing truth or falsehood of
religious texts, and especially the sayings, will be eliminated while
the intellectual, doctrinal and psychological background necessary for
accepting them, with a religious and *shari‘ah*-based acceptance, will
provide the ground for any oppressive and corrupt action and will
ultimately give a good reason to those in power and the bad clerics to
document their oppressions and violations with the religion in order to
achieve their goals. More importantly, the religion will also be made
liable to such exploitation and misuse.[^4]

Unlawful exploitation of the religion, especially by those in power, has
generally been done by falsifying the reason in the name of the
religion. When reason is put aside with all its capabilities and
limitations, especially as regards to religion, the oppression and
superstitions will replace it. This has always been favored by the
misusers of the religion. Thus, when reason is falsified in one of the
most sensitive and important religious discussions, i.e. justice, such
results will inevitably follow.

Results of the Two Different Interpretations
--------------------------------------------

It should be added that the difference in the Mu‘tazilite and Shi‘ite
perception and interpretation and those of the Ash‘arites of justice did
not make them create the most just sociopolitical system through their
history. They were in practice more or less the same and the belief in
the principle of justice did not entail sociopolitical justice. There
was essentially no difference between the Mu‘tazilites, who were at the
service of Ma’mun, Mu‘tasim and Wathiq, and the Ash‘arites and
Ash‘arite-like thinkers after and before them although these caliphs,
especially Ma’mun, were considerably different from the caliphs before
and after him; but this was mainly due to his better cultured and
freethinking character rather than the advise or attention of the
Mu‘tazilites around him.[^5]

This applies to the Shi‘ites to a large extent as well. It is difficult
to accept that Shi‘ite sultans throughout history were more just and
democratic than their Sunni counterparts.[^6] The desire for justice and
administering justice, especially in the Islamic east, which lacked the
necessary sociopolitical institutions for the administration of affairs
by considering the appropriate interests and requirements rather than
personal decisions, was more than anything indebted to their own
internal and personal tendencies and to the general conditions of the
territories they ruled.

Nevertheless, despite all this, it cannot be denied that the two, i.e.
the Mu‘tazilites and especially Shi‘ites and Ash‘arites, were and acted
in two different ways in terms of guiding the ruling system to the right
way, dethroning it or establishing a just system. In other words, the
outcome of belief in justice and the way these two interpreted is shown
when standing up against the ruler. One of the most important factors
that called the Mu‘tazilites and Shi‘ites to stand up against the
tyrants was their understanding of justice.[^7]As such interpretation
was principally not considered or believed in by the Ash‘arites, it
would not make sense anymore to stand up against the sultan by relying
on it. They denied rational agreeableness or disagreeableness and they
did not have any criterion beyond the existing factors in order to
evaluate what was there.

Therefore, in history, the Mu‘tazilite and especially Shi‘ites have had
many justice-seeking movements while similar examples cannot be found
with the Ash‘arites, Salafis or Traditionists. What they actually had
and have was movements that, according to them, sought to reject heresy
and to defend and establish the tradition.[^8]

Indeed, their different understanding and interpretation of justice is
not the only factor for this difference. There were other factors as
well. Undoubtedly, however, this different perception has had and will
have the greatest share. In other words, although the belief in the
principle of justice actually did not bring about sociopolitical
justice, its acceptance provided the best ground for justice-seeking
movements.

The story of justice-seeking and liberal movements throughout the
history of Islam is itself the best confirmation of this. Such movements
did not exist within the Ash‘arite and Traditionist territories while
they were abundant within the Shi‘ite and Mu‘tazilite territories. This
relation was so strong and powerful that, in periods in which such
tendencies appeared for any reason, the grounds were prepared for
Mu‘tazilite thought and especially the Shi‘ite ideology. Although the
Shi‘ite ideology was welcomed for reasons beyond its belief in the
principle of justice, the belief in this principle had yet a basic role.

It was precisely because of this that the Mu‘tazilites and especially
Shi‘ites were attacked by those in power, the clerics and their
affiliate propagandists. The ruling oppression prepared the ground for
the growth of justice-seeking movements. However, as the dominant
religious thought, which was promoted and probably created by the
rulers, could not fulfill this need because of its lack of belief in the
principle of justice, the revolutionaries had to face and encourage
religions that claimed to seek justice.[^9] As Shi‘ism and Mu‘tazilah
were so, attempts were made to give them a bad reputation so as to
divert the public opinion from them. This failed indeed. Part of the
pessimism among Sunni masses about these two results from the same
preventive and counter-propagandist actions.[^10]

What has been said so far was about the theological concept of justice.
Now we have to see what its jurisprudential concept was and what results
it entailed. In this connection, contrary to the previous one, the
Mu‘tazilites are like non-Mu‘tazilites and the difference is between
Shi‘ites and non-Shi‘ites.

Jurisprudential Concept of Justice
----------------------------------

The fact is that the concept of justice is not jurisprudentially very
much different among Shi‘ites and Sunnis. The basic difference is in
considering justice as a qualification, most importantly for the
communal prayer leader and the Friday communal prayer leader as well as
the ruler. Shi‘ites deem justice as a necessary for all of these while
Sunnis do not define it as a qualification for the communal prayer
leader and the Friday communal prayer leader and only some Sunnis
consider the communal prayer leadership of a corrupt and heretic person
as religiously undesirable[^11] as many of them do not consider justice
to be a necessary qualification of the ruler either.

What is important in this discussion is the justice of the communal
prayer leader and the Friday communal prayer leader because they have
differing views on the ruler’s justice. Now let’s see what results this
difference entailed.

Prior to entering the discussion, it is necessary to note the special
and sensitive position of the communal prayer leader and the Friday
communal prayer leader in early Islam. In that time, prayers or Friday
communal prayers were socio-politically far more important than they are
today. These two, especially the Friday communal prayer, were the key to
maintaining Islam, unity, integrity and, finally, stability and security
of the society. It indicated the health of thought and belief in the
participants and their being on the religion agreed on by the
Muslims.[^12] It showed that the society accepted the order of their
emir and ruler and recognized him. It was through this prayer that the
rulers, sultans and caliphs were recognized and their power and position
would be stabilized and consolidated.

At that time, the cities and the other points of concentrated population
were small and had small populations. All the people and especially the
men considered it their duty to participate in the public and Friday
communal prayers, while this participation was obligatory in many
respects.[^13] Some Sunni jurisprudents consider communal prayers and
all Sunni jurisprudents consider Friday communal prayers to be
obligatory. Shi‘ite jurisprudents consider participation in Friday
communal prayers during the presence of an infallible *imam* to be
obligatory as well. Many of them consider it obligatory even in the
absence of an infallible *imam* if the appropriate conditions are
provided. It was, therefore, natural that these two prayers would have a
high political value so far so as to become the most important indicator
of belief in Islam and unity in the society.[^14]

According to the above points and its sensitivity, who other than the
most prominent person, at least apparently the most prominent, could
lead it? It would not make sense to give the responsibility for this
most important symbol of the community of the believers and the key to
the unity and stability of the society to someone other than such a
person. The people also did not expect anything other than this. Apart
from this, the jurisprudential fundamentals would approve of and
reinforce such a current. We had better say that the people’s perception
of the communal prayer leader, the Friday communal prayer leader and
imamate was in harmony with the appearances of the orders of the
*shari‘ah*.[^15] The *shari‘ah* legislator required the most prominent
person to be the prayer leader although the meaning of prominence and
the application of the most prominent person changed in the later times
under the pressure of sociopolitical necessities.

During the Prophet’s (S) time, he led both prayers in Medina or in any
other part when he was present. Where he was absent, the prayers would
be led by the representative, substitute, emir or ruler that he
appointed. After the Prophet (S) passed away, the first caliph led the
prayers. This specially helped him on the first days in gaining
acceptance for and establishing his caliphate.[^16] This current
continued in this way until the end of the period of the Senior Caliphs
and also when the Umayyad took power. [^17]

For example, concerning the permission of the infallible *imam* or his
special or general substitute for saying the Friday communal prayer and
on how to appoint the Friday communal prayer, Muhaqqiq Karki says, “…The
principle in this issue, before the consensus, is the agreement of the
Muslims to the effect that the Prophet, in his own time, appointed the
Friday communal prayers and judges. After the Prophet (S), the caliphs
did so. As it is not right for one to be a judge with the *imam*’s
permission, it is also not right to be the Friday communal prayer leader
without such permission. This is not reasoning by analogy. It is
referring to the continuous practice and opposing it is violating the
consensus.”[^18]

As quoted by Pederson, “From the early days of Islam, the ruler also led
the prayers. He was the commander of war, head of government and leader
of communal prayers. In the same manner, province governors were both in
charge of prayers and taxes. He would lead prayers, especially the
Friday communal prayers, in which he would deliver sermons. In his
absence, the police chief would represent him. However, this changed in
the time of the ‘Abbasids and the caliph would not regularly lead the
prayers.”[^19]

What existed in the time of the Senior Caliphs was not that problematic.
The first two caliphs and their governors would keep the appearances of
the *shari‘ah* although the conditions changed during ‘Uthman’s time,
especially in the second half, and people such as Walid ibn ‘Aqabah was
appointed as governor—governor of Kufah who stood to pray while drunk,
saying four prayer units for the [2-unit] morning prayer, besmearing the
altar with the effects of drunkenness.[^20] However, such cases were
rare and ignorable. Imam ‘Ali’s (*‘a*) time is well-known. Basically,
there could be and was no problem in this period.

The problem shows itself seriously from the time of the Umayyad, at
which time the justice of the communal and Friday communal prayer leader
is overshadowed, interpreted and justified by the realities and
necessities. It is gradually reduced to a level that is forgotten.

The heritage of the Prophet (S) and the Senior Caliphs required that the
caliph and his representatives and governors would lead the communal and
Friday communal prayers. The caliphs would not be content with less than
this, not because they sought to enforce the Prophet’s (S) tradition and
that of the Senior Caliphs but because failing to do so would contradict
their rule, establishment and legality. They wanted to be in power and
to govern and this could be achieved if the one in power would lead the
communal and Friday communal prayers as well. Thus, they led both of the
prayers.

It was a necessity at this time. According to the history sources
relating to those days, the Umayyads were not so willing to lead
prayers, especially on Fridays because the Friday communal prayer leader
had to give sermons while this was difficult for them to do. In this
regard, Goldziher says, “Delivering sermons was not easy for Umayyad
caliphs but they consented to do it so as to remind the people that they
were in charge. ‘Abdu’l-Malik was asked, “Why do you have a white beard
at this early age?” “How do you expect me not to,” he replied, “While I
have to deliver a sermon once a week and expose my thoughts to be judged
by the others.”[^21]

Reluctance to deliver sermons was not limited to the Umayyad caliphs
only. Their province governors did not like to do it either. Even an
eloquent person such as ‘Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad would consider it as an
impediment to the pleasure of governing.[^22] Another emir told the
people, “Before becoming the emir, Friday was the best of my days while
nowadays it is the worst because I have to deliver sermons.”[^23]

On the other hand, the problem was that the Muslims had to take part in
regular and Friday communal prayers. Both the previous customs required
this and the religious texts recommended it. It was a *shar‘i*
obligation. Indeed, it has to be added that, from the early days and
even in the Prophet’s (S) time, the people were asked to take part in
regular and Friday communal prayers and those who refused to do so would
be severely punished.[^24] The point was not that an individual, by
refusing to take part in a communal or Friday communal prayer would be a
sinner by violating an obligation, the more important thing was that he
could not do so. He was forced to do so because such non-participation
would be deemed as an entire or partial rejection of the accepted
religion by the believers or as rejection of the present government or
denying its legality or compulsory obedience of it. No ruler, especially
the oppressive Umayyad rulers, would bear such a thing.[^25]

Denying the Justice Qualification
---------------------------------

Considering these conditions, what way was there other than denying
justice as a condition for qualification of communal and Friday communal
prayer leaders. The most committed individual in the Umayyad dynasty,
other than ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz, who was an exceptional person, was
Mu‘awiyah himself. However, his behavior was different from the minimum
consideration of which was necessary according to the *shari‘ah*
legislator and was practiced by the earlier caliphs. He went so far as
to say prayers different in form from what the Prophet (S) and the
Senior Caliphs read—He is the first person to deliver a Friday sermon
while sitting.[^26]

The caliphs after him and his governors were in more inappropriate
conditions, so much so as if they were absolutely unfamiliar with the
religion and did not think of anything other than ruling and pleasures.
They had the power and would lead the regular and Friday communal
prayers and the people had to say their prayers with them. Now the
problem was if such prayers were separate or not. This is other than if
the regular and Friday communal prayer leaders were qualified to lead
prayers and principally what such qualifications were. Is justice or not
committing sins or at least not persisting on committing sins one of
these qualifications or not? Is it possible to take as prayer leader a
corrupt tyrant who commits any crime? If yes, is the prayer of those
standing behind him accepted?

The only solution was to deny the qualification of justice. Indeed, if a
development had occurred at a time when the Umayyads entered the scene,
no interrelation would have been established between the governance and
legality of the ruler and the regular and Friday communal prayer
leadership. Most probably, justice would have not been denied in this
case, like in the case of the judge and witness. However, such a
development did not occur and, therefore, they had to interpret and
justify the issue to a certain extent as to the qualifications of
regular and Friday communal prayer leaders, so as to deny the justice
qualification in practice or at least reduce the issue to reluctance in
saying prayers behind a corrupt tyrant.[^27]

Indeed, Shi‘ites did not face such a problem. They considered the
Umayyads to be illegal usurpers and did not have to accept those
conditions and obligations. Consequently, they did not have to face such
interpretations and justifications. Apart from this, the texts of the
divine decrees they accepted, which had been passed to them through the
Infallible Imams, explicitly defined justice as one of the
qualifications of the regular and Friday communal prayer leaders;[^28]
although this does not mean that the Shi‘ites never took part in regular
and Friday communal prayers in the past. They took part in these prayers
and generally deemed their prayers as accepted. In their view, in
certain cases such prayers were accepted as well as worthy of being
highly rewarded. [^29] However, such religious rewards and such pious
deeds had their own special reasons. It was not, for example, because
they considered the justice qualification unnecessary for a regular or
Friday communal prayer leader.

The fact is that Sunnis’ failure to accept the justice qualification and
Shi‘ites’ accepting of it affected the development of the
jurisprudential and theological structures of the two, their
sociopsychological structure and ideological and religious sensitivities
more than it seems in the beginning. Not accepting this condition meant
recognizing the present condition and whatever related to it, although
there were other factors involved. Yet, this was the most important,
effective and finally the most critical factor.

Although the Sunni jurisprudential and theological structure is so that
the ruler’s obedience is compulsory,[^30] the problem is if the Sunni
masses throughout the history accepted the rulers as legal only because
of these reasons. The complex theological discussions and the arguments
in jurisprudence were and are far above the average level of culture of
the masses. It was not through familiarity with these discussions that
they accepted to obey the rulers. Principally, such discussions did not
have a role in their religious perception and understanding. Their
understanding and perception were too simple and limited to digest these
ideas.

Importance of Denying the Justice Qualification
-----------------------------------------------

In other words, the problem is not simply what the natural and logical
requirement of the Sunni jurisprudential and theological structure is.
More importantly is which part of this large collection exists in their
thought, mind, faith and belief, i.e. what the perception of the mass of
the people is of this collection, what its limits are and what the
interrelations of the various components are. What is living and
effective is this understanding and perception and it is the same that
play a role in the society and on the scene of the history. Although
such religious perception changes to a certain extent in any time and
condition depending on the conditions, there are generally fixed
elements in the changes which are affected by the fixed principles and
fundamentals of the religion itself.

The most tangible, understandable and routine part of the religious
faith of a Muslim was and is the prayers. Considering the fact that, in
the early periods, the Muslims said their prayers always communally and
took part in Friday communal prayers and that these prayers were always
led by the caliphs, their representatives or emirs, and, to the people,
such leading symbolized the government, legality and religious
acceptability of the caliph or ruler. Is it not that the justice
qualification has the most important share in accepting the ruler and
the present condition and in legalizing his position?

This is truer especially in the early centuries when the people were
obliged to take part in regular and Friday communal prayers and those in
power and even the regular were more sensitive to the participation of
the various walks of life and to the emirs who led the prayers, at least
on Fridays. However, later, when such obligation and sensitivity were
attenuated, the prayers were led by people other than the emirs, who
were generally and rather entirely appointed directly or indirectly by
them.[^31] However, the effects of this current, especially before such
attenuation occurred, affected the jurisprudential and theological
structure and the psycho religious structure of the Muslims.

It was not important here to accept the ruler’s governance when
accepting his prayer leadership. More important than that was the
thought based on which the leadership of the corrupt tyrant was allowed.
Such a thought permeated the other aspects and resulted in deeming as
acceptable saying prayers behind such individuals and even paying the
alms and religious tax to them and going on *hajj* pilgrimages and
*jihad*s with them. Even a cautious pious person like Ibn Hanbal got to
a point as to say, “*Jihad* along with emirs is allowed until the day of
resurrection whether they are just or unjust and they may distribute the
spoils of war and enforce punishments.

No one may make sarcastic remarks about or fight them. It is allowed to
pay alms to them and one who gives alms to them, whether they are good
people or not, has done his duty. It is allowed to say prayers behind
them and one who violates this is heretic and has abandoned the
tradition of the Prophet (S). If one does not believe that prayers
behind emirs, whether the latter are just or corrupt, are religiously
allowed, he has not understood the good aspects of Friday communal
prayers. The tradition is that you have to say two units of prayer
behind them and believe that it is a perfect prayer without having the
smallest doubt about this.”[^32]

Now we will examine what the thought was and where its root was. The
main origin of this thought, which was relied on for verifying the truth
of affairs, was that such things as prayer, religious tax and *jihad*
are inherently good and desirable and the *shari‘ah* legislator has
ordered them. The important thing is to perform them rather than the way
in which they are performed. The important thing is that the obligated
person has to fulfill his duties according to the rules defined by the
*shari‘ah* legislator and it is not important with whom the act is
performed.

The important thing is to say the regular and Friday communal prayers
and for the Muslims to participate therein. It is not important who
leads them. What is important is not to give up the duty of *jihad*, it
does not matter under whose command and with what motivation it is done.
What is important is to pay alms and religious tax as part of religious
fees but it does not matter to whom they are given, whether the one to
whom it is given is a corrupt roué or not, and for what purposes they
are used.

This is thus explained by Hasan Basri where he intends to account for
the acceptability of the prayer of one whose prayer is led by a
hypocrite, “The believer’s prayer behind a hypocrite will not harm him
and the hypocrite’s prayer behind a believer will not benefit him.”[^33]
He expresses, more explicitly than ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, “Prayer is good.
I do not mind who will be my partner in performing it.”[^34]

Ibn Hazm says in this regard, “We do not know any Companion who refused
to say his prayer behind Mukhtar, ‘Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad, Hajjaj or any
person more corrupt than them. God says, ‘Cooperate on good deeds and do
not cooperate on sin and enmity.’ There is no good thing better than the
prayer and saying it in mosques. Then it is forbidden for us to help it.
The same is true about fasting, *hajj* and *jihad*. We will accompany
the one who calls us to them and we will not accept the invitation of
and will not help the one who calls us to sin. These are the views of
Abu Hanifah, Shafi‘i and Abu Sulayman.”[^35]

Ibn Qudamah, who is one of the great Hanbalite jurisprudents, says, “It
is obligatory for Muslims to participate in communal prayers on Friday
and the Two Feasts even if the prayer leader is corrupt, a roué or
heretic because the duties are Islamic rites that the rulers of Muslims
perform. Then, failing to perform the prayers behind them will result in
the prayers being abandoned.”[^36]

Deeds and the Conditions of Deeds
---------------------------------

From this point of view, what matters is the deed per se without
considering its conditions while, since the conditions are part of the
deed, it cannot be so. According to them, for example the regular and
Friday communal prayers are only for worshipping purposes and,
therefore, they recommend and emphasize them by mentioning the good
aspects and their desirability—no matter who leads them—and consider
them as worthy of being rewarded. Although this may be true about
worships to which there is an individual aspect, this cannot be true
about regular and Friday communal prayers or about *jihad*.

If we have accepted that the regular and Friday communal prayers are
among the most important and sensitive Islamic rites as this can be
diseovered by referring to news, sayings and practices of the Prophet,
“and it has been decided that the purity, monotheism, Islam and Islamic
worships shall be apparent and visible, because showing them is a proof
for the people of the east and the west…”[^37]

Practically, they have been among the most important rites through
history. Therefore, one cannot ignore or underestimate the issue of
prayer leading only on the grounds that the prayer per se is a good and
desirable thing. It is not acceptable to give the responsibility of
religious rites, which indicate the social reality and presence, to
someone who is not religiously or morally qualified for it. Religious
rites themselves constitute part of the religion and are even among the
most important parts of the religion. How can one who is the
manifestation of unreligious values and ideals or is at least strange to
them lead them?[^38] This is too evident to be argued.

Apart from this, praying behind the prayer leader, at least in the first
centuries, did not just mean performing a compulsory religious duty, be
it daily or Friday prayers. It had further implications and it was these
implications that were subject to more attention. According to the
people of that time, the problem was not that such and such a person had
performed their prayers by taking part in the communal prayer. More
important than this, it meant recognizing the legality and governance of
the *imam* whose imamate had been approved through his taking part in
the prayer.[^39]

As we have already said, communal and Friday communal prayers symbolized
the unity and consensus of the Muslims and also was the symbol of
recognition of the ruler. This was the inevitable result of
participating in these two prayers, which directly contributed to the
approval, reinforcement and consolidation of the pillars of the ruling
power. This had nothing to do with the individual’s intention, whether
he wanted this or not. His deed in the context of that time had such an
implication. When ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar said, “Friday prayers are to be
led by the one who is the victor in fighting his rivals.”[^40], he
mentioned this point. This was not only his words but also was the words
of the most of Muslims at that time.

There is no argument about the foundations of this way of thinking, its
dimensions and results. The purpose of mentioning all this was to show
how the Sunni clerics think and why they think as they do. For example,
Ibn Taymiyyah says in his well-known book *As-Siyasat ash-Shar‘iyyah*,
“There are two types of cooperation. Firstly, cooperation on goodness
and piety, from *jihad* and applying the religious punishments to
receiving religious dues and giving them to those who deserve it. These
are the things that were ordered by God and His Prophet.

One who fails to do them fearing that he may be accomplice to tyrants
has abandoned a compulsory religious duty on the illusion that he is a
pious and abstinent person. There are so many occasions when fear and
languor are confused with piety and abstinence because both are omission
of actions. Secondly, it is cooperation between sin and enmity, like
contributing in the killing of a respected person or taking away
property or beating someone who does not deserve to be beaten, and the
like. These are matters that have been forbidden by God and His
Prophet.”[^41]

Most certainly, such a way of thinking, as we expressed in the case of
the communal and Friday communal prayers, results from religious
obligations on the one hand, and the undesirable and abnormal conditions
in early Islamic centuries on the other hand, to which the Umayyads and
the early ‘Abbasid caliphs contributed greatly. The possible solution
was the one they chose, i.e. removing justice as a condition in certain
cases. For example, they could not ignore verses of the Qur’an that
called the people to *jihad* and giving alms and religious tax.
Therefore, they said that the important thing was doing these, no matter
under whose leadership and with what motivation.

Nevertheless, these were subjects that received the attention of the
rulers. They wanted to mobilize the people to go to wars that they
called *jihad* as they wanted to get the religious dues of the people.
It would not make sense to seek to stop or weaken such religious
precepts. If they had, this would weaken their position or at least
impede their ambitions. On the one hand, they took material benefit in
implementing the precepts and, on the other hand, they took benefit of
the intangible profits. Thus, they could call themselves the warriors of
God. This would further add to their popularity and contribute to the
consolidation of their position.[^42]

Nevertheless, it has to be mentioned that not considering justice as a
valid condition for communal and Friday communal prayer leading
contributed extensively to creating, reinforcing and stabilizing this
way of thinking in its entirety. All of the people in all places dealt
with these two religious duties on a daily basis and, these would
include all the people in all the five daily prayer occasions. Apart
from the fact that the prayers had a special position in religious terms
and in the perception of the people, when the condition of justice was
reduced to such a low level, it would naturally be lowered to a similar
level in other affairs as well and this would not surprise anyone or
make anyone raise an objection. Basically, a new religious thought that
was in harmony with some new principles and rules was founded.

When Qattadah asked Sa‘id ibn Musayyib, who was a great pious Follower
and had undergone the severest forms of torture as ordered by
‘Abdu’l-Malik on several occasions because of insisting on his
opinion—that it is not possible to swear allegiance to two caliphs at
the same time while ‘Abdu’l-Malik wanted to get allegiance for his two
sons Walid and Sulayman[^43]— “Should we pray behind Hajjaj ibn Yusuf?”,
he said in response, “We pray behind one who is far worse than
him.”[^44] This was also true about the Companions and the Followers in
general as ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Umar prayed behind Hajjaj and Najdah, who were
heads of the Rebels.[^45] Indeed in those days the Shi‘ites and even
their seniors would participate in these prayers;[^46] but, as it has
already been mentioned, this was because of certain reasons and not
because they believed that justice was not a qualification for the
communal and Friday communal prayer leader.

This is one of the most important and sensitive diverging points of the
Shi‘ite and Sunni jurisprudential and theological systems and,
subsequently, of their sociopsychological structures and political and
historical developments. From the early days of its development, the
Shi‘ite ideology was formed and developed outside the limits of the
recognized conditions of those days and the resulting necessities. Thus,
justice in its jurisprudential framework played a far deeper and more
extensive role than its theological concept in the way it formed the two
branches of Islam differently. The historical, religious and
sociopolitical developments of the two branches cannot be properly
studied and analyzed without considering this point as one would not be
able to recognize and evaluate their different limitations and
potentials in forming the future developments.

Thus, justice maintained its position in the Shi‘ite jurisprudential and
theological system despite Sunnis although Shi‘ites in practice rarely
could realize the justice in the society the way they believed in it.
Yet, they were constantly sensitive to it and at least thought of it as
an ideal. The fact is that such a current cannot be seen among Sunnis.
If there is such a current, it is mainly due to their Shi‘ite tendencies
in certain parts of the history.[^47]

‘Ali al-Wardi explains this very well, “Shi‘ism is right now like a
dormant volcano. Its difference with the other mountains is just in the
smoke that comes out of it. However, a dormant volcano, despite its
apparent calm, is not without danger. It differs from the other
mountains in that it has melting fire within it that no one knows when
will explode.” Then he adds, “The Twelver Shi‘ite beliefs were so that
they were not stopped from criticizing and opposing the rulers in any
period of their long history. They believed that any government is
tyrannical, a usurper and unacceptable, unless its power is given to a
just infallible *imam* from among the children of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib.

Accordingly, Shi‘ites were like a constant revolution that would never
calm down or stop fighting. They compared any ruler with the rules of
the infallible imamate the way they believed in it and, therefore, saw
him as defective and a usurper. This belief from the very early periods
of Islam to the present resulted in the growth and deepening of
hostility between them and those in power and they were accused of being
Zandaqah, apostates and heretics. They were deemed heterodox to the
religion and to the government. Because of the intensive frequent
pressures on them, they would rather be known as Zandiqs and unbelievers
instead of Shi‘ites ot heretics.

Mu‘awiyah and his Umayyad descendants as well as the ‘Abbasid caliphs
tried all the different methods of force, pressure and torture to
eliminate them but failed to do so. Shi‘ism resisted all this and will
resist in the future all the tyrants that disrespect human rights and
dignity.”[^48] This indeed has its own consequences, the most important
of which is its conflict with what one would interpret as stability,
establishment and historical continuity.

The acceptance of justice as a principle with the Shi‘ites entailed its
own religious psychology and religious perception. Self-motivation,
irritability, tendency of devotion and idealism among the Shi‘ites are
indebted to this same principle. There were other factors also that
helped shape such characteristics, the most important of which is the
episode of ‘Ashura. However, the problem is that, in the Shi‘ite
perception, this story is itself an exalted example of liberalism, love
of justice and living bravely. Therefore, it approves of and even serves
explaining, reinforcing and consolidating the same idealistic concept.

These set of factors resulted in the presentation of the ideal of
justice as the most superior and the most motivating ideal throughout
the Shi‘ite history, and this will continue to be so. This is the
natural result of believing in the ideology of Shi‘ism. As long as this
school exists and inspires its followers, gives them faith and affects
their psychological structure and religious perception, such a
characteristic will be in place. Although it may go into a dormancy
state for a short or long period due to certain reasons, it will never
be put out or eliminated.

Sunnis’ failure to accept justice as a principle has shaped their
religious psychology and perception differently. These two aspects, i.e.
power and security and accepting the status quo, have developed with
them in a way that the justice has retreated in their favor. Why was
this ignored despite the explicit decrees relating to the communal and
Friday communal prayer leaders in which justice, piety and religious
belief were deemed necessary[^49]—decrees that were valuable to them.
This was either ignored or depicted as unimportant. Was this because of
any reason other than the need to accept the status quo and avoiding the
consequences of objecting to it? Yes, their religious psychology and
their religious perception were shaped on the axis of the concept of
power and security, which competed with justice and made the latter
retreat.

This current has special results, among which agreement of this spirit
of religious perception with what we interpreted as stability,
establishment and historical continuity is the most important. When the
status quo had the minimum requirements for some legality that would
deem disturbing it as illegal and at the same time there was not a
higher legal ideal, no ideal would make the people move in order to
reach it. The religious psychology and the religious perception of the
people were not so as to respond to such calls. Naturally, such
stability and establishment would be attained.

Indeed, this does not mean that history was necessarily so in the two
realms of Shi‘ism and Sunnism or it will be exactly so in the future.
There were other factors, each of which played their own role in turn.
The history of these two religious branches is the outcome of the
interaction of these factors. What was said was and will be
undoubtedlyone of the most important and most critical factors. We say
it will be so because these two characteristics are deeply rooted in the
subconscious and psychological structure of the followers of these two
sects due to the ideological structure and specific characteristics of
the two ideologies. Therefore, as long as these two have followers,
these two currents will continue to exist.

Duties of the Government
------------------------

The second factor was the concept of government in old times. Contrary
to what it is today, i.e. the government provides services, in the past
it firstly provided security. Presently, the government is expected to
provide services while in the past it was required to provide and
guarantee security, internally and externally. This expectation was
exactly affected by the expectation of the ancestors from the government
and arose from the conditions of those times. In their view, the
government was a system to protect the people’s property, lives and
family and its first duty was to deal with such affairs rather than, for
example, providing such services as health, treatment, education,
culture and healthy recreation or similar services. The modern-day
developments changed the concept of the duties of the government, to
consider provision of security as one of its duties rather than the most
important one.

However, in the past, especially in the Islamic east, which lacked
political stability and continuity, the situation was not this way. In
those days, everything and all the values ended in security. What was
important was for the government to provide such security. This would be
the greatest gift that a government could give to its citizens. However,
if the issue is looked at not through today’s view but according to the
conditions in the past, the concern of the great Sunni jurisprudents and
theologians in this respect will be understood, to the effect that
everything can be obtained in the light of such security, from religious
rites and orders to the protection of the people’s property, lives and
family. In their view, the government both protected the religion and
the people. Therefore, it had to provide for their good in this world
and in the afterworld.

Sunni scholars in general, who have written about imamate and caliphate,
or have dealt with the same, considered the first and the most important
duty of the government to be providing security. Even some of them chose
this duty as a definition, from a cautious Sufi-type individual like
Ghazali[^50] to a strict fanatic like Ibn Taymiyyah[^51] and from a
political scholar and politician like Mawardi[^52] to a thoughtful
intellectual like Ibn Khaldun.[^53] All of them lived in conditions that
made them sensitive to such concerns, which was natural.

You would ask why the story did not end up so with Shi‘ites, i.e. why
the great Shi‘ite theologians and jurisprudents were not so sensitive
about security and the protection of security while they also lived in
the old times and closely witnessed the events and developments. One has
to say in response that their concern about security and protecting the
lives and blood and reputation of the Muslims was and is not at all less
than that of the Sunni clerics. However, that they did not forget about
justice despite such sensitivity and this principle was not overshadowed
by security and their thoughts and beliefs were due to the practice of
the *imam*s and the special decrees that they had accepted, i.e. there
was a special reason for this and, if it had not been there, like the
Sunni clerics and under the influence of the conditions in the past and
the expediency for protecting security and peace, they would have
thought the same way.

Finally, the third factor would arise from the historical realities and
necessities. Throughout the history of Islam, other than in certain
periods, it was the Sunnis who had the power and were responsible for
protecting the society and its borders. Shi‘ites, i.e. the Twelver
Shi‘ites, were a small minority community and rarely had such a
responsibility. Accordingly, it was natural that the Sunni political
thought would be more strongly and more deeply influenced than the
Shi‘ite political thought by questions concerning the administration and
protection of the society and guarding its internal and external
security and providing the means for it. Their jurisprudence and
theology flourished and expanded at a time when they inherited centuries
of experience in statesmanship and protecting the foreign borders.
However, the Shi‘ite jurisprudence and theology had not undergone such
experiences when they were developing. The latter was based more on
theoretical principles and foundations rather than on realities and
practical necessities.

Islam was in constant conflict with fierce malicious domestic and
foreign enemies. Such conflicts never stopped and are still going on.
Basically, the geographical situation of the Muslim World from the very
beginning was so that it exposed it to constant relentless attacks. The
most important of these dangers came from the east, where the yellow
race from Central Asia threatened the Muslim territory from the very
early days. These threats continued long after the Mongol attack. The
other attack was from the west, where the Christians and the Crusaders
were, and continued to the early times of the present century in
military form and still goes on in a different form.[^54]

Vastness of the Muslim World
----------------------------

The vastness of the Muslim World and the various groups, cultures,
races, nations and religions therein were yet another problem. No
religion had so much variety within its territory and no religion has
been able to create so much harmony, coherence and unity. This provided
an appropriate ground for understanding Islam in different ways and, as
a result, for creation of an unlimited number of sects and a great deal
of religious, cultural and sociopolitical tensions. Consequently, from
the very beginning of its appearance, this religion was in conflict with
foreign aggressors on the one hand, and with the internal insurgents on
the other. Because of its vastness, anyone could convert to it and,
naturally, it had a great potential for widely different interpretations
and justifications. Any of these two could easily benefit from the
internal groups who had different thoughts and generally fought, killed
and plundered each other in order to create tension and insecurity or at
least contribute thereto.

It would be appropriate here to quote part of the views of Ibn
Abi’l-Hadid, as quoted by Muhammad Abu Zuhrah, about the causes of
sectarianism in Iraq, which is an example of Muslim sectarianism
throughout history, and why it was so, “Iraq was home to all Islamic
sects because it was the point where all ancient civilizations met.
There, one could find the sciences of the Iranians and those of the
Chaldeans and the remains of the cultures and civilizations of these
nations, merged with Greek philosophy and Indian thoughts, while all of
them had been mixed with Islamic thoughts.

Therefore, this land became the birthplace and growing center for
various Islamic sects. Ibn Abi’l-Hadid thus explains why different sects
were formed in Iraq, “Concerning the difference of this people with the
Arabs of the Prophet’s (S) time, I have found out that all of these are
from Iraq and reside in Kufah. The Iraqi nature is so that it constantly
fosters the believers of various sects and new religions. The people of
this land have insight and are interested in discussions and
contemplating different issues while they have views and beliefs similar
to objectors to religions. People like Mani, Disan, Mazdak and the like
were from among them, who appeared at the time of the Sassanid kings.
The Hijazi nature and thought are not like this.”[^55]

The words of Ibn Abi’l-Hadid were true about Iraq as well as about many
other places. The same causes that created various sects in Iraq or at
least contributed to their growth and development existed in the other
Islamic lands as well. It was the destiny that this religion extend to
lands that were the cradles of ancient cultures and civilizations.

In such circumstances, one can expect that they [the Sunnis] would not
think about anything other than security and power that can bring it
about. The history of Islam is full of such problems. Apart from all the
foreign dangers, one of which was the Mongol invasion that destroyed the
Islamic east, Islam was throughout its history involved in constant
malicious conflict with Christianity in the western front. If there were
intervals in the meanwhile, it was for refreshing the forces rather than
for stopping the conflicts permanently. Christianity and the medieval
church considered Islam to be a usurping enemy, one that had invaded
part of its territory and had risen against its authenticity and truth.
Although Muslims followed their teachings to consider Christians as
People of the Book, the fact is that the Christians, other than in the
present century when they recognized Islam as a religion, considered
Muslims as unbelievers[^56] that had to be destroyed.

Threat of Christian Powers
--------------------------

An example of Ha’iri’s account of the Christians’ view of Muslims,
quoting from Sanders, “You could hardly find a Christian with honesty in
the period of belief that would consider the Prophet (S) impartially as
his religion, in his view, was an infidel caricature of the Christian’s
own religion and its followers—from the first to the seventh century,
when the Muslims took Syria from the Byzantine government—had destroyed
Christianity in its birthplace where it had grown.”[^57]

Then, he adds, “Thus, the Christian World, i.e. Europe, looked at Islam
and, therefore, they always considered the Prophet of Islam and his
religion and followers as enemies and cursed at them, so much so that
Pike, in a book that he wrote about the Prophet’s life, admits that
Muhammad is one of the great men that has been subject to accusations
more than any other famous man.”[^58]

As we said, the Christians’ hostility never stopped. They were the
permanent organized ideological enemies of Muslims. Their attacks were
contrary to that of the eastern invaders, who were general idolaters and
whose attacks were for slaughter and plundering and for finding pastures
and occupying developed and residential lands. The latter would finally
merge into the Muslim society by converting to Islam while the
Christians’ attacks were preplanned and ideological. Not only would they
not accept Islam, they were also seeking to Christianize the Muslims.
The purpose of the eastern invaders was slaughter and destruction while
the western invaders sought to destroy Islam and the centrality of
Islam.

“To the leadership of the Roman Catholic Church and the European
governments, the fall of Granada did not just mean the defeat of Abu
‘Abdullah, the last Muslim ruler of the Granadan Nasiris, against the
united forces of Ferdinand and Isabella. It also meant an unforgettable
victory for the Christian World against Islam and, as Sanders puts it,
the Granada event was ‘an uncompleted partial avenge by Christianity’
against Islam. Europe, which was constantly worried about and feared the
unity of the Muslims and the material and spiritual progresses of the
Muslim World—which had extended after the Muslims took control of
Constantinople—celebrated the fall of Granada and expressed much
happiness for the defeat of the Muslims while, as Bartold writes, the
fall of Granada was ‘like a bomb exploding in the Muslim World’, making
all the Muslims mourn on it. The leaders of the Roman Catholic Church
arranged feasts, dances and celebrations in Rome and the Vatican for the
event.

In his book *Jam-*Sultan, a French writer writes that, after the news of
the Granada fall spread, the Vatican and the other places in Rome were
lit for celebrations, there were plays and horseracing and bullfighting
competitions for consecutive days. In one of the plays, two people
dressed as Ferdinand and Isabella, while another man playing the role of
Abu ‘Abdullah, the defeated Muslim ruler, was chained and fell to their
feet. The people were joyous for the king and queen of Spain, who had
finally been united to defeat the Islamic rulers of Granada after years
of being defeated by them.

Among the first-hand spectators or audience, there was the same Jam, the
brother of Bayazid II, the Ottoman Sultan, who was held by the Pope’s
government in order to make the Ottoman sultan behave himself. According
to the French writer, more than anything else the prince disliked the
chaining play of Abu ‘Abdullah and throwing him at the feet of Ferdinand
and Isabella. It seems that the Vatican Catholic leaders held such
plays, feasts and celebrations to show that the Muslims were in bad
conditions and were disunited, especially in the presence and with the
awareness of Jam Sultan, who contemplated having the crown of the
greatest Islamic government of that time. They thus sought to quench
their sense of avenge and:

1) Say to the Christian World that, despite the past, Islam was now
powerless against the West and Christianity had overcome Islam.

2) Severely break the spirit of the Muslims and Muslim rulers,
especially the Ottoman kings who claimed to conquer the world.”[^59]

Power and Security
------------------

In such conditions, it was natural that the thoughts and sensitivity to
security and power be directed towards the creater and protector of
security rather than to justice or the practice of justice. What
mattered here was merely having power and splendor because these would
frighten the enemies and protect the centrality and borders of Islam.
Therefore, everything would have to be put at the service of making the
ruler as powerful and splendid as possible. This is the duty of all and
it is a religious and Islamic duty because, in their view, defending
Islam was so intermingled with defending the ruler that it was not
possible to defend the religion without defending the ruler. To them, it
was not important who he was and what he did and how far he was
committed to the religious precepts and Islamic justice. What was
important was that he symbolized Islam and everybody had to be at his
service and obey him in order to consolidate his position as much as
possible because it is the power and splendor of this symbol that
silences the enemies, frightens the aliens and establishes
security.[^60]

This is well explained by Ibn Hanbal where he is accounting for the
religious necessity of obeying the rulers, “It is obligatory to obey the
rulers and commander of the faithful, be he a good or bad person. It is
necessary to obey the one who has become the caliph and the people
gather to express their allegiance and also the one who has gained
domination over the people with the power of the sword and by force and
is known as caliph and commander of the faithful. *Jihad* by the side of
the emirs, whether they are good or bad, is acceptable untill the Day of
Resurrection.

The decisions they make like the distribution of spoils and tributes and
on punishments is acceptable. No one should be sarcastic towards them or
stand up against them. It is allowed and rewarded if you pay them alms,
whether they are good or bad. Standing behind them for prayer and behind
any other person who is qualified is acceptable and one who refuses to
do this is a heretic and a violator of the tradition of the ancestors.
One who does not believe that standing behind good or bad emirs to say
the Friday communal prayer is accepted, has not understood the true
virtues of the Friday communal prayer.

The tradition is that two units of prayer have to be said with them and
you have to believe that this prayer is complete and should not doubt
it. One who disobeys an *imam* of the Muslims whom the people have
accepted and whose caliphate the people have accepted, whether with
satisfaction or with force or reluctance, has broken the customs of the
Muslims and opposed the Prophet’s tradition and, if he dies, it is as if
he has died in the pre-Islamic ignorance period.”[^61]

The Muslims in the past centuries lived under such conditions and this
was true especially in the first centuries of Islam when the seed of
Sunni jurisprudential and theological structure and thoughts was
planted. These foundations developed in the light of such conditions and
necessities. Indeed, this was approved by the experiences of the
subsequent centuries. Hajjaj ibn Yusuf says, “The sultan’s weakness is
more damaging than his oppression because his weakness affects everybody
whereas his oppression affects a certain group.”[^62] This indicates the
true spirit of that time and the mentality and sensitivity of the people
of that time. It was an example for later times and the emirs advised
their children about them.

In those times, it was possible to make one of the two choices, either
accepting anarchy, insecurity and foreign threats or submitting to the
oppression of the ruler and his deviation from the right path of Islam
and Islamic justice. In such conditions, naturally all the people would
choose the latter.

Ghazali’s Theory
----------------

As Ghazali sought to prove the religious rather than the rational
necessity of imamate, he says things that are a clear expression of the
problems that were mentioned and of the necessities arising therefrom,
“…And as to the second introduction: It is that the world affairs and
the security of the souls and of property is not provided, unless under
a powerful obeyed sultan. The best reason for this is when a sultan or
caliph dies, that if he is not immediately substituted by another obeyed
king, there will be anarchy, murder, plunder and drought everywhere. The
beasts will die and the industries will be stopped. The powerful will
steal and plunder and no one will have rest so as to worship or seek
knowledge, if he survives the situation, and most people will be killed.

Therefore, it has been said that the religion and the sultan are
together. The religion is the foundation and the sultan is its guard.
What has no foundation will be destroyed and what had no guard will be
ruined. In brief, any reasonable person will notice that the people will
be destroyed if they are left to themselves, because of their class
difference and conflicting views, and there being no powerful obeyed
person to gather them together.

This disease has no cure other than a powerful sultan to maintain the
worldly system, and the maintenance of the worldly system is necessary
for establishing a religious system, and the religious system is
necessary for the otherworldly salvation, which is what the prophets
meant. Therefore, the necessity of having an *imam* is an inevitable
religious necessity. Understand this very well.”[^63]

It is interesting that the well-known theologian, Qadi ‘Abdu’r-Rahman
bin Ahmad Ayji mentions the same point. As the second reason for the
necessity of appointing an *imam*, he mentions preventing probable
damage. Explaining this, he says, “With a relative certainty, we know
that the *shari‘ah* legislator, while legislating the religious rites on
the days of feast and Fridays, meant to provide for benefits for the
people in this world or in the afterworld. These benefits will not be
attained other than by having an *imam* appointed according to the
*shari‘ah* so as to be referred to in what relates to him because the
people, with their differing views and their conflicts, rarely submit to
each other.

This would result in fights and perhaps the death of all. This has been
shown by experience and also by disturbances that happen in the interval
between the death of a sultan and the appointment of another individual
because, if this appointment is delayed, the daily life will be stopped
and everyone will take a sword to protect his life and property. This
will result in the destruction of the religion and of all the
Muslims.”[^64]

We quoted the above in full because of its importance in the entire
discussion. However, despite all this, the big problem was that the
second choice, i.e. submitting to an oppressor despite his deviation
from the right path of Islam and from the Islamic justice, which was due
to necessity, resulted in the establishment of a tyrannical
sociopsychological structure among them and formed the foundations of
their thoughts accordingly in all respects. This temporary necessity had
a lasting effect, which continued to the present day and aroused a great
deal of protests by the youth and the intellectuals of the new
generation.”[^65]

Preserving the System
---------------------

All of these factors finally constituted the thought of preserving the
system and the need to do so. The question was to preserve the system.
This had the first priority. The other factors were either in its
employment or had a peripheral or secondary importance. Such a way of
thinking would certainly nip any objection in the bud on grounds of
justice, either by claiming to return to the Prophet’s (S) tradition or
by claiming to confront heresy. From this point of view, the question is
not what the truth is and what the falsehood is. The principle is that
all people have to serve to protect and preserve it and to consolidate
and reinforce it as much as possible. Anything other than this would be
violating the customs of the Muslims and prohibited, and persistence on
that would be deemed as rejection of the religion. Accordingly, the
greatest protest that one could have would be an objection in one’s
heart and a personal one, i.e. one must not accept a ruler’s heresy by
heart, yet objecting to it would be violating the customs of the Muslims
and one has to avoid doing so. One’s duty is, at the ultimate point, a
denial by heart not in action or practice. The following story explains
this very well.

One day, the jurisprudents of Baghdad went to Ibn Hanbal and said to
him, “This person—they meant Wathiq, the ‘Abbasid caliphate, who, like
Ma’mun and Mu‘tasim, promoted the issue of the creation of the
Qur’an—has corrupted the people’s beliefs and does not stop on this. It
is necessary to do something.” They meant to get a *fatwa* for rising
against the caliph. However, he said in response, “Your duty is to deny
in your hearts. You have to deny him in your heart but are not allowed
to rise against him or oppose him.”[^66]

Ibn Hanbal did not say this because he sought comfort or he was
conservative. He champions the period of hardship, to be later known as
the Days of Hardship. He is one of the most prominent opponents of the
thought of the creation of the Qur’an and insisted so much on this that
he was defamed and beaten for it. In Mu‘tasim’s period, he was lashed
nearly to death. He was not afraid or did not seek personal comfort. He
really thought so and recommended that too.[^67]

However, the question why he thinks so returns to his jurisprudential
and theological foundations, as were mentioned. He believed that even if
the imamate and caliphate is attained by force and sword, one is not
allowed to oppose it thereafter. When the ruling system and the
protection of the ruling system are made a principle, the person who
takes it and the qualifications he has to have are overshadowed thereby.
The principle is solidity and power rather than conforming the religious
precepts or justice. It is this principle that makes it legal and
necessary to be obeyed rather than its characteristics. Because of this,
even a caliph that believes in the creation of the Qur’an and promotes
this has to be obeyed because they believed that the negative results
and consequences of opposing the ruling system are far more than the
positive results that may result in ‘calling to goodness’ or
‘prohibiting the evil’ in words and in practice. Therefore, one must not
do it. Although this is a true saying, if its limits are not defined and
it is considered to be true in any circumstances, it would provide the
best ground for the rule of oppression and deviation from the religion
and justice, as this happened.[^68]

It was exactly on this basis that he said they should not make any
objection to Wathiq or take any action against him. It was again based
on this he did not call Mu‘tasim, the powerful and strict and at the
same time uninformed and unlearned ‘Abbasid caliph, by any title other
than caliph and the Commander of the Faithful, even when he underwent
the severest forms of torture.[^69]

These were the most important factors that formed the mentality of the
senior Sunni clerics regarding security and protecting the ruling
system, from among of which the third factor was the most effective and
critical. This was one of the major differences between Shi‘ites and
Sunnis. One of the most important reasons why Shi‘ah has been criticized
and even blamed throughout history has been this last factor. They
constantly said and say that Shi‘ah, with what they did, has broken the
Muslim unity and created differences and disputes. Some even criticize
Imam Husayn with this same reason and explicitly ask why he stood
against the consensus of the Muslims.[^70]

Here the problem is not whether this criticism of theirs is right or
not, i.e. whether Imam broke the Muslim unity or whether there was
another issue. What is important is that this criticism is the product
of their intellectual and doctrinal system. Commitment to such a system
will necessarily take one to such views as they have adopted. The
critics of the Imam thought so and those that did not say anything, were
under the influence of the special sayings regarding the Imam, which
were also cited by great Sunni sayings scholars. That is to say, from
among the prohibition of breaking the Muslim unity, which was a natural
and logical result of their intellectual, ideological and
jurisprudential system, and the sayings that were cited as to the high
position of the Imam, they resorted to the sayings. Their silence and
probably admiration was due to this rather than due to the agreement of
the ‘Ashura uprising with their jurisprudential and theological
foundations—here we are talking about the true independent Sunni
scholars rather than the ones who were affiliates of tyrants and would
give up their religion in order to justify the purposes and actions of
those in power. These would say anything even at the price of insulting
a person like Imam Husayn.

Ibn Qayyim’s Theory
-------------------

It would be better here to cite the theory of one of the greatest Sunni
scholars, Ibn Qayyim. In his most important and serious book *A‘lam
al-Muwaqqi‘in*, he has a full chapter on “Change and difference of
*fatwa* depending on change of time, place, conditions, intentions and
results”, in which he provides a detailed account on that “The
*shari‘ah* has been constructed for the people’s benefits in the worldly
and the otherworldly affairs.”

Then, he provides the degrees of prohibiting the evil and its
conditions, saying on the latter, “The Prophet necessitated prohibiting
the evil so that what God and his Prophet like will prevail. Then, if
prohibition of the evil involves another evil which is disliked by God
and his Prophet, it will not be allowed, although that evil is not liked
by God and He will punish those who commit it. It is like prohibiting
the sultan or the governor from evil by rising up against him, as this
will be the basis for any disturbance and evil to the end of time. The
Prophet’s Companions asked him about fighting emirs who delay saying
prayers on time, and if they should fight them. He said, ‘No, not as
long as they say it.’

‘One who sees something from his emir that he dislikes, he has to be
patient regarding it and must not refuse to obey him.’ One who
contemplates small and big damages that occurred to Islam will see that
it has been due to non-commitment to this principle and impatience on
the evil. They sought to eliminate an evil but were entangled in a
bigger evil, which was the result of their action. The Prophet saw the
greatest of evils in Mecca but he could not change them. When God opened
Mecca to him and made it the home of Islam, he began changing the Ka‘bah
and made it the way Abraham had built as the Qurayshis could not bear it
since they had just converted to Islam and left paganism. Therefore, the
Prophet did not let the Muslims stand up against the emirs and prohibit
the evil in practice as a great disturbance would arise out of it.”[^71]

Seeking Justice and Ambition of Power
-------------------------------------

The important thing here is that these two different types of attitudes
and interpretations will entail absolutely different consequences. The
historical experiences of Shi‘ites and Sunnis and their present
conditions are mainly affected by these two types of consequences rather
than by the two types of attitudes and interpretations.

One of the most important differences of these types is that the Sunni
revolutionary potential in the contemporary time had an ‘ambition for
power’ rather than ‘seeking justice’ the way it is within the Shi‘ite
world.[^72] The biggest motivation and rather sensitivity and worry of
revolutionary Shi‘ites at present are their seeking justice. The
important characteristic of their Islamic political ideology, which is
the source of their inspiration and mobility, is their seeking justice.

They have risen to establish justice, i.e. they have risen to establish
an Islam whose main message is justice and the establishment of justice
while the goal of the Sunni Islamic movements in general is mainly
creating a powerful grand centrality. They are looking for the power and
splendor of Islam like the early periods and want the Muslims to have a
power like in the past. Their ideal is powerful caliphs of the early
period. To them, Islam is the religion of power in the first place and
its history is one of power and majesty. Shi‘ites, at least contemporary
Shi‘ites, see Islam as the religion of justice in the first place and
deem its true history to be one of justice and administration of
justice.

For example, in the Shi‘ite view, the most important distinguishing
feature of ‘Ali’s character is his appreciation of equality, justice and
justice administration. The former see bright grand faces among the
powerful Islamic caliphs, who ruled over the greatest empire of that
time while the later find manifestations of justice and equality in the
true caliphs, who lived like the most ordinary people and did not bow
other than to the religion and justice.[^73]

It is exactly because of this that the internal developments after the
Islamic Revolution of Iran, especially after the committed
revolutionaries took control of the power, have to be studied based on
their concerns about enforcement of justice and social justice. The most
important factor that formed the ups and downs in Iran in the meanwhile
was exactly this. The other factors were secondary. However, if such a
revolution had occurred in a Sunni country, the critical sensitivities
and factors would certainly not have been so and, most probably, they
would have thought of making the revolution as powerful as possible. The
natural result of it would have been its further ability in achieving
social integrity and absorbing those that had different thoughts in
order to create a powerful centrality.[^74]

Channels for the Manifestation of the Revolutionary Potential
-------------------------------------------------------------

From among the other important consequences of this different attitude
towards security and justice is that, throughout the history, Sunni
Islamic movements were generally religious or cultural and one hardly
sees any political movement while in the Shi‘ite world, political
movements even during the rule of Shi‘ite sultans are abundant as there
were the necessary theoretical foundations for rising up against the
ruler. Therefore, they were more likely to occur than where there were
no such principles and such actions would be deemed illegal as causes of
the order established by the ruling system.

The fact that Sunni Islamic movements in general have been religious and
cultural is not because of their lack of theoretical sociopolitical
foundations. In the absence of a sociopolitical channel which is both
religiously acceptable and can contain and guide the revolutionary
potential of the people, a tendency towards change, development and
reform shall be naturally contained within the religious and cultural
channel while the Shi‘ites did not have such a problem. It was likely
for this potential to be put through its religiously acceptable channel,
be it social or political or any other military or armed form. There was
no problem in this regard. Therefore, a revolutionary potential could
easily be led through its natural channel. However, this was not the
case with Sunnis.

The outlets of public anger had been blocked and one could not rise up
against the ruler, its oppressions and heresies. Consequently, all of
these were manifested in the form of fighting heresy, religious
deviation and intellectual problems so far as it does not relate to the
ruler. One day in the form of fighting the Mu‘tazilites, while the other
day in the form of fighting Shi‘ism, Sufism, the philosophy and the next
day in the form of fighting any of the four religious branches and the
jurisprudential and theologian schools and sometimes in the form of
confronting the people and their beliefs claiming that they do things
that are not acceptable to a certain religiously dogmatic and backward
group, whereas they have adopted polytheistic tendencies and shedding
their blood is allowed.[^75]

From this historical point of view, this has been one of the important
causes of the endless internal conflicts of the Muslims throughout
history. Despite the many common points among the various sects of
Islam, which is due to the firm, clear and explicit principles and the
infinite capacity of Islam itself, the history of Islam is still full of
bloody confrontations between the sects. A great part of this indeed is
due to the social, political, tribal and racial factors. However, it
should not be ignored that lack of an appropriate and religiously
acceptable channel through which one can benefit from the revolutionary
potential of the people for sociopolitical reforms was itself a factor
for the deviation of this accumulated and at the same time natural
force. When this force was deprived of an appropriate and religiously
acceptable means to achieve its goals, it will naturally use channels
and means that are acceptable to it and, instead of dedicating its force
directly towards the ruling system, it will confront its brothers with
various excuses.[^76]

This is especially more important in a religion such as Islam. Islam,
more than any other religion, is capable of mobilizing its hidden forces
for promoting its objectives. The other religions more or less dedicate
their manpower to individual salvation. It is not so in Islam. Yet, its
difference with the other religions is that this individual salvation
will be attained in the light of social action, any action that is
dedicated to the promotion of the objectives of this religion.

The final purpose is for this religion to achieve its social objectives.
Man will be happy if he puts himself at the service of realizing such a
goal and ideal. It is because of this that this religion has been and is
better able than the other religions to realize hidden individual
talents and benefit from them for its sociopolitical progress.
Therefore, a Muslim wishes to make maximum use of his power in order to
promote his religion and to devote himself to this cause as much as
possible, as this would finally result in his salvation. In other
religions, this salvation is attained with a sort of practice on one’s
soul or by individual or probably collective actions. However, in this
religion, this salvation is attained mainly through individual or
collective actions that somehow contribute to the promotion of the
objectives. In the meanwhile, the important thing is that Islam has the
ability and power to improve the internal forces of a Muslim, develop
his sense of devotion and apply all of these forces.[^77] Further
discussion is needed to better clarify this issue.

Seeking Devotion
----------------

It is principally an important human feature to be affected and
attracted by something. This is one of his constant unchangeable needs.
If this need is not equally found with all people, it is not because it
does not exist. Rather, the reason is the scattering of their internal
forces. They are attracted by numerous factors and their forces are
scattered without being sufficiently concentrated for the appearance and
emergence of this intrinsic aptitude.

However, from among the many elements that can attract one, religion is
undoubtedly one of the most important and powerful. This returns on the
one hand to one’s intrinsic aptitude to seek the religion and God and,
on the other hand, to the deep nature of the religion itself. It is
because of this that it can permeate the depths of one’s subconscious
and employ all his visible and invisible forces. From this point of
view, there is not much difference between Islam and the other
religions, such as Christianity, for example. Medieval Christianity
employed its followers the same way. A Christian missionary or warrior
would work and devote himself with the same passion as a Muslim
missionary or *jihad* warrior. However, in the modern era, when
Christianity, and not just Christianity but all the other religions
other than Islam, made extensive reforms and put aside many of their
authentic elements and primary claims, the difference in Islam and
Christianity emerged. Present-day Christianity, contrary to medieval
Christianity, is a set of rites with a limited capacity, incapable of
mobilizing and employing all the capabilities of its followers, as in
the past.

The fact that one does not see Christians nowadays who are as firm as in
the past is not due to the intrinsic weakness of today’s Christianity.
Rather, it is mainly due to the weakness of the version of Christianity
which is now believed in because Christianity today is not as firm,
determined and direct as it was in the past and is actually required of
a divine religion. When a religion is set back by the modern
civilization by its necessities and pressures and it retreats step by
step and gives up its original values in order to adapt to the present
conditions at any price, it cannot have the minimum attraction with the
help of which to create love and devotion in its followers. The
inattention and non-devotion of Christians nowadays is more due to the
internal weakness of Christianity promoted by the modern church than to
their weak faith.[^78]

This is the difference of Islam and the other religions, on top of
Christianity today. For various reasons, which related entirely to its
essence and nature, Islam went, and could only go, on a path different
from the one that the other religions went or had to go on in the modern
centuries. Although modern Muslim thinkers wanted it and still want it
to be like the other ones. It is precisely because of this that the
Islamic beliefs among the masses of the people are not less original
than those of their fathers in the past centuries. This means that this
religion has retained its originality, purity, entirety, certainty and
explicitness and has been able to preserve the same influence,
attraction and potential that it had in the past centuries. It can
quench the thirst of the new generation and employ them in the same way
as it did their ancestors.[^79]

Nevertheless, the discussion was that Islam can develop the internal
capabilities of its followers and make them fond of it and employ their
mobilized force for promoting its objectives. Now, the point is, when
these forces and capabilities flourish but do not have a chance in the
sociopolitical scene, it will be deviated and misled, and will turn into
a force to encounter all that is deemed as heresy. When the emotions are
excited, they will not submit to reason. Then the individual will seek
to make his religion the most devoted by encountering whatever that is
heresy. It will not matter to him if the one whom he attacks is his
brother or fellow believer. He sees confronting him one whom will mean
his religious purity and the victory of the religion, the truth, the
Qur’an and the Prophet (S). This is not because the one he encounters is
really on the wrong path. It is he who needs cases to deem as misled
although this might be a mental process and an illusion, so as to apply
the fire within him for devotion.[^80]

Scenes of bloody sectarian clashes throughout the history of Islam did
not just involve Shi‘ites versus Sunnis. It is surprising that sectarian
violence between Hanafites and Shafi‘ites[^81] or the Traditionists and
the non-Traditionists were far more extensive and bloodier.[^82] The
problem was not a Shi‘ite-Sunni one—indeed, according to what was said,
there was in practice a much greater number of moves by Sunnis against
Shi‘ites rather than the other way round as Shi‘ites, apart from the
fact that they were generally in a minority, they were not like the
Sunnis in terms of facing jurisprudential and theological limitations
for making and taking sociopolitical moves and actions and for having a
revolutionary potential for reform. Apart from this, their
jurisprudential and theological foundations, religious thought and
historical experiences were not so as to consider Sunnis to be outside
the religion.[^83] The problem was that there was no means for
expressing religious purity other than by fighting heresy in the sense,
as we said, of relating to the ruling system. It was as if the heresy of
the other sects had attracted the entire sap of the tree of religious
self-sacrifice and devotion and the other branches had been cut away. In
other words, ‘sacrifice oneself for the high objectives and ideals of
the religion” was put at the service of rejecting heresy, the way they
called it, a current that is still going on.[^84]

Ideology of the Ruling System
-----------------------------

What has so far been said was related to the development of Shi‘ite and
Sunni political thought in the first one or two centuries, to the
background in which the Sunni jurisprudence and theology developed and
what effects this background had on its realization. However, how these
foundations were understood in the following centuries and how they
developed are independent subjects without considering which one cannot
understand the present situation, especially because their social,
religious and psychological structures and institutions are formed in
this same period. In the meanwhile, the religious and political method
of the ‘Abbasid caliphs was more effective and critical. Although the
foundations of Sunni political thought were laid at the time of the
Senior Caliphs and the Umayyad, especially Mu‘awiyah, it was in fact the
‘Abbasids who developed it into a final system. They needed the religion
and pretended so and made use of it as much as possible in order to
preserve and continue their rule.[^85]

The flourishing, extension and development of Islamic sciences from
jurisprudence, sayings and analysis to theology, statesmanship and
history, go back to the same period. Because of their general politics,
it was natural that this current be strongly influenced by their
interests. It practically became so influential that the Sunni
jurisprudential and theological system was involved in the ruling system
of the society and, finally, turned into the ruling system’s ideology
and justified and legalized it.[^86] Later, after the fall of the
‘Abbasid caliphate, the bond was still in place and was put at the
service of local rulers.

This requires further explanation. The fact is that the ‘Abbasids, in
order to consolidate their power and position, needed the religion more
than their predecessors. The Islamic society was more integrated and
harmonious in the Umayyad period than in the ‘Abbasid period. The newly
converted Muslims of the newly conquered lands in the Umayyad period
were frightened of the new situation and power that had dethroned their
kings. They either witnessed the events that went on or were finally in
the employment of Arab or ethnic Arab rivals who had risen to fight for
power. Years had to pass before they could discover that they could
effectively and actively participate in the formation of the
sociopolitical and even religious and cultural currents.

In the late Umayyad period, the days of seclusion and watching had
passed. That is to say, the non-Arab Muslims entered onto the scene,
providing for the fall of the Umayyad. Their fall intensified their
entering on the scene in all its aspects. The other problem was the
presence of new forces that not only had political claims, but had
religious and cultural aspects that aggravated the sociopolitical
differences despite all its positive results.[^87]

The set of these conditions weakened the power of the ‘Abbasids compared
to the Umayyads.[^88] This was not because, for example, the ‘Abbasid
caliphs were less capable or probably less strict or tyrannical; rather,
it was mainly due to the change in the conditions. The conditions in the
‘Abbasid period did not allow the pursuit of the Umayyad policies. If
the Umayyads had taken power in the ‘Abbasid time, they would have
followed more or less similar policies and would have a similar degree
of power.

What matters here is the effect of these conditions on the Sunni
jurisprudential and theological structure, which was founded and
flourished mainly in this period. That is to say that the caliph’s weak
military power made it necessary to use the religion as a means to
consolidate his position. In fact, the religion made up for the power
that could no longer be obtained by sword.

This does not mean that all the clerics who followed a similar path
followed the caliph or pursued certain interests that could be gained by
doing so. Doubtless, there were people among them that arrived at such
conclusions only for the protection of the religion and for the security
of the people. In their opinion, what mattered in those hard days of
tension was a powerful centrality that could protect the religion and
the people’s property and lives, while the ruler alone could not create
such centrality. Therefore, the religion had to help create such
centrality.

Thus, the religion was adopted as the ruler’s ideology. This did not
mean that the religion responded to the ideological needs of the ruling
system concerning how to run a society and how to govern. Rather, it was
like a support to make up for his weaknesses and shortages. This indeed
required a minimum of the religious appearances to be considered by the
ruling system. It was not possible to ask the people to bow to and
defend the ruling system while the system was entirely inattentive to
religious appearances.[^89]

New Objections
--------------

According to this, one has to say that, if the ‘Abbasid caliphs after
Harun were not militarily weak, the Sunni jurisprudential and
theological structure, at least where it concerns the political and
governmental issues, would be shaped otherwise. This did not arouse any
objection by Sunnis themselves until the contemporary era. In the latter
period, and especially in the last two decades, numerous objections were
made, some indications of which can be traced in the writings of
revolutionary and even reformist Islamic or non-Islamic political groups
in Egypt, northern Africa and some Arab countries.[^90]

However, Shi‘ite ideology did not go on this route from the very
beginning. Its principles were not so as to be able to turn into the
ideology of the ruling system, even where the sultan was a Shi‘ite. When
the religious acceptability of the ruling system is defined in
connection with its conformity to the principles and conditions that the
ruler of the ruling system should have, such an ideology cannot be
adopted by the ruling system and cannot serve its justification.

The theoretical foundations of Sunni ideology were so that, in practice,
it had no claim other than legalizing and justifying the present
conditions. This was, firstly, because its theoretical and doctrinal
foundations had been formed and had grown under the influence of
political and historical realities, especially where it related to the
early period of Islam. In other words, here the ideology was peripheral
to and derived from the reality—we have already said that, in the issue
of imamate and leadership, despite Shi‘ites, who first defined the
position, Sunnis defined and interpreted the position in the light of
the one who was in the position. To them, what had happed in the early
period was true and religiously acceptable.

Naturally, they would derive the definitions and concepts from the
officially accepted cases. Secondly, the reason for this was that they
deemed the preservation and protection of the religion possible only in
the light of the existence of the government and the governing
system.[^91] Since this had been accepted as a principle, it would serve
to justify and legalize the present situation. Their thoughts and minds
were shaped like this from the very beginning, especially because, in
their view, the consensus of the Companions, the Followers and the
clerics of the later periods as well as the Qur’anic texts and the
Prophet’s tradition approved it as well.[^92]

The problem was not just that they had accepted such a principle. They
thought this way. More importantly, they understood the religion like
this and would interpret it like this. Doubtless, there were many among
them who accepted and promoted this method because of bad intentions or
for gaining material profit or approaching the sultan. Yet, it cannot be
denied that there were also others who had accepted it for reasons that
were mentioned.[^93]

Nevertheless, these foundations were otherwise with Shi‘ites, who did
not think or bow other than to their own rules, criteria and values.
That is to say, they did not consider the justification of the present
situation and avoiding weakening the ruler’s power and probably trying
to strengthen it, as some Sunnis claimed so, to be the only way to
preserve and protect the religion. At least in certain parts of history
they believed the contrary. Therefore, in their opinion, the present
situation has to be accepted so long as it conforms to these rules or if
the conditions are so that the preservation and protection of the
religion require non-opposition to the ruling system, in which case they
would neither recognize it nor oppose it.[^94]

Although this difference may not seem very important and critical at
first glance, it has shown its importance in the course of the
developments of the new period. The theoretical problems of contemporary
Islamic movement in the Sunni world and lack of such problems among
Shi‘ites are initially due to this difference as the meaningful silence
of Sunni religious circles against the criticism of the new generation
about their support of Islam offered and interpreted by the corrupt
tyrants, whether in the past or in the present, is because of the same
reason.[^95]

Although some Shi‘ite intellectuals in Iran and in other countries have
made similar criticisms against the Shi‘ite clergy, the problem here had
other causes and could, therefore, be solved. Although there were some
Shi‘ite clerics by the side of Shi‘ite rulers in the past, this had
secondary causes and was not because they considered the ruling system
as religiously acceptable or their obligation to be religiously
required. The necessity of defending the true religion and a more
important expediency led them to adopt such a position temporarily.
Apart from this, as there was not such a necessity in the contemporary
times and they had to stand up against the ruling power in order to
defend and support the religion, even if the power was a Shi‘ite one,
they did so.

The Shi‘ite Stance
------------------

The important thing, nevertheless, is that, for certain reasons, the way
the clerics stood by the side of the sultan was different in the Shi‘ite
and Sunni history. A Shi‘ite cleric could never accept the legality of
the power attained by religiously unacceptable means and which acts with
a method contrary to the religious rules. Because of this, he could not
approve it in this respect. If he had to approve and support him, it was
for peripheral and secondary reasons.[^96] However, a Sunni cleric did
not face such a limitation. To him, the ruler simply because he was the
ruler and had the power was religiously acceptable and had to be obeyed.
At least, he would deem any opposition to him as religiously prohibited.
If some of the early jurisprudents expressed doubts as to the necessity
of obeying a ruler only because he was a ruler, they did not yet
unanimously agree on the acceptability of opposition.[^97]

Indeed, a moral and pious factor prevented the pious Sunni clerics and
jurisprudents from getting close to the sultan. They would stay away
from the sultanate as it often involved material pleasures, tyranny,
violation of others’ rights, lavish drinking and forgetting about the
afterworld and the Resurrection. They would similarly avoid the company
of the others who lived a similar life. As we said, this mainly had
moral rather than doctrinal reasons. According to pious Sunni clerics,
the sultan himself was one who had to be avoided in order to avoid the
world and the pursuit of worldly pleasures. They followed sayings in
this regard that advised avoiding the sultan.[^98]

Considering the above points, one has to see now why some Shi‘ite
clerics, some of whom were among the best-known of their time and even
the following times, stood by the sultan’s side. In fact, most clerics
in the Safavid time were so.

The basic reason for this was the political conditions of those times
and the constant tensions between the Safavids and the Ottomans. The
rivals of the Ottomans, i.e. the Safavids, were Shi‘ites. Therefore, it
would be in the Ottomans’ interest to introduce the Shi‘ites as people
away from or even outside of and opposing Islam. By doing this, they
could arouse the support and courage of their people and persuade them,
under the claim of defending the religion and gaining rewards in the
afterworld, to do things that they liked and they managed in so
doing.[^99] However, the important point is that these actions and
arousals were and could not merely be against the Safavids and would
naturally include the Shi‘ites that lived within the Ottoman territory.
It was exactly because of this reason that they were under constant
pressure, harassment, murder and pillage. Some of the slaughters were so
extensive that the Shi‘ites in some parts were eliminated forever. As an
example, Sultan Salim I, after he dethroned his father Sultan Yazid II
and killed his brother and took the throne, in the very beginning
ordered the beheading of 40,000 Shi‘ites.[^100]

In fact, the political rivalry between the two had resulted in religious
rivalry or rather hostility. The fact is that, if it is assumed that the
two had a similar role in arousing political rivalry, the Ottomans
doubtless had a greater share in arousing religious hostility because
the Safavids were Shi‘ites and the Shi‘ites had never throughout the
history considered the Sunnis to be outside of Islam so as to fight them
on such grounds.[^101] However, the contrary is true. For reasons that
are beyond the present discussion, there were numerous occasions when
the Sunni mobs, provoked by a worldly cleric or a bloodthirsty emir,
attacked Shi‘ites. The same was true in this case, i.e. the Ottoman
sultans could easily employ such a mentality in order to provoke the
people to fight against Iran or the Shi‘ites within their territory.
Indeed the undesirable consequences of such provocations were far deeper
and longer lasting than was expected by the sultan or the other
provokers.[^102]

The Safavids and the Shi‘ite Clergy
-----------------------------------

Under such circumstances, the clergy naturally stood by the sultan’s
side in order to defend the status and the only powerful Shi‘ite
centrality[^103] so as to protect the power that was constantly under
different pressures by the rival, as a result of which they would
prevent ruthless slaughters of their fellow Shi‘ites in the Ottoman
territory, as this was a deterrent against the disrespect shown against
the Ottoman Shi‘ites and their slaughter and pillage. In those critical
days, the destiny of Shi‘ites whether inside or outside Iran was
interdependent with the strength and power of the Safavids and they had
no way other than to protect the latter. We finish this section by
mentioning a historical example that shows the conditions and situation
of those days.

“Sultan Murad IV (1032-1049 A.H.) took interest in taking Iraq, which
was controlled by the Safavids at that time. He prepared to enter into
war with Iran but, as he knew he could not defeat the Safavids, he
decided to arouse a tribal and religious disturbance. Therefore, he
asked the court clergy to issue a *fatwa* for the war against the
Shi‘ites. No one accepted his request other than a young man by the name
of Nuh Afandi. He issued the *fatwa* that the Sultan desired. The title
of his *fatwa* was, “One who kills a Shi‘ite will go to paradise.” In
some parts of his elaborate *fatwa*, he said, “Know that God will make
you happy as this infidel rebellious group of roués have all the types
of infidelity, rebelliousness, hostility, corruption, heresy and
apostasy in them and one who hesitates on the order to kill them is an
infidel like them.”

He also says, “The reason for fighting and the permission for killing
them are their rebelliousness and infidelity. They are rebellious
because have refused to obey the caliph while God says, ‘*Fight the
rebels so that they will obey God’s orders.*’ This is a must ordered in
the Qur’an. Therefore, the Muslims have to respond to the call by their
caliph for fighting this rebellious group who were cursed by the
Prophet. The Muslims have to help him fight them.” Finally, he adds,
“After killing these infidels, whether they repent or not… it is not
allowed to get tribute from them or give them temporary or permanent
refuge… Enslaving wives is permitted as it is allowed to enslave
apostate women when they enter into war or go to a place that is not
controlled by *imam* or caliph and this place is a war zone. Their
children can also be enslaved following the enslavement of their
mothers.”[^104]

This *fatwa* resulted in a war that lasted for seven months, in which
thousands of people from both sides were killed until a peace treaty was
concluded between Iran and the Ottoman Empire in the city of Qasr-e
Shirin and the war ended.

After the war, another war began in the Ottoman territory against
Shi‘ites based on the same *fatwa*. They killed as many of them as they
could. The most terrible of all was the slaughter of the people of
Aleppo as it was a Shi‘ite-settled city since the time of the
Hamdanites. The slaughter and pillage was so extensive and terrible
that, except a few people who fled to the neighboring villages, no one
survived. In this event, 40,000 Shi‘ites were killed only in Aleppo,
thousands of whom were the Prophet’s (S) descendants. Sayyid Sharafuddin
Ali ibn Hujjatullah Shulestani, who was a cleric from Najaf, sent the
*fatwa* to Iran so that the terrible slaughters might be stopped.”[^105]

Shi‘ite Isolation and Its Consequences
--------------------------------------

It is necessary to mention another point here. It is the fact that
Shi‘ites, unlike Sunnis, were always a minority in isolation. Shi‘ites
lived as scattered minorities within the greater Sunni society. Even
where they formed a majority and had the power, they were like an island
surrounded by their neighbors. As a result of this isolation, especially
after the Shi‘ite sultans took power in Iran, the active connection of
the Iranian religious society with the outside world and the Muslim
World was cut off. When the modern history began in Muslim countries,
including Iran and the other Shi‘ite territories, the negative
resistance of the religious society to guard its original values further
isolated this society.[^106]

Although this phenomenon can be seen in Sunni communities as well, their
isolation has never been so severe and as deep as that of Shi‘ites. The
result of this difference can now be seen in the Islamic thought and the
sociocultural movements of the two, especially on a spectrum of
religious scholars and thinkers who have been carrying out the mission
of defending Islam in the two territories.

Although, for numerous reasons, Shi‘ite Islamic thought is more genuine
and firmer than the Sunni one, because of the more direct and more
extensive contact of Sunni thinkers with the modern civilization, apart
from the fact that their thoughts are better updated than those of
Shi‘ites, their way of thinking is more objective and less subjective
than that of Shi‘ites. The long history of reformist and modernist
thought among Sunnis is probably affected by this.

When the preservation of the original values is to mean merely a
nostalgia about the past and entirely rejecting everything that is new
or strange, there would be no room for reform, development and
modernism. Such thought, more than originating from the religion and the
religious foundations, is due to the secluded historical experience of
Shi‘ites and the Shi‘ite religious society.

Indeed, Shi‘ite seclusion, at least in Iran, has other reasons as well.
Lack of communication between the religious institutions and
establishments and the ruling political power has intensified the
seclusion. Lack of relations between the two in modern history and while
foreign influence and that of the modern culture was expanding, resulted
in a clash between them. As Iran was never a colony and modern thought
and culture were not directly but practically imported into the society
through the ruling power and its dependents and advocates, the clash
between the two finally resulted in the clash between the religious
society and modern culture.

As this culture did not show itself to the religious people in any form
other than colonialism, exploitation by foreign powers, corruption and
irreligiousness, they thought it proper to avoid it entirely. They
withdrew themselves from the surroundings and closed their society as
much as possible so as to protect themselves and their children. Most
probably, nothing could be done in such conditions and situation other
than this that could be possible and useful.[^107]

However, the story of the clash of the religious society with the modern
culture was not like this. First of all, the strong relation of their
society with the ruling political power exposed them to almost the same
thoughts and developments that the ruling system was exposed to.
Secondly, their clash with the modern culture was a direct one. Sunni
settlements in general, from India to the Middle East and Northern
Africa were subject to colonialism for a while.

They saw the features of the modern civilization in all its aspects in
the faces of their children. However, this civilization was symbolized
in Iran in general by people who were frail-minded, and, alienated from
themselves, who neither knew this civilization nor thought of achieving
such knowledge. Their resorting to that civilization was mainly for
avoiding their moral, social and religious obligations. Finally, they
were so in order to distinguish themselves from the masses of the
people.[^108]

In brief, the Shi‘ite and Sunni societies entered the contemporary
history in two completely different ways. They experienced the modern
civilization, culture and thought in two different ways and this culture
influenced them in two different ways. They have inherited two different
experiences and are children of two different developments. The study of
the religious situations of these two, especially their Islamic
movement, is impossible without bearing this in mind.

Now let’s see, according to what has so far been said on the foundations
of Shi‘ite and Sunni political thoughts, how the Islamic movements are
within these two realms, what differences they have and where the
differences originated from.

New Pressures and Necessities
-----------------------------

The fact is that the Shi‘ite Islamic movement did not have any
significant ideological problem. The doctrinal principles,
jurisprudential foundations, historical experience and
sociopsychological structure arising from these principles, foundations
and experience were not so as to be in conflict with the necessities and
pressures of modern history in order to find an Islamic answer for
political and revolutionary actions. Shi‘ites, led by their clergy,
could rely on their ideological foundations to stand up against the
tyrannical ruling system and to resist it as long as to overthrow it.

This current was in agreement with the psychological, cultural and moral
consequences of the massive socioeconomic and political developments of
the recent decades in Islamic countries that produced oil or somehow
benefited from it. The problem was not just that, in order to protect
the religion and guard its values, it was necessary to rise up against
the dominant power that was inattentive or even opposed to it—for
example, the way we have been witnessing in the last fifty or one
hundred years.

Religious movements in the recent century, other than in the last two or
three decades, were for stopping the unbridled actions of the ruling
system against the religious and national interests—more important than
this was that such a struggle had significant objectives without
considering its ultimate goal. It did not matter that one had to stand
up against and lead to the right path the corrupt ruling system in order
to defend the religion.

What mattered was that the various developments, the presence of active
leftist and rightist groups that carried out political and revolutionary
actions provided such an intellectual and psychological background for
the Muslim youth and students that the very presentation of a way based
on the principles of Islam which were at the same time revolutionary and
challenging was itself a necessity. Other than through this way, it was
not possible to quench the religious and justice-seeking souls of the
youth who felt an ideological gap for justice and struggled for it. They
were so thirsty and passionate that, if they could not find an answer in
Islam, they would have certainly gone to other schools of thought. In
order to protect its children, the religion had to offer its
revolutionary ideology.[^109]

As we said, Shi‘ite ideology and historical experience could well
respond to this without making any change or reform in its foundations
or without providing interpretations or justifications beyond its actual
capacity, especially as the ‘Ashura of Imam Husayn had a place in the
minds and feelings of the people, a story every moment of which
contained a message and the revival of whose memory was actually the
revival of the principle that one has to oppose the corrupt tyrannical
system no matter how powerful it is, and that one had to resist even by
devoting one’s blood. This was the most important source of inspiration
for finding appropriate solutions to problems that the new Shi‘ite
generation faced.[^110]

However, the problem was not like this with Sunnis. On the one hand,
there was the pressure of the new generation and the thirsty loving
souls of the youth, which required a religious, political and
revolutionary answer, and, on the other hand, there was their historical
jurisprudence, theology and historical experience that were contrary to
such needs and expectations. The problem was both a theoretical and
ideological one and a practical, historical and social one. Sunni
ideology, even in its most committed, revolutionary form, never went
beyond verbal advices when the sultan was a Muslim. Brave Sunni liberals
throughout history were those that did not bow to the sultan and did not
give up God’s content for that of God’s creation. They did not sell
their faith to the world and were not overwhelmed by the splendor or
threats or offers of the ruler. They stood against him, his wishes and
expectations and told the truth despite the sultan desire and accepted
the outcome of living this way.[^111]

These are the great Sunni revolutionary heroes. They had the moral and
spiritual power to stand firm against the world and the seekers of
worldly advantages while their resistance was different from what was
needed for the modern period. The new generation needed figures who
would stand up against the ruling system with religious motivations and
who would call the people to their way and goals. Figures like Imam
Husayn, Zayd ibn ‘Ali and other great Shi‘ite advisors to the truth not
people like Ibn Hanbal or Sa‘id ibn Musayyib or other Traditionists who
were beaten in the Days of Hardship but still stood firm on their
beliefs.[^112]

Their denial of the ruler was in their heart or, ultimately, verbal
rather than in practice—indeed, verbal denial rarely occurred where it
means criticizing the ruler—because denial in practice was not deemed
proper by anyone. We have already said that their avoiding advising the
truth was because of their beliefs rather than conservatism. Therefore,
the changes of the time did not and could not affect it. The Sunni
political thought had accepted it as a principle that one cannot and
should not rise up or draw one’s sword against the Muslim ruler even if
he is a corrupt tyrant,[^113] while this was exactly what the modern era
needed.

The problem was and is not that the present rulers, whom the Sunni youth
oppose, are more tyrannical or corrupt than their previous counterparts.
The problem is that today’s conditions are entirely different from those
in the past. In the past, people would stand against the corrupt tyrant
ruler in order to administer justice and spread religion throughout the
society. The justice and the religion required this and this required
standing up against the deviating ruler. There was no obligation other
than this because, firstly, the deviation of the society originated from
the ruler’s deviation, and that of the latter originated in him.
Secondly, there was no sociopolitical, intellectual or cultural need to
provide a revolutionary ideology or an ideology for armed struggle so as
to, for example, prevent the increasing distance between the youth and
the religion.[^114]

In our era, however, the problem had another face. The ruler was the
puppet or follower or at least an ally of great world powers. It was not
he who had control of the affairs. He carried out the plans that were
prepared by others and given to him to be implemented. In the past, it
was the ruler who had the power or ruled as he wished while now the real
power lied somewhere else and he was more like a performer than a
decision-maker.[^115]

Apart from this, the sociopolitical, cultural and psychological
conditions had changed entirely. In the disorderly severe conditions
that existed, every school provided its own solution and claimed to be
solving the problem while Islam could not do so. This solution naturally
had to be proportionate to the existing characteristics, some most
important ones of which were aggression, challenge and reformism of the
youth, which could be created only in the big urban, industrial and
conflicting communities of today that were full of tension and turned
into a real need.[^116]

If Islam had not provided an acceptable competitive solution in such
conditions, it would certainly have lost its influence. Any religion can
maintain its active effective presence, if it is not indifferent to the
realities and needs of the surrounding environment. It can even be said
that preserving a situation worthy of the religion is indebted to its
active creative exchange with all that is going on around it. In
conditions in which any school, rightfully or wrongly, claims to reform
the present situation, or seeks to disrupt it in favor of a more
desirable situation, and such claims were accepted by a large number of
young people only because there was a proper background for them, Islam
could not remain silent and just watch. This was neither possible nor
would the religious commitment and zeal of religious believers, the
clerics, the educated people and the intellectuals allowed this.[^117]

Other than these two factors, there was another obligatory factor which
was neither internal nor external. In the recent decades, all the
manifestations of the collective and individual lives had changed.
Naturally such conditions would develop a psychology, thought,
personality and ideal in harmony with it. The contemporary young Muslim
grew up in an environment absolutely different from that of his fathers
and ancestors. His psychology and personality, mind and thoughts,
sensitivities and needs, wishes and ideals and, finally, understanding
and perception were under the effect of the new rapid accelerating
socioeconomic, intellectual and political developments. His religious
understanding, even in its most committing type possible, was different
from the religious understanding of his ancestors. He was the child of
another era, another experience, another necessity and another
need.[^118]

For certain historical and sociopolitical reasons, this personality,
psychological and ideal difference was manifested in socio-religious
discussions. The major difference in the religious perception of the new
generation and that of his previous generation is in their understanding
of politico-religious discussions. Therefore, the classical Sunni
thought, even in its most progressive and modernized form could not
provide an appropriate response in this regard. The classical thought
was appropriate for conditions that no longer existed and it was no
longer effective, especially as this had its own vulnerabilities. The
Sunni political thought is mainly based on consensus while this basis
could not bear and survive the doubts and criticisms of the new
generation, as it did not, and many of its assumed principles and
theorems collapsed in practice.[^119]

Nevertheless, these factors altogether entailed new needs and
obligations. The basic problem was that the needs and obligations were
in conflict with the past thought and heritage. They sought to find,
from an extensive jurisprudential and theological or even historical and
traditional collection, which at least considered weakening the ruler as
religiously unacceptable if not entirely approving the ruler and the
ruling system, a response for fighting the ruler. For the first time in
their history, they wanted to stand against their ruler based on
religious grounds and to find examples in the past history and *fatwa*s
with whose help to justify their actions and legalize it while this was
impossible to do.

This was a serious real need while their doctrinal foundations and
historical experiences were in conflict therewith. Such a dead end led
them towards unprecedented theories and solutions that were far from the
general beliefs and consensus of Sunnis, from the theories set forth in
Sayyid Qutb’s *Ma‘alim fi’t-Tariq* to the extremist thoughts of Mustafa
Shukri’s “*At-Takfir wa’l-Hijrah*” group, and from ‘Abdu’s-Salam Faraj’s
*Al-Faridah al-Gha’ibah* to ‘Utaybi’s *Al-Imarah wa’t-Ta‘ah
wa’l-Biy‘ah*.

It is not clear yet which of these theories will prevail in the future
because these theories are not based on specific principles so as to be
used for predicting the future. What is critical and forms it is the
present conditions and the pressure to find a challenging solution and
the mentality of those who think of their own problems, one day by
saying the society is a pre-Islamic Ignorant one, so as to obligate
fighting it, and the other day by resorting to certain parts of the
Prophet’s (S) and the early Islamic history in an attempt to choose an
isolated minority who has left its society and immigrated, with the help
of which they intend to Islamicize the society, which at another time
they resort to a *fatwa* by Ibn Taymiyyah and prove the need of fighting
the present society, which includes Muslims, who, although they are
Muslims and cannot be deemed as infidels, yet they are ruled by
non-Islamic rulers and by non-Islamic law and order, and, sometimes,
they question his religious legality and prove the need to fight him
because of violating the allegiance conditions.[^120]

We see that, although all seek the same goal, each have gone a different
way without the slightest agreement or similarity between their ways.
This is itself the best reason for what was said. On the one hand, there
is increasing pressure that cannot be moderated or deviated and requires
an explicit definite response. On the other hand, there is no ground for
a response and, because of this, anyone seeks a way out without seeking
the problem in its entirety. If anyone can invoke one or more verses of
the Qur’an, sayings or historical examples to suggest a theory, one can
invoke other examples from the Qur’an, the tradition and the history to
provide their opposing theories. Any study of Islam in which its
principles, foundations, spirit and generality are ignored and are not
in harmony with its foundations is wrong, unreliable and cannot be
continued. The big problem of the theoreticians and their theories
returns to the same thing.[^121] Therefore, these theories attract young
people for a while and are then forgotten. To clarify the issue, it
would be better to mention the thoughts and tendencies in modern
history.

Thought of an Islamic Government
--------------------------------

The history of the thought of an Islamic government and the attempts to
establish it within the Sunni territory goes back to the fall of the
Ottoman caliphate. From the early days of the expansion of Islam to the
fall of the Ottomans, the Islamic laws ruled the Muslim territories in
practice. More importantly, the existence of a caliph in the following
periods of the history of Islam was a great religious and spiritual
support that calmed the Muslims and reminded to them that the Islamic
rules and standards flow in all the aspects of their lives and that they
have practiced their duties.

According to Suyuti, throughout the history of Islam before the fall of
the Ottomans, Muslims lacked a caliph only for a period of three
years.[^122] Other than this brief period, there was always a caliph in
some part of the Muslim World. This in itself rejected the thought of
lack of an Islamic government and no one, therefore, thought of
establishing one. Apart from this, the existence of the caliph responded
to the religious obligation of having a caliph, following his orders and
swearing allegiance to him because, according to them, any Muslim had to
be under an oath of allegiance to a caliph and *imam*. Otherwise, they
would die as if before Islam.[^123]

Here the problem was not political dependence. It was a form of
religious obedience and allegiance. Otherwise, they had to live under
the political control and influence of a caliph. Since the late 18th
century, when the Ottoman caliphate descended to a weak position,
Muslims in general did not have a caliph based in Istanbul. More
importantly, he was not anymore considered the most powerful Islamic
power to be proud of. However, despite lack of political hegemony, his
religious position was recognized and the people had performed a great
duty by paying or swearing allegiance to him.[^124]

Fall of the Caliphate
---------------------

The Ottoman caliphate was overthrown in 1924 by the Young Turks. This
was an unexpected dizzy blow. The Muslims everywhere felt that they lost
their support and one of the most important divine duties had no longer
been done. They could not imagine living without a caliph and at the
same time being a true Muslim. To evaluate the excitement and emotion
that the fall of the Ottomans entails, for example, see the poems of
Shawqi, the prominent Egyptian poet of that time.[^125]

It would be appropriate here to mention some of the developments
following the termination of the caliphate in the Muslim World and
especially in Egypt.

“One of the well-known events of Egypt at that time was the formation of
a permanent assembly as ‘the General Islamic Assembly for Formation of
Caliphate’, which published a magazine known as *As-Khilafat
al-Islamiyyah*. The goal of the conference was to appoint one of the
kings in the Islamic countries as the caliph.”[^126]

Other than the activities of this assembly and its magazine, many
scientific circles and newspapers contained the religious discussions
relating to the imamate and the caliphate. As a result of these
attempts, they mentioned or rather definitely said that, with the
termination of the Ottoman caliphate by Ata Turk, Islam had been
eliminated in Islamic countries and all Muslims are sinners until they
pledge allegiance to another caliph. This sin would have worldly as well
as otherworldly punishments which would soon occur… They also mentioned
that, because of removal of the caliphate, they had returned to the
Ignorance Period and those who die in such a state would die as if they
had died in the pre-Islamic Ignorance Period.

Many magazines published numerous articles and *fatwa*s in this respect,
saying, “It is necessary for all to appoint an *imam* at this time as in
the other times. All Muslims are sinners so long as they have not
appointed an *imam* who can unify them and they will be punished in the
world with what the people of insight know and, in the afterworld, they
will be punished with what God knows… Those whom we have to follow are
not Muslims, unless they have an *imam* whom has pledged allegiance been
to voluntarily… The *imam* of Muslims heads their government and the
Muslims have to serve his glory, power and splendor.”[^127]

After the caliphate, some Muslim thinkers and clerics considered for a
while to revive it, as Rashid Rida theorized, “As much as the Islamic
forces of this time can”.[^128] However, they did not manage to do this
for numerous reasons. Revival of caliphate at that time, despite in
other times, that if the caliphate had been removed, it would have been
restarted somewhere else, was not subject only to the decision of the
Muslims. At that time, the foreigners had a critical and effective
influence and would not remain indifferent to such a current.

Apart from this, a generation of new educated people had risen who were
in sensitive sociopolitical positions. They thought similarly to the
Young Turks in this regard and, not only did they not intend to return
to the caliphate, but they would also oppose it as much as possible. For
example, Muhammad Hasanayn Hiykal, the well-known Egyptian politician
writer was among them. At that time, he defended the thoughts of
‘Abdu’r-Razzaq, whose book was published immediately after fall of the
caliphate, and attacked his critics and harshly criticized those who
worked to revive the caliphate. He wrote in this regard, “What could one
say about an Islamic cleric who seeks a caliphate for the Muslims at a
time when any Muslim king wishes to be the caliph.”[^129]

Smith, who studies the mutual relations of Islam and the contemporary
developments in Egypt in the light of Muhammad Hasanayn Hiykal’s
biography, says, “Everybody was under the influence of the political
events and socioeconomic developments of Egypt of that time. Everybody
was to a certain degree under the influence of the modernists of the
1920’s and wanted to limit Islam and the power of Muslim authorities.
Such actions were reflected in ‘Abdu’r-Razzaq’s book, *Al-Islam wa Usul
al-Hukm*, and in Taha Husayn’s *Ash-Shu‘ara’ li-Jahili*.”[^130]

Nevertheless, many, occasionally honest, attempts of many of the
believers in the religious necessary of the caliphate failed. The
caliphate was terminated and attempts to revive it were futile. The
Muslims, despite their tendencies and beliefs, accepted that it was not
possible to revive it although some of those in power at that time in
Islamic countries were tempted to nominate themselves for the position,
yet such temptations did not last long and were replaced by realism, and
the thought was entirely forgotten.[^131]

With the weakening of this trend, another trend appeared and grew, which
was the thought of an Islamic government, which, to many clerics and
religious intellectuals, meant nothing but the same Islamic caliphate
and its continuation.[^132] Before the fall of the caliphate, this
thought was not that comprehensible. The previous caliphs and sultans,
although corrupt, were not against the religion as it existed among the
people. Their interests on many occasions even required them to promote
the religion. So long as there was no significant foreign or domestic
factor against the religious reality of the society, everything was in a
form of harmony with and in compatibility to the religion and the
religious heritage.

However, in the modern history, everything had evolved. The scientific,
intellectual and industrial developments, the opening of the closed
religious society, the backward society, foreign hegemony, direct or
indirect dependence of those in power and influential people on the
colonialists created new conditions, as if the religion was under
pressure and attack from all directions. The problem was not just that
the Ottoman caliphate, as the last sociopolitical and military symbol of
the Islamic society had collapsed. More importantly, the situation had
entirely changed and the Muslims truly believed that all that they had
was threatened by these events.[^133]

In such conditions, eyes were directed towards a new concept, which was
the Islamic government. Indeed, it was not a new concept but its
realization, as it occurred in middle of the present century and its
manifestation as a politico-religious ideal was a new issue. It soon had
numerous supporters in different classes and, in the absence of an
acceptable, deeply rooted and unanimously agreed on political ideal, it
became the most important ideal of the Islamic societies. In the
meanwhile, numerous other developments and events occurred, all of which
contributed to the acceptability and expansion of this trend.[^134]

Influence of Western Laws
-------------------------

Along with this trend, the western laws rapidly extended in Islamic
countries. This had indeed nothing to do with the termination of the
caliphate. Even if the Ottoman caliphate continued, the western laws
would have entered Islamic countries and even to Turkey itself, as it
had already done. This resulted from the entire conditions of those days
not from the fall of the Ottoman caliphate, although some thought of
these two as relevant.[^135]

At this time, Muslims in all Islamic societies had crept into their
closed society. The rapid pace of the developments and pressure of the
time along with backwardness and desperation had put them in a passive
position and pushed them towards passive resistance. Those who denied or
opposed the religion or had claims for the western culture, laws and
value system were, in practice, the only ones who ran the society
without facing any opponent or opposition. No one could help resist the
new trend and its advocates.[^136]

In such conditions, it was natural that the legal system and even the
constitution in Islamic countries would be formed and reconstructed in
the light of western laws. As the entry of Islamic countries in general
into modern history coincided with the expansion of liberal thoughts and
tendencies, the first thing that attracted attention was to develop laws
and a constitution. Where could the laws be adopted from other than
western sources?[^137]

This requires further explanation. Throughout their history, Muslims,
like many other Third-Worlders, constantly suffered from the tyranny of
their rulers. The most important aspect of tyrants is breaking laws and
not bowing to or recognizing any rule or law. In such conditions, the
new developments began and eyes and ears were opened. All of a sudden,
they found out that they lived in the worst sociopolitical conditions
and in the utmost decadent backward conditions.

Indeed the top intellectuals had an undeniable role in arousing this
feeling and reinforcing it.

By formally comparing their society to the developed societies of that
time, they had reached the conclusion that their backwardness was rooted
in political tyranny and that it occured in the lack of a legal system.
Therefore, they promoted liberalism as much as they could and they
considered the developing of a constitution and the other laws as the
only way to achieve it. The problem, in their opinion, was entirely due
to the rule of tyranny and lack of freedom, and the cure was naturally
the western laws.[^138]

This was perhaps one of the most inappropriate choices that the Islamic
societies could make, which would entail various complications. Right
now, we do not intend to say why it was inappropriate. What matters is
that a flood of new laws began to flow without there being proper
grounds for them, while the Muslims, at least in this respect did not
face any shortage. Although there were no well-compiled laws at that
time, at least the sources were there, which are the same Islamic
jurisprudence and laws, and they could easily get help from and be
inspired by them for their various needs, as this happed in some Islamic
countries.[^139]

The first serious experience in modern history in Islamic countries,
however, began through the modernization of the legal and legislative
system. As we have already pointed out, this happened in the absence of
committed Muslims. In those days, they were in a state of numbness and
fear, had left the scene and, when they regained balance, they found out
that they had to bow to new laws that were in many cases against their
religious principles and fundamentals.

It would be appropriate here to quote part of the views of William
Shepherd on how the Muslims entered the contemporary history, “It was
through military events that for the first time the leaders of Muslim
societies faced changes, such as the British conquests in the 18th and
early 19th centuries in India and the defeats of the Ottomans by the
Russians in the 1768-74 wars, although the Ottomans’ awareness of the
westerners’ military superiority had made them take limited actions in
order to westernize their society in the early periods of the same
century. In a place such as the Ottoman Empire, it was the military
issues that entailed reformist attempts. However, when these reforms
began, they could not be limited to what the leaders had chosen them to
be.”[^140]

He goes on to say, “If Christian theology sought to understand God’s
nature and actions in this world, the Muslim jurisprudents sought to
understand God’s will and the divine laws and *shari‘ah*, which would
define the behavioral duties of all people. It was because of this that
modernization attempts are mainly in legal fields and for sociopolitical
institutions rather than on issues concerning theology. In the Muslim
world, one cannot see anything similar to the great doubts that
Darwinism aroused in the Western World although the picture of the
creation as provided by the Qur’an is similar to that provided by the
Holy Book.[^141]”

It is exactly from this point that the seed of the ideology of Islamic
movements in the Sunni World was planted. As we have already said, Sunni
jurisprudential and theological structure and historical experiences
were not as if to allow opposing a Muslim ruler that pretended to
believe in Islam. The ultimate apposition was not to bow to him in one’s
heart, distance oneself from him and not to serve him. The most extreme
form was to object in words about his vices and note his deviations,
heresy or tyranny.

However, for various reasons, it was not allowed to stand up against the
ruler and the ruling system and to take political or military action.
From this point of view, the problem of objecting to the ruling system
was not solvable. The new period, by offering laws other than those of
Islam and by making them rule, opened a new door for objecting to the
ruler and all the contemporary Sunni religious movements benefited from
it. This was a way out and would allow them to live and go on with their
activities.[^142]

Conformity to the Shari‘ah
--------------------------

In their view, there was no place in an Islamic country for non-Islamic
laws. Everyone had to accept Islamic laws and it was merely these laws
that had to rule. Working for the promotion of this cause was a great
undisputable and unchangeable duty. This is the concept that was later
suggested as ‘the conformity to the *shari‘ah*’, which attracted the
thoughts and minds of committed Sunni revolutionaries and justified the
moves that had begun with this motivation.[^143]

Genuine Sunni Islamic movements in the second half of the recent century
in the Sunni World have all been formed with the same motive and goal.
According to them, the Islamic government, i.e. a government in which
Islamic laws rule, means Islamicizing, i.e. applying the Islamic laws in
all aspects of individual and collective lives and making them rule in
the society. This is a thought that is in itself a reform but not a
revolution against the ruling system. It is one against the present
laws. Its goal is to change laws not the ruler, and if the ruler does
not accept this, he has to be obeyed. If he stands beside these laws and
wants to defend them against the people, then a *fatwa* may be issued
for countering such a person.[^144]

The principle is to Islamicize the society by Islamicizing its legal
system rather than by Islamicizing it by changing its political rule.
The problem is that the ruler should accept such a change and,
preferably, take such an action on his own. From this point of view,
regimes such as the Sau‘dis or the other regimes in the 80’s, when the
Islamic movements were at their peaks in the contemporary era, began to
conform to the *shari‘ah*, as in Pakistan under Diya’ al-Haqq, Sudan
under Numayri, Egypt under Sadat, and in many sheikdoms of the Persian
Gulf.[^145]

Such a way of thinking in the past four or five decades, when
non-Islamic laws ruled absolutely, although a reformist thought was
considered to be a revolutionary thought at that time. Now that the
conditions have changed entirely and the psychology, wishes and
religious ideals of the young people have changed, this thought cannot
respond to their passion for change and struggle. They need something
far beyond this limited and somehow conservative capacity. They require
the rule of Islamic values in all aspects not the rule of Islamic laws
in the appearances of the social life, which the *shari‘ah* deals with.
The utter dead end of the present Islamic movement in the Sunni World is
in this same point. The only door that was opened to them in their
jurisprudential and theological thought is too limited to respond to the
serious needs of the present generation.[^146]

It is because of this limitation that thinkers of the new Islamic
movements in general, from Sayyid Qutb to ‘Utaybi and ‘Abdu’s-Salam
Faraj, have provided interpretations and justifications that are
entirely strange to Sunni principles, beliefs and consensus. They have
tried to resort to witnesses in the Qur’an, the tradition and *fatwa*s
of some clerics of the past, on the top of whom are Ibn Taymiyyah and
Ibn Qayyim, to provide an ideology that can religiously legalize and
even necessitate fighting the ruling system and even establishing a new
system. If great Sunni scholars consider these thoughts and theories
with doubt, so much so that they liken their founders, claimers and
supporters to the Rebels, it is not because of conservatism or seeking a
comfortable life. It is because of believing in the principles and
foundations of Sunni jurisprudence and theology, unanimously agreed
on.[^147]

They truly say that, by considering the Qur’an, the tradition and the
practice of the Companions and the good people of the past, which the
Sunnis have understood and practiced in the past, one cannot accept such
theories. These theories are far beyond the most extremist true
interpretations of the Qur’an, the tradition and the practice of the
Companions. Although there may be others in the meanwhile that say such
a thing because of bad intentions and having certain dependences and may
even promote that it is practically so—in which respect the Sau‘dis and
the clerics supporting them are the great claimers of this thought at
present—this is true without regard to who has said it and with what
intentions.[^148]

Apart from these issues, which are theoretical anyway, there are other
issues as well. We have already said that the differences of Shi‘ite and
Sunni movements, especially in contemporary history, are not ideological
differences. There is also a difference in their sociopsychological
structure, with each of them having created theoretical specifications
of their own in a different sociopsychological structure. This
difference is the product of centuries of differently experiencing two
different ideologies. Any great extensive movement in any of the two
would naturally be strongly influenced by these different structures.
Because of this, one should not expect the manifestations and emergence
of the two movements to be the same merely on the grounds that they are
both Islamic. It is true that both are Islamic movements and seek to
establish the rule of Islam, yet the problem is that two different
interpretations of Islam have influenced their past and is still
influencing them today.[^149]

Sunni Islamic and revolutionary problems and dead ends are, on the one
hand, rooted in the jurisprudential and theological limitations of this
religious branch for fighting the ruling power and, on the other hand,
in the rapid developments that have led the new Islamist generation in
some Islamic countries to embrace challenging thoughts and methods.
These limitations and this rapid pace made it impossible for Sunni
religious clergies and intellectuals to move side by side with
them.[^150]

Indeed, a great part of this was due to the pressures of the ruling
governments on scientific and religious centers, eliminating their
dependence and employing them forcefully. Those in power in Sunni
countries in general, especially in Arab countries which are the base
for extensive self-motivated religious movements, from Tunisia and
Morocco to Egypt, Syria, Arabia and Yemen, have constantly attempted in
recent decades to take control of scientific and religious centers with
such claims as modernizing the educational system. However, the result
of these developments was not just their being put at their service.
More important than that was that they gave up their scientific depth
and comprehensiveness and religious authenticity while this was
something contrary to the needs of the time. Responding to religious,
scientific and moral needs requires living in the time and comprehending
the time while also requiring depth and genuineness. Those who are
strange to the great Islamic heritage in various grounds will certainly
not be able to provide an appropriate response to the needs of the
time.[^151]

These problems showed themselves from the mid-60’s and were intensified
by the proper conditions in the 70’s, while culminating after the
victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran. The main problem was arriving
in a new interpretation of Islam that would guide them in their struggle
and tell them what to do in order to make an Islamic society and how to
fight. They rose to action in the absence of a well-informed scientific
and religious authority that they could trust. However, the problem was
that, firstly, they knew little, and, secondly, they had already made
their decision as to what they wanted and what they had to do. Their
little knowledge served to respond to a question that had already been
answered. The purpose was to get confirmation for the response.[^152]

In such conditions, naturally the answer could not be completely
Islamic. It was more Islamic-based than of an Islamic nature. However,
as the responses were in general harmony to the psychological,
intellectual and doctrinal needs of the young people and the students,
they were rapidly and intensively absorbed and deemed as strictly
Islamic solutions. This, however, had two basic problems and could not
resist the ups and downs to survive. The resistance of an ideology,
especially revolutionary and military ideologies, against the current of
events depends on their commitment to the adopted principles, on their
internal coherence and harmony and their ability in solving the new
problems and dead ends, while the latter is indebted to the first two
former characteristics. These newly-founded ideologies lacked such
characteristics.

[^1]: A practical example of this way of thinking can be seen in Ibn
‘Arabi, Al-‘Awasim min al-Qawasim, and especially the footnotes of
Muhibb ad-Din Khatib. These two provide a justification for and
interpret the wrong actions of those whom they intend to defend.
Actually, they consider only the reality and not anything beyond it as
the criterion. According to them, justice is what existed rather than a
superior concept according to which the existing situation has to be
evaluated. Compare with the way Mu‘awiyah is introduced by Ziyad and
that his actions were political and for the maintenance of power;
Al-Jawhar an-Nafis fi Siyasah ar-Ra’is, p. 73. For example, while
defending Mu‘awiyah on his ordering the killing of Hajar ibn ‘Uday—which
aroused the objection of all even that of ‘A’ishah (‘Ali wa Banuh, p.
219)—Ibn ‘Arabi says, “If you say that his killing is injustice, unless
it is proved to be right for a reason, we will say, ‘The principle is
that the killing is right and the one who claims that it was wrong has
to prove his claim. If it was wrong then all the people have to curse
Mu‘awiyah while in Baghdad, which is the center of the ‘Abbasid
caliphate, whose rivalry with the Umayyad is known to all, it is written
on mosque doors, ‘The best of the people after the Prophet (S) is Abu
Bakr and then ‘Umar and then ‘Uthman and then ‘Ali and then Mu‘awiyah.’”
p. 213.

[^2]: The theoretical example of this perception can be found in the
works and views of Ibn Taymiyyah, Ibn Qayyim and Ibn Hanbal. As-Siyasah
ash-Shar‘iyyah, pp. 10, 21; A‘lam al-Mawqi‘in, vol. 3, pp. 3-6; Al-Ahkam
as-Sultaniyyah. Also see endnote 54 to the previous chapter.

[^3]: Al-Mawaqif fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, p. 323.

[^4]: For further explanations, see the introduction to Min al-‘Aqidah
ila’th-Thawrah, vol. 1, pp. 3, 41.

[^5]: See Amir H. Saddiqi, Caliphate and Kingship, pp. 2-5.

[^6]: This is approved by Shi‘ites as well. See Ash-Shi‘ah wa’l-Ḥakimun,
pp. 7-8, and also Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i, pp. 268-71.

[^7]: For example, see the actions of Ghaylan Damashqi, who, based on a
concept different from the Umayyad interpretation, called the people of
Armenia to rise up. Dhikr Bab al-Mu‘tazilah, pp. 16-17, and also the
justice-seeking risings of Shi‘ites and the Mu‘tayelites.; Al-Intifadat
ash-Shi‘ah, pp. 97-110.

[^8]: To find out about the sensitivities of dogmatic Sunnis concerning
the ideal ruler and ruling system and that there was no place therein
for justice, see Manaqib al-Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, p. 438, and also
Tabaqat al-Hanabilah, vol. 2, p. 31, and concerning how a hard-hearted
tyrannical roué such as Mutawakkil is praised simply on the ground that,
in their view, he resisted heresy. The praise is one like that given to
the first caliph and ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz.

[^9]: The fact is that the infleucne of Shi‘ite views on a pressurized
and suffocated society like ours is more than the influence of Sunni
views as the latter does not benefit anyone other than the existing
ruling system. Min al-‘Aqidah ila’th-Thawrah, vol. 1, p. 26.

[^10]: Concerning the blaming of the Mu‘tazilites and how the founders
of Sunni belief view them, see Tabaqat al-Hnabilah, vol. 2, pp. 30-1,
and also Al-Ibanah ‘an Usul ad-Diyanah, pp. 13-16.

[^11]: Fiqh as-Sunnah, vol. 1, pp. 209-10, Al-Mahalli, vol. 4, pp.
213-4. You can find the elaborate account in Bidayah al-Mujtahid wa
Nihayah al-Muqtasid, vol. 1, pp. 147-8.

[^12]: For example, see how he sets forth and asks the questions from
Imam Baqir concerning attending the communal prayers. Wasa’il
ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, p. 381, saying no. 5 and also saying no. 8, p. 377;
Ibid., and also Mustadrak Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 6, p. 457.

[^13]: The Hanbalites consider it obligatory to take part in communal
prayers. See Al-Fiqh ‘ala’l-Madhahib al-Arba‘ah, vol. 1, p. 375. The
Formists consider communal prayer participation obligatory for those who
have the relevant conditions. Bidayah al-Mujtahid, vol. 1, p. 143.

[^14]: You can find the rejection of the arguments of opponents of
permission of Friday communal prayers in the time of Occultation in
Jami‘ al-Maqasid, vol. 2, pp. 74-380. Also see Salat al-Jumu‘ah by
Haydar ibn al-Mawla Muhammad al-Dizfuli, as commented on by Shaykh
Ansari, and Risalah Salat al-Jumu‘ah by Muhaqqiq Karki in Rasa’il
Muhaqqiq Karki, vol. 1, pp. 117-40.

[^15]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, pp. 581-2.

[^16]: It was because of Abu Bakr’s leading the prayers that people like
Hasan Basri, Ibn Hazm and a group of the Traditionists said that his
caliphate had been explicitly advised by the Prophet (S). Ma‘alim
al-Khilafah fi’l-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami, p. 133.

[^17]: For further explanation, see Al-Badr az-Zahir fi Salat al-Jumu‘ah
wa’l-Musafir, pp. 6-8.

[^18]: Al-Muhaqqiq al-Karki, Rasail, vol. 1, p. 144.

[^19]: Shorter Encyclopaedia of Islam, p. 350.

[^20]: Al-Imamah wa’s-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 34; Fiqh as-Sunnah, vol. 1, p.
209.

[^21]: Goldziher, Muslim Studies, vol. 2, p. 50.

[^22]: ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. 2, p. 282.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 281.

[^24]: That the Prophet (S) blamed and even threatened those who refused
to attend regular and Friday communal prayers has been cited by Shi‘ites
as well as Sunnis. See Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7. For the necessity of
attending the communal prayers, see pp. 581-2, for attending Friday
communal prayers, see pp. 728-33. Similar to the contents of these
sayings are sayings 6, 9, 10 in Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, pp. 376-7,
and can also be found in Jami‘ al-Madarik, vol. 1, p. 489 cite from
Ash-Shahadat in Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah.

[^25]: In this respect, the ‘Abbasids were like the Umayyads. They had
allocated exclusively to themselves all that concerned regular and
Friday communal prayers. “One of the most important symbols of religious
mastery of the ‘Abbasid caliph was that a drum was played in front of
his house at the times of the five prayers so as to announce the time
while no one else, even the crown princes, were allowed to have a drum
beaten in front of their house, so that no body could share this symbol
of mastery with the caliph.” Muhammad Safar az-Zahrani, Nizam al-Wizarah
fi’d-Dawlah al-‘Abbasiyyah, p. 26, cited by Ibn al-Jawzi, Al-Muntazam,
vol. 7, p. 92.

[^26]: Fiqh as-Sunnah, vol. 1, p. 272. The author thus quotes Sha‘bi as
saying, “At a time, Mu‘awiyah grew fat and had a protuberant belly, then
he delivered the sermon while sitting.” Cf. Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5,
p. 31, saying 1.

[^27]: Concerning the corrupt heretic imamate and the view of each of
the four branches of the religion, see Al-Fiqh ‘ala’l-Madhahib
al-Arba‘ah, vol. 1, p. 429.

[^28]: See Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, chapter on non-permission of
praying behind a corrupt person, pp. 392-5.

[^29]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, pp. 381-2.

[^30]: For example, see Al-Fasl fi’l-Milal wa’l-Hawa wa’l-Nihal, vol. 4,
p. 87, and also A‘lam al-Mawqi‘in, vol. 1, p. 48.

[^31]: Al-Badr az-Zahir, pp. 7-8, and also Min al-‘Aqidah
ila’th-Thawrah, vol. 1, pp. 22-3, which critically studies how a regular
or Friday communal prayer leader is appointed by the sultan and the
mutual relations of the two.

[^32]: Al-A’immah al-Arba‘ah, vol. 4, pp. 119-20.

[^33]: Al-Mahalli, vol. 4, p. 214.

[^34]: Ibid., p. 213.

[^35]: Ibid., p. 214.

[^36]: Mu‘jam al-Fiqh al-Hanbali, Part II, p. 575, and also Al-Ibanah
‘an Usul ad-Diyanah, p. 23.

[^37]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, p. 372, saying 9.

[^38]: This is an example of the religius alienation of the Umayyad
caliphs and agents, “Tariq was a governor for some Umayyad caliphs. I
saw him ask for food, which he ate on the Prophet’s (S) rostrum. There
was a bone in his food that contained marrow. He hit it on the wood
around the rostrum to take out the marrow.” ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. 2, p.
46. When the governor of Medina behaves like this, what can one expect
from the governors of the other regions?

[^39]: This participation not only meant recognizing the caliph or the
ruler, it also means recognizing all that related to him. For example,
see the suggestion of the governor of Medina to Sa‘id ibn Musayyib in
Waffiyat al-A‘yan, vol. 2, p. 117.

[^40]: Al-Musannif, vol. 2, no. 148.

[^41]: As-Siyasah ash-Shar‘iyyah, p. 42.

[^42]: An example of this materialistic and profit-seeking attempt in
the name of the religion can be found in the actions of the chancellor
of the Sultan Sulayman Qanuni, Lutfi Pasha, who tried to promote the
former’s position to imamte or caliphate. In his book, Khulas al-Ummah
fi Ma‘rifah al-A’immah, he names Sulayman with such titles as ‘imam of
the time’, ‘God’s Prophet’s substitute’, ‘defender of Islam’, ‘powerful
supporter of God’s religion’, ‘sultan of Muslims’, ‘bridler of the
infidels’, ‘just prayer leader’, ‘establisher of the shari‘ah laws’,
‘one with a characteristic of divine blessing and happiness and whom God
accompanies with His infinite attention’. All of this indicates how the
religion could be used for strengthening a worldly position. Majalleh-ye
Daneshkadeh-ye Adabiyat wa ‘Ulum-e Insani (Journal of the Faculty of
Literature and Humanities), Mashhad University, serial no. 257-8, pp.
7-8.

[^43]: Al-Islam bayn al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun, pp. 133-8.

[^44]: Al-Mahalli, vol. 4, p. 214.

[^45]: Fiqh as-Sunnah, vol. 1, pp. 209-10.

[^46]: Al-Mahalli, vol. 4, p. 214.

[^47]: Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 5, p. 383, saying 9. This point is
emphasized in Mustadrak Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 6, p. 456, and
Al-‘Awasim min al-Qawasim, vol. 3, pp. 242-4, which elaborately cite
Sunni documents.

[^48]: Min al-‘Aqidah ila’th-Thawrah, vol. 1, p. 26.

[^49]: Hashim Ma‘ruf al-Husayni; Intifadat ash-Shi‘ah ‘ibar at-Tarikh,
pp. 108-9, cited from ‘Ali al-Wardi, Wu‘‘az as-Salatin, well explains
the reasons for the stability and survival of Shi‘ism despite many other
religions; see 109-10.

[^50]: For example, see Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, pp. 591-7.

[^51]: Al-Iqtisad fi’l-I‘tiqad, pp. 197-206; ibid., Fatihah al-‘Ulum, p.
11.

[^52]: As-Siyasah ash-Shar‘iyyah, p. 23.

[^53]: Mawardi, Adab ad-Dunya’ wa’d-Din, p. 115.

[^54]: Ibn Khaldun, Introduction, p. 180.

[^55]: Concerning the historical rivalry of Muslims and Christians and
its reflections in their religious understanding of each other and its
continuation to the present, see the critique of The Satanic Verses and
especially The Legacy of Islam, pp. 9-62. To find out about the
perception of the Christians about continuation of this historical
tension and their critical attitude towards the Muslim perception in
this regard, see Yayambar wa Fer‘un (the Phrophet and Pharaoh), pp.
185-202, Islam dar Jahan-e Mu‘asir (Islam in the Contemporary World),
pp. 106-20.

[^56]: Muhammad Abu Zuhrah, Al-Imam Zayd, pp. 108-9.

[^57]: As Christians, at least in the past, did not recognize Islam,
they considered Muslims as infidels and, naturally, the latter lacked
any right, religious or nonreligious, in their territory. A Christian
turned Muslim from Andalusia, thus writes in his books, “One of the
Muslims of the city of Nabunia had to hide his Muslim beliefs in order
to protect his life and to be able to continue his life in his homeland.
He became a pastor and called himself Nicola Martil.” Majalleh-ye
Daneshkadeh-ye Adabiyat wa ‘Ulum-e Insani (Journal of the Faculty of
Literature and Humanities, Mashhad University), serial no. 57-8, p. 9.
Although Christianity did not recognize Islam as a religion at least
until after the 2nd Christian Assembly in mid-60’s of the present
century, it still has some very hostile criticisms. For example, see
Joseph Craft’s articles in Washington Post, 19 May 1981, entitled, “Who
Wanted to Assassinate the Pope?”, and also The Conciliar and
Post-Consiliar Documents, pp. 738-42, Diya’uddin Sardar, Islamic
Futures, John Loffin, The Dagger of Islam. To find out about the causes
of this hostility, see Daniel, Islam and the West: The Making of an
Image, pp. 1-14.

[^58]: The same journal, no. 56, p. 753.

[^59]: Ibid., p. 753.

[^60]: The same journal, nos. 57-8, pp. 10-11.

[^61]: The fact is that the caliph’s or sultan’s ability to create
domestic security and especially to protect the borders was so important
in the past that many Sunni clerics were made to support him as a
religious duty because, to them, this ability and splendor means the
strength and splendor of Islam and of Muslims and the best deterrent
against the foreigners and infidels against the Muslim territory. The
individual position of Harun ar-Rashid, both in his time and in the
following periods, despite all his oppressiveness and corruptuion, some
of which is reflected in the One Thousand and One Nights stories, was
mainly for the same reason. To many Sunni clerics, he symbolized power,
grandeur and splendor of Muslims, and was therefore respected and
popular. He was one who could stand powerfully against the Roman Emperor
and make the latter obey him. The following is an example. In 187 A.H.,
the Roman Empire wrote him a letter and canceled the peace treaty
between them. Ths treaty had been made by the previous emperor, who was
actually a woman. The Roman Emperor wrote, “In the previous treaty,
which was due to weakness and stupidity of my predecessor, you were
given properties which you have to return upon receiving the letter or
have to prepare yourself for war. When Harun read the letter, he got so
angry that no one dared to look at his face let alone talk to him. He
asked for a scribe to write overleaf the letter, “In the Name of God,
the Beneficient, the Merciful. From Harun ar-Rashid to Nacnur, the Roman
Dog! O’ you the son of an infidel woman, I read your letter. The
response to that is what you will see not what you will hear.” The same
day, he rushed towards Rome, defeated the Emperor in a fierce battle and
specified a tribute for him to pay. Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 288.
Concerning his good characteristics and even virtues, which indicate an
example of the great clerics’ perception of him, see ibid., pp. 283-97.
It has also been cited that, “One day, he was reading the Qur’an. He got
to the verse, ‘Is the Egyption land not mine? Are these streams not
flowing under my feet? Do you not see?’ He said, ‘Curse on this mean
person who claims to be a god because of having Egpyt’s kingdom. I give
the Egyption kindom to the one who is the most inferior of my servants.’
He then asked for Khasib, who was his bathman and appointed him as the
governor of Egypt. He ordered a charter to be written for that and
dispatched him to Egypt. Khasib ran that state and was proud of it…”
Ighrad aa-Siyasah fi I‘rad ar-Riyasah, p. 320. Interestingly, the author
of this book considers this as Harun’s magnanimity. This way of thinking
has a long history and was deeply influential.

[^62]: Al-A’immah al-Arba‘ah, vol. 4, p. 119.

[^63]: Ighrad as-Siyasah fi I‘rad ar-Riyasah, p. 285.

[^64]: Al-Iqtisad fi’l-I‘tiqad, pp. 198-9.

[^65]: Al-Mawaqif fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, pp. 396-7.

[^66]: For example, see the explicit critiques of Mustafa Shukri in
Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp. 87-90 and, still
better, see the more scholarly and principal critiques of Hasan Hanafi
in the introduction to Min al-‘Aqidah ila’th-Thawrah, vol. 1, especially
pp. 20-32.

[^67]: Abu Ya‘la, Al-Ahkam as-Sultaniyyah, p. 21; Al-Khilafah
wa’l-Imamah, p. 300.

[^68]: Concerning the Days of Hardship [Ayyam al-Mihnah] and the hard
conditions that Ibn Hanbal and his fellow-theologians underwent, see
Al-A’immah al-Arba‘ah, 4, pp. 140-80, Al-Khilafah wa’l-Imamah, pp.
300-9, and still better, the readable chapter ‘Clerics and the Pains
they Suffered from the Rulers’ in Al-Islam bayn al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun,
pp. 129-214, and Manaqib al-Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal by Ibn al-Jawzi, pp.
397-420.

[^69]: If the preservation of the system, in fact the ruling system, is
the only criteria for judging the good and corrupt things, deviation
from the religion and justice with that excuse may go so far as to
result in disrespecting the Prophet’s daughter, “Fatimah’s house was
violated. She was disrespected in order for the ruling Islamic system to
be preserved, for the caliphate not to be dispersed, to prevent some
Muslims from disobeying the caliph and to disrupt the Muslims’ unity.”
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, The Description, 20, p. 16… Other examples can be found
in the following pages of this book. Concerning the criticism of the
caliphs who believed in creating the Qur’an, see Al-‘Awasim min
al-Qawasim, pp. 249-51.

[^70]: Al-Khilafah wa’l-Imamah, p. 301.

[^71]: Yazid and the corrupt clerics of his court and the descendants of
the two in later periods accused Imam Husayn and his companions of
having ‘desterted the religion and risen up to oppose the imam and
caliph. Therefore, they had to be fought against and eliminated.’ See
Tarikh Tabari (Tabari’s History), p. 342.

[^72]: A‘lam al-Mawqi‘in, vol. 3, pp. 3-4.

[^73]: For example, see India and Pakistan, pp. 37 and 38.

[^74]: For example, see the well-known magniloquent speech of Rashid
Rida in approving the caliphate of Sharif Husayn in Menna in Thawrah
al-‘Arab didd al-Atrak, pp. 320-6, and words of Sharid Husayn at the end
of Rashid Rida’s speech, ibid., p. 342, and also the introduction by
Muhibb ad-Din Khatib to Al-‘Awasim min al-Qawasim, where he praises even
the Umayyad caliphs because they expanded the territory of Islam with
their power (p. 3). Also see Khasar al-‘Alam bi Inhitat al-Muslimin, pp.
299-319.

[^75]: One of the best examples is the letter of Zaynab al-Ghazali, the
well-known Egyptian writer to Yasir ‘Arafat when the centers of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization in Tunisia were bombarded by Israeli
airplanes.

[^76]: There is a long bloody history for religious dreams in Islam, in
which the Hanbalits had the greatest share—exactly because of their
fanatic populist beliefs and the strict and repellant psychology that is
the outcome of such beliefs—so far that even the Ash‘arites, who are
well-known for fanaticism and strict attitude, have complained of their
fanaticism, dogmatism, atrocity and mischief. For example, a group of
Ash‘arite clerics in the time of Khwajah Nizamu’l-Mulk wrote him a
letter in support of the head of the Ash‘arites of their time,
‘Abu’l-Qasim Qushayri, in which they complained of what the Hanbalits
did and asked for his effective support. It is interesting to know that
they wrote the letter at a time when the Ash‘arites and the Shafi‘ites
were in the peak of their power. This shows the amount of pressure that
the Hanbalites exerted on non- Hanbalites and one can imagine how hard
they pressued the other sects, “…A group of rabbles who call themselves
Hanbalites committed disgusting heresies in Baghdad which no apostate,
let alone monotheist, would let himself do. They disrespected the imams
of the past and abused the followrs of truth and the religious people in
mosques, circles and bazaars…” Al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, Subhani, pp. 279-82.
One can find numerous stories in Tabaqat al-Hanabilah, which the
Hanbalites themselves wrote as biographies of their great clerics. The
following story is an example of the disturbances they made, “In the
second trip of Tabari from Tabaristan to Baghdad, one Friday, in the
congregation mosque, the Hanbalites asked his view about Ahmad Hanbal
and the story of God sitting in heaven. He responded that Ahmad Hanbal’s
opposition did not count. They said that the clerics consider him in the
disputes. Tabari said, ‘I neither saw him or any story about him nor any
of his trustable companions. The story of God’s sitting in the heaven is
an impossible thing.’” “When the Hanbalites and Traditionists heard
this, they attacked him and threw their inkwells at him. Tabari took
refuge in his house. The Hanbalites, of whom there were thousands,
stoned his house so that a great pile of stone was made in front of his
house. Nazuk, the police chief of Baghdad with thousands of police
arrived and rescused Tabari from the mob, while staying there for one
day and ordered for the stones to be taken away.” The Wahhabis, p. 27.
Also see the pain that ‘Izz ibn ‘Abdu’s-Salam, one of the greatest
7th-century clerics suffered from the Hanbalites. Al-Islam bayn
al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun, p. 192.

[^77]: This is exactly opposite to the stances of the Shi‘ite Imams.
They never ignored the basic role of the ruling system in corrupting the
people. Therefore, they paid attention to individual upbringing as they
did to social reform and especially reforming the ruling system. Even
where deviation from the right path was for reasons other than inherent
mischief and the power was in the hands of an individual or system with
such characteristics, they did not show much willingness to confront
such individuals. For example, Imam ‘Ali thus (‘a) wrote in his will
about the Rebels, “After me, do not fight with the Rebels because one
who seeks the truth but goes on the wrong path is not like the one who
seeks falsehood and achieves it.” Sermon 61, Nahj al-Balaghah, edited by
Subhi Salih. From the very early days of the appearance of Islam, this
religion could employ its followers and especially the youth
successfully. Such a mechanism was in the first place due to the
characteristics of this religion and its coordination with the human
nature. This continues to date and will continue in the future. In this
regard, one can reflect on the speech of Abu Hamzah Khariji when he
addressed to the people of Hijaz, who criticized his supporters for his
young age, “O’ the people of Hijaz! Do you blame the young age of my
companions? Is it not true that the Prophet’s Companions were young too?
Young people who lived in their youth [as piously] as old people. They
take their eyes away from evil and their feet are hard to move on the
wrong path. They are thin and weak because of staying awake at night to
worship. God looks at them in the dark of the night while their backs
bend on the Qur’an because they see a verse that tells of the paradise
and cry happily about that. And when they read a verse corcerning hell,
they yell as if they hear sounds come from the hell… In the most
frightful moments of the battlefield when the pioneers of the army
tremble with the fear of death and from the dazzle of the swords and
spears, they see the fear of enemy minute compared to their fear of God
and step forward. The wild animals go to their dead bodies and the birds
fly to them. So many eyes that cried with the fear of God through the
night are taken in beaks of the bids and so many hands that prostrated
through the night for long periods of time are cut from the wrist…”
Al-Bayan wa’t-Tabyin, vol. 2, pp. 102-3. His description of the religius
piety of his young followers and that they think but to the promotion of
the religion while devoting themselves for this cause is one that is
more or less true about all times. For example, see the various issues
of the magazine An-Nadhir, the organ of Syrian Ikhwan al-Muslimin and
books that study the actions and spirits of the devotees of Islam. Also,
see Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh).

[^78]: For further explanation, see On Being a Christian, especially
pp.31-4.

[^79]: Gibb truly attributes this to the nature of Islam, “The belief
system of Islam is a consolidated, positive and emphatic collection.
These characteristics are due to the Qur’an, the sayings, the tradition
and the shari‘ah.”

[^80]: The study of the psychological, religious and morals of the
Sa‘udi Ikhwanites and their actions well reveals this. See The Wahhabis,
pp. 446-59. For example, Hafiz Wahabah, who was closely familiar with
them and witnessed their wars, says in this regard, “The Ikhwanites are
not afraid of death. They embrace death in order to return to God. When
a mother says goodbye to her child, she says, ‘God will bring us and you
together in heaven.’ Upon attacking, their slogan is, ‘O’ God we only
worship You and get help only from You.’ I witnessed some of their wars
and saw how they embrace death and go to the enemy group by group while
thinking only about breaking and killing the enemy’s army. The
Ikhwanites in general have no mercy. They release no one and, wherever
they go, they are the messengers of death.” The Wahhabis, p. 452, quoted
from Jazirat al-‘Arab fi’l-Qarn al-‘Ishrin, p. 314. Wajjan Filbi says
about them, “The Ikhwanites have prohibited murders, pillage, banditry,
smoking and living a good comfortable life. Their attempts were mainly
focused on saving for the other world. Other than themselves, they
called all the other Islamic sects polyetheists and idolaters.” The
Wahhabis, p. 449, quoted from the Tarikh-e Najd, pp. 305-8.

[^81]: For finding out about the competition between the Hanafites and
Shafi‘ites, which prepared the ground for many conflicts, the following
story, which is quoted from Hindu Shah, is worth reflecting upon,
“Khwajah was the follower of the Supreme Imam Shafi‘i. Sultan Malik Shah
built a school. When they wanted to write which group attended the
school, they asked the Sultan. He said, ‘Although I am a Hanafite, I
have constructed this for God Almighty. It is not good to protect and
let a group attend and prohibit another.’ He said that the followers of
both Imams had to attend the school equally and cooperatively. As the
Sultan was a Hanafite, they wanted to write the name of Imam Hanafiyyah
before the name of Imam Shafi‘i. Khwajah did not allow this. The book
had to wait for a while… Finally, it was decided that it should be
written, “Endowed to the followers of the two Imams from the early imams
of Islam.” Majalleh-ye Daneshkadeh-ye Adabiyyat wa ‘Ulum-e Insani
(Journal of the Faculty of Literature and Humanities), serial no. 56, p.
742, quoted from Tajarub as-Salaf, pp. 277-8.

[^82]: “The strong fanaticism between Shafi‘ites and Hanafites, between
maturidiyun (‘those who follow their wishes’) and Ash‘arites, between
Sunnis, Mu‘tazilites and Shi‘ites was one of the most important factors
to weaken the Muslims. One who reads Muqaddasi’s Safarnameh and Yaqut’s
Mu‘jam al-Buldan, will find out to what extent such fanaticism resulted
in destruction of lands, killing of people and creating disturgances…”
Zuhr al-Islam, 4, p. 102. “In 350 AH, there was a great dispute between
Sunnis and Sudanese soldiers on one hand and Shi‘ites on the other hand.
The soldiers would ask anyone that they saw on the street, “Who is your
uncle?” If he failed to say Mu‘awiyah, they would beat him severely or
even kill him. In the years, 408, 444, 445 and 449 AH, there were
terrible conflicts and many from both sides were killed…” Al-Fikr
as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i, pp. 285-8.

[^83]: “Among the Islamic sects, Shi‘ites were subject to killing and
violation more than the others. There were many reasons for this; most
importantly because the people inclined towards them since they [their
leaders] were as the Prophet’s Family. The tendency grew so strong that
it very worried and terrified the Umayyad and the ‘Abbasid and they
became strict on them, prosecuted and tortured them.” Islam bila
Madhahib, p. 285.

[^84]: Many of those who now, especially in black Africa, the Indian
Subcontinent and the Far East, spend their energy to fight Shi‘ism have
the same motivation. They seek a means to do their duty in the religion
and are ready to give their life in order to promote their religion and
its purification. However, since they do not have the means to this goal
and, at the same time because of their unawareness and naïveté, are
under the influence of the hostile propaganda of Wahhabis against
Shi‘ites, which is full of lies and slanders, are ready to do all they
can for this cause in order to do their duty properly. These have to be
considered separately from spiteful Wahhabis who are aware of what they
are doing for their own interests. See Afriqa: Mirath-e Gozashteh wa
Mawqi‘iyyat-e Ayandeh (Africa, the Past Heritage and the Future
Situation), pp. 112-4.

[^85]: “In 143 A.H., Muslim clerics began to put in writing the sayings,
jurisprudence and analyses. Ibn Jarih did this in Mecca, Malik wrote the
book Mu’atta in Medina, Owza‘i in Syria, Ibn Abi ‘Urubah and Himmad ibn
Salmah and others in Basrah, Mu‘ammar in Yemen, Sufyan Thawri in Kufah,
Ibn Ishaq wrote Maghazi and Abu Hanifah wrote on jurisprudence and
collected opinions. Much was done on the compilation and classification
of the sciences and various books were written on Arabism, language,
history and the stories of the past. Prior to this, the clergy talked of
memorizing and would narrate science from reliable books that had not
been complied.” Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 261. In order to study what
factors and reasons prevented the writing of the Prophetic sayings in
the early period, see Al-Milal wa’n-Nihal, pp. 51-71, and also see the
discussion in the book Adwa’ ‘ala’-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah in this
respect on page 261 and thereafter. In the beginning, the clerics,
following the tradition of the past, were not willing to write books
and, when Hisham forced Zahri to do so, the others followed suit. Ibid.,
p. 262.

[^86]: See the introduction to Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah, vol. 1, pp. 35-49,
printed by Al al-Bayt Institute. Concerning the ‘Abbasid policies, see
Goldziher, Muslim Studies, pp. 75-7.

[^87]: An example of non-Arab and especially Iranian influence in the
early ‘Abbasid society can be noticed in this story. Mansur asked Imam
Musa ibn Ja‘far to attend the Nowruz feast to visit the presents. The
Imam refused. Mansur said in response, “This ceremony is held for
political reasons and for pleasing the army.” Jawahir al-Kalam, vol. 5,
p. 42.

[^88]: In the last century, classical Sunni thought, especially where it
concerned the relations of the clergy and the sultans’ and caliphs’
courts has been sharply criticized. The critics are from various groups
and do so with different motivations. Some are clergy, like Shaykh
Kushak, Khalid Muhammad Khalid and the Ikhwan al-Muslimin-dependent
clergy in general, above them Sayyid Qutb. Other than these, they are
leftists and progressivists, libral or freethinkers. Criticism of some
of them, who are generally from the first group, is reformist,
constructive and sympathetic while that of the others is bitter,
disturbant and, probably, despicable and destructive. Concerning the
views of Shaykh Kushak, see Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the
Pharaoh), pp. 219-20. For views of Khalid Muhammad Khalid, see
Ash-Shi‘ah fi’l-Mizan, pp. 375-8. For views of clergy supporting
al-Ikhwan al-Muslimin, see Al-Ikhwan al-Muslimun wa’l-Jama‘at
al-Islamiyyah, pp. 262-70. For criticisms of the second group, see
Al-Islam wa’l-Khilafah fi’l-‘Asr al-Ḥadith, pp. 9-34, especially 18-23,
and introduction by Muhammad ‘Amarah to Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm.

[^89]: “In the early 4th centuary A.H., most ‘Abbasid lands were
governed by local governments without any or with little connection to
the ‘Abbasids and only symbolized by mentioning the caliph’s names in
sermons. As a result, their territory was in practice limited to Baghdad
and a small part of Iraq.” Nizam al-Wizarah fi’d-Dawlah al-‘Abbasiyyah,
p. 19.

[^90]: As an example, concerning the religious policy adopted by the
Seljuks and their employing the policy for consolidating their political
position, see Nizam al-Wizarah fi’d-Dawlah al-‘Abbasiyyah, pp. 47-50.
Regarding their religious policies, Ibn Athir says, “When the Seljuks
took power, they revived the grandeur of caliphate, which had been
weakened, especially during the vizierate of Nizamu’l-Mulk. He carried
this out in the best way possible.” See ibid. when quoting from
At-Tarikh al-Bahir fi’d-Dawlah al-Atabakiyyah, p. 51, and also An-Naqd,
pp. 47-8, which provides a positive account of their religious actions.
This policy was followed by the ‘Abbasid themselves. Al-Bandari says
that the ‘Abbasids—he means in 6th centuary A.H., improved the
caliphate’s image so that “Baghdad was so grand to its enemies that
taking it would be impossible. Therefore, no king made any attempt to
conquer it.” Nizam al-Wizarah fi’d-Dawlah al-‘Abbasiyyah, p. 64 quoting
Al Saljuq, p. 268. For further explanation, see ibid., pp. 62-7.

[^91]: A‘lam al-Mawqi‘in, vol. 1, pp. 47-8. Grunebaum thus explains the
major characteristics of the Muslim government and its role in
preserving the religious and moral authenticities: 1. The purpose of the
creation of man is worship. 2. Perfect worshipping requires a group of
believers. 3. To have such an ummah, a government is needed. 4. The
first duty of the government is to provide the grounds for worshipping.”
G.E. Grunebaum, Islam, 1969, p. 127.

[^92]: Concerning the value and importance of consensus, especially the
consensus of the Companions and the Senior Caliphs, which, in Subhi
Salih’s words, is the third source of Islamic shariah legislation, and
how it has been the source of many governmental and caliphate affairs,
see An-Nazm al-Islamiyyah, p. 281. The author believes that the most
important aspect for caliphate itself is consensus and the sayings that
have been provided in this respect have been aimed at further
consolidating and approving something whose source was proved with
consensus.

[^93]: Read these words of Ibn Taymiyyah, “Ahmad ibn Hanbal writes an
account of ‘Abdullah bin ‘Umar, who in turn quotes the Prophet (S) as
saying, ‘Any person in any part of the earth shall appoint one as
leader.’ The Prophet (S) necessitated having a leader even in a small
community so it may be a lesson for other communities. God necessitated
recommending the good and prohibiting the evil. This can be carried out
only with power and leadership. In addition, the other necessary
obligations such as jihad, administration of justice, hajj, the Friday,
the feasts, victory of the oppressed and enforcing the other orders can
be carried out only with power and leadership. Therefore, it has been
quoted that, “The king is God’s shadow on the earth.”, “Sixty years
living under a tyrant leader is better than one night without a sultan.”
These are proved by experience.” Then he adds, “It is because of this
that the good people of the past such as Fudayl ibn ‘Ayyad, Ahmad ibn
Hanbal and the others said, ‘If there is one prayer that we can do and
will be fulfilled, it will be a prayer for the sultan.” As-Siyasah
ash-Shar‘iyyah, pp. 138-9. Also see Tabaqat al-Hanabilah, 2, p. 36.

[^94]: “The truth is that Fatimite policies and those of Al Buyeh do not
express Shi‘ite beliefs. They were governments in their own time.”
Ash-Shi‘ah wa’l-Ḥakimun, p. 7. “…Therefore, actions of kings who called
themselves Shi‘ites have nothing to do with Shi‘ite beliefs and Shi‘ites
do not see any relation between themselves and these rulers and think
that any seizure by them is a personal one. If it is according to the
Qur’an and the Tradition, it is right. Otherwise, they are sinners.
Therefore, the Shi‘ites divest themselves of any responsibility in the
rulers’ seizures. As politics is mixed with religion and, at the same
time, politics has not been manifested other than in the practice of the
Infallible Imams, Shi‘ite political thought cannot go beyond the
opinions and practice of the Imams. Principally, Shi‘ite political
thought can be clarified according to Shi‘ite views and actions
regarding political issues. Any action or seizure from a Shi‘ite and any
view that he expresses, if being according to the orders of the
Infallible Imams, is part of Shi‘ite political thought. Otherwise, it is
separate therefrom.” Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i, p. 280. For further
explanation, see ibid., pp. 268-71.

[^95]: For example, see this bitter and destructive criticism by Mustafa
Shukri, who founded an armed Islamic movement in Egypt and was executed
after being arrested and tried, which is about the Four Leaders of Sunni
jurisprudence. In fact, he tries not only them, but also mainly the
jurisprudents of the later periods and those of his time and accuses
them of being accomplices of the sultans. In response to the question
why the Four Leaders claimed they took religious expertise to its
ultimate limit, he says, “So that they and their writings would be
admired and they would be idols to worship like gods in temples.
Therefore, they put themselves between God and the believers and took
themselves outside Islam. They belong to the Ignorance and savagery.”
Then he adds, “Did those who claimed that jurisprudence was completed
really do so? No, they did so for the public and the remainder of the
Muslims but left it open to interpretation through generations of court
clergy so that the latter may issue fatwas proportionate to the ruling
opinions, no matter who and what opinion rule, and so that, in the name
of Islam, they can propagate sins and legalize the illegal. If we were
to provide examples of the present and of the past, no one could deny…
because there are cases of prescribing adultery, usury and legalizing
the government on principles other than divine principles and even cases
of approving prostitution and drinking alcohol in the name of Islam.”
Then, he gives examples of fatwas issued in his time. Payambar wa Fir‘un
(The Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp. 88-9.

[^96]: For example, see Nokhostin Ruyaruyiha-ye Andisheh-garan-e Iran
(The First Encounters of Iranian Thinkers), pp. 323-66.

[^97]: A small group of Sunni jurisprudents have allowed opposing the
corrupt ruler if there is no way to make him go on the right path other
than by the force of the sword. See the considerable views of Imam
al-Haramayn Juwayni in Sharh al-Maqasid, pp. 271-5. Indeed, as it has
already been said, these have always been and remained in a minority.

[^98]: In his readable book Talbis Iblis, Ibn al-Jawzi mentions the
various traps that the Satan may set for jurisprudents, including their
approaching the sultans. He talks on this elaborately, “… In addition,
entering a sultan’s court is a dangerous thing to do because, although
one may have good intentions in the beginning, one will gradually change
as a result of being respected and tipped or by having greed and
avoiding advising the good and prohibiting the bad. Sufyan Thawri used
to say, ‘I fear a sultans’ respect rather than insult because then my
heart will incline towards them. The clergy of the past avoided the
sultans because of their oppression while the latter asked them for
fatwas and judgments. Consequently, a group was formed that were fond of
the world, would learn sciences that would be useful to emirs and would
run to them with these sciences in order to have worldly fortunes…”
Talbis Iblis, pp. 118-9. Such criticisms can be found in abundance in
books of the sayings, ethics and history. For example, Ghazali
elaborates on the position that the cleric scholars have to adopt
towards sultans, “…And this was the practice and habit of the scholars
in advising the good and prohibiting the bad. They were saved by not
fearing the sultans and relying on God. They were satisfied with God’s
orders and willing, if God wanted to make them martyrs. As they had pure
intentions, their words were very effective on hearts and would soften
them. However, greed has now closed the mouths of the clerics and
silenced them. If they say something, their words do not suit their
actions and, therefore, they will not succeed. If they are honest in
what they say and have good intentions, they will succeed. The
corruption of the people is because of the corruption of the sultan and
that of sultan is because of the corruption of the clergy. The
corruption of the latter is for love of wealth and positions. One who is
filled with the love of the world cannot lead the rabbles to the right
path let alone the kings and great people.” Ihya’ ‘Ulum ad-Din, vol. 7,
p. 92. Interestingly, Ghazali allows entering a sultan’s court only in
two cases, which indicates his politico-religious perception as,
“Entering a sultan’s court is acceptable only on two grounds. First, if
the king calls the cleric scholar by force rather than with respect,
while the cleric knows that, if he refuses to accept the call, he will
be persecuted and, if he avoids to enter the sultan’s court, this will
result in the people’s uprising and in political disputes, in which case
it is necessary to go to the court, not for obeying the king but for the
people’s expedience so that the government will not be disturbed. The
second is for removing an oppression on a Muslim or on himself…” Ihya’
‘Ulum ad-Din, Ch. 6, as quoted in Al-Islam bayn al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun,
p. 112. Also see, Al-Fawa’id, Ibn Qayyim, pp. 149-53. Also see
Goldziher, The Zahiris, p. 165, and Gibb, Studies on the Civilization of
Islam, p. 145.

[^99]: An example of this policy can be found in a sermon by a Friday
communal prayer leader of Aba Sufiyah Mosque, Shaykh Ubaydullah, early
in the month of Ramadan of the later years of the Ottoman caliphate, “…
Here I repeated what I said before, that all the people, other than the
poor, the handicapped and the blind, who are among them, the sheikhs who
claim that they are inheritors of the Prophet (S), the teachers, muftis,
judges, heads of Sufi sects, dervishes, merchants, craftsmen and all the
people, have become apostades according to the Qur’an, are among the
hypocrites and it is necessary to kill them because they have
intentionally abandoned jihad with wealth and body, for whose proof
there are thousands of Qur’anic verses. It is necessary to make them
faithful again by: First, making them personally appear in battlefields.
Secondly, they shall give half of their wealth to the seat of the
Turkish caliphate so that the Turks can take revenge on their domestic
and foreign enemies… If they fail to do so, i.e. to give half of their
wealth to the government, their reconversion to the faith is not
accepted and, on the Day of Resurrection, they will be resurrected with
apostates and infidels and will go to hell…” Thawrah al-‘Arab didd
al-Atrak, p. 224, from p. 25, Qawm Jadid (The New People).

[^100]: Ma‘alim al-Khilafah fi’l-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami, p. 11. The
elaborate account of the story can be found in the book Al-Bilad
al-‘Arabiyyah wa’d-Dawlah al-‘Uthmaniyyah by Sati‘ al-Husari, the famous
Arab nationalist theoretician. Pages 300-1 of Al-Fikr as-Siyasi
ash-Shi‘i thus quote part of the story, “Sultan Salim became the leader
of the Sunnis and took a fatwa from the evil scholars to the effect that
Shi‘ites are not Muslims and it is necessary to kill them. He,
therefore, ordered the beheading of any person within his territory who
was known to be a Shi‘ite.” p. 38. Ha’iri quotes Sanders on Sultan Salim
and his actions as saying, “During the 8 years of his reign—918-927
A.H—the Sultan attacked Iran and, from 920 A.H. onwards, he conquered
Kurdistan and Azerbaijan, killing or jailing anyone within his territory
who was known to be a Shi‘ite. Sunni clerics had said that killing a
Shi‘ite is more appropriate than killing 70 Christians. According to an
account, 40,000 Shi‘ites were killed in those events.” Journal of the
Faculty of Literature & Humanities, Mashhad University, serial nos.
57-58, pp. 5, 6.

[^101]: For exmaple, although the Seljuks for various reasons had an
extensive anti-Shi‘ite policy (Nizam al-Wizarah fi’l-Dawlah
al-‘Abbasiyyah, p. 47), and Khajé Nezamolmolk considered them to be
infidels, saying, “Kill them whenever you see them.”, or “He ordered
that the heretics be taken to the rostrums, their heads be uncovered…and
it be said to them, ‘You are the enemies of the religion.’”. At the same
time, however, one of the great Shi‘ite theologians of that time,
Abdoljalil Qazvini, says in appreciation of the religious deeds of the
Seljuks, “The truth is that, throughout the world, whatever of Islam
that appears in schools, mosques, Sufi monasteries, rostrums, good
traditions and rejection of heresies, is indebted to the power of Seljuk
sword.” Majalleh-ye Daneshkadeh-ye Adabiyyat wa ‘Ulum-e Insani (Journal
of the Faculty of Literature and Humanities), serial no. 56, pp. 744-5,
quoting An-Naqz wa Siyasatnameh. There are many such examples in Shi‘ite
history although contrary examples are rare. For example, “When Nader
Shah attempted in 1741 to convince the Ottoman Sultan to accept Shi‘ism
as the fifth branch of the religion, he went so far as to accept to call
him ‘the caliph of Islam’, but the Sultan did not accept this.

[^102]: In many cases, Shi‘ites were under pressure, were beaten and
killed by people other than the sultans. The evil clergy had a great
role in this. They deceived the public and provoked them in the name of
defending the religion against Shi‘ites and, principally, against those
who did not have beliefs similar to theirs, “Abu Muhammad Hasan ibn ‘Ali
ibn Khalaf Barbahari, the chief of the Baghdad Hanbalites, has special
views and would treat harshly anyone that opposed his views and
opinions, having his companions treat the people violently, even
plundering their houses and bothering them in their trades and
terrorizing whomever that would not accept what he said. “One of the
things Barbahari did was prohibiting mourning and dirge singing about
Imam Husayn and the pilgrimages to his shrine in Karbala. He would order
the killing of the dirge singers. Once there was a dirge singer known as
Khilb, who was a master in his job and had a good voice. I [Tanukhi]
heard him in the house of one of the chiefs. At that time, no body would
dare mourning on Imam Husayn in public. Dirges were also rimited on
mourning on Imam Husayn and the Prophet’s Family. However, when
Barbahari found out about this, he ordered searching for and killing of
the dirge singer.” The Wahhabis, p. 26. To find more examples on what
Barbahari and his advocates did, see ibid., pp. 26-33 on the dispute
with Abu’l-Hasan Ash‘ari and his views, beliefs, actions and the end of
his stories. See Tabaqat al-Hanabilah, vol. 2, pp. 18-45.

[^103]: The fact is that, other than the mentioned factors, there was
another religious factor that would bring the clergy closer to the
Safavid. The Safavid themselves were Sufis and had Sufi attitudes. It
was with their help and devotion that they took the power and,
therefore, they appreciated the Prophet (S) and his family. Many Shi‘ite
clerics in that time used this interest to convert them to Shi‘ism.
Their approach was for carrying out this task. It appears that Shaykh
Baha’i and his father were among these clerics.

[^104]: The story of the persistence of this fatwa and its consequences
can be found in the magazine Turathuna, no. 6, pp. 38-41, and in
Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah fi Ta’lif al-Ummah, pp. 143-7. To find other
examples, see the same magazine, pp. 32-61.

[^105]: Turathuna, no. 6, p. 40.

[^106]: Tahawwul wa Thubat (Development and Stability), pp. 161-5.

[^107]: An example of the perception of the clerics about the
intellectuals of those days, which indicates their reality as well, can
be found in these words of Sayyid Jamaluddin, “These atheists are not
like the atheists of Europe because one who abandons the religion in
western countries will still remain a patriot and his zeal to defend his
country against foreigners will not be affected and he will be ready to
give his life for the interests of his country but Ahmad Khan and his
advocates, along with their propaganda for the people to abandon their
religion, have made the people indifferent to their country and prepare
them to accept foreign domination and try to wipe off any religious or
national determination… not for being highly rewarded but for having a
mean life and mean benefits. This is how an eastern atheist can be
identified from a western atheist, i.e. meanness and humiliation after
heresy and infidelity.” Al-‘Urwah al-Wuthqa, pp. 572-5, quoted from
Al-Fikr al-Islami al-Hadith Waslatuh bi’l-Isti‘mar al-Gharbi, p. 43.
Al-Minar, issue of 13 April 1925, p. 31, quoting from Muhammad ‘Amarah’s
introduction to Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm, pp. 8-9. Concerning the
excitement after the fall of caliphate and the supports for the
assembly, see ibid., pp. 7-14.

[^108]: Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 15-164.

[^109]: Ibid., pp. 169-184.

[^110]: In the sociopolitical developments of the Shi‘ite history, the
epic of Ashura has been of the utmost importance. This is truer about
our time. In the Shi‘ite World, at least in Iran, in the contemporary
history there has always been a need for revolutionary thoughts and
solutions for changing the political destiny. For example, the unclear
stance of Malik ibn Anas towards Muhammad Nafs Zakiyyah is very likely
due to this same point. The people of Medina wanted to support Muhammad,
but they had already sworn allegiance to Mansur. Malik said that an
allegiance could not be achieved with reservations. Therefore, the
Medina people surrounded Muhammad, as a result of which Malik was beaten
on the orders of the emir of Medina, so badly that his shoulder blade
was broken. However, despite all these, when he was asked about the
permission of rising up against the ruler, he said, “If it is an
uprising against ‘Umar ibn ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz, it is not allowed.” In another
citation, ‘it is not allowed’ has been replaced by ‘God kill them, and
if it is not an uprising against a person like him, let God take revenge
on him through another tyrant, and then both will be taken revenge on.”
Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i, p. 321. To find other examples of the
resistance of the cleric scholars against the wishes of the rulers, see
Al-Islam bayn al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun, pp. 104-222. One of the people
introduced by the author is Sa‘id ibn Musayyib. He resisted
‘Abdu’l-Malik, who wanted to take allegiance for both his children,
Walid and Sulayman at the same time, saying, “The Prophet (S) had
prohibited double allegiance.” He suffered much torture for this but did
not submit. Adopting such positions against the sultan is essentially
different from the position that, for example, Imam Husayn adopted
against Yazid or Zayd ibn ‘Ali against Hisham. Almost none of the Sunni
scholars have admitted unacceptability of rulers whose wishes they
resisted. At the most, they would refuse to accept his demand.

[^111]: For example, Al-Islam bayn al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun, pp. 115-32.
However, what mattered was that Shi‘ites and Sunnis have more or less
different interpretations of the duty of a religious scholar. This
difference is mainly or rather entirely due to their position against
the ruler and that they should not remain silent against his tyranny and
corruption. For example, compare the duties and responsibilities of a
religious scholar the way they have been provided in the words of Imam
Husayn. Tuhaf al-‘Uqul, pp. 171-2, and the way they have been defined by
Ibn Hanbal. A‘lam al-Mawqi‘in, 1, p. 9, citing Ar-Radd ‘ala’z-Zanadiqah
wa’l-Jahmiyyah by Ibn Hanbal.

[^112]: Al-A’immah al-Arba‘ah, pp. 140-80, and Manaqib al-Imam Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal, pp. 397-437.

[^113]: The fact that one should not rise up against the sultan and has
to be patient on his oppression is unanimously agreed on by Sunni
jurisprudents. Shafi‘i, Malik and Ibn Hanbal have confirmed this.
Intifadat ash-Shi‘ah ‘Ibar at-Tarikh, p. 98. In his Sharh al-‘Aqa’id, he
cites this opinion from Abu Hanifah and then says, “After the Senior
Caliphs, corruption and tyranny emerged from caliphs and rulers while
[our] righteous ancestors followed them, standing behind them to say
their regular and Friday communal prayers and did not rise up against
them.” Ibid., p. 99. Those who in general do not allow such opposition
have resorted to this argument. For further explanation, see ibid., pp.
97-107, and also Tabaqat al-Hanabilah, vol. 2, p. 22.

[^114]: To find out about the urgent need of Muslim youth to a
revolutionary Islamic ideology, for example see the various issues of
magazines An-Nadhir, Ath-Thawrah al-Islamiyyah, Al-Muntaliq, Ad-Da‘wah
and the other magazines and publications of Muslim armed groups.

[^115]: Concerning the perception of Sunni revolutionary youth about the
ruling regimes, see the criticisms of ‘Utaybi, who, on the 1st of
Muharram 1400 A.H, seized the Ka‘bah house, about the Sa‘udi rulers and
even the person of ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz Baz, who interceded to free him from
jail in 1978 in Faith and Power, pp. 180-5.

[^116]: Concerning the effects of modernization on Islamic societies,
especially in big cities, and in general the thoughts and ideals of
young people, see Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp.
273-95, and also the researches of Sa‘d ad-Din Ibrahim in this regard,
and Idi’uluzhi wa Inqilab (Ideology and Revolution), pp. 169-178.

[^117]: As to the quality and amount of pressure that Islam has borne in
the 50’s and 60’s, especially in the Arab World and Egypt, see Al-Fikr
al-Islami al-Hadith wa Silatih bi’l-Afkar al-Gharbi.

[^118]: Concerning the differences of these two periods and these two
experiences, for example see the story of the intellectual and doctrinal
developments of one of the contemporary Muslim intellectuals, which he
recounts honestly and frankly. Min al-‘Aqidah ila’th-Thawrah, pp. 46-8.

[^119]: See the discussions and arguments of ‘Abdu’r-Razzaq in Al-Islam
wa Usul al-Hukm, where he seeks to remove caliphate as a religious
principle or even a religious affair. He denies the consensus of
scholars in this respect, and indirectly the partisans of consensus. His
critics in general have relied on this and have rejected his opinions
from this point of view. For example, see the seven criticisms that the
al-Azhar Faculty made of him, based on them he was tried and then
expellected from al-Azhar. Introduction by Muhammad ‘Amarah to Al-Islam
wa Usul al-Hukm, p. 21. Also see the book Sadd Bab al-Ijtihad wa ma
Tarattab ‘alayh by ‘Abdu’l-Karim al-Khatib, which makes similar
criticisms of ‘Abdu’r-Razzaq from a different position. His main goal is
defending the opening of the way for new interpreations, thereby
overcoming the religious crisis, contributing to religious awareness of
Muslims and helping further Islamicize the society. Ibid., p. 7.

[^120]: Concering the views of ‘Utaybi, see Al-Harikah al-Islamiyyah
fi’l-Jazirah al-‘Arabiyyah, pp. 119-30.

[^121]: For example, see the fatherly sympathetic advices of Yusuf
al-Qardawi in his book As-Sahawah al-Islamiyyah bayn al-Jumud
wa’t-Tatarruf, in which he asks the youth to put aside extremist methods
and interpretations in the religion and not to go beyond the principles
and rules of the religion.

[^122]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 77.

[^123]: Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm with an introduction by Muhammad
‘Amarah, p. 9, citing Al-Minar, issue of 23 April 1925/29 Ramadan 1343
A.H., p. 31.

[^124]: Majalleh-ye Daneshkadeh-ye Adabiyyat wa ‘Ulum-e Insani (Journal
of Faculty of Literature and Humanities), Mashhad University, serial no.
57-8, pp. 4-8.

[^125]: Ahmad Shawqi, the ‘King of Egypt’s Poets’, was especially fond
of the Ottomans and even Turks as the supporters of Islam and Islamism.
In his divan, Ash-Shawqiyyat, one can find numerous poems full of epics
and feelings that were said on different occasions in praise of the
Ottomans and Turks. For example, somewhere he praises Turks and calls
them the ‘noblemen of all nations’, asking them not to follow the
thoughts of the Young Turks and not remain backward and tired and rather
be dynamic, active and determined people (pp. 206-7) while some other
place in his poems he rejoices at the sight of their navy with the flag
of Islam waving (pp. 208-11). He greatly admires the war of Turks
against the Greeks and calls their commander, Mustafa Kamal, ‘the
Turkish Khalid’ (pp. 44, 258). Even where Sharif Husayn claims to be the
caliph, he sends a long poem to Sultan ‘Abdu’l-Majid (1194) and asks him
as the main master of Mecca and Medina to eliminate Sharif (p. 194). One
of his most attractive and emotional poems was said when caliphate was
terminated by Ata Turk, which begins like this, “The wedding songs have
turned into dirges and the message of death was brought in the cheers of
happiness.” In this poem, he asks the Muslims to remind Ata Turk to stop
what he is doing (pp. 90-93). Compare these poems with those in praise
of Sharif Husayn, the Arab Empire, and in criticism of the Ottomans and
Turks. Thawrah al-‘Arab didd al-Atrak, p. 354 and onwards.

[^126]: Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm with an introduction by Muhammad
‘Amarah, p. 8.

[^127]: Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm, p. 9, citing the newspaper Al-Ahram of
12 May 1925, the magazine Al-Minar of 23 April 1925, p. 31. Concerning
the excitement following the fall of caliphate, and the supports that
were given to the Assembly, see ibid., pp. 7-14.

[^128]: Ibid., p. 17, citing Al-Minar, vol. 2, issue of 21 July 1925, p.
100.

[^129]: Ibid., p. 13, citing the newspaper As-Siyasah, issue of 22 July
1925.

[^130]: See Charles D. Smiths, Islam and the Search of Social Order in
Modern Egypt, p. 1.

[^131]: In those days, some were tempted to take the position of the
caliph, including the king of Egypt, Malik Fu’ad. Introduction to
Al-Islam wa Usul al-Hukm, pp. 35-145. Another of them was Sharif Husayn
in Mecca. Thawrah al-‘Arab didd al-Atrak, pp. 312-53. The interesting
thing is that Rashid Rida and his fellow thinkers nominated the Imam of
Yemen for caliph as they saw that he had the entire politico-religious
conditions necessary. Andisheh-ha-ye Siyasi dar Islam-e Mu‘asir
(Political Thoughts in Contemporary Islam), p. 137.

[^132]: “Caliphate is usually understood as meaning ruling over an
Islamic government. It must even be said that ‘caliphate’ means an
Islamic government. The consensus is that the head of the government can
be called a caliph”. Ma‘alim al-Khilafah fi’l-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami,
p. 30.

[^133]: For example, see Al-Fikr al-Islami al-Hadith fi Muwajihah
al-Afkar al-Gharbiyyah, pp. 7-42.

[^134]: See the response of Hasan al-Banna when he was asked what he
wanted. Min Usul al-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami, p.11. His response
provides the primary signs of the realization of the concept of Islamic
government and its idealization.

[^135]: Concerning the nature and history of western influence and laws
in Islamic countries, especially within the Ottoman and Indian
territories, see Islamic Surveys, A History of Islamic Law, pp. 149-62.

[^136]: Al-Islam bayn al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun, pp. 15-25.

[^137]: H. A. Gibband Harebd Brown, Islamic Society and the West, vol.
1.

[^138]: For example, see the various issues of the newspaper Qanun (Law)
published by Mirza Malkam Khan.

[^139]: ‘Abdu’l-‘Aziz al-Badri thus explains the story of the influence
of the new laws in the Ottoman territory, “… In 1957, new laws including
criminal and civil laws began to influence. However, these laws were not
practiced before the Shaykh al-Islam agreed to them, who issued a fatwa
that they did not contradict the shari‘ah. The cleric scholars did not
deem the entrance of the new civil laws into Islamic countries as
religiously acceptable. Therefore, they compiled the book Al-Majallah,
which was a collection of laws relating to transactions, which the
authors considered to be documenting the shari‘ah. Al-Islam bayn
al-‘Ulama’ wa’l-Hakimun, p. 17, and also Tahrir al-Majallah, vol. 1.

[^140]: William Shepard, The Faith of a Modern Intellectual.

[^141]: Ibid., p. 4.

[^142]: One of the first people who began political and somehow
revolutionary activities in the Sunni world was Hasan al-Banna, the
founder of the Ikhwan al-Muslimin movement. He taught his followers, “If
you are asked, ‘What do you call the people to?’, tell them, ‘To the
Islam that was revealed to the Prophet (S), part of which is the
government, and freedom is a duty of its duties. If they say, ‘This is
politics.’, say, ‘This is Islam and we do not make such divisions.’ If
they say, ‘You are calling to a revolution.’, say, ‘We claim the truth
and peace, which we believe in and are proud of. Then, if you stand
against us and want to stop us from fulfil our calling our call, know
that God has allowed us to defend ourselves and you will be
oppressors.’” Min Usul al-Fikr as-Siyasi al-Islami, p. 11, citing Hasan
al-Banna’s book, Bayn al-Ams wa’l-Yawm.

[^143]: Ma‘alim fi’t-Tariq, 8-11.

[^144]: Even a committed independent sholar like the author of the book
Ma‘alim al-Khilafah al-Islamiyyah, who in his book criticizes the views
of many before him concerning caliphate, its qualifications, how it can
be established and the necessity or non-necessity of opposing it, is not
willing to oppose the ruling system although his definition of caliphate
is more logical and progressive than those of many of his predecessors
and even contemporaries, “Ruling over all the Muslims in the world in
order to administer the shari‘ah and carry out the call of Islam to the
world”, ibid., p. 30. He also says, “The ummah has power and, when it
pledges allegiance to a caliph for the latter’s ruling over the
government and to match Islam to the everyday life scientifically, the
caliph will represent the ummah in its power because the ummah wishes to
enforce the laws of Islam and the caliph represents the ummah in doing
so. Therefore, one is appointed caliph only if the ummah pledges
allegiance to him willingly and voluntarily, which constitutes a reason
for the caliph’s representing the ummah.” Ibid., p. 38. Regarding rising
up against the ruler, he says, “If the uprising results in bloodshed
between Muslims, it is not allowed as disturbing the country is
religiously forbidden and an action that results in a forbidden thing is
forbidden based on the rule ‘The means of the forbidden is forbidden.’
Therefore, it is necessary to obey him [the ruler] and to take part in a
jihad by his side in order to put down any disturbance. He will the emir
but not the caliph, unless he has taken allegiance from Muslims with
their satisfaction and without their reservations.” Ibid., p. 126.

[^145]: One of the outstanding committed Sunni cleric scholars in our
time, Shaykh As‘ad Bayyud at-Tamimi, says, “The purpose of the Islamic
government is to enforce the shari‘ah.” This has been often quoted from
him. Also see Tahawwul wa Thubat (Development and Stability), pp. 120-1.

[^146]: For further explanation, see Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and
the Pharaoh), pp. 75-192.

[^147]: The implicit response by many to such criticisms, which are in
turn the result of new expectations brought about by the newly created
socio-economic developments and politico-intellectual necessities, has
been provided humbly by a virtuous Sunni cleric scholar, Muhammad Diya’
ad-Din ar-Rays, many years before the criticisms were so severe. Indeed,
he is addressing non-Muslim criticics or non-believer Muslims. However,
it is an answer to all those who have criticized Sunni clergy for their
political position throughout the history, whether they are committed
Muslims or uncommitted non-Muslims. “Some writers, and especially
orientalists, accuse Sunnis and provide a picture of them that neither
conforms to the reality and nor favors them. They say, ‘They were
inclined towards the rulers and were in agreement with their practice
and cooperated with them in what they did. People like Hasan Basri,
Sha‘bi, Sa‘id ibn Jubayr and Sa‘id ibn al-Musayyib during the Umayyad
and Abu Hanifah, Malik and Ahmad during the ‘Abbasid periods were in
conflict with the policy of the rulers and emirs of their time and even
refused to accept the governmental order with which they had reached
power.” An-Nazariyyat as-Siyasiyyah al-Islamiyyah, p. 71. Somewhere
else, he explains the reasons why they were indifferent to political
issues, “Sunnis and the people believed that an uprising and a
revolution that is not expected to succeed will create disturbance,
anarchy, bloodshed, dispersion and crimes. Therefore, they preferred to
stay out of politics and, instead, have scientific activities that were
more useful and stable.” Ibid., p. 71. Providing further explanation, he
says, Sunnis left it to the Rebels, Shi‘ites, Mu‘tazilites and
suspensionists to discusss and contemplate imamate and the relevant
issues. They did not develop, define and limit their views in this
regard until later when the former gave them up. However, this does not
mean that they lacked political opinions or were content with the ruling
politics, whether the Umayyad or the ‘Abbasid ones.” Ibid., p. 70. For
further explanation, see ibid., pp. 69-75.

[^148]: This point and even deadlock is well explained by Gibb, “Thus,
it emerges that, while one can legally depose the caliph, there is no
legal means to do it. This is not only Mawardi’s problem, but a problem
in Sunni political thought up to his time. This confirms that the Sunni
political theory is in fact the rationalization of the history of the
Islamic ummah while there is no theory without it.” For further
explanation, see Nazariyyat al-Imamat ‘inda ash-Shi‘ah al-Imamiyyah, pp.
149-63.

[^149]: Al-Fikr as-Siyasi ash-Shi‘i, pp. 116-266

[^150]: See the book Sadd Bab al-Ijtihad wa ma Tarattab ‘alayh, pp. 5-8.
The author himself is one of the religious scholars who approaches the
intellectual and religious stagnation of the religious scholars and the
resulting problems more honestly and sympathetically. Also see the views
of Amin concerning the need to open the doors to religious
interpretation in William Shepard, The Faith of a Modern Muslim
Intellectual.

[^151]: Concerning the modernization of the religious educational system
and its consequences, see the views of ‘Abduh in Al-Fikr al-Islami
al-Hadith wasailathu bi’l-Isti‘mar al-Gharbi, pp. 176-81, in which he
provides an interesting description of the mentality of the cleric
scholars in al-Azhar, “If a book reaches the hands of these scholrs in
which something is written that they do not know, or if they do not find
out about the intentions of the writer, or if they find little about it,
they will reject it and will refuse to accept it. If they accept it,
they will interpret it with their own knowledge, which is in fact
distorting it.” Also, see the views of Khalid Muhammad Khalid in
Ash-Shi‘ah fi’l-Mizan, pp. 375-8, and also Wu‘‘az as-Salatin, 291-302
concerning its consequences, especially see Payambar wa Fir‘un (The
Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp. 102-15; also, Charles D. Smith, Islam and
the Search of Social Order in Modern Egypt, pp. 109-13; and also Fazlur
Rahman, Islam and Modernity, pp. 63-70.

[^152]: Payambar wa Fir‘un (The Prophet and the Pharaoh), pp. 273-95.
Better examples can be found in the various issues of the magazine
An-Nadhir, especially in years 1981-1985.


