The Believer of the Pharaohâ€™s People
====================================

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

***And a believing man of Firon's people, who hid his faith, said: What!
Will you slay a man because he says: My Lord is Allah, and indeed he has
brought to you clear arguments from your Lord? And if he be a liar, on
him will be his lie, and if he be truthful, there will befall you some
of that which he threatens you (with); surely Allah does not guide him
who is extravagant, a liar. (The Holy Quran, Shakir 40:28)***

***And he, who believed, said: O my people follow me, I will guide you
to the right course; O my people, this life of the world is only a
(passing) enjoyment, and surely the hereafter is the abode to settle.
Whoever does an evil, he shall not be recompensed (with aught) but the
like of it, and whoever does good, whether male or female, and he is a
believer, these shall enter the garden, in which they shall be given
sustenance without measure. And, O my people! How is it that I call you
to salvation and you call me to the fire? (The Holy Quran, Shakir
40:38-41)***

***You call on me that I should disbelieve in Allah and associate with
Him that of which I have no knowledge, and I call you to the Mighty, the
most Forgiving; No doubt that what you call me to has no title to be
called to in this world, nor in the hereafter, and that our turning back
is to Allah, and that the extravagant are the inmates of the fire; So
you shall remember what I say to you, and I entrust my affair to Allah,
Surely Allah sees the servants. So Allah protected him from the evil
(consequences) of what they planned, and the most evil punishment
overtook Firon's people. (The Holy Quran, Shakir 40:41-45)***


