The Final Word about the Faithfulness of Abu Talib
==================================================

The faithfulness of Abu Talib was so clear and certain that it did not
need any evidence to be proved except that if you wanted to certify for
the blind that the sun was shining in the sky and sending its rays and
that the day was bright!

All Abu Talib’s sayings, his continuous jihad he had done for the sake
of Islam and all the witnesses of the Prophet (S), his pure progeny and
the companions confirmed his faith, his belief in monotheism and in the
mission of the Prophet (S).

Since all the evidences had confirmed Abu Talib’s faith in Islam, all
the Shia agreed upon that with no any bit of doubt or suspect. Whoever
said other than that is not a Shia especially when the infallible imams
had confirmed that with their irrefutable witnesses.

So Shiism and believing that Abu Talib was unbeliever would never meet
together; for whoever said that Abu Talib was unbeliever would deny the
sayings of the infallible imams of the Shia when confirming the
faithfulness of Abu Talib.

Would he, who objected his imams, be a Shia?
Therefore, the faithfulness of Abu Talib was one of the necessities of
Shiism. All the Shia said that and many of the Zaydis.[^1] Some of the
great personalities of the Muítazilites said that too.[^2] Among them
was Sheikh Abul Qassim al-Balkhi and Abu Ja’far al-Iskafi.[^3]

Many of the saints and ulema said that it was proved for them that Abu
Talib was a Muslim[^4] and that he would be safe from punishment; among
them were al-Qurtubi, as-Sabki, ash-Sha’arani, and many others. They
said: “This is what we believe in before Allah.”[^5]

Imam Ahmed bin al-Husayn al-Moossily al-Hanafi, who was known as ibn
Wahshi, said: “Hating Abu Talib is unbelief.”[^6] So was said by
al-Ajhoori, who was one of the Malikite imams, in his fatwas.[^7]

At-Talmassani said when mentioning Abu Talib: “He should not be
mentioned except with protecting the Prophet (S) because he protected
and supported the Prophet (S) in saying and doing. Criticizing Abu Talib
would harm the Prophet (S) and he, who harmed the Prophet (S), would be
unbeliever and the unbeliever should be killed.”[^8]

Abu Tahir said: “He, who hates Abu Talib, is unbeliever.”[^9]

Dahlan said: “Believing in the sayings of these imams that Abu Talib was
a faithful is safer for one before his God especially that the evidences
proves that as it has been mentioned by al-Barazanji.”[^10]

As-Sayooti had written a book about this subject with this title:
(Bughyat at-Talib li Eeman Abu Talib) the aim of the seeker for the
faithfulness of Abu Talib).[^11] The title of the book was enough to
show the thought of the author about the subject.

Zayni Dahlan had written a book named (Assna al-Matalib), which we
referred to in a previous chapter, about the same subject.

We don’t want to quote all the names of the authors and their books
written about the subject because they are so much many.

As for that, who thought that Abu Talib was unbeliever, he deviated from
the right way. He fabricated those accusations and lies and received his
immediate fees in this life but he would receive his other fees in Hell
and then he would know that the lowest bottom of Hell would be for whom!

And then came those, who saw the fabrication but didn’t try to draw its
cover for they knew well what they would uncover.

We were so astonished to see those people denying the faithfulness of
Abu Talib in spite of that there were much many clear evidences
confirming it whereas at the same time we found such a tradition:

Ash-Shareed said: “One day I rode behind the Prophet (S)”. He asked me:
“Do you have something of the poetry of Umayya bin Abus Salt?”

I said: Yes.
He said: Come on!
I recited him a verse.
He said: Come on!
I recited another verse.
He said: come on!

I kept on reciting until I recited one hundred verses.

He said: “He was about to become a Muslim!” or he said: “He was about to
be a Muslim with his poetry.”[^12]

Zayd bin Amr set out looking for the religion of Abraham (as). He took
his way towards Sham and then from Sham to Mecca but he died on his way
to Mecca. It was related about Aaíisha her saying: “The Prophet (S)
said: I entered into Paradise and found that there were two large trees
for Zayd bin Amr.”[^13]

It was mentioned that Saíeed bin Zayd bin Amr bin Nufayl and his cousin
Omar bin al-Khattab said to the Prophet (S): “Do you beg forgiveness for
Zayd bin Amr?” The Prophet (S) said: “Yes! He would be resurrected as a
nation by himself.”[^14]

It was mentioned too that the Prophet (S) had said: “May Allah have
mercy upon Qass bin Saíida. He would be resurrected in the Day of
Resurrection as one nation or as a nation by himself.”[^15]

So what was this contradiction?

Why was the Prophet (S) so generous to the non-relatives, who had never
done him any favor, and was so miser towards his uncle, who had done him
great favors since his childhood until he became a prophet? Hadn’t his
Lord revealed to him:

***Is the reward of goodness aught but goodness? (The Holy Quran, Shakir
55:6o)***

Then why would the Prophet (S) reward his uncle with else than goodness?

After all we found that accusing Abu Talib of being unbeliever would
harm the Prophet (S) and this would be a great sin that could never be
forgiven.

Allah the Almighty said:

***…and (as for) those who molest the Messenger of Allah, they shall
have a painful punishment. (The Holy Quran, Shakir 9:61)***

***…and it does not behoove you that you should give trouble to the
Messenger of Allah. (The Holy Quran, Shakir 33:53)***

***Surely (as for) those who speak evil things of Allah and His
Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world and the hereafter, and He
has prepared for them a chastisement bringing disgrace. (The Holy Quran,
Shakir 33:57)***

Hence we found that at-Talmassani had said that the one, who accused Abu
Talib of being unbeliever, should be killed because it would harm the
Prophet (S) and whoever harmed the Prophet (S) should be killed.

The Muslims agreed upon killing the one, who harmed the Prophet (S),
according to the Quranic verses, which confirmed that whoever harmed the
Prophet (S) would be in Hell for ever.

No harm was be caused to the Prophet (S) more than defaming his uncle
and supporter and accusing him of being unbeliever whereas he was a
sincere believer and a nonesuch supporter.

They mentioned that one day Subayía bint Abu Lahab had come to the
Prophet (S) complaining that people often said to her: “You are the
daughter of the firewood of Hell (for she was the daughter of Abu
Lahab).”

The Prophet (S) stood up angrily and said: “Why do some people harm me
with my relatives? He, who harms me, will harm Allah.”[^16]

What kind of kinship with Abu Lahab, who had cut every relation and
perished every connection by harming the Prophet (S) so severely, it
was!

They also mentioned that the Prophet (S) had said: “Don’t curse the dead
lest you harm the live.”[^17]

They determined that: “Harming the Prophet (S) is unbelief. Whoever does
that shall be killed if he doesn’t repent.”[^18]

The Malikites thought that whoever harmed the Prophet (S) should be
killed even if he repented.[^19]

If it was so according to their thought, then wouldn’t defaming Abu
Talib and accusing him wrongly harm the Prophet (S)?

It would be enough sin to make its committer deserve to be killed as
punishment in this world and to be in Hell for ever as punishment in the
afterlife.

Therefore as-Sayooti said that their purpose behind defaming Abu Talib
was to defame Ali himself but their arrow missed and hit the Prophet’s
parents; Abdullah and Aamina, and grandfather Abdul Muttalib.

Any how the Prophet (S) and Ali (as) were as one soul and Abu Talib was
to the Prophet (S) as was Abdullah to him and Fatima (Aliís mother) was
to the Prophet (S) as Aamina was.

As-Sayooti said: “I didn't pretend that the matter of the parents was
agreed upon by the consensus but there was disagreement[^20] about it
like the other matters, which were disagreed upon, but I chose the
sayings of those, who thought that the Prophet's parents were pure, and
this was the most suitable.

Be cautious of mentioning them (the Prophet’s parents) with anything bad
because this may harm the Prophet (S)[^21] because the traditional
custom determined that defaming one’s parents would harm the son
undoubtedly.”[^22]

If it would defame the Prophet (S) when one of his forefathers was a
polytheist, then definitely it would defame him to be brought up in a
house of a polytheist,[^23] who looked after him, assisted him, defended
him and defended his religion and defended the followers of his
religion. Then the Prophet (S) with all his glory and success would be
indebted to that polytheist man! What a great value and a high position
that polytheist would have!

Hadn’t the Prophet (S) said: “O Allah! Don’t make a dissolute or an
unbeliever have a chance of getting my kindness!”

If the polytheist father would defame the faithful son, so the
polytheism of Abu Talib would defame his son Ali! Definitely Abu Talib
was accused of being polytheist just to defame Ali in order to perish
his virtues and high qualities, which no one at all had save Ali. No one
of the companions’ fathers was faithful nor was they themselves free
from polytheism at some time of their lives whereas Ali was pure, since
his birth in the Kaaba, whether in his lineage or his beliefs.

Hence, we found how they fabricated different traditions pretending that
some of the companionsí fathers were Muslims.

They fabricated such traditions besides the tradition talking about the
polytheism of Abu Talib just to lighten the scales of Ali (as) and to
make the scales of others outweigh!

Even if those traditions were true, the two scales of the balance would
never be equal in any case that their fathers were polytheists and then
became Muslims -if sincerely- while Abu Talib was monotheist where
polytheism could never find any outlet to his heart at all.

The same was fabricated against the antecedence of Ali’s faithfulness in
the Prophet’s mission. They fabricated as possible as they could until
they reached a point that they couldn’t deny the truth but they tried to
clothe it. Ignorantly they tried by saying: “The first of boys, who
believed in Muhammad, was Ali, the first of men was Abu Bakr and the
first of women was Khadeeja.”

If it was said that somebody became a Muslim, that was because that
somebody was unbeliever and then became a Muslim but this was not true
concerning Ali, who had never been unbeliever for a moment of his life
nor had he bowed before an idol! He always raised his head upwards
looking at the greatness of the great Creator. He had been faithful
since the first day. He had never been unbeliever and then turned to be
faithful. He had never prostrated himself before anything save Allah.

Therefore discussing the subject of antecedence in being faithful
wouldn’t be fit about Ali (as).

Then if the unbelief of Abu Talib would defame his son Ali, it would, at
the same time, defame the Prophet (S) as long as Muhammad and Ali were
as one soul. They participated in having the same qualities of the house
of deep-rooted faithfulness.

Muhammad and Ali had to be in one degree of virtues and qualities except
for the prophecy, which distinguished Muhammad from Ali, in order to be
united as one self.

Therefore Abu Talib must be like Abdullah and Fatima must be like Aamina
either in faithfulness or unfaithfulness so that the parents were to be
united as the sons were united; so Muhammad and Ali were but one!

If the Prophet (S) would be harmed when it was said to Sabee’a, whose
father and mother were cursed by the holy Quran, that she was the
daughter of the firewood of Hell, then how would he be when his uncle
was accused of what he was free from?

Wouldn’t that harm him so much because it was unjust accusation and
violation of the truth against his nearest relative; Abu Talib, who was
the kindest one to him and who supported him until the last moment of
his life? Wasn’t that required the Prophet (S) to be loyal towards the
favors of his kind uncle and to suffer when something harmed his uncle;
the faithful, the supporter and the nearest relative to him?

It also did harm the equivalent of his soul; Ali, whom whatever harmed,
would harm the Prophet (S) and whatever harmed the Prophet (S) would
harm Allah as the true prophetic tradition said.

And if the intercession benefited all those great numbers of people,
most of whom deserved to be in Hell, wouldn’t it benefit his uncle even
if he was not faithful as they pretended?

And as long as the Prophet (S) was the kindest one to his relatives as
Onayss had sworn of that and so had every one, who knew the merciful
Muhammad, then would his intercession benefit all those great numbers of
sinful people but it would fail to include his loving uncle, who was to
him like his father and who was the father of Ali; his own self, his
beloved brother, his son-in-law and his guardian?

But Abu Talib, as we said and so did every fair one, saw the rightness
and followed it and so he would enter into Paradise deservingly as a
reward for his deeds with no need for intercession, which would benefit
those whose doings didn’t save them from the torment of Hell.

He, who did his duties rightfully, would deserve to be in Paradise
according to the justice of Allah the Beneficent with no need for any
intercession.

If Abu Talib would not enter into Paradise, then for whom would it be?

In fact for whom would it be if Abu Talib wasn’t the first to be in it
rewardingly?

If Abu Talib entered into Hell, as they raved, then who would be safe
from it- even the prophets? Then Hell would not be feared, the values
would be perished punishment would be random, justice would be lost and
judgment would be unfair! Allah forbid!

O Allah! Forgive us and do not destroy us for what the fools have done!

***And those who speak evil things of the believing men and the
believing women without their having earned (it), they are guilty indeed
of a false accusation and a manifest sin. (The Holy Quran, Shakir
33:58)***

[^1]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.310, Sheikhul Abtah p. 55, A’yan
ash- Shia, vol. 39 p.135.

[^2]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.310, Sheikhul Abtah p. 55, A’yan
ash- Shia, vol. 39 p.135

[^3]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p.310, A’yan ash-Shia, vol. 39 p.135.

[^4]: As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1 p.87, al-Ghadeer, vol. 7 p.382,
A’yan ash-Shia, vol. 39 p.135.

[^5]: Al-Ghadeer, vol. 7 p.383.

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Al-Ghadeer, vol. 7 p.382.

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Muslim’s Sahih vol.1 p.48-49.

[^13]: As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1 p.96.

[^14]: Ala Hamish as-Seera vol.1 p. 136, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1
p.73, 76, 95.

[^15]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 6 p.57, As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1 p.73,
76, Murooj ath-Thahab vol.1 p.69-70.

[^16]: As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1 p.77.

[^17]: Ibid

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Ibid

[^20]: We don’t think that there was any kind of disagreement upon this
matter. It had been proved by the Quran and the sayings of many scholars
that the Prophet’s parents and grandparents were faithful until they
reached the first faithful Adam (S).

[^21]: There was no any doubt that this would harm the Prophet (S) not
because of the justification of as-Sayooti but because it would wrong
those faithful ones, who were the source of faithfulness and monotheism.

[^22]: As-Seera an-Nabawiyya, vol. 1 p.76.

[^23]: No doubt that a child will be affected by the manners of the
house, in which he is brought up, and that he/she is ready to imitate
the one, who brings him/her up, and definitely that one will be
considered as his/her example.


