Biography of the Author
=======================

Full name: sheikh Abdullah bin sheikh Ali bin Hasan bin Mehdi bin Kadhim
bin Ali bin Abdullah al-Khunayzi.

Birth-date: 1350 AH. 1931 AD.
Birth-place: al-Qal’a/al-Qateef.

He went to a local school and learned the holy Quran, reading, writing
and first principles of mathematics in his early years.

He studied the Arabic language with the old style by his brother
Muhammad Sa’eed in 1361 AH.

In the same year, he began to write short stories. He liked writing
stories. He began to poetize stanzas of not more than two verses. He
wrote a book called al-Hadeeqa al-Adabiyya (literature garden). He
divided this book into three parts; poetry, prose and tales, in which he
used old and modern styles.

In the night of 21/11/1363, AH his kind father left to the better world.
It caused him a great shock that affected him so greatly. He felt that
he lost the spring of kindness and sympathy, from which he used to
ladle.

The loss of his father affected him so much. He elegized him in every
occasion with articles and poems but later on he got rid of many of his
articles for his style and thinking advanced much better than before.

He published articles in many newspapers and magazines in Saudi Arabia,
Bahrain, Iraq, Lebanon, and Egypt. The first article he published was in
al-Irfan magazine in 1368 AH.

He tried to work in trade for about one year but he did not succeed. His
loss in trade was because of his indulgence and leniency in getting back
his debts besides that he had no commercial tendency. He was obliged to
close his shop after the loss.

The costs of life forced him to look for a job where he could not devote
himself to the study that his father had wished for him. He did not find
any way except to join a government job. He worked in this job for more
than twenty years.

In 1390, AH, he left his country to Iraq and after some months, his wife
and children joined him there. He lived in the holy Najaf. He bought a
house and kept on the religious study. He studied the books that were
taught in the advanced stages for he thought that he was not in need of
studying the books taught in the primary stages. In fact, he was able to
teach those books himself. He taught many students some of those books.

After this stage, he attended the highest level of study near Imam
Sayyid Abul Qassim al-Khoo’iy, who had a good relation with him and took
much care for him. He (Sayyid Abul Qassim) often appreciated him and
entrusted him with many duties like answering some asking of people for
the legal fatwas, answering some of the letters and some other jobs,
which he was fit for.

In 1401, AH, he went to his country to visit his relatives and friends
but his family remained in Najaf. The war between Iraq and Iran had
broken out two months ago. He couldn’t come back to Iraq. He stayed
there for nearly one year without being able to come back. Then his
family became obliged to go back to the home country. He settled down in
his country performing his religious and national duties.

He taught many people before his emigration to Iraq, during his
emigration and after coming back to his country.

Here are some names of those, who were taught by him in Najaf and
al-Qateef:

a. Ordinary people: Sa’eed al-Khabbaz, Muneer al-Khabbaz, Muhammad
al-Awami, Haydar al-Awami, Majeed ash-Shakhoor, Mehdi ash-Shu’la and
Hashem al-Khabbaz.

b. Sheikhs: Mansoor Musa Tahir, Muhammad Abdullah Kadhim, Nizar Sumbul,
Dhiya’ Sumbol, Abdullah Sumbol, Muhammad Muhammad Husayn, Sadiq
al-Maqeeli, Mehdi al-Awazim, Abdul Adheem ash-Sheikh, Muhammad Obaydan,
Abbas al-Anki, Abbas al-Mahrooss, Muhammad Ali al-Bayyabi, Hasan
as-Saffar, Ibraheem al-Hammood, Sa’d Abus Sa’ood and others.

His works
---------

1. Thikra (memory of) Imam al-Khunayzi (his first work).

2. Thikra az-Za’eem (leader) al-Khunayzi.

3. Abu Talib; the faithful of Quraysh.

4. Ada’una (our performance).

5. Dhaw’un fid Dhil (a light in the shadow).

6. Nasseem wa Zawba’a (breeze and hurricane).

7. Madameek Oqadiyya, in two volumes.

8. Zahrat (flowers), a collection of poetry.

9. Short stories.

10.Suwar min al-Hayat (scenes from the life).

11.The rest of Madameek Oqadiyya.

12.Ibnul Muqarrab: the revolutionary poet.

13.Al-Harakat al-Fikriyya (the intellectual movements) in al-Qateef.

14.La Ikrah (no coercion).

15.Al-Mar’a binadhra Islamiyya (Woman according to the Islamic view).

16.Praying and Fasting during travel according to the Quran and the
Sunna.

17.Autobiography.

18.Ad-Du’a wel Akhlaq fee Madrasat Ahlul Bayt (praying and morals
according to the school of Ahlul Bayt).

19.Alaq min ath-Thikrayat (a shine of memories).

20.As-Sayyid as-Sabzawi Irfaniyyen (mystically).

21.Qitaful Masjid (the fruits of the mosque).

22.A collection of different studies and articles, and other works like
editing his father’s books and other famous books.


