Reference Books
===============

1. The holy Quran

2. Sharh Nahjol Balagha by ibn Abul Hadeed, Dar al-Kutub al-Arabiyya
press, Egypt 1329 AH. 3. Al-Bayan wet Tebyeen by aj-Jahidh, edited by
Hasan as-Sandoobi, al-Istiqama press, Cairo 1366 AH.

4. Musnad of Imam Ahmed bin Hanbal, al-Maymaniyya press, Egypt 1313 AH.

5. Tareekhul Umam wel Mulook by ibn Jareer at-Tabari, al-Istiqama press,
1357 AH/ 1939 AD.

6. Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh by ibnul Atheer ash-Shaybani aj-Jazriy, Egypt
1356 AH.

7. Al-Ghadeer fil Kitab wes Sunna by Sheikh Abdul Husayn al-Ameeni,
al-Haydari press, Tehran 1372 AH.

8. Sahih of Muslim, Muhammad Ali Sabeeh press, Egypt 1324 AH.

9. Mo’awiya bin Abu Sufyan fil Mizan by Abbas al-Aqqad, Cairo 1375 AH.

10. The theses of aj-Jahidh, collected by as-Sandoobi, ar-Rahmaniyya
press, Egypt 1352 AH.

11. Sulh al-Hasan by Sheikh Radhi Aal Yaseen, az-Zahra’ press, Baghdad
1372 AH.

12. Al-Hasan bin Ali by Kamil Sulayman, Beirut 1373 AH.

13. Ad-Da’wa al-Islamiyya ila Wahdat Ahlul Sunna wel Imamiyya by Sheikh
Ali Abul Hasan al-Khunayzi, al-Iqbal press, Beirut 1376 AH.

14. Al-Kamil fil Lugha wel Adab wen Nahw wet Tasreef by al-Mubarrid,
al-Babi press, Egypt 1356 AH. 15. A'yan ash-Shia by Muhsin al-Ameen,
al-Insaf press, Beirut 1370 AH.

16. Lubab an-Nuqool fee Asbab an-Nuzool by as-Sayooti, al-Babi press,
Egypt 1373 AH.

17. Majma'ul Bayan fee Tafseer al-Quran by at-Tabarsi, Beirut 1376 AH.

18. Al-Kashshaf an Haqa’iq Ghawamidh at-Tenzeel by az-Zamakhshari,
al-Istiqama press, Egypt 1373 AH.

19. As-Seera al-Halabiyya by al-Halabi, al-Azhariyya press, Egypt 1351
AH.

20. Ihya’ Uloom ad-Deen by al-Ghazali, al-Babi press, Egypt 1358 AH.

21. Sirrul Aalameen wa Kashf ma fid-Darayn by al-Ghazali, al-Hajar
press, Bombay 1314 AH. 22. Al-Istee’ab fee Asma’ul Ass~hab by Yousuf
an-Namri al-Qurtubi, Mustafa Muhammad press, Egypt 1358 AH.

23. Muqaddamat ibn Khaldoon, Mustafa Muhammad press, Egypt.

24. Yanabee’ul Mawadda by Sheikh Sulayman al-Husayni, al-Irfan press,
Sayda- Lebanon and Bombay press.

25. Fassl al-Hakim fee an-Niza’ wet Takhassum fee ma bayna Bani Umayya
wa Bani Hashem by Muhammad bin Aqeel, al-Irfan press, Sayda-Lebanon 1343
AH.

26. Kashful Astar an Wajh al-Gha’ib an al-Abssar by Mirza Husayn
an-Noori, Ahmad Agha press 1318 AH.

27. Abu Hurayra by Abdul Husayn Sharafuddeen, al-Irfan press,
Sayda-Lebanon 1365 AH.

28. As-Seera an-Nabawiyya wel Aathar al-Muhammadiyya by Ahmed Zayni
Dahlan.

29. Al-Issaba fee Temyeez as-Sahaba by ibn Hajar al-Asqalani.

30. Imam Ali; the Voice of Justice by George Jirdaq, 1956 AD.

31. Imam Ali bin Abu Talib by Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Dar al-Kitab
al-Arabi, Egypt 1366 AH.

32. Mo'jamul Quboor by Muhammad Mehdi al-Musawi, an-Najah press, Baghdad
1358 AH.

33. Assl ash-Shia wa Ussooluha by Sheikh Muhammad al-Husayn Kashiful
Ghita’, al-Irfan press 1355 AH.

34. Murooj ath-Thahab by Abul Husayn Ali al-Mass’oodi, as-Sa’ada press,
Egypt 1377 AH.

35. Biharul Anwar by Muhammad Baqir al-Majlissi, Khorsheed press, Tehran
1323 AH.

36. Al-Abbas bin Ameerul Mo™mineen by Abdur Razaq al-Muqarram,
al-Haydariyya press, Najaf.

37. Haleef Makhzoom by Sadruddeen Sharafuddeen, al-Irfan press 1373 AH.

38. As-Seera an-Nabawiyya by ibn Hisham, al-Babi press, Egypt 1355 AH.

39. Ala Hamish as-Seera by Taha Husayn, Dar al-Ma’arif, Egypt 1952 AD.

40. Al-Majaliss as-Saniyya fee Manaqib wa Massa’ib al-Itra an-Nabawiyya
by Muhsin al-Ameen, ibn Zaydoon press, Damascus 1363 AH.

41. Tathkiratul Khawass by Sibt bin aj-Jawzi, al-Ilmiyya press, Najaf
1369 AH.

42. Ithbatul Wassiyya by al-Mass’oodi, al-Haydariyya press, Najaf.

43. Omdatut Talib fee Ansab Aal Abu Talib by (Ahmed) bin Ali ad-Dawoodi,
Ja’fariyya press, Leknoo’.

44. Manaqib Aal Abu Talib by ibn Shahrashoop al-Mazindarani, Bombay.

45. Al-Hujja ala ath-Thahib ila Takfeer Abu Talib by Shamsuddeen Fakhar
bin Ma’add, al-Alawiyya press, Najaf 1351 AH.

46. Majalis Tha’lab by Abul Abbas Ahmed Tha’lab, Dar al-Ma’arif, Egypt
1348 AH.

47. Abu Talib; Sheikh Bani Hashem by Abdul Aziz Sayyidul Ahl, Dar al-Ilm
lil Malayeen, Beirut 1951 AD.

48. Hashem wa Umayya fij-Jahiliyya by Sadruddeen, Baghdad 1365 AH.

49. Sahih of al-Bukhari, al-Babi press, Egypt.

50. Sheikhul Abtah, or Abu Talib by Muhammad Ali Sharafuddeen, Dar
as-Salaam press, Baghdad 1349 AH.

51. Mu’jamul Buldan by Yaqoot al Hamawi, Beirut 1376 AH.

52. Fatima bint Muhammad and Muhammad al-Arabi by Omar Abun-Nasr,
al-Wataniyya press, Beirut 1953 AD.

53. Qissass al-Arab by Muhammad Jadul-Mawla, Egypt 1367 AH.

54. I’jazul Quran by Abu Bakr al-Baqillani, Dar al-Ma’arif, Egypt.

55. Ghayatul Maram by Hashem al-Bahrani, Iran 1272 AH.

56. Ar-Riyadh an-Nadhira fee Manaqib al-Ashara by al-Muhibb at-Tabari,
al-Husayniyya press 1327 AH.

57. Tafseer Ali bin Ibraheem, Iran 1363 AH.

58. Divan Abu Talib, Faydh Rasan press, Bombay 1326 AH.

59. Eeman Abu Talib by Sheikh al-Mufeed, al-Haydariyya press, Najaf 1372
AH.

60. Thamaratul Awraq fil-Muhadharat by Taqiyyuddeen bin Hujja al-Hamawi,
al-Mash~had al-Husayni press, 1368 AH.

61. Nassab Quraysh by Muss’ab az-Zubayri, Dar al-Ma’arif 1953 AD.

62. Al-Aghani by Abul Faraj al-Isfahani, at-Taqaddum press, Egypt.

63. Tafseer al-Quran al-Adheem by Abul Fida’ bin Kuthayr, Dar Ihya’
al-Kutub al-Arabiyya, Egypt.

64. Waq’at Siffeen by Nasr bin Muzahim, Cairo 1365 AH.

65. As-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa by Ahmed bin Hajar al-Haytami, al-Maymaniyya
press, Egypt 1312 AH.

66. Al-Fitnatul Kubra by Taha Husayn, Dar al-Ma’arif, Egypt 1947 AD.

67. Muhadharat Tareekh al-Ummam al-Islamiyya by Sheikh Muhammad
al-Khudhari, al-Istiqama press, Cairo 1364 AH.

68. Mizanul I'tidal fee Naqd ar-Rijal by Muhammad ath-Thahabi, as-Sa’ada
press, Egypt 1325 AH.

69. Tafseer of al-Baydhawi, Mustafa Muhammad press, Egypt.

70. Dala'il as-Sidq by Sheikh Muhammad Hasan al-Mudhaffar, Taban press
1379 AH.

71. Iss’af al-Mubatta’ birijal al-Muwatta’ by Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti,
Mustafa Muhammad press 1358 AH.

72. Al-Fihrast by ibnul Nadeem, ar-Rahmaniyya press, Egypt 1348 AH.

73. Siyer A'lam an-Nubala' by Muhammad ath-Thahabi, Dar al-Ma’arif,
Egypt 1957 AD.

74. Futooh al-Buldan by Abul Abbas al-Balathari, Dar an-Nashr
lij-Jami’iyeen 1377 AH.

75. Al-Ittiqan fee Uloom al-Quran by Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti, Hijazi
press, Cairo 1368 AH.


