The Revolt of Hujr b. Adi
=========================

While Mu'awiya was in power adherents of the Shi'a in al-Kufa remained
fairly quiet. On the death of al-Hasan some of the Kufan Shi'a were
prompted to write to al-Husayn urging him to lead a revolt against
Mu'awiya. However in his reply al-Husayn advises them to keep their
views to themselves while Mu'awiya is alive. When Mu'awiya died, he
would be prepared to seek office8 .

Al-Husayn may have been being merely politic in avoiding any
confrontation with Mu'awiya, who had clearly established his power.
However it is also possible that he was observing the terms of the
treaty his brother had concluded with Mu'awiya.

During this time, the cursing of 'Ali had regularly taken place in the
mosque at al-Kufa on the orders of Mu'awiya. Some of the leading members
of the Shi'a, notable among them Hujr b. 'Adi, had voiced their
opposition to this practice. However, Mu'awiya's governor in al-Kufa,
al-Mughira b. Shu'ba, had turned a blind eye to such protests9 .

On al-Mughira's death Mu'awiya had joined the governorship of al-Kufa to
that of al-­Basra and put the governor of al-Basra in charge of both
cities. This man was Ziyad. Ziyad had been a follower of 'Ali and had
enjoyed positions of some responsibility under 'Ali. For a time he had
held out against Mu'awiya after al-Hasan's abdication. He had been won
over by Mu'awiya through judicious bribery. The biggest bribe that
Mu'awiya gave to Ziyad was the offer of paternity. Ziyad was the
illegitimate child of a prostitute of Thaqif. What Mu'awiya did was to
arrange witnesses to swear that his own father, Abu Sufyan, had been the
father of Ziyad and he then recognised Ziyad as his brother10 .

Through this offer of legitimacy to Ziyad, he seems to have gained his
total support.

During the time of 'Ali, Ziyad and Hujr b. 'Adi had been comrades. When
Ziyad came to al-Kufa, he attempted to use that old comradeship which
the two men had shared to win over Hujr, at the same time threatening
Hujr with dire consequences if there was any opposition from him11 .

This seems to have worked while Ziyad was in al-Kufa but when he
returned to al-Basra, Hujr and some of the Shi'a began once more to show
their opposition to the cursing of 'Ali. Ziyad's deputy sent to him and
he quickly returned. He sent a delegation to Hujr to try to win him over
but Hujr refused. Ziyad's next act was to send the shurta, a kind of
police force, to Hujr but he and his friends drove them off. A Shi'a
rebellion under Hujr had in effect begun12 .

The group with Hujr do not appear to have belonged to the front rank of
Arab nobility. Hujr himself had enjoyed a position of some seniority in
his tribe under 'Ali, but he owed this status to his position in Islam
and his loyalty to 'Ali rather than to any traditional tribal position13
.

Another close colleague of Hujr's in the revolt 'Amr b. al-Hamiq
alsoappears to have had a similar status14 .

Ziyad used the strategy of applying pressure to the traditional tribal
leaders15 , whose authority seems to have been endorsed by Mu'awiya as a
means of reducing the power of the Shi'a. The policy worked and soon the

numbers of Hujr's supporters were reduced. Hujr became isolated and had
to flee for his life. Ziyad then threatened Hujr's tribe Kinda that
unless Hujr surrendered he would execute their leader16 .

Thus Hujr, deprived of even a tribal base, surrendered. Ziyad sent him
to Mu'awiya where he was offered his free­dom if he cursed 'Ali. He
refused to do this and was executed17 .


