Al -Husayn's letter to the Shi’a in al -Basra
=============================================

The Shi'a in al-Basra also wrote to al-Husayn asking him to lead a
revolt against Yazid. In al-Tabari's version of Abu Mikhnaf's account,
the text of al-Husayn's reply is pre­served. If genuine, it represents a
very early record of some of the basic articles of the Shi'i doctrine of
the Imamate and as such may be of great value. The letter reads as
follows:

"God gave preference to Muhammad from among his creatures. He graced him
with prophethood and chose him for His message. After he had warned His
servants and informed them of what he had been sent with, God took him
unto Himself. We are his family (ahl), those who possess his authority
(awliya 'uhu), those who have been entrusted by him (awsiya ‘uhu), his
inheritors, and the most appropriate of people (to hold) his position
among the people. Our people claim the exclusive right of this for us.
Yet we have consented (to the rule of Mu'awiya) since we hate disunion
and love the well-being (of the community). However we know that we are
more entitled to that (the rule) because of the right which is entitled
to us, than are those who have seized it. They have been brought honour,
prosperity and conven­ience through (this) right of ours. May God have
mercy upon them and forgive us and them. I have sent my messenger to you
with this letter. I summon you to the Book of God, the sunna of His
Prophet, which has become obsolete while innovation (bida) has become
fertile. If you hear my words and obey my command, I will lead you along
the path of righteousness”20 .

In this letter we see al-Husayn claiming on behalf of ahl al-bait that
they hold the wilaya, (authority from God), that they are the stipulated
successors of the Prophet (wasiya) as well as being the rightful
inheritors of his authority. Furthermore implicit in al-Husayn's

summons to the sunna of the Prophet is the idea that ahl al-bait know
the Prophet's example and how to follow it.


