Muslim b. Aqil's Death in al -Kufa
==================================

When Muslim arrived in al-Kufa, he went to the house of al-Mukhtar b.
Abi Ubaid. There the leaders of the Shi'a assembled to deliver
statements of loyalty and sacrifice21 .

At that time the governor of al-Kufa was Nu'man b. Bashir. When re­ports
of the activities of the Shi'a reached his ears he spoke in the mosque,
denouncing revolution and preaching obedience and submission. However
the pro-Umaiyad faction in al-Kufa felt that this action was not enough
and they wrote to Yazid to tell him that he needed a strong governor in
al-Kufa22 .

When Yazid received this information, he sent an urgent message to
'Ubaid Allah b. Ziyad, his governor in al-Basra. He joined al-Kufa and
al-Basra together under 'Ubaid Allah's administration, and told him to
hurry to al-Kufa to put an end to the trouble23 .

'Ubaid Allah left al-Basra but he took with him Sharik b. A'war one of
the leaders of the Shi'a in al-Basra. It is reported that the contents
of al-Husayn's letter to the Shi'a of al-Basra had already been betrayed
to 'Ubaid Allah. Perhaps he was taking Sharik to see if the latter might
unwittingly lead him to Muslim.

He entered al-Kufa with a small group accompanying him. He was wearing a
black turban and his face was partially covered. The Kufans thought that
it was al-Husayn who had come and they gathered around him with cries of
welcome24 .

They were soon disillusioned. After entering the governor's palace,
'Ubaid Allah called the people to the mosque. He set about finding
Muslim by applying pressure to the arifs. He made them write down the
names of any strangers in their 'irafa and any rebellious or suspicious
people. He held the arif responsible for

what happen in his 'irafa and threatened him with crucifixion and the
cutting off of money from that 'irafa if any information was withheld
from him25 .

With the news of 'Ubaid Allah's arrival, it was decided that Muslim
should leave al-Mukhtar's house because of his notoriety. He moved to
the house of Hani' b.'Urwa al-Muradi of Madhhij. The wisdom of this move
is questionable for we are told that it was the place where Sharik b.
A'war, the leader of the Basran Shi'a whom 'Ubaid Allah had brought with
him, was staying26 .

It seems likely that Muslim's move brought him much closer to the
surveillance of 'Ubaid Allah's spies. One of these spies, a mawla from
Syria, was given 3,000 dirhams and told to buy himself into the Shi'a
organisation. The spy only made contact after Muslim's move. He went up
to Muslim b. 'Awsaja al-Asadi in the mosque and asked how he could
contribute 3,000 dirhams from his people in Syria to the Shi'a cause.
The reason he gave for knowing that Muslim b. 'Awsaja was a Shi'a
supporter was that he had heard people saying so in the mosque27 .

By insisting on giving the money personally to Muslim b. 'Aqil the spy
was able to infiltrate right into the heart of the Shi'a organisation.
when

'Ubaid Allah thought he had enough information, he decided to act
publicly. He pretended to notice that Hani' b. 'Urwa had been absent
from his

gatherings and he sent three tribal leaders to bring Hani' along as a
friend. However when Hani' reached the governor's palace, 'Ubaid Allah
accused him of plotting against him. At first Hani' denied this but
'Ubaid Allah summoned the mawla and Hani' knew that he had been exposed.
He offered to send Muslim away. However 'Ubaid Allah wanted Hani'to hand
Muslim over but this Hani' refused to do. 'Ubaid Allah struck him
brutally with a stick and had him imprisoned28 .

At this point, it appears that Muslim b. 'Aqil's strength must have been
great. 'Ubaid Allah did not try to arrest both men at Hani's house.
Obviously the reason was that this would have led to a conflict which
'Ubaid Allah was by no means sure of winning. Before Hani's arrest,
Muslim had sent to al-Husayn urging him to come and telling him that
affairs were going well in al-Kufa and that he had 18,000 pledges of
allegiance29 .

By pressing Hani' to hand over Muslim, 'Ubaid Allah was also trying to
achieve his pur­pose by treachery without the use of force.

Two of the leaders who had brought Hani' were shocked at 'Ubaid Allah's
deception in the way he had used them. One protested personally and was
imprisoned. The other who belonged to Madhhij, the same clan as Hani',
called out his tribesmen, who gathered outside the palace, demanding
Hani"s release. 'Ubaid Allah sent out the qadi Shuraih who assured them
that Hani' was al right. Satisfied that nothing was going to be done to
one of their tribal leaders, Madhhij departed30 .

When news reached Muslim of what had happened to Hani', he decided to
revolt immediately. He sent a messenger around to call out the people31
.

The fact that this revolt was a spontaneous reaction to a situation did
not augur well for its success. In the organisation of the tribesmen
into some form of army the same tribal groupings as were usually used
were used again32 .

This clearly indicates that no radical prepara­tion had taken place
among the revolutionaries. For their numbers were not spread evenly
among the tribes and their organisation should have reflected this.

The mobilized Shi'a forces moved off towards the palace and found its
doors locked. There in the square in front of the palace, they remained
with their numbers

being constantly increased. Inside the palace 'Ubaid Allah had thirty
men of the shurta, twenty of the tribal leaders and his family. While he
was in this position other tribal leaders began to come to him through a
side-door to the palace33 .

The fact that the Shi'a forces had not barred all entry and exit to the
palace shows the incompetence of the Kufan leadership of the Shi'a and
the disorganisation of the ranks.

It seems that 'Ubaid Allah had won over the vast majority of tribal
leaders before the revolt had begun. The way he had done this is
explained by information al-Husayn received later on his way to al-Kufa.
For al-Husayn was told that the bribery of the tribal leaders had been
great34 .

Thus it seems that 'Ubaid Allah had even bought the allegiance of those
tribal leaders who had leaned towards the Shi'a. He now sum. moned six
of the tribal leaders, two of whom had been among those who had written
to

urge al-Husayn to come to al-Kufa. These six, 'Ubaid Allah sent out to
try and bring their followers away from Muslim. But he did not trust the
rest of the nobles because he thought the paucity of his support in the
palace might encourage them to throw in their lot with Muslim. So he
kept them in the palace with him. Not only were these six able to leave
the palace, they were also able to return bringing with them what tribal
support they could muster35 .

'Ubaid Allah, now having much stronger military strength, used the
tactic of assemb­ling the tribal leaders on the palace roof to call to
their tribesmen to discourage them from revolt. The major persuasion
used was to warn them of the punishment they would receive when the
Syrian army came and to make them believe that the Syrian army was not
far away. The ploy worked and the leaderless mob began to be afraid and
one by one they

began to slip away. The false rumours about the approaching Syrians must
have spread rapidly through al-Kufa for the women now came out into the
streets and urged their men to come away. By evening there were only
thirty people left to pray the maghrib prayer with Muslim b. 'Aqil36 .

He realised that all was over and there was nothing to do but to make
his escape. It is difficult to believe that Muslim b. 'Aqil was so
completely deserted but as no details are given about the de­ployment of
Shi'a forces, we cannot know who was with Muslim and who was not. But it
seems probable that Muslim was in command of the forces in front of the
palace and the other leaders were spread out through the different
districts of al-Kufa. If this was the case, then it is hardly surprising
that 'Ubaid Allah's tactics worked; Muslim did not know the men who were
with him; he did not know al-Kufa. He was hardly the man to be able to
oppose the influence of the tribal leaders. Had there been some of the
leaders of the Kufan Shi'a with him, it is not so likely that his
support would have dwindled so fast.

With the disintegration of the revolt 'Ubaid Allah took swift action. He
ordered the head of his shurta, Husayn b. Tamim of Tamim to control all
roads and highways37 .

Muslim took refuge in a house in the Kinda quarter. However his hiding
place was betrayed and Muhammad b. al-Ash'ath the leader of Kinda was
sent to arrest him. The house where Muslim was hiding was surrounded.
Muslim came out to fight to the death but eventually surrendered when
Muhammad b. al-Ash'ath offered him a guaran­tee of security. He asked
Muhammad to send a message to al-Husayn telling him that Kufans were
liars and that he should not come. Muhammad sent the message38 .

'Ubaid Allah had Muslim tortured and Wanted Muhammad b. al-Ash'ath to
execute him. The latter refused but anyway Muslim was executed on the
palace roof. Then 'Ubaid Allah ordered the execution of Hani' b. 'Urwa,
which took place in the market. Others who had been arrested during the
course of the revolt were also executed39 .

In order to hunt down Muslim b. 'Aqil, 'Ubaid Allah had had all the
roads of al-Kufa blocked. It seems likely that the controls were
continued after Muslim's execution so that no Shi'a supporter could
escape to al-Husayn or regroup in al-Kufa itself.

After the executions of Muslim b. 'Aqil and Hani' b. 'Urwah, 'Ubaid
Allah sent their heads to Yazid together with an account of events in
al-Kufa. Yazid wrote back com­plimenting 'Ubaid Allah on his work and
instructing him to keep a careful watch over al-Husayn's approach, but
not to fight him40 .

'Ubaid Allah sent Husayn b. Tamim to al-Qadisiya to block all approach
roads41 .

Husayn b. Tamim sent al-Hurr b. Yazid al-Tamimi on to watch over
al-Husayn42 . In the meantime 'Umar b. Sa'd had been made governor of
al-Rayy by 'Ubaid Allah and he had been commissioned to recruit an army
of 4,000 men. However, 'Ubaid Allah then ordered him to march against
al-Husayn. This he was reluctant to do but when 'Ubaid Allah threatened
to dismiss him from his new office if he did not go, he agreed43 .


