The Second Stream: About Superiority of The Holy Qur’an
=======================================================

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that if you have a matter that appears
like the darkest of dark nights and you are unable to ravel the puzzle,
then the Holy Qur’an, the brightest of lights, will help you dispel all
the doubts you have pertaining to the matter. This will help one in
strife, in solving irresoluble problems and is the beacon for showing
the way to Jannat. It is the negligence of the Qur’an that might
dispatch one to the Hellfire!

Qur’an is the best Guide and Leader. This is the Book that has in it all
the commandments and details. It has two types of commandments—clear and
hidden. Its clear aspect is full of Allah’s Commandments to humanity.
The hidden aspect of the Qur’an is about unending store of knowledge.

The clear aspect of the Book is a harbinger of good for its followers
and the hidden aspect is profound. There are some stars, big and small
(*Kawakib*) for it’s interpretation. These stars are Infallible Imams
(as) who put the wayward on the right path. These Infallible Imams (as)
possess the knowledge about the Qur’an.

From them only the Knwledge can be acquired. They are the ones who
disseminate the Knowledge about the Book. The Chapter of *Bara-at* is
proclaiming in the Holy Qur’an that the chapter could be presented to
the infidels of Mecca either by the Prophet (S) himself or his *Nafs
(*the personal and rational mouthpiece).

Men have to perceive with the eyes of their hearts the path shown by
these Infallible Imams (as) and follow them with true hearts. They have
said that the Qur’an is a guide for the ignorant, helper for those who
go astray, a light in the darkness, the best friend in this world and
the Hereafter. The Qur’an contains the complete faith within its two
covers.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Allah, who has the knowledge of
everything hidden, has sent this Book to you. This Book has knowledge
about the things past and those to come.It has the information about the
land and the firmament. Those who have total knowledge of the Qur’an
(*The Aalam*) and the practitioners (*perhaps here the Infallible Imams
are meant)* can reveal facts about the hidden matters (*the Ghaib*).”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “I am departing from you midst and
leaving behind two weighty things—One is the Book of Allah and the other
is my *Itrat (*the progeny) and *Ahl-ul-Bayt* (the Infallible Imams). If
you remain attached to these two, you shall never go astray!”

A note by Maulana Syed ‘Ali Akthar Amrohi: This was one and only
prescription for the welfare of Islam and unity of the Muslims. If the
Muslims honestly followed this tradition of the Holy Prophet (S), they
wouldn’t have followed different teachers and the schism of 73 sects
wouldn’t have come about!

The Superiority of Bearers of The Holy Qur’an
---------------------------------------------

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said that when on the Day of Judgement
people will be brought for accounting of their deeds, the Qur’an will be
there in the form of a handsom and good looking person to bear witness.
It will say, “O Allah! This *Mu’min* spent sleepless nights reciting me!
At the time of the *Tahajjud* prayer in the night he used to have
parched lips and wet eyes. O Allah! Forgive him his mistakes! ‘Allah
will fill the person’s right hand with His Acceptance (*Ar-Ridha’*) and
the left hand with His Blessings (*Rehmat*) and will enter the Heaven
reciting the Qur’an.” Then the Prophet (S) added, “After the Superior
prophets (*Anbiah*) and other prophets (as), the reciters of the Qur’an
will have a high status in the Heaven. Don’t under-rate the people who
recite the Qur’an! They have a great status in the eyes of Allah!”

In another tradition the Prophet (S) has said, “Allah addresses the Holy
Qur’an thus,’ I swear by My Greatness! Whosoever respected you, I shall
respect him! One who belittled you, I shall belittle him!’”

It is narrated from the Prophet (S) that he said, “Recite the Qur’an and
memorise it! On the Day of Judgement the Holy Qur’an will approach those
who recited it. It will be in the guise of a very good looking person.
It will say, ‘I am the same Qur’an reciting which you spent sleepless
nights. During the days you moved with parched lips because of loss of
sleep in the nights! Because of excessive recitation the moisture in
your mouth used to run dry. Tears used to run from your eyes because of
the strain of reading! Therefore, wherever you go, I shall be with you!
Whatever trading you wish to do, do it today! I am there with you to
bring to you more profits than other traders can get! I bear witness
that Allah’s Blessings are about to come your way!’”

Then a crown will be brought and placed over the head of the person and
the letter of permission for freedom from Allah’s Retribution will be
placed in the person’s right hand. In his left hand letter of permission
for perpetual residence in the Heaven will be placed. Two Heavenly
Raiments (*Hillay*) will be given to him to wear. He will be Ordered,’
Recite the Holy Qur’an, and for every verse recited, you will rise one
step higher in the Heaven!’” If the parents of the reciter of the Qur’an
were *Mu’min,* they too will be provided two *Hillay* each and will be
told that this reward was in rturn for instructing their son in the
recitation of the Holy Qur’an.

It is narrated from the Holy Prophet, (S) “The noble and big persons
among my people (Ummat) are those who are the bearers (*Hamilan)* of the
Qur’an and remain awake in the nights in prayer. The bearers of the
Qur’an will be termed superior amongst the people of the Heaven.”

Allah will not give Retribution to the Heart that has memorised the Holy
Qur’an. The bearers of the Qur’an will be in the second echelon in the
Heaven after the Prophets (S). Therefore, don’t under-rate the reciter
of the Holy Qur’an. They have a very high status in the consideration of
Allah.

The Qualities of The Reciters of The Qur’an
-------------------------------------------

The phrase *Haamilan al-Qur’an* (Bearers of the Qur’an) has several
meanings:

First, one should properly learn the words in the Qur’an.

Secondly: he should learn the correct meaning of the contents of the
Book. Such a person will have a status higher than the first.

Thirdly: One should practice the Qur’anic precepts. Therefore, the true
bearer of the Qur’an is one who understands the words, their meanings
and practitioner of the Qur’anic Precepts.

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that the Holy Qur’an is the table laid
with the Bounties of Allah.as there will be various types of victuals on
the table of a generous person.

There are some people who draw benefit from the words of the Qur’an.
There are other who benefit from the meanings of the Qur’an. The people
who supply the ink for writing or printing the Book or those who supply
the paper too derive benefit from the Holy work. In a nutshell, everyone
associated with the publication, translation, commentary, and
distribution of the Book gets his share of reward for the work.

To put it briefly, people of all fields such as scholars, jurists,
mathematicians, poets, scholars etc derive benefit from the Qur’an’s
unfathomable store of knowledge. Those who possess total control over
the contents of the Qur’an are the Prophet and his Infallible
Descendents (as). Therefore the very word ‘Qur’an’ is associated with
them. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has observed, “I am the Speaking
Qur’an (*Qur’an al-Natiq)*”

All the knowledge contained in the Qur’an is in the possession of the
Infallible Imams. It is said that a third of the Qur’an has come in the
praise of the *Infallible Masoomeen*, another third of the Book as
criticism of the enemies of the *Ahl-ul-Bayt* and the rest contains the
commandments about the duties and precepts for the Believers. Whatever
good qualities that are alluded to in the Qur’an pertains to the
*Ahl-ul-Bayt* and whatever criticism is there is about their enemies.
From where has the Qur’an in its present shape come? First it was with
Allah (*Ilm al-Wajib al Wajood*), then it was transcribed to the *Lauh*
(the Tablet), then it was revealed to the Propphet(S) directly or
indirectly through the Angel Gibraeel. From the Prophet (S)’s heart it
was transferred to the hearts of the *Ausia* (the Infallible
Descendents) and then it was rendered to paper.

Therefore, the real Qur’an is one that is etched on the hearts of the
Infallible Imams (as). When those who show disrespect to the Qur’an
printed on paper are rated infidels, then those who showed disrespect to
the *Qur’an al-Naatiq* will be the worst of infidels.

It is said about the Holy Prophet (S) that the Qur’an is his character
and he is the character of the Qur’an. In fact the real Qur’an are those
Infallible Personalities who have in them the words, the meanings and
the character of the Qur’an. Now, for one to understand the opt repeated
tradition quoted by Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that the Qur’an would come
on the Day of Judgement in the garb of a handsome person and intercede
on behalf of those who recited or studied it. The Imam (as) also said
that *Salat* (the Prayer) has a face and tells about *Amr wa Nahi* (dos
and donts).

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Haj and circumambulation of the
Kaaba is necessary because after these rituals the people should meet us
to learn about the tenets of the Faith”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: There are three categories of the
reciters of the Holy Qur’an: 1. Those who recite the Book for worldly
gains, name and fame. 2. Those who recite the Qur’an but don’t act on
it’s precepts.(Allah will rid the world of these two types of people).
3.Those who consider the Qur’an as a cure for the ailments of their
hearts. They remain awake in the nights and light the lamps of
spirituality in the mosques and the homes. They derive benefit from the
recitation of the Book themselves and for the Love of Allah (*Qurbatan
il Allah*) pass the benefit to others. With the blessings of such
persons Allah wards off calamities in store for people. But there are
very few such dedicated reciters of the Book

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said: Derive ornamentation from the Qur’an
for Allah and not to show to the people! One who completes the
recitation of the Qur’an has acquired the messengership (*Paighambari*)
between his flanks that has no element of revelation! The reciter of the
Qur’an should abstain from the company of ignorant persons. He should
stay away from carnal desires and worldly wants. He should be grateful
to Allah that He has made him the reciter of the Qur’an who becomes
eligible for the Riches of the Hereafter!

The Etiquette of Reciting The Holy Qur’an
-----------------------------------------

*Qir-at* or recitation of the Qur’an has one basic requirement, that is,
*the Tarteel* or the distinct intonation and pronunciation of the words.
While reciting one has to keep in mind the *fasl* {division) and *wasl
(*joining) of words and sentences.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that *Tarteel* is delivering words
according to their *Makharij* (outlets for sound or intonations).
Uttering the words clearly and slowly and reciting with understanding
and uttering the contents correctly is of prime importance. One should
not recite the Qur’an with such speed that it might become
incomprehensible and bore the listener. Neither the recitation be so
slow that it takes long time and puts the listeners off. *“Khair al
umoore ausatha”* or it is better to follow the middle path.

The other important aspect of the recitation is the reading with
understanding and thought. One should keep his eyes on the meanings of
the Qur’an. While reciting the verses about Allah’s Blessings, one
should seek *Astaghfar (*Allah’s Help and Foregiveness).

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) used to recite the Qur’an with feelings and tears.
He used to cry when reference to the Heaven and Hell came during the
reading of the Book. At these points he used to seek Allah’s Help. When
the Imam (as) recited the verse *Qul huwallahu ahad,* he used to say
*Kadhalik Allahu Rabbi* three times. Similarly after reciting the verse
*Qul ya ayyuhal kaferoon* in the prayer, the Imam used to say *Rabbi
Allaho Deenalislam* three times. After reciting the verse *Wat-teene
wazaitune* Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) used to say *bala wa ana zaalika min al
shahedeen.* On reciting the verse *Ala uqsimo beyoumilqiyamah* the Imam
(as) said *Subhanaka Allahumma Balah.* On reciting *Sura al-Fateha* the
Imam (as) said *Alhamdu lillahe Rab al Aalemeen.* Whenever the Imam (as)
came across the words *ya ayyuhal lazeena aamanu* during the recitation
of the Qur’an he would say slowly the words *Labbaek Allahumma labbaek.*

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that whenever one recited *In Allaha
malaekatahu yusalloona alan-nabi….* It should be followed by benediction
(*durood*) whether during the prayers or while at the session of
recitation. He said that after reciting the verse *wat-teen* one should
say *Nahnu ala zalika min al shahedeen.*

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) used to say *deenilislam alaihi ahya-an wa
alaihi amwaatu insha* *Allah* after reciting the verse *Qul ya ayyuhal
kaferoon*.

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) has said: If a person wishes to converse with
Allah, he should recite the Qur’an. When he comes to the passages where
Allah addresses the people, he should say *labbaek Allahumma labbaek*
and in the passages where Allah addresses the Prophet (S) or the people
of the earlier times, he should feel that the communication is for his
own benefit only. When he reads about the spread of victuals of the
Heaven in the Qur’an, he should draw pleasure from the very thought of
the delicacies. He should visualise that his Friend has made the spread
for him. Sometimes Allah recounts His most superior qualities of
Beneficence and Sustenence in the Qur’an, and at other places He talks
of the unfathomable treasures of knowledge.

Thus Allah recounts his innumerable Bounties to His creatures in the
Book and shows them the way of happiness and pleasure. He promises them
a place in the Heaven and also warns them of the Hellfire. The gathering
for the recitation of the Qur’an is the most wonderful gathering. In
this gathering Allah is the Host and the courtiers the Prophets and
their Vicegerents (as). How could one not be happy in such a gathering!
Due respect for such a gathering is very important. One should therefore
purify oneself with ablution (*Wadu)* is necessary.

About Isti’adha: Seeking Allah’s Protection From The Satan
----------------------------------------------------------

Before commencing the recitation of the Holy Qur’an one should do
*Isti’adha* or seek the protection of Allah against the machination of
the Satan. For this one should say *Aa-uzu billahi.* This has been
mandated by the Qur’an.

There are two ways of doing the Isti’adha. The first is saying, *‘Aa-uzu
billahi min al shaitan ir rajeem’* and the second is *‘Aa-uzu billahi
samiul aleem min al shaitan ir rajeem’*. According to some other
traditions, one should say *‘Aa-uzu billahi min al shaitan ir rajeem in
Allaha huwal fattahul aleem.’* But the first two methods of seeking
Allah’s Help to ward off the Satan are very much in vogue.

Facing The Kaaba Or Qibla While Reciting The Qur’an
---------------------------------------------------

It is advised to face the Kaaba while reciting the Qur’an, be it in
loneliness or in congregation. One should not sit at the back of anyone
while reciting the Qur’an.

About Khatam al-Qur’an or Finishing A Recitation of The Holy Book
-----------------------------------------------------------------

One person told to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that he used to complete
the recitation of the Qur’an in a single sitting in the night. (Abu
Baseer).

The Imam (as) said, “It is better if you do one complete recitation of
the Qur’an in one month. Qur’an should be recited with *tarteel* or
slowly with proper pronunciation and punctuation. The reading should be
such that the words are comprehensible to the reciter and the listener.
Whenever there is mention of the Heaven in the Qur’an, the reciter
should seek Allah’s help for his deliverence. Similarly when the Hell is
mentioned, he should seek deliverence.One should recite the Qur’an more
during the Holy month of Ramadan.”

‘Ali bin Mugheera asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “My father asked your
ancestor, the Prophet of Islam (S) about completing a recitation of the
Qur’an in one night. The Prophet said (S), ‘Yes! It can be done!’” Then
Bin Mugheera said, “My father used to complete forty recitations of the
Qur’an or even more during the month of Ramandan. I follow the same
practice and on *Idd al Fitr* I complete one recitation to felcitate
Holy Prophet (S), one for Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), one for Lady
Fatima Zahra (as) and one each as tribute to each of the Holy Imams
(as). This is my practice from the beginning and what Reward I could get
for this? Will it be entered in the account of my deeds?”

The Imam (as) said, “Because of this practice Allah will treat you with
these Infallible persons on the Day of Judgement!” Bin Jaseem was
astonished and said, “Is there so much reward for an insignificant
person like me?”

The Imam (as) said thrice, “Yes, yes, yes!”

The Reward For Learning, Teaching and Memorising The Qur’an
-----------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said one whose memory is weak should learn
the Qur’an with more practice. Allah will give him more reward. The
Qur’an should be recited in a good tone but not with rhythm.

It is not good for a person to memorise the Qur’an and forget it. The
verses that he had memorized, and forgotten, will salute the reciter in
the Heaven from an elevated place by saying,’ *Salam alaik’.* The person
would respond to the greeting and ask who they were and why they were
greeting him from that distanceThey will reply that they were the verses
of the Qur’an that he had memorised and didn’t care to retain in his
memory. If he had tyaken care to retain the memory, he would have been
in the higher echelons of the Heaven with them!

The Prophet of Allah (S) said, “A person who memorises the Qur’an and
purposely forgets it will be raised on the Day of Judgement in a manner
that his hands will be tied to his neck. For every verse that he had
forgotte Allah would impose a snake on his body and he will be consigned
to the Hell.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said that when Allah wants to send his curse
and retribution to a people who have been sinning very much and finds
that amongst the evil persons there are some people who offer prayers
and some children are reciting the Qur’an, he puts away the Retribution.

The Benefits of Reciting The Qur’an
-----------------------------------

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that Qur’an is a Commandment of Allah
for His creatures. Therefore it is the bounden duty of every Muslim to
study the Qur’an with deep thought.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that a house where the Qur’an is
recited the angels would descend there and the Satan flees away from the
precincts. The house where the Qur’an is recited appears like a star to
the people of the Firmament.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said, “A person who recites the Qur’an while
standing will get reward equal to fifty good deeds. If a person seeks
succor against his enemies from the Qur’an with true spirit, he will be
safe from the adversaries. However strong the enemy might be!”

It is narrated by Bashir bin Ghalib that Imam Husayn (as) said, “When a
person recites the verses of the Qur’an while standing, Allah will
reward equivalent of ten good deeds for every word recited. If someone
listens to the recitation with intent, he will get one good deed
recorded in his account for every word that he listens to. If a person
completes the recitation over-night in one sitting, in the morning the
angels say his praises.

If a person completes the recitation during a day, the angels praise him
and one of his wishes that he makes after completing the recitation
would be fulfilled. The Reward for completing the recitation of the
Qur’an is better than the reward for any other good deeds.” The narrator
asked the Imam (as), “Ya Imam! If a person has not learned to read the
Qur’an, what should he do?” The Imam (as) replied, “Allah is Kind and
Munificent! He should recite as much as he knows! He will certainly get
the Reward!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “When a person completes the
recitation of the Qur’an in Mecca from one Friday to the other, or a
similar period of time, he will be Rewarded amply by Allah.”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Allah (S): A person who recites as
few as ten verses in a night, he would not be counted amongst the
negligent people. If he recites fifty verses, he will be counted as a
*Dhakir* (a person who remembers). If one recites a hundred verses, he
will be counted amongst the *Qaneteen* (the obedient). One who recites
two hundred verses in a night, then he is amongst the *Qashe-een*. If a
person recites three hundred verses overnight, he one of the *Fayezeen*
(the elevated). If a person recites five hundred verses in a night, he
will be counted in a group of persons who prayed their whole lives. When
a person recites a thousand verses in a night, he will get a *Qantar* of
Reward. A *Qantar* is equal to fifteen thousand *Mishqal* (a *mishqal*
is equal to 24 carat of gold) This will be equal to the Mount Ohud.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “When a person recites any hundred
verses of the Qur’an from any chapter, and after the recitation says
thrice the words,’ *Allah humma akshif anni bala’,* all his calamities
will be warded off.”

The Prophet of Islam (S) said, “If one has pain in the chest, he must
seek succor from the Qur’an. Allah has promised that the Qur’an cures
the chest pain!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Every place has a spring season.
For the Qur’an the spring is the Holy Month of Ramadan!”

It is narrated from Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) that if one listens to
even a word of the Qur’an with interest, Allah will order writing one
good deed in his record and obliterates one sin committed by him. The
person will be elevated one stage upward. If a person memorises even one
word from the Qur’an, Allah will record ten good deeds in his name and
removes ten sins from his record. He will also be raised ten stages
upward in his status. When a person recites the verses of the Qur’an
sitting at prayer, Allah will record fifty good deeds for him and remove
fifty sins from his record. And raises his status fifty stages. When a
person recites one verse standing in prayer, He will record hundred good
deeds for him, remove a hundred sisn from his account and raise his
status a hundred stages.When a person completes a full recitation of the
Qur’an, Allah will fulfill his wish for this life or the Hereafter.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that when a person recites a
hundred verses from anywhere in the Qur’an and then says *Ya Allah*
seven times and order a stone to shatter, it will shatter with Allah’s
wish!

The Superiority Of Reciting The Holy Qur’an Looking At Its Words
----------------------------------------------------------------

The eyesight of a person will improve if he recites the Qur’an looking
at it pages. Allah will reduce the punishment for the sins of this
person’s parents, even if the father or the mother was an infidel.

The house where a copy of the Qur’an is kept the Satan cannot come.

Authentic traditions indicate that three things would complain to Allah:
1. A mosque where people don’t go to offer prayer. 2. A scholar who
lives amongst ignorant people and none respects him. 3. A copy of the
Qur’an that takes dust in a house and no one reads it.

Someone asked the Prophet of Islam (S), “I have memorised the Qur’an. Is
it better to recite it from the memory or by looking at the Book?” “The
Prophet (S) replied, “It is better to recite looking at the pages of the
Book because even looking at the book is auspicious.” Then the Prophet
(S) said that there are six things that would be the cause of benefit to
a person even after his death: 1. A pious son who prays for the
deliverence of his parents after their death. 2. A copy of the Qur’an
that will be read and recited by others after a person’s death. 3. A
well that has been dug for the benefit of the populace. 4. Creating a
canal or a source of running water. 5. A tree that has been planted to
give shade to the others. 6. The good examples set by the person for
others to follow after his death.

The Prophet of Islam (S) said that looking at the face of
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali bin Abi Talib (as) is equivalent to prayer. He
also said that looking with affection on the faces of one’s parents too
is prayer. Looking at the Holy Qur’an is prayer and setting eyes on the
Kaaba too is prayer.

The Benefits Of Certain Verses Of The Holy Qur’an
-------------------------------------------------

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said *Ism al-Azam* (the ineffable word) is so close
to *Bismillah* as the white of the eye is to it’s black!

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “To get rid of any ailment reciting
*Al-Fatiha* seven times is sufficient. Even then if there is no relief,
then recite the verse seventy times and I guarantee relief from the
sickness!”

Imam Hasan Al-’Askari (as) said, “The Prophet of Allah (S) says that
Allah has divided the verse *Al-Fatiha* into two parts. One part for
Himself and the other for His creatures. When a person says *Bismillahir
Rehman ir Rahim,* Allah says, ‘My creature has commenced with My Name! I
shall complete all his works with felicity!’ When the person says
‘*Alhamdu lillahi Rab il Aalimeen’, Allah says, ‘*My creature has
expressed gratefulness for my Bounties.and therefore I have increased
for him the Bounties in this world and the Hereafter!’ Now, when the
person says, ‘*Ar Rehman ir Rahim’* Allah observes,’ My creature has
borne witness to My being Most Beneficient and Merciful! I shall enhance
My Rewards for him!’

When the person recites,’*Maalike youm id Deen’* Allah says, ‘O ye
angels! You must bear witness that the person has accepted that I am the
Arbiter of the Day of Judgement. Therefore I shall pardon all his sins
on that fateful day!’ Now the person recites, ‘*Ayyaka naabudu’,* Allah
says, ‘You have worshipped me and I shall Reward you for this act!’. The
person then recites,’*Wayyaka nastaeen’* *when Allah responds,’I shall
come to your rescue in all calamities and difficulties!*” The person now
implores, ‘*Ehdinus sirat al mustaqeem*’ when Allah joins with,’
Whatever you have asked for I have Awarded to you and whatever fears you
had I have removed them!’”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “For any pains and aches recite
*Al-Fatiha* seventy times and the pain will vanish. If *Al-Fatiha* is
recited seventy times over a dead body, there is no wonder if the dead
comes back to life!”

A person complained to the Prophet of Islam (S) of acute headache. The
Prophet (S) said,’ “Put your hand near the spot where you have the pain
and then recite *Al-Fatiha* and *Ayat al Kursi.* Thereafter recite the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ أكْبَرُ اللهُ أكبَرُ لا إلَهَ إلاّ اللهُ وَاللهُ أكبَرُ
وَأجَلُّ وَأكْبَرُ مِمّا أخَافُ وَأحْذَرُ وَأعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنْ حَرِّ
النّارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is the most great, Allah is the most great, there is no God
but Allah and Allah is the most great, He is higher and greater from
what I fear and from what I am causious about and I seek refuge in Allah
from the hellfire.”***

One person complained of fever. The Prophet (S) said, “Open your collar,
put your head in the garment and say the *Adhaan* and *Iqamat* and
recite *Al-Fatiha* seven times.” The man did likewise and the fever left
him.

The Prophet (S) also said that one who regularly recite the verses *Al
Baqarah and Aal al-Imran*, these verses will provide him shade out
through the hot Day of Judgement!”

Imam Zain-ul-’Abidin (as) has said, “The Prophet of Allah (S) has
observed,’ Whoever recites the last three verses of the chapter *Al
Baqarah* then he will not suffer any material losses, the Satan will
never come near him and the person will never ignore the Holy Book!”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) said that when a person recites the *Ayat al Kursi*
at bedtime he will never get afflicted with paralysis. If he recites
this verse after mandatory prayers, he will never suffer from the bite
of poisonous insects.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said that if a person recites the *Ayat
al Kursi* once, Allah will remove a thousand calamities from him.

It is narrated that Abu Dharr Ghiffari asked the Prophet (S), “Which is
the greatest verse of the Holy Qur’an?” The Prophet (S) said, “The *Ayat
al Kursi!”*

Someone complained of a fever to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as). The Imam
asked him to write the *Ayat al Kursi* on a plate, wash it with water
into a tumbler and drink it.

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) narrates that amongst his ancestors heard a
person reciting *Al-Fatiha* and told him, “He has thanked Allah and has
been pardoned!” Then he heard the man recite *Qul huwallahu Ahad* and
said, “The person has faith in the Unity of Allah and has become
fearless!” When the person recited *Inna Anzalna,* the Imam (as) said,
“The person has borne witness to the Prophethood of Muhammad (S.A) and
he has been pardoned by Allah.” When the man recited *Ayat al Kursi* the
Imam (as) said, “*Subhan Allah!* The person has escaped from the Hell!”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said that if one has any ailment of the
eye, he should recite *Ayat al Kursi* with full faith and he will be
cured of the disease. If a person recites *Ayat al Kursi, Qul hu*
*wallah, Inna anzalna* eleven times each at dawn, his properties will
remain safe.When a person leaves his home for some errand, he should
recite *Ayat al Kursi, Inna anzalna and Al-Fatiha* before starting on
his journey. The person will be successful in his errand.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Whoever recites *Ayat al Kursi* a
hundred times will get reward equal to his prayers offered over a
lifetime.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said, “If a Muslim knows the benefits of
reciting *Ayat al Kursi* then he will never forget to regularly recite
this versae.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “When Allah had revealed *Ayat al
Kursi, Al-Fatiha, Shahed Allaho annahu la ilaha, Qul Allahumma
Malikalmulk* then these verses clung to the Firmament and said, “O
Allah! Where are you revealing us? These people are sinners?” Allah
ordered them to go to the earth and observed, “By My Might! Whoevr
amongst the Progeny of Muhammad (S) and their Shi’as recite you, I shall
secretly shower My Blessings on them. I shall fulfill seventy wishes of
the person every day. I shall accept their penitence despite their
having committed many sins!”

Ashjah Salma told to Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “I have to pass several
times through fearsome wilderness. Teach me a prayer that I negotiate
these places safely.” The Imam (as) said, “Keep your hand on the head
and recite the *Ayat al Kursi*”

The Benefits of Other Verses of The Holy Qur’an
-----------------------------------------------

### Surat An N’isa

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said that one who recites this verse on Friday
will be safe from pressures (*Fishar)* of the grave.

### Surat Al Maida

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: One who recites this verse on
Thursdays will never become a hypocrite.

### Surat Al Inaam

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said: If a person suffers from a serious
disease, he will get relief by reciting this verse.

### Surat Al Aaraf

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has narrated that a person who recites this
verse will be amongst the friends of Allah.If one recites this verse on
Friday, he will be exempted from the accounting of deeds on the Day of
Judgement.

Asbag bin Nabata narrates that Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said: By the Great
Allah who sent Prophet Muhammad as the true Prophet (S) and endowed his
*Ahl-ul-Bayt* with august status, that people used to search for amulets
and tablets, to save themselves from drowning, fire, theft and to guard
their slaves and animals going astray. All these safety measures are
there in the Holy Qur’an.Whoever wants help can ask me. One person stood
up and asked, “Ya Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as)! Please do instruct me with
thos verses of the Qur’an.” The Imam (as) recited two verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ وَلِيِّي اللَّهُ الَّذِي نَزَّلَ الْكِتَابَ وَهُوَ يَتَوَلَّى
الصَّالِحِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely my guardian is Allah, Who revealed the Book, and He befriends
the the righteous.*** ***(7:196)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّماوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they have not honored Allah with the honor that is due to Him;
and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the day of resurrection and
the heavens rolled up in His right hand; glory be to Him, and may He be
exalted above what they associate (with Him).*** ***(39:67)***

The man recited these verses and he escaped unhurt from a ferocious fire
that had burnt down many houses in his neighborhood.

Another person got up and asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as), “Ya Imam! I
have a flock of animals. Some of them have the tendency to flee” The
Imam (as) said: Recite this verse in the ear of the animals that have
tendency to run away from the flock:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا
وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Is it then other than Allah's religion that they seek (to follow),
and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or
unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned.*** ***(3:83)***

The person followed the Imam (as)’s instruction and the animals remained
docilely in the flock.

One more person got up and asked, “Ya Imam! The place where I dwell
there are plenty of wild animals. They enter my barn and harm my
domestic animals.” The Imam (as) said, Keep reciting the following two
verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَقَدْ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ مَا
عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَءُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ. فَإِنْ
تَوَلَّوْا فَقُلْ حَسْبِي اللَّهُ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ عَلَيْهِ
تَوَكَّلْتُ وَهُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***But if they turn back, say: Allah is sufficient for me, there is no
god but He; on Him do I rely, and He is the Lord of the Throne (of
Glory) Supreme!*** ***(9:129)***

When the man started reciting the verses regularly, the wild animals
kept away from his place.

Another person rose and said, “Ya Imam! I suffer from excessive
biliousness which is troubling me much. Kindly teach me a verse that I
get rid of the ailment.” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said: O person!
Hear carefully! You will spend neither a Dirham nor a Deenar for this
treatment! Write *Ayat al Kursi* on your tummy wash it down. Also write
the *Ayat al Kursi* on a plate, wash it with water and drink it. Allah
will give you cure.

Another person asked, “Ya Imam! My slave has run away. What can I do to
bring him back?” Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said, “Recite this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَوْ كَظُلُمَاتٍ فِي بَحْرٍ لُجِّيٍّ يَغْشَاهُ مَوْجٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهِ
مَوْجٌ مِنْ فَوْقِهِ سَحَابٌ ظُلُمَاتٌ بَعْضُهَا فَوْقَ بَعْضٍ إِذَا
أَخْرَجَ يَدَهُ لَمْ يَكَدْ يَرَاهَا وَمَنْ لَمْ يَجْعَلْ اللَّهُ لَهُ
نُورًا فَمَا لَهُ مِنْ نُورٍ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Or (the Unbelievers' state) is like the depths of darkness in a vast
deep ocean, overwhelmed with billow topped by billow, topped by (dark)
clouds: depths of darkness, one above another: if a man*** ***stretches
out his hands, he can hardly see it! for any to whom Allah giveth not
light, there is no light!*** ***(24:40)***

When the man started reciting the verse, the slave returned home by
himself.

Another person asked, “Ya Imam! Kindly instruct me with a verse to guard
against thieves and burglars.” The Imam (as) said: When you go to bed,
recite the following two verses. Your property will be safe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ ادْعُوا اللَّهَ أَوْ ادْعُوا الرَّحْمَانَ أَيًّا مَا تَدْعُوا
فَلَهُ الأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَى وَلا تَجْهَرْ بِصَلاتِكَ وَلا تُخَافِتْ
بِهَا وَابْتَغِ بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ سَبِيلاً. وَقُلْ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ
الَّذِي لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَدًا وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ شَرِيكٌ فِي
الْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ وَلِيٌّ مِنْ الذُّلِّ وَكَبِّرْهُ
تَكْبِيرًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: Call upon Allah or call upon, the Beneficent Allah; whichever
you call upon, He has the best names; and do not utter your prayer with
a very raised voice nor be silent with regard to it, and seek a way
between these. And say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has not taken
a son and Who has not a partner in the kingdom, and Who has not a helper
to save Him from disgrace; and proclaim His greatness magnifying (Him).
(17:110-111)***  
 Then Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) said: If a person is in a wilderness
in the night, he should recite the *Ayat Sakhra* and angels will guard
him and the satans dare not come near him. The ayat is,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ رَبَّكُمْ اللَّهُ الَّذِي خَلَقَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُغْشِي اللَّيْلَ
النَّهَارَ يَطْلُبُهُ حَثِيثًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ وَالنُّجُومَ
مُسَخَّرَاتٍ بِأَمْرِهِ أَلا لَهُ الْخَلْقُ وَالأَمْرُ تَبَارَكَ
اللَّهُ رَبُّ الْعَالَمِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods of time, and He is firm in power; He throws the veil of
night over the day, which it pursues incessantly; and (He created) the
sun and the moon and the stars, made subservient by His command; surely
His is the creation and the command; blessed is Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.*** ***(7:54)***

One person, who had heard this, happened to stay in a wilderness in the
night. He did not remember the verse. Two satans cam to him. One shut
his mouth to stop him from reciting the verse and the other said, ‘Don’t
gag his mouth! Give him some time!’ The man suddenly remembered the
verse and recited it. The angels immediately appeared and stood in guard
around him and stayed with him till the morning. The man went to
Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) and said, “Ya Imam! I found your instruction
right!” He recounted his experience of the night. He said, “I went to
the place after the sunrise and found the footmarks of the Satans who
dragged away from there.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) said that those who are exposed to the dangers of
drowining in the high seas, should recite the following verses to have
safe voyages:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ مَجْرَاهَا وَمُرْسَاهَا إِنَّ رَبِّي لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
بِسمِ اللهِ المَلكِ الحَقِّ المُبينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And he said: Embark in it, in the name of Allah be its sailing and
its anchoring; most surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.***
***(11:41)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
. وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا
قَبْضَتُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّماوَاتُ مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ
سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And they have not honored Allah with the honor that is due to Him;
and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the day of resurrection and
the heavens rolled up in His right hand; glory be to Him, and may He be
exalted above what they associate (with Him).*** ***(39:67)***

### Sura Bani Israel

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that a person who recites this verse
every Friday night will not die till he sets his eyes on the *Saheb al
Asr* (The Twelfth Imam). This person will also have the status of the
companions of the Prophet of Islam (S).

It is narrated that Omer bin Hanzala came to the presence of Imam Ja’far
As-Sadiq (as) and complained of a headache. The Imam (as) said: Put your
hand at the spot you feel the pain and recite the following verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قُلْ لَوْ كَانَ مَعَهُ آلِهَةٌ كَمَا يَقُولُونَ إِذًا لابْتَغَوْا
إِلَى ذِي الْعَرْشِ سَبِيلاً﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: If there were with Him gods as they say, then certainly they
would have been able to seek a way to the Lord of the Throne!.***
***(17.42)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِذَا قِيلَ لَهُمْ تَعَالَوْا إِلَى مَا أَنزَلَ اللَّهُ وَإِلَى
الرَّسُولِ رَأَيْتَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ يَصُدُّونَ عَنْكَ صُدُودًا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when it is said to them: Come to what Allah has revealed and to
the Messenger, you will see the hypocrites turning away from you with
(utter) aversion.*** ***(4.61)***

### Sura Hood

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) said: Whoever recites this verse on every
Friday, he will be raised on the day of Resurrection along with the
prophets (as).

### Sura Yusuf

One who recites this verse regularly everyday, his face will be bright
on the Day of Judgement like the face of the Prophet of Islam (S).

### Sura Raad

The one who recites this verse will be safe from the strike of
lightning.

### Sura Ibrahim and Sura Hajr

One who recites these verses on Fridays with a prayer of two
genuflections will never be penurous.

### Sura Nahl

One who recites this verse will never be indebted.

### Sura Kahf

One who recites this verse on Fridays will have the status of a martyr
when he dies.

### Sura al-Hajj

One who recites this verse once in every three days, he will perform
Hajj the same year.

### Sura Ankaboot and Alrome

One who recites these verses on 14th of Ramadan will go to Heaven.

### Sura Yaseen

This verse is the heart of the Qur’an. Reciting this verse enhances
livelihood and wards away evils. Someone asked Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) a
cure for piles. The Imam asked him to write Sura Yasin on parchment with
honey, wash it and drink the fluid.When a person has leukoderma the same
process of treatment should be followed.

One person asked Ameeral Mu’mineen (as) to give him a prayer for
recovering lost valuables. The Imam (as) asked him to offer two *rakaat*
of prayer and in every *raka* recite sura Yasin. Then he should say,
*‘ya hadi alzallat rad ala zaallati.’*.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) narrates that a person who recited the sura
Yasin once in his lifetime, Allah will enter good deeds in his record
equal to the numbers of the creatures in the entire universe. Allah will
also pardon two thousand sins of the person. He will be safe from
penury, indebtedness and disease. The death qualms and the pressure of
the grave will be light for him. He will prosper in the world and get
rewards in the Hereafter. Allah will reward him so much that He will
announce to the angels to keep praying for the person’s deliverance.

The Imam (as) also said that a person who has marks of leukoderma on his
face should write Sura Yasin with honey, dissolve in water and drink.

### Sura al-Saffaat

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said: Whoever recites this verse on Fridays
will be safe from all sorts of calamities. His livelihood will increase.
No harm will come to his life, property and the family. No cruel ruler
or Satan would trouble him. He will enter the Heaven with the martyrs.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Ameer al Mimineen (as) narrates that when a person has
the fear of getting stung by a scorpian or snake should recite this
verse.One who desires to have plenty of Reward on the Day of Judgement,
should recite the following after every prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿سُبْحَانَ رَبِّكَ رَبِّ الْعِزَّةِ عَمَّا يَصِفُونَ. وَسَلَامٌ عَلَى
الْمُرْسَلِينَ. وَالْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Glory be to your Lord, the Lord of Honor, above what they
describe.*** ***And peace be on the messengers.*** ***And all praise is
due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.*** ***(37:180-182)***

If any person recites this verse while getting up from sitting posture
everytime, whatever sin he committed while sitting will be pardoned.

### Sura al-Saad

A person who recites this verse on the eve of Friday Allah will bestow
on him so much reward in this world and the Hereafter that He Has not
given to any mortal other than the Prophets (as). The kin of the person,
and even his slaves and servants, will enter Heaven on his intercession.

### Sura Haa Meem Sajda

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “Any person who recites this verse,
Allah will provide him a light on the Day of Judgement that there will
be illumination to the extent his eyes could see. Allah will bless him
with contentment and happiness. Looking at the person, others would
express their desire to be like him.”

### Sura Haa Meem Ain Seen Qaaf

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that a person who regularly recites
this verse will rise from his grave on the Day of Resurrection with a
face as white as snow and would shine like the sun. While he will stand
in front of Allah’s Firmament, Allah would say ‘O My creature! You
always recited this verse! If you were aware of the Reward for reciting
it, you would never have tired of doing it!’ Now, know the Reward for
doing it.

The angels will be ordered to take the person to the Heaven. He will be
guided to the palace speciaally erected for him. The walls of the palace
would be made of red rubies. The parapets would be of green emeralds. It
will be delicately constructed that everything outside the palace will
be visible through the walls from inside. In the palace there will be
virgin houris, young women and a thousand slaves and slave girls to
attend on him.

### Sura al-Zhaqraf

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) says, “Whoever recites this verse regularly
Allah will prevent him from the vermin in the grave and he will remain
safe from the pressure of the grave. This verse will intercede on behalf
of the person on the Day of Judgement.and lead him to the Heaven.”

### Sura al-Muhammad

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “Whoever recites this verse will be safe
from commitment of sins. He will not carry any doubts about the Faith.
He will not be afflicted with penury. He will be free of the fear of the
rulers. Allah will appoint a thousand angels to pray for him at his
graveside after his death. Thousand angels will be beside him when he is
raised from the grave on the Day of Resurrection. These angels will
protect him from the hardships of that eventful Day. The person will be
in the trust of Allah and His Prophet (S)!”

### Sura al-Rehman

This verse has much felicity. The person who recites it will have a face
as bright as the moon. It is advised that whenever one recites *fabe
ayye aalaye Rabbekuma tukazzebaan* he should say *la beshaiyun min
alaayeke Rabbe akzib.*

### Sura al-Jinn

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A person who recites this verse
regularly, will be safe from any harm from the jinns and magicians in
this world. He will be amongst the companions of the Prophet (S) in the
Heaven.”

### Surat Al Waqia

One who recites this verse every night, Allah will befriend him. The
person will never suffer from poverty or hunger.

### Sura Inna Anzalna

A person who recites this verse will get the satatus of a martyr. If one
recites it during prayers, all his sins will be padoned. If a person
recites this verse continuously during Ramadan and a thousand times on
the eve of 23rd Ramadan, he will witness such wonders on the morning of
the 23rd that he will get amazed! His belief and Faith would become
firmer!

Whenever Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) wore a new dress he would recite *sura inna
anzalna, sura Qul huwalla, sura qul ya ayyuhal kaferoon* ten times each,
blow on a small quantity of water from his mouth and sprinkle it on his
new clothes. The Imam (as) used to say that whoever does this will be
given good sustenence by Allah till a thread of the dress remained with
him.

Someone asked Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “Ya Maula! I have married a few
women, but still I am issue-less!” The Imam (as) replied, “Before
copulation you must recite *Sura Inna anzalna* seven times in a manner
that your right hand is near the umbilicus of your wife Till the
pregnancy becomes evident, keep placing your hand near the umbilicus of
your wife and recite the verse every night.” When the person adopted
this practice, his wife became pregnant and he was blessed with seven
sons thereafter.

The Imam (as) also said, “One who recites the verse *Inna anzalna* in
the prayers instead of *Qul hawalla,* there will be doubt about the
acceptance of his prayers. Even if it is accepted, there may not be any
Reward for such a prayer.”

### Sura Zalzaal

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) said, “A person recites this verse in optional
prayers, Allah will save him from earth-quakes, lightning strikes and
other calamities. At the time of his death an angel will recommend to
the *Malak al Maut* (the angel of death) to make his death easy. The
person would see his place in the Heaven before his death. All the
curtains would be raised from in front of him and his spirit would be
taken away peacefully.”

It is narrated from Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) that the Prophet of Allah (S)
has said, “A person who recites the *Surat al Zalzaal* four times, it
would be like reciting the complete Book.”

### Surat Al Qareaa

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Whoever recites this verse
regularly, will be rendered safe by Allah from the tortures of Dajjal.
He will be spared the Hellfire in the Hereafter.”

### Surat Al Takasur

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) says, “One who recites this verse will be
given the rewards equal to that for a hundred martyrs. Whoever recites
it in the optional prayers, rewards equal to that of fifty martyrs will
be entered into his account. Such a person will be having forty rows of
angels praying the mandatory prayers standing behind him.”

### Surat Al Asr

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “If a person recites this verse in
his optional prayers, Allah will raise him on the Day of Judgement with
a radiant face, smiling teeth and bright eyes. He will be sent to the
Heaven.”

### Sura al-Kawthar

A person who recites this surat during his mandatory and optional
prayers, Allah will quench his thirst at the Cistern of Kawthar and will
give him a place in the vicinity of the Prophet of Allah (S).

### Sura Iza Ja-Aa Nasr Allah

Reciting this verse in the prayers protects one from the machinations of
his enemies.

### Surat Al Iqlas

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said that if a person recites this verse
once, Allah will shower Blessings on him. When the person recites it
twice, Allah will Bless his children. If the person recites the verse
thrice, Allah will also Bless the person’s friends. Thus, the more a
person recites this verse, the more he shall be Blessed by Allah. For
reciting the verse a thousand times, the person will get the august
status of a martyr.

While the Prophet of Allah (S) was offering the funeral prayer of Saad
bin Ma-aaz, he noticed that seventy thousand angels were present at the
prayer. He asked Jibraeel the reason for this honor to the dead person.
Jibraeel replied that he used to recite *Sura al-Iqlas* frequently.

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “If you desire Allah’s protection
from your enemies, recite *Sura al-Iqlas* on your six sides, that is,
right, left, up, down, front and back.”

And when you go to confront a superior, recite this verse thrice in
front of the person and at every recitation close one finger of you left
hand. With Allah’s help you will come out successful!

Then the Imam (as) said, “If a person has not recited the *Surat al
Iqlas* for one week, his Reckoning will be along with the accursed abu
Lahab.”

The Imam (as) further said: If one is suffering from an ailment, and
doesn’t take help from this verse, then he is a denizen of the Hell.

Also said: If your believe in Allah and the Day of Judgement, then after
the mandatory prayers don’t forget to recite *Sura al-Iqlas. Allah will
pardon the sins of your forbears and your offspring.*

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen ‘Ali (as) has said: A person who recites the *Sura
al-Iqlas* eleven times after the mandatory morning prayer, the Satan
cannot make him commit a sin even if he tempts the person a hundred
thousand times.

Also Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (a.s..) said, “When a person recites the verse in
the night, Allah will depute fifty thousand angels to keep vigil the
whole night.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “When a person reads *Sura al-Iqlas*
it is like reading a third of the Qur’an, a third of Torah, Injeel and
Zaboor.”

Also the Imam (as) said, “Allah has subjugated fever to Lady Fatima
Zahra (as) in lieu of the *Garden of Fadak.* Therefore if a friend of
the *Ahl-ul-Bayt* recites *Sura al-Iqlas* a thousand times and blows
over a person suffering from high fever, the person will recover with
Allah’s Help.”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said, “If one sits near a sick person, recites
*Surat Al-Fatiha, Al Iqlas, Qul Aooz berabinnaas, Qul Aoozo berabbil
falaq* and touches the face of the ailing person, *Insha Allah,* the
sickness will vannish.”

### Surat Al Kaaferoon

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “When a person recites *Surat al
Kaaferoon and Iqlas* during the mandatory prayers, Allah will pardon his
parents and siblings. If he is a callous(*Shaqi*) person, Allah will
remove his name from the roster of such persons and put him on the list
of the virtuous. Allah will give him felicity in the worldly affairs, he
will die the death of a martyr and will be raised a martyr on the Day of
Reckoning.”

### Surat Al Mauzateen

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) say, “There are two verses, *an Naas and
Falaq,* that when they were revealed, the Prophet (S) was having fever
and this verse was used as an amulet for him and he recovered.”

### Surat Ad Dahr

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Whoever recites this verse on the
morning of Thursdays, Allah will grant to him in the Heaven a group of
eight hundred virgins and four thousand houris. The person will be in
the company of the Prophet (S).”

Imam Ar-Ridha’ (as) has said that it is a fact that there will be effect
of bad eyes. A person can set a bad eye even on himself. Therefore to
prevent against the effect of bad eyes one should recite thrice the
following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا شَاءَ اللهُ لا قُوَّةَ إلاّ باللهِ العَلِيِّ العَظِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Allah’s will prevails and there is no might but the Most High, the
Great.**

When one has the fear of bad eye affecting him, he should recite the
verse *Mauzatain* while going out.


