Chapter 12: The Status
======================

Backbiting Condemned
--------------------

All schools of thoughts in Islam are united on condemning back-bitiing
as a *haram* act. It is proved beyond doubt through authentic traditions
that the Prophet of Islam (S) has termed backbiting as a major sin worst
than adultery.

Backbiting is more nefarious than adultery. If a person commits adultery
and expresses his compunction wholeheartedly, Allah might pardon him.
But backbiting is an unpardonable sin. The only way out for the
backbiter is that the person about whom he carried tales himself pardons
him.

Abusing a Muslim is impiety, fighting with him is infidelity but
backbiting against him is like eating the flesh of one’s own brother.
This is tantamount to disobedience to Allah.

It is authentically reported from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that If a
person carries the tales of a *Mu’min,* that he had witnessed or heard,
his position will be as stated by Allah,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَ أَنْ تَشِيعَ الْفَاحِشَةُ فِي الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَاللَّهُ
يَعْلَمُ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Those who like to reveal the failings of the faithful, they have
severe chastisment in store for them?*** **(24:19)**

Backbiting destroys the faith of a Muslim as leprosy disintegrates the
body from inside.

Awaiting the arrival of the time of the next congregation in the mosque
is an act of virtue, if one doesnot indulge in backbiting about others
in the meantime.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that. “If a person
narrates the doings of a *Mu’min* to others with a purpose of belittling
him, Allah will remove this backbiter from his guardianship and transfer
him to the guardianship of the Satan. Satan willingly accepts the charge
of such a person!”

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that a person who has faith
in the Day of Judgement, he should not sit in a company where there is
talk against the Infallible members of the Prophet (S)’s Family and also
there is a practice of backbiting against *Mu’mins.* When a person
prevents others from backbiting, Allah will remove from him a thousand
difficulties. If the person quietly listens to backbiting and doesn’t
intervene on behalf of the absent person, he will himself become a party
to the sin of backbiting. This sin will be seventy times more severe
than the sin of the person who was actually doing the backbiting.

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) that one who backbites
against a *Mu’min*, although he may have no enmity against the person,
the progeny of such backbiter will have the Satan’s share in it.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) says that when someone talks against a *Mu’min*
with the purpose of putting him to disrepute, Allah will place him in
such a station on the Day of Judgement where there will be accumulation
of the scum of the adulterers’ semen. He will remain there till he
receives a pardon.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Abstain from carrying false notions
against others. This is the biggest weakness. Move in the way of Allah
as brothers. Allah ordains thus: ‘… and don’t call one another with bad
names. Don’t search others’ faults. Don’t use abusive language while
conversing. Don’t do backbiting. Abstain from fights. Don’t hate or be
jealous of others. Remember, jealousy eats away faith the same way as
the fire consumes the dried wood!’”

In another narrative the Prophet (S) says, “Allah sent a Revelation to
prophet Musa (as), ‘If a backbiter repents, he will be the among the
last to enter the precincts of the Heaven. If he doesn’t repent his act,
he will be amongst the first to be sent to the Hell!’”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said: Four persons are such that their
torture would even cause pain to the people of the Hell. The *Hameem* of
the Hell will be there for them to feed on. They will raise lots of
wails. The people of the Hell would complain that despite their own
pain, they are raising noise and disturbing them the more. Some of them
will be hanging on the sarcophagus of the Hell. They will be pulling out
the innards of each other.

From the mouths of others pus and blood will flow out. Some others will
snatch the flesh from their own bodies and eat. The people of the Hell
will inquire about those hanging on to the sarcophagus and will be told
that at the time of their death they owed lot of money to others. They
did not leave behind anything to settle others’ dues. They will then
inquire about those who were pulling at each other’s innards. They will
be told that these were the people who eased themselves anywhere not
bothering about anyone. When they inquired about the persons who were
oozing pus and blood from their mouths; they will be told that they were
the persons who were in the habit of backbiting and carrying tales.

The companions of Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) asked him about the meaning
of the tradition of the Prophet (S), “A *Mu’min’s* woman is taboo for
another *Mu’min.”* The Imam replied: Revealing a *Mu’min’s* secret is
*haram.* The fast and the ablution of a backbiter goes void. One who
recounts the failings of others, himself has many failings.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen Ameer al Mimineen (as) has asked people to refrain
from backbiting. This habit is the fodder of the dogs of the Hell.

Meaning Of Backbiting
---------------------

Talking about a *Mu’min* in a tone that would hurt him, if he were
around, and heard you talk, is tantamount to backbiting.

Even if this backbiting is in gestures and and subtle indications, it is
taboo. However if the name of the person is not mentioned and only said
that in the city there is a person who has such and such a bad habit,
then it will not be termed backbiting. But if certain traits are
attributed to a person in his absence, and, in fact, he doesn’t manifest
those traits, then the act is backbiting and is taboo. In fact this
would be an allegation much worse than backbiting.

Justification For Backbiting
----------------------------

There are ten situations in which backbiting is justified

When a tyrant oppresses someone and the oppressed persons seeks help
from another person in authority by informing him of the oppression he
has suffered at the hands of the tyrant.

Recounting the faults of a person to someone else with the solemn hope
that this way the faults of the person could be corrected.

While applying for an edict (*fatwa)* mentioning the name of the other
party. For example, informing to the jurist the name of a brother who is
denying to him his just rights.

If a *Mu’min* takes the advice of another *Mu’min* whether he can
entrust his valuables to a particular person and that whether that
person, in his opinion, can be depended upon.

Revealing the hypocritic acts of the hypocrites that can harm the
society is justified.

If a jurist (*mujtahid)* points out the *khata al-mujtahidi (*error of
judgement) of another *mujtahid,* it is permissible.

Arguing about the veracity or otherwise of narrators of events is
permitted.

When people are told about a particular failing of a person and they
don’t agree, then highlighting that defect as an explanation is
justified. For example, someone says about a person that he is volubly
talkative!

If a group of persons is compulsively commiting the same mistake, then
it is permissible to talk about their failings.

When a culprit is arraigned in front of a magistrate for repeated
commitment of crimes, then it is justified to recount his foul acts in
the court.

Giving Ear To Backbiting
------------------------

One who listens to backbiting is a sinner as much as the one who carries
the tales. Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said, “The one who gives ears to
backbiting is one of the two backbiters!” It is a common saying that one
should discourage backbiting. If one fails to achieve this, then he
should discreetly walk away from the place.

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “One who prevents people from
backbiting against brother *Mu’mins* and helps them, Allah will save him
from the travails of this world and the Hereafter.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq has said, “If someone is, whom we donot know,
backbites about a *Mu’min,* we should not belittle the *Mu’min.* Who
knows he may be the righteous one!”

Expiation For Backbiting
------------------------

The expiation for backbiting is that one should seek the pardon of those
against whom he has committed the act and try to remove the rancor from
their hearts.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said that backbitring is a sin worse than
adultery. People asked the reason for this. The Prophet (S) replied, “If
one repents having committed adultery, Allah might pardon the person.
But repentence for having done backbiting is not accepted till the
person who was the victim of the act does not forgive the perpetrator.”
Also the Prophet (S) said, “If a person whose backbiting has been done
is not aware of the act, even then the person who has talked about him
should personally seek his forgiveness. If, in the meantime, the victim
dies, the backbiter will not be pardoned at all.”

False Allegations Condemned
---------------------------

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said that if someone makes a false
allegation against a *Mu’min* or a *Mu’mina,* and relates a thing about
them that is not true, such a person would be made to stand on a hill of
fire on the Day of Judgement.

Someone asked Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as), “What is the distance between
truth and falsehood!” The Imam (as) replied, “Only the width equivalent
to the width of four fingers! He told this putting his four fingers
between his ear and the eye. Then added, “What you see with your eye is
the truth and most of what you hear through your ear might be the
falsehood!”

One who tells falsehoods about brother *Mu’mins* to belittle them, Allah
will shame him in this world and the Hereafter!

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) made a will that people should keep away from
those who make false allegations about others. Their company might make
others adopt their nefarious habit.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said: One who keeps company ofpeople who
tell falsehoods, might himself be in the same habit.

Jealousy
--------

Jealousy is among the worst psychological sins. This is the first sin
that Satan committed against prophet Adam (as). Jealousy is one of the
major sins. The jealous person wishes harm to the subject of his
feelings. If he feels that he should attain the same status as the other
person has, then it can be termed as the spirit of competition that is
permissible. When a jealous person wishes that the status of his subject
of jealousy diminishes, it may not happen because all privileges are a
gift from Allah. Jealousy against what Allah has given to some will be
tantamount to confronting Him! The jealous person, therefore, will be
sad and dejected because of this pernicious habit.

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said, “Don’t be jealous. Jealousy eats away
the Faith as the fire devours the dry wood!”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) has said, “A *Mu’min* has recourse to the
spirit of competition (*Ghibta)* and not jealousy. In *Ghibta* there is
no element of wishing diminishing of the other person’s status but the
wish to equal him or even surpass him in his achievements.”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Heaven is taboo for the *nammam
(*the backbiter), carrier of tales and the jealous!”

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “O Abu Dharr! One who is a hypocrite
and tale carrier in this world, he will be in the Hell on the Day of
Reckoning. A hypocrite is one who praises the person on his face and
belittles him in his absence.”

O Abu Dharr! Every secret that a brother *Mu’min* has confided to you in
private, revealing it to others is dishonesty. Abstain from revealing
it. If you don’t guard the secret of a brother *Mu’min,* he too might
not uphold your secrets!

The Talebearer
--------------

A talebearer will never enter the Heaven and will not have any relief
from the tortures of the Hell.

The Prophet of Allah (S) has said, “Those who have made it their habit
to gossip and carry tales, create enmity amongst good friends, and
allege failings in others that are not there, are the worst of men.
Heaven is taboo for such persons.” Then the Prophet (S) added, “Four
types of people will be denied the Heaven: 1. Soothsayers or wizards. 2.
Hypocrites. 3. Alcoholics. 4. Talebearers.”

Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as) narrates that three categories of persons will
not go to the Heaven. 1. Those who shed the blood of Muslims. 2. Those
who take intoxicants. 3. The talebearers.

It is narrated from the Prophet of Islam (S) that on the night of
*Meraj* he saw a woman whose head was like that of a pig and the body
akin to one of a monkey. She was victim to a thousand hardships. The
companions asked the Prophet (S), “Ya Imam! Why the hardships visited
the woman?” He (as) replied, “She was a talecarrier and perpetrater of
untruths!”

Imam Muhammad Al-Baqir (as) has said, “Very bad is the person who has
two opinions and two words! He praises one on his face and condemns him
behind his back! He will be jealous when given something and run away in
times of difficulty!”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said, “A twofaced person will come on the
Day of Judgement with a face having a second tongue in the back of his
head. One of the tongues will be hanging in front of his head. Flames
will be emanating from both the tongues. The fire will then enter his
entire body. A herald will announce that this was the same person who
adoped two tongues and faces in the world!”

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (as) has said, “Three types of persons will be under
the shadow of the Firmament on the Day of Judgement, when there will be
no other shade than this: 1. A person who arranges marriages of
unmarried *Mu’mins.* 2. One who provides a servant for a brother
*Mu’min. 3. One who keeps the secrets of* Mu’mins. Remember keeping
others’ secrets is very important.”

Amir’ul-Mu’mineen (as) has said, “Keep good relations with your friends
lest they become your enemies someday. Don’t exceed in the enmity with
your enemies. Perhaps they might become your good friends someday!”

“O Abu Dharr! The acts of people committed between a Friday to the next
are recounted to Allah on the following weednesday and Thursday. Allah
pardons the sins of all barring those have carried enmity against their
brothers. Allah orders to keep their deeds in abeyance till they reach a
rapprochement and the enmity is banished.”

“O Abu Dharr! Abstain from keeping a distance from your brother! Because
of creating distances, no action will be acceptable to Allah! O Abu
Dharr! I warn you against creating distances! If circumstance force
separation, let it not be for more than three days! One who keeps away
for more than three days from his brother *Mu’min,* and dies in that
period, then the Hellfire will be more appropriate for him!”

An authentic source quotes from the Prophet of Islam (S), “One who has
more cares and sorrow will be sickly. One who carries a bad character,
will be the accursed. One who fights and argues with people will lack
humanness and thoughtfulness.” Then the Prophet (S) added, “Jibrael (as)
has always been warning me against litigation the same way that he
warned against drinking and idolatory!”

It is narrated from Imam Ja’far As-Sadiq (as), “As long as two Muslims
remain at loggerheads, Satan will remain happy. When they reach a
rapprochement, the Satan’s knees crumble! He then complains, ‘What a
calamity has struck me!’”

The Imam (as) also said, “*Sadaqa* (charity) is very dear to Allah. That
is, arranging a rapprochement between warring groups arranging a truce
between two fighting men is a better charity than giving away two gold
coins in alms!”

Pride
-----

“O Abu Dharr! The maximum number of people who will go to the Hell will
be from those who are victims of pride!”

Someone asked, “Ya Imam! What is the way of protecting oneself from
becoming proud?” The Prophet (S) replied, “A person who wears coarse
cloth, rides on the long eared mules, milks his own goats and shares his
food with the poor and prefers to carry his own burden is free from the
trait of pride!” This means that humility protects one from becoming
proud.

“O Abu Dharr! One who makes his robe trail behind him in pride, Allah
will not cast the look of Blessing towards him on the Day of Reckoning!”
One who draws the ends of his robe in his hands and walsk on the street,
and doesn’t walk like the proud, conceited Arabs, who repairs his own
footwear and bows his Head to Allah on the sands is free from the trait
of false pride!

Very soon the Prophet (S) said, “My *Ummat* will have people who will be
born in affluence. They will be pampered with delicious foods and
victuals. Flattering poets will sing paens in their praise. These will
be the bad ones among my *Ummat!*”


