Preface
=======

**In The Name of God, The Most Beneficent, The Most Merciful**

“Since we cannot change reality, let us change the eyes which see
reality.” - Nikos Kazantzakis

“Let the hearts of those rejoice who seek the Lord.” - 1 Chron [16:10]

“Guide me in Your truth and teach me, for You are the God of my
salvation; I wait for You all day long.” - Psalms [25:5]

“Blessed is the man who finds wisdom, the man who gains
understanding.” - Prov [3:13]

***“Oh my People, follow the Messengers!” - Holy Quran [36:20]***

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Dear Reader, dear human being, wherever you are and whichever time you
exist, whether you are a believer or not, Muslim or not, monotheist or
polytheist, fair or unjust, good or evil, righteous or corrupt,
good-doer or sinner, truthful or liar, faithful or hypocrite, lover or
hater, sane or foolish, whether you are interested or indifferent,
white-skinned or black, yellow or brown, Arab or non-Arab, in China you
reside or in America, in Europe you reside or in Africa, in India you
reside or in Spain…all that does not matter. What is important is that
you are a human being with a spirit and a unique being, with a heart and
a pair of eyes, with ears, tongue, hands and legs…and most importantly a
brain with sound intellect, intelligence and the ability to recognize
and sense.

This is what makes you different from the animal kingdom and elevates
you to the rank of a human being. Dear human reader, I present this
clarification to you and I call upon you by every sacred, valuable and
beloved thing to you. I invite you to begin reading these pages with
full concentration, thought, insight, and with all patience and effort
to dedicate sometime for yourself. I call upon you to live these words
that you’re about to read and follow the thoughts, suggestions, logic,
proofs, questions, certainty, possibilities, rejected thoughts, accepted
ideas, equations, calculations, results and conclusions.

I present all that to your mind and intellect that is free from any
previous knowledge, fanaticism, leniency, and from every belief or
intimacy. I ask you to empty everything inside you except your
brainpower, intelligence, sound judgment and wisdom. Do not bring
anything with you except your common sense which is agreed upon by any
human being.

Dear reader, be patient since this is all for your benefit. In the end,
it will not hurt you and you have nothing to lose. Rather, you may gain
some benefit, advantage, or profit, so this possibility certainly
deserves your attention and patience. In the end, the decision is yours
and the final judgment is in your own hands. But do not let anyone
prevent you from reaping its fruits.

So stand up against every attempt to prevent you from using your logic
and sound judgment, for there are always those who desire to discourage
you from using your mind and try to lead you astray. After all, it is
the right of your intellect that you give it an opportunity even for
once, to make its judgment by itself. No one ever regretted when they
saw the light, embraced it, and dealt with the truth. We offer this
advice to you sincerely and we leave the decision up to you. As a known
philosopher (Descartes) once said, “I think, therefore I am!”

Now, let us start our journey together from the very beginning. Extend
your hand to me and let us promise each other that we search together
for the truth and reject what is clearly far from the truth. That we
accept the truth regardless of whether we find it sweet or bitter. Let
us go ahead without further ado, in our intellectual journey until we
reach our desired destination. So go ahead and flip the page and let us
start in our first research topic of this book, Building Blocks of
Faith.


