Translator’s Introduction
=========================

When I first picked up the case studies in this compilation of work to
read, little did I know what I was to embark on! By the time I finished
reading this precious work, I was convinced that the thoughts presented
here were divinely inspired. I was very impressed, yet I felt a bit of
shame. I was glad and lucky to have read and absorbed the thoughts
presented in these chapters as I felt that my faith have become revived
and strengthened from its very foundation. Yet, I wondered why didn’t I
(as human being with a healthy and functional brain) ever ask myself
these questions posed in this work, without having someone else lift my
attention to it? And if I did ask myself these questions, would have I
reached the conclusions reached by logical deduction?

This piece of work which I consider to be a “masterpiece” is written by
an humble, wise, and sincere servant of God, my esteemed father whom I
consider to be my teacher and mentor at the very least. Because of its
dire importance and value, we sought to translate this work by the grace
of God which was originally written in Arabic and is now available in
English to accommodate a vast population of readers.

This work is unique in that it is directed to everyone who has a sane
and healthy mind, regardless of their color, race, creed, or sect they
belong to. It takes the hand of every human being and walks them step by
step in the journey of guidance, in order to build the foundation of
their faith from scratch, while disregarding any prior belief or
influence, whether from our upbringing or societies we live in. Even if
the building of faith is already present, it is still worth the time for
you read this work and embark on this journey to renovate, reconstruct,
and inspect this building from the bottom and up, just like a home
inspector who routinely conducts an inspection of a house or building.

The thoughts presented in this work are based simply on two things:

1) Common Sense and Logical Deduction.

2) Facts in History which are definite and accurate.

It is directed to people of all backgrounds, classes, and levels of
education. There are no prerequisites to reading these research topics.
You don’t need to own a bank account or earn a college degree. You don’t
need to come from a high class family or be a citizen in your homeland.
You don’t need to own a house or have connections. No pens or paper
need! All the reader needs are two important tools in order to fully
benefit from the thoughts presented in this valuable compilation of
work. These tools, which are readily available to every sane person,
are:

1) Logical Reasoning-that is, working the Mind and using basic rules of
logic and common sense that are inherently born within us and is
universal across all human beings.

2) Open-Mindedness-that is, the desire and motivation to search for
guidance. This entails the willingness to accept the truth when it is
obvious and reject falsehood when it is exposed.

The reader is advised to read the material sequentially and start from
the bottom of the building before getting to the roof. This way, every
brick will be appropriately placed in its position until the final brick
is placed at the very top of the building. The purpose will be met best
in this way and will avoid the reader from having any bias whatsoever.

So let us throw all of our preexisting thoughts behind our backs and
start with a clean white piece of paper. Let us sharpen our minds and
put on our thinking caps. Our only motivation now is to sincerely find
the truth and accept it, regardless of where we find it and whether or
not it matches our preexisting thoughts. Let us promise ourselves to
readily accept the truth when it stares us in the face and to reject
falsehood and nonsense when it is clearly exposed. With that said, you
are ready to pack your bags in preparation to travel in your journey of
guidance!


