1st Case Study: The Divine Presence
===================================

1st Research Topic: Logical Reasoning and Inevitability behind the Existence of God
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Why is it inevitable and essential that God exist?

What is the logical reasoning and essentiality behind the existence of
God?

Does that reasoning follow the logic or not?

Logical Reasoning:

1) If we gaze at the spacious universe which surrounds the Earth, we
will observe spatial objects and stars that all move in an orderly,
specific, and sound pattern. These so-called stars are surrounded by
planets that orbit them in an organized and systematic manner which
reflect the rays of these stars. Surrounding the planets are small moons
that move in regular orbits and their number is different from planet to
planet. They too reflect the rays of the stars. These stars consist of
great bodies of fire and blazing lavas, as well as gases and melted
elements. Every group of stars, planets, and moons that have specific
orbits are called a galaxy. In the spacious universe, there are in fact
millions of galaxies that all move in regular and specific motion.

Furthermore, in every galaxy there are millions of suns or stars that
are surrounded by planets in orbit, which are also orbited by the moons.
Everything travels and moves according to the same fixed laws of motion
(e.g., law of gravity, law of Newton, centrifugal forces, etc.) which if
they were altered for one moment, it would disturb this neat system. In
every second, many of the stars in these different galaxies get
destroyed while many others are born. With these same stable laws, the
new stars are orbited by spatial bodies which themselves are encircled
by other smaller celestial bodies. This is how new solar systems are
created; all this takes place around you and in front of your eyes
millions of time in every second but you do not see or notice it.
However, modern technology have revealed all of these facts to us
including the fixed laws which govern these spatial objects, such that
we are even able to apply these fixed laws and invent satellites which
orbit the Earth for different purposes.

So the question we’re interested in asking is: Who originated and
developed these precise laws? And more importantly, who made these laws
constant and steady without being prone to change? Man requires an
intellectual mind and sound judgment to simply benefit and apply these
laws. In fact, it took hundreds of extraordinary bright heads joined
together to make endless calculations and actually send off a satellite
to orbit the Earth. This was possible only because these laws exist and
are stable. Doesn’t it then require that these laws be established from
nothing and that they be maintained in such a way that makes them
constant and steady in any place in the universe? Doesn’t this
challenging task require an extraordinary brilliant and
super-intelligent mind that would create these non-existent laws,
organize them and regulate them in every place and time? Isn’t this
logical and necessary according to the human brain?

Consider the regulated motion of the multitude of galaxies in space?
This magnificent arrangement could not exist by chance or by accident
because it is built on regulated and fixed laws which man recently
discovered. Could these laws possibly exist without a regulator who is
in charge of maintaining such laws and regulating these systems? Could
this all simply be a coincidence or happen in a random fashion? The laws
we witness around us are considered to be great miracles, but what is
more brilliant and challenging is the ability to maintain and keep these
laws constant and ongoing in every time and place. Do our brains accept
the idea of such intriguing phenomenon happening by chance?

Even if we accepted that, is it acceptable that such accidental and
aimless phenomenon also take on the role of maintaining its intricate
and organized laws in every place and time? If this was actually
possible, would it be appropriate that we still consider these
phenomenon as “accidental” or “random” or “chance”? After all, how can
an “accidental” event be governed by rules that are comprehensive and
regulated? How could such amazing and beautiful phenomenon exist by
chance? And how could something exist from nothing?! Is that logical and
does it agree with a sane mind?

Therefore, the question to ask now is: Who established these organized
and meticulous laws and who maintains these laws at all times and in
every place? Surely, there must exist a wise, great, strong, and
competent mastermind and creator who behold such power and ability that
enables it to carry out all that. This is indeed the logical conclusion
that agrees with common sense of any sane person.

To make the picture more clear to you, consider this scenario: Man
collects all the elements, tools, and equipment needed to assemble a
satellite, then he left these various components on a field without
constructing them together. Could one imagine that all of these
components could come together and rebuild themselves in an appropriate
fashion such that it could take off into space like a satellite would?
Could such event happen by luck or chance? Certainly, this possibility
cannot cross the mind of a sane and logical person! Without our mind and
intellect, we could not ever reap the benefits of these mundane laws.

Then imagine what it would take for one to actually develop these laws
from scratch, let alone maintain its continuity and application.
Therefore, the logical mind concludes that if simply applying these laws
require a smart, thoughtful, and intelligent mind, then it is imperative
that the creator and regulator of these laws himself be very brilliant,
knowledgeable, clever, and talented, etc. This creator must have the
ability to create from nothing. Without having a creator with those
attributes, there would not exist any law and there would not be the
need to regulate anything. Hence, we would not see any sun, stars,
galaxies, or constellations when we gaze at the sky.

If it was not for these laws, there would not be any orbital or spatial
bodies. The actual presence of these laws lead us to believe that there
must exist a God who established these phenomena and oversees its
maintenance. This is the logical reasoning of the human mind and there
is no room for denial or argument on this obvious conclusion.

2) If we take a closer look around us in our everyday life, we will
notice that it is also governed by constant and well-defined laws in all
fields. Similarly, these laws are similar to what we mentioned in the
previous sections; they are constant laws in mathematical sciences,
engineering, biology, chemistry, mechanics, physics, and pharmaceutical
sciences, etc. When man was able to solve and decipher the mysteries and
secrets of these laws, he was able to benefit from them and hence, the
quality of his life advanced and improved dramatically. It would be
foolish for one to think that the recent knowledge and advanced
technologies that we experience in our life nowadays in every field is
the result of the human mind.

The human intellect was only able to discover these already pre-defined
laws and rules and to simply apply them and reaps its benefits. Rather,
true credit and recognition must be given first and foremost to the one
who created these laws and rules from nothing. After that, this creator
and founder made sure that these laws and rules were constant, steady,
and applicable in every time and place. So who did all that? There must
exist a capable, all-powerful, and mighty creator who is in control at
all times! As we mentioned before, if simply benefiting from these laws
requires the presence a wise, smart, and brilliant human mind, then
creating these laws and keeping them in a constant and steady form
certainly requires a much more brilliant and intelligent being who is
more knowledgeable and capable than man.

For example, operating a computer and its programs demands a smart and
clever user. Then imagine what it would take for a person to actually
invent the computer and program it from scratch?! For instance, if you
use electricity for heating, freezing, light or motion, then remember
this great creator who developed the electrical energy and created its
intricate laws. Based on these laws, we were able to use this energy in
our everyday life and enjoy it although we don’t realize exactly who the
creator and caretaker of this phenomenon is.

When you turn on your television set, radio, wireless, radar, telephone,
video, or satellite network; you are indeed using instruments whose
functions rely on constant, well-defined laws that are specific to
electromagnetic waves present in the air which need to be carried and
received appropriately. These waves were present with its laws ever
since the Earth existed, but all man did was simply encounter these laws
and apply them after he learned its constant rules and conditions. So,
all praise and credit is due to the creator of these previously
nonexistent laws that enabled us to invent these instruments and devices
which in themselves stand as an obvious proof of His Existence.

If you ride transportation such as a car, train, aircraft, rocket or
ship, all of these inventions have been built based on laws which
convert fuel to energy, which is in turn converted into motion in
different ways. If it was not for these well-defined and constant laws,
the scientists and researchers would have not been able to invent and
build such intricate machines. So all credit here should be given to the
creator and sustainer of these laws!

There exist many laws around us which are constant and well-defined. For
example, there are centrifugal forces, light energy, speed, electrical
forces, heat energy, wave motion, atomic energy, magnetic energy,
nuclear power, gravitational forces, floatation, sound waves,
calculator, natural laws which govern the interaction between
electricity and heat, electricity and light energy, light and heat,
light and speed, speed and force, electricity and sound waves, light and
sound with electro-magnetic waves.

There also exists chemistry-related laws; the interaction between atoms,
and molecules of elements and compounds, laws that govern these elements
and compounds; laws that convert raw materials into products, laws
related to industrial science, devices, papers, textiles, compounds,
toys, masterpieces, chemicals, food, drink, luxuries…all of that exist
with well-defined and constant laws. Ask the scientists and they’ll tell
you that they built all these inventions and innovations based on laws
that already exist in all the different fields.

Everything you see around you from advanced technology and innovation
stand as a witness and proves that these laws exist and are consistent,
which in turn indicates the presence of the creator who originated these
laws. Without the creator, there would be no laws, and without these
laws there would be no inventions. And without these laws, there would
be no life on Earth. So if you look around you and judge based on logic
and common sense, you will realize that the presence of the creator is a
fact and is logically inevitable and essential because everything around
you indicates that.

3) If you take a closer look at yourself, your own body and organs, and
the life in the creatures around you, e.g. animals, plants, and
microorganisms, you will find that everything is governed by rules and
laws. You can ask the scientists of biology, physiology, anatomy, and
biochemistry about the laws like those which deal with the cells,
osmosis, nuclear acids, genes, nutrients for the cells; laws dealing
with conservation and expenditure of energy. The process of building and
breaking down (anabolism and catabolism) require laws, as well as those
that deal with tissues and the different organs in our body. Every organ
carries its function based on specific laws. Even the relationship of
the organs with each other requires laws.

The different body systems and processes such as breathing, gas
exchange, blood flow, blood pressure, and heartbeat all work under a
defined set of laws. Furthermore, the digestive system, excretion,
reproductive, endocrine, and nervous system also are regulated by laws.
Our five senses, muscle movement, nerve impulses, and perspiration
require laws. The brain and its thought process, cognition, and
coordination of physical movement all have laws that govern them.

Every place in our body like our skin, hair, bones, and joints work with
laws, as the scientists could testify to that. When man was able to
unravel these different processes and gain knowledge about them, many
questions were answered. Man was able to benefit and develop in areas
like medicine and biosciences. He was able to experiment with in vitro
fertilization and even predicts the gender and inherited traits of an
embryo in its mother’s womb.

And now, he wants to take a step further and control genetics (through
the Human Genome Project)! Man was able to perform simple and
complicated surgical procedures and develop other treatments and means
of diagnostics. Even the diseases are governed by laws that are stable
as well as the drugs used for treatment. Medical treatment became
possible when man discovered some of these laws and was able to run
analytical and diagnostic tests to detect a disease. If it was not for
these consistent laws, it would’ve been impossible for us to grow and
develop as we did. It would have been impossible for the human body and
organs to carry out its functions. In fact, all the scientific
disciplines and medical specialties have come to existence based on
these unchanging laws that govern our lives. So who does all the credit
go to?

Logically, our mind tells us that the credit is due to the one who
originated and established these laws from nothing and ensured their
continued status. Without the creator, no law would exist; and without
law, we would not be able to reap the benefits of an organized and
stable system. After deep thought and study, the sound judgment of a
wise mind finds it inevitable to admit the necessity of the presence of
a great Creator who wisely and powerfully created all these mundane laws
for all the living creatures who are alive only because these laws
exist. So, life in and of itself indicates the presence of laws, and
laws indicate the presence of a law-maker and regulator. In fact, your
whole existence and life surrounding you is proof to the logical
existence of a creator and founder of these mundane laws.

So far, we did not discuss or dwell on how life was created from nothing
and this in itself is a clear proof which the mind cannot escape from.
We will avoid discussion in this topic due to the high volume of
controversy and discussion that has already taken place in this topic.
There are those who support the theory of Mother Nature and that life
came into existence by chance. Others believe in the Darwin theory of
evolution. These theories are illogical and go against common sense! In
order for evolution and gradual development to happen, this process
requires a source of energy that needs to be intelligent and thoughtful.

Or else, why would the process of evolution always proceed towards
completion and perfectionism, and why is it always a one-way road? Even
if this theory proves to be correct, its principle is a proof of the
presence of an all-powerful and dominant, wise creator. Actually, thanks
to those who presented this theory of evolution because they provided
for us another proof that supports the existence of a creator.

4) If you take a look at the nature surrounding us, you will find that
it is also built on rules and laws that are stable and do not change.
For example, there are night and day, four different seasons, solar and
lunar eclipse, earthquakes and tornados, hurricanes and blizzards,
thunderstorm and lightening, rain and snow. All of these natural
phenomena are governed by laws which we gained knowledge about and was
able to predict the earthquakes and forecast the weather. Man was able
to predict the occurrence of an eclipse and season timing in different
places. The existence of these laws that govern nature in a consistent
and continuous manner certainly indicates the presence of a creator who
originated these natural phenomena. If it requires a mature and wise
mind to simply benefit from these laws, then it is logical that the
law-maker himself has to be even more intelligent, wise, clever, and
powerful.

4) Take a closer look at the atom and its composition, contents, and the
laws that govern and are governed by it. When man came to know about
this building block of life, he was able to make new elements and
radioactive isotopes. He was able to use the atomic energy (useful and
destructive) and benefit from its physical and chemical properties in
military, civilian, pharmaceutical, and therapeutic areas. The atom
consists of a nucleus which carries a positive charge. It is very small,
but it carries all of the weight of an atom and it is orbited by small
electrons which are negatively charged. These electrons travel in
different levels of orbital with different quantity in every orbital.

This system is very similar to the solar system in the universe and
galaxies and is governed by similar set of principles and laws of
motion. Is it not logical for the mind to conclude that the creator of
the whole great universe is the same as the one who created the smaller
particles in it, which is the atom? Isn't this a divine miraculous hint
from the Creator Himself? Otherwise, if it was an accident or Mother
Nature that created, the questions begs itself whether the accident or
Mother Nature also intended that the whole universe be built under the
same principle of its smallest particle?

And if it did so, could we still call it a coincidence or randomness,
while it can find such similarity that is impossible to happen by mere
coincidence? It was able to build a system which is totally against
randomness! This cannot be accepted by the mind! After all, isn’t it
more than a coincidence that we observe a great similarity between these
phenomena which is impossible to have existed accidentally?

The word “system” itself contradicts the notion of “accident” or
“randomness”. What is more logical is that there exists a creator who
intended this similarity and harmony so that we can recognize this as a
proof for his existence, even if we can’t visually see him. Once again,
there are laws that govern the interaction of electrons with neutrons,
protons with neutrons, etc. When man discovered all of these types of
interactions at the microscopic level, he was able to use this knowledge
in many fields. Doesn't these laws and its consistency and stability
point to the presence of its creator, establisher, and maintainer?

6) As we reached the conclusion earlier, the rules and laws that govern
the universe and the life around us is an organized system that is
stable and cannot come into existence except by a powerful creator who
is wise, capable, and in control.

If we were to accept the notion that life came to existence by Mother
Nature, chance, accident, coincidence or randomness, then we pose the
following question: Is it also possible for Mother Nature, randomness,
or coincidence to create a defined set of laws and an organized system,
and after that, take care of its maintenance, regulation, and
continuity? This is absolutely impossible because the notion of
accident, randomness, and nothing contradicts the idea of a system,
organization, and existence. After all, can nothing create something?
And can something create its opposite? Even if it was able to do so,
could we then still consider it unwise, as the case is with coincidence
and randomness? Furthermore, could man present an example of a similar
analogy to this impossible theory so that we can make a sound judgment?

7) More importantly, there is the creation of man himself! Human beings
are created with a mind and intellect, so how could chance or randomness
create mind and intellect when they themselves lack mind and wisdom?
Logical reasoning dictates that “a deficient thing cannot give what it
does not have.” Therefore, what makes sense is that the one who created
man and granted him the ability to use his mind and think, must be more
wise, more knowledgeable, and more thoughtful than man himself, such
that he is able to give his creation the mind and intellect.

From the previous items 1-7, after thorough study and contemplation, and
after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

1st Conclusion
--------------

There MUST exist a wise, all-powerful, strong, all-knowing, capable,
dominant, eternal, and all-perfect God. The presence of this Creator is
essential, inevitable and agrees with logic and common sense. This
divine presence is surely a reality without any doubt, and therefore, it
is a truth that cannot be denied or refuted logically, reasonably, or
practically.

2nd Research Topic Logical Reasoning and Inevitability that There Exists Only ONE Creator
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

We previously reached the conclusion that there exists a Creator. Now,
the question we ask ourselves: Is there one creator, two, or more?

What is the reasoning and essentiality behind the idea that there exists
only One God?

Does that reasoning follow the logic or not?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) Our logic and common sense deduces that there are only two
possibilities:

*Possibility \# 1: There exists only one God without a partner nor an
associate with Him. He created everything; the universe, life, land,
heavens, atoms, and anything else you can think of. He created them by
Himself and He is the Dominant, Guardian, and Sovereign Ruler by
himself.*

If this possibility is true, then what can our minds expect? Logic and
common sense simply deduces that if there exists only one God, then we
should find everything around us to be organized and peaceful. There
should be no disturbance of any kind or deviation from this organized
system from any creature or living thing.

To make the picture clear in our heads, consider this example: Take a
look at the different ruling systems present in the countries of our
world. What is the difference between the countries that rule
democratically and involves a leadership team consisting of a president,
national assembly, and juridical authority, and the countries that rule
in a totalitarian regime and dictatorship system? In the latter, the
ultimate ruler is only one person and one dictator. There is no power
existing except his power, no word except his word, and no law except
his law.

We see that the condition of most of the countries around us that are
ruled democratically with three branches of government and different
authorities are unstable and troubling due to the presence of many
conflicts, objections, rallies, protest, strikes, demonstrations, and
confrontations. That is because often times, the president desires
something while the national assembly (congress) disagrees and wants
something different. The Supreme Court says that the decision of the
ruler is not constitutional. There are confrontations between the
national assembly and the Supreme Court, and so on and so forth. What
has been decided today is cancelled tomorrow. A policy that is carried
out this year is totally changed next year. Laws and bills are written
down, discussed, and then disagreed upon, then laid for referendum. Some
of these laws are accepted while others are rejected. Tentative or
preliminary laws are applied, and then revised. So, the state of affairs
are shaky, unstable, the power is split up, and the harmony is lost.
Corruption is widespread, man is confused, and his matters are chaotic.

On the other hand, in the totalitarian regime governed by one dictator
ruler, the matters are always stable and peaceful. The people may feel
oppressed if there is an unjust ruler. However, due to the presence of
one ruler, there is no room for conflicts, contradicting decisions,
confusion, competing powers, strikes, demonstrations, no fluctuation in
prices, no changes in laws, no political confrontation or conflicts,
political scandals, propaganda or debates. Instead, there is stability,
tranquility, and no deviation from the system. The system is enforced by
force where nobody can deviate.

Therefore, our minds lead us to conclude that the stability and
organization we observe in the life and universe around us indicate that
the creator is one, the ruler is one, the controller is one, and the
governor is one. Likewise, the state of the universe and creation agrees
with the idea that the creator is one.

*Possibility \# 2: There exists more than one god…two, five, ten, or
hundreds, etc.*

Here we pose several questions to the mind which deserve some
contemplation and answer. For example, do these different gods help each
other and share in the process of creation and establishment of the
laws? In that case, any creature together with the laws that govern him,
have been created by these gods together!

Or does every god specialize in creating something particular in the
universe and establishes its own set of laws? So there would be a god
who created the sun, a god who created the moon, a god who created the
stars, a god who created the fire, and a god who created beauty, etc.
This ideology is similar to what the ancient Egyptians, Greeks, Romans,
and some of the ancient philosophers used to believe. Furthermore, do
these gods know about the presence of each other? What is their
relationship and level of interaction with each other? And how is their
relationships organized? Are they equal in power, strength, ability,
dominance, and wisdom, or not? If this idea is true, then what does the
mind expect the picture to be? If we use our mind, logic, and common
sense to answer these questions, we will find the following:

In the first research topic, we had reached the logical conclusion that
there must exist a strong, capable, wise, and powerful God that is
perfect without any deficiency. So, logically if there exists more than
one god, it would be necessary also that every god possess the same
attributes that we agreed upon in the first logical conclusion. So,
every god should be strong, dominant, powerful, wise and without any
deficiency. If that is the case with every god, then why would every god
need each other to participate in the creation of the universe and
creatures?

The idea of sharing and assisted cooperation is generally needed when
there is deficiency in ability. This is what the human mind understands
and this means that you may have a weakness in something and strength in
another, while I have strength in one thing which you are weak in and
weakness in another thing which you are strong in. In that case, you and
I will need to come together to complement each other in the areas we
lack so that we cover up for each other’s deficiency. However, if you
are capable, strong, and perfect in your abilities, then there will be
no need for partnership or cooperation with other gods to create a
universe, life, or creature. This is logical and agrees with common
sense, so the idea of cooperation between gods to create something which
means that every being is the result of cooperative creation from more
than one god is a rejected idea for any logical and reasonable mind.

Another idea that may cross the mind is that every god specializes in
the creation of a specific being in the universe. For example, one god
created the stars; another god created the human beings, while another
created the animals. If we accept this notion, it means that every god
possesses his own will. Or else why would each god specialize in
creating something that is different from the others? This is clearly
logical and so long as we assume the multiplicity of gods, then there
will also be multiplicity of wills and desires.

And this naturally leads to the fact that these different wills may
either coincide or contradict each other. These supposed gods who should
all be knowledgeable (as we reached in the previous research topic),
should be very well aware and cognizant of each other’s presence.
Furthermore, they should know the wills and desires of each other. Now,
if the desires of all the gods coincide with each other, then there is
no problem. But, what will be happen if their wills and desires clashed
or contradicted each other, as we expect that to happen whenever
multiplicity exists? What will happen in this case and how will these
conflicts and disagreements become resolved, taking in consideration
that the creation is living together in one universe? Will one of the
gods impose his opinion on the others, or will he surrender to the
other’s desires? Will they all reach to a compromise, or will each god
take his creation along with him to a different place?

All of these scenarios are impossible to happen because they contradict
the logical attributes of God. After all, if a god became defeated, was
forced upon, surrendered, or conceded, then he cannot be called god
since all of these actions indicate weakness and deficiency. Rather, we
expect the god to be absolutely strong, perfect, powerful, and without
any deficiency. So if all these scenarios are impossible and illogical,
then this means that there are no contradictions. And if contradictions
are impossible, it follows that multiplicity is also impossible which
leads us to confirm that God is indeed only one.

What is the relationship between these gods and each other? Are they
friends? Or are they enemies? Or are they neither friends nor enemies?
If they are friends, then how will their friendship last when they have
interests and desires which may clash or contradict each other? If they
are enemies, what will happen to the universe and creation as a result
of their hostility? And if they are indifferent to each other, how is
that possible when they have common interests? It is clear that all of
these possibilities are invalid and totally illogical since they go
against common sense and sound judgment! If these gods are not equal in
power, dominance, and wisdom, then the one who has the lesser share of
these attributes will be weaker. This will automatically disqualify him
from being god!

Furthermore, what is the scope and extent of the relationship between
these gods? Is there an assembly, for instance, that gathers them all as
some of the ancient people imagined? If that is the case, then it would
be logical for us to expect that this assembly will be governed by a
boss who will be chosen or elected by them. This boss will therefore
have authority over the others and that means that he will be more
powerful and the rest will be less powerful (authority here will be
relative). And if they become less powerful, this disqualifies them from
being gods. Furthermore, the boss would also disqualified from being god
because his strength will depend on the selection and submission of the
others. Therefore, he will be deficient since he gains power from others
while the god as we logically concluded, is perfect and without any
deficiency. Therefore, this possibility is invalid and impossible to
accept

Now, what does our minds expect the state of the universe, creatures,
and life to be if there exists more than one God? Our minds can picture
that the situation be filled with many struggles, problems and
conflicting laws. There will not be an ultimate governor to turn for
decision-making. Hence, corruption will become widespread in the
universe and between the creatures in such a way that life cannot be
imagined! In fact, what we observe in the universe is totally the
opposite! Life is running continuously in a very organized, systematic,
and orderly manner. All of the creatures are living in peace and
tranquility. This state of affair totally contradicts the notion that
there are multiple gods.

From this, we conclude that the first possibility we proposed earlier,
that there exists only one God without any partner, is the only logical
truth and reality that is accepted by our minds. As for the second
possibility, it is not acceptable at all and does not hold any water,
due to its impossibility and contradiction to logical reasoning.

2) As we discussed before in the first research topic, the universe,
creatures, and life around us are all built on stable and well-defined
laws. Every creature and every part of the universe has its own specific
laws. Fire, water, plants, animals, and human beings are all governed by
laws. The same is the case with the ocean, air, sand, wind, mountains,
stars, planets, clouds, electricity, heat, light, sound, etc. But that
is not all! There is even another set of laws which regulate the
relation and interaction between all these creatures with each other. So
there are laws that regulate the scope of interaction between the fire
and water, fire and air, air and water, heat and electricity, heat and
water, sun and earth, earth and planets, stars and planets, galaxies
with each other, acids and alkaline, cats with mice, birds with snakes,
winds with clouds, and so on and so forth. The list of examples can go
on and on without end.

Every creature has laws that regulate his relationship and interaction
with the other creatures. These laws and regulations are stable and do
not change in any time or place, so what does all of that indicate? Pure
logic and common sense tells us that the creator of the universe and
everything else is only one. Otherwise, if there is more than one god
who each specializes in a particular creation, then why is there all
that concern to regulate the relationships and interactions between the
creatures and each other?

Furthermore, if every God established their own laws for their own
creation, then who will take care of establishing the set of laws which
govern the relationships between all the creation? For example, if one
god creates the fire and another god creates the water with each of
their individual set of laws, who then is the God who establishes the
laws which precisely regulate the interaction between fire and water? Is
it the god of the fire or the god of the water or a third god who is
different from them? If it is the god of the fire, then how will it
exercise his power over the water when it is not the god of water?

Similarly, if it is the god of water, how will it determine the
relationship of water with fire when it is not the god of fire? And if
it is a third different god altogether, how will it mediate the
interaction between their individual creations? If this third god
enforces its law on both of them, then that means that the other two
gods are both disqualified to be gods because this third god will be
more powerful than them. On the other hand, if the third god derives its
power from their submission to them, then it also will be disqualified
from becoming god since its authority will be dependent on the others.
Therefore, it will be deficient and a God as we agreed earlier, has to
be absolutely perfect without need for anyone or anything. Therefore,
all of these ideas are rejected and deemed impossible!

Rather, what makes sense and follows logical reasoning is that the
creator of the fire is the same God who created the water, and he is the
same God who created everything else. Hence, He is the only one who
established the laws which regulate the interaction between all the
creatures and each other. There is only one creator, and one God without
any partner or associate! This is what our minds accept as the logical
and reasonable conclusion.

3) Furthermore, there is a clear similarity in many of the laws that are
specific to every creature and the laws which overall regulate the
interaction between the creation and each other. That in itself is a
clear indication that the creator of these various sets of law is only
one and not more. After all, if the law-makers were more than one, we
would’ve seen a great difference in the laws. For example, the laws that
govern living cells are generally constant, whether in the plants,
animals, or human beings. The laws that govern the sun and its fire, and
elements, and its movements and rays are similar to the laws which
govern the rest of the stars in the universe.

In fact, the laws that control the earth and its movement are not
different than those which govern the planets Mercury, Jupiter, and
Saturn. The earthly elements are nearly the same as the elements present
on the sun, moon, planets, and living organisms. The laws that connect
the sun with the earth are similar to those that connect the sun with
Venus and those which link a star with any planet. In fact, it is his
similarity and huge resemblance in the laws which enabled man to make
predictions, scientific guesses, and theories before even discovering or
proving them! This is possible by using the laws as a tool of
measurement and reference point. This actually happened and is presently
occurring frequently in every branch of science and in the developing
fields of study. Through this process, the scientists and scholars were
able to make new discoveries and reveal more secrets.

So, the discovery of one compound in the body can lead (through
prediction based on the similarity of laws) to the discovery of hundreds
of other compounds in other bodies which perform different functions,
but it is similar in law and regulation. Doesn’t the fact that we’re
able to use comparison and measurement with the laws indicate that its
creator, inventor, and organizer is only one without a partner? This is
the conclusion that we reach using sound judgment and logical reasoning.

5) Furthermore, we observe great connection, network, and dependability
between all the creatures. So there is no life without energy, no energy
without heat, no heat without reactions, no reactions without elements
and compounds, no life without food, no food without animals, no animals
without plants, no plants without sunlight, oxygen and water, no light
without sun and stars, no water without clouds, mountains, rain, wind,
ocean, river, seas, and underground earth soil that is able to store
water. There is no oxygen without plants and air, no galaxies without
planets, no planets without stars, no stars without fire, no agriculture
without suitable valleys and freshwater, and no freshwater without
saltwater, and all that is for the benefit of man. There are no
inventions, development, or equipment without man, and the list goes on
and on in one circular network or chain that links everything together
and is dependent on each other.

Doesn’t this complicated but well-organized chain and dependency of
creatures on each other prove that there is indeed only one God? After
all, if different gods create different creatures and have no
relationship with each other, there wouldn't be all that organization,
dependency, and networking! If every God created something different
without having any relationship with the other creatures, then why do we
see strong interaction and dependency of these creatures with each
other? For example, if you opened a television set to view its internal
structure, you will find thousands of circuits and electric cells,
fuses, and condenser that may be different in shape, form, content,
laws, or function. But they are all part of one network and they all
work together in harmony, complement each other, and depend on each
other to achieve a function. Now, would you have any doubt at that
moment that the maker of this television set is only one person, one
manufacturer, and one designer? This is logical and clear without any
disagreement or debate.

6) Notice the magnificent similarity observed between the biggest things
in the creation which is the endless vast universe (including its solar
systems, galaxies, stars, and planets), and the smallest particle in our
earthly life which is the atom (with its nucleus, electrons, protons and
rays). Doesn’t this miraculous similarity in the structure,
organization, and movement indicate the oneness of the creator? After
all, if the one who created the greatest thing in the universe is the
same as the one who created the smallest particle in the creation, then
we can logically conclude that anything between them from creatures and
beings are also the production of the same one God.

Furthermore, doesn’t this harmony and resemblance in the universe
contradict the notion of life being created accidentally or by chance?
Isn’t it obvious that the creator intended for resemblance to exist in
the universe so that we can reflect upon it, realize, and appreciate His
extreme mightiness and His Oneness? Indeed, common sense and logical
reasoning dictates that there exists only one God without any accomplice
and one creator without a partner. Otherwise, what does that resemblance
and similarity indicate?

From the previous items 1-5, we can comfortably conclude after thorough
study and contemplation and after using our mind and logical reasoning,
we can with all confidence, faith and without any doubt conclude that:

2nd Conclusion
--------------

The god and creator is only one, without any partner or associate with
Him. He created everything alone with His own Power, Ability and Wisdom.
This is surely a reality without any doubt and it is a truth that cannot
be denied or refuted, logically, reasonably, or practically.

3rd Research Topic: The Logical, Expected, and Essential Attributes of God the Creator
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Question:**

What are the essential and logical attributes that should be present in
the One God whom we proved His Existence and Oneness?

**Logical Reasoning:**

We have established in the first research topic of this case study, that
the existence of a creator is a reality that is logical and inevitable.
Furthermore, we established the oneness of God in the 2nd research
topic. Now, it is imperative on us that we pause and use our minds to
examine this Creator and the logical attributes that are essential to be
present in Him, based on the reality of the natural phenomena and
creation that we observe around us in the universe.

In the first research topic, we had agreed on some logical attributes
that we expect to be present in the Creator. However, it is worthwhile
to take a closer look in this aspect as follows:

1) So far, we have concluded that God is the One and Only Creator of
everything including the laws that govern all of creation. He is the
Guardian and Caretaker who maintains the continuity and preservation of
laws. He is the one who rules and everything eventually returns to Him.
Therefore, among His characteristics is Lordship, which means continuous
governorship, guardianship, and care which never ceases. Therefore, He
is Lord and we can refer to Him as the Great Lord, or the Lord of All
Creatures, or the Lord of All Worlds. This nomenclature is accepted by
our minds and can be reached by pure logic. The Lord created everything
from nothing, and He was not created, since He is Solitary and there is
no one before Him or after Him. There is no one who shares His Lordship,
He has no boundaries or limits, and this is logical being that He is the
One and Only God. He is one without being divided or constructed,
because the divided or constructed usually need its parts to function.
And God, as we agreed, does not need anything. This attribute is logical
to His divine and absolute Being.

2) Furthermore, it is logical that this One God has to possess a lot of
Strength that is too great to imagine such that He is able to create all
living and non-living things. In fact, our human minds cannot possibly
reckon all the creatures, universe, and what’s behind them. Therefore,
it is logical to conclude that no one can ever comprehend, imagine, or
calculate the strength of God. Strength naturally leads to capability,
and this capability cannot be measured because it is built on strength
that cannot be conceived. Since this one Creator possesses immeasurable
strength and capability, then this naturally means that He can do
anything He desires and no one can prevent Him from doing so. That is
because everything else will have much less strength than Him and their
strength is derived from the Strength of the Creator.

Everything is deficient while the Creator is completely perfect.
Therefore, the whole creation is submissive to His Will and Desire. So,
it is logical that no being or creature can escape the divine will. Nor
do they have any authority to change, appeal, or substitute this divine
will because they do not possess the strength or ability to do so. Since
the Creator possesses strength and ability that cannot be measured or
conceived, we can therefore conclude that His Strength and Ability are
absolute attributes.

3) Furthermore, God the Creator must be very magnificent and so great
that we cannot measure His Greatness, and so magnificent such that minds
cannot envision His Glory. After all, our simple minds cannot imagine
the greatness of the universe, the number of stars, or number of atoms
in one gram of iron while these are all simple creations from the
Creator! Then how can our minds possibly comprehend the magnitude of the
Creator Himself?! Of course, the human mind cannot reach to such level
of comprehension because it has limited capability in thinking,
understanding, and imagination. God is very Magnificent and Great, and
our minds cannot fathom or measure His Greatness. We can therefore
conclude that the Greatness and Magnificence of the Creator is absolute
and beyond any limits whatsoever!

Since God is absolute in His Greatness and Magnificence, then this also
means that He is Greater than any of His creation. Even if you were to
gather all of the creation and universe together, God is still greater
than all in such a way that cannot be pictured or imagined.

Since God is absolute in His Greatness and Magnificence, it is fair to
say that He is also Vast and All-Encompassing in an absolute manner. It
follows then that absolute strength, mightiness, greatness,
magnificence, all-encompassing attribute that is incomparable logically
leads us to conclude also that God is the ultimate defeater of those who
refuse to obey Him. He is absolutely Dominant over those who challenge
Him, and He is an absolute Compeller over those who have the audacity to
disobey, challenge, or oppose Him. All of these are attributes of God
which we can logically and reasonably deduce using our minds and
intellect.

4) It is clear and logical that the One and Great Lord must be very
Knowledgeable and All-Aware. His Knowledge is so vast that it cannot be
measured and is beyond any limit or imagination. After all, if our minds
cannot comprehend some or part of the creation, then how can we possibly
conceive or imagine the magnitude of God’s Knowledge of all His universe
and creation? Therefore, we can conclude that the knowledge of God is
absolute, unlimited, and is beyond everything; the past, the present,
the future, the obvious, the hidden, the unknown, the interior and
exterior of the earth and universe, etc. It is not possible to imagine
that anything in the heavens or earth be concealed from His knowledge.
Since His Knowledge is absolute, He is very well Aware of all the minute
details and the secrets of the souls. Nothing is hidden from Him no
matter what. The magnitude of all these attributes cannot be
comprehended by our minds, except to believe in them since it is the
correct way of thinking.

5) Furthermore, God the Creator should be Dominant and be in total
control at all times. He should be the Sustainer and Preserver of all
the laws which govern His creation. This dominance, control, and
preservation of laws are absolute and cannot be conceived or imagined.
After all, if our minds cannot conceive the preservation of one type of
animal, or bacteria, or one of the galaxies which are all simple
creations of God, then how can we possibly fathom the dominance of the
Creator Himself? Hence, we can conclude that the dominancy, control, and
preservation of God are absolute and beyond any limit. It is from the
logical attributes that can be expected to be present in God so that
life and the laws of the creations are kept stable and steady. It is
also imperative that God be Truthful and Honest in an absolute manner.
We can expect Him to be free from any fault or deficiency.

6) Our minds can also expect that God who possesses all of these
attributes we discussed, is Boundless and without any limit. So, He the
Lord cannot be described, imagined, or even fanaticized! It is
impossible for us to specify a place, shape, body, resemblance, or image
from His creation. Hence, it is logical to conclude that nothing
resembles Him, describes Him, limits Him, or places a similarity to Him
since all of that contradicts logic and common sense.

7) We can also logically expect God to be the Eternal and the
Ever-Lasting one. His existence is before the existence of any of His
creation, for He is the First (in an infinite manner) and before
anything. Since He is not bound by time, He is also the Last (in an
infinite manner) and after everything. These characteristics are
logically deduced and necessary to be present in God the Creator.

8) We can also expect that God who created the well-defined laws of the
universe and created man with an intellectual and wise mind, be very
Wise, Intelligent, Clever, and Guider in such a way that is greater than
anything and is in harmony with His Glory, Strength, Knowledge,
Awareness, and Dominance. These divine traits are logical and does not
need any explanation or proof because as the saying goes, “A deficient
thing cannot provide what it does not have.” After all, man is not
capable of comprehending the magnitude of another being’s wisdom that is
similar to him. Then how can he possibly comprehend the magnitude of the
Creator’s wisdom? Therefore, we can conclude that God’s Wisdom,
Intelligence and Brilliancy are all absolute. Wisdom is necessary to be
present in God so that He can create the universe and manage His
creation, considering that He is the One and Only creator who does not
have any partner.

9) We can also logically expect God to be Independent of anything and
anybody. His attributes are not characteristics of Him, but they are the
essence of Him, e.g., sweetness of sugar is not a characteristic of
sugar but rather its essence. He is not to be described by any adjective
because His characteristics are the essence of Himself and He is not in
need of anything. Hence, He is Rich, Perfect, and Independent of
everything without any deficiency or change. This is an attribute that
is logical to be present in God the Creator who by Himself created the
universe and creation from nothing, and He created everything from
nothing. So, He must have everything and is not in need of anything.

10) From among the attributes of God is that He originated and innovated
everything. He is beautiful, since everything in His creation is
wonderful and beautiful. After all, how can God provide splendor and
beauty when He Himself lacks that attribute? His Beauty and Innovation
are absolute and agrees with the attributes we previously concluded. He
originated everything without a previous example, and that is logical
due to His eternity. He innovated with His Power and Strength without
needing an example to follow and without resembling anything. So He is
absolute Beauty, and absolute Innovator, and Beautiful, as this can be
reached logically by our minds and common sense.

11) Furthermore, among God’s logical attributes is that no one can
envision or visualize Him. After all, how can the naked eye envision God
with all His infinite Greatness, Magnificence, Strength and Knowledge?
If the naked eye cannot look at the sun directly, then it is not
surprising that it cannot see the Creator of the sun!

12) From among God’s attributes which we can expect to be present in Him
is that He is the Absolute Justice, which fits well with his other
attributes. So, He is the creator of justice and He is the one who
provides for the creation. And the deficient thing cannot give what it
does not have. He is the absolute Justice and He applies His justice
between His creations. So, justice is a logical attribute that must be
present in Him.

13) As we logically deduced earlier, there is nothing that is similar to
Him and He has no equal. He is Solitary and His attributes are Absolute.
Therefore, it is not possible for us to even imagine that He has a wife,
father, mother, son, relative, or equal of any kind. After all, if God
possessed any of these relations, then they would naturally be similar
to Him and could be gods like Him. Of course, we had rejected the idea
of polytheism in our past discussions, so this logically means that God
does not have any companion or son. He does not beget nor is He
begotten; nothing resembles Him and He does not resemble anything
because He is the One and Only God while everything else is His
creation.

Our minds cannot accept the notion that God created a son, father, or
wife for Himself. This is simply because He is not in need of any one
and any relation since His Richness and Independency are absolute. Given
that these types of relationships are typically associated with
creatures like animals and human beings, it is not appropriate for it to
be associated with the Great and Solitary God. Furthermore, a son of God
would logically inherit the same attributes as God or at least some of
them. This notion is totally unacceptable because there is nothing
similar to Him in His attributes whether all or some of it!

Hence, it is also impossible for any of God’s creation to possess even
one of His attributes in an absolute and infinite manner because in that
case, he would resemble God in His attributes. Therefore, we can
logically and reasonably conclude that it is impossible for God the
Creator to have a father, mother, wife, or to resemble anything in His
creation. Any person who accepts this idea is going totally against
logical reasoning and sound judgment.

14) It is also logical and natural that God’s presence be Permanent and
Eternal in an absolute manner. He does not cease to exist, for if He
did, He wouldn’t be God and therefore, the creation would not exist. He
should also have absolute eternal life, for He is always Alive and
Immortal and He never tastes death. If He died, then the whole creation
and life would end. Also, among His attributes is continuous and
absolute awakefulness, for if he slept or went into slumber even for one
second, life would immediately end and the laws of the universe would be
disturbed. His Presence is Constant and He does NOT experience change.
That is because all the laws of the universe are maintained in a steady
fashion by God. After all, if God changed, then the e laws would not be
constant and there would be disturbance in the universe and kingdom. All
these characteristics are logically necessary to be present in God being
that He is God the Creator.

15) Based on the previously discussed attributes, we can logically
deduce that God is the Absolute King, Ruler, and absolute owner of the
whole universe, creation, and existence; both what we see and what we
don’t see. He is the Ultimate Judge between His creation and He has the
total freedom to do anything in His Kingdom. No body shares Him in His
Governorship except by His permission and command. These attributes are
intuitive and there is no need for disagreement or debate because they
conform to logical reasoning and common sense.

16) It is also imperative for God the Creator to be capable of setting
alive and ending life in an absolute manner, and this is based on human
logic and intuition. He should be capable of starting life and restoring
life. He creates and destroys at any time in any way He pleases, and
this fits well with His absolute Strength, Capability, and Magnificence.

17) Furthermore, it is not surprising that none of God’s creatures are
able to encompass any of His attributes or even imagine them because
they are all absolute and infinite attributes. His attributes cannot be
fathomed or encompassed by anyone. They are different to that which
exists in the creation although these adjectives may bear the same
title. None of His creation can encompass His Knowledge since His
Knowledge is absolute.

18) It is also logical that God the Creator who created everything
around us would be attributed with Dignity and Exaltation. Everyone in
the creation fears Him due to His Power and Dominion over them. At the
same token, all the creatures love Him because He is the One who brought
them into existence and kept them alive. He granted them beauty and
bounty and He sponsors and oversees their needs. Therefore, He deserves
love, fear, humility, and obedience from all His creation and this is
certainly included among His logical and essential attributes.

19) It is also necessary that the attributes of the One and Only God who
is Knowledgeable, Watchful, and a Great Sovereign that is dominant,
obeyed, dignified, just and truthful also include that no one can have
the audacity to fabricate things about Him, or make false claims on His
behalf or against Him in such a way that displeases Him. Hence, nobody
from His creation can in any way speak on His behalf in such a way which
He doesn’t accept, or convey something from Him which He didn't order,
or propagate a command from Him something which He didn't say. This
would be inconsistent with His other attributes. Now, if any one of His
creatures had the audacity to do such thing, it would be imperative for
God to expose him, reveal his lies, inflict severe punishment on him,
and eradicate him and his lies. This is very logical to be an attribute
of God the Creator since He is the Sustainer who is Knowledgeable,
Watchful, Dominant, and in control over His creation. Any other reaction
from God is illogical and does not conform to common sense.

20) Last but not least, it is impossible for God to possess an attribute
that conflicts with or contradicts any of the absolute and necessary
attributes that we previously deduced logically.

From the previous items 1-20, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

3rd Conclusion
--------------

Some of the logical and reasonable attributes that are the essence of
God the Creator, in addition to His Oneness are as follows: LORDSHIP,
STRENGTH, CAPABILITY, GREATNESS, MAGNIFICENCE, KNOWLEDGE, AWARENESS,
WATCHFULNESS, AND DOMINANCE, etc.

He is present in every place, and He is not limited to a specific place.
He has no boundaries, shape, form, or body and He does not resemble any
of His creation. Nothing existed before Him and nothing will exist after
Him. He cannot be defined by anything and it is impossible for anyone to
imagine Him or draw a picture of Him or to envision Him in any way using
our simple human minds. He cannot be composed or divided into parts and
there is nothing like Him.

His Divine Presence is Eternal and is not limited by any time. He is the
First and the Last and He is Wise, Judicious, Rich, Independent,
Originator, Beautiful, Innovator, and no sight can envision Him. He is
the absolute Justice and is Immortal. He does not sleep or slumber, His
Presence is constant, and He is not subject to any change. He is the
Governor, Judge, King, and Owner. He is capable of bringing life into
existence and also bring life to the dead. He destroys and recreates,
and He does as He pleases in any time and in any place. He is not in
need of anybody or anything.

He does not have a father, or mother, or brother, or sister, or wife, or
son, or partner. He does not have any equal and does not resemble
anyone. He is free from everything and is the Solitary, the Loved one,
the Compeller, the Defeater, the Protector, the Preserver, and the
Self-Existing One. No one is capable of encompassing all of His absolute
attributes. No one can encompass His Knowledge. Also, no one can make
false claims or lie on His behalf without being punished and destroyed.
Finally, it is not logical that that God possess an attribute which
would contradict His other logical attributes.

All of God’s attributes are absolute and infinite and do not have any
limit or similarity with anything. The scope of these attributes cannot
be conceived or imagined and they are solely unique to God the Creator.
He is not composed of them and He cannot be divided into parts. These
attributes are the essence of Him and not a part of Him.

This conclusion is acceptable by our minds and our intellect, and it
certainly conforms to pure logical reasoning and common sense. These
attributes are necessary and imperative to be present in God and cannot
be argued or refuted by anyone intellectually, logically, or
practically.

4th Research Topic: Logical Reasoning and Inevitability that God the Creator Announces His Presence
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

We had logically deduced the existence of God the Creator and some of
His logical attributes. Now the question is: Will He keep His Presence a
secret and hide this reality from His creation? Or will He make Himself
known to His creation?

What does the mind and logic judge in this matter?

Is it logically possible that He introduce Himself to some of His
creation, and not others?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) As we agreed earlier, one of the attributes of God the Creator are
absolute Wisdom and Guidance. So He must have created His creation for a
specific reason and wisdom. Wisdom is typically a desired goal and
objective, so can God achieve His purpose if He keeps His presence
hidden from His Creation? Indeed, this idea does not conform to logical
reasoning and common sense.

2) If God was to keep the reality of His Presence hidden from His
creation, then logic deduces that the creation will naturally question
themselves about the identity of their Creator and the purpose behind
their existence. They will wonder who regulates the existing laws
surrounding them and they will feel confused. This confusion and lack of
knowledge may very well lead them to assume lordship to those who are
not God or to others from among themselves. Every creature may take any
God that conforms to its interest which may be different from that which
the others choose, and so on and so forth.

So does it make sense that the Wise and Intelligent God leave the
situation like that and allow for His creation to take someone other
than Himself as God and give it false credit for their creation? Will He
accept that without intervening presenting Himself so that the truth is
revealed and falsehood abolished while He is the One and Only true God
and Creator who is Strong, Capable, and Self-Existing? Will He leave the
matter for every creature to decide based on their judgment so that they
can assume divinity and lordship to whomever they desire? Our minds
certainly refuses this idea since it goes against logic and common
sense. After all, He is the real God who is knowledgeable, competent,
all-encompassing, and deserves obedience as He is the real creator.

3) As we concluded before, one of the attributes of God the Creator is
that He is the Absolute Justice. Based on this attribute, God does not
accept any type of injustice because it is against fairness and
equality. So how can He allow for Himself to cause confusion in His
creation regarding their Creator, while He is Present and capable of
announcing His existence to everyone? This would actually be injustice
committed on the creation, which is not appropriate to come from the
absolute Just Creator.

Furthermore, how can He accept that divinity be given to others while He
is the one who created, and He is the one who established the laws and
maintained their effectiveness? How can He accept that His creation give
their love, devotion, and obedience to someone other than Himself, when
He is the reason for their whole existence? Indeed, this would be
injustice committed against Himself and to His Lordship and His divine
rights for love, guardianship, and obedience. And God the Creator as we
know is absolute Justice who does not commit injustice to anyone! He
must announce His presence, divinity, and His right of being obeyed,
followed, loved, trusted, and dignified because He is the One and Only
Great Creator. Our minds agree that this is logical and rather
essential.

4) As we logically deduced, the Creator is the Sovereign King and
Governor, so how can He rule over this kingdom without announcing that
He is the ultimate King and Ruler. This is totally contradicting to
every logical mind and sound judgment. There is no similar analogy in
our lives such that we can refer to as a proof that it can happen. What
will be the case if governorship and authority was claimed by someone
else from His Creation? Will He accept that and still keep His presence
concealed so that someone else can enjoy and take false credit for what
they didn’t do or have?

Indeed, this does not fit the state of wisdom, guidance, truthfulness,
and absolute justice which are among His logical attributes. Hence, it
is not appropriate for our minds to accept this idea. Rather, what makes
sense and is necessary is that the Creator announces His Existence as
the One and Only God and the Solitary King and Owner who bears the final
judgment. He must publicize His presence so that no possibility exists
that someone other than Himself takes credit due to confusion caused by
ignorance and concealed truth.

5) One of the attributes that we logically deduced and built on is that
God is to be obeyed, glorified, and loved. He is also the Defeater, the
Victorious, and the Compeller. So the question is: How can these
attributes be recognized when His creation is not aware of His presence
since He did not inform them of Himself and kept it a secret from them?
How will He be obeyed, dignified, and loved when no one knows of His
existence? How will He defeat and attain victory, and who will bear
witness to that if His existence remains a secret? This is absolutely
illogical and is not in harmony with God’s attributes which require that
He reveal the truth of His Divine Presence to His creation. Only then
can He demand obedience, love, and dignity from them and warn them of
defeat, compellation, and victory. This is something that cannot be
disagreed upon by any two human beings.

6) As to the notion that God the Creator who is the Lord of everything
may reveal His presence to only some of His creation while hide it from
others, this would clearly be injustice committed against the creatures
that are not aware of His existence. However, we already established
that God the Creator is absolute Justice; so therefore, it is not
acceptable that the Just Creator would exhibit that. In addition, this
scenario will lead to commotion and confusion in the universe since some
creatures will know its true Creator and will be obedient to Him, while
the other group of creatures will be confused and may very well take
other creatures as false Gods. This discrepancy will certainly lead to a
major conflict that cannot be accepted by the absolute Wise and
Intelligent Creator. Therefore, the mind and pure logic dictates that
this idea is absolutely impossible as it contradicts the divine
attributes of God and goes against common sense.

7) Since it is logical that God the Creator announces His presence and
reveals the truth regarding Himself (as we already established the
rationale behind it), then it is also imperative for Him to inform all
His creatures of that, without any exceptions. It is an all-or-nothing
concept! After all, is it logical that every atom and creature in the
universe have no idea or knowledge about their Creator and that He
conceal Himself from everyone? Indeed, this cannot be accepted by logic
and common sense. Hence, if one creature was informed about the
existence of God, then it is logical and necessary that God announces
His Existence and introduce Himself to all of His creation.

From the previous items 1-7, after thorough study and contemplation, and
after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

4th Conclusion
--------------

Logic and common sense dictates that the One and Only Lord and Creator
must announce His divine presence to all of His creation. It is
essential for Him to reveal His existence and present Himself as the One
and Only God, Lord, King, Sovereign, Owner, Sustainer, and Governor who
is Self-Existing, Dominant, Knowledgeable, and in control over all
creation. This revelation and proclamation from God must be clear
without any vagueness or ambiguity. This is absolutely essential and
logical and cannot be refuted using our mind and common sense.

5th Research Topic: The Wisdom and Goal Behind the Existence of Creation Who Are Created By God
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Why did God create His creation?

What can He logically expect or demand from His creation, and what are
their duties towards Him?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) As we discussed before, among the attributes of God the Creator is
that He is Wise and Intelligent in an absolute manner. So therefore, it
is essential that He creates the whole universe and creation for a
specific purpose and great wisdom. We had concluded in the 8th point of
the 3rd research topic that it is impossible for anyone to encompass His
Knowledge or Wisdom except through what is conveyed to us by Himself.
From this we can logically deduce that we cannot know the great wisdom
and reason behind the creation of the universe except if God Himself
informs us. After all, it is not possible for the human intellect no
matter how brilliant it is to encompass this Supreme Wisdom except by
the absolute Wise Creator. This deduction is logical and reasonable to
our minds.

2) If we use our minds and common sense to anticipate the possible
things which God the Creator may demand from His Creation, we can
imagine or expect that God would demand things from His creation which
are intuitive and reasonable to the mind. For example, it is surely
expected that He demand complete and absolute obedience from His
creation, complete loyalty, absolute sacrifice, surrender, submission,
exaltation, reverence, respect, fear, love, and trust. He will also
expect us to refrain from corruption and infliction of harm on anyone,
and to be righteous and pious. In a nutshell, absolute worship will be
expected of the creation because worship in its wide meaning includes
all of the above meanings, definitions, and derivatives. This is what
the mind and logic expects God to demand from His creation.

3) As for the duties required by the creation towards their Creator and
Lord, we can certainly use logic to deduce the following:

First: To search for Him, to attempt to know about Him, and to try to
get closer to Him. To anticipate that He conveys Himself to us and His
revelation of the reality of His Divine Presence.

Second: Complete and unconditional obedience and loyalty to Him, and the
execution of His Commands word by word.

Third: To dignify, revere, exalt, and respect Him unconditionally.

Fourth: To fear Him and love Him unconditionally, to be loyal to Him,
and to seek His nearness (reunion).

Fifth: To thank and praise Him sincerely.

Sixth: To have faith in Him and believe in His absolute attributes. To
avoid attributing anything that is inappropriate to Him or anything that
would demean or belittle His great status and position as the One and
Only Great God.

Seventh: Complete and unconditional surrender and submission to God.

Eighth: To live in peace with the rest of the creation and to refrain
from inflicting any harm or corruption to anyone or to deviate from
God’s laws and regulations.

Ninth: To be righteous and behave well towards God’s creatures and His
Kingdom. To actively seek positively change for a better life.

Tenth: Unconditional sacrifice for Him and for the sake of carrying out
His commands and desires.

Eleventh: To convey His Presence to others and enjoin the people to obey
Him and to carry out His commands.

Twelfth: To accept and submit to His will, providence, laws, commands,
rules, and to be pleased with them. In short, to worship Him
unconditionally! The word “worship” here entails all of these twelve
points from the creation towards their Creator.

All of that is logical and necessary and it is not possible for sound
judgment to accept otherwise as the duties imposed on the creation
towards their Creator.

From the previous items 1-2, after thorough study and contemplation, and
after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

5th Conclusion
--------------

God the Creator must have a great purpose, wisdom, and meaningful goal
behind the creation of the universe. However, it is impossible for our
minds to encompass that great wisdom and purpose except through what He
may convey to us Himself. Nevertheless, the mind and logic deduces that
God the Creator will require from His creation that they obey Him and
worship Him unconditionally with all the meanings that the word
“worship” entails, as we clarified. Furthermore, the mind deduces that
it is incumbent on the creation that they seek and search for their
Creator and that they anticipate His conveyance and introduction of
Himself to them. This reasoning is essential and reasonable to the mind
and cannot be refuted using logic and common sense.

6th Research Topic: The Prophets and Messengers - Logical Reasoning and Inevitability of Their Existence, Their Trustworthiness and Their Nature, as well as The Nature of Their Message
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Did there appear any reports indicating that God the Creator announced
Himself? If so, how?

Who exactly are the Prophets and Messengers?

Are they honest and trustworthy?

What is the logic and essentiality behind their existence, their nature,
and their trustworthiness?

What is the nature of their Message?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) The entire history of humanity did not relay any event whatsoever
that indicates that any God announced Himself or any claim of divinity
or creation of any type or from any source, except from only one source.
This source is the Prophets and Messengers and nothing else.

These Prophets and Messengers are normal human beings in different age
ranges who appeared in different places and time and for different
nations and groups of people. They did not claim divinity or lordship
for themselves. Rather, they said that they have received divine
revelation and inspiration from God, and that they were assigned to
convey and broadcast His Message to their people and their nations. They
appeared and supported each other’s truthfulness in conveying and
informing about the One Creator. None of them claimed that they were
sent by another God except by the same God whom their predecessors
called for.

Rather, they unanimously conveyed the lordship of One Great God. He is
the Creator, the Sustainer of the creation, the Destroyer of Life, and
He is the one who sent the messengers to convey that reality to the
people of their time and place so that everyone knows who their God is.
Each one of them confirmed and verified the authenticity of the
prophecies of those who were sent before them. None of them accused the
other of lying or making false claims; rather they were one chain which
not only verified each other but also informed and gave prophecy about
the future appearance of each other. They even foretold the prophecy of
the next messenger(s) who will follow them. Other than these prophets
and messengers who conveyed their One and Only God, no other God
announced Himself, no other God claimed divinity, and no other God sent
any messenger or message to indicate His presence and claim his Kingship
and Lordship.

As for these prophets and messengers, they conveyed and informed about
one God from whom they all received their message. They were unanimous
in His regard and in their support to each other, despite the difference
in their times and places of appearance. Their number is many but the
famous and most known among them are: Adam, Enoch, Noah, Hud, Saleh,
Abraham, Lut, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Sho’ayb, Moses, Aaron,
David, Solomon, Job, Jonah, Elias, Zachariah, John the Baptist, Jesus,
and Muhammad.

They were all kind-hearted people who became known among their people
for their righteousness, piety, truthfulness, honesty, wisdom,
intelligence, and noble upbringing. All of the messengers unanimously
conveyed that they received divine inspiration (by the command of the
God) through unknown and unseen creatures called angels. None of them
claimed that they saw the Great Creator with their own eyes, nor did any
of them claim that they hold a higher rank than the rest of the human
beings. The only thing they asserted was that they were chosen by God to
deliver His message to them, convey His existence, and call for the
worship of the One and Only God. None of them claimed that they have
knowledge of the foreseen or the future except what was inspired to them
from the Lord Himself.

None of them demanded or required any type of reward from the people in
return for conveying the message of the Lord. They were from the most
ascetic, humble, and well-behaved people of their time and place. They
were all supported by extraordinary miracles that verified their claims
and the truthfulness of their prophecies. Sure enough, history testifies
the occurrence of some of these miracles and extraordinary events which
were witnessed by the contemporaries of these prophets. This has been
confirmed and narrated by the witnesses who lived during the time of
those prophets.

2) If we place these facts regarding the messengers side by side with
what we logically deduced in the previous research topics, we will
recall that we had concluded in the 4th research topic that it is
necessary and logical that the One and Only God announce His presence to
His creation and introduce Himself to them. However, let us ponder a
moment over how the Great Creator can accomplish this considering His
great attributes which we previously proved must exist. How will He
announce His existence? Will He appear to the people directly? This is
absolutely illogical and impossible because it contradicts His absolute
attributes such as His Magnificence, Strength, Greatness, infinite
Vastness, and that no sight can envision Him, and no mind or feeling can
encompass Him.

Man by nature has limited capabilities in recognition, sensation, and
emotions. Therefore, it is logical and necessary that God convey His
message through mediators. Due to the great differences between the
absolute attributes of God the Creator and the monetary, moral, and
limited attributes of mankind, it is inevitable that there would be
numerous mediators who would relay the message between God and the human
beings.

Let's consider this example: Suppose that you have a small radio that
requires 9 volts of electricity. However, it will derive its energy from
an electrical source that has over a million volts. Is it possible to
connect the radio directly to the main power source? Of course not,
because it will lead to burning the radio and possibly causing a big
fire. However, to complete this connection, it should be indirect and
there must be a transformer or transformers in between. The greater the
difference between the equipment and the source, the more converters
will be needed in order to ensure a successful connection.

Similarly, it is logical to conclude that it is impossible for
communication to proceed directly from God to the people, and that there
must exist mediators who may be different in number or nature. The
presence of these mediators is not peculiar, illogical, or surprising to
the mind. Rather, it is completely anticipated, inevitable and
reasonable. Furthermore, these prophets and messengers have conveyed to
us about other creatures with different natures named angels that we
can't see. Those angels have relayed the divine message to the prophets,
so we now have more than one mediator. This is in fact very logical and
is in agreement with sound judgment and conclusion.

3) Since these mediators will deliver their message to mankind, it is
logically necessary that they be as close as possible to the nature of
humanity itself so that they can successfully accomplish their mission.
Rather, if you desired the best results for their performance, it is
better and more prudent that they be human themselves just like the rest
of humanity! This will make their job easier in connecting with the
people and propagating the message to them. A human being will be more
likely to accept and understand the relayed message in this case. It is
part of human nature that he can better relate to, understand, and
follow those who are like him much quicker and easier than following
those who are very different in nature, physical characteristics, and
abilities.

Consider this for example: If you wanted to deliver a message to a group
of children, which scenario do you think is better? To send an old wise
man to them, or a strong knowledgeable man, or a young child in the same
age range as them who understands the message is capable of relaying the
message to them? What is the judgment of the mind and logic in this
case? There is no doubt that the young child will be much more capable
in relaying the message to those like him and will be able to relate
much better with the other children. He will be able to successfully
accomplish his mission and they will understand and follow him more
easily.

Similarly, if you wish to send a message to a group of birds, it is
logical that you wouldn’t send to them a human messenger like yourself.
Rather, it is better that you choose a bird from among them who will be
able to receive and understand the message and carry out the mission of
delivering the message to those fellow birds like him. This is the sound
judgment of the mind and logic and leaves no room for disagreement or
debate.

The International imperialization have benefited from this same simple
logic when it utilized that same approached and realized its importance.
It was then able to achieve its goals and ambitions in a much more
successful and universal way. In the past, imperialism depended on the
presence of an imperial ruler for the colonies and imperial foreign
occupying forces to exploit the nation and control its resources and
wealth. This policy was successful in the beginning. But it later led to
revolt of the inhabitants of the colonies against the foreign imperial
ruler with the foreign occupying forces. This happened because man by
nature does not like to deal with those who are foreign and different
from him in terms of race, gender, color and nature. Hence, revolution
took place in all of the colonies and imperialization in its old form
soon came to an end.

However, the new imperialists realized the reality we mentioned before,
namely, that it is the role of the mediator to achieve the goals. So
they replaced the foreign rule with a ruler from the local population
who would carry out the same mission of the foreign ruler. He would
accomplish the imperialistic goal of taking control over the nations and
their wealth, for the benefit of imperialism. But because he is not a
foreign ruler to the local people, he is able to accomplish his mission
more easily and successfully. The inhabitants of the colonies are less
likely to be upset or rebellious because the ruler is one of them. His
blood is their blood, his flesh is their flesh, his language is their
language, and his culture is their culture. So he is very near to them.
This fact is the key to his success in his mission.

The new imperialism replaced the foreign occupying troops with the
national and local armies in which its loyalty and function are the same
as the foreign occupying force. This function is to oppress and control
the local people, but because its troops are from among the people
themselves, it is more able to achieve the goal of imperialist. Those
troops will not upset the local people because it has the same race,
color, language, culture, faces, and names as the local people. But it
achieves the same function of the foreign occupying troops. And this is
exactly the new imperialism!

In the past, they used to bring British and French consuls from England
and France to rule the colonies. When the inhabitants of these colonies
revolted against the foreigners and strangers, they simply replaced the
foreign ministers with local ministers from among the inhabitants of the
colonies themselves. These local rulers and agents were westernized and
their loyalty was for the imperialized. But because they are from among
the same inhabitants of the colonies, nobody revolted against them. On
the contrary, the people followed these local rulers, respected them,
and recognized them as progressive reformers and modern leaders. That’s
how colonization continued as well as exploitation and looting of
wealth. But this time, it was in a new acceptable and hidden formula
that is deceiving, yet successful. All that is due to the application of
a simple logical rule, and that is, the mediators and messengers in this
case, will be more successful in their mission if they are from the same
race and nationality as those whom they’re sent to.

Based on this logical rule, we can conclude that the prophets and
messengers which God will send to humanity to deliver the divine message
will be chosen from the human beings themselves. This is to ensure the
success and feasibility of the mission. Therefore, the idea of prophets
and messengers being normal human beings is logical, essential, and
anticipated using sound reasoning and common sense.

4) We know that the One God and Creator is the absolute Truth, Justice,
Perfection and Wisdom. We also concluded earlier that it is expected
that God will demand from His creation that they be righteous, pious,
truthful, loving, merciful, and refrain from harming others and doing
any type of corruption. Then, what do we expect when God chooses His
messengers from the people? What characteristics do we expect to be
present in these messengers? Logic and common sense ascertains that
these selected prophets and messengers will certainly be from the most
wise, intelligent, knowledgeable, truthful, just, honest, loyal,
trustworthiness, righteous, loving, merciful, and well-behaved. After
all, they will be the messengers of God who are characterized by these
attributes.

Therefore, it is not logical that they possess different or opposite
characteristics of God, although God's attributes are absolute and
infinite and are not shared by anyone. However, the indication of the
attribute itself remains the same. For example, since one of the
attributes of God is absolute Justice, it is not logical that He chooses
a prophet or messenger from humanity who is known and characterized for
his injustice or oppression. No prophet or messenger can deliver an
order from God and invite people to be good and truthful, just,
merciful, honest, etc., while he himself (the messenger) lack these
attributes or has the opposite!

In other words, how can God send a messenger to the people to spread
justice while he (the messenger) himself is unjust, and to command them
to be truthful while he himself is a liar? Or to urge them to have mercy
or love, while he himself is oppressive and malicious! This is
impossible and contrary to every logic and reasonable thinking! Hence,
logical reasoning and sound judgment dictates that those messengers and
prophets should be at the highest level of behavior, justice, wisdom,
goodness, compassion, truthfulness, love, honesty, trustworthiness, and
generosity, etc. This way they will be most suitable to achieve their
mission and function in the best ways to ensure all possible success to
this sacred mission.

5) Furthermore, in order for the chances of success for accomplishment
of the mission to be greater, it is logically better if the messengers
are individuals from the same people, clan, and tribe, who speak the
same language and live the same lifestyle as those whom the message will
be delivered to. This will make it easier for the messenger to convey
his message and communicate with the people. It will make it more
probable that the people will listen to him, believe, understand, and
follow him, and this logic is based on what we discussed previously in
item \#3.

6) Since the people on Earth are naturally divided into different
nations, tribes, and countries, based on item \#5 it is logical that
there would appear many prophets and messengers who will fit the wide
array of nations present on Earth. Furthermore, since these prophets
possess the highest rank of manners and behavior, we can also expect
that the rules of inheritance apply here, and that prophethood is passed
on to the offspring or specific families. This is logical and accepted
by the mind and is very likely to happen.

7) It is of human nature that man generally tends to forget over long
periods of time. Since it is a known fact that man tends to forget,
change, deviate or get confused over time, it is also essential and
logical that these prophets appear at different time intervals instead
of appearing all in one age in time.

8) Human nature, in general, is inclined to deny things which he cannot
not see, touch, or feel with his senses. The mission of the prophets and
messengers is to deliver the divine message from an unseen God, due to
His absolute attributes which we logically deduced earlier and also due
to the limited physical capabilities of man. Therefore, it is
foreseeable that these messengers appear with extraordinary events and
miracles to prove their prophethood and confirm the authenticity of
their message. These miracles will help the people trust and believe in
them and will serve as a logical proof of their mission. This is all
very logical and rather essential and is not subject to debate.

9) As we know, there are many different classes, levels, and types of
people. In order for the divine message and prophecy to be communicated
to all of mankind across all classes, circumstances, types, it was
logical and essential that the prophets sent to them also be of
different classes, types, and with different providence. For example, we
can expect to find among the prophets those who are rich, poor, king,
ruled person, healthy, ill, patient, white, black, victorious, and those
who are killed. We can expect to find those who are sent to some people,
and those who are sent to all of the people. We may find those who are
beautiful, those who are ordinary, those who were born in a normal way,
and those who were born without a father, or without a mother, or
without both parents.

We may find those who were born in a wealthy family or in a poor and
deprived family; those who enjoyed parental affection and those who were
deprived of that. We may find those who were born into a believing
family or into a non-believing family; those who are fathers to a
righteous son, or fathers to a nonbeliever, husband of a righteous wife,
or the husband of a disobeying wife. We may expect to see those who are
young and those who are old and so on and so forth. So, diversity of
prophets is logical and essential and can certainly be expected so that
the message is directed and compatible for all types of people at every
time and place.

10) In item \# 19 of the first research topic, we had logically
concluded that among the logical divine attributes is that no one can
make false claims or lie on His behalf without being eradicated, his
lies exposed, or punished by God. Therefore, based on this attribute, it
is not logical that God the Creator would allow these messengers or even
one of them to falsely deliver a message on His Behalf which He does not
approve of, or to make false claims in His Name which He does not agree
with, considering that He is the absolute Truthful and Justice.

Furthermore, it is not logical that this would repeat itself time and
time again in different places and occasions. If any of the prophets
actually had the audacity to do that, then God would have surely exposed
him and revealed his falsehood. He would have severely punished him and
eradicated his existence in order to protect the people from those like
him. However, none of that happened; rather, the complete opposite took
place! Logic and common sense therefore dictates that these prophets and
messengers were indeed truthful and honest in everything they conveyed.
After all, if they lied even in one minor point or one moment, or if
they omitted a part of the message or disobeyed one command or were
deficient in relaying the message, God would have punished and destroyed
them. This idea is logical and is in agreement with the absolute
attributes of God. Therefore, we can conclude that these prophets and
messengers are indeed truthful and are true representatives of God the
Creator to the people.

11) We had concluded in the 4th research topic that it is necessary and
logical for God the Creator to announce His presence and existence to
all of His creation. However, we did not receive any revelation
regarding a God who announced Himself and His divine rights, except
through the prophets and messengers who spoke and represented the One
and Only God who created the entire universe and is the Lord of all
worlds. So it was necessary that God announce Himself, His presence and
existence. Sure enough, there was no announcement from any God about
Himself except the God of the prophets and messengers who delivered His
message and claimed for Him divinity and lordship.

Therefore, we can conclude with 100% confidence that the God of those
prophets and messengers is indeed God the Creator who is expected to
announce Himself. As expected, He announced Himself through them and no
other God announced Himself except Him. After all, if there is another
God, then He should have and would have introduced Himself. Divinity and
Lordship are surely His absolute rights, He has no partner, and there is
no God but Him. He is the one who sent the messengers, and He is the one
who conveyed Himself and informed everyone of His presence. This in
itself indicates the truthfulness of these prophets and messengers in
what they delivered from their Lord.

12) As we previously demonstrated logically, one of the attributes of
God is absolute Justice. So how can He accept that a group of people
falsely claim divinity and lordship to someone other than Himself, and
that this would repeat itself in different times and places? It would
indeed be great injustice committed against the Creator, so how can the
absolute Justice accept for such great injustice to happen against Him
and His Divinity while He is the one who created, organized, and
established the laws of the universe?

Furthermore, we had previously established that God is the Absolute
Truth. So how can He possibly accept falsehood? After all, God is the
only existent God is the Ultimate King, Owner and absolute Governor? So
is it reasonable that the Absolute Truth accept that misguidance
widespread by worshipping a false God? How can He accept that someone
claim His kingship, ownership, and governorship while He stands helpless
and conceals His Divinity, and while He possesses absolute strength,
power, and capability? Indeed, this is all impossible to happen, so
there is no doubt that the God represented by the prophets is indeed the
One and Only God and Creator. Or else, if he wasn't the real God, He
would never allow the prophets and messengers to claim divinity to
somebody else. This is surely evidence which indicates without any doubt
the truthfulness of these prophets and messengers.

13) Moreover, if these prophets and messengers ascribed attributes to
their God whom they represent which contradicts the attributes we
logically deduced, then we can definitely say that they violated the
logical and reasonable truth which we previously demonstrated. We would
then conclude that it is possible that they are liars and untruthful in
their claim to prophethood. However, as history testifies, none of the
prophets (despite their different places and times of appearance)
attributed any characteristic to God that contradicts logical reasoning.

Rather, all of the attributes they mentioned regarding God are in
complete agreement with the logical attributes that we expect to be
present in God the Creator. This complete harmony and conformity is in
itself a logical and irrefutable proof of their truthfulness and the
verity of their message that they conveyed on behalf of their Great
Lord. Then based on what do we accuse them of lying and making false
claims? For example, if a person came up to you and told you that
someone fell off from the 10th floor and immediately died, can you
accuse them of lying? After all, it is logical that whoever falls from
the 10th floor will immediately die. Therefore, what the man claimed is
in agreement with logic and common sense and so he must not be accused
of lying.

14) In the 5th research topic, we had discussed the logical duties that
may be expected of the creation and demanded by God the Creator. So now
the question to ask is: Did these prophets and messengers do anything to
contradict these obligations? For example, we had concluded that one of
the things that God will demand from us is honesty, loyalty,
righteousness, goodness, and piety. Now, did these prophets come to the
people and claim that God the Creator is demanding that the people lie,
cause corruption, be unloyal, harm, or betray others? If they did that,
then we can conclude that they have contradicted the logical obligations
that we have deduced earlier, and therefore doubt the validity of their
prophet hood. Was there an inconsistency in at least one of the duties
that we discussed? On the contrary, all of their messages are in harmony
with what we expected using logical reasoning.

Sure enough, the Great God demanded from His creation everything that we
expected and deduced. Doesn’t this harmony and consistency in the
message that the prophets relayed on behalf of God, indicate clearly
that these prophets and messengers are truthful in what they conveyed on
behalf of their Lord? Doesn’t it remove any doubt and nullify any
accusation or even the possibility that they may be lying? After all, if
they lied then their message would contradict the duties and obligations
that we logically demonstrated. Since that did not happen, we can
finally conclude that these prophets and messengers are indeed truthful
and honest in everything they communicated on behalf of the Creator.

15) Moreover, none of these prophets and messengers contradicted or
differed with each other. None of them accused the other of lying or
spoke negatively of each other. Rather, they supported each other and
verified the prophethood of those who preceded them. They even foretold
the prophecy of those messengers who will follow them. They were like
beads in one chain or like bricks of one building that support and help
each other. After all, if Abraham came and claimed that Noah was a liar,
or if Muhammad belied Moses or Jesus, then we would doubt some or all of
them. However none of this happened.

Rather, the complete opposite took place. Therefore, we can remove any
doubt or question to the validity of their prophethood and what they
conveyed. Since this doubt is now removed, we can certainly believe that
these prophets are truthful. We can believe in them and in the God they
represent whom we logically anticipated that He will reveal Himself to
His creation. So their support and verification of each other’s
prophethood clearly proves their truthfulness, and if they were anything
but truthful, the matter would’ve differed greatly.

16) Based on what we discussed so far, we can confidently and reasonably
conclude that it is logical to believe that all the prophets and
messengers are one, without division. So if their God is one, their
message as a whole is one, and there is no discrepancy or disagreement
between any of them, then it is not logical after this to believe in
some prophets and disbelieve in others. This would certainly contradict
the simplest rules of logic and sound judgment.

So whoever claims that Moses is truthful but Abraham is bogus, or that
they believe in Moses but not in Jesus, or that they believe in Jesus
but have nothing to do with Muhammad, they are totally contradicting the
mind and logic and have to revisit their thought process. After all,
there is no wisdom or reason in making distinction between these
messengers, except for pure fanaticism or personal interest. This in
itself contradicts what these prophets relayed from the truth and divine
message from the Lord of the Worlds. Therefore, whoever falls in this
sin and makes distinction between the prophets and believes in some
while disbelieve in others, he has gone astray from the message and
divine revelations of all these prophets. He has deviated from having
true faith in their God and His divine message. This is clearly logical
and can be accepted by sound judgment.

For example, suppose that five brothers assured you that they are the
sons of the same father and mother. Each one of them assured you that
they are biological brothers and they all delivered to you the same
message from their father. On what basis or logic could someone come
later and claim without proof that they believe three of the brothers
but doubts the fourth or the fifth, or both of them for that matter?
This is not permissible and is rather impossible as there cannot be any
debate over this, except for the purpose of fanaticism or personal
interest. Hence, we can conclude that it is necessary to believe in the
integrity and truthfulness of all of the prophets and messengers without
excluding anyone. It’s either you believe in all of them or disbelieve
in all of them, since division between them is unthinkable.

17) Furthermore, the actions, deeds and behavior of those prophets and
messengers were in total harmony with each other and never contradicted
their message. So they never ordered the people to be honest and
truthful while they themselves were liars and dishonest. They never
ordered the people to do good while they committed bad. They never
ordered the people to obey God while they themselves disobeyed God. They
did not order the people to respect and love God while they themselves
disrespected and disliked God. They never asked the people to follow the
truth while they themselves followed falsehood. History and the
contemporaries of those prophets and messengers bear witness to that.
This complete harmony and agreement is in itself a strong proof and
evidence to their truthfulness and authenticity of their prophethood, as
they make their lives an example to the message.

18) These prophets and messengers have commanded us to be truthful and
emphasized that as an integral part of the divine message. They forbade
any type of deceit under any circumstances and made it clear that this
would bring the wrath of God on the person who does that. So how is it
logical that they enjoin honesty, forbid lying, and warn the people
against God’s punishment…yet at the same time they are lying on behalf
of the Creator Himself?! How can they be safe from the curse and
punishment of God, unless they all truly believe that God does not
exist, so they found it easy to lie and engage in fraud?

Furthermore, isn’t it more than a coincidence that all of the messengers
behaved in the same way despite the difference in time and their places
of appearance? A person may be doubtful of the existence of God, but no
matter what, no one can ever claim with confidence that God does not
exist or provide evidence in support of that. This is absolutely
impossible using common sense and logical reasoning. Then how can a
person with some doubt about the existence of God have the audacity to
lie in such grave matter? A simple doubt regarding the presence of God
would be sufficient to prevent that person from lying on His possible
existence (even if that possibility is 50%) in fear of His wrath and
punishment.

Based on this logic, it is not possible for a wise and sane person to
have the audacity to lie about the absence of a God unless He is 100%
sure of His absence. Therefore, it is impossible for a prophet or
messenger to lie, especially considering that they came to promote
honesty, truthfulness, and warn against revenge of God for those who
lie, misguide, or fabricate. How can they practice what they are
preaching against and neglect what they’re commanded to do? Indeed, this
is illogical and very unlikely to happen using logical reasoning and
sound judgment.

19) History narrates a few examples of those who falsely claimed that
they were messengers of God and thought that they would get away by
doing so. Furthermore, history narrates to us how their lies and
fabrication were revealed and exposed to the public and they were
eradicated. So this in itself is a clear indication that the prophets
and messengers are truthful. After all, if they did lie on behalf of the
Creator, they would’ve surely received the same punishment from God as
those imposters and fabricators. Therefore, logic takes from this point
a clear proof and evidence of the truthfulness and integrity of those
messengers, and it gives us trust in every word they said and conveyed
on behalf of their Creator.

20) In addition, all of the contemporaries of these prophets who dealt
with them personally, testified and acknowledged their good behavior,
honesty, truthfulness, and loyalty long before they (prophets and
messengers) even received the divine revelation from God. They were not
known to ever lie and they were all well-respected and outstanding
individuals who were liked by everyone. The people came to know them by
their good behavior, noble manners, wisdom, intelligence, loyalty,
sincerity and chivalry. Is it then possible that these righteous
personalities would all of a sudden change into dishonest, fake and
deceitful characters who would lie on behalf of God the Creator? Can the
mind or logic accept such thing and did we ever witness such example in
our real life? This idea is unlikely to happen and goes against common
sense and sound judgment.

Therefore, we can confidently conclude that it is impossible and
improbable that those who became known for their honesty, loyalty, and
good behavior would have the audacity to lie and fabricate on behalf of
the Creator and claim for themselves the prophethood when they have no
authority or permission from God. Even if we accepted the possibility
that this may happen, it is unlikely that this possibility would repeat
itself with all the prophets and messengers. Therefore, this is yet
another proof and indication to the integrity and sincerity of the
prophets and everything they conveyed.

We must also keep in consideration that those prophets and messengers
did not have any personal interest, reason, and they did not benefit in
any way from this claim of prophecy and from relaying the message to the
people. On the contrary, they were often persecuted, harmed, fought, and
deported by the enemies of God. So what could their motivation be for
lying in such a grave matter and allowing themselves to be exposed to
such torture and danger? In fact, the mere absence of motivation and
interest is the greatest proof of their honesty and truthfulness!

21) As for the nature and content of the message which they delivered,
it can be summarized as follows:

(a) They called for the worship of the One God and Creator and conveyed
the reality of His Existence, absolute attributes, lordship, divine
rights, kingdom, and governorship. They proclaimed that He is the
Creator of the entire universe and creatures, and the sustainer who
maintains regulation of life by Himself. He has control over fate,
existence, life and death of everything. He is the Master and Protector
and Controller alone of every creature. He has no partner and there is
no God but Him. He is the Lord of the Worlds and everyone must be
convinced of that in order to surrender and submit to Him with faith and
conviction.

(b) They conveyed many of the divine attributes of God which are not
different from the ones we logically deduced using the mind and logic.
Rather, they are the same ones and are in agreement with our logical
reasoning and this indicates their truthfulness.

(c) They conveyed that God has creatures of a different nature that we
can't see like angels and jinni that each have their own unique
characteristics and abilities, which they explained in detail.

(d) They narrated the story of the human creation beginning from Adam
and how God honored him, followed by his disobedience to His Lord, then
his descension to Earth and his trials. Man is always tested and placed
in trial and tribulation. They spoke about the story of Iblees the devil
(Satan) and how he harbored hatred and animosity to Adam and his
children. The devil always tries to lure the people away from their God
and entice them with temptation which leads them to disobey God and
commit sin. Hence, some light was shed on the purpose of life.

(e) They conveyed that the whole worldly life (Dunya) is temporary and
that a day will come when God will resurrect all of humanity back to
life and will reckon them on all their deeds whether good or bad. He
will judge them based on their faith and belief in the prophets and
messengers and whether they believed and followed them or not. He will
judge whether they believed in His Divine Existence, worshipped Him, and
obeyed His commands. The prophets also conveyed that whoever believes,
performs good deeds, and obeys the Lord, God will let him enter a
beautiful Paradise which has no similarity. Everything delicious and
every desire imaginable and not imaginable are present there and that
person will live there eternally. As for those who lied, disbelieved and
worshipped other Gods besides Him or along with Him, or disobeyed His
commands or disbelieved in the prophets etc., He will make him enter
Hell-Fire where he eternally faces severe punishment. The prophets also
made it clear that God is merciful on whomever He pleases and that He
forgives those who repent and seek His forgiveness.

(f) They conveyed that above the heaven of this earth, there are six
other heavens (total of seven) that are inhabited by different angels
and other inhabitants whom we know nothing about. They also informed
that most of the other creatures except man are aware of the existence
of their God and are continuously praising Him and are in submission to
Him. However, man alone is tested and given the choice from among the
creation to act as they please. If he believes and does good deeds, he
will be rewarded, and if he disbelieves and commits evil, he will be
punished and this is the Justice of God.

(g) The prophets have conveyed what is expected and demanded by God, and
the message they relayed is in full agreement with what we logically
deduced in the previous research topics. They directed the people to the
road of guidance and salvation; they warned and alerted them against
evil, sin, and devils. They forbid committing major sins such as
disbelieving, killing, committing adultery, stealing, and disobeying the
parents. They urged the people to adopt good manners and behavior, to
obey the orders of God, and to love, fear and sincerely worship Him.
They commanded everyone to completely submit and surrender themselves to
God.

The messengers have supported each other’s message and confirmed that
their message, their God, as well as their teachings are all one. They
foretold the prophecy of each other and called their people to worship
the One and Only God. They ordered them to abandon the worship of idols
and other deities, and not to associate any partner with Him.
Furthermore, they relayed to us that the name of God is “Allah”, and
that He has many other names which are also His divine attributes. God
alone created the whole universe and creation from nothing by His Might,
and He inspired life and created man from clay, jinni from fire, and
angels from light. Everything they said is in complete agreement with
what we logically deduced earlier.

All of the prophets were supported by extraordinary events and miracles
from God which verified their truthfulness, as we previously
demonstrated. These events and miracles were different with each prophet
and each age in time. Some of the prophets were additionally inspired
with divine books and revelations that contained cumulative rules and
guidelines sent from God to the people. These instructions are to be
followed and carried out by the people as they will be questioned about
it on the Day of Judgment and will be held accountable. Man will be
evaluated for their extent of obedience, respect, and abidance to the
divine doctrine. These messages differed very slightly with the
different groups of people, time, and prophets. However, the core
essence of the creed is one and never changed which surely indicates the
unity and oneness of the source of the revelation.

All divine messages and revelations were sealed with the message and
prophethood of Muhammad who conveyed that he is the last of the prophets
and messengers and that his message is universal and directed to all of
humanity. Sure enough, since the demise of Muhammad till now,
approximately 1400 years have passed. Since then, no prophet or
messenger appeared with any new divine revelation, which proves that
Muhammad’s message is indeed the last and final message. In brief, the
core and essence of their message is for guidance, mercy, peace,
invitation and warning against punishment, glad tidings and
encouragement, exhortation and apprehension, teaching and propagating
knowledge, spreading truth and falsifying evil, seriousness not
foolishness, certainty not imagination, honesty not lying, justice not
bias, and light not darkness, etc.

None of the prophets claimed that they physically saw the Creator or
that they are immortal. Nor did they claim that they are different from
the rest of the human beings or that they will live eternally. Nor did
they claim that they possess knowledge of the unknown or that they
possess extraordinary abilities which others don’t have, except that
which Allah (SWT) gave them from the prophetic miracles. History,
people, contemporaries, friends, enemies, followers, believers, and
nonbelievers have all witnessed and testified to their honesty,
truthfulness, justice, sincerity, good behavior and fulfillment of their
mission and conveyance of the divine message to them. They witnessed
that these prophets and messengers came to life empty-handed, and
departed empty-handed. They did not gain any personal interest or
benefit, nor did they ask for reward, position, or wealth from the
people. Their lives were a continuous struggle that were filled with
trial and tribulations. Their people accused them of lying, fought
against them, and persecuted them to the point of deporting them from
their homes!

However, Allah (SWT) the One God and their Lord gave them victory and
destroyed their enemies. He propagated and protected their religion
because it is His Religion and His Message. They are His prophets and
messengers, so it is logical that God supports His messengers who are
His representatives. This point in itself stands as a proof of the
integrity and truthfulness of the prophets as well as their God. So
moving forward, we can refer to God as ALLAH after it has logically been
proven to us that He IS the God and Creator who has no partner and there
is no God but Him. He is their Lord and our Lord, and the Lord of the
entire universe, creation, kingdom, heavens, and earth. Glory be to Him,
the Great King!

From the previous items 1-21, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

6th Conclusion
--------------

The God and Divine Creator has announced His presence and existence
through prophets and messengers whom we logically proved their
truthfulness and integrity of their message and the authenticity of
their Great God, who is Allah (Glory be to Him). It is reasonably proven
that He is the Lord and Creator who does not have any partner.
Everything these prophets and messengers conveyed is truth and reality;
their existence is consistent with our logical deduction that their
presence is necessary and inevitable. Their nature is also consistent
with the characteristics we rationally deduced to be present in a
messenger.

Everything they relayed to us confirmed their prophethood. We have also
proved that all of these prophets are part of one chain without
division. Believing in all of them is essential and required. After
complete conviction based on common sense and logical reasoning, and
after freeing ourselves from fanaticism, personal interests, and
previous beliefs…Dear wise and intelligent Reader…we can both bear
witness with our minds and intellect, with all our soul, without being
forced or pressured by anyone, and after witnessing all the logical
proofs and evidence clearly…we can bear witness with confidence and
certainty of what we’re about to admit and testify that:

“There is no God but Allah, the One and Only Great Creator. He is our
Lord and our Creator who by Himself created everything from nothing by
His Absolute Ability. He possesses many absolute attributes and there is
nothing like Him. All of the prophets and messengers were sent from God;
they are all truthful and we do not differentiate between any of them.

We only say ‘We heard and we obey’ in response to Allah, His Divine
Message, and His prophets and messengers. We seek forgiveness from the
Great Allah of everything in the past. We promise Him that we will
continue to use our minds to search for the truth and to accept the
truth that becomes obvious to us logically and rationally. We promise
Allah (Glory be to Him) to follow Him and obey His commands when it is
proven to us that it is the case.

We assure Him that we will be sincere to Him and we will worship Him
unconditionally. We will not associate any partner with Him and we ask
the reward, salvation, and Paradise from Him. We seek to attain His
pleasure on the Day of Judgment and the Day of Resurrection. May Allah
(Glory be to Him) bear witness to our testimony!”

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Dear Reader, at this time we would like to congratulate you for becoming
one the monotheists who have come to know their Lord based on faith and
certainty. You are now a believer, not by inheritance or
blind-obedience, nor by force or pressure. So all praise and thanks be
to the Lord that He guided and blessed you with a logical mind and made
you recognize His proofs and evidence! As a result, you became aware and
guided to Him. You believed in Him and fell in love with Him. You
responded to His call and obeyed Him with all your heart. You worship
Him after knowing that He is the clear Truth and that He deserves
Lordship and Worship. You worship Him as He wants, not as the others
want you to worship Him.

Congratulations, for you have cleansed yourself from misguidance,
falsehood, and darkness by the grace of your Lord. You came to
acknowledge the truth and took the first step towards the right path. So
keep up the good job and continue your thorough study in the next
research topic until you reach the shore of safety! Glad tidings of
Paradise to you so long as you are sincere with yourself and fulfill
your promise and agreement with our Lord.

This is the promise of Allah, and Allah (Glory be to Him) does not break
His promise because among His attributes are absolute Loyalty, absolute
Trustworthiness, absolute Justice, and absolute Truth. Indeed, you are
among the happy and lucky ones! And now, let’s move on to the second
research topic so that your faith can be stronger and your belief
completed. Continue walking on the road of truth, using your mind and
intellect, sound judgment and conscience, and by your prayers to your
God so that He completes His blessings on you and completes your
religion!


