4th Case Study: The Eleven Executors of Will, Leaders (Imams), Guardians, and Proofs of God
===========================================================================================

1st Research Topic - Logical Reasoning Behind the Inevitability of Continuous Guardianship and Successorship after Ali ibn Abi Taleb over the Final Revelation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Is it logical and essential that the Wasayah and Wilayah over the Final
Message continues on after the martyrdom of Ali ibn Abi Taleb who is the
divinely appointed Wasi and Wali?

What are the logical proofs and rationale behind that?

What is the meaning of the term “Hujjat Allah”?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) As we have previously demonstrated, the final Islamic message is
without a doubt the greatest and most rich of the divine revelations.
Thus, it is logical and natural that this message would need ample time
(decades at the least) until it establishes itself, grows, and
flourishes. So if the previous messages which were much smaller in scope
and less significant needed hundreds of years to establish itself, then
it is expected that the Final Message which is greater and more
complicated would certainly require double the amount of time and even
more! For example, it may take at least 300 years. If that is true, then
it will be clear to us that neither the lifespan of the prophet nor the
age of one Wasi after him will ever be sufficient to cover all of this
time.

Therefore, it is necessary that there exist other Awsiyaa (plural of
Wasi) after the first Wasi to complete the mission of guardianship and
look after the final and universal message. It is just like growing and
taking care of a huge and fruitful tree that is rare and old. It needs
several generations of care and nurture until its growth is completed
and its fruits are harvested. Due to the fact that some of the less
complicated and smaller messages (compared to the Final Revelation)
required more than one Wasi after the departure of the prophet, then it
is logical and natural for us to expect that the greater and final
message will certainly require more than one Wasi after the Seal of
Prophets. This is logical and is in agreement with the mind and sound
judgment.

2) The Wasi after the last Prophet who is Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) was
martyred and departed from this world while he was only sixty-three
years of age. He did not live long enough to finish his role of Wasaya
after the death of the Prophet (SA) except for only thirty years. This
amount of time is certainly not enough and impossible to complete the
great role of guardianship and carry this tremendous burden on the
shoulders of only one Wasi. Perhaps if Ali lived for a hundred years
after the Prophet’s death for example, his age may have been enough to
accomplish the job. But thirty years is certainly not enough, so
therefore, we must anticipate the appearance of other Awsiyaa after him
to continue his mission and complete his role which his lifespan did not
permit him to complete.

In addition, there were many battles, hostilities, and wars which
occupied most of Ali’s time and did not give him enough opportunity to
complete the role of Wasaya over the message with all its universality.
Thus, it is logical for us to deduce the essentiality of the presence of
Awsiyaa (guardians) after him to complete the unfinished business due to
the tough circumstances and instability that was present at the time of
Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS). This is logical based on the historical events
which have already taken place posed as obstacles to the first Wasi.

3) We must also take into consideration the nature of the nation which
the Final Revelation descended to. This ignorant and backward society
was illiterate and very hard to deal with. The message came to transform
this nation from its Stone Age which controlled its life and way of
thinking, to a nation that would absorb this huge and rich message and
transform it in such a way to adapt to this message. In order for this
process of transformation and adaptation to happen in such a nation with
a tough nature and attributes, it will certainly need a much longer time
and greater effort. Thus, the lifetime and efforts of one Wasi, or two,
or four will not be sufficient.

For example, suppose that you hired a clever cook and requested him to
bake a very enormous cake that has no like in history. This cake should
be beautified and decorated in such a way that is unique in magnificence
and taste. So you provided him the raw materials he will need, but
instead of giving him flour, you gave him the wheat spikes which he has
to manually extract, peel, and grind from scratch. Instead of giving him
eggs, you gave him small chickens which he has to raise and wait until
they lay their eggs. Instead of giving him chocolate powder, you gave
him the cocoa beans and left it up to him to plant it, harvest, break,
grind it and take the end product. Instead of giving him milk, you gave
him small calves to look after and then milk it afterwards.

And so on and so forth, instead of handing him the simple raw materials
that will suit the great task at hand, you provided him the complicated
and difficult raw materials that are hard to use or deal with. In such
case, do you think that the cook can accomplish this great task all by
himself in such a short period of time, especially considering its
complicatedness and the challenging raw materials? Or don’t you think
that he will logically need many helpers and assistants, as well as days
and months to accomplish this great task with such complicated raw
materials?

The nature of the Arab nation during that time necessitates that there
should be several Awsiyaa after the first Wasi to complete the mission
in order for the newborn message to continue its growth and development
until it reaps its fruits and accomplishes its goals. One who studies
the psychological, sentimental, and intellectual components of this
nation during that time will immediately realize the difficult and
complicated raw material that was present at that time. He will realize
the need for continuous guardianship after the first Wasi for a long
period of time afterwards.

4) The multitude and diversity of enemies against the Islamic message
continued on afterwards especially after the Islamic conquests and that
certainly indicates the need for many Awsiyaa. After all, if the
hostility against Islam ended with the death of the first Wasi, then
there would not be the need for multiplicity of Awsiyaa after him.
However, the continued increase of these enemies and the presence of
means for destruction, whether from inside the Arab nation or from other
nations, posed a direct threat to the existence of Islam. This calls for
the necessity of having more than one Wasi who would stand up and
protect the message. This is indeed a logical proof to the presence of
those who would carry out this role, so long as the Message has yet to
grow and establish itself, at least in the nation in which it descended.

5) The conquest of many countries in the East, West, North and South by
Muslims, the embrace of inhabitants of these countries into this new
religion, and the entrance of most of these different countries into
Islam led to important influences and new circumstances which affect the
atmosphere and climate in which the Final Message developed during the
period of its growth, development, and establishment. We can summarize
these changes and influences as follows:

First: POLITICAL CHANGES AND INFLUENCES

The Islamic state have enlarged quickly and extended greatly, and have
started to maintain many new political and organizational relations with
the other nations. The distance between the central government and the
states in the conquered countries became widespread over time.
Consequently, the control over the regime and the political stability in
this growing empire became in need of a lot of organization, wisdom, and
cleverness. All of that was very new and different to the Arabs who did
not ever unite themselves or merge with each other inside their
peninsula. Not even two tribes have been united under one political
regime even if they lived in the same city. So the political regime was
totally tribal and was based on the loyalty of the tribe to its leader
and elderly who represented the center of political power. Thus, the
political circle was very small and limited. Those who were ruled lived
near the ruler, whether directly or closely. There was no need for the
establishment of political foundations or organizations since loyalty
was guaranteed according to the habits and traditions. The ruler was
aware of his citizens by name and therefore, political life was simple
without any complication.

Now all of a sudden, these same Arabs now find themselves in the midst
of a totally imperialistic political regime that is very different. This
change did not happen gradually such that it would permit the people to
assimilate and adapt. Rather, it occurred suddenly, so without a doubt
it led to political turmoil and chaos at the very beginning. Then, the
Arabs leaned towards ruling the new empire in an authoritative and
tribal way for the purpose of getting rid of that political conflict. It
made them resort to using the policy of “iron and fire” in order to take
control over the different nations whose loyalty was not anymore
guaranteed as it was in the tribal system. All of that resulted in an
unhealthy and disturbing political atmosphere that was troubled,
unorganized, and unstable. This led to the increase in enmities,
hostilities, and warfare for two reasons:

*1st Reason*: It was between the Arabs themselves. The widespread and
increase in the conquered land and the diversity of wealth, and the
importance of the ruler was greatly emphasized like that of an emperor.
There were also the ruler’s tribal absolute powers in the absence of any
clear political regime. The nobles and elderly of the tribes became
ambitious in attaining such position, just like they had their eyes on
the position of successorship after the Holy Prophet (SA). That is
because they thought that taking this position meant having political
power and leadership over the Arabs. Then imagine in this situation as
the leadership has now extended nearly over half of the world with its
wealth, influence, and great power!

This situation resulted in the increase of enmities, hostilities, and
competition among the Arabs to climb the lofty throne of power and
judicial and treasurer positions (Baytul Maal). In this position, they
saw the glitter of pride, honor, power, and leadership, but they now see
it as an entrustment and employment for the sake of protecting,
safeguarding, and propagating the final message. Due to these factors,
there were a lot of hostilities and conspiracies between them and
everyone was waiting for the right opportunity to seize power from the
other. There was an abundance of coalitions, cues, and alliances (both
openly and secretly), as well as many attempts for rebellion and
revolutions.

*2nd Reason*: It was from outside the Arab nation, the inhabitants of
the countries and civilizations which were conquered by the Muslims.
Those inhabitants saw that they owned ancient and new civilizations of
development and possessed a long and rich history just like Persia,
Egypt, Yemen, and Sham (includes Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine) which
were influenced by the Roman Empire. All of the populations of these
countries used to look down upon the Arabs in the Arabian Peninsula with
inferiority and they saw them as ignorant and uncivilized people who
only knew of Bedouin type of life.

Now all of a sudden, those people saw these Arabs occupying their land
and conquering it. They found themselves under the rule and power of the
Arabs, occupied after they were superpowers, and occupied by whom?! By
people who are much less developed and civilized than them! So all of
that caused them to be very disappointed and led to feelings of
animosity to develop in their hearts towards the new tyrant leaders and
to the rule of "iron and fire" which they were never used to. They may
not necessarily be enemies of the Islamic message itself, but their
hostility was towards the tyrannical political regime that is derived
from the tribal political system which was very new to them, so
animosity started to surface from the new population which accepted
Islam. Then, animosity started to appear from other countries which have
not been conquered by the Islamic state, countries like the Roman
empire, the Turkish, Russian, Asian, and the Ethiopian populations who
all harbored animosity and grudge towards the new developing state and
tried to prevent its widespread and growth.

Although these nations welcomed the Islamic message, they refused the
power and leadership of the tyrannical Arabs whom without a doubt
presented the worst picture of Islam. By their trivialness and
silliness, the Arabs showed these nations that Islam is just the outer
covering which covers their desire for power, expansion, and wealth.
That's why those people refused these oppressive rulers, and bore
animosity towards them. As a result, the inhabitants of the conquered
lands were not able to comprehend and understand the true nature of the
Islamic message because they saw the message deformed and disfigured in
the hands of the authoritative leaders. After a while and gradually,
most of the people from these different nations felt at ease with the
Islamic message and adopted it voluntarily.

But after a period of time, they saw it necessary that there exist
separation between the Islamic message and those tyrannical Arab rulers.
Thus, these nations started to promote the idea of separation of their
area from the central government and tried to control the local rulers
in their own local civilizations. They sought to integrate and attract
the other civilizations to them.

Second: ECONOMICAL CHANGES AND INFLUENCE

There is no doubt that the wealth and money started to flow abundantly
in the developing Islamic state due to the conquest of many countries
which were full of bounties as well as the natural resources. As a
result, there was a great economic luxury which led to corruption of the
souls, especially if we keep in mind that the Arabs were among the
poorest nations of the world during that time. This poverty was due to
lack of resources and water in their peninsula. So they suddenly found
themselves in midst of an affluent economy, vast wealth and property, as
well as variable resources which became available to them. They became
the owners who had control over all of that.

After all, we can imagine a hungry person who is starving and have spent
most of his life barely meeting the needs of his day. Now, he finds
himself in front of a big dinner table with all the delicious types of
food set on it. Then he is told that the whole meal now belongs to him
and he can help himself as he pleases! Thus, it is no wonder that these
hungry and weak souls go after the money and property and rush to own
it. It is no surprise that this be their first priority over everything
else. Furthermore, they went on seeking compensation for what they and
their parents missed out on. So they indulged themselves in extravagance
and over-spending, and they sought to satisfy all their desires. They
did not observe the teachings and regulations of the Final Islamic
Message which under its name they were able to conquer and seize control
over all that wealth. They did not abide by the orders of the Divine
Creator and did not stay away from the forbidden and unlawful. Rather,
they went after their nomadic and bohemian instincts.

At the same time, this rapid flow of wealth seduced the souls and caused
them to deviate from their religion. They sold their conscience and
replaced it with enmity, competition, fighting, and disagreement. All of
that ultimately led to many battles and wars that took place, as
mentioned earlier, which the first Wasi and Wali, Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS)
faced when he sought to bring the religion and its application back to
the way it originally was at the time of the Holy Prophet (SA). This
state of enmity and competition over the wealth continued on as it
dominated the life of this nation for a long time after the conquest.
With the presence of abundant money and economic prosperity, the
tyrannical ruler had the opportunity to take control over the leadership
very easily. This led to an increase in absolute centralism and the
appearance of significant differences in the classes, as well as
discrimination when it came to distribution of grants.

All that resulted in the increase of tyranny and oppression of the
solitary ruler and difficulty in revolting and rebelling against him.
That was due to the fact that his treasures were filled with money in
which he only had control over. This also caused the tyrannical ruler to
have authority over the consciences, opinions, and everything else.
Anything coming from the tyrannical ruler is seen as a grant since he is
the only owner of all the wealth and grants. So everybody strives to
please him, even if pleasing Him is tantamount to displeasing Allah
(SWT). This policy ultimately led to the establishment of tyranny and
terror (politically, religiously, and intellectually).

Third: CULTURAL INFLUENCES AND DEMOGRAPHIC CHANGES

The nations of the conquered countries entered the Islamic state as they
carried with them their different cultures, habits, traditions,
languages, civilizations, religions, populations, and demographics. So
if we keep in mind that the Arabs were primitive people without any
previously existing civilization or culture, then it is logical for us
to conclude that they will certainly be influenced and their lives will
be greatly affected by the other cultures, habits, civilizations, and
languages. Sure enough, the Arabs were heavily influenced by the
different civilizations and cultures as well as the various languages
and traditions. They were not concerned whether these influences would
be in agreement with the Islamic teachings or not.

In the midst of all these changes, they forgot that they are the ones
who should affect and influence the nations of the world, rather than
become affected themselves. They are the ones who should carry the torch
of light from Allah (SWT) and convey the teachings of the final divine
message to them. They should be the ones inviting them to the religion
and calling them to abandon their own civilizations, cultures, and
habits, which contained many devilish actions and trivial human desires
that are destructive. They forgot that they are the ones who should
influence and not become influenced. Unfortunately, however, the
opposite is what happened.

Instead of bringing the people of these conquered countries out from
darkness of ignorance and into the light of guidance, the Arab Muslims
entered into darkness themselves along with the others. They came out of
the shadow of true Islam and were affected by the cultures, habits, and
innovations. Even their own language which is the language of the Holy
Quran became affected by other languages and dialects. It started to
integrate Arabic words with strange accents appearing on them. After the
passage of a few hundred years, new generations appeared among the Arabs
who barely knew the meaning of some of the words in the Holy Quran and
were unable to pronounce them correctly.

The new Islamic state was also influenced by the demographic composition
of the residents living in the conquered areas and its vast population.
Many of the Arab tribes migrated quickly to these countries to seek
wealth and money, while being indifferent to their low number in
comparison to the huge numbers of population in the host countries. So
they totally dissolved in the midst of the huge population of citizens
living in the conquered countries. They gradually lost their identity
until they almost vanished among this huge crowd. They could not resist
its influence so they decomposed and integrated with it.

If we take into account all these great changes and influences that
affected the atmosphere in which the Final Message will grow and
establish in, how can we feel safe leaving this religion in such
circumstances without providing any guardianship, care, or protection
until it reaches the safe haven? Surely, that is not logical! After all,
is it safe to leave a small child of five years under the care of a
mother who is with a different husband everyday? Could we leave this
child under her guardianship when this mother is occupied with
fulfilling her carnal desires? Of course not! Then imagine if this kid
is a VIP child, it will be even more necessary for him to grow up in the
best environment. Do you think it will be wise to leave that child under
the care of this mother in the midst of such disturbing atmosphere and
influence? Certainly not! Therefore, it is inevitable that there exists
a Wasi and protector of the child who takes care of him and protects him
from this insecure environment, until he grows up and reaches the age of
puberty and maturity.

So, if the first Wali or Wasi was martyred while the Message was still
in its childhood stage, then it is logically necessary that we expect
continuation of the Wasaya and Wilayah in order to complete the mission
at hand. This is especially needed if the situation is going from bad to
worse, as a result of the changes and influences that have been
introduced with the ongoing conquests. So who will be the one to judge
and make the decision regarding these innovations? Who will guide and
direct the people to what is permissible or forbidden? Who will set
things right, verify the truth, and invalidate falsehood if there’s no
Wasi appointed from Allah (SWT) for the Muslims to perform the vital
role?

6) The occurrence of the great test, the division between the Muslims
and their combat with each other, followed by the finalization of the
conflict in favor of oppression, hypocrisy, and darkness as well as the
start of complete deviation away from the religion, its rules, spirit,
and content, then its exchange for a deformed, false metamorphosis; all
of these historical events that took place logically require the
presence of a Wasi to protect the religion and safeguard it in order to
remain in its original and pure form throughout the years and
generations to come. The Wasi is needed so that the message does not
vanish or get dissolved between the atoms of fake metamorphosis. Such
role is needed so that the form, description, and place of the message
are known for those who seek the guidance, light, and true faith.

After all, if these historical events did not take place, then perhaps
one may have argued that the presence of one Wasi after the prophet is
sufficient since the state of affairs are stable and there is no any
threat to the religion. However, these historical events actually took
place, so it is logical for us to expect the appearance of more than one
Wasi to look after the religion and protect it from distortion and
fabrication in the hands of the oppressors who assumed the power and
leadership.

7) What’s even more dangerous than all of what was discussed so far is
the appearance of a group of fake scholars who have complete support
(financially, morally, and behaviorally) from the tyrannical and
hypocritical rulers. They are the ones who took it upon themselves to
distort the message and conduct surgery to the message to deviate it
from its original form which was revealed from God, whether done out of
ignorance or intentionally. In return, they accepted monetary rewards,
honor, and reputation from the tyrannical rulers. This policy made it
easier for these corrupted rulers to rule the countries and have
authority over the people in the name of the fabricated religion which
was faked by those who claimed to possess knowledge.

Thus, the oppressive rulers raised these false scholars to a high
position and opened for them schools of jurisprudence (Fiqh). They
encouraged and rather urged the people to follow them as true and
authentic scholars. The rulers showed that they respect those fake
scholars and submit to their word, while at the same time, the rulers
forced them to issue legal statements (Fatwa) issued which would enable
these rulers to cross the limits of the religion, to justify their
oppression towards the Muslims, and to enjoy a luxurious life without
restriction from the religion or the message.

As for those fake scholars, they engaged deeply in studying the
different fields of religion like jurisprudence, interpretation,
beliefs, usool (foundations), and foroo’ (branches). They also meddled
and fooled around with the traditions of the Holy Prophet (SA). They
picked and chose what they liked and deleted and modified what did not
fit with their best interest, depending on their leaders who are the
sole reason behind their popularity, prosperity, and existence. So
doesn’t the presence of such fake scholars who readily sell their
religion for the sake of worldly interests, call for the need of
continuous guardianship over the religion in order to protect it from
their own personal interests? After all, the true origin and essence of
the religion would disintegrate permanently if these people were left to
do as they please.

We can conclude that the appearance of those who falsely claim to
possess knowledge in every place and every field in religion is in
itself a logical proof to the necessity of continuous and everlasting
guardianship over the Message so that it stands up against this danger
which threats its very existence and try to make an empty and disfigured
model of Islam which may deceive the people by its false appearance that
it is the true Islam. After all, Allah (SWT) would not at all approve
this fabrication and distortion! So therefore, it is logical that He
(SWT) appoint a Wasi who would protect His true religion until it grows
and establishes itself far away from the distorters and fake scholars.

8) Furthermore, there was a great abundance of trials, tribulations,
mischief, and opinions that affected the developing Islamic state in
many different ways and in every place and time. All that was present
during the guardianship of the first Wasi, especially throughout the
hundred years that followed the conquest of countries and the
establishment of the Arab-Islamic Empire. This required the need for one
who would stand up against these tribulations, conflicts, and diseases.
One who would direct the people towards the right path and guide them in
their problems.

For example, if the nation is subjected to dominance of materialism,
there should be a Wasi and Wali who can stand up against this problem
and guide the nation to the right path. If the nation is subjected to
danger at a later time due to the presence of fake scholars, the
presence of the Wasi is imperative in order to verify the truth and
invalidate the falsehood. If the nation becomes exposed to tyranny,
oppression, torture, and imprisonment, then there would definitely be a
need for one who would stand up against that. One who would become a
role model for patience, and sacrifice for the sake of principles, no
matter how great the omnipotence of the ruler. And so on and so forth,
the great amount and increase of such problems is a clear indication of
the need for many Awsiyaa and Awliyaa, and the multiplicity of their
roles for the protection of the religion, as well as to address these
different problems.

9) As for the term “Hujatullah”, it means the Wasi, the Wali, and the
Imam who is divinely appointed by Allah (SWT). His role is to verify the
truth, invalidate falsehood, provide guidance, and establish the proof
upon the people. Thus, they are proofs on the people from Allah (SWT).
So no one can come afterwards and claim that they didn’t know or that no
one informed them. No one can say, “I did not realize”, or “I did not
find a guide”, or “I did not observe”, or “I was deceived”, or “The
truth was not present”, or “The truth was not clear to me.”

And so on and so forth, all of the excuses which a person may say to his
Creator on the Day of Judgment when he is questioned. Therefore,
Hujjatullah refers to the Wasi, Wali, and chosen Imam from Allah (SWT)
so there is no other Hujjah to the people after him in front of Allah
(SWT). Thus, he is named Hujjatullah or the proof and evidence, the
clarity, the light, the certainty, and the clear truth to every human
being, and to every seeker of truth at any time and any place. So
everyone who carries out this great role and is directly appointed by
Allah (SWT) is referred to as Hujjatullah. Therefore, every Wasi is
considered to be a Hujjah (evidence) from Allah (SWT) against the people
on the Day of Judgment, as they will be brought forward forth as
witnesses over the people.

From the previous items 1-9, after thorough study and contemplation, and
after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

1st Conclusion
--------------

Sound judgment and logic dictates the necessity having
guardianship/Wasaya and Wilayah over the Final and Universal Religion
after the death of the first guardian/Wasi, Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS).
Furthermore, it is logical that there exist numerous guardians to allow
enough time for the religion to establish itself and grow, as necessity
dictates. Therefore, it is logical for us to anticipate the presence of
a second and third Wali, and even more. The multiplicity of Awsiyaa for
the Final Revelation is very much expected since it is inevitable. If it
happened, then there is no wonder and if it did not happen, then we must
anticipate its occurrence.

We must search for the identity of those Awsiyaa and get to know them.
We must follow them and become guided by their guidance. We must learn
from their knowledge and abide by their curriculum. That is because they
are trustees and guardians of the Final Message as Allah (SWT) revealed
and as the Prophet (SA) conveyed. They are the Hujjaj (proofs) from
Allah (SWT) against us on the Day of Judgment. Therefore, it is
incumbent on us to follow them alone, tread their path, and take from
them. This is a confirmed reality and truth that is supported by logical
evidence. Hence, it is not possible for us to deny or refute it
logically, mentally, or realistically.

2nd Research Topic - The Logical and Expected Attributes of the Guardians over the Final Islamic Message after the First Guardian - Ali ibn Abi Taleb
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Question:**

What are the logical attributes that are essential and expected to be
present in the Awsiyaa over the Final Revelation, after the martyrdom of
the first Wasi, Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS), who are known, identified, and
recognized by their fulfillment of all these requirements?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) Complete, sincere, and pure faith in: Allah (SWT) the One and Only
Creator, His Absolute Attributes, His Last Messenger and Seal of
Prophets, Muhammad (SA), all of the Final Message including its details,
and the first Wasi. This is the most important and logical requirement
that must be fulfilled in all of these Awliyaa, regardless of their
number. Otherwise, how will they act as Awsiyaa and Protectors of a
religion which they do not believe in or have any doubt in its content,
position, its messenger, or the concept of installing
Wasaya/guardianship after the prophet? They must be role models in
having complete and absolute faith that will enable them to carry out
their roles in the best way possible.

2) Strict observance of all the laws and regulations of the Final
Message without crossing its boundaries at any time or in any aspect.
These guardians must set a very good example in completely applying
these rules and regulations in all aspects of life, on themselves first
and on their families. This way, they can be true role models to all
people.

3) Good manners and noble behavior that distinguishes the prophets and
is a necessary condition for them as well as the first Wasi. It should
also be among the logical attributes that are necessary to be fulfilled
in all of the Awsiyaa who will follow afterwards. (At this point, the
reader may review the 1st case study, 6th research topic, 4rth item;
third case study, 2nd research topic, 3rd item). This is logically
derived from the same points we mentioned in our previous topics.

4) Complete knowledge and awareness of all the laws and regulations of
the Message, its content, the hidden, the obvious, its goals,
objectives, directions, and the method of Ijtihad (effort a scholar
makes to issue a verdict about recent matters which there is no ruling
stated the Islamic message) and deduction in Islam. By nature, this is a
logical condition for the Awsiyaa as it is for the first Wasi, which
enables them to perform their required duties perfectly and in the best
way possible.

5) Noble origin and family, and disciplined upbringing are without a
doubt an expected requirement that must be fulfilled in these Awsiyaa as
it was fulfilled in the first Wasi. The reader may refer to the 3rd case
study (2nd research topic, 7th item) in order to review the logic behind
the necessity of this requirement for the Awsiyaa.

6) These Awsiyaa should possess special intellectual and mental
capabilities that will enable them to memorize, comprehend, absorb, and
encompass all branches of religious knowledge. Furthermore, they must be
able to make deductions from the religion that will appear to the
society and nation during the period of their guardianship. These
abilities will also enable them to continue the organization and
regulation of the religion and its sciences, until it reaches an
organized state that is acceptable to use and deal with in all the
different ages to come.

7) As we mentioned before, wisdom is one of the most important
attributes that must be present in these Awsiyaa as it was fulfilled in
the first Wasi. They must possess great wisdom in order for them to
carry out their mission especially in the midst of these events,
influences, and tyrannical leadership. So in order to steer the ship in
the midst of these turbulent waves and perform their duties of Wasaya
and protection to the message in the best and safest way possible, it is
logically necessary that they entertain a great amount of wisdom which
is a bounty and blessing from Allah (SWT). He (SWT) bestows it to those
whose role is in need for it.

8) Having little wealth and being ascetic is an important requirement
that is logical to be present in those Awsiyaa as it was in the first
Wasi. This attribute is needed especially considering the fact that the
periods of time in which guardianship will exist are filled with
seduction, wealth, and luxury. So how will the Wasi stand up against and
face these seductions when he himself is a part of this wealth and
extravagance and will be prone to bias? Surely, that is not logical and
therefore, this condition is essential to be fulfilled by them, even
more than anyone else.

9) As we mentioned in the 3rd case study (2nd research topic, 5th item),
among the logical attributes that are expected to be present in these
Awsiyaa is young age. This is required in order for them to continue
each other’s roles and follow the preceding Wasi for a significant
period of time. Therefore, it is necessary that the guardians follow one
another.

10) Direct and successive leadership between the Awsiyaa is logical and
inevitable. It is not acceptable that there exist a big difference in
time between one guardian and the next one who will follow him. The
religion cannot be abandoned during this gap in time without a
protector, caretaker, and guardian who would look after its affairs and
protect it from the influences, changes, and forces that may affect it
even if it is a short period of time. There must be continuous
protection of the religion from corruption, political tyranny,
instability, and fake scholars. So it is not safe to abandon it in such
an environment without a Wasi, thereby resulting in a big gap in time
between these Awsiyaa. After all, they must continue their mission until
the religion grows and stands firmly on its feet. So the consecutive
succession in guardianship is necessary and inevitable and it is
expected by the mind, logic, and historical events.

11) Extreme closeness and attachment between the new Wasi and the former
Wasi is also among the logical and necessary attributes of a Wasi. This
interaction is needed in order for all of the knowledge to transferred
to him in a direct fashion. As we previously concluded in the 3rd case
study (2nd research topic, ninth item), we can logically expect that the
Wasi will be the closest of people to the Wasi who precedes him. So, the
new Wasi would either be his son, brother, adoptee, or any person with
such a relationship that will allow for complete and continuous
attachment and direct contact between the two individuals.

If we combined items 9-11 of this research topic and pondered over how
these requirements could be fulfilled in a practical and realistic way,
we will find ourselves in front of only one conclusion without escape.
This logical deduction is that all of these Awsiyaa must be part of one
chain of ancestry in which the son inherits his father in guardianship.
This scenario is the only practical way to accomplish these requirements
in addition to the 5th item too. Any other way are just theoretical
possibilities that is hard accomplish in a successive manner even if it
happened once.

12) It is predictable that each Wasi will face different problems,
conflicts, and tribulations of his own, due to difference in time,
developments, and circumstances around him. He is required to address
these issues and protect the religion from these influences. He must
establish the truth and nullify falsehood in the midst of a tyrannical
political system and enmities that has no limit. Therefore, it is
logical for us to conclude that each of these guardians must possess
special unique capabilities that will enable him to face these special
problems and conflicts. For example, if a Wasi had to face the disease
of extreme wealth and financial extravagance, then it is necessary that
he possess special capabilities to face this particular problem and to
protect the religion from it. He must be able to guide the people back
to the right path and true religion without fabrication or falsehood.
Similarly, each Wasi must possess personal characteristics and abilities
that will suit his own role which may be different from the others.

13) As we mentioned, these Awsiyaa will carry out special roles that are
very important and critical for the Final Message in order for it to
grow and establish itself in a pure manner as it was revealed. After
all, this is the Last Revelation that is universal and directed to all
of humanity in every place and time. After all, there will be no any
other prophet or messenger that will come after Prophet Muhammad and
these Awsiyaa are the last ones to appear for the divine revelations. If
we take all that into consideration, in addition to the great roles that
these Awsiyaa will be accountable for, we can logically conclude that
their appointment and selection must come directly from Allah (SWT)
without any intervention from the human beings, not even from a Prophet
or Wasi! Furthermore, we can expect that this divine selection be made
known to everyone so that the people do not have any doubt or confusion
in this matter.

However, the situation here is different. In order for the people to
accept and believe in the validity of the message from Allah (SWT), the
matter must be conveyed by the Prophet (SA) himself before his death.
This matter cannot be relayed by the Wasi since the people may question
his authority in conveying a message on behalf of Allah (SWT) being that
he is not a prophet. Therefore, logic and common sense dictates that the
Seal of Prophet must have clearly announced the specific names of these
successive Awsiyaa who will come after him in the years and centuries to
come.

Furthermore, it is expected that the Prophet (SA) have made it clear
that this is the choice of Allah (SWT) Himself. Therefore, the people do
not have any right to argue or disagree in this matter at all, as was
the case with the first Wasi, Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS). Logic and common
sense says that it is not enough for the prophet to simply announce
their expected appearance in the future or to only indicate the tribe
that they will be from. Rather, it is logical that he explicitly and
straightforwardly announces the specific names and personalities of
these Awsiyaa to the people. In addition to their names, we can expect
that he also provide their descriptions and time of appearance in order
to confirm that they are indeed appointed by Allah (SWT). After all, if
the prophet foretold the name of the Wasi who will come after 100 years
or more, is there any doubt left that this Wasi is indeed appointed from
Allah (SWT)? Otherwise, how can the prophet know the future by his
limited human capabilities?

Therefore, one can feel confident that the choice is truly from Allah
(SWT) alone and the prophet is simply conveying what Allah (SWT)
inspired to him directly. With that in mind, it is incumbent on us to
research the traditions and autobiography of the Holy Prophet (SWT). We
will then find this direct announcement from Allah (SWT) with the names
of all those Awsiyaa, including their characteristics, time of
appearance, their specific roles and some of the events which will occur
to them.

Furthermore, it is logical that these Awsiyaa inform each other about
the name of the next Wasi who will follow them and confirm the ones who
preceded them. This is clearly expected to happen, so if it actually
happened there is no wonder or surprise. Based on that, it is also
necessary for us to conclude that belief in all of these Awsiyaa is one
package. One cannot separate between them or believe in only some of
them while disbelieve in the others. Since the Prophet (SA) foretold
about all of them, and the Awsiyaa themselves foretold about each other
(as was the case with the prophets), then we must believe in all of them
as one package. In conclusion, direct appointment by Allah (SWT) is a
necessary requirement to all of these Awsiyaa. This logical attribute is
a proof in itself of the obligation of following them, obeying them, and
taking them as our role models.

14) As we mentioned before, there were a lot of enemies of Islam present
throughout time due to the great mischief which happened after the
killing of the 3rd Caliph which ended in favor of falsehood,
fabrication, and misguidance. Oppression, tyranny, and political
corruption became dominant in the centuries to come due to expansion of
the Islamic state. Based on what we mentioned in the previous case study
that the presence of righteousness between the people naturally result
in division between these people into two parties, one supporting truth
hood and one against it. It acts as a test and trial, hence the people
end up dividing into two groups because of disagreement.

Similarly, these Awsiyaa are the epitome of truth from Allah (SWT) that
is walking on Earth as they are Hujjatullah on the land. In
consideration of all of the above, it is necessary for us to conclude
that it is likely that these Awsiyaa become oppressed, persecuted, face
animosity, and the people will differ over them and form a second group.
It is expected that people disagree over them and become divided in two
groups. One group will stand with them and believe in them and they
would be the minority as it is usually the case. That is because what is
generally observed is that those who support the truth and righteousness
are always the minority.

The other group will oppose the Awsiyaa and become their enemies since
they are stubborn, corrupt, and rejecters of truth and righteousness.
They compose the majority since they are with the falsehood. Once again,
this is usually observed in real life, as the group supporting falsehood
is usually the dominant one. This is especially the case if we take into
account the nature and structure of the society that was present during
that time. We can take in consideration the nature of the corrupted and
tyrannical political regime that was dominant and the influences that
was present due to the conquest, as well as the extravagance and luxury.
All of that logically indicates that the majority of the people will be
the opponents and enemies of the Awsiyaa who deny them and their roles.

Finally, we can expect the presence of a 3rd party who will become
victims since they do not possess any knowledge whatsoever about these
Awsiyaa. That is due to vastness of the expanding Islamic state and lack
of means of communication, and also the oppression and tyranny of the
rulers who strongly oppose these Awsiyaa. These rulers will do anything
to deny the right of the Wasi and even the presence of any Wasi over the
Message after the Holy Prophet (SA). We can expect that this 3rd party
will be great in number. Most of them will be the inhabitants and
citizens of the conquered countries who don’t know anything about the
truth and will take only what is presented to them by the totalitarian,
oppressive, and corruptive rulers.

15) Based on our logical deduction in the previous point, we can expect
that these Awsiyaa will become exposed to the toughest types of
oppression and injustice. We can expect that they be killed and
martyred, one after the other. It is very likely that they become
imprisoned, tortured, confined, and deprived.

Furthermore, we can expect that there exist a great media propaganda
against them that is sponsored by the tyrannical rulers. Academic
universities and schools of jurisprudence will become established which
will try to stand up against them and deprive them of performing their
roles. They will try to lessen the influence of these Imams and distract
the people away from them. All of that is logically expected due to the
great abundance of enemies and the stance of the political ruling power
against them. Therefore, it is logical that these Awsiyaa become
oppressed, tortured, treated unjustly, and killed. We can assert that
this attribute should be fulfilled in them and it will be a way to
recognize them. This is the sound judgment and logical reasoning, so
therefore, it must be true!

From the previous items 1-15, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our sound intellect and logical reasoning, we can with
all confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

2nd Conclusion
--------------

The logical and expected attributes that are necessary to be fulfilled
in the Awsiyaa of the Final Message after the first Wasi are:

Absolute faith, sincerity, and certainty in the Message, the Last
Messenger, and the 1st Wasi.

Strict observance and application of the message, its laws and
regulations.

Good manners, noble behavior, complete knowledge and awareness of the
message, its rules, content, and interpretation.

Noble origin and ancestry, special intellectual and mental capabilities,
wisdom, asceticism, lack of wealth, and young age.

Succession in guardianship without gap in time, and extreme closeness
and attachment and direct contact with the preceding Wasi.

Presence of special unique and personal capabilities that suits the
individual roles assigned to each of the Awsiyaa and the tribulations
that they will face.

Direct appointment by Allah (SWT) and the public announcement of that
selection clearly and straightforwardly to all people via the Last
Messenger (SA) and specification of their names, descriptions, and time
of appearance.

These Awsiyaa must inform each other about their presence, and inform
the subsequent Wasi of the next Wasi who will follow him. They are all
one package that cannot be separated or divided. It is essential and
inevitable to believe in all of them without exception or denial to any
of them.

People will disagree over them and they will face hostility and enmity
from the enemies of Islam.

A group of people composing the minority will believe in them and follow
them, while the majority of the people will stand against them and bear
hostility towards them. A third group of people will not know anything
about them and they will also constitute a significant majority of the
people.

The Awsiyaa will become oppressed, persecuted, isolated, tortured,
imprisoned, and then finally killed as martyrs in the hands of their
enemies by instigation of the ruling power.

All of these attributes should collectively be fulfilled in each of
these Awsiyaa, one by one without any deficiency. That is because they
are all inevitable and logical to be present in them. This is a
confirmed reality and certain truth that cannot be denied or refuted
logically, mentally, and realistically.

3rd Research Topic - Logical Proofs that the Eleven Sons and Grandsons of Ali ibn Abi Taleb are the Appointed Guardians over the Final Islamic Message after the First Successor Ali ibn Abi Taleb
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Who are the eleven Imams from the sons and grandsons of Ali ibn Abi
Taleb (AS)?

What are the logical proofs to support that:

These eleven Imams from the descendants of Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) are
truly the expected Awsiyaa over the Final Revelation after the first
Wasi.

They are really chosen by Allah (SWT) to carry out their critical roles
for the final message.

They are the ones whom we should follow, abide, and be guided by their
light of guidance and we should follow their leadership.

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) The eleven Imams from the sons of Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) are: Al
Hasan ibn Ali Al Mujtaba (lived from 3-50 A.H.[after Hijra] ), Al Husain
ibn Ali Seyyid Al Shuhadaa (4-61 A.H.), Ali ibn Al Husain Al Sajjad
(37-95 A.H.), Muhammad ibn Ali Al Baqir (57-116 A.H.), Jafar ibn
Muhammad Al Sadiq (83-148 A.H.), Musa ibn Jafar Al Kadhem (128-183
A.H.), Ali ibn Musa Al Redha (148-203 A.H.), Muhammad ibn Ali Al Taqi
(195-220 A.H.), Ali ibn Muhammad Al Hadi (212-254 A.H.), Al Hasan ibn
Ali Al Askeri (232-260), Muhammad ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (minor
occultation: 255-328 A.H.) \>\> MAJOR OCCULTATION (328 A.H till now)

Dear Reader, as you see they are all fathers and sons who succeed each
other. So familiarize yourself with their names in preparation for the
points that will be discussed in this research topic.

2) These eleven Imams are the only individuals on the face of the earth
who have fulfilled all of the necessary requirements and expected
attributes that should logically be present in the awaited Awsiyaa who
follow the first Wasi. As we clarified in the previous chapter, they
completely and entirely possessed all of the required attributes which
are as follows:

First: REQUIREMENT OF ABSOLUTE FAITH AND SINCERITY IN THE MESSAGE, ITS
GOD, ITS PROPHET, AND ITS WASI

This attribute is completely fulfilled in each of them, one after the
other. All of their contemporaries have testified to that despite their
different times of appearance. No one ever doubted this attribute in
them whether from their enemies or their deniers. Therefore, there is no
need to dwell in this point since it is agreed upon historically. After
all, how can the sons and grandsons who come from the household of
prophethood and guardianship not entertain complete faith and
certainty?! They were brought up in the laps of their fathers who were
prophets and Awsiyaa, one after the other! Who else will entirely
fulfill this requirement if they themselves do not?

Therefore, there is no need to present historical proofs or testimony as
this requirement is logically fulfilled. We leave it up to the reader to
review the history books and personal autobiographies of each of these
Imams from the sources of their enemies and opponents, before their
proponents. This way you will see for yourself how these esteemed
personalities represented complete faith and submission, and are
analogous to the Holy Quran walking on Earth!

Second: REQUIREMENT OF BELIEF AND COMPLETE OBSERVANCE OF THE MESSAGE,
ITS RULES AND REGULATIONS

As we mentioned in the first point, the case here is similar for there
was no any doubt raised by the enemies regarding their observance of the
message. On the contrary, their absolute adherence of the message and
their desire to apply its rules perfectly is what caused them to have
many enemies and face torture and tyranny from the oppressive rulers and
hypocrites. After all, if they did not show strict observance to the
religion, do you think they would have faced enmity from the deviators
and corrupt people? In that case, they will have been welcomed and
highly respected by those people, as it happened with others who did not
abide by the laws and regulations of the message and deviated from the
right path.

So their fulfillment of this requirement is logical and supported by the
evidence that they have many enemies and face enmity and oppression from
the rulers and corrupt people. After all, who will be the role models
and example for observance of the message if it is not for those who
were raised in the lap of the prophetic household? Once again we urge
you, dear reader, to review the pure autobiographies of these Imams
which were written by their enemies and opponents to see for yourself
how each of these Imams were great examples for application and
observance of the message as well as its rules and regulations, whether
on themselves or the members of their household or Shia (their followers
and supporters).

Third: REQUIREMENT OF EXHIBITING HIGH MANNERS AND NOBLE CONDUCT

Dear reader, this point especially is obvious! If all philosophers can
envision one day a perfect city (as Aflaton called it) and the manners
and ethics of its inhabitants, it can never pass their imagination one
out of thousands of the good manners and ethics of these Imams! All of
their contemporaries and enemies testified to that on their behalf as
well as those who came after them whether from their enemies or their
lovers. They became great examples of good behavior as their conduct
resembled that of the prophets and messengers. They even attained high
respect and veneration from their enemies, oppressors, captives,
torturers, and killers due to their exceptionally high manners. This
unique and high degree of manners also earned them the love and loyalty
of their admirers and devout followers throughout the years and
centuries.

The following noble attributes were present in all of the Imams as they
are essential attributes that should be present in every prophet and
Wasi: truthfulness, trustworthiness, generosity, gallantry, dignity,
nobility, giving without limit (munificence), patience, honor, courage
in battle, manhood, kindheartedness, modesty, good speech, no backbiting
or tale bearing, forgiving, humility, eloquence in speech, etiquette,
and pleasant appearance, etc.

All of the above high-quality manners and behavior was instilled in them
as it was with every prophet and messenger. After all, is there any
doubt in our minds that those individuals who were raised in the
purified laps of the Prophet and Wasi would certainly inherit these good
and noble manners? Again, we encourage you, dear Reader, to explore the
history books and autobiographies and to judge for yourself by the books
of their enemies before their followers. These Imams were even described
to be angels in the form of human beings, as their exceptionally noble
behavior was the best of all mankind. It is as if they were personified
“noble behavior” walking on Earth!

Fourth: REQUIREMENT OF COMPLETE KNOWLEDGE AND AWARENESS OF THE MESSAGE,
ITS LAWS, INTERPRETATION, ORIGIN, CONTENT, AND THE ABILITY TO MAKE
DEDUCTIONS AND LEGAL VERDICTS

This requirement is surely fulfilled being that they were raised in the
very households of the Holy Prophet (AS) and first Wasi. Thus, they were
able to acquire the prophetic knowledge directly and successively from
the original source, just like an electric wire transfers electrical
energy to you from a source that is much further away from you. However,
the continuity of the wire without any interruption guarantees that the
current intensity will be equal from the beginning till the end. After
all, if they do not enjoy the true and complete knowledge of all parts
of the message as they grew up one after the other in the household of
prophethood and guardianship, then who will?

For example, if a skilled and talented person does not pass on the
secret of his talent to his son or grandson, who will take it from him?
So, it is a common phenomenon seen in front of us all that a talented
athlete is in most cases the son of a talented athlete, a clever
politician is usually raised and carry the same cleverness from his
father, a magician usually passes on the secrets of his profession to
his son, etc. This is a logical phenomenon that we usually observe
around us. So is there any doubt about the logic of passing on all the
knowledge from the ancestors to the sons and grandsons? Is there any
doubt that the Imams have fulfilled this requirement and that they are
most worthy of it, much more than those who have not been raised in the
household of prophecy, guardianship, and knowledge?

Once again, if you take a look at the books of jurisprudence,
traditions, and exegesis that were written by the hands of their enemies
before even their believers, you will find that in many cases, their
enemies had to refer back to the Imams for their knowledge and judgment
in most of their matters. With that in mind, there is no room for doubt
in our minds in recognizing this attribute of theirs as it has not been
fulfilled by anyone else in such a high degree and level. You will
realize that they are the core of “knowledge” walking on earth to
benefit the people. They are like a fountain that never ceases to spring
its water, and a sun which never dies down. It is enough that you
realize that all of the branches of knowledge and jurisprudence
originated from these Awsiyaa and were established by them. Later
unfortunately, it was distorted by the personal interests and lower
desires.

Fifth: REQUIREMENT OF NOBLE ORIGIN AND ANCESTRY

It is enough for us to know that they are all from the family of the
Holy Prophet (SA) and he is their great grandfather. His origin is their
origin, his family is their family, and his roots are their roots.
Furthermore, it suffices that they are from the same family as the first
Wasi, Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS), and he is also their great grandfather.
His origin is their origin, his family is their family, and his roots
are their roots. Therefore, it is a good and blessed tree in which its
origin is fixed and its branches extend high up in the heavens. They are
descendants of each other, just like Prophets Noah, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, the Asbaat (Tribes), Joseph, Moses, Aaron, and Jesus (peace and
blessings be upon all of them). Therefore, there is no room for argument
here and there is no need to present logical rationale or discussion.

Dear Reader, you can take a break this time from researching the history
books and autobiographies. These Imams were without a doubt from the
noble ancestry, origin, and roots which are walking on earth in the form
of a human body!

Sixth: REQUIREMENT OF POSSESSING SPECIAL INTELLECTUAL AND MENTAL
CAPABILITIES

This attribute was very much fulfilled in all of the Imams from the time
they were very young and throughout their lives. In fact, due to their
extraordinary capabilities at a very young age, the people used to
consider these abilities as miracles or divine gifts. The Imams would
attend gatherings of jurisprudence (Fiqh) and issuance of verdicts
(Eftaa’) and they would debate, challenge, and engage in very
intellectual discussions with the grand scholars when they didn’t even
exceed the age of ten! Some scholars used to come to them and ask them
about jurisprudence when they were only children while these scholars
were old and experienced! Despite the age difference, the Awsiyaa would
stand before the Imams as young students in the schools of divine
knowledge.

Now isn’t that a strong proof that these Imams indeed possessed
extraordinary intellectual and cognitive abilities that enabled them to
memorize, comprehend, remember, understand, deduce, conclude, and
acquire knowledge when they were very young in age?! After all, it is
not a wonder for it to happen to the inheritors and grandchildren of the
Holy Prophet (SA) and his first Wasi, at least based on the rules of
inheritance? Once again, you may research the history books and
autobiographies written by their opponents to find out for yourself the
special intellectual and cognitive abilities which they possessed as it
was the source of wonder witnessed by their contemporaries and
followers, as well as their enemies. They are analogous to intellectual
and cognitive miracles that are walking on earth in the form of a human
body!

Seventh: REQUIREMENT OF WISDOM

Was there anybody much wiser than the Awsiyaa? History testifies in
their favor how they stood up against the rulers and were diplomatic and
wise in their dealings with them. This policy was needed in order for
them to perform their roles of guardianship over the message in the best
way possible. They faced oppression, confinement, imprisonment,
banishment, spying, aggression from the rulers, threats, torture, and
more. Despite all that, they were able to attract many followers and
supporters. They were able to propagate and communicate the true message
to the people and reveal the fabrication of the fabricators. So how were
they able to accomplish all of that without exercising wisdom in dealing
with the events and circumstances that face them?

History is surely a witness to their great wisdom and exceptional
insight which enabled them to accomplish all that. The policies they
implemented and their way of dealing are a strong indication of the
tremendous wisdom that they possessed. After all, how can a person who
grew up in the household of prophethood and guardianship be unwise and
not inherit the prophetic wisdom, generation after generation? Dear
Reader, if you open the history books and autobiographies of the Imams,
you will certainly be able to recognize the wisdom that they entertained
and is clearly obvious in their way of dealing with the current events
and the ruling power, their enemies, followers, and fake scholars. You
will find yourself in front of wisdom that is walking on earth in the
personalities of all these Imams.

Here, we do not want to present simple examples of their wisdom, since
such examples will not do justice to the extent of their wisdom. Nor can
we present all the different aspects of their wisdom throughout their
lives for it will require volumes of books and endless texts! For this
reason, we leave it up to the personal efforts of the reader to research
and find out from the enemies before the friends about the exceptional
wisdom of those eleven Imams.

Eighth: REQUIREMENT OF ASCETICISM AND LACK OF WEALTH

All of these Imams were great examples in asceticism and self-restraint
from indulging in the pleasures of this earthly world which became very
prevalent among the people of that time. None of the Imams were wealthy
or enjoyed prosperity and money which came in abundance in the countries
due to the numerous conquests. These Imams held a highly respectable
position and were loved by the people, as they are the descendants of
both Prophet Muhammad (AS) and the first Wasi Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS). So
if they desired, they could have easily became the most rich and
wealthiest people of their time since they are the inheritors of the
prophetic household and the grandsons of Ameer al Momineen Ali ibn Abi
Taleb (AS).

However, this did not happen despite the fact that it contradicts the
logical expectation for them during that time, especially considering
all of the wealth that came in abundance to the Muslim nation. The
reason is simply because of their asceticism and humility as well as
their intention to avoid living a life full of luxury, extravagance, and
wealth that is corruptive. They would immediately give away everything
that came to them to their families, the poor, the needy, the orphans,
the widows, and the transit travelers. They did that for the sake of
attaining the pleasure of Allah (SWT) and sacrificing everything they
own for His sake. As a result, their lives were very simple and
down-to-earth which was contrary to the luxury lives of most Muslims of
that time, especially the tribal leaders and some of the companions and
those who followed them, the fake scholars, and the supporters of the
ruling power.

As a matter of fact, their lives were much simpler and they possessed
much less property than the average person or even poor person among the
Arabs during that time. After all, why wouldn’t they when they are the
sons and descendants of the Holy Prophet (SA) and the first Wasi who
called for asceticism and discouraged extravagance? If these individuals
do not possess this attribute, then who will? Once again, take a look at
the autobiography books of these Imams, and you will clearly find
evidence that they all lived very simple and modest lives compared to
the economical situation present during their times. You will find that
they were great examples of unlimited generosity as they often times
gave away a lot of alms and charity from everything they owned. They are
truly role models for every ascetic person, worshipper, monk, and
devotee over the years and centuries! They are analogous to asceticism
walking on earth amidst the people in the form of human bodies!

Ninth: REQUIREMENT OF BEING FROM THE YOUTH

As for the attribute of being young in age, they all assumed the
position of Imamate and Wasayah when they were very young in age. Some
of them were even considered to be children by our standards. Dear
Reader, the following is a simple report of their ages at the time when
they each assumed guardianship and Imamate over the Message:

Imam Al Hasan - 37 years Imam Husain - 45 years

Imam Zainul Abideen - 25 years Imam Al Baqir - 38 years

Imam Al Sadeq - 33 years Imam Al Kadhem - 20 years

Imam Al Redha - 35 years Imam Al Taqi - 8 years

Imam Al Hadi - 8 years Imam Al Askeri - 22 years

Imam Al Mahdi - 5 years

After learning this, is there any more explanation needed in this
matter? Did they fulfill the requirement of being from the youth and
having young age or no? The numbers speak for themselves so there is no
need for further discussion.

Tenth: REQUIREMENT OF SUCCESSION IN GUARDIANSHIP WITHOUT GAPS IN TIME

As for the attribute of succession in guardianship without gaps in time,
all of these Imams were fathers and sons who are part of one consecutive
chain. So, on the same day which the Wasi of the time dies, he passes on
the responsibility of Imamate and Wasayah to his divinely appointed son.
The son immediately undertakes his role of guardianship and custody over
the message, even if he is still a young child of five or eight years
old. Hence, succession was present without any gaps in time or
interruption in the role of Imamate, not even for one moment.

During the years that followed, the people did not ever miss the
presence of an Imam or Wasi. As soon as the preceding Imam gets
martyred, his appointed son simultaneously raises the banner of
guardianship. He immediately becomes the Imam and Hujjah from Allah
(SWT) over the people.

Eleventh: REQUIREMENT OF CLOSE ATTACHMENT AND DIRECT AND CONTINUOUS
CONTACT WITH THE PREVIOUS WASI

The same is the case here as with the tenth requirement. Being that all
of the Imams were fathers and sons in one complete and connected family,
the new and subsequent Wasi grew up in the house of his father. Thus, he
naturally attains extreme closeness and direct contact with his father
who is the preceding Wasi. He acquires the knowledge from his father and
that information is transferred to him in a direct, continuous, and
flawless manner. Therefore, the requirement that all of these Awsiyaa be
part of one chain and family in which guardianship is successively
passed on from father to son is certainly fulfilled.

Twelfth: REQUIREMENT OF POSSESSING UNIQUE AND PERSONAL ABILITIES THAT
FIT THE ASSIGNED ROLE AND CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH EACH OF THE AWSIYAA WILL
FACE

One who studies the autobiographies of these Imams will certainly
realize the great and miraculous harmony that exists between their
nature, their abilities, and their roles. whoever from them was assigned
to make peace with the ruling power for a specific great wisdom, we find
him performing that role with political smartness and tactfulness, as
well as extreme patience. Whoever was assigned to face the ruler, stand
up against him, and expose himself to danger, we find him performing
that with absolute courage, boldness, gallantry, and insurgency that
have no resemblance. The one who was assigned to face materialism, we
find him performing his role with absolute asceticism, worship, and
spiritualism. The one who was assigned to carry the burden of research
and knowledge, we find him performing that with all sincerity, effort,
seriousness, intelligence, talent, and competence.

The one who was assigned to propagate knowledge and teach jurisprudence,
we find him carrying out his mission with all perseverance, patience,
endurance, benevolence, wisdom, intelligence, tactfulness, and
knowledge. The one who was assigned to stand up against oppression and
injustice of the tyrannical ruling power, we find him performing his
role with utmost patience, tolerance, fortitude, sacrifice, and so on
and so forth. If we studied all of their lives and assigned roles, we
will find that each of the Imams possess special personal abilities or
attributes which are bounties from Allah (SWT) to them, in order to
enable them to adapt to their roles and execute them in the best way
possible.

Thirteen: REQUIREMENT OF DIRECT SELECTION AND APPOINTMENT BY ALLAH (SWT)
AND CLEAR DECLARATION OF THAT DECREE THROUGH THE LAST MESSENGER (SA)

This requirement has been fulfilled by the Imams in many occasions by
the testimony of the Holy Prophet (SA) himself. For example, Jabir ibn
Abdullah Al Ansaari narrates in a holy tradition that the Messenger (SA)
specifically identified them by their number, their names, descriptions,
and agnomens, one after the other. He clearly proclaimed that they are
the Awsiyaa, Imams, and Awliyaa who are chosen by Allah (SWT). He called
for the nation to follow them, take them as their guardians, love them,
and consider them their role models whom they receive their guidance
from.

Furthermore, the Prophet (SA) warned the people against opposing the
Imams and he promised that whoever bears enmity towards them will
certainly displease Allah (SWT) and deserve His wrath and punishment.
Such tradition or rather traditions are present in its entirety in the
books of the just and trustworthy authors who chose the truth over
misguidance, and the hereafter over this worldly life. These traditions
are also present in the books of the hypocrites and enemies of
Ahlul-Bayt, but they have been shortened, distorted, deleted, and
modified. They did that for the sake of the worldly pleasures and to
attain the pleasure of the misguided rulers and sacrifice that over the
religion. They preferred blindness and misguidance over light and
guidance.

They would narrate a tradition in an altered or partially deleted form,
so for example they would narrate that the Prophet (SA) has stated that,
“The Imams after me are twelve like the number of the tribes of Bani
Israel. All of them are from Quraish.” They present the tradition in
this way only and do not complete the rest of the narration in which the
Prophet (SA) spelled out the names, descriptions, and agnomens of all
the Imams and Awsiyaa. They delete and hide parts of a narration that
does not serve their best interest and may very well expose them to the
wrath and punishment of the oppressive and tyrannical rulers. Logic and
common sense testifies to their lies and fabrication.

After all, how can the mind accept that the Seal of Prophet and
Messenger stand up to foretell a prophecy that is incomplete in this
manner? In order for a prophecy to be considered a valid prophecy and be
considered as such, it must fulfill certain criteria so that there is no
question or doubt in the matter. It should present the entire and
complete prophecy of what will happen in the future and not just half or
1/4rth of the information.

For example, suppose that a prophecy is presented to you which states
that “The American Presidents after George Washington are one hundred
and they are all from the Anglo-Saxon race.” Now, is that prophecy worth
anything to you if it came from a fortune-teller or psychic? Of course
not! Then, how can such an incomplete prophecy possibly come from the
Seal of Prophets himself? After all, does the Holy Messenger present a
prophecy in order to prove that he is truly a prophet? Or does he intend
to arouse people’s curiosity for the sake of putting them in suspense?
Or does he aim to accomplish a much greater, important, and wise goal,
by the order of Allah (SWT)?

There is no doubt that the mind and logic agrees with the last scenario.
A prophecy from the Messenger surely has to have a valuable goal in the
lives of the people. So what could be this great and important goal that
will be accomplished if the people only learned that the Imams are
twelve in number and that all of them are from Quraish? What will they
benefit in learning this piece of information? Let us think about this
more thoroughly. It does not make sense because in order for the
information and prophecy to be valid, the Prophet (SA) has to mention
the names of all these Imams and Awsiyaa and urge the people to follow
them! This way, the goal would be accomplished and the objective of the
prophecy will be clear to us. Otherwise, there would be no point to the
prophecy. Therefore, the mind and logic does not accept their altered
narration and we must say those who try to misguide us that Allah (SWT)
have revealed their lies and fabrication! He (AS) has given us the mind
and intellect to logically distinguish between truth and falsehood.

Sure enough, the complete and original narration is present in the books
of the honorable scholars who are sincere in their research, knowledge,
and study. They did not hesitate from revealing the whole truth. In
fact, there are many narrations regarding these Imams starting from Ali
ibn Abi Taleb (AS), until Muhammad ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) whom
Rasulullah (SA) prophesized that he will fill the earth with equity and
justice after it becomes filled with injustice and unfairness. These
traditions are in fact cited in all of the Muslim books, but as we
explained earlier, they were truncated and modified in the books of the
fabricators. But at least they were mentioned and they were not able to
deny its existence!

If you were to ask one of those fabricators and fake scholars to name
for you the twelve Imams who are mentioned in their books by a narration
from the Holy Prophet (SA), they will not be able to do so. You will
find them confused, puzzled, and they will try to evade your question.
Hence, their lies, fabrication, and hypocrisy will be apparent and it
will be clear that they intentionally try to conceal the truth and
misguide the nation, even after all these years and centuries.

So, the requirement of being directly chosen by Allah (SWT) is fulfilled
in its entirety in many of these prophetic traditions which specifically
provides the names, descriptions, and agnomen of the Imams. They even
state their time of appearance, martyrdom, and places of burial. As we
expected, the Prophet (SA) conveyed the divine appointment of these
Imams on behalf of Allah (SWT) and without any intervention from the
people. He conveyed His divine order to obey them, follow them, and
adhere to their path. He proclaimed that to the people publicly and
straightforwardly without any vagueness, just like he did on the Day of
Ghadeer when he conveyed that Allah (SWT) selected Ali ibn Abi Taleb
(AS) for the guardianship over the religion and nation after him. The
Prophet (SA) gave glad tidings to all those who will obey and follow
them in adherence to the order of Allah (SWT) and that they will attain
the pleasure of the Great Creator as well as the eternal abode in
Paradise. On the other hand, the Prophet (SA) warned their enemies from
the severe punishment and wrath of Allah (SWT).

Hence, this requirement has been fulfilled and may all praise be to
Allah, the Lord of all Worlds! Dear Reader, research the books of
traditions from both the opponents and those who bear hatred and
hostility towards the Imams, as well as the fair and righteous. Compare
and contrast all the narrations regarding the description of the Imams
and Awsiyaa after the Prophet (SA). We are sure that your sound judgment
will discover the whole devastating truth of fabrication and distortion
that took place over the years by some of the fake scholars from the
past or present. You will realize that by their actions they have
misguided the nation from its true religion and Imams.

Furthermore, each of the Awsiyaa have mentioned and confirmed to us who
will follow them, as Allah (SWT) ordered and as Rasulullah (SA) have
foretold. So, Ali announced that the Wasi after him is his son Hasan.
Hasan in turn, publicized the guardianship of his brother Husain after
him. Husain announced his son Ali Al Sajjad, and so on and so forth.
Every Wasi informs the people of who will follow him. The Imam or Wasi
may have several sons, however, only one of them is chosen by Allah
(SWT) for the role of guardianship and Imamate. That chosen son is the
one whom Rasulullah (SA) had mentioned and confirmed his guardianship.
The present Wasi confirms the words of the Prophet (SA) again and
declares the new Wasi to the people of his time before his death.

Once again, we stress the necessity of believing in all of the Awsiyaa
as one whole package. It doesn’t make sense to believe in Husain but
deny the Imamate of Al Sajjad. Or to believe in Imam Al Sadiq but refuse
the guardianship of Imam Al Kadhem (AS). Each of them informs the people
who will be his successor, so having doubt or disbelief in the successor
is equivalent to belying the Imam himself and disbelieving in him! In
addition, he would be disbelieving in the Prophet (SA) himself who
foretold about all of them. From this logic, it is clear that one should
believe in all of the Imams without any exception or division. This is
similar to the case of believing in all of the prophets and messengers,
as we previously demonstrated. So it is either you believe in all of
them or deny all of them.

Fourteen: REQUIREMENT THAT THE IMAMS FACE ALOT OF ENEMIES AND THE PEOPLE
DIFFER OVER THEM AND BECOME DIVIDED INTO THREE GROUPS

One group is the minority which is composed of the true followers and
believers (commonly known as the Shias), and the other group is the
majority which is composed of the enemies and opponents of the Imams.
Finally, the third group are the ignorant who do not know any better
about the matter and are deceived. Sure enough, history testifies that
this is exactly what happened. The nation has been divided into three
groups: A minority group who believed and followed the Imams and was
referred to as the “Twelver Imamiya”. The majority denied their
guardianship and instead followed others. They became divided and
submitted to their rulers as the Quranic verse states, *“Pharaoh led his
people astray instead of leading them aright* [20:77].”

And the third group is composed of a good majority of the inhabitants of
the conquered countries who do not know much about the Imams. Although
they only heard about them vaguely, they showed them love and respect.
However, they did not follow them or tread their path. Rather, they
followed the path of their enemies and became divided and misguided
since they were blind to the fabrication and concealment of truth. They
did not use their minds to differentiate between truth and falsehood,
reality and fabrication. Rather, they surrendered to what was presented
to them and accepted it without thinking. Therefore, this requirement is
logically fulfilled in these Imams and sound judgment is in total
agreement with the actual reality. With that, we can relax and feel
relieved that we are on the right path, by the grace and blessings of
Allah (SWT).

Fifteen: REQUIREMENT OF BEING OPPRESSED, ISOLATED, TORTURED, IMPRISONED,
AND KILLED BY CONSPIRACY FROM THE TYRANNICAL RULING POWER

History testifies and confirms that this is exactly what happened to
them! The oppressive and hypocritical ruling powers harbored animosity
against the Imams and feared them, as falsehood usually fears the truth
since it reveals and exposes its hidden reality. They were greatly
concerned about their positive effect on the people due to their love
and attraction to the Imams. They feared the Imams’ role of guardianship
on the Final Revelation since it limits their movements and restraints
their desires. As a result of all that fear and anxiety, all of the
oppressive political governments that came afterwards unanimously
undertook the policy of being their enemies and bearing enmity towards
them. Despite the differences and competing struggles for power, all of
these political systems treated them with cruelty and planned
conspiracies to get rid of them, then finally killing them in the most
inhumane way.

The Imams had many followers, believers, and those who loved and
respected them throughout the developing Islamic state. Because of that,
the oppressive ruling power could not kill the Imams openly as it did
with others, especially after it saw the consequences of what happened
after the killing of Imam Husain ibn Ali (AS) in Karbala. Therefore, it
avoided engaging in such act publicly despite its great hatred and
hostility towards the Imams. Rather, it resorted to secret assassination
by inserting poison in the food of the Imams to kill them or by prison
guards or a third party agent. That way, their deaths will seem natural
and would not stir up any doubts or cause the people to be angry and
bear hostility towards them (ruling power).

Rather, the ruler or caliph himself may even go to convey his sympathy
for the death of the Imam and give a speech in his praise, yet at the
same time he is the killer! This is what led to the multiplicity of the
Imams and guardians. Every time they killed a Wasi, Allah (SWT) sends to
them another Wasi, just like Bani Israel used to do with their prophets.
They would kill them, so Allah (SWT) would send to them other prophets.
As a result, the number of prophets sent to them increased. As Allah
(SWT) says in the Holy Quran, “They desire to put out the light of Allah
with their mouths, and Allah will not allow but that His Light should be
perfected, even though the nonbelievers may detest [9:32].”

Dear Reader, if you read the Islamic history books and personal
autobiographies of these Imams, you will certainly shed tears of blood
in learning what each and every Imam faced from pain and suffering.
Throughout the years, they faced punishment, isolation, oppression,
injustice, imprisonment and murder in the hands of the oppressive
Caliphs and rulers who inherited the Caliphate one after the other and
ruled the countries with the policy of "iron and fire". You will curse
the day in which the Muslims neglected and abandoned their first Wasi!
The day when they started this rotten chain that increased in corruption
and deviation away from the religion day after day and ruler after
ruler, until it surrendered to its lower desires and interests and
totally deviated from the religion! And with the help of the fake
scholars and phony Sheikhs, they were able to deceive the people in
believing that they are the Caliphs of Rasulullah (SA) and the leaders
of the believers. But in reality, they do not have any relation to the
Prophet (SA) whatsoever, whether close or far, or to the faith or to the
believers!

It is enough to note that all of the ten Imams were killed and martyred
in the hands of the oppressive ruling power, with the exception of the
last Imam, Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan al Mahdi (AFS). In his case, Allah
(SWT) directly intervened to save him from this fate which his fathers
faced in the hands of the murderer rulers. So, Imam Hasan was killed by
Caliph Mu’awiya ibn Abi Sufyan. Imam Husain (SA) was killed by Caliph
Yazeed ibn Mu’awiya. Imam Al Sajjad was killed by Caliph Al Waleed ibn
Abd Al Malik. Imam Al Baqir was killed by Caliph Hisham ibn Abd Al
Malik. Imam Al Sadiq (AS) was killed by Caliph Al Mansoor Al Abassi.
Imam Al Kadhem (AS) was killed by Caliph Haroon Al Rasheed. Imam Al
Redha (AS) was killed by Caliph Al Ma’moon. Imam Al Taqi (AS) was killed
by Caliph Al Mu’tasim. Imam Al Hadi (AS) was killed by Caliph Al Mu’taz.
And Imam Al Askeri (AS) was killed by Caliph Al Mu’tamad Al Abassi. So
dear Reader, what do you conclude after learning that? Haven’t these
Imams fulfilled this requirement? Is there any doubt left in your mind
that this attribute was present in them and was a reality in their
lives?

3) The fact that all of these attributes were not present collectively
in anyone else other than these Imams is a clear proof that they are
indeed the eleven Imams from the sons of Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS)and they
are the awaited and expected Awsiyaa over the Final Message. After all,
if we were to find another group of people who possess all these
attributes without any exception, then it is logical that they would
share with them in the right of Wasaya. However, we do not find any and
we challenge any person to present the name of at least one person who
collectively possesses all of these logical attributes that are
necessary to be fulfilled in these awaited Awsiyaa. We will not find any
and this in itself is a strong proof that they are the only ones who
fulfilled these requirements.

4) Furthermore, the Holy Prophet (SA) has informed us of them and have
specifically mentioned their names, descriptions, and some of the events
that will happen to them. We must keep in mind that Prophet Muhammad
(SA) is the “truthful and loyal one” (Al Sadiq Al Ameen) who does not
speak out of his own desire, but only speaks what he is inspired with
from Allah (SWT). Let us return to the books of narrations and the pure
autobiographies which are not influenced by any oppressive ruling power.
We will find thousands of proofs that cannot be doubted or refuted.

So long as we believe in what the Prophet (SA) have conveyed and
foretold, then it is incumbent that we also believe and accept this
matter, so long as it is confirmed to us that he foretold about them. Or
else we would be contradicting ourselves by choosing parts of the
Message while abandoning others and this is not acceptable in front of
Allah (SWT). It will certainly lead to disbelief in the Message as a
whole. As Allah (SWT) said in the Holy Quran, *“Do you then believe in a
part of the Book and disbelieve in the other* [2:85]?*”* The Final
Revelation is one whole package that cannot be divided. It’s either you
accept all of it or reject it all.

5) At the same token, the fact that the Holy Prophet (SA) did not inform
us of anyone else other than these Imams is a logical proof that
confirms the validity of their guardianship and Imamate. Whoever denies
their Imamate and successorship should then present to us who are the
Awsiyaa whom the Messenger of Allah (SA) indicated and mentioned by
name? No matter how good he is in lying and fabricating, he will not be
able to come up with any tradition whatsoever that point to others for
the position of Wasaya and Imamate over the Message!

6) The fact that these Awsiyaa informed and foretold each other about
who will be the next successor is yet another logical proof that
indicates succession of a chain that is built on each other. Since we
already confirmed and proved the validity of the guardianship of Ameer
Al Momineen Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS), then we must also believe and accept
the guardianship of Al Hasan ibn Ali (AS) since Imam Ali (AS) conveyed
and announced him as the next successor (by the order of Allah SWT).
Since Al Hasan ibn Ali has conveyed the Imamate of Al Husain ibn Ali
(AS) himself, then we have to believe in Husain since we already
accepted and believed in Imam Hasan’s guardianship. And so on and so
forth, the successive chain continues on one after the other. Each of
the Imams are supported by the previous Wasi.

For example, if a trustworthy person tells you that another person is
trustworthy, then it is logical that the 2nd person is really
trustworthy since the narrator himself is trustworthy. Similarly, if the
2nd person points to a 3rd person and testified that he is truthful,
then it is logical to believe that he also is truthful. Using that same
logic, since each one of the Imams informed us of who will succeed them
(as the Prophet indicated), and since we believe that the first Wasi is
Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) who is known to be honest and truthful, then it
is logical for us to conclude that all those who come after him are
truthful and honest Awsiyaa. Their integrity is derived from his
integrity and each other’s integrity which is accepted by the mind and
sound judgment.

7) Furthermore, no one else other than these Imams ever claimed Wasaya
over the Message or Wilayah over the nation by the order and divine
appointment of Allah (SWT). We have previously concluded the absolute
necessity of continuation of the Wasaya and Wilayah over the final
revelation after the first Wasi. We established the logic behind the
multiplicity of the Awsiyaa and our expectation for that to happen.
After research, we did not find anyone except these eleven personalities
from the descendants of Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) who claimed that they are
the awaited guardians and successors who are appointed by Allah (SWT).
Therefore, we can conclude that since no one else claimed that great and
sacred position, then it logically belongs to them!

Let us present again the example of the missing watch which you happen
to find in the street. We remind ourselves here the example which we
presented earlier about a lost item which you announced it but no one
claimed to own it except only one person. In that case, will you
hesitate in giving this watch to him based on the logical deduction that
the absence of a claimer other than him indicates that he is the true
owner? Otherwise, if someone else had the right for it, they would have
certainly made themselves apparent and announced that they are the
awaited Wasi! This did not happen so based on that, we must logically
conclude that these Imams are indeed the true owners of guardianship and
successorship after the last messenger.

8) Let us review the 3rd case study (4th research topic, 13th item)
which discusses the unique status given by Allah (SWT) to the divinely
chosen person(s) for the position of Wasaya in many other aspects of
their lives besides the unique status of assigning the Wasaya to them.
If we applied that idea in the case of these Imams, we will certainly
find many other important and unique attributes that are present in them
and makes them worthy of this guardianship (since they were specialized
by Allah SWT with the other unique status in their lives).

First: These Imams are the sons and descendants of Ali ibn Abi Taleb,
the Commander of the Faithful, the Wasi of the Holy Prophet (SA), and
the Wali of all the Believers. They are the sons of Fatima Al Zahra, the
Master Lady of All Worlds and the daughter of the Holy Prophet (SA), and
the core of the "People of the Cloak". Now, isn’t the end product of
this purified and blessed marriage which took place by the direct order
and inspiration of Allah (SWT), considered to be a unique status and
great purification? Their grandfather is the Seal of Prophets and Last
of Messengers who is the best of all creation. Their father is Commander
of the Faithful and the Wasi of the Last of Messengers! Their mother is
the Master Lady of all Worlds!

As you can see, the Imams have been bestowed this unique status from
Allah (SWT) with this purified ancestry, chaste loins, and virtuous
laps. So this is indeed a great honor for them which no one before them
or after them attained. After all, suppose that a hundred individuals
were presented to us so that we can choose five of them by human
selection to become the Awsiyaa and Imams over the Message. Among these
hundred are five individuals who are the grandsons of the Prophet (SA)
and the sons of Ameer Al Momineen and the Master Lady of all Worlds.
Will you then have any doubt that these five individuals will win the
human votes and that the people will choose and elect them based on this
unique status? Surely, the people will not elect anyone else who did not
fulfill this unique status which is given to them by Allah (SWT),
without intervention by any human being.

Dear Reader, permit us to lift your attention to another important and
logical point! If Allah (SWT) is the one who arranged for this marriage
to take place between Ali and Fatima (AS), then what do you think is the
wisdom behind that? After all, Allah (SWT) is the most Wise and He (SWT)
does not make an order unless there is some great divine wisdom behind
it. This is similar to what happened in the divine command with the
marriage between Zaid ibn Haritha and Zainab bint Jahsh. After they got
married, Zaid divorced her and the Prophet (SA) married her afterwards.
All this happened for a great divine wisdom which Allah (SWT) clarified
in His Holy Book. Allah (SWT) does not issue a direct order in such
grave matters except for a very great wisdom. What is the wisdom then
behind the divine order of marriage between Ali, the Commander of the
Faithful, with Fatima, the Master Lady of all Worlds?

Go ahead, dear Reader and try to deduce why Allah (SWT) sent Angel
Gabriel to order His Prophet to marry his daughter to Ali! We will not
be able to fully encompass the wisdom of God, however, it is okay to try
to think and deduce. Did this direct divine intervention take place to
complete the marriage between two people since marriage is the way of
life? If that was the case, it would have been sufficient for Him to
will for that to happen in a normal way as it usually happens among the
people. He (SWT) would simply determine the fate as “Be, and it is.” So
what is the motive behind sending an angel to the prophet to convey the
order of Allah (SWT) directly to him and that he informs the people of
that? To whom is the message and wisdom directed to?

It is very clear that it is directed to us, the believing Muslims, so
that we may ponder over why Allah (SWT) took that action. Allah (SWT)
desires to direct our attention through this event and this direct
divine inspiration to the Prophet (SA) and realize that the matter here
is not simply the will of a regular marriage as it happens with all
people. Rather, the matter is intentional for the sake of a great divine
wisdom. This marriage did not last in time except for only eight years.
After that, Fatima Al Zahra (AS) departed from this world while in the
midst of her youth as she was absolutely purified by her Lord.

So what is the wisdom behind this short-lasting marriage that would
deserve for it to happen via direct order from Allah (SWT)? No matter
how much you contemplate and ponder over this matter, you will find
yourself in front of only one clear and shining truth. Namely, that the
reason for this divine intervention from Allah (SWT) was for the sake of
attaining a progeny from this marriage which Allah (SWT) has willed a
very important role for. So He (SWT) set up this marriage by Himself in
order to establish the purified progeny that will carry to the nation
its guardians and Imams who will reap this precious fruit. Those who
will carry the burden of Wasaya over the Message after the departure of
the Prophet (SA) until it reaches the safe haven!

This is analogous to the process of hybridization in the agricultural
factory which we carry out with our own hands among some types of
plants. You plant it in order to harvest the fruit which is very unique
and has pure and desired characteristics which you will use later to
extract an important medicine or compound for agriculture or industrial
purpose. The wisdom behind setting up this marriage between Ali and
Fatima by the direct order of Allah (SWT) is to give rise to this very
blessed and important fruit! Doesn’t that indicate to us that these
Imams who are the fruits of this divine marriage are indeed the truthful
Awsiyaa and awaited Awliyaa?

We had previously explained how Allah (SWT) established this Arab nation
by His Ability and direct order when He (SWT) inspired His prophet and
friend, Abraham, to take his son Ishmael and his wife Hagar to a barren
area in the desert. Then he built His Holy House in that special
location. What do you think is the wisdom behind establishing this Arab
nation? It is obvious that Allah (SWT) chose this nation to receive the
Final Revelation and Message and set the stage for the appearance of the
Seal of Prophets and Messengers. So the careful planning of events took
place by the direct order of Allah (SWT) and was certainly for a great
wisdom.

If we analyze all the events that are of this type, we will find that
there is always a similar divine wisdom behind them. For example, Sarah,
the wife of Prophet Abraham became pregnant by the order of Allah (SWT)
even though she was old and sterile. Why? The wife of Prophet Zachariah
became pregnant by the will of Allah (SWT) even though she was infertile
and he was an old man. Why? Prophet Moses was thrown in the river by the
will of Allah (SWT) while he was still a suckling infant. Why? Virgin
Mary became pregnant with Jesus by the will of Allah (SWT) even though
no man touched her. Why? Prophet Joseph was thrown in the well by the
will of Allah (SWT). Why?

The People of the Cave went to the cave by the will of God. Why? Prophet
Job becomes sick by a very strange and painful illness by the will of
God. Why? Prophet Jonah was thrown in the sea by the will of Allah
(SWT). Why? The Muslims and nonbelievers faced each other without
previous appointment on the Battle of Badr, by the will of Allah (SWT).
Why? And so on and so forth, the examples can’t be reckoned!

Allah (SWT) wills that a matter take place via direct order from Him so
that He (SWT) may attract our attention to the wisdom behind it. It is
not just for the purpose of simply accomplishing the matter at hand.
After all, the accomplishment of the matter does not require the direct
intervention of Allah (SWT) and it is enough for it to take the form of
“Be and it is” like any other fate or will. However, the matter in
question is intended to attract the attention of those who have
intellectual minds so that they contemplate over the wisdom and ability
of Allah (SWT). Thus, they better appreciate His power, magnificence,
might, and wisdom. They would be convinced of the matter and accept it
as a proof that is intended by Allah (SWT) to make it easier for them to
believe in His Prophets, Messengers, Awsiyaa, Awliyaa, Hujjaj and Ayaat
(signs of His divine presence). Praise be to Allah (SWT), the Lord of
all Worlds who guided us to that, for we would not have been guided if
it was not for Allah (SWT)!

Second: The extraordinary preparation and special training by God to
those Imams and the unique personal capabilities and attributes that
suit the nature of their roles are certainly considered to be a special
and unique status that is bestowed to them by Allah (SWT). Not all of
the Muslims or believers possess such unique status or characteristics
which are almost like miracles. Therefore, the unique status from Allah
(SWT) is a clear proof that they are indeed truthful in their claim to
guardianship, Imamate, and Wilayah!

Third: Furthermore, all of the sincere and reliable exegetists of the
Holy Quran unanimously agree that certain verses were revealed in their
honor, even before the Imams appeared. These scholars rely on the
interpretations of the narrations from the Holy Prophets (SA), the first
Wasi, and the faithful companions. This in itself is a great and unique
status from Allah (SWT) to them which no one else attained. The
following is a list of some of the holy verses that were revealed in
their honor:

**Verse of Purification [Surat Al Ahzab, Verse \# 33], Surat al Bayyena,
Surat Al Saffaat [40-61], Surat Al Waqe’a [10-26, 88-89], Surat Al Zomor
[73-75], Surat Al Motafifeen [18-28], Verse of Mawwadah fil Qorbah
(Closeness to Kin), Verse of Salaat on the Nabi, [Surat Al Ahzaab, 56],
Surat Al Mominoon [1-6], Surat Al Forqaan [63-76], Verse of Mubahala,
and there is much more!**

So what does all that uniqueness indicate? Doesn’t it logically qualify
them to become the Awsiyaa and awaited Awliyaa, even if they did not
claim that position and even if Allah (SWT) did not appoint them and the
Prophet didn't announce His divine selection?

Fourth: Isn’t their presence represented by Hasan and Husain under the
Cloak with the Holy Prophet (SA) in that renowned event considered to be
a unique status and honor from Allah (SWT) to them which no one else
attained? Likewise, their presence (represented by Hasan and Husain)
with the Holy Prophet (SA) on the Event of Mubahala by divine order
surely indicates a special uniqueness from Allah (SWT) to them that no
one else was given.

Fifth: There is also the massacre of Karbala and the martyrdom of most
of the purified progeny of the Prophet (SA) for the sake of Allah (SWT)
and to protect His Final Message. Most of them died except for one
person, and that is, Ali ibn Al Husain Al Sajjad Zainul Abideen who is
the only male survivor of the aggression of the oppressive rulers. His
miraculous survival from death on that very tragic day is a miracle and
will continue to be among the amazing secrets indicating divine care and
ability! Those evil people killed the suckling infants from the family
of the Prophet (SA) and even the women.

With that in mind, how did they overlook the killing of Ali ibn Al
Husain who at that time was a young man of about 24 years old? No one
knows the answer to this question except Allah (SWT), for it is due to
the great ability of Allah (SWT) which saved both Ishmael and Abdullah,
the father of Prophet Muhammad (SA) from being slaughtered. It is the
same divine power which intervened to save the Holy Prophet (SA) from
being killed the day the polytheists surrounded his house and plotted to
kill him. It saved Moses from Pharaoh, Jesus from being crucified, Jonas
from the stomach of the whale, and Joseph from dying inside the well. It
is the same great power of Allah (SWT) which intervened to miraculously
change the logical flow of events for the sake of a greater wisdom!

So, what could be the great wisdom for saving Ali ibn Al Husain in this
miraculous and strange manner which the historians and analysts stand
amazed and bewildered when they learn about it? What is the secret
behind the unique status in that all of them were martyred and this did
not happen to anyone else, despite the fact that they are the members of
the household of the Prophet and the first Wasi? It wasn’t logical for
this to happen to them, but it was the power of God which willed so.

Surely, we do not find any wisdom in front of us except the wisdom of
continuing the guardianship and Wilayah from this specific door,
embodied in Ali ibn Al Husain ibn Ali ibn Abi Taleb! Hence, all the
other doors were closed by the martyrdom of the rest of the family
members of the purified household of Prophet Muhammad (PBUH). Perhaps in
that, Allah (SWT) willed to finalize the matter of Wasaya and Wilayah by
specifying that the chain of Imams and Awsiyaa come only from Ali ibn Al
Husain (AS). This limitation serves to prevent the likelihood of
disagreement and division among the believers regarding who their Imams
are. So this unique status gifted by Allah (SWT) to them is clearly a
strong proof of their truthfulness in their claim to guardianship and
Wilayah. It indicates that they are truly the awaited Imams who would
protect the Message after the Holy Prophet (SA) and the first Wasi.

Sixth: The fact that all of the Imams are very well respected,
venerated, and loved by all of the Muslims, despite the difference in
time, place, and race is considered to be a unique status for them. Even
if the people deny their Imamate and guardianship, they never denied
their virtues, love, and special status. Now, who planted this love and
veneration in the hearts of the people? Surely, the great power of Allah
(SWT) is what granted them this unique status which He did not give to
others at the same degree. If we were to take a survey of the number of
people among the Muslims who were named Hasan, Husain, and Ali
throughout the fourteen centuries, and compare it to the number of those
called by other names such as Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, or Khalid etc., we
will find that the former set of names have exceeded the latter by
billions of times! So what does that indicate?

Surely, without a doubt, it points to the love and veneration which the
Muslims carry in their hearts for these names and personalities despite
their time, place, school of thought, or belief. Who else granted the
Imams this unique status if it is not Allah (SWT)? Doesn’t this unique
status from Allah (SWT) stand as a strong proof that compels us to
accept them for the position of guardianship and Imamate?

9) These eleven Imams did not differ or disagree about each other or
with each other at all. Isn’t their support and verification for each
other stand as a logical proof to the validity of their guardianship and
Wilayah? As was the case with the prophets and messengers, we had
logically deduced that their support and agreement for each other proves
that they are truly prophets and messengers from Allah (SWT).

For example, suppose that Jafar ibn Muhammad Al Sadeq claimed that Ali
ibn Al Husain was not a Wasi or Imam, or if Imam Al Kadhem differed in
opinion in a jurisdictional matter with Imam Al Baqir, then we would
have concluded that they are not truthful and therefore cast doubt on
all of them regarding their Imamate. However, that did not happen and
rather, the opposite was the case! Hence, it is incumbent for us to
believe in their truthfulness and remove any doubt regarding their
Imamate which is one package that cannot divided or separated.

10) The fact that these Awsiyaa have complemented and continued each
other’s roles and are in harmony with each other is yet another logical
proof that supports their guardianship, Imamate, and Wilayah. If we were
to study the roles that each of them executed and compared them with
each other taking in consideration the diversity of these roles, we will
immediately realize the amazing harmony and synchronization that could
not exist without the great divine magnificence and absolute divine
perfection! This in itself is a clear proof to everyone which supports
their guardianship, Imamate, and Wilayah over the message, the nation,
and the religion.

11) There is also the occurrence of some of the obvious miracles which
were witnessed by those who accompanied the Imams and were recorded in
history throughout the years. For example, God delays the time of sunset
for one hour for the sake of Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) until he
accomplishes victory over his enemy. Husain ibn Ali (AS) throws a
handful of the blood of his killed infant son up to the sky as he
supplicates to his Lord and not one drop of blood fell to the ground and
that was witnessed by his enemies and killers! Husain foretells the fate
of his killers one by one and his prophecy is fulfilled exactly with the
details that he mentioned.

Ali ibn Al Husain (AS) recites Tasbeeh [the ritual process of glorifying
or praising Allah (SWT)] during his prostration (Sujood), so those who
were with him actually hear with their own ears the sounds of the rocks,
stones, and dust particles reciting Tasbeeh along with him. Muhammad ibn
Ali Al Taqi (AS) defeats the supreme judge of the Islamic Caliphate by
his extensive knowledge when has not yet reached the age of ten. Ali ibn
Muhammad Al Hadi (AS) was thrown in a cell containing hungry lions, but
instead of devouring him instantly they prostrated to him and licked his
slippers out of respect to him.

Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (may Allah hasten his reappearance)
disappears in his minor and major occultation, yet he is still alive and
present throughout all these ages. So what is the significance of all
these divine miracles which Allah (SWT) distinguished them with? Should
we then consider anyone other than them for the Imamate? Should we then
seek knowledge from those who were never honored with such miracles from
God?!

12) The knowledge and school of thought of these Imams which is the true
divine revelation was able to reach us in the way it was revealed by
Allah (SWT). It reached us despite all the dangers, risks, hostilities,
and wars from tyrannical ruling power that existed throughout all these
decades and centuries. It arrived to us despite all the efforts which
were exerted to erase their positive influence and eradicate and distort
their school of thought. It reached us despite the hostility of the
enemies, the jealousy of the envious, the oppression of the oppressors,
and the fabrication of those who misguide the people.

Despite all that which took place over the past centuries, we were still
able to receive their knowledge and benefit from their school of thought
which is the continuation of the true and pure Muhammaden message. How
did that happen? Surely, it is a miracle from Allah (SWT) just like His
miracle in protecting the Holy Quran! So do you think if Allah (SWT) did
not approve of this school of thought and if these eleven Awsiyaa were
all lying in their claim of successorship and Imamate, will He (SWT)
have granted this miracle for them and protected the Message through
them, such that it reaches us today in this complete, pure, and rich
form, despite all the obstacles and danger it faced until now? Doesn’t
this miracle indicate their truthfulness in being guardians, Awliyaa and
Imams?!

13) Most of the scholars of the other schools of thought in Islam were
students of these eleven Imams who learned from them and narrated from
them. However, the opposite never happened. Doesn’t this fact indicate
that these eleven Imams are indeed the origin, the foundation, and the
source while the others are the branch, the imitation, and the
outer-covering? Being that this is the case, wouldn’t it be all the more
appropriate that these eleven Imams would be the Awliyaa, Awsiyaa, and
the awaited Imams over the Message, without any partner or associate?
Surely, this is a very clear logic that cannot be denied by any wise and
sane mind!

14) Let us review the 3rd case study (4rth research topic, 10th item)
which researches the position of the oppressed people that is always
with the true Wasi and uses that as a proof for the truthfulness of that
Wasi. So if we search in history, we will find that those who followed
the eleven Imams, benefited from their guidance, and believed in them
were indeed people who were oppressed, deprived and unfortunate. They
were the only ones who supported the Imams and stood by them. They
abided by their school of thought and defended it throughout the years,
in spite of what they faced from the tyrannical ruling power and the
enemies of the religion who attempt to deviate from and distort the
religion at every opportunity they got. So based on the position of
those oppressed and unfortunate people who stood alongside the eleven
Imams, we can logically deduce the truthfulness of their guardianship,
Imamate, and Wilayah over the religion and the Islamic nation.

15) Despite the fact that these eleven Imams were deprived from their
role of political Wilayah, they still continued to play their role of
guardianship over the Message and safeguarding the religion. Rather, the
matter was not limited to depriving them; it went on to the point of
bearing hostility towards them, chasing them, persecuting them,
imprisoning them, then plotting against them and killing them in the
hands of the unjust and tyrannical political ruling power. Despite all
these harsh and grueling circumstances, we find these Imams carrying out
their mission in the best way possible. They took advantage of any
opportunity they found, so they were like one who grinds a boulder, or
dig by his hands in the bottom of the sea, or fight without a shield or
sword. Doesn’t their actions logically indicate that they are truly the
owners of this important position which they were assigned to by Allah
(SWT)? Therefore, they did not hesitate to execute their role no matter
what the circumstances were.

In general, the insistence of a person to perform his role under the
most difficult circumstances is a logical proof that this person is
without a doubt the true owner of that position. So, the fact that these
eleven Imams were exposed to oppression indicates that they were indeed
carrying out their role of guardianship. After all, if they were not
performing their role, the rulers would have left them alone and not be
bothered by them. Their persistence in performing their roles despite
the oppression, persecution, and isolation they faced is a clear proof
that they are really the true owners of this position.

16) The number of disciples from the sons of Prophet Jacob (AS) (Israel)
and the Awsiyaa after him were twelve. The number of leaders of the sons
of Israel in Egypt was twelve. The number of springs which sprang out
for the Israelites in the desert of Sinai was twelve. The number of
disciples and Awsiyaa of Prophet Jesus (AS) were twelve. The number of
months in the Book of Allah (SWT) on the day He (SWT) created the
heavens and the earths are twelve. The number of constellations in the
sky is twelve. The only number which can be written in English in a form
that is different from the numerical form is twelve (we say dozen
indicating the number twelve). With all that in mind, doesn’t the self
feel somewhat at ease in learning that the number of Awsiyaa over the
Final Revelation after the departure of the Seal of Prophet (SA) is also
Twelve?!

17) Allah (SWT) has honored the family of Prophet Noah (AS) and granted
prophecy to his descendants. He (SWT) honored Prophet Abraham (AS) and
granted prophecy to his progeny. He (SWT) honored the family of Imran as
well as the family of David by granting them prophecy and guardianship
in their descendants. So why would it be hard for us to believe that
Allah (SWT) also honor the family of Muhammad who is the Seal of
Prophets and Messengers and the best of His creation and most beloved
one to Allah (SWT)? Not surprisingly, He (SWT) blesses the descendants
of Muhammad with guardianship and Wilayah! Surely, this is logical and
accepted as you will not find change in the Sunnah (way) of Allah (SWT).

18) The total amount of time in which the eleven Imams spent in their
role guardianship over the Message after the Holy Prophet (SA) is about
300 years. This duration of time is quite logical and reasonable to
allow for the Final Revelation that is universal and comprehensive to
stand firmly on its feet. This agreement between the duration of their
guardianship and the approximate required amount of time that is logical
for the safeguarding of the message and guardianship over it is in
itself a clear proof that supports the truthfulness of their
guardianship and Wilayah over the nation.

19) These Imams did not have political Wilayah and Caliphate over the
Muslims as they were supposed to, and that is the wise providence of
Allah (SWT). This is yet another logical proof of the truthfulness of
their guardianship over the Final Revelation that is due to the
following reasons:

First: If these Awsiyaa assume the Caliphate, it will result in the
return to the way of the Prophet (SA) and the way of the first Wasi. But
the time had already passed and it was too late for that to happen. If
it did happen, it would have certainly resulted in a great division in
the nation! The enemies of the Awsiyaa and the pure form of the Religion
would have increased in their animosity and initiated a bloody
counter-revolution for the sake of their best interests that will be
harmed if the matters in the Islamic state returned to the way of the
Holy Prophet (SA) and the true final message.

And if that happened, it would certainly pose a great threat to the
stability and very existence of the Islamic state! It will lead to its
division at a time when it is still growing and surrounded by enemies
from all sides and from within its people. This will surely lead to its
downfall and the enemies will jump at the opportunity to destroy and
eradicate the religion once and for all. In order to avoid all that, it
is logically necessary that none of the Awsiyaa actually assume the
position of Caliphate. Rather, they would only practice their roles
behind the scenes in the midst of the most difficult circumstances. This
was their destiny which they had no choice but to face it and execute
their roles.

Second: If the Imams actually assumed the Caliphate, one of their
logical attributes which we had deduced the necessity of it being
present in those Awsiyaa over the Final religion would not have been
fulfilled. We are referring to the 15th attribute that is discussed in
the 15th item of the 2nd research topic in the fourth case study. That
is because if they did take hold of this position, they would no longer
be oppressed, imprisoned, or killed.

As we agreed earlier, the Awsiyaa should fulfill all of the logical
attributes that we previously concluded logically, without any
exception. Therefore, the fact that they were deprived from their right
of Caliphate made them fulfill this requirement and possess this
attribute from Allah (SWT). This way, they have fulfilled all of the
logical requirements and this will certainly make it easier for us to
recognize them. It is as if Allah (SWT) desired that they be in complete
agreement with the mind and logic! So the fact that they did not assume
the position of Caliphate politically is proof to the truthfulness of
their guardianship and that they truly deserve the Imamate since they
have fulfilled all of the necessary attributes that should logically be
possessed by the awaited Imams and Awsiyaa.

Third: If they had really assumed the position of Caliphate, the people
would have followed them since they would have become the official
rulers. In such case, these eleven Imams would no longer stand as a test
(fitna) for the people and they would not be proofs (Hujjaj) over the
people. After all, the people would have to take them as guardians since
they are the dominant political ruling power that is feared by
everybody. In that case, the people may not follow them sincerely for
the sake of obeying Allah (SWT). The obedience of the people will be
contaminated with the desire to please the ruler. Hence, the good will
not be distinguished from the bad nor will the true believer be known
from the hypocrite. This would contradict the most important duty of
guardianship and that is the conservation of truth and its distinction
from falsehood. It would go against the role of nullifying falsehood,
deceit, and forgery, and separating that from the truth, light, honesty,
and certainty.

Thus, it was necessary that the Imams don’t assume the political role of
Caliphate and that they be persecuted, oppressed and tortured, such that
no one follows them except those who are really truthful believers, and
sincere to Allah (SWT) and to the Message. Therefore, we can conclude
that they are truly the Hujjaj and Awliyaa from Allah (SWT) and they are
the Imams and Awsiyaa over the Final Islamic Message after the Holy
Prophet (SA) and after the first Wasi.

From the previous items 1-19, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

3rd Conclusion
--------------

The Eleven Imams from the sons and grandsons of Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS)
and Fatima Al Zahra (AS) are as follows: Al Hasan ibn Ali, Al Husain ibn
Ali, Ali ibn Al Husain, Muhammad ibn Ali, Jafar ibn Muhammad, Musa ibn
Jafar, Ali ibn Musa, Muhammad ibn Ali, Ali ibn Muhammad, Al Hasan ibn
Ali, and Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan (AFS). They are the awaited and expected
Awsiyaa over the Final Islamic Message after the first Wasi. They are
the ones whom Allah (SWT) chose for this vital role and mission. They
are the Imams, the Awliyaa, and the Hujjaj from Allah (SWT). Therefore,
it is logically incumbent on us to believe in them, follow them, and be
guided by them. We must take them as our role models, our Imams, and
derive our knowledge from them. This is a confirmed truth and reality
since it is logical, rational, and essential. Thus, it is not possible
to deny or refute it logically, intellectually, or practically.

And now, dear sincere and free thinker, after what was presented to you
and at the conclusion of this case study, after complete conviction that
is based on sound intellect, contemplation, and pure thought, and after
getting rid of any personal interest or fanaticism, both you and I can
bear witness with all our souls and without being forced or pressured by
anyone, and after witnessing all the logical proofs and evidence, and
after it has been proved to us by logic and sound reasoning alone…We can
bear witness that:

“There is no God but Allah, the One Creator who has no partner or
associate, and that Muhammad in His Slave and Messenger. He is the Seal
of Prophets who delivered the last, final, comprehensive, and universal
Islamic message that is directed to all of humanity. And Ali ibn Abi
Taleb (AS) is the Wasi and Caliph of Muhammad, and Wali Allah after him
over the message and nation. The Imams from the sons and grandsons of
Ali and Fatima Al Zahra (AS) are as follows: Hasan ibn Ali, Husain ibn
Ali, Ali ibn Al Husain, Muhammad ibn Ali, Jafar ibn Muhammad, Musa ibn
Jafar, Ali ibn Musa, Muhammad ibn Ali, Ali ibn Muhammad, Al Hasan ibn
Ali, and Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan (AFS).

They are the Awsiyaa over the Final Islamic Message after Ali ibn Abi
Taleb (AS). They are the Imams, Awliyaa, and Hujjaj from Allah by direct
divine selection for them to assume this important role and position.
Their way is our way, their path is our path, their school of thought is
our school of thought, and their obedience is obligatory on us since it
is equivalent to the obedience of Allah (SWT) and the obedience of the
Messenger of Allah (SWT). May Allah (SWT) bear witness to our
testimony!”

\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*\*

Dear Lucky and Happy Reader, by this testimony you have completed the
pillars of your faith and the verification and security of your belief!
You should now prostrate to Allah (SWT) in praise to Him! You must show
gratitude to Him for His Bounties upon you. After all, He (SWT) is the
one who first created you, then granted your life, and then blessed you
with His Sustenance. He (SWT) continuously provides you your needs in
life until He decides otherwise. He (SWT) then chose you and blessed you
with the bounties of the mind, intellect, cognition, and comprehension.
By that, He (SWT) favored you over the creation. He (SWT) then guided
you to believe in His Oneness, to know Him, and to worship Him alone
without any partner or associate. He (SWT) guided you to believe in all
of the prophets and messengers, and in their Last Messenger, Muhammad
(SA). He (SWT) then guided you to believe in His true Wali and Wasi
after His Prophet, Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) and He saved you from the
great test (fitna).

And now, He (SWT) is completing His Bounty on you and finalizing your
faith. He (SWT) made the truth apparent to you and showed you falsehood
as it is. He (SWT) opened your heart and guided you, so you became
transformed by His Bounty and Generosity into a truly sincere Muslim
believer who now has the correct set of beliefs. Dear Lucky Reader, if
you truly recognized the greatness, significance, and importance of that
bounty which Allah (SWT) gave you, you would have flied out of happiness
and you would not find it enough to spend your whole life in prostration
to Allah (SWT) out of gratitude! After all, those whom Allah (SWT)
grants His Bounty like He did with you are very little throughout all
ages in time.

Dear Fortunate Reader, it is enough that you hear the words of Allah
(SWT) in this Sacred Tradition in which He (SWT) says, “Whoever knows
that there is no God except me, and that Muhammad is My slave and
Messenger, and that Ali ibn Abi Taleb (AS) is my Caliph, and that the
Imams from his descendants are my Hujjaj, I will let him enter my
Paradise by My Mercy. I will save Him from the Hell-Fire by My
Forgiveness and allow him to be my neighbor. I will make him deserve My
Generosity and I will complete My Blessings upon him. I will make him be
from My special and close ones. If he calls Me I will respond to him,
and if he prays to Me I will answer his prayer. If he asks Me I will
give him, and if he is silent I will initiate with him. If he sinned I
will have mercy on him.

If he escaped from Me I will call and invite him. If he returns to Me I
will accept him, and if he knocks on My door I will open it for him.
Whoever doesn’t testify that there is no God except me, or testified
that but does not testify that Muhammad is my slave and messenger. Or
testified that but does not testify that Ali ibn Abi Taleb is my Caliph,
or testified that but does not testify that the Imams from his progeny
are my Hujjaj, he will have been ungrateful to My Bounty! He will have
belittled My Greatness and disbelieved in My Signs and Books. In that
case, if he comes to Me I will return him back, and if he asks Me I will
not give him. If he calls Me I will not listen to his call, and if he
prays to Me I will not answer his prayer. If he hopes from me I will
fail his hopes, and that is his punishment from Me and I am Not unjust
to my slaves.”

Now what is your opinion regarding these great glad tidings from Allah
(SWT) and this high position and universal status that you now possess!
So go ahead and thank your Lord and praise Him! Pray to Him that He
increases His precious Bounties on you and makes you stand firm on the
right path after He guided you to Him, until you meet Him and depart
from this life victoriously and safely with your religion! Pray to him
that He provides you support in facing His enemies and your enemies, and
the enemies of the truth who will turn against you from this point on!
They will try to discourage you and make you turn back from your faith.
They will try to misguide you and counterfeit the truth out of enmity
and jealousy since you have been guided while they have not. They will
become envious that you have been saved while they have perished. So
they’ll try to lure you and let you join them in their lost way,
misguidance, and punishment.

But no matter how hard they try, do NOT allow them to accomplish that
now that you have witnessed the truth by the grace of Allah (SWT)! Stay
firm on the truth and use the help and support of Allah (SWT) over them
regardless of who they are and where they are! Let your weapon be your
sound intellect as well as your cognition and wisdom. That is of course
after depending on Allah (SWT), His Book, and the guidance of His
Prophet and Awsiyaa. This is the best weapon from Allah (SWT) which He
gave you and guided you by it to where you have reached now. You have
completed your religion and faith and won the pleasure and love of Allah
(SWT), the Great Creator!

After all, man has lost his way and became misguided the day he
abandoned his mind and intellect. The day he stopped thinking and
allowed for the others to lead him, manipulate his mind, and control
him! So they made him into a clone with no mind or opinion or logic or
cognizance! By that, they turned him into the worst of human beings, or
rather, the worst of animals! May Allah (SWT) protect us from all those
who want to deprive us from using our minds and getting in the way of
our logic reasoning and thoughts! And from those who fabricate and
counterfeit our religion and beliefs! Oh Allah (SWT), protect our
religion and true faith until we meet you as you are pleased with us,
for You are the All-Hearing, the Responsive! We will follow Your Right
Path and adhere to the Sunnah of the Seal of Your Prophets and Last of
Messengers. We will conform to the guidance of the Lanterns of Guidance
from your Awsiyaa, Imams, and Hujjaj of your religion. We have boarded
Your ship of salvation and we are the followers of the guides whom You
have sent. May Peace and blessings be upon all the messengers and the
Last Messenger and his purified progeny! Praise be to Allah, the Lord of
All Worlds!

And now dear Reader, in order for you to make your faith and belief more
firm and stronger, and to clarify the complete truth to you, we will go
ahead with you to the last case study in this book which Allah (SWT)
throws on the falsehood by His Will, so it becomes eradicated! We have
dedicated this case study to the 12th Imam who is the Last of the Imams
and Awsiyaa. The reason why is because he has a special case that is
miraculously unique and we must clarify and understand it. We must
comprehend the aspects of the greatness, significance, and wisdom behind
it. We must make the truth apparent since it was concealed, distorted,
and fabricated to the point that it became like a confusing riddle that
is unknown to most of the Muslims. This is in spite of the fact that it
is a very important pillar and cornerstone of their religion, creed, and
Final Message. The Muslims must belief in it, present it, reveal it, and
clarify it to all people. But how will they accomplish that when they
themselves have doubt or confusion in it?! Therefore, we find it
necessary to discuss this matter and make an attempt to research and
study it together.

So let us move on, Dear Reader, as we are accompanied by our mind,
logic, and sound judgment, and by our human guidance that is agreed upon
by all people, to continue this journey in its last stage! Afterwards,
it will reach the safe haven by the will of Allah (SWT), and the ark
will finally rest on Mount Judi! By that, the matter will be finished,
the bounty will be perfected, and the light will be completed! We will
then prostrate to Allah (SWT) and say “Praise be to Allah, the Lord of
All Worlds!”


