5th Case Study: The Twelfth Imam, the Occulted & Awaited One, the Sustainer and Rising One - Al Hujjah ibn Al-Hasan Al-Mahdi
============================================================================================================================

1st Research Topic - Logical Reasoning and Inevitability of Termination of the Divinely-Appointed Guardians and Chosen Leaders (Imams)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Why doesn’t the presence of the Awsiyaa continue on, one after the other
till the end of time?

Why is it inevitable that there be a Seal to the Awsiyaa (guardianship)?

What is the logic and necessity behind that?

What are the proofs and evidence to support that?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) We had previously concluded in the 2nd case study (first research
topic, 1st item) that beginning and end are logical phenomena that are
present in the universe and are part of the way of life. So everything
that has a beginning also has to have an end. This principle has been
applied on the divine prophecies and revelations and it was logical that
it would eventually conclude and reach an end. Sure enough, that
happened and the revelations were concluded with the Final Islamic
Message, and the prophets and messengers were sealed with Muhammad (SA).

So shouldn’t we also apply this principle to the Awsiyaa after the Seal
of Prophets? After all, so long as they had a beginning with Ali ibn Abi
Taleb (AS), they also must have an end! This chain of Awsiyaa must
conclude and discontinue, otherwise it contradicts the simplest rules of
logic. It is logically inevitable that we expect the termination of the
chosen Awsiyaa and Imams who were appointed by Allah (SWT) to safeguard
and protect the Message after the departure of the prophet.

2) As we know, the Awsiyaa were assigned the mission of caretaking and
looking after the Final Revelation until it establishes itself and
stands firmly on its feet, and to protect its pure form after organizing
it in such a way that is feasible for all of the nations to use and
follow at any time or place. So if the mission was accomplished and the
Message have grown and stood firmly on its feet, then what is the need
for further continuation of the chain and more branches to form over the
ages until the end of time? The accomplishment and completion of the
desired goal is a logical proof that there is no need any more for one
who would accomplish the goal. Therefore, the fact that the Message has
reached its desired destination and has actually established itself is a
clear proof that the termination of prophets is logical to happen with
the termination of the mission.

3) It has not been narrated that the last Wasi, Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan,
married nor had any kids, so there is no possibility of passing on the
guardianship/Wasaya to a son after him just like it was passed on from
his forefathers to each other. The probability that Wasaya would
continue after him and be transferred from this pure prophetic chain to
another chain that is lower is very farfetched and almost impossible as
well as illogical. Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan al Mahdi (AFS) was
occulted most of the time so therefore, there did not exist any person
who was in direct contact with him such that this person would acquire
direct knowledge from him. Because of that, this logical and necessary
attribute was not fulfilled in a potential Wasi after (if there is one)
as it was fulfilled in those before him. Therefore, it is not possible
that a new Wasi appears after the 12th Imam, Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al
Mahdi, and this is a reality that can very well be comprehended by the
mind and logic.

4) Furthermore, there did not appear anyone else who claimed Wasaya and
Imamate over the Message by divine appointment from Allah (SWT) after
Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS). Therefore, logic dictates
that there is no any Wasi after him and that the Awsiyaa were terminated
and sealed by him. So the lack of presence of a claimer in this regard
indicates the lack of presence of another appointed person after the
12th Imam.

5) As we know, the Holy Prophet (SA) who does not speak out of his own
will or desire, have foretold about the termination of the 12 Awsiyaa
after him with Al Hujjah Muhammad ibn Al Hasan al Mahdi (AFS). The
Prophet (SA) conveyed that he will be the last of the Awsiyaa. Thus, his
name will be the same as the name of the Holy Prophet (SA) himself, and
that is, “Muhammad”. He conveyed his description, occultation, and
return which are depicted in detail among all the Muslims. Only the
opponents have deviated and distorted it by the direct command of the
oppressive ruling power. So if we already believed and testified the
prophecy of Muhammad (SA), then it is logically incumbent on us to also
believe him in this matter, namely, that Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi
(AFS) is the Seal of Awsiyaa and the last one of them, by the order of
Allah (SWT).

6) All of the twelve Imams and Awsiyaa have conveyed that Al Hujjah ibn
Al Hasan Al Mahdi is the Last Wasi and that the Awsiyaa will end with
him. There will not be any Wasi after him until the end of time. Even
the 12th Imam himself had confirmed that he is the Seal of Awsiyaa,
Awliyaa, and Imams who are appointed by Allah (SWT). Since we have
already established their integrity and believed in the Awsiyaa, then we
must also believe them in this matter, and that is, Al Hujjah ibn Al
Hasan Al Mahdi is the Seal of Awsiyaa and the last one of them.

7) Ever since Allah (SWT) sent the twelve successive Awsiyaa who are
qualified and fulfill all the requirements, they have been lied upon,
tortured, and killed! Only a very small group of people believed in them
and followed them. With that in mind, what sense does it make to
continue their successiveness till no end? Surely, it is inevitable that
Allah (SWT) eventually puts an end to this bounty which was not
appreciated by most of the people since they disbelieved in it and
killed it. It is logical that Allah (SWT) would take this light away
from them after a while after they expressed disdain and hatred towards
it. This is a very logical expectation and it is the tradition of Allah
in the universe!

For example, suppose that Allah (SWT) granted a person with many
children, so he kept on killing and torturing each one of them, one
after the other. Being that he has rejected this bounty from Allah (SWT)
and was unappreciative to it, do you think it is logical that Allah
(SWT) take this bounty away from him and put an end to it? Or do you
think that He (SWT) will continue to give that bounty to that man until
his life ends? There is no doubt that logic says that this bounty from
Allah (SWT) will eventually be confiscated due to lack of gratitude and
appreciation, just like it would increase and continue with thankfulness
and praise.

As Allah (SWT) says, *“If you thank Me, I will increase you, but if you
disbelieve, then My punishment is severe.”* So the termination of
Awsiyaa is logical and expected in this matter. Whoever refuses the
bounty and sustenance of Allah (SWT), he surely does not deserve to
receive that bounty anymore. We have an example in the sons of Israel
when they refused the bounty of Allah (SWT) and did not appreciate the
“Mann and Salwa”. They insisted in replacing the pure sustenance of
Allah (SWT) which descended from the heavens with sustenance from the
earth with its impure beans. So what did Allah (SWT) say about them and
what did He (SWT) punish them with? Similarly, there is also the example
of the village which used to receive plenty of sustenance, but it
disbelieved in the bounties of Allah (SWT). So it tasted the
consequences of its own actions.

Suppose you were to receive pure sustenance directly from the heavens
from Allah (SWT) but you disbelieved in it and was ungrateful for that
divine bounty. Then you rejected that pure sustenance and instead went
after the impure source to get the sustenance from. Similarly, you
rejected the Awsiyaa whom Allah (SWT) specified and appointed and
granted them extensive knowledge so that they may be signs and guides
for you. Instead, you replaced them with others from the fabricators and
fake scholars and the followers of the oppressive ruling power to take
them as your role model and tread their path. Is it expected after this
that Allah (SWT) would continue providing this bounty to you when you
have rejected it? Or will He (SWT) put an end to it as a consequence to
your disbelief? Isn’t He (SWT) going to leave you to follow your fake
Imams and scholars to misguide you and make you go astray? He (SWT) will
surely let you depend on yourself so that you may lose your way, and
this is what we observe in reality.

8) The Awsiyaa are the divinely appointed scholars and guides from Allah
(SWT) who are purified and have the responsibility of teaching the
people and guiding them. Thus, they are in essence the teachers who
provide the coaching and training. So if this stage of teaching was
provided by Allah (SWT), it is logically necessary that it be temporary.
It is expected that this teaching phase would end after a period of time
so that it may be followed by a time of test and trial! At that time of
trial, the teacher will be taken away and the student will be left alone
to apply what he learned from the teacher in the exam given to him. This
is similar to what happens in any school or college. The teacher or
professor teaches for a period of time then after completing the
curriculum, there is no more teacher or professor.

Rather, it is time for the students to be tested and examined for what
they learned all along. This is logical and based on that, we can
conclude the necessity of termination of Awsiyaa so that afterwards, the
time of trial would begin. This way, these Imams stand as Hujjaj
(proofs) of Allah (SWT) over the people. So, if they were really sealed
and terminated, then it is no wonder or surprise! Rather, it is very
well expected rationally and logically!

9) In general, the Awsiyaa are in continuous struggle and conflict with
the ruling power. Now, will this struggle continue forever by the
sustained presence of the chain of Awsiyaa endlessly? Surely, this is
not logical! If they were victorious in their struggle with the
authorities such that they became the ruling power themselves, then they
would no longer be fulfilling one of the logical requirements for being
Awsiyaa. This is not permissible so therefore, it is logically necessary
that this continued struggle eventually reach an end with the
termination of Awsiyaa.

10) If there was continued presence of the chain of Awsiyaa in front of
the people’s eyes for hundreds of years, it would have been a clear
proof of their truthfulness. Thus, it is a reason for the people to
follow them and believe in them. In such case, the purpose of testing
the people will be nullified. These Imams will no longer stand as Hujjaj
through which Allah (SWT) differentiates the good from the evil, the
liar from the honest, and the believer from the hypocrite. Since a clear
proof for their truthfulness was available by the continuation of their
chain throughout time, then whoever believes in them will be forced to
do so since the proof is clearly present. Their belief will not be based
on true faith and the desire for truth itself. Even if this truth was
fabricated or hidden from the person, he would strive to seek for the
truth and he is the one who will deserve the reward and retribution from
Allah (SWT).

After all, if you are able to see with the light on, that is not a
miracle. However, the real challenge is to be able to see and find your
way in the presence of darkness and obstacles. So, the termination of
Awsiyaa is logical in order for the test and trial to manifest itself to
the people, and so that these Imams may continue to stand as proofs on
the people till the Day of Resurrection. The mind and logic accepts that
and rather expects it even before it happens. So if it actually
happened, there is no wonder or surprise since it is in agreement with
the mind, logic, and sound judgment!

From the previous items 1-10, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

1st Conclusion
--------------

The termination of the chosen Awsiyaa and divinely appointed Imams is
logical, necessary, and inevitable. Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan al Mahdi
(AFS) is indeed the last Imam over the Final Revelation. He is the Seal
of Awsiyaa and there is no appointed Wasi or Imam from Allah (SWT) after
him. This is a confirmed reality since it is logical and rational.
Therefore, it is impossible to deny or refute it.

2nd Research Topic - Logical Reasoning and Inevitability of the Continuation of Both the Guardianship and the Relationship Between the Heavens and the Earth, the Caretaking and Safeguarding of the Final Revelation
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Is it essential that the Guardianship continues on for the Final
Revelation?

What is the logic and rational evidence to support the necessity of
continuing this guardianship and continuing the relationship between the
heavens and the earth?

Why couldn’t everything end with the termination of the Awsiyaa?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) Dear Wise Reader, is it comprehendible that the One and Only Divine
Creator who is the Dominant, the Capable Sustainer, the All-Knowing, the
Protector, the Truth, the Ever-Living One, the First, the Last, the
Manifest, and the Hidden who does not sleep or slumber, that He (SWT)
abandons His creation without providing divine care for the message sent
from Him? Is it comprehendible that the relationship between the heavens
and earths end with the termination of prophecy, revelations, and also
with the termination of the Awsiyaa?! After all, how could that be
possible when the earth and all those in it derive their existence from
the divine power and creation and from the protection of its laws day
and night? If this connection is interrupted for one moment, everything
will certainly collapse and cease to exist! Therefore, the continuation
of direct relationship is necessary and imperative for the continuation
of existence itself.

So, if we agree that the connection is present continuously at every
moment, then how is it possible that Allah (SWT) abandons His slaves
without providing them care in their affairs and their Final Revelation?
How can He (SWT) leave them to deal with their matters on the basis that
the prophethood and guardianship have been terminated and this
relationship has come to an end? This may be logically permissible when
it comes to the relationships between human beings in the formal
occasions, e.g., business relationships. However, is it permissible in a
relationship between a father and his children? Of course not!

After all, the parent-child relationship does not end after the parents
provide care and education to their children and they grew up into
adults. This is not logical or permissible in these types of human
relationships. Then how can one imagine that to be the case in the
relationship between the Creator and His Creation whom their whole lives
and existence were originate and revolves around Him?! After all, He
(SWT) is the one who provides them sustenance, grants them life, brings
death upon them, and manages their affairs. How can one imagine that He
(SWT) would abandon them and end His relationship and care with them and
with His Final revelation that He sent for their guidance? This idea is
illogical and is totally rejected! Rather, what is logical is the
continuation of the relationship between the heavens and the earth which
does not ever cease to exist with regards to the following aspects:

• Materialistically in maintaining its existence, life, and laws

• Morally and spiritually in protecting the Final Message

• Protecting the religious and behavioral goals from the heavenly
revelations and protection of the good for the people

• Continuation of the struggle between truth and falsehood

In all of the above, there is protection to the life and existence in
the way that Allah (SWT) desires. So the continuation of the
relationship between the heavens and the earth is absolutely necessary
for the continuation of life and of existence itself and to protect it
from corruption.

2) Dear Wise Reader, can one imagine that Allah (SWT) neglect His
universal and Final revelation that is directed to all of humanity at
every place and time? Can He (SWT) abandon His religion which He
approved for His slaves without providing continuous guardianship
throughout time? The ways of life are continuously changing as well as
the nature, behavior, and morals of the people especially as new events,
incidents, and innovations are introduced in their lives. Thus, all that
is not permissible and is illogical if Allah (SWT) desires to protect
and safeguard His Final Revelation such that it continues over the ages
and gets propagated throughout the world. The mind and logic here
deduces the continuation of the guardianship and divine care over the
Final Revelation till the end of time.

3) It is of human nature that people tend to lean towards misguidance,
disbelief, freedom, corruption, selfishness, and self-serving interest.
All that naturally calls for the necessity of continuation of
guardianship over the Final Revelation. It calls for a long-lasting and
endless relationship between the heavens and the earth. Suppose that you
had a patient whose health was deteriorating day after day or is subject
to deterioration at any moment in time. In such case, you will place him
in the intensive care unit where he has continuous supervision by the
physicians. This continuous supervision does not come to a halt due to
the instability of his situation and bad prognosis.

Similarly, because the nature of humankind is always leaning towards
misguidance, corruption, disbelief, and freedom, that calls for the
necessity of having continuous guardianship and actual contact from the
heavens to the earth from the Divine Creator to the people and
everything including the Final Revelation, the religion, and the
continuous struggle that exists between truth and falsehood.

4) The cursed devil (Shaytan), Iblees, had requested from Allah (SWT)
that He (SWT) postpone his punishment till Judgment day so that he may
misguide the people. Allah (SWT) accepted his proposal and Shaytan
became among those who have respite. So the devil, his supporters and
progeny are continuously practicing their role of misguidance and
corruption until the promised time. And Allah (SWT) does not break His
Promise.

So how can one fathom that Allah (SWT) would give permission to the
devil to carry out his intentions to misguide the people by inspiration
of poisonous ideas, evil desires, and sickness of the soul, yet He (SWT)
abandons the human beings in such a weak and solitary state after
terminating the prophets, messengers, and Awsiyaa? Not only that, He
(SWT) allows for this state to continue on for many long centuries to
come! Surely, this is illogical and totally contradicts the attribute of
Absolute Justice which is one of the names of the Divine Creator. So it
is necessary that in exchange for Shaytan’s seduction, Allah (SWT) would
grant guardianship and guidance to the people via continuous
relationship between the heavens and earth, so that it may serve as a
weapon for humans to resist the Shaytan and his soldiers. This
guardianship must continue till the end of time since the devil will try
to misguide the people till the Day of Resurrection. This way, there
will be equality and the human struggle will be balanced; thus absolute
divine justice will be accomplished!

This is the sound judgment of the intellect and anything other than that
is rejected by the mind. So the presence of the devil and the
continuation of his role certainly call for the necessity of continuous
guardianship and guidance that would work in the opposite direction. So
the devil misguides while the guardianship guides. The devil corrupts
while the Imamate sets things straight. The devil plans evil while the
guardianship nullifies and reveals its mockery and planning, and
establishes the truth. And so on and so forth!

5) As we observe and continue to witness in history, the continued
presence of enemies against the Final Revelation at every place and time
calls for the necessity of maintaining continuous guardianship,
protection, and guidance to the religion. It calls for the continued
guardianship between the heavens and the earth so that it safeguards the
message and stands up against its enemies. The religion must continue
its journey throughout the centuries despite the animosities,
hostilities, attacks, and events that it will face. So how will the
Message accomplish all that if it is left abandoned in the midst of the
wavering waves, without any guardianship or divine guidance? Surely,
that is not comprehendible because logically the presence of enemies
against the message throughout the ages dictates the necessity of having
guardianship and protection from the heavens.

6) There was continued presence for a number of factors which logically
calls for the continuation of guardianship over the Message as well as
guidance and protection. For example, there was the distortion,
deviation, and fabrication in the Message coupled with the ongoing
attempt to empty the religion from its true contents and propagate a
counterfeit and lifeless religion to deceive the people, the increase in
such aggressive attempts with the passage of time, the great increase in
the number of fake scholars of knowledge and their misguidance of the
people, and also their conspiracies with the oppressive ruling power in
every place. Guidance and protection can only be accomplished by
maintaining an ongoing relationship between the heavens and earth.

This way, the Message will stay in its pure and original form for
everyone who seeks the truth and guidance. It will be available for
every believer who desires to worship his Lord they way that God
desires. Hence, all the devout believers at every age in time will find
in that message a sense of security and a safe haven from the events,
incidents, emergency cases, and innovations that may occur. They will
find guidance and laws for everything that they come across their lives
which will be relevant to the changes that may happen over time.

Thus, they will find in it a pure life, not a petrified and isolated
life. In doing so, the Message will live on throughout time with its
flexibility and livelihood, otherwise it will break due to its rigidness
and strictness, as it what happened with the false religion of
idol-worshipping that were created by the sons and inheritants of Al
Sameri who falsely claimed knowledge. And the leaders from the ruling
power who misled the people in thinking that this was their religion,
the religion of Muhammad, while the religion itself had vindicated
itself from them!

Yet, how is that possible in the absence of continuous guardianship and
ongoing guidance that is needed for the message to maintain its
continuous life, movement, and flexibility? And to be able to adapt with
the events and problems, solve it, react with it, nullify its
corruption, and benefit from its good aspects while abandoning the
negative.

7) One of the main goals of the Final Message is to provide aid and
support to the weak, deprived, and oppressed people. Its objective is to
save them from the evil of the arrogant, dominant, and luxurious people
who torture them without any right out of aggression and conceitedness.
So if the relationship ended between the heavens and the earth by the
termination of the Prophets and Awsiyaa altogether, and if the mission
of guardianship, guidance, and protection ceased to exist, then who will
look after these weak and deprived people who are present in every place
and time in great masses and their number increases throughout the ages?
Who will take care of their matters, support them, and offer them a
helping hand? Surely this is not logical and the mere presence of this
set of guidelines which the Final Message highlighted is a clear and
logical proof of the necessity and inevitability of maintaining
continuous guardianship over the Final Religion as well as Wilayah,
protection, and guidance for it.

8) Logical reasoning also supports the continuous presence of a Hujjah
(proof) from Allah (SWT) over the people so long as the people continue
to exist. Otherwise, what sense does it make for some people to have a
Hujjah (proof) from Allah (SWT) over them, while others do not? In such
case, the latter would have an excuse on the Day of Judgment to escape
punishment. Certainly that does not comply with the absolute divine
justice! It contradicts the wisdom of having a Hujjah (proof) from Allah
(SWT) over the people. So long as the people continue to exist, the
continued presence of a Hujjatullah is the only logical and acceptable
scenario and can only be accomplished by the continuation of
guardianship, guidance, and protection of the Final Islamic Revelation.

From the previous items 1-8, after thorough study and contemplation, and
after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

2nd Conclusion
--------------

It is logical, necessary, and inevitable that there exist continuous
guardianship, guidance, protection, and supervision over the Final
Revelation. This would take place through maintenance of a continuous
relationship between the heavens and the earth. Continuous guardianship
calls for the continued presence of a Wasi, Guider, and Protector who
would be directly appointed by Allah (SWT). This is a confirmed reality
that is built on logical rationale, thus, it is impossible to deny or
refute it.

3rd Research Topic - Logical Reasoning and Essentiality of the Divine Protection to the Last Guardian (12th Wasi) From Being killed By the Tyrannical Rulers, and the Method for Accomplishing This Goal
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Why is it expected and logical that Allah (SWT) intervene to protect the
Last Wasi and the 12th Imam, Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi, from being
killed by the tyrannical rulers, as it happened to the Awsiyaa from his
father and grandfathers before him?

What is the logical reasoning behind the necessity of anticipating its
occurrence?

How is it possible for that to take place?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) It has been observed as a trend with the previous eleven Awsiyaa that
the tyrant and oppressive rulers are very much insistent and determined
to kill all of the Awsiyaa no matter where they are or how many they
are. They have become addicted to committing such heinous acts and have
taken the matter very lightly. The reason why is because they would
sense great danger from these Awsiyaa who posed a direct threat to their
seat on the throne. Thus, they could not ignore or neglect that matter.
So it was logical and necessary to put a final stop to this pattern of
killing and that it comes to an end, just like everything eventually
comes to an end.

2) The aggression and assault of these tyrannical rulers have increased
over time and crossed all limits and boundaries. It even reached to the
point of killing and imprisoning the Awsiyaa publicly! They tortured and
isolated them openly without any bashfulness or regard to their status,
knowledge, kinship, or followers. The aggression reached to the point of
transgression (Toghyaan) and wickedness. Usually, when the situation
reaches such a grave state, the heavens intervene to protect the
purified believers from this transgression.

Furthermore, there were a great number of enemies who came from all
places, while there were very little supporters who were weak and did
not take any action due to the pressure of oppression and persecution
that was inflicted upon them. All that created an atmosphere which made
it impossible for the Wasi to practice his role or be given any
opportunity to do so. This in itself is a proof that leads the mind to
logically deduce that divine intervention should take place in order to
protect the Wasi, especially after the matters have become worse to such
degree. This intervention would enable the Wasi to carry out his mission
and duty despite all of these unbearable circumstances.

3) The last Wasi, Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) is the only
Wasi whose father, the eleventh Imam Al Hasan ibn Ali Al Askeri, passed
away and left him when he was only five years of age. So how can the
divine care abandon this last Wasi and Wali who is chosen and appointed
by Him (SWT), when he is still very young and is exposed to the assault
and aggression of the corruptive ruling power? Let’s keep in mind that
this ruling power had already killed his fathers before him who were
grown-men.

Then imagine what could happen to this very young child when they come
to know that he is the last Wasi! Surely, they will plan to get rid of
him as soon as possible so that they could finish off all of the Awsiyaa
and finally rest from all this agony! This is not permissible or
acceptable at all! Rather, what is acceptable and logically expected is
that the heavens would directly intervene to protect this young Imam
from those tyrant rulers and enemies and save him from their jaws until
he completes his mission that he is appointed for.

4) Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) is the last Wasi and Wali
in the purified chain of Awsiyaa and Awliyaa. Being that he is the last
one and there is no Wasi after him, this logically demands the need for
extra special protection for him which differs from the protection of
those who preceded him. After all, no one will come after him to
complete his role if he does not complete it. His mission will exceed
the limits of his time, as we will later see. Hence, increasing and
tightening the circle of protection on him is logical and expected to
happen.

5) A similar situation took place with Prophet Muhammad (SA), the Seal
of Prophets and Messengers. Since he was the last of the prophets and
messengers, Allah (SWT) guaranteed his protection to shield him from his
enemies. After all, there is no prophet or messenger after him and he is
the one who is carrying the universal and final revelation to every
place and time. This logically calls for special protection and divine
care to be provided for him. Sure enough, that happened and Allah (SWT)
protected Prophet Muhammad (SA) from getting killed the day when the
tribes in Mecca plotted to kill him in his house. They chose a
representative from each of their tribes to share in the shedding his
blood. So Allah (SWT) saved the Prophet (SA) from them and he came out
to them when they encircled his house, but they did not see him and it
was miracle from Allah (SWT)! Then, Allah (SWT) saved him once again
when he was in the Cave of Thawr with his companion. When the
nonbelievers were about to see him, Allah (SWT) sent out a bird to lay
its egg at the opening of the cave. He also sent a spider to spin its
web on the door and therefore, mislead the nonbelievers in thinking that
the cave was vacant, and so they left that place.

Then, Allah (SWT) saved the Prophet (SA) yet another time from Zoraqa
ibn Malek and also from the conspiracy of the Jews in Medina to kill
him. He (SWT) also saved him from the plot of the Jewish woman who
presented the poisoned lamb to him. The special divine care also came to
his rescue on the day of Battle of Uhod and Hunayn when the enemies
surrounded him and wanted to kill him. Allah (SWT) saved him the day
when the nonbelievers saw him standing under a tree and they intended to
kill him. Allah (SWT) also saved him when some of his hypocrite
companions planned to kill him at the Aqabah (cliff) on his way back
from the Battle of Tabuk. So, the divine care surrounded him with
special protection since he is the Seal of prophets and his message will
extend throughout time.

So in order for his message to be conveyed and his role completed, it
was inevitable that Allah (SWT) protect him from his enemies by the
divine power. Based on this example, why shouldn’t we expect the same
case to happen with the Seal of Awsiyaa and Awliyaa whose role will also
extend throughout time and there will not be any prophet or Wasi after
him? The situation here is similar, so it is logical that what happened
there would also happen here. It is expected that the special divine
care would include the Seal of Awsiyaa, Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al
Mahdi, just like it included his grandfather before him, the Seal of
Prophets and Messengers, Muhammad (SA). After all, there is no change in
the tradition of Allah (SWT).

6) The same set of circumstances also happened with Prophet Jesus, the
son of Mary, who was the last of many prophets sent to the sons of
Israel. The sons of Israel went on killing their successive prophets
whom Allah (SWT) sent to guide them, one after the other. They were not
ashamed from Allah (SWT) and they did not fear Him. So, the divine care
intervened to protect their last messenger, Jesus (AS), from their
assault, mockery, and plots. Sure enough, their conspiracy reached to
the point of killing and crucifying him, just like they did with those
who came before him. Their last victims were Zachariah and John the
Baptist who were killed by a plot that was carried out in the most
degrading manner.

However, by His Great Capability, Allah (SWT) willed to protect their
last prophet from his enemies. This is the sound judgment of the mind
and logic, hence, it is expected and it surely happened. But what was
illogical is that the pattern of killing the prophets continues on
without any end, especially when he is their last prophet. So Allah
(SWT) desired to teach them a great lesson and demonstrate His Divine
Capability to them. An expected miracle took place and Allah (SWT)
raised Prophet Jesus (AS) to Him. They were deceived into thinking that
the person they crucified was Jesus as Allah (SWT) made that person
resembles Jesus. So, their weakness and lack of ability became apparent
to them. Until this moment, they are not sure if they really killed him
or not! Hence, this logic is true and has repeated itself twice in front
of our eyes. Then why wouldn’t it repeat itself yet another time with
the Seal of Awsiyaa, since the circumstances resemble each other closely
in all aspects?

7) As we know, the 12th Imam is the only Wasi who did not get an
opportunity to have close and direct contact with his father who is a
Wasi, and time did not permit for him to grow up in the arms of his
father and learn directly from him. Therefore, the mind and logic
expects that Allah (SWT) does something to compensate for that loss.
After all, Allah (SWT) is the Absolute Justice and He (SWT) is the Most
Wise. It is very logical that since Allah (SWT) took away something from
him which He (SWT) gave to all of the Awsiyaa before him, that He would
also give something to him in return which He did not give to the other
Awsiyaa. This “something” is expected to be extraordinary and unique to
him.

So what could this divine bounty be if it is not the divine care that
will extend its hand to save and protect him from his enemies in a
direct manner? It will distinguish him forever throughout the years to
come. Furthermore, it is logical that Allah (SWT) transfers to him the
knowledge of the prophets and Awsiyaa directly. Thus he is named Al
Mahdi (the Self-guided), or one whom Allah (SWT) will guide miraculously
by granting him direct knowledge miraculously without it being passed to
him by someone else.

8) Furthermore, the mercy of Allah (SWT) which is greater than
everything must benefit the weak and deprived in every place and time,
as they are the backbone and core of the Message. So, what will these
people do if their last Wasi and Imam is killed like those before him?
It is expected that the divine care intervene to save those weak and
oppressed believers who do not seek high status or corruption on earth.
It would save their Wasi and caretaker who is the protector of their
religion. We often observe this logical phenomenon which happens around
us when the divine care intervenes to raise the oppression from the weak
and deprived, even if they’re not from the believers and worship another
God. Despite that, the mercy of God includes them and sends to them one
who would liberate them and defend their rights.

Based on this logic, we can expect that Allah (SWT) save the last Wasi
from being killed and assaulted, and that this would be out of mercy and
compassion to those unfortunate believers who have already lost their
Awsiyaa repeatedly. So they became more weak and oppressed over time.
And if they also lost their last Wasi, it will be a great disaster for
them! After all, the Final Revelation descended to save them and shower
its mercy on them, so how can one imagine that it abandon or neglect
them in such manner? Therefore, it is logically necessary that the
divine care intervenes to save their Wasi and Imam for them, so that he
is present throughout time.

9) Furthermore, it is logical and expected that in the end, Allah (SWT)
would demonstrate His Capability, Greatness, and Strength to his
enemies. We can expect Him to challenge their arrogance, haughtiness,
and assault like he did with Pharaoh, Hamaan, Qaroon, Namrood, the sons
of Israel, and everyone who tries to assault His Prophets, Awsiyaa, and
Awliyaa and take His orders and religion lightly. This is the tradition
of Allah (SWT) that is observed around us. Thus, it is logical and
expected to happen.

So if it really happened, then there is no wonder or surprise since it
is expected based on the lessons of history which we can benefit from.
It is expected that He (SWT) intervenes to show His enemies that He
(SWT) is Omnipresent and He listens, sees, and is capable of supporting
and protecting the Awliyaa and Awsiyaa of His Final Message and religion
from their assault. He (SWT) would show them that He is capable of
making them feel weak and paralyzed, despite their arrogance, power, and
tyranny towards the young Imam who did not even pass the age of five.
What a great and amazing miracle from Allah (SWT)!

The Kings stand helpless as they are not able to inflict harm on a young
child whom they heard the prophecy that he will be the one who will
destroy the kingdom of evil over their heads and the heads of their
fathers and children. Despite that, they stand helpless in front of the
power of Allah (SWT), just like the helplessness of Pharaoh in front of
Prophet Moses (SA). So, the occurrence of such event and Allah’s rescue
to His last Wasi by a miracle is expected. This example from Allah (SWT)
is very important for the protection of the Message from its enemies in
the future and the long centuries that will come after the last Wasi. It
is important for disintegrating the group of oppressors who will rule
over the Muslims for many long ages, until our time now and until Allah
(SWT) wills.

10) As for how that can take place, we pose ourselves this question: How
may Allah (SWT) protect His Wali and Wasi from the assault, persecution,
and killing of the oppressive rulers who are insistent on killing the
Wasi no matter what the price is? In fact, we are in front of two
possibilities only:

It’s either Allah (SWT) raises the Wasi to Him, OR that He (SWT)
conceals and hides him from the eyes of the people. There is no third
possibility!

As for the possibility that Allah (SWT) raises the Wasi as He (SWT) did
with Prophet Jesus (AS), this is unlikely since Prophet Jesus (SA) had
already accomplished his mission and so it was okay for him to be raised
to the heaven after he performed his role. As for the last Wasi, Imam Al
Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS), he was still in the beginning of his
journey and he has yet to finish and complete his role. He still has a
long way to go as his mission is very critical and important! Without
accomplishing his mission, he cannot be raised to the heavens.
Therefore, his presence on Earth is necessary and inevitable as there is
no escape from it so that he may complete and perfect his mission.

The other possibility is that he be occulted and hidden from the eyes,
just like the Holy Prophet (SA) was hidden from the eyes of those who
surrounded his house and wanted to kill him the day he left for
migration. This possibility is actually valid since it guarantees him
protection from the enemies. At the same time, he is available and
present on a continuous basis to perform his role and duty. Therefore,
the possibility of being occulted and hidden from the eyes is more
logical so that Allah (SWT) may protect the Message by maintaining the
role of guardianship and Imamate.

From the previous items 1-10, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

3rd Conclusion
--------------

It is logical, necessary, and expected that Allah (SWT) intervenes with
His direct and divine power to protect and save the last Wasi, Imam Al
Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) from being killed and assaulted by
the tyrannical and hypocritical rulers. It is logically expected that
this would happen directly from Allah (SWT) by the miracle of
occultation and concealment of the last Wasi from the eyes of the
people. This will enable the 12th Wasi to perform his role while being
protected from his many enemies. This is a confirmed reality since it is
logically deduced and therefore, it is expected to happen. So if it
actually happened, then one cannot deny or refute it. And if it did not
happen yet, then we must anticipate its occurrence since that is the
sound judgment of the intellect and it is not possible to imagine or
prove the occurrence of something else, logically or realistically.

4th Research Topic - Logical Evidence Behind the Continued Presence of the Awaited Mahdi throughout Time While in Occultation, then his Return and Reappearance on Earth at the End of Time
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Questions:**

Is Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi present now?

Is he the Awaited Mahdi?

Why do we not see him?

Will he return back and reappear?

If so, when will he reappear?

What is the logical evidence supporting the occurrence of such event?

If it is expected to happen logically, is it necessary for us to believe
in the Awaited Mahdi or not?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) Before anything, we must pose a very important question which is as
follows:

What happens if the mind and intellect reaches two confirmed logical
facts that are expected to happen, yet each of these facts contradicts
each other? In such case, how can we solve this tough contradiction
between the two logical facts? And how can we proceed when we have
reached a dead end with these two contradicting and opposing realities?

The truth is that this problem or “knot” is impossible to solve mentally
or intellectually because the minds stand totally helpless in front of
these two opposing logical facts which are inevitable to take place. In
fact, this impossible state is the only logical solution. The only
logical solution in this situation is either total collapse of the whole
life and hence, ending the whole argument from its foundation and
disappearance, or resolving it in an illogical way that cannot be
comprehended by the mind.

In other words, to solve it in an extraordinary and miraculous way that
is beyond the comprehension of the mind and logic. Therefore, expecting
the occurrence of a miracle as the solution to this problem is the only
logical possibility in order to resolve this issue. The mind and logic
dictates that if two logical facts that are expected happen oppose each
other, then we must expect the occurrence of a great and extraordinary
divine miracle in order to solve this logical problem.

For example, it is logical and expected that Prophet Abraham (AS) who
was sent from Allah (SWT), lives to complete his assigned role. At the
same time, it is also logical and expected that Abraham dies when he is
thrown into the fire, just like any person would naturally die if he was
burned in fire. Here, we are in front of a logical problem since the two
expected and logical facts are opposing and contradicting each other. So
how can one find an exit from this situation?

In fact, it is not possible to solve this problem except by ending this
world and having Judgment day, thereby eliminating the whole problem.
Or, to solve it in an illogical way that cannot be comprehended by the
mind and logic. That is, to expect the occurrence of an extraordinary
divine miracle that is the only logical solution to this problem. So, if
the miracle actually took place and Abraham is saved, it is no wonder.
Sure enough, the miracle happened and Prophet Abraham (AS) survived the
fire! It is no wonder since this miracle is expected to happen in order
to satisfy both realities.

Similarly, Allah (SWT) saved the sons of Bani Israel with Prophet Moses
(AS) and allowed them to leave Egypt to survive for the sake of
completing a specific role, and to proceed to the "promised land". Here,
it is logical that they live and continue their procession, and this is
a logical fact that is expected to happen. But at the same time, Pharaoh
and his great army caught up with them until they reached the sea and
the enemy was now behind them! This situation leads us to logically
expect that they be totally defeated and perished once and for all. In
such case, we will find ourselves in front of two contradicting but
inevitable realities. There is no solution here but to expect a divine
and heavenly miracle that is illogical and cannot be comprehended by the
bare mind. Otherwise, the only other option would be to accept
destruction of this life and resurrection in the Hereafter to eliminate
this problem from its roots. If not, then how will the sons of Israel
become saved while they’re all supposed to be killed and destroyed? It
is impossible and a miracle here is expected and inevitable to solve
this problem, as there is no any other way out.

So, if the miracle actually happened and the sea has been divided and
separated to enable them to safely pass to the other side and to drown
their enemies when they attempted to cross the sea, then there is no
wonder or surprise! Rather, what happened is absolutely logical and
expected in order to solve this logical problem.

So if two logical and inevitable facts oppose each other, then we should
logically expect and anticipate the occurrence of an extraordinary
divine miracle. There should be direct divine intervention to solve this
contradiction and logical opposition.

2) We had previously deduced in the conclusion of the 1st research topic
of this case study the logic and essentiality behind the termination of
Awsiyaa and Wasayah (guardianship) with Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al
Mahdi (AFS). We had presented sufficient evidence and logical proofs to
support that idea. Then in the 2nd logical reasoning, we deduced the
necessity of having continuous guardianship and therefore, the
continuous presence of the Wasi which we had also presented logical
evidence and proofs.

By making those two logical conclusions, we have reached the same
situation of having two contradicting and opposing facts that are each
logical and expected to happen. After all, how will the guardianship be
terminated with the 12th Wasi and at the same time how will the
guardianship continue on with him such that there is no Wasi after him?
Surely, this is impossible to happen logically since these two facts are
certainly opposing each other! As we had explained in the first point,
we must logically expect the presence of a great divine miracle that
will solve this logical problem. So what could this inevitable miracle
be that will eliminate this problem? And how can we imagine it to be,
especially if we take into account the 3rd logical conclusion of this
case study which deduces that it is expected that Allah (SWT) protects
His Last Wasi by a miracle through hiding and occulting this Last Imam
and Wasi from the eyes of the people.

Let’s think more carefully to picture how the miracle of Allah (SWT)
will take place such that it satisfies both conclusions of termination
of Wasaya AND its continuation throughout time. It must satisfy the
conclusion we reached that the 12th Imam must be the Seal of Awsiyaa and
the Wasi’s presence must be continuous. In addition, appropriate
protection of the Imam is to conceal and occult him from the eyes of the
people. Sure enough, if we pondered over all of this, we will reach only
one possibility to solve these problems once and for all. This logical
and accepted solution is as follows:

Allah (SWT) will grant a miracle to the 12th Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan
Al Mahdi (AFS). He (SWT) will hide and occult him from the eyes of the
people for a specific period of time. During this period, the Imam will
carry out his role, then afterwards, Allah (SWT) will hide him
completely from the people. The Imam will still be present but cannot be
seen physically. However, he is the acting Wasi, the Rising one, and the
protector of the Message until the end of time.

This is the extraordinary miracle from Allah (SWT) which will accomplish
a satisfying solution. This solution assures that there is termination
of Awsiyaa with Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS). At the same
time, the mission of Wasaya and Wilayah will continue to exist under the
same Imam who is the Seal of Awsiyaa until the end of time. This way,
the Imam will be protected during the period of his presence so that he
can practice his role of direct guardianship from the oppression of the
tyrannical rulers. Thus, we can logically conclude that Allah (SWT) will
grant a miracle for the Seal of Awsiyaa that will take the form of
occultation of him from the eyes of the people, initially for a period
of time where he carries out his role and duties directly via disciples
and intermediates. These disciples are the only ones who will be capable
of seeing him. Then afterwards, there will be complete occultation in
the sense that the Imam will be completely hidden from the eyes of the
people. He will continue to live afterwards throughout time by the power
of Allah (SWT). However, he will be hidden and occulted and at the same
time, he will be practicing his role of guardianship but in an indirect
fashion. He is present until the end of time and this is the miracle
which is the sound judgment of the bare mind and intellect!

So if this miracle actually happened by Allah (SWT) in this form, then
it is not a surprise! In that case, it will be incumbent on us to
believe in it and accept it. On the other hand, if it did not yet
happen, we must anticipate its occurrence since it is in agreement with
the mind and logic. After all, there is no other way of solving this
logical problem except by this solution alone.

4) Sure enough, the miracle took place and the 12th Imam was saved by
complete occultation from the eyes of the people such that he continues
to live throughout time for the purpose of accomplishing continuous
guardianship. However, the logic and mind says that the miracle will not
be completed logically except by the return and reappearance of the Imam
to the people one more time. This way, the miracle will be apparent to
everyone. Otherwise, it will only be a fantasy or illusion that may be
seen as truth or falsehood. In such case, its true value and miraculous
aspect will become lost. After all, what value is the miracle of the
People of the Cave if Allah (SWT) did not awaken them from their sleep
and allow them to return one more time to the people? Also, what value
is the miracle of raising Prophet Jesus (AS) if he is not going to
return back and descend another time?

What is the miracle of Uzair if Allah (SWT) did not resurrect him after
100 years, restore life to him, and recreate his donkey in front of him
after it was only bones left? What value is the miracle of dividing the
sea for the sons of Israel if it was not completed by their successful
passover in crossing the sea to the other side safely, followed by the
perishment of their enemy? In all these scenarios, these miracles are
completed and they manifested itself and became apparent to everyone
that they are indeed miracles. No one can deny or refute it especially
since it is of human nature to deny and falsify anything that the eyes
can't see and hands can't touch.

Similarly, the miracle of Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) in being hidden and
occulted and living through all these ages is not completed logically,
EXCEPT by his return and reappearance to the people in the same
appearance and description which the people already know so that they
can recognize him. They know that he is occulted from them as that fact
is passed on to them by others. So if he reappears with the same
description and characteristics that are known to be attributed to him,
the miracle will be manifested and apparent to the people! Thus, they
will all have to submit and admit the greatness and power of Allah (SWT)
until the Day of Judgment.

4) As for the occultation and concealment of the Imam from the eyes of
the people, it had a beginning, so its situation is the same as
everything else. It must logically have an end! As we previously
mentioned, the logical phenomenon of things is termination and end, so
long as it has a beginning. Therefore, termination of occultation with
the reappearance of Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) is logically expected to happen.

5) We have an example in the ascension of Prophet Jesus (AS). This event
happened and it had a beginning, so it must also have an end. It is
logical that Jesus (AS) would eventually descend from the heavens
another time, even if Allah (SWT) did not inform us of that. Sure
enough, Allah (SWT) and the Last Messenger (SA) conveyed that to us, as
well as the Messiah himself who informed us of that event, including his
disciples and those who believed in him. They all mentioned this
prophecy and expected its occurrence. So, if we logically accepted that
and believed in it, then we must also believe in the return and
reappearance of Al Mahdi (AFS). We must accept that his occultation will
end sooner or later. Dear Muslims, how is it that you confirm the return
and descension of Prophet Jesus (AS) later on, yet at the same time, you
reject and refuse to accept the idea of Al Mahdi reappearing another
time?! Why is it that your minds do not question the first scenario and
you accept it as a fact? Yet, you reject the 2nd scenario which your
minds deny although the logic behind both scenarios is the same! If you
accept the first scenario, then it is logical that you must also accept
the second!

6) Allah (SWT) has confirmed His promise in the Holy Quran and He (SWT)
does not break the promise that every self will taste death. Imam Al
Mahdi (AFS) is a noble self just like any self, thus, he must die like
any other person. He is currently alive and occulted by the power and
miracle of Allah (SWT), yet the previous fact logically necessitates
that he must return and reappear, and then he must die just like all the
creatures die. In this manner, the promise of Allah (SWT) would be
fulfilled as it is logically expected. Without this event happening,
Allah (SWT) will have broken His Promise as He (SWT) allowed for a soul
to live eternally. It is logically impossible that Allah (SWT), who is
the Great and Powerful Creator, break His promise. Therefore, it is
logical that Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) must return and reappear so that he may
die just like everyone else before and after him. This is what happened
with the People of the Cave, and you don’t find change in the tradition
of Allah (SWT). Allah (SWT) saved them and put them to sleep for 309
years, but that did not prevent them from returning back to life and
waking up one day so that they may die afterwards just like everyone
else.

Based on this logic, we can also deduce the inevitability of the return
of Prophet Jesus (AS) to Earth after he was raised to the heavens, so
that he too can die like the rest of the people. As Allah (SWT) said in
his regards, “And peace on him on the day he was born, and on the day he
dies, and on the day he is set alive [19:5].” So his death is
inevitable, but how will Prophet Jesus (AS) die when he has been raised
to the heavens? It is inevitable that he must return and descend to
Earth so that he may die like all people. Similarly, the return and
reappearance of Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) is necessary and logical from this
same perspective.

7) We have already accepted and believed that Prophet Jesus (AS) is
alive in the heavens and receives his sustenance all these years and
ages, by the power of Allah (SWT). Based on that, why can’t we also
accept the fact that Al Mahdi (AFS) is alive too as he is present on
Earth and receives his sustenance through all these ages in time? If
anything, this is easier to believe and accept since life on earth among
the people while in the state of occultation, is easier to comprehend
than life in the heavens with the inhabitants of the heaven who are not
human! So if the power of Allah (SWT) allowed for that to happen with
Prophet Jesus (AS), then why wouldn't it repeat with Imam Al Mahdi (AS)
as there is no change in the tradition of Allah (SWT)? After all, if the
great power of Allah (SWT) was able to keep a person alive all these
years in the heavens, then it is also logically expected that this same
absolute power can keep a human being alive for a long time on earth!
This would be to demonstrate an flavor of the different types of the
divine capability, just as Allah (SWT) created a human being without a
father, namely Prophet Jesus (AS) so that He (SWT) may manifest all the
aspects of the absolute divine capability. Then, He created a human
being without a mother, and she is Eve (mother of Adam). And He created
a human being without father and mother, who is Adam. This way, all
forms of absolute divine power is demonstrated!

If Jesus (AS) remained alive in the heavens all these ages to be saved
from his enemies and for a great wisdom that relates to his
reappearance, so why wouldn’t we also accept that Imam Al Mahdi (AFS)
also remain alive on earth all these ages, since he is more worthy of
that? After all, the purpose is not only to save him from his enemies,
but it is to enable him to carry out his role of guardianship over the
Final Revelation and religion on Earth. However, this will take place in
an indirect and invisible manner during the period of his disappearance
and occultation.

Furthermore, we believe that the miracle of Allah (SWT) is keeping
Prophet Jesus (AS) alive all these ages in the heavens till Allah (SWT)
wills since he is the Last Prophet of Bani Israel. Then why do we find
it hard to believe that the miracle of Allah (SWT) is also keeping Imam
Al Mahdi (AFS) alive all these ages till the end of time? After all, he
is the Seal of Awsiyaa and the inheritor of all the knowledge of the
prophets, messengers, Awsiyaa, and Imams till the Day of Judgment! Since
we already witnessed a similar example of the divine power previously,
then why is it hard for us to believe that Allah (SWT) may repeat it
again as He (SWT) has already done it before?

Haven’t we seen time and time again that Allah (SWT) presents many
examples of His Power and Capability in creating life from dead, as He
(SWT) demonstrated to Prophet Abraham in restoring the life of the bird,
and to Prophet Jesus (AS) in breathing life into the dead and the
living? He (SWT) manifested His Capability to Uzair in bringing life
again to his donkey, and also to the People of the Cave after their long
period of sleep. So why does Allah (SWT) present all these examples?
Surely, He (SWT) presents them so that we may be assured that since
Allah (SWT) did it once, then He the Almighty can certainly do it again
on the Day of Resurrection! He (SWT) can bring life to the dead and
resurrect those in the graves.

As Allah (SWT) says in the Holy Quran, “Say: He will give life to them
Who brought them into existence at first, and He is cognizant of all
creation [36:79].” He also says, "And certainly you know the first
creation, why then do you not reflect [56:62]." For surely, it is easier
for the mind to believe that something can happen again if it already
happened once before. So there is no surprise or wonder in this aspect
and there is no room for denial!

8) Hence, the miraculous case of Prophet Jesus (AS) and Imam Al Mahdi
(AFS) is the same in that they both live for a long time over the ages
and centuries to come, except that one resides in the heavens, while the
other is present on Earth by the power of Allah (SWT). It is logically
expected that both of their reappearances occur at the same time by the
power of Allah (SWT). The mind and logic expects that Prophet Jesus (AS)
descend from the heavens at the same time in which Imam Al Mahdi (AFS)
reappears after his occultation on Earth. Since the miracles were
similar and unified, then why wouldn’t their times of appearance also
coincide with each other? Thus, Prophet Jesus (AS) returns by descending
and Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) returns by reappearing simultaneously.

This way, the Oneness of the Divine Creator is substantiated and the
completion of His Miracles confirms the unity of the religion, which is
Islam. By these miracles, He (SWT) would unite the monotheists and
believers in everyplace and the great benefit will be accomplished by
the return of both Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) and Prophet Jesus (AS) together.
This will be an extremely great and amazing miracle for everyone in that
both miracles will take place at the same time! The people will see with
their own eyes how the religions are united and terminated with the
inheritor of knowledge of the prophets, and the Seal of Awsiyaa of the
Final Revelation who will bring everyone together. This is the will of
Allah (SWT) for the people.

So in order to accomplish these goals and finally unite all of the
monotheists under one divine banner to fight the enemies of Allah (SWT)
and purify the Earth, it is logically necessary that we expect the
reappearance of Prophet Jesus (AS) and Imam Al Mahdi (AS)
simultaneously.

9) The Holy Prophet (SA) who is known to be the “truthful and honest
one,” have foretold the appearance of the Antichrist (Dajjal) at the end
of time who will misguide the people away from their religion. During
that time, he will spread corruption on Earth, so it is also logically
expected that his appearance will also coincide with the descension of
Prophet Jesus (AS) from the heavens and the reappearance of Imam Al
Mahdi (AFS) on Earth. Together, they will fight a holy war against the
Antichrist (Dajjal) and his supporters, after which mankind will rest
forever from his evil. This is also expected to happen logically based
on the current events.

10) Overall, as time passes, the Earth is increasing in oppression,
injustice, and corruption. The people are becoming more misguided and
are deviating from their religion, their Creator, and their morals, or
rather humanity. The arrogant are increasing in their arrogance, and the
weak and deprived are becoming more weak, oppressed, and deprived! As a
result, injustice and darkness are becoming more widespread with time.
This is what is observed ever since the departure of the Seal of Prophet
(SA) till now. So, until when will all that continue? It is logically
inevitable that it will eventually reach an end, as it is the norm with
everything.

There must come a time in which light and justice returns to Earth. A
time when truth is established and falsehood is nullified! A time when
oppression stops and the nonbelievers, arrogant, and oppressors are all
defeated! A time when the weak people and the believers attain victory
and finally become the inheritors and the Imams! A time when they will
be supported by Allah (SWT) and win a great triumph after being
oppressed, defeated, and deprived for a long time! Especially
considering that they were the main focus and concern of the messages
and revelations over time. So it is logically expected that a time will
come when their rights will be returned to them and they will attain
revenge from their oppressors. This way, the balance of justice will be
accomplished on Earth before the Day of Judgment.

Logic dictates that all of this will happen under the leadership of a
religious leader for them who will unite them all under his banner in
every place wherever they are. Under this leader, they will engage in
holy war of liberation and purification that will eradicate the roots of
injustice and evil which became widespread throughout the past
centuries. In its place, they will plant the seeds of goodness, love,
faith, and peace on Earth, as Allah (SWT) desires. Thereafter, the
absolute government of Allah (SWT) will be established on Earth, under
the Final Islamic Message. It will be run by its Wasi, Protector,
caretaker, and guider, and the Wali of the believers, the Imam of the
monotheists, Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS), who is the Seal
of Awsiyaa. He will carry the banners of goodness and blessings.

So, logic calls for the expectation of all that to take place, even if
it still did not happen since it is logical and rational. If it did
happen, then there is no wonder or surprise. And if it did not yet
happen, then we must expect and anticipate its occurrence. After all, it
is logical that the oppressors and those who committed injustice against
the people be accounted for their injustice and oppression. Justice must
be served in favor of those who were oppressed and defeated. The hearts
of those victims of injustice must be satiated as they have patiently
waited for the day in which Allah (SWT) will take vengeance for them
from those who committed injustice to them. Anything other than this is
illogical, or else the whole world will turn into a jungle where the
people fight each other endlessly. In such case, the people will strive
to attain justice on their own, from those who committed injustice to
them as they lost all hope in attaining justice one day in the future.

11) Can a person comprehend that Allah ((SWT) create the Earth and all
those on it along with the universe, without establishing a pure,
perfect, and righteous government for even a period of time that will
rule all of Earth? In this government, the divine code of conduct and
law will be established and run alone. Only Allah (SWT) will be
worshipped, and the Caliph on Earth will be the person whom Allah (SWT)
will allow him to inherit all the knowledge and virtues of the prophets,
messengers, Awsiyaa, Awliyaa, and Imams. So it is illogical that Allah
(SWT) end the life of this world without establishing His absolute just
Government, even if for a specific period of time. This government will
be a great paradigm of the divine wisdom for the existence of life and
the creation of man. So, will this government be led by someone other
than the Seal of Awsiyaa who should logically appear to lead and run
this divine government that will rule over the world for the first and
last time?

12) Prophet Joseph (AS) returned back once again after he was thrown
into the well and all hope was lost for his return. Prophet Moses (AS)
returned after his absence when he went to meet His Lord, and also after
his absence from Egypt when he went to the land of Madyan. Prophet Jonah
returned after his disappearance in the stomach of the whale. Prophet
Job (AS) returned from his absence after being subdued by the cursed
illness. With all that in mind, why wouldn’t the 12th Imam and the last
occulted Wasi also appear, as the other prophets did before him? After
all, every absent or hidden person must eventually return and appear one
day, and this logic is certainly agreed by the mind and sound judgment.

13) The return of the 12th Imam and the formation of the absolute
government of God, then the death of the Imam followed by the permanent
termination of guardianship…all that must logically happen at the end of
time. After that, there will only be a short period of time left before
the Day of Resurrection, during which there is the expected return
(Raj'aa) of all the Prophets and Imams to share the continuity of the
divine government. This period of time will be so short and it will be
at the end of time. The 12th Imam will appear at the end of time near
the end of the world. This is logical and is in agreement with our
previous deduction.

14) It is also logically expected that the Power and Wisdom of Allah
(SWT) must terminate the prophecies, revelations, and guardianships.
There must eventually be an end to the divine light, bounties, mercies,
grants, and guidance to human beings. Furthermore, it is expected that
it should end with a great miracle that extends through time and is
eternal such that it becomes a witnessed miracle at the end of time. So
if all of the prophets and Awsiyaa were granted miracles, then what
about that person who will conclude the relationship between the earth
and heavens and is the inheritor of all of the human representatives of
God? Don’t you think that such personality will carry the greatest,
long-lasting, and most amazing of miracles? Isn’t that expected to
happen logically and rationally? So if we really do hear about a
miracle, shall we then deny or wonder or claim that it is illogical? In
reality, it is very logical and can be deduced based on what we know
from the lives of all the prophets and Awsiyaa!

15) The verses in the Holy Quran indicate the continuous protection of
the Message and therefore, the presence of continuous guardianship. For
example, *“Surely, We have revealed the Reminder (the Holy Quran) and We
will most surely be its guardian* [15, 9].” And “*It is for us to
collect it and promulgate it* [75:17].” Also, there are verses which
indicate the establishment of the absolute government of Allah (SWT) and
of the weak people such as, *“And we desired to bestow a favour upon
those who were oppressed in the earth, and to make them the Imams and to
make them the inheritors* [28:5].”

So, who will be the leader of the oppressed people if he is not the Last
Wasi who shall appear at the end of time to lead them directly? And how
will the weak people inherit the Earth without the presence of the
inheritor of knowledge, virtue, and light of the prophets and Awsiyaa
before him? How will that happen without the presence of a person who
will terminate the chain of divine light from the heavens to the earth
so that he can be with them to guide them and be their caretaker? When
will this happen? And under whom will the absolute government of Allah
(SWT) become established if it is not in the hands of the Seal of
Awsiyaa who must reappear one day to carry out this final and conclusive
role? The holy verses of the Quran which are the Words of Allah (SWT)
stand as a clear and logical proof to the necessity of appearance of Al
Mahdi (AFS) after his occultation, so that he may lead the government of
Allah (SWT) on Earth and fill it with justice, light, and truth.

16) There are many successive narrations of the Holy Prophet (SA)
regarding the right of Imam Al Mahdi (AFS). Many narrations indicate
that he will emerge at the end of time to fill the earth with equity and
justice after it was filled with oppression and tyranny. These
traditions are unanimously agreed upon by all Muslims without division
since it is successive and reported from multiple sources. According to
some schools of thought, disbelief in the awaited Mahdi is even
considered to be deviation from the religion and Kufr (disbelief) since
that person would be contradicting a successive narration from the
Prophet (SA) that is unanimously agreed upon by all Muslims.

However, the disagreement happened when some Muslim scholars denied that
the awaited Mahdi is himself Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi, the
Seal of Awsiyaa. Of course, their denial was due to pressure and
influence from the oppressive and tyrant rulers. They claimed that the
Mahdi will appear at the end of time, he will be from Quraish, and that
he will be from the progeny of the Holy Prophet (SA). However, according
to them, he will be born and grow up as a normal child just like any
other person. This claim is rejected since it is illogical and
contradicts sound judgment. It disagrees with everything we logically
deduced earlier and we present the reasons for its irrationality as
follows:

First: The Awaited Mahdi will rule under the final Islamic message, so
therefore, it is logical that he will be one of the guardians and Imams
of the Final Message. We had previously deduced in the first logical
conclusion the reality that Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS)
is the last Wasi and there is no Wasi after him. So how can the awaited
Mahdi be a person other than this Last Imam and Wasi? Surely, the
Awaited Mahdi has to be a Wasi over the message! That is impossible
logically, so therefore it is rejected. Rather, it makes sense that both
are really one person who will return after occultation.

Second: If according to them, Imam Al Mahdi (AFS) is another person who
will be born and grow up like a normal human being and become the Wasi
over the Final Message, the question that poses itself is, how can he
become a Wasi when he lacks two of the logical attributes that we
previously concluded its necessity of being fulfilled in any Wasi? The
first condition is succession without any gap in time compared to the
Wasi before him. And the second condition is close attachment and direct
contact with the preceding Wasi to enable him to obtain the knowledge
from him completely. Therefore, he cannot be a Wasi and so he cannot
possibly be the awaited Mahdi who must be one of the Awsiyaa over the
message.

Third: If a young child was born and grew up like any other kid, then
where is the divine miracle that will accompany the Mahdi and will
thereby gather all the people together? A miracle that will accompany
the person who will have an army with which he will eradicate the roots
of injustice and defeat arrogance, oppression, and corruption!

Fourth: If the Mahdi was born as a child and grew into another person,
how can one guarantee that the people don’t think that he is another
prophet? After all, they may mistakenly take him as God or give him the
status of prophethood due to his vast knowledge and wisdom! In that,
there is great fabrication and danger to the nation! It is not logical
that Allah (SWT) subject his nation to such misguidance, and he is the
Most Wise and Most Merciful!

Fifth: Opening this door in front of the minds may set the standard that
every person who acquires a significant amount of knowledge in religion
is allowed to think that he is the awaited Mahdi. So long as the picture
itself is not clear to them, he may deceive and mislead others so that
they believe in him. Sure enough, that has happened as a result of
confusion. Over the years and centuries, many people claimed and are
still claiming that they are the awaited Mahdi and their followers
believed and sanctified them. Another group of people did not claim
that, but their followers later on claimed that they were the awaited
Mahdi, and so on and so forth. Opening this door gives the opportunity
for the foolish and ignorant, and all that is certainly not accepted by
the mind or logic.

Sixth: If the awaited Mahdi will be born as a child and will grow, then
how will the people identify him and with what signs will they recognize
him? After all, those people from Quraish are many and the descendants
of the Prophet (SA) are from several branches, and many of them are
false claimers. So how will the people be able to identify their real
Mahdi and Imam so that they can follow him? Furthermore, if they
followed him, will they be certain and sure of his identity such that
they are ready to present their lives between his hands? Will this
scenario be appropriate for the establishment of the absolute government
of Allah (SWT) on Earth, and the destruction of the thrones of the
arrogant and the oppressors? In this case, the Mahdi will find thousands
of people who doubt or deny him, so long as the matter does not have
clear evidence that cannot be denied or doubted.

Seventh: There are many reliable and successive narrations which
explicitly states that the Awaited Mahdi is the same person as Imam Al
Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi, the occulted one who will return and
reappear again. These narrations are cited in many books of the
well-known, trustworthy, and sincere scholars who refused to submit to
the pressure of the rulers. They refused to change the truth, modify, or
delete parts of the prophetic traditions. So why then, do we refuse
these narrations which draw a complete, logical, and realistic picture
that can be comprehended and accepted by the mind? Why do we instead
accept the incomplete, shaken, and doubtful picture that is distorted
and unclear to the mind?

After all, if a clear scenario for a logical event was presented to you
along with a shaky, incomplete, and vague scenario, which one shall you
logically choose? And which one will you abandon? So if the name of the
Mahdi is associated with the 12th Imam, then it is not logically
possible that someone other than the 12th Imam would be the owner of
this title or agnomen (kunya), since it was for him to begin with. This
is a proof for the mind that Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan (AFS) is indeed
the awaited Mahdi and no one else was ever given this name or title
before him. So what does that indicate to you?

Eighth: Is it comprehended that Allah (SWT) and the Prophet (SA) would
neglect this grave and decisive matter and allow there to be confusion
without clearly completing the prophecy? Would they leave the picture
blurred, disturbed, and ambiguous? This surely contradicts the logic as
well as the etiquettes of prophethood and prophecy! It goes against
what’s known and observed from the manners and speech of the Holy
Prophet (SA). After all, how can he relay a prophecy from his Lord that
is deficient and unclear? Will Allah (SWT) inspire the Prophet (SA)
something that is deficient? Surely, this is not permissible or logical!

Or do you think that Allah (SWT) would inspire to the Prophet (SA)
something complete, but the Prophet (SA) is the one who is making
changes such that it becomes deficient? This also is impossible, so the
mind and logic says that the Prophet (SA) must have clarified the whole
truth in many traditions numerously. He drew a complete picture and
narrated a full prophecy that is crystal clear. And if he conveyed it
unclearly or vaguely, then why didn’t his companions ask him for further
explanation knowing very well that they used to ask him about
everything, even the simple and trivial issues? Why didn’t they request
him to clarify for them the exact signs of the awaited Mahdi in detail?
After all, they were in hope that this honor would be granted to them or
be related to them in any way! All of this is certainly unlikely.

Rather, the only logic in front of us is that we accept the many
successive and authentic narrations that are reported from multiple
sources. We must accept these traditions which draw a clear and logical
picture for us and present a complete prophecy from the Seal of Prophets
and Messengers who does not speak out of his own desire. This way, the
weakness and poor logic of this silly claim becomes apparent.

Let’s also keep in consideration the political factors and great test
and mischief which followed, as well as the exposure of all the Awsiyaa
to injustice, oppression, and murder in the hands of the ruling power.
Not to mention the weakness of the self in front of money, in addition
to the presence of fake scholars who distort the religion and narrations
due to pressure from the rulers so that they can distant the virtue from
those who deserve it. Instead, they replaced them with distorted
narrations which they propagated among the people, just like what
happened in the Caliphate of the Holy Prophet (SA) when the divinely
appointed Caliph was denied his right for successorship!

Rather than following the divinely appointed Caliph, a replacement was
presented in such a way that the Caliphate was rotated among the Arab
tribes. So if we take all that into consideration, the picture will
become clear to us. It will be obvious why the narrations were
distorted, modified, denied, and deleted. The picture was shaken
intentionally because it could not be hidden completely, so they had to
resort to concealment of certain aspects of the truth which did not
serve their best interest and they put the truth aside wrapped in
vagueness, mysteriousness, and ambiguity. This was done for two main
reasons. First, to remove or distant the virtues from those who truly
deserve them since they pose a direct threat to the rulers. And second,
to open the door for all the Arabs from Quraish to think that they too
can compete for this honor and claim it one day if they found the
opportunity.

However, they plotted and planned and Allah too planned, and the best of
planners is Allah (SWT)! The truth is clear and falsehood is also clear.
The free and sane mind chooses its way smoothly if it is truly seeking
the light, the truth, and its One Creator. Glory be to Allah (SWT) who
is Exalted High above the partners they ascribe to Him!

17) All of the Awsiyaa relayed the same prophecy regarding the 12th Imam
Al Mahdi (AFS) and his occultation, followed by his expected
reappearance at the end of time. We have already believed in their
integrity as a whole and in the truthfulness of their Wasaya
(guardianship) based on logic and common sense, so they must be truthful
in this matter too! Namely, that Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi
(AFS) is the awaited Mahdi who is anticipated to emerge at the end of
time after the termination of his occultation. This logic is clearly
understood and accepted by the mind and sound judgment.

18) History testifies that occultation of Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al
Mahdi (AFS) really took place and that he introduces himself as the Seal
of Awsiyaa. This in itself is a great proof that logically calls us to
accept and believe that Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) is
indeed the occulted and awaited Imam and the Hujjah of Allah (SWT) over
His creation. He will return and appear at the end of time to establish
the absolute government of Allah (SWT) on Earth and fill it with equity
and justice, after it was filled with injustice and tyranny.

From the previous items 1-18, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

4rth Conclusion
---------------

The 12th Imam, Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) is the Awaited
Mahdi and he is the Imam of the Time and Age. He is alive and present,
but he is occulted and hidden from the eyes, by the power of Allah
(SWT). He will continue to be present while in the state of occultation,
as he practices his role of Imamate and guardianship over the final and
universal Islamic Message. However, he will perform his role in an
indirect way and this is the miracle of Allah (SWT) which is similar to
the ascension of Prophet Jesus (AS) to the heavens. Imam Al Hujjah ibn
Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) will reappear once again and his period of
occultation will terminate at the end of time. This event will coincide
with the descending of Prophet Jesus (AS) to Earth who will join him.

The 12th Imam will establish the absolute government of Allah (SWT) on
Earth. He will be surrounded by a group of true believers and the weak
and oppressed people in every place who will fight along with him. The
monotheists will gather around him and embrace the Final Islamic
Religion of Allah (SWT). He will take revenge from the oppressors and
take vengeance for the oppressed people. He will also overcome the great
test (fitna) of the Anti-Christ (Al Dajjal). Allah (SWT) will finally be
worshipped alone without any partner or associate, just as He the
Almighty (SWT) willed.

Imam Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (AFS) will fill the earth with
equity and justice after it was filled with oppression and tyranny.
Subsequently, life on earth will only last for a short period of time
during which the Raj'ah (return) will take place. Soon after, the Day of
Judgment will come and the trumpet will be blown which will be followed
by the agonies of the Day of Resurrection. This is a confirmed reality
that is based on all of the proofs and logical evidence. Therefore, it
is impossible to deny or refute it logically, mentally, or practically.

5th Research Topic - How Does The Awaited Mahdi Execute the Duties of Guardianship Over the Final Message While He is Veiled From the Eyes and Physical Senses?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Proposed Question:**

1) Is it possible that the Imam carry out the duties and mission of
guardianship during the time that he is occulted from the physical and
visual senses? How could it happen and in what way?

**Logical Reasoning:**

1) The coach of a soccer or basketball team or any other sport practices
his role of caretaking and guardianship over his team. He works on that
role during the whole game until he leads the team to victory or at
least accomplishes the best results and performance. Throughout the
game, he continuously practices that role without interruption, not even
for a moment. But is he physically present in the play field? Actually
not, he stays outside of the play field and is not present in it. The
players don't necessarily see the coach every moment during the game
since they are busy playing, performing, and exerting physical effort.
However, does the lack of the coach's presence inside the play field and
the players not seeing him every minute of the whole game prevent the
coach from practicing his role as the leader, caretaker, and guider of
the team?

The coach directs, coordinates, plans, instructs, and is obeyed by his
team even though he is outside the field. So how does the coach carry
out his role? He issues directions and instructions to the captain or
leader of the team who is present inside the sports field. The captain
in turn passes it on to all the team players so they can follow it. This
captain or leader of the team is usually appointed before the game and
he is usually one of the players and he makes sure that these orders are
obeyed. However, he is not any player as he is the most learned and
experienced of them. He is the most well-behaved, active and smart
player with a strong personality. The coach is not required to contact
each player of his team.

It is understood that as the obedience of the team to their coach
increases, the better the performance and the more the team gains
admiration from others, and the opposite is also true. The more the
players rebel against the orders of their coach, leader, and caretaker,
and the more negligent they are in carrying out his instructions on the
pretext that he is located out of the field and is not present in front
of their eyes and that they know better the affairs of the game since
they are present inside the field, the more they fail in performance and
dispute with each other and play without an organized plan. As a
consequence, they will lose the game due to poor performance and failing
results. If the captain or leader of the team assumed that he should act
as the Wasi and caretaker, or if he became greedy to assume that role,
or if he became arrogant over his co-players, and if he rebelled on the
coach who is seated outside the sports field, the team will be divided
and revolt will widespread which will eventually lead to chaos,
humiliating loss, and disappointment of the audience!

This is an example which helps bring the picture closer to the mind
regarding the ability of the guardian and caretaker to practice his role
and duties, even if he is not present inside the field of competition,
and even if he is not visually seen by every person at all times. It
also clarifies one of the ways by which he can accomplish that and what
the consequences would be if his orders and instructions were disobeyed
and he was prevented from performing his role. Even if he is not
physically present in the sports field, he closely follows every minor
and major event, he observes every detail and he reacts with every
incident and development by providing updated instructions, directions,
and guidance. His only goal is for his team to perform well and obtain
final and decisive victory.

All of that happens in a simple sports game. Then, imagine if the ‘game’
represents the struggle of the whole life itself, and if the sports
field is the world around us, and if the players are us ourselves, and
if the ultimate goal is to attain the final victory, salvation, and
eternal abode in Paradise as well as the pleasure of God who observes
our performance and efforts. In such case, don't we need a coach and
caretaker (in this case would be the Wasi and Imam) who would direct and
guide us even though he himself is not present inside the field? Nor is
he seen during the game, however, his existence is critical and
essential since he is the coordinator, organizer, guider, planner, and
caretaker from behind the scenes. Whoever obeys him will win and attain
salvation. And whoever revolts against and disobeys him will fail and be
misguided.

2) There is also the aviation controller who is seated in the aviation
controlling tower and observes and directs the planes that are arriving,
departing, landing, and taking off. To the plane and its pilot, this
controller is the one who acts as the caretaker and Wasi until the plane
arrives safely to its destination with all its passengers. He issues
instructions, orders, and directions to the pilot of the plane who
blindly obeys him because in that lies the safety of the plane and its
passengers. In this case, however, is that aviation controller
physically present inside the plane itself? And is he seen by the pilot,
crew, and passengers? Of course not, he is usually present in the
aviation controlling tower at the airport, but his location does not
prevent him from practicing the role of guardianship and caretaking over
the plane and its passengers.

So, isn’t it also fair to conclude that the presence or absence of the
Wasi and caretaker himself does not at all contradict his ability to
carry out of the duties of caretaking and guardianship. The question
that comes to mind is how does the aviation controller carry out his
duty when he himself is not present inside the plane? Rather, he
accomplishes that via electronic and wireless communication with the
pilot and the crew. This recent human technology are based on natural
phenomena which was present before the existence of man, but he simply
discovered it and learned how to use it. Surely, it is from the miracles
and secrets of Allah (SWT) in His universe and glory be to Him! If a
human being had informed people 200 years ago that this could be
possible, they would've accused him of being insane. And if he really
achieved it, they would've considered that a miracle from God. This is
only a tiny example of God's bounties which He (SWT) bestowed us and
does not even compose one drop from the oceans of divine knowledge. Then
imagine how the vast and all-encompassing knowledge of God is! Would it
then be appropriate for us to ask "how"?!

The pilot simply carries out the orders, directions, and instructions of
the aviation controller in the controlling tower. He doesn't question
him since he does not possess the information which the aviation
controller has. The orders and directions of the aviation controller
naturally changes and is updated every minute, rather every second with
changes in the status of the air traffic and the weather forecast. They
also change from one plane to another depending on the circumstances of
the air traffic and airlines. Now, if the pilot failed to perfectly
execute any instruction from the guardian and the caretaker at the
moment it is issued, a catastrophe may very well take place! And in
seconds, the plane and its passengers will have lost its way and perhaps
crash with another aircraft which may double the disaster! However, if
the pilot immediately abides by the instructions, then the plane and its
passengers will arrive safely to the airport without accidents, trouble,
or disaster.

So, if all that happens in just an air flight, then imagine if this
journey represents the struggle of life itself! If the plane represents
the life around us, and the passengers are us ourselves, and if the
ultimate goal is to arrive safely to a safe haven and desired
destination, then don't you think that we'll certainly need the
guidance, the aviation instructor, and caretaker who in this case is the
Wasi and Imam who directs and saves us even though he is not physically
present inside the plane, nor is he visually seen throughout the
journey? However, his existence is necessary and critical since he is
the coordinator, organizer, director, and caretaker from behind the
scenes. Whoever obeys him will attain salvation, and whoever revolts
against him and disobeys him will fail and be doomed.

2) There is also the gynecologist who follows the growth of an embryo in
the womb of its mother until it is born and sees the light and comes to
life safely. He gives the embryo full attention and follows every
development and event that happens to him during the period of
pregnancy. To the baby, this doctor is the one who plays the role of the
caretaker and the guardian until delivery takes place safely both to the
baby and the mother. The gynecologist continuously issues instructions
and directions to the mother and prescribes for her treatment,
investigation, and reports. At the same time, the mother obeys him
because in doing so, there is safety for her and her baby that is in her
womb. However, is that doctor (the caretaker and guardian) present
himself inside the womb of the mother? And is he seen by the embryo who
is being taken care of and looked over? Of course not! Rather, the
doctor is present in his office or hospital, but his location certainly
does not prevent him from practicing the role of guardianship and
caretaking over the embryo in the mother's womb.

Thus, the presence or absence of the Wasi and caretaker with the person
who is being taken care of does not contradict carrying out the duties
of his role as a guardian and caretaker. But how can the doctor carry
out his role of guardianship and caretaking of the embryo when each of
them are located at a different place and they never meet until the
moment of delivery?

Well, the doctor carries out his role through conveying the knowledge to
the mother and through continuous examination, checkup, and issuing
directions based on the status of the embryo, health of the mother,
change in circumstances, and age of the embryo. He accomplishes that
also through recent methods of investigation by which he can closely
follow the status of the embryo, although he is not physically present
with the embryo and does not see it directly. So from where did the
doctor gain the knowledge?! And what drives the mother to obey him? Who
permitted the discovery of sciences and laws upon which the modern
devices and equipment to screen the embryo was built on (ex: ultrasound,
genetic analysis, blood work, and different scanning methods)?

All that is from the miracles and secrets of God! So is it appropriate
to ask “how” when it comes to the power and miracles of Allah (SWT)?
This proof and evidence is very clear and we witness it every day
hundreds and thousands of time in every place of the world. One visit to
a prenatal care clinic is enough to discover the miraculous truth and
Glory is to Allah (SWT) who is Capable of everything!

Now, the mother simply obeys the instructions and directions of the
doctor. She doesn't question them since she doesn’t possess the
knowledge nor experience of the doctor who is like the “Wasi”, nor does
she possess what he possesses from resources and devices which Allah
(SWT) equipped him with. Through them, he sees what she does not see,
and so she surrenders to the instructions of the doctor who acts as the
Wasi and she submits to his leadership and obeys his directions by the
word. But if she disobeyed or didn't exactly carry out any direction of
the doctor (acting as caretaker and Wasi), this will immediately reflect
negatively upon her and her baby. Consequently, the pregnancy and
delivery may end in a tragic way for the mother, the baby, or both of
them! However, if she closely abides by the instructions of the Wasi who
is assigned and qualified, then the duration of pregnancy and the
delivery will proceed safely. The baby then will see the light of life
and the mother will recover peacefully.

If all these concerns is present in the duration of pregnancy, then
imagine if this pregnancy represents the struggle of life itself, and if
the uterus of the mother and her womb is the world around us, and if the
embryo is us ourselves, and if the ultimate goal is to exit safely from
this life and to be born safely in the Hereafter and live in the house
of peace in the kingdom of Allah (SWT)! Don't we then need the
obstetrician, caretaker, and guider who in our case is represented by
the Wasi and Imam? One who would take care of us and direct us with his
knowledge and with what Allah (SWT) placed at his disposal from the
extraordinary abilities and miracles, even if we do not see him
physically in front of our eyes? Whoever obeys him will have achieved
his goal and attained salvation. And whoever deviates and disobeys him
will fail and loose his way.

3) There is also the chief military commander who follows the progress
of war in the battlefield as well as the performance of his military
army until they achieve final victory. He oversees this army and
monitors every development and event during the battle. To the soldiers,
this chief military commander is the one who practices the role of
caretaker and guardian until he completes and achieves victory in the
war. He issues the directions and updated orders continuously to the
field commanders and they execute it with their soldiers. They must all
blindly obey him since there is safety for the army and troops by doing
so. However, is that chief military commander present physically in the
battlefield among the soldiers and is he seen by them all the time?! Of
course not!

Rather, the chief military commander is situated at the central command
headquarter, and this usually is a secret place which only few people
know and only few can see him. However, his absence from the battlefield
does not prevent him from practicing his role of guardianship over the
army and soldiers in the battlefield. Thus, the absence of the Wasi and
caretaker alongside the one who is being taken care of does not at all
contradict with carrying out his duties as a guardian and caretaker.
Now, how does the chief military commander practice his role as the
guardian and caretaker of the army and soldiers when he is not
physically present with them and they may not even meet him during the
battle, except maybe after the goal is accomplished and victory is
achieved?

Well, the military commander accomplishes that via ranks of officers in
the chain of command who conveys his orders from rank to rank until they
reach the smallest rank soldier for the orders to be carried out. He
accomplishes that also by his experience, wisdom, courage, bravery, and
military abilities upon which he was chosen for commandership. He
accomplishes that also through the continuous flow of information coming
to him from the battlefield and the surrounding areas. This information
reaches him through intelligence, satellites, and radars, etc. All of
that are from the recent technologies. From these pieces of information,
he can make changes in his decisions, design an alternate plan, change
tactics and movements, and then issue the orders that are for the
benefit and protection of the army and soldiers whom he is responsible
of.

So from where did the commander gain knowledge and wisdom, and who
inspired him? And who made the rank officers and commanders below him
submit to his obedience, and who established the natural laws upon which
all these recent technologies were built on? He is Allah (SWT) who is
capable of everything and controls the everything, and He (SWT) is the
organizer and planner of everything. Is it appropriate to still question
“how” and “in what way” if the question is in regards to the absolute
power and ability of Allah (SWT)?

The officers and soldiers simply carry out the orders and directions of
the chief military commander. They do not debate or argue since they are
not provided the knowledge of the guardian and the leader, nor his
wisdom, courage, expertise, or the information that he possesses about
the whole front, upon which he makes his decisions. So, they surrender
and submit to his orders and instructions carefully and exactly. And if
any of them, whether the rank officers or soldiers, disobeyed the orders
of the chief military commander even if in one issue or simple order,
the chain will fall apart and chaos will prevail. Rebellion will become
widespread, the branches of the army will tear apart, and the soldiers
will go astray. Defeat and failure will start to grow in the hearts of
the soldiers which will reflect negatively in the battlefield and in the
whole front. Retreat and tragic loss will be the ultimate result. But if
the orders of the guardian military commander are carried out carefully
and precisely in an organized manner, then the army will surely achieve
victory and reach the desired goal.

So if all that is present in a military battle, then imagine if this
battle represents the struggle of life itself, and the battlefield
represents the world around us. The army and soldiers symbolize
ourselves. The ultimate goal is to achieve victory over the Satan
(devil), the self, the lower desires, and the corrupt, and to achieve
the ultimate goal of pleasing Allah (SWT). Don't we then need the chief
commander, the guardian, the caretaker, and the instructor, who in this
case will act as the Wasi and the Imam who will take care of us, direct
and guide us through his knowledge, and through what Allah (SWT) enabled
him of miraculous abilities, even if we don't see him personally or
visualize him in front of us.?! Yet his presence is essential and vital!
Whoever obeys and submits to him will attain victory and get saved. And
whoever disobeys and rebels against him will fail, be defeated, and go
astray.

5) There is also the "remote control" which has recently been introduced
by man and many of the modern inventions and technology were built based
on this invention like an airplane which flies without a pilot, a boat
sails without a sailor, a submarine without a crew, a car without a
driver, a space craft that carry out discovery missions, electronics,
and children's toys, etc. This concept is built on the lack of need for
direct contact to control what we desire to control. So you can control
anything even if you are not in front of it, inside it, or near it!
Miles may even separate you from it! Despite the distance, you can
control that object and direct it as you please. This is very clear in
front of our eyes today which is represented in many of the modern
inventions. This is regarding controlling an object in another object,
or a human in an object or device, using applied physical sciences that
are built on divine, physical, and stable laws.

The role of guardianship and caretaking is in essence controlling,
managing, and directing. So why do we wonder about the possibility of
assuming or carrying out this role from a distance without seeing or
direct physical presence of the controller, while these materialistic
and worldly examples are in front of us? Especially if the guardian is
the true Imam and guidance who is enabled by the Lord of all Worlds.
After all, the thing which is being looked after is the final divine
message for all humanity. And the Assigner of the whole mission is the
Divine creator who is the Lord of all worlds, and the Lord of the laws,
and universe, and lord of the human who innovated the innovations and
invented the inventions!

6) Is it necessary for us to visualize all the different natural
phenomena in life in order for them to play their role?! For example,
you feel the effects of electricity, magnetism, gravity, heat, and
sound, etc., but you cannot see them. Similarly, bacteria, viruses, and
fungi all perform their roles which Allah (SWT) created them for without
enabling you to see them with your naked eye. So, now the question to
ask is: Does your lack of ability to see and visualize these things
prevent them from performing their different functions? Some of these
things affect you although they are far away and distant from you, like
sunlight and its heat, the gravity of the moon, and the earth's
magnetism. How does all that happen? Surely, all of these are signs that
testify first to the capability and power of Allah (SWT) who is the Only
Creator. And second, that it is unnecessary to have direct contact
between the affecter and the thing which is being affected. It is not
necessary to have direct contact between the controller and the thing
which is being controlled, or between the guardian and the person who is
being guarded.

7) Furthermore, the cursed devil carries out his role of misguiding the
human beings. However, is the devil visible to you? He whispers,
inspires, tempts, deceives, instigates, puts down, orders, forbids,
directs, and arouses the desires. But do you actually see him? And does
your lack of ability to see the devil prevent him from playing his
devilish role? That is just a question to ponder over. How does he
perform all these roles and in what way? Well, he is enabled by the
power of God who gave him ample time and empowered him, so what Allah
(SWT) willed happened. After all, if the matter boils down to the power
and capability of God, should we still question "how"? So if Allah (SWT)
enabled the devil to lure and misguide without being seen, couldn't He
(SWT) also enable the Imam and the guardian to guide and direct without
being seen? So if the devil was enabled, then it is all the more worth
it that the Imam become enabled even more so than what the devil has
been enabled. With the absolute power and might of Allah (SWT), there is
no need to question "how" or "in what way?"

8) Regarding the divine presence itself, Allah (SWT) is the Sustainer,
Caretaker, Guider, and Protector, etc. But does the fact that you don't
see the Divine Creator Himself prevent Him from assuming these roles?

9) The gradual transition between the Imams (AS), from the complete and
continuous presence (which was present in the beginning of the Imamate),
to the gradual decrease in this presence and attachment, especially
during the time of the 10th and 11th Imams, Al Hadi and Imam Al Askeri
(AS), respectively, up till the time of minor occultation of the 12th
Imam Al Qaem (May Allah hasten his reappearance). Did that prevent the
Imams from carrying out their roles as Awsiyaa over the message and
nation? Or did it lead to any deficiency in their performance compared
to what their noble fathers? Of course not! So, it is fair to conclude
that complete vision, or partial, or none does not at all effect the
performance of the Imam and Wasi as a caretaker. Through this gradual
decrease, Allah (SWT) demonstrates to us that visualizing is not a
requirement for the Wasi to practice his role. Its purpose was to set
the stage and train the nation for the period of occultation where the
Imam and Wasi practices his role completely without been seen or present
physically.

10) If the whole issue is divine, then we cannot ignore the miracles and
extraordinary aspects of it. That is, if we really believe in God and
His absolute attributes!

11) When discussing the performance of functions, it suffices to judge
by the results. In other words, did the function get done or not? As for
how this function has been accomplished, that is a secondary and
complementary question that is very specific. It is harmless if you do
not know the immediate answer to that question, so long as the function
itself is accomplished and the performer is known and trusted.

Consider this example:

Is it important to know how the pilot operates an airplane? Or is it
more important that the plane itself fly and reach its desired
destination safely, and to have confidence in the experience and
competence of the pilot himself? Surely, what's more important is that
the plane fly and reach its destination safely and to be sure that it is
operated by an efficient and experienced pilot. Regarding how the pilot
operates a plane, that is a secondary and more specialized question that
would not cross your mind to ask, so long as the function will get done
and the person who will perform the function is known and trustworthy.

Similarly, is it more important to know how a computer works, or that
the computer works and carries out its function and that you feel
comfortable with the company that will provide online service for your
computer? Long time ago, man didn't know how clouds and rain form, and
how oceans and rivers form, and how the sun rises and sets. Did this
lack of knowledge of "how" prevent him from benefiting from the water,
oceans, rivers, rain, sun, moon, night and day? Along the same lines,
when man didn't know how his organs function, did that prevent him from
benefiting from the functions of the different organs and systems of his
body?

Logic and sound judgment says that performing the function and the
identification of the performer and trusting him is generally what's
more important. As for the question "how", that is a secondary question
that is left for the professionals, specialists, and scientists, and it
is not a question to be posed to the general public. That's why when
Allah (SWT) designated Prophet Abraham (AS) as an Imam and close friend
and choose him to be from the special ones, Abraham then requested that
Allah (SWT) provide him the knowledge of "how". So he prayed, *"Oh My
Lord, show me how you give life to the dead."* So Allah (SWT) responded
to him, "Don't you believe?" And that response carries a confirmation
from Allah (SWT) that asking how is not important, rather having faith
is what's more important.

So, Prophet Abraham (AS) answered, *"Yes, but it is so that my heart
would feel reassured."* Meaning that with Allah's answer to his
question, he would be reassured that he has become from the very special
ones, since the special ones only are those who seek the knowledge of
“how” and are bestowed that knowledge. So, Allah (SWT) granted him the
knowledge of “how” which was simply represented by the power of Allah
(SWT) through "Be and It is". Glory be to Allah (SWT) the Strong, the
Magnificent, and He (SWT) is the True King!

12) Performing a function or task may be done in many different ways
without limit and that depends on the competence of the performer and
his nature. It also depends on the nature of the function itself, its
duration, its scope and importance. Then, it depends on the assigner who
will appoint the performer and assure the availability of the resources,
circumstances, and abilities. So if the assigner is none other than
Allah (SWT), the Capable Divine Creator, and if the performer is a
competent infallible Imam by the power of Allah (SWT) who is occulted by
divine miracle till the end of time, and if the task at hand is to
overlook over the final divine message and act as guardian sent to all
of humanity throughout time and age, is there any question left after
that regarding how the job will be performed? This is in light of the
knowledge that the assigner is the Lord of all Worlds, and the performer
is the best of all creation after his purified fathers, and the task is
the most important, greatest, and most complicated job and mission for
the benefit of man and creation till the end of time.

From the previous items 1-12, after thorough study and contemplation,
and after using our bare minds and logical reasoning, we can with all
confidence and faith conclude the following truth without any doubt:

5th Conclusion
--------------

The occultation of the 12th Imam Al Mahdi the Awaited one (May Allah
hasten his reappearance) from the physical and visual senses does not at
all prevent him or contradict with him carrying out the duties of
guardianship and mission of Imamate. As for how that happens, there are
many different ways but its most important is the miraculous power from
Allah (SWT) and divine enablement to the Imam and divine support to him
which makes "how" have no meaning to it in front of the absolute power
of Allah (SWT) who is the Lord of all Worlds. This is a confirmed
reality that is indicated by the observations, logical proofs, and thus,
it is not possible to contradict, deny, or cast doubt on it.

Dear Reader, in the end of this case study, both you and I can bear
witness to the last testimony by which we will have reached the safe
haven and approached the house of peace, by the Grace of Allah (SWT). We
can testify after complete conviction that is based on logical
reasoning, meditation, and pure thinking, and after getting rid of any
personal interests or fanaticism, and after depending on Allah (SWT)
firstly and on our minds and intellectual capabilities secondly without
being forced or pressured by anyone. We can bear witness with our bare
minds, intellect, with all our soul and with confidence and certainty
with what we’re about to admit that:

“There is no God but Allah, the One Creator who has no partner or
associate. He does not beget nor is he begotten, and that Muhammad is
His slave and messenger. He is the Seal of Prophets who delivered the
last, final, comprehensive, and universal religion that is directed to
all of humanity. The Awsiyaa over the Islamic Message after the Holy
Prophet (SA) are twelve. Their first is Ali ibn Abi Taleb, then Al Hasan
ibn Ali, then Al Husain ibn Ali, then Ali ibn Al Husain, then Muhammad
ibn Ali, then Jafar ibn Muhammad, then Musa ibn Jafar, then Ali ibn
Musa, then Muhammad ibn Ali, then Ali ibn Muhammad, then Al Hasan ibn
Ali, then Al Hujjah ibn Al Hasan Al Mahdi (May Allah’s peace and
blessings be on all of them).

They are the Imams and Awliyaa by the order of Allah (SWT). Their
obedience is obligatory and incumbent on us since they are the Awsiyaa
over the Final Revelation. Their last Wasi who is the Awaited Mahdi is
currently present but he is hidden and occulted from the eyes. He is the
Imam of the Time by the power of Allah (SWT) and He is the Sustainer and
Wasi over the Last Religion. He will return at the end of time and
reappear after his occultation by the power of Allah (SWT) to establish
the absolute divine government on His Earth, to attain final victory for
the oppressed and weak people and to raise God's word.

The 12th Imam will fill the earth with equity and justice after it has
been filled with oppression and tyranny, by His Will. We have testified
to that, believed in it, and accepted it. And if we lived long enough
and caught up with the time of his appearance, we will certainly be from
among his supporters, believers, and soldiers. We will sacrifice
ourselves for him with our bodies, blood, and money. May Allah (SWT)
bear witness to our testimony!”


