Surah Bayyinah, Chapter 98
==========================

**(The Clear Evidence)**

**Number of Verses: 8**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The contents of the Surah attests to the fact that it was revealed in
Medina, because, the People (Jews and Christians) of the Book (the
Scripture) are repeatedly talked about, and we know that at the time of
revelation the communication between the Muslims and the people of the
Book occurred mostly in Medina.

Furthermore, the words of the Surah are both about prayers and alms. It
is true that the duty of paying the alms-tax was issued in Mecca, but
the act of spreading this idea with the necessary formalities, was
extended in Medina.

In any case, this Surah refers to the universal message of our holy
Prophet (S) in the same line of prophecy that the Jews and Christians
received their scriptures. They should have prepared themselves for the
Advent of the greatest and last of the prophets, but when the awaited
Prophet, whom they were waiting for, came with clear signs and
evidences, they rejected him, because they were not really searching for
truth; they only followed their own desires to gain worldly profits.

By the way, this Surah shows the fact that the doctrine of the prophets
such as Faith, monotheism, prayers and fasting are eternal and
unchangeable principles in all Divine religions.

In another part of the Surah the different reactions of the pagans and
the People of the Book, regarding the invitation to Islam, are referred
to saying that those who believe and do righteous deeds are the best of
all creatures, and those who disbelieve and refuse to worship Him are
certainly the worst of all creatures.

The most popular titles of this Surah are: ‘Bayyinah’, ‘Lam Yakun’, and
‘Ghayyimah’; titles which come from the text, itself.

The Virtue in Studying Surah Bayyinah
-------------------------------------

On the virtue in reciting this Surah, there is a tradition from the holy
Prophet (S) who has said:

*"If people knew how blessful this Surah is (Bayyinah), they would leave
their property and family to learn it”.*

Someone from the' Khaza'ih’ people asked:

*"O Messenger of Allah! What is the reward for reciting it?".*

He (S) answered:

*"Neither a hypocrite nor those in whose hearts contain doubt about
Allah recite it. By Allah, the near-stationed angels have been reciting
it from the time the heavens and the earth were created and do not
languish in its recitation.*

*There will be no servant who recites it at night but that Allah sends
angels who protect him in his Faith and his present life and that seek
forgiveness and mercy for him; and when on the day he recites it, he
will be rewarded as much as what the day sheds light upon and what the
night darkens.”*[^1]

Surah Bayyinah, Verses 1-5
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَكُنِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ
مُنفَكِّينَ حَتَّى تَأْتِيَهُمُ الْبَيِّنَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَسُولٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ يَتْلُو صُحُفًا مُّطَهَّرَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيهَا كُتُبٌ قَيِّمَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تَفَرَّقَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا الْكِتَابَ إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ مَا
جَاءتْهُمُ الْبَيِّنَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أُمِرُوا إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ مُخْلِصِينَ لَهُ الدِّينَ
حُنَفَاء وَيُقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَذَلِكَ دِينُ
الْقَيِّمَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Those who reject (Truth) from among the People of the Book and
the polytheists were not going to depart (from their ways) until there
should come to them Clear Evidence,"***  
***2. “A Messenger from Allah, reciting pure scriptures;"***  
***3. “Wherein are laws right and straight.”***  
***4. “Nor were those divided who were given the Book, except after the
Clear Evidence had come to them.”***  
***5. “And they were ordered no more than that they should worship Allah
(alone) being sincere to Him in obedience, upright, to keep up prayer,
and pay zakat (poor-rate) and that is the religion right and
straight.”***

### The Religion Right and Straight

At the beginning of the Surah the situation before Islam, the People of
the Book and the pagan Arabs, is referred to.

It says:

***"Those who reject (Truth) from among the People of the Book and the
polytheists were not going to depart (from their ways) until there
should come to them the Clear Evidence,”***

***"A Messenger from Allah, reciting pure scriptures;"***

***"Wherein are laws right and straight.”***

Yes, they said that they were convinced of the coming of the Prophet of
Islam (S), but later when his heavenly Book was revealed the
circumstances changed and they differed in their ideas about the
religion of Allah.

It says:

***"Nor were these divided who were given the Book, except after the
Clear Evidence had come to them.”***

Thus, the aforementioned verses reveal that the claim of the People of
the Book and the disbelievers was that they insisted on a prophet having
clear evidences to accept. But, when the clear evidence, Islam, and the
awaited prophet, in the person of Muhammad (S) arrived, they rejected
the religion of Islam and resisted the Prophet except for a minority of
them.

The preceding verse is similar to the content of Surah Baqarah, No. 2
Verse 89 which says:

***"And when there comes to them a Book from Allah, confirming what if
with them, although from of old they had prayed for victory against
those without Faith, when there comes to that which they (should) have
recognized, they refuse to believe in it, but the curse of Allah if on
those without Faith.”***

We know that the People of the Book expected such an Advent and too, the
Pagan Arabs, who knowing the People of the Book to be more learned than
themselves, customarily followed the same idea and adopted it as their
own, but after reaching their goals they changed the way and joined the
opponents.

A group of commentators have another idea on the contents of these
verses. They say that the objective meaning is that the mentioned
people, not simply by mere claim, but, in actuality, did not leave their
old belief until they had clear evidences.

This statement means that after having such clear evidences they
accepted the Prophet, but this contrasts with the following verses which
indicate that they did not. Or, it may be said that the objective
meaning is that some of them believed, though they were in the minority.

But, this idea seems improbable and perhaps it was for the same reason
that Fakhr-i-Razi in his commentary considered the first verse which to
him is in contrast with the next verse, one of the most complicated
verses of the Qur'an and then, in order to solve the problem he gave
some explanations the best of which is the very one that we have
mentioned above.

A third commentary exists which says that the objective meaning is that
Allah does not leave the People of the Book and disbelievers to
themselves unless He completes the argument; sends them an evidence, and
shows them the straight way. For this reason He sent the Messenger of
Islam to guide them.

In fact, this verse is a reference to 'the principle of favor' which is
discussed in 'speculative theology' and states that Allah sends clear
evidences for every sect to complete the argument.

In any case, the meaning of /bayyinah/, here is 'Clear Evidence' and
whose example, according to the second verse, is the Messenger of Allah
(S), himself, who had at his disposal the Holy Qur'an for his teachings.

The term /suhuf/ is a plural form of /sahifah/ which means 'a leaf or
page of a book', or 'some leaves of paper on which something is written'
and here it means 'the contents of them', because we know that the holy
Prophet (S) could not read anything from the pages and therefore, was
teaching the 'contents' of them.

And the purpose of using the term /mutahharah/ is that it was exactly
the very truth, the original Word of Allah, in its purity, without
corruption having polluted it, and far from the evil hands of Jinn and
the human race; as is mentioned in Surah Fussilat, No. 41, verse 42:

***"No falsehood can approach it from before or behind it...”***

Now, Verse 3

***"Wherein are laws...”***

refers to the fact that, in these scriptures, there are, without doubt,
decrees contained therein that are right and straight.

Therefore, /kutub/, here means 'what is written', or it means 'the laws
or decrees appointed by Allah', because / kitabat/, in Arabic, has been
used in the sense of 'prescribing a decree' as in Surah Baqarah, No. 2,
verse 183:

***"O ye who believe! Fasting is prescribed to you as it was prescribed
to those before you that ye may learn self-restraint.”***

Then, the term /qayyimah/ means 'smooth, straight, right, strong,
confirmed, valuable, worthy' or all these meanings collectively.

It is also probable that since the Qur'an contains all that the former
scriptures had, besides many other additional points, then, it is said
that therein are the right ordinances of the past.

It is worthy to note that in the first verse 'the People of the Book' is
mentioned prior to 'the polytheists' but, in the fourth verse only 'the
People of the Book' is mentioned and while 'polytheists' is not stated,
the verse refers to both of them.

Apparently, these differences may be for that, in this matter, the
People of the Book were the main rejectors and the polytheists were
their dependants; or for that the People of the Book deserved more
blame, because they had many men of knowledge among them and had a
higher standard of theology than the polytheists therefore, their
rejection was more disgraceful and blameworthy.

Then, the Qur'an reproaches 'the People of the Book' and the polytheists
saying:

***"And they were ordered no more than that they should worship Allah
(alone) being sincere to Him in obedience, upright, and to keep up
prayer, and pay zakat (poor-rate) and that is the religion right and
straight.”***

On the phrase

***/wa ma umiru/ "and they were ordered no more",***

some have cited that the purpose of using this phrase is that the People
of the Book already had the three eternal principles in their own
religion: Unity of God, prayer, and alms. These are some fixed
principles, but those people were not true to their promise concerning
these principles.

Furthermore, the same decrees, in Islam, are, also, pure monotheism,
prayer and alms which are the same eternal principles. So, why did they
refuse to accept them?

Using this phrase, then, seems more suitable, because, /umiru/
‘ordered', refers to the acceptance of the new religion, that which was
mentioned in the preceding verse, over which 'they divided'.

Some of the commentators believe that using the word /din/ ‘religion',
here means 'worship' and the phrase 'no more than that they should
worship Allah (alone)’, confirms this idea.

The term /hunafa/ is the plural form of /hanif /derived from /hanaf/
‘pure in faith' and as Raqib cites in Mufradat it means 'to decline from
aberration to the straight way'. All those who make pilgrimage to Kaaba
or were circumcised were called /hanif/, by the Arabs, referring to the
fact that they had believed in Abraham's religion.

On the whole, this word in lexicology and in various dictionaries
originally means 'crookedness or inclination', but, in the Qur'an and
Islamic traditions it has been used with the sense of 'declining from
polytheism and inclining toward monotheism and the straight way'.

The phrase 'the religion right and straight' denotes that those
principles, i.e., pure montheism, prayers and alms, are eternal and
unchangeable in all religions, or it can be said that they are found
within the nature of all human beings.

So, the destiny of Man leads him to monotheism and his nature invites
him to being grateful to his Lord, knowing His divine essence, and
further, Man's social spirit calls him to the service of the deprived by
practicing deeds of charity.

Therefore, the root of these characteristics, in general, exists in all
humans and that is why these laws are also found in the teachings of all
the former prophets and are the core in the teachings of the Prophet of
Islam, Muhammad (S).

Surah Bayyinah, Verses 6-8
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ وَالْمُشْرِكِينَ فِي
نَارِ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أُوْلَئِكَ هُمْ شَرُّ الْبَرِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمْ
خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَزَاؤُهُمْ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ جَنَّاتُ عَدْنٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا
الْأَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا رَّضِيَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُمْ
وَرَضُوا عَنْهُ ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ خَشِيَ رَبَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***6. “Surely those who disbelieve from among the People of the Book and
the polytheists shall be in the fire of Hell, therein dwelling forever;
they are the worst of all creatures.”***  
***7. “Surely those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the
best of all creatures.”***  
***8. “Their reward with their Lord will be Gardens of eternity, beneath
which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever; Allah is well-pleased with
them and they are well-pleased with Him. That is for him who fears his
Lord and Cherisher.”***

### The Best and the Worst Creatures

In the former verses, it was mentioned that the people of the Book and
the polytheists were waiting for clear evidence to be sent by Allah, but
when it came they were dispersed and everyone went his separate way.

In the following verses, from the point of Faith in truth, people are
divided into two groups believers and disbelievers, and then the fate of
each is pointed out.

At first it says:

***"Surely those who disbelieve from among the People of the Book and
the polytheists shall be in the fire of Hell, therein dwelling forever,
they are the worst of all creatures.”***

The term /kafaru/ ‘they disbelieved', here refers to their blasphemy
rather than their being Muslim, otherwise their previous infidelity was
not a new matter.

The phrase

***“They are the worst of all creatures"***

is a startling statement which shows that among all the living and
non-living creatures there is nothing worse than those who left the
right path and went astray after the truth became clear and the argument
and reason became complete.

This is, in fact, like that which is mentioned in Surah Anfal, No. 8,
verse 22:

***"For the worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the
dumb. Those who understand not”.***

Or similar still, to what Surah A'raf, No. 7, verse 179 says after
referring to the people of Hell with the same characteristics:

***“...they are like cattle, nay more misguided: for they are heedless
(of warning)”.***

There is also a point in the current verse which goes beyond these
matters, because it introduces them as

***“The worst of all creatures",***

and this is, indeed, a statement of evidence for their perpetual stay in
the fire of Hell.

And why not! They were the worst of all creatures, because all the means
of salvation were being prepared for them, but they refused it
intentionally, due to their pride, deceit and enmity.

In this verse, again, the phrase 'the People of Book' is mentioned prior
to 'polytheists' perhaps for the reason that they had heavenly Books and
learned men among them and also possessed some signs and information
about the Prophet of Islam which were clearly mentioned in their Books.
Therefore, their rejection was more hideous and indecent.

In the next verse, the contrasting group, who are in a higher position,
are referred to.

It says:

***"Surely those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the best
of all creatures.”***

Then their rewards are pointed out:

***“Their rewards with their Lord will be Gardens of eternity, beneath
which rivers flow, therein dwelling forever; Allah is well-pleased with
them and they are well-pleased with Him. That is for him who fears his
Lord and Cherisher".***

This high rank and the splendid, unparalleled rewards are for the one
who fears his Lord:

***"That is for him who fears his Lord and Cherisher".***

It is worthy to note that when speaking about the righteous, it also
mentions 'doing good deeds', which is in fact the fruit of Faith, and
indicates that a mere claim of Faith is not enough. Man's conduct should
adapt to this Faith, too. But blasphemy itself even with the lack of
evil action causes aberration in Man and this is apart from the fact
that blasphemy is usually the source of many kinds of sin, crimes, and
wrong actions.

The phrase:

***“They are the best of all creatures"***

clearly shows that good believing people who do righteous deeds are even
higher than the angels, because the verse is general and there is no
exception made in it.

There are other verses, also, that are witness to this idea like the
verses concerning the prostration of the angels to Adam, and the verse:

***"We have honoured the sons of Adam...”***[^2]***.***

However, in this verse, the material and physical rewards of the
righteous; gardens full of different blessings in Heaven, are mentioned
first, and then, their spiritual reward is referred to, that is;

***“...Allah is well-pleased with them and they are well-pleased with
Him".***

They are well-pleased with Allah because whatever they have asked of
Him, He has given them and if they erred He forgave them by His Grace.
What pleasure can be better or higher than that one feels that his
beloved, his Lord, accepts him and is pleased with him and he succeeds
to be close to Him.

Yes, the Paradise, for Man's body, is the eternal Gardens of the next
world, but the Paradise for his soul is the Lord's pleasure.

The sentence:

***"That is for him who fears his Lord and Cherisher"***

shows that all these gifts come into being because of the existence of
the 'fear of Allah' since it is the motive of all obedience, piety, and
righteous deeds.

It should also be noted that the 'fear of Allah' is the fear to offend
His holy Law, the fear to do anything which is against His holy Will.
Such fear is akin to love; for with it dawns the consciousness of
Allah's loving care for all His creatures.

Some of the commentators have combined this verse with Surah Fatir, No.
35, Verse 28:

***“...those truly fear Allah among His servants, who have
knowledge...”,***

and have concluded that Paradise is, in fact, the incontestable right of
the scientists and learned people.

Of course, regarding the fact that the 'fear of Allah' has stages and
degrees as well as knowledge, which has hierarchies too, the meaning of
this statement is clear.

By the way, some believe that the position of /xasiyat/ is higher than
that of /xauf/ because the latter is used for any fear, but the former
is a kind of fear mixed with exaltation and respect.

### Explanation: Hazrat Ali (as) and His Followers are 'the Best Creatures'

There are a great many narrations quoted by famous Sunnite and Shi'ite
sources in which the verse:

***“...they are the best of all creatures"***

is rendered to mean Hazrat Ali (as) and his followers.

Hakim Haskani Neyshaburi, one of the famous Sunnite scholars, in the
fifth century A.H., has cited some narrations with different references
whose number is more than twenty in his well-known book
Shawahid-ut-Tanzil.

The following are some examples:

1. Ibn-Abbas says that when the verse:

***"Surely those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the best
of all creatures"***

was revealed, the holy Prophet (S) told Hazrat Ali (as):

*"It is you and your followers who will come on the Day of Reckoning
when you and your followers are well-pleased (yourselves) and
well-pleasing Him and your enemy will come angrily pushed (into
Hell)”.*[^3]

2. Abu Barazah has narrated a tradition from the Prophet (S) who recited
the verse and said:

*“They are you and your followers. O' Ali! The appointment for you and
me is (beside) the Pool of Abundance"*[^4]

('Haud' is the pool of 'Kawthar').

3. Jabir-ibn-'Abdillah-Ansari narrates in another tradition that they
were sitting with the holy Prophet (S) in the Sacred House when Ali (as)
came to them.

As soon as the Prophet (S) saw him, he said:

*"My brother is coming to you".*

Then, he turned toward the Ka'ba and said:

*"By the Lord of this Structure! Surely this man and his followers will
be triumphant on the Day of Judgement".*

Then, he addressed them and added:

*"By Allah! Truly he was formost to all of you in believing in Allah;
and among you all he is the most correct in obeying Allah; the most
faithful in fulfilling the covenant of Allah; the hardest to the decree
of Allah, the best distributor of the (treasury) in equality, the
justest to the citizen and the most important in position with Allah".*

Jabir said it was then that Allah sent down the verse:

***"Surely those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the best
of all creatures",***

and from then on whenever Ali came, the Helpers of the Prophet (S) would
say:

*“The best of all creatures next to the Messenger of Allah came".*[^5]

The descent of this verse, in Mecca, does not contrast with the idea
that the Surah is Medinan, because it might have been revealed, again,
there. Further, the descent of this verse might have happened on one of
the holy Prophet's trips from Medina to Mecca, in particular that the
reporter of the narration is 'Jabir-ibn-'Abdillah-Ansari' who joined the
Prophet (S) in Medina. Then, terming these kinds of verses 'Medinan' is
not improbable.

Some of these traditions are cited by 'Ibn-Hijr' in 'Sawa'iq' and some
others by 'Muhammad Shablanji' in 'Nur-ul-Absar'. [^6]

A great part of the last narration is narrated from Ibn- 'Asakir, from
Jabir-ibn-'Abdillah by Jalal-id-Din-Suyuti in Durr-ul-Manthur.

4. It is narrated from Ibn-'Abbas in Durr-ul-Manthur that when the
verse.

***“Surely those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the best
of all creature."***

was revealed the holy Prophet (S) told Ali:

*"It is you and your followers who, on the Day of Reckoning are
well-pleased (yourselves) and well-pleasing (Him).”*[^7]

5. In another tradition, the above mentioned person narrates from
Ibn-Marduyah from Hazrat Ali (as) that the Prophet (S) had told him
(Ali):

*"Have you not heard the word of Allah:*

***'Surely those who believe and do righteous deeds, they are the best
of all creature'?***

*You and your followers are those and the appointment place of mine and
yours will be at the Pool of Abundance'. When I come for the account of
nations you will be invited in the case that your foreheads are white
(to be known)”.*[^8]

Many other Sunnite scholars have also cited the same meaning in their
works including: Khatib Kharazmi in 'Manaqib', Abu-Na'im Isfahani in'
Kifayat -ul -Khisam', 'Allamah Tabari in his famous commentary, Tabari,
Ibn- Shabbaq Maliki in 'Fusul-ul-Muhimmah', Allamah Shoukani in'
Fath-ul-Qadir', Shaykh Sulayman Qanduzi in 'Yanabi' -ul- Mawwadah',
Alusi in' Ruh -ul -Ma'ani', and some others.

In conclusion, the above mentioned tradition is one of the famous
traditions that is accepted by a great many scholars of Islam. And this,
in itself, is an important, matchless excellence for Hazrat Ali (as) and
his followers.

By the way, this narration makes this fact clear that the term 'Shi'ah'
was applied and was spread among Muslims by the Prophet (S), himself, at
that time, and it refers to the particular followers of
Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali (as).

### The Necessity of Intention in Adorations

Some of the scholars of the principles of Islamic Jurisprudence have
taken the verse:

***"And they were ordered no more than that they should worship Allah
(alone) being sincere to Him in obedience...”***

as an evidence for (niyyat) 'intention' with divine motive being
necessary in 'worship' and this depends on the word 'din', here to be
meant 'worship' so that it becomes a reason for the necessity of
sincerity in worship.

We should also take the term

***/amr/, 'command'***

in this verse, unlimited in order to have a sense of necessity of
intention with divine motive in all commands. However, the meaning of
the verse does not seem to be either of them, but the purpose of the
verse is to prove monotheism in contrast with polytheism. It means they
are only invited to monotheism.

### The Wonderful Heights and Depths to Which Man Can Reach

We understand, clearly, from the verses of this Surah that there is no
creature in the world like, Man to be able to gain the highest ranks and
being the best of all by doing righteous deeds, (note that 'righteous
deeds' includes all good deeds; not only a part of them), and if he goes
on the path of blasphemy and aberration he will fall so deep that he can
be the worst of all creatures.

The vast, great distance between these two extremes of highness and
lowliness of Man; although a very sensitive and dangerous status for
him, indicates his dignity and capability of development. It is natural
that Man, with such an efficiency and extraordinary potentiality, is
also quite close to the possibility of extraordinary aberration.

Supplication
------------

*O Lord! We look to You, Your Grace, to gain the high rank of “The best
of all creatures".*

*O Lord! Count us among the followers of the man who deserves this title
the best.*

*O Lord! Endow us with such a sincerity that we worship and love nothing
but You.*

[^1]: Majma’ al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 521

[^2]: Surah Bani Israel, No. 17, verse. 70

[^3]: Shawahid-ut-Tanzil, vol. 2, p. 357, tradition 1126.

[^4]: Shawahid-ut-Tanzil, vol. 2, p. 359, tradition 1130.

[^5]: Shawahid-ut- Tanzil, vol 2, p 362, tradition 1139

[^6]: al-Sawa'iq ul Muharraqah, p 96, and Nur-ul-Absar, p 70, 101

[^7]: Durr-ul Manthur, vol 6, p 379

[^8]: Ibid


