Surah Asr, Chapter 103
======================

**(Time)**

**Number of Verses: 11**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

It is known that this Surah was revealed in Mecca, though some
commentators have also said that it is probably Medinan. Its short
verses, as well as its tone and style, attest to the first idea, too.

In any event, the completeness of this Surah is so much that, according
to some commentators, all the knowledge and objectives of Qur'an are
briefly gathered in this single Surah. In other words, this short Surah
leads Man to a total complete program for his happiness.

It begins with a meaningful oath to 'Time', whose commentary will be
delivered later, to refer to the loss existing in nature along the
gradual path in the lives of all human beings except for the persons who
have: Faith, good deeds and who enjoin on each other truth, and enjoin
on each other patience. These four principles involve, in fact, the
theological, practical, personal, and social doctrine of Islam.

The Virtue of Studying Surah 'Asr
---------------------------------

On the virtue of reciting the Surah, a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as)
says:

*"He who recites (Surah) 'Asr, in his optional prayers, Allah will raise
him with a shining, bright face, cheerful features, and delighted eyes
(looking upon the blessings of Allah), until when he enters Paradise on
the Day of Judgement.”*[^1]

It is obvious that these honours and pleasures belong to the one who
practices these four principles in his life and does not suffice only to
the mere reciting of the Surah.

Surah ‘Asr, Verses 1-3
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْعَصْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَتَوَاصَوْا
بِالْحَقِّ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالصَّبْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “By Time",***  
***2. “Surely man is in loss,"***  
***3. “Save those who believe and do good deeds, and enjoin on each
other truth, and enjoin on each other patience.***

### The Only Path to Salvation

At the beginning of this Surah we are faced with a new oath, thus:

***"By Time,"***

The term /‘asr/ literally means 'to press, to squeeze' and then, it has
figuratively been used for 'evening' meaning 'the affairs of the day are
rolled and squeezed into the evening'.

After that the word has been used in the sense of -absolute time, in
general; the course in the history of Man or a part of it, such as the
appearance of Islam and the Call of the holy Prophet (S), and the like.
This is why commentators have provided different probable meanings for
the commentary of the oath which are given as follows:

1. Some have rendered it to mean the time of 'evening' with the evidence
that in some other verses of the Holy Qur'an an oath is taken to the
beginning of the day, like Surah Duha, No. 93, verse 1:

***"By the Glorious Morning Light",***

or Surah Muddaththir, No. 74, verse 34:

***"And by the Dawn as it shineth forth".***

This oath is made due to the importance that this time of day has, since
this time is the time when the regularity in the life of Man varies;
daily activities end, people return to their homes, birds and cattle
come back to their shelters, the sun sets on the horizon in the West,
and night gradually falls.

This variation attracts Man's attention to the endless, everlasting
power of Allah dominating over this regularity. It is, indeed, a sign
out of the signs of the Divine Unity that deserves an oath to be taken
to.

2. Some others consider it to be the

***'Time'***

through the ages of the history of Mankind, which is full of lessons and
teachings from the startling events which have occurred. For the same
reason, it has such a dignity that matches the Divine Oath.

3. Some have emphasized on a proper part of the time like the Age of the
Holy Prophet (S) or the Rise of the twelfth Imam, 'Mahdi' (as), which
has peculiar specialities and a definite glory in the history of Man, to
which, they say, the oath refers to. [^2]

4. Some have also referred to the original meaning of the term and say
that the oath points to the various kinds of stresses and difficulties
that happen during the lives of people which awaken them from their
neglectful sleep, reminds them of Allah, and develops the spirit of
patience and constancy in them.

5. Some other commentators have taken it to mean 'the chosen ones' who
are the 'pick of the crop' in the world of creation.

6. And finally, some others have rendered the word' 'Asr' to mean the
ceremonial afternoon prayer for its special importance among the
obligatory prayers, because they interpret /salat-i-wusta/, on which the
Qur'an emphasizes particularly, as afternoon prayer.

The above ideas are not contradictory to each other and they may be all
correct for the meaning of the verse, and the oath could be taken to the
whole of those important matters, but among all of them the most fitting
one is 'Asr with the meaning of

***'Time'***

and the history of Man; because, as it was said repeatedly before, the
oaths of the Qur'an are in relation to the subject that the oath is
taken for, and it is certain that the loss human beings incur in their
lives is the consequence of passing their lifetime, or passing the Age
of the Call of the Prophet (S), because the command of 'four
principles', mentioned in the, last part of the Surah, was revealed in
that very life.

Referring to the above explanations, it makes the greatness of the
Qur'an and the vastness of its meaning clear when one word of it is so
expressive and deserves so many profound and diverse interpretations.

In the following verse it refers to the object that this great oath is
made to. It says:

***"Surely man is in loss".***

They, willy nilly, will lose the capital of their existence. Hours,
days, months, and years of life pass quickly, spiritual and material
potentialities decline and abilities fade.

Yes, Man is like a person who possesses great capital and without his
permission and will, every day, a portion of that capital is taken away.
This is the nature of life in this world; the nature of continual loss.

The term /xusr/ as well as /xusran/, as Raqib cites in his book,
Mufradat, means 'declining the capital'. Sometimes it is concerned with
humans and it is said that such and such a person has suffered loss; and
sometimes it is concerned with the action, itself, and it is said that
the persons' bargain showed a loss. This word is often used for outward
capital such as wealth and position, but it is sometimes used also for
inward capital, like that of health, wisdom, faith and reward.

This is the same thing that Allah has referred to as 'the evident Loss'
in Surah Zumar, No. 39, verse 15; where it says:

***“...truly those in loss are those who lose their own souls and their
people on the Day of Judgement: Ah! That is indeed the (real and)
evident Loss!”***

Commenting on the verse under discussion, Fakhr-i-Razi cites:

One of the old scholars said that he had learnt the meaning of this
verse from an ice-seller who had been calling again and again:

*'Have pity on him whose capital is melting'.*

He said to himself that it was the meaning of

***'surely man is in loss'.***

Time passes and one's lifetime ends, but, he does not obtain any reward.
Then, he, in the case, is in loss. [^3]

However, according to Islamic world-view, this world is a market of
bargaining, as a tradition from Imam Ali-ibn-Muhammad Naqi (the tenth
Imam) (as) says:

*“The world is a market wherein some people gain and some others
lose".*[^4]

The verse under discussion denotes that all lose in this market except a
select group of people, whom will be referred to in the next verse.

Yes, there is only one way to avoid this great compulsory loss; the only
way which is pointed out in the last verse of the Surah.

It says:

***"Save those who believe and do good deeds, and enjoin on each other
truth, and enjoin on each other patience".***

In other words, the thing that can change this great loss to profit, a
wonderful gain, is that in place of losing this capital we try to obtain
a more valuable and better capital in order not only to fill its empty
room, but, also to earn something thousands and thousands times better
and more valuable than that.

Every breath we take is a step toward death, as Hazrat Ali (as) says:

*“The breaths of man are his steps (put forward) towards his
death".*[^5]

Of course, nothing can match the priceless capital of Man; his
life-time, save the pleasure of being close to Allah with gaining His
pleasure.

Or, as Hazrat Ali (as) has said:

*"Verily there is no price for you save Heaven. Beware not to sell it;
save for it".*[^6]

There is reason for one of the names of the Hereafter being

***/yaum-ut-taqabun/ ‘a day of mutual loss'***[^7]***,***

a day when it will be made clear who has lost.

The beauty of the matter is in that on the one hand, the buyer of the
capital of the souls of the believers is Allah, the Almighty, as Surah
Taubah, No. 9, Verse 11 says:

***“Allah hath purchased of the Believers their persons and their goods;
for theirs (in return) is the Garden (of Paradise)...”***

On the other hand, He buys the little and small materials, too, when it
says:

***"So, whoever has done an atom's weight of good shall behold
it”***[^8]***.***

And further, He pays a great deal for a little; sometimes tenfold and
sometimes upto seven hundred times as much, or more than that.

For example:

Surah Baqarah, No. 2, Verse 261 says:

***“...of a grain of corn: It groweth seven ears, and each ear hath a
hundred grains. Allah giveth manifold increase to whom He
pleaseth...”***

Still more, having given all the capitals to us He, Himself, is so
Gracious that He purchases them back for the dearest price.

### Explanation: Salvation Through Four Principles

It is interesting that the Holy Qur'an offers a complete program with
four principles which can make us free from that great loss.

The first principle is Faith which forms the basis of all activities of
Man, because all the practical movements he has originate from his
theological doctrines, outside the realm of animals whose movements are
from their instincts.

In other words, the actions of Man are reflections of his beliefs and
thoughts. For the same reason all prophets used to improve the basis of
the Faith of their people first and before anything else, and worked
especially against blasphemy which is the source of many kinds of
corruptions and miseries.

It is interesting to note that Faith, here is mentioned in an abstract
form in order to include the Faith in all things sacred, like belief in
Allah and His attributes, belief in the Hereafter and Reckoning, reward
and punishment, the Divine Books and prophets as well as their
vicegerents.

In the second principle it refers to the worthy product of the fruitful
tree of Faith, the Good Deeds.

What a vast and expressive sense the phrase

***'good deeds'***

is!

Yes, verily

***'good deeds'***

are indeed not only 'worthy deeds', adorations, charity for the sake of
Allah, Holy War on the path of Allah, and learning divine knowledge, but
it also includes every worthy action that can be a means applied in the
way towards soul-perfection, moral improvement, nearness to Allah, and
the progression of the human society in all fields.

This meaning envelops all good deeds from even the tiny ones like moving
a troublesome stone out of people's way to saving millions and millions
of men from aberration, perdition and going astray.

When in a tradition from Imam Sadiq (as)

***'good deeds'***

is rendered into 'equivalence and generous help to bretheren', it is a
statement of a clear example.

Sometimes 'good actions' may be issued by some unbelieving persons, but
this behaviour is not certainly so profound and vast, because they are
not based deeply on divine motives, thus they are hollow.

The Holy Qur'an has mentioned the word /salihat/ particularly in the
plural form and especially with (al **ال**) at the beginning with the
meaning of 'generality' and indicates the fact that the shield against
that natural automatic loss is, next to Faith, the fulfillment of all
good deeds, and not to suffice just one or a few of them. and truly, if
Faith settles deeply in the soul of a person, this very effect will be
produced in him.

Faith is not a mere single thought or belief in the mind, free from any
affect, it changes the whole entity of Man to, its own essence.

Faith is like a bright lamp inside a room which not only gives light to
the room, but the beams penetrate through all the windows and spaces to
the outside so that everyone who passes by, outside, can realize the
existence of that bright light inside the room.

Similarly, when a person has the light of Faith bright inside his soul,
his tongue, eyes, ears, hands and feet reflect that light to others and
the movements of every limb, outside, show that there is a light inside.

For that reason, in the verses of Qur'an the words

***'good deed'***

and

***'Faith'***

often come together as interdependent; for example, Surah 'Nahl, No. 16,
verse 97 says:

***"Whoever works righteousness, man or woman, and has Faith, verily, to
him will We give a new Life, a life that is good and pure...”***

Also, in Surah Mo'minun, No. 13, verses 99 and 100, the wrong doers,
after departing from this world, regret that they had not done good
deeds, so, they insist on saying:

***“...O' my Lord, send me back (to life),"***

***"In order that I may work righteousness in the things I
neglected...”***

Again, in the same Surah, verse 51, Allah bids to His apostles:

***"O ye apostles! Enjoy (all) things good and pure, and work
righteousness...”***

And since

***'Faith'***

and

***'good deeds'***

cannot endure in a society unless there is an invitation to the right
and truth, and the acknowledgement of it, on the one hand, and an
invitation to patience and constancy along the path of the achievement
of that invitation, on the other hand, for completing the first two
principles,

***'Faith'***

and

***'good deeds',***

the second two principles are, now, pointed out.

The third principle, the general invitation of all to

***'Truth'***

is referred to, so that all the members of the human race will fully
recognize right from wrong and observing it will never forget it
throughout their lives.

The term /tawasau/ is based on /tawasi /and as Raqib cites in Mufradat,
it means 'to enjoin or recommend to one another'.

The term /haqq/ means 'Truth' or 'adapting to Truth'. There are twelve
meanings used or applied for this term in the Holy Qur'an, as are
mentioned in 'Wujuh-i-Qur'an', such as: Allah, Qur'an, Islam, theism,
justice, truthfulness, sincerity, clarity, obligation and the like, all
of which refer to the root word mentioned above.

In any case, the phrase /tawasau-bil-haqq/ has such a vast meaning that
includes both 'enjoin the good and forbidding of wrong' and 'guiding
with teaching the ignorant' or 'admonishing the neglectfull' and
'encouraging and preaching Faith together with good deeds'.

It is needless to go into the details about those who enjoin on others
truth, because it is understood that they should be advocators and
administrators of it in their own lives.

The fourth principle is based on patience, perseverance, and enjoining
these on each other. Next to the acknowledgement of them, in the course
of practice, everyone faces with some difficulties which need patience
and constancy, otherwise, he can never adjudicate and do a righteous
deed or preserve his Faith.

Yes, adjudication and execution of truth and fulfilling it in the
society is not possible, except by a common decision and having
constancy and perseverance against the problems.

The word

***'patience',***

here has a vast meaning that involves both the patience of obedience and
the patience against motivations of committing sin, and patience for
bitter happenings like losing members, forces, wealth, etc.

Regarding what was said here about the four principles towards
salvation, which are truly the most complete program for men to follow
in their lives, it makes it clear why some narrations denote that the
followers and companions of the holy Prophet (S) used to recite Surah
'Asr when they reached each other or before saying good-bye and
separating from each other, they reminded each other of the magnificent
content of this short Surah.

Verily, if the Muslim believers of today would carry out these four
principles in their personal and social lives, their problems and
difficulties will be solved, their retardation will be amended, their
defeats will be changed to victories, and the vice of their wickedness
will be removed from them.

Supplication
------------

*O Lord! Bestow on us the patience and constancy needed for accepting
and supporting the Truth.*

*O Lord! All of us are in loss and it is impossible for us to recompense
it save with Your Grace.*

*O Lord! We wish to follow the content of the four-principle-command in
the Surah; please help us to be successful.*

[^1]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 545.

[^2]: Nur-uth- Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 666, tradition 5.

[^3]: Tafsir-i-Fakhr-i-Razi. vol. 32, p. 85.

[^4]: Tuhaf-ul-'Uqul, p. 361.

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Saying 74.

[^6]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Saying 456.

[^7]: mentioned in Surah Taqabun, No. 64, Verse 9

[^8]: Surah Zilzal, No. 99, Verse 7


