Surah Nasr, Chapter 110
=======================

**(Help)**

**Number of Verses: 3**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

This Surah was revealed at Medina after the migration of the Prophet (S)
from Mecca to Medina. It contains the glad tidings of a great victory
for Islam, after which, people, in droves, flocked to the banner of
Islam.

Then, to thank Allah for that great gift, the holy Prophet (S) is
invited to

***'glorify'***

and

***'praise'***

Allah, and to pray for His

***'forgiveness'.***

There were many victories for Islam, but no triumph was as important as
the bloodless conquest of Mecca, especially the Arabs believed,
according to some narrations, that if the Prophet of Islam (S) could
conquer and capture Mecca, then, it was a sign of his legitimacy because
if he were not right, Allah would not let him do so, as He did not allow
Abrahah and his great force to destroy the Ka'ba. It was for this reason
that the Arab pagans entered Islam, in groups, after the conquest of
Mecca.

Some have said that this Surah was revealed alongside the 'Hadibiyyah
Peace'; six years after migration and two years before the conquest of
Mecca.

But, it is completely improbable to say, (as some have said), that it
was revealed at the time of the farewell Pilgrimage after the conquest
of Mecca, in the year 10 A.H. because, the ideas involved in the Surah,
which inform of the incidents regarding the future, not the past, do not
fit with this meaning.

One of the names of this Surah is /taudi'/ ‘leave-taking',” because it
implicitly implicates the death of the Prophet (S).

A tradition indicates that when this Surah was revealed and the holy
Prophet (S) recited it to the followers, they all became happy, but
Abbas, the uncle of the holy Prophet (S), began shedding tears. The holy
Prophet (S) asked him why he was crying. He answered that he supposed
the Surah contained the implication of the Prophet's death.

And he (S) said:

*"It is so, my uncle"*[^1]

The commentators are divided on how this meaning is understood, from the
Surah, when there is nothing apparent in it to imply the idea. The Surah
is wholly about the victory, and it seems that the Prophetic mission of
the holy Prophet (S) is completely fulfilled and his religion is fixed.
It is clear that in such a case the departure of the Prophet (S) from
this fleeting world to the next, eternal world, is completely
predictable.

The Virtue of Studying this Surah
---------------------------------

A tradition from the holy Prophet (S) says:

*"He who recites it (Surah Nasr), it is the same as if he had been with
the Messenger of Allah (S) at the conquest of Mecca".* [^2]

Another tradition from Imam Sadiq (as) says:

*"He who recites Surah Nasr in his optional*[^3] *or obligatory prayers,
Allah makes him successful in defeating his enemies, totally, and on the
Day of Judgement he will come with a letter which talks. Verily Allah
has brought him out of his grave with that letter as an immunity from
the heat and fire of Hell...”*[^4]

It is clear that this virtue and honour is for the person who, with
reciting it, follows the way of the Messenger of Allah (S) and practices
his religion and his tradition, not only suffices its recitation with
the tongue.

Surah Nasr, Verses 1-3
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا جَاء نَصْرُ اللَّهِ وَالْفَتْحُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَأَيْتَ النَّاسَ يَدْخُلُونَ فِي دِينِ اللَّهِ أَفْوَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ وَاسْتَغْفِرْهُ إِنَّهُ كَانَ تَوَّابًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “When there comes the help of Allah and victory",***  
***2. “And you see people entering Allah's religion in multitudes",***  
***3. “Then celebrate the praise of your Lord and seek His forgiveness,
(for) surely He is Oft-returning (to mercy)”.***

### Allah's Help Brings Multitudes to Allah's Religion

***"When there comes the help of Allah and victory",***

***"And you see people entering Allah's religion in multitudes".***

***“Then celebrate the praise of your Lord and seek His forgiveness,
(for) surely He is Oft-returning (to mercy)”.***

In these three short, but, expressive verses, there are some elegant,
elaborations whose careful observation helps us to understand the final
goal of the Surah.

In the first verse, it says that the victory belongs to Allah.

It is not only in this occurence that this meaning is mentioned, but, in
many other verses of the Qur'an the idea is reflected, including Surah
Baqarah, No. 2, verse 214:

***“...Ah! Verily the help of Allah is, (always) near!";***

and Surah Al-'Imran, No. 3, verse 126; and also Surah Anfal, No. 8,
verse 10, says:

***“...there is no help except from Allah...”***

It is true that preparation and supplying forces are necessary for
defeating the enemy, but a believing person knows the victory comes only
from Allah, and for the same reason when victory comes he does not
become deluded or proud, but thanks and praises Allah...

In this Surah, the words are about, at first, the help of Allah, then,
the victory, and then, the influence and spread of Islam, and finally,
the entering of people, in groups, into the religion of Allah. All of
them are causes and effects for each other.

Victory is absent unless there is the help of Allah, and people do not
enter Islam in multitudes unless there is triumph and victory in order
to remove the barriers and hindrances from the way. Of course, along
with these stages, each of which is a great, divine blessing, the stage
of being thankful and praising Allah; comes forth.

On the other hand, the help of Allah; and the victory are all for the
final goal, i.e., people entering Allah's religion in multitudes, and
guidance for all.

Victory, here is stated in general, and with some evidences that were
mentioned before, the purpose is, undoubtedly, the conquest of Mecca
which had such a wide effect and verily, the conquest of Mecca
introduced a new chapter in the history of Islam, because the main
center of polytheism was disturbed; idols were destroyed; the hope of
the idol worshippers changed into disappointment; and the barriers in
the way of people's faith in Islam were removed.

That is why the conquest of Mecca should be considered as a stage of the
settlement of Islam in Arabia and then, in the world. It was after the
conquest of Mecca that no opposition from the pagans was seen (except
once, which was quickly controlled) and people from all parts of Arabia
came to the holy Prophet (S) to accept Islam.

There are three important instructions, in the verse, given to the holy
Prophet (S) (and naturally to all believers) which are, in fact, a
gratitude for this great victory and an appropriate response to the help
of Allah: the instructions of celebrating, praising, and seeking His
forgiveness.

This great victory caused the polytheistic thoughts to disappear; the
perfection and beauty of Allah to become more clear; and those who had
lost the right way to return to the truth.

Further, it is possible that at the time of victory, some disgraceful
behaviour appears in a person and he becomes involved in pride and
self-conceit, or tries to take revenge and clear the personal accounts
against his enemy.

These three instructions train him 'to remember the attributes of
perfection and the beauty of Allah at the sensitive moments of victory';
and 'to know all of the effects from Him'; and 'to seek His forgiveness
in order to both remove pride and negligence from himself; and avoid
revengefulness'.

It is certain that the holy Prophet (S) of Islam, like all other
prophets (a.s.), was sinless; then what is the instruction of seeking
His forgiveness for?

To answer this question, it should be said that this is a model for the
whole community, and on the part of a sinless, infallible one like the
holy Prophet (S) and his Ahlul-Bait (as) who have already been purified
by the Lord, Himself[^5] will mean seeking further grace and greater
blessings or futher protection of the Lord against the forces of Satan.

Here, /istiqfar/ means holy Prophet's beseeching the protection of the
Lord, for himself and his followers, against the forces of evil, and
seeking pardon of the Lord on behalf of his faithful adherents who,
might have been prey of human weakness, as did Moses for his people who
had yielded to the worship of the calf.

The phrase

***/innahu kana tawwaba/ ‘surely, He is Oft-retuming (to mercy)’***

is the statement of reason in proportion to 'seeking forgiveness', that
is, seek forgiveness and repent because Allah is Oft-returning
(merciful)’.

By the way, it may also refer to the meaning that 'when Allah accepts
your repentance, you, too, should accept the repentance of the guilty
after victory, as far as you can, and do not repulse them from
yourselves as long as there is no sign of offence or plot coming from
them.’ So, the holy Prophet (S), himself, on the event of the conquest
of Mecca, showed the feature of Islamic grace and mercy to his defeated,
hostile enemies at its highest standard.

It was not only the holy Prophet (S) who celebrated Allah's grace and
glory on his final victory against his enemies, but all prophets
throughout history also did so.

For example, when Joseph (as) became exalted in Egypt and his parents
and his brothers succeeded in seeing him after a very long time, he
said:

***"O my Lord! Thou hast indeed bestowed on me some power, and taught me
something of the interpretation of dreams and events, O Thou Creator of
the heavens and the earth! Thou art my Protector in the world and in the
Hereafter. Take Thou my soul (at death) as one submitting to Thy Will
(as a Muslim), and unite me with the righteous"***[^6]***.***

Or, when Solomon (as) saw the throne of Bilqis (Queen of Sheba) ready
before him, he said:

***“...this is by the grace of my Lord! -to test me whether I am
grateful or ungrateful!...”***[^7]***.***

The conquest of Mecca was the greatest victory. After that conquest,
whole tribes from all parts of Arabia gave their allegiance to the holy
Prophet (S), collectively, and before his earthly ministry was finished,
the ground was prepared for the introduction of Islam to the world.

What was the lesson to be learned from this episode in world history? It
was not about Man's self-glory, but humility; not power, but, service;
not an appeal to Man's selfishness or self-sufficiency, but, a
realization of Allah's Grace and Mercy, and the abundant outpouring of
Allah's Praises in word and conduct.

Supplication
------------

*O Lord! You are able to give that glory back, again, to Muslims under
the light of following the traditions of the Apostle.*

*O Lord! Set us among the true advocates of the Messenger of Islam.*

*O Lord! Bestow on us such a success that we can spread Islamic Justice
in the world so that the people of the world eagerly accept it in
multitudes.*

[^1]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 554. (also see Al-Mizan, vol. 20, p.
532. )

[^2]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 553.

[^3]: See footnote 1 in Surah Ma'un, page 249, of this volume.

[^4]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, 553.

[^5]: 33:33

[^6]: Surah Yusuf, No. 12, verse 101

[^7]: Surah 'Naml. No 27, verse 40


