Surah Ikhlas, Chapter 112
=========================

**(Monotheism)**

**Number of Verses: 4**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

This Surah, as its name indicates, is about the Unity of Allah, and His
Oneness. In its four verses, the Surah describes monotheism completely.

Occasion of Revelation of the Surah
-----------------------------------

On the occasion of revelation of this Surah, a tradition from Imam Sadiq
(as) says:

***"A Jew asked the holy Prophet (S) to describe the identity or to
relate the geneology of Allah. He remained silent and gave no answer for
three days, then, the Messenger Angel brought (him) this Surah and he
(S) gave them their answer.”***[^1]

Some other narrations denote that the Jew who asked this question was,
Abdullah ibn Suriya, one of the known chiefs of the Jews. Another
narration says that 'Abdullah ibn Salam asked this question from the
holy Prophet (S), in Mecca, and believed (in Islam). But, he kept his
faith concealed.

Another narration says that the pagans of Mecca asked such a
question.[^2]

In some narrations it is also said that the Christians of Najran asked
the question.

There is no contradiction in these narrations because the question may
have been asked by all of them, separately, which is, itself, an
evidence to the extraordinary importance of this Surah, which answers
the questions of different persons from various groups.

The Virtue of Studying this Surah
---------------------------------

On the virtue of reciting this Surah, numerous narrations from the holy
Prophet (S) and Ahlul-Bait (as) are cited in Islamic sources which refer
to the extraordinary greatness of the Surah. The author of
Atyab-ul-Bayan Commentary, collected 25 of them.[^3]

The holy Prophet (S) is narrated to have said in a tradition:

***"Is there anyone of you unable to recite one third of the Qur'an in
one night"?***

One of his listeners asked:

***"O Messenger of Allah! Who is able to do that"?***

The Prophet (S) said:

*"Recite*

***'Say: He, Allah, if One! (Surah Ikhlas)”.***[^4]

A tradition says that the recitation of this Surah, when arriving at a
home, causes the increase of sustenance and removing poverty from the
people therein.[^5]

There are ninety different traditions and narrations mentioned, with
their approved references, on the virtue and commentary of this Surah in
Tafsir-i-Nur-uth- Thaqalayn.[^6]

On the idea that reading this Surah is equal to one third of the whole
Qur'an, some have said that it is for the reason that the Holy Qur'an
contains ordinances, creeds, and history, and this Surah states the
creed part in an intensive form.

Some others have said that the Qur'an is made up of three main themes;
origin, end, and what is in the middle between these two, and this Surah
is about the first theme.

This meaning, that about one third of the Qur'an is the description of
monotheism, is also acceptable; the extract of which has come in this
Surah.

In conclusion, of this statement, we cite a tradition on the splendor of
the Surah.

Imam Ali-ibn al-Husain az-Zain-ul-Abideen (as) was asked about Surah
Ikhlas (Monotheism), and he said:

*"Verily Allah, the Almighty and Glorious, knew that at the end of time
there will come some people who will be precise and careful (in
affairs), then, He sent down the Surah (Ikhlas), and the beginning
verses of Surah Hadid up to*

***'And He has full knowledge of the secrets of (all) hearts'.***

*Everyone who seeks beyond this will perish".* [^7]

Surah Ikhlas, Verses 1-4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Say: He, Allah, is One,"***  
***2. “Allah, the Eternal,"***  
***3. “He begets not, nor is He begotten,"***  
***4. “And there is none like unto Him.”***

The first verse of this Surah, is an answer to the repeated question of
many persons from different groups of people or tribes who asked about
the attributes and identity of Allah.

The command is:

***"Say: He, Allah, is One,"***

It begins with the Arabic term

***/huwa/ ‘He'***

which is a pronoun-third-person-singular and refers to something known
to all, but ambiguous and not identified with any, as against the usual
reference in the term of first person singular ‘I’.

It is, indeed, a code referring to the fact that His Holy Being is
extremely concealed and no human thought or imagination can touch it,
though the signs of His Existence have filled the world, totally, and
are more apparent and clear than all things, as Surah Fussilat, No. 41,
verse 53 says:

***"Soon will We show them Our Signs in the (furthest) regions (of the
earth), and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to them that
this is the Truth...”***

Then, it makes this unknown fact manifest by saying that

***'Allah is One'.***

By the way, the term /qul/, here means 'express thisfact and tell
others'.

A tradition from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says that after expressing
this statement he has said:

*"Pagans and idol worshippers used to point to their idols using
demonstrative pronouns and say:*

*'O Muhammad, these are our gods that can be seen. You, too, describe
your God so that we can see and understand'.*

Allah revealed these verses:

***'Say: He, Allah, is one',***

and the /h/ in the word /huwa/ refers to the confirmation of the matter
and takes it into consideration. And /w/ is a third person pronoun which
refers to the meaning that it is concealed from the sight of the eyes
and it is beyond the limits of the touch of the senses".[^8]

In another tradition, Imam Amir-ul-Mo'mineen Ali (as) says:

*"On the night before the battle of Badr I saw 'Khidr’ in my dream. I
asked him to teach me something with which I would defeat the enemies.*

*He told me:*

*‘Say: /ya hu ya man la huwa illa hu/.’*

*The next morning I told the Messenger of Allah (S) what had happened,
and he (S) said:*

*'O Ali, you have been taught the Greatest Name (of Allah)’.*

*Thereafter, I repeatedly said the phrase in the battle of Badr ".*[^9]

When 'Ammar Yasir heard that Hazrat Ali (as) was reciting this phrase,
habitually, while he was fighting on the day of Siffin, he asked him
what it was, and Hazrat Ali (as) replied:

*"It is the Greatest Name (of Allah) and the pillar of
monotheism".*[^10]

Allah is a proper name for God, and the meaning of the Imam's expression
is that in this very word are gathered all His attributes of Bounty and
Glory, and due to this it has been called 'the Greatest of Names'.

This proper name is used for nothing but God, while other names for
Allah, each of which usually refers to one of His qualities of Beauty
and Glory, are often used for other than Him.

The root of the word is mentioned differently; /ilahat/, /alahah/,
/alilahah/, /ilah/, /walih/; however, Allah, from whatever root it is,
has been used as a proper noun, applied to 'the Being Who exists
necessarily, by Himself; comprising all the attributes of perfection; a
proper name denoting the true god, containing all the excellent, divine
names; a unity having all the essence of existing things'.

This Sacred Name is mentioned in the Holy Qur'an almost one thousand
times, which is more than any other name of His Holy Names. This name
brings light in our heart, makes us firm and calm, and takes us into a
world full of purity and serenity.

The term /ahad/ is derived from /wahdah/, and some believe that /ahad/
and /wahid / are the same in many cases. In this case, /ahad/ is
interchangeable with /wahid/ when it is used as an epithet applied for
Allah, because /al-ahad/, as an epithet, is applied to Allah alone, and
signifies 'the One'; the Soul; He Who has always been one and alone; or
the Indivisible; or He Who has no second (to share) in His Lordship, nor
in His Essence, nor in His attributes.

One can say /huwal wahid/ and /huwal ahad /and in like manner, /ahad /
without the article being used as an epithet, especially in relation to
Allah. It is interchangeable, in this case, (but not in other cases)
with / wahid/. In this verse / ahad/ is a substitute for Allah, just as
an indeterminate noun is sometimes a substitute for a determinate noun.

But, some others believe that there is a vast difference between the two
Arabic words /ahad/ and /wahid/ both commonly thought to mean 'Oneness'.
To indicate the Unity of God, it is said, in this verse, that God is
Allah, i.e. One; One in the sense of Absolute Oneness of His Essential
Existence, not in the numerical sense of the word, which has its second
and third, but, the One which has no second.

The expression

***'One',***

is in the sense of being the 'ONLY' and in conceiving Whose existence,
all faculties of the human intellect are helpless. He is such a One that
even His attributes are His Essence and are not and can never be
separate from Him.

It is a death blow which Islam has rendered, about the All-Divine, to
all imaginary concepts of any kind of polytheistic doctrines and the
phenomena of plurality.

He is One with none comparable to Him, without any beginning or end,
unlimited by time, space or circumstances. A reality before which all
others have no existence. He is the Creator, One, and everything is His
creation.

A tradition from Imam Muhammad Baqir (as) says:

*"Ahad' and 'wahid' both have one concept which is One with nothing
comparable or similar to it, and monotheism is the confession to His
Oneness".*[^11]

In the Qur’an /wapid/ and /apad/, both, refer to Allah, the One, the
Only.

In the next verse, another epithet of that Holy Essence is referred to:

***"Allah, the Eternal"***

Many meanings are mentioned for /samad/ in Islamic narrations,
commentaries, and lexicons.

Raqib cites in Mufradat that 'Samad means a Lord; one to whom reference
is made in matters of importance'. Some others have said that 'Samad'
means 'something whose inside is not hollow, but it is full'.

It also means 'a Lord', when applied for Allah, because affairs are
dependant upon Him. 'Samad' signifies one who is high or elevated in the
utmost highness, and a Lord to whom one resigns himself, has recourse
to, or is in need of, or One above Whom there is no one, or One Who
continues, after His creatures have perished.

Imam Husain ibn Ali (as), in a tradition, has stated five meanings for
'samad '

1. Samad is a Lord Whose Lordship has attained its utmost point or
degree.

2. Samad is an Essence and Being that continues or continues for ever or
is everlasting.

3. Samad is the Existence that has not a hollow inside.

4. Samad is the One Who takes no nourishment, food or drink.

5. Samad is One Who does not sleep.[^12]

A tradition from Imam Ali-ibn-al Husain (as) says:

*"Samad' is One Who has no partner and it is not difficult for Him to
protect things, and nothing is hidden from Him".*[^13]

Some others have said /samad/ means 'independent of anyone' - All
perfect - the One to Whom recourse is made by everything: Eternal for
its needs, both for existence and for perfection; the One Who needs no
sustenance of any kind-Self-existing to understand, Whose existence,
every mind is captured in marvel and wonder. Nothing is hidden from His
all-enveloping knowledge-is not accommodatable in anything, not even in
intellect: Infinite in all aspects of existence and attributes.

The term 'samad' has such a vast meaning that we cannot mention them,
completely, or in other words, the names or the attributes, mentioned to
describe its nature, cannot be translated to covey the exact sense to
the fullest meaning of the terms.

A tradition denotes that the citizens of Basrah wrote a letter to Imam
Husain (as) and asked him the meaning of /samad/.

He replied:

***"In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful:***

*then do not plunge in vain talk about the Qur'an and do not dispute
about it and do not speak about it when you do not know (it).*

*Verily, I heard from my grandfather, the Messenger of Allah, who said:*

*'the person who talks about the Qur'an without knowing (it), his abode
will be in fire'.*

*Allah, Himself, has rendered 'samad’ to mean:*

***'He begets not, nor is He begotten',***

***'And there is none like unto Him'...***

*Yes, Allah is 'samad' Who is not from anything and is not in anything
or on anything; He is the Creator of everything and all are from Him by
His Power; what He has created to perish will perish at His Will, and
what He has created to remain will remain in His Knowledge. This is
Allah; al-Samad".*[^14]

In the next verse, it rejects the idea of the Christians, the Jews, and
the pagan Arabs who declared that Allah had a child or is a father.

It says:

***"He begets not, nor is He begotten"***

Different from this is the statement of those who believe in Trinity;
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.

Christians know 'Jesus' as the son of God. The Jews believe 'Ezra'
('Uzair) was the son of God:

***“The Jews call 'Uzair a son of God, and the Christians call Christ
the son of God. That is a saying from their mouth; (in this) they but
imitate what the Unbelievers of old used to say. Allah's curse be on
them, how they are deluded away from the Truth!"***[^15]

The Arab pagans believed that angels were the daughters of Allah:

***“...And they falsely having no knowledge, attribute to Him sons and
daughters...”***[^16]

It is understood from some of the Islamic narrations that

***'begets',***

in the verse under discussion, has a broader meaning. It negates any
material and delicate things emerging from Him, or He, the Sacred
Essence, emerging from any material and delicate thing.

In the above mentioned letter of Imam Husain (as) to the people of
Basrah, about the commentary of the term /samad/, he commented on the
current verse, saying:

*"/lamyalid/, i.e. there emitted nothing from Him - neither material
things nor a child, nor other things that emit from creatures, nor a
delicate thing like a soul.*

*Nothing appears in Him, such as sleep, imagination, grief, sadness,
happiness, laughter, tears, fear and hope, courage and discouragement,
hunger and satiety.*

*Allah is more exalted than that something should emit from Him, or that
He begets something material or delicate, nor is He begotten from
something material or delicate...*

*Similar to a living creature coming out from another one, or a plant
from the earth, water from a spring, fruits from trees, nor the like,
emitting delicate things from their sources, such as vision from the
eye, hearing from the ears, smelling from the nose, tasting from the
mouth, speech from the tongue, knowledge and understanding from the
heart (insight and soul), and particles of fire from stone...”*[^17]

According to this tradition,

***'begets'***

conveys a vast meaning, so that it may envelop any emitting things of
any kind from anything else, and this is, in fact, the second meaning of
the verse whose first and apparent meaning was the meaning that was
mentioned in the beginning.

Besides, the second meaning, with the analogy of the first meaning, is
quite adaptable and understandable; since, if Allah has no children, it
is because He is aloof from the qualities of material. This meaning is
also right for other qualities of matter.

***"And there is none like unto Him".***

The term /kufw/ originally means 'equal from the point of position and
rank', then, it is used for any similarity.

Considering this verse, the Holy Essence of Allah is free from all
qualities or obstacles that creatures have, and free from all defects
and limitations. This is 'Unity of Attributes' that corresponds with
'Unity of Number’.

Therefore, He is One in Essence, in attributes, and in deeds; and He is
unique in every aspect.

Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali (as) has said:

*“...no change can take place in Him and no lessening, diminishing,
dwindling, decay and dissipation of His Mighty and Glory is possible,
that He is not begotten from anyone nor does He beget anyone... He has
no peer and no equal. He can destroy things created by Himself in such a
way that they will cease to exist and disappear into
nothingness...”*[^18]

This is an interesting commentary because it discusses the narrowest
points of Unity. It warns us not to ascribe our qualities and attributes
to Allah and thus, not to create our glorified image as a personal
diety.

### Explanation: The Belief in the Oneness of Allah

The belief in Allah, as the Creator of the great universe, is the basis
of Islam, and the criterion of thought, education, behaviour and action
of the Muslim. All the details of the doctrine, nature and life's
philosophy, etc. are built on this foundation

Belief in Allah, in Islam, is based on logical evidence Islam
disapproves of imitation.

In this respect, Imam Ali ibnAbi. Taleb (as) is quoted to have said

*“The first step of religion is to accept, understand and realize Him
(Allah) and a perfection of understanding lies in conviction and the
true way of conviction is to sincerely believe that there is no god but
He…"*[^19]

Islamic doctrine is rooted in the pure belief in the Oneness of Allah,
the Glorified, and that there is no one but Him, no one like Him, or
opposite to Him, etc Allah is, also, above human qualities as these are
characteristic of mortals. Allah is the Absolute, the Independent, and
the Sufficient.

Believing in the Oneness of Allah, can according to Islamic doctrine, be
understood from four distinct points:

### 1. The Belief in the Oneness of Allah in Himself

Allah, the Glorified, is One, Unique in Himself, not one of His
creatures is like Him

***"And there is none like unto Him".***[^20]

It is a fact dictated by sound intellect and scientific reasoning. It is
logically accepted that the self of the cause is different from the
effect.

It is worth mentioning that the human intellect can only perceive that
which has an image which Man invokes in his own mind. Allah, the
Glorified, is far from being reducible to this, and that is why the mind
cannot fathom His Essence.

How can Man perceive the Essence of the Divine self while he is unable
to discover the truth about the material of the universe, though he can
see and feel it and can describe it and know its effects. He, still,
cannot know its essence, even if he can break it down into its component
parts.

How could he perceive the Essence of the Great Creator, while the Qur'an
presents this fact:

***“...yet these (are the men) who (dare to) dispute about Allah, with
the strength of His power (supreme)!"***[^21]

### 2. The Belief in the Oneness of Allah in His Attributes

He alone has the most glorious attributes. He has complete absoluteness
in knowledge, power, will, wisdom, independence, etc. He is above all
faults, and no one is like Him in His attributes. It is logical that the
attributes follow the self, and so the qualities of the sun are
different from that of the dust. Likewise, Allah's attributes are
different from that of the creatures.

This is the meaning of Allah's saying:

***“The most beautiful names belong to Allah: So call on Him by
them...”***[^22]***,***

or

***“Most Gracious, Most Merciful"***[^23]***.***

It clarifies that He, alone, possesses the praised attributes.

This is the meaning of Allah's saying:

***"Glory to thy Lord, the Lord of Honour and Power! (He is free) from
what they ascribe (to Him)!”***[^24]***.***

That means that Allah is above any fault the polytheists attribute to
Him. The belief in the Oneness of Allah in His attributes cannot be
comprehended except after stating the attributes which are truely
Allah's.

They are called 'the attributes of perfection', like having power,
knowledge, will, choice, life, eternity, perpetuity, and wisdom, etc.
This entails denying whatever attributes that are not His, like that of
imperfection and fault, the need for time land space, doing evil,
incarnation, movement, having appendages like hands and legs, etc. These
are called 'the attributes of greatness' or 'the negative attributes'.

### 3. The Belief in the Oneness of Allah in His Actions

It is a self-evident truth that actions are expressions of the self and
of attributes. As the hand can by no means act like the mind, due to the
natural difference between the two in essence and attributes, and as the
wind cannot act like electrical current, so no one can act like Allah,
the Glorified.

The inventions of Man are merely a process of making good use of the
natural laws set by Allah. It is done through the mind which is granted
to Man by Allah. Man's role is confined to arranging the particulars
according to natural laws.

Allah alone can create, provide Man's provisions, raise up from death,
cause to die and resurrect. He can do whatever He wills, for He is the
Lord Who can do anything.

None can, other than Allah, affect the creation. None can repeal Allah's
Will or do what He does.

### 4. The Belief in the Oneness of Allah in Worship

True belief in the Oneness of Allah is incomplete without worshipping
Allah, faithfully. He is the Creator and the Owner of His creatures. He
grants them His grace. He is, for such consideration, entitled to be
worshipped. All divine messages have called Man to submit and yield to
Allah alone.

The Most Exalted says:

***"Verily, I am God (Allah): there is no god but I: So serve thou Me
(only), and establish regular prayer for celebrating My
praise"***[^25]***.***

He taught Man to say:

***“Thee do we worship, and Thine aid we seek".***[^26]

Worship is the gratitude shown to the source of grace and blessing, and
acknowledgement of His favor, and performance of the duties ordained by
Allah. Simultaneously, it leaves its perfecting impact on the human
spirit, by guiding the instinct of religiousness buried in the depths of
the human soul to the right direction. Thus, Man does not go astray, or
wind up in the grip of tyrants.

Being a slave to Allah propels Man, really, to break the shackles which
servitude intensifies in Man. Moreover, being a slave to Allah means
turning one's face to Him, the source of grace, and beauty and
rightness.

The soul yearns for such attributes and seeks to attain perfection and
progresses towards them. They become the sublimest objective and the
highest ideal of Man's thought and actions. The Muslim knows with
certitude that his Creator owns the most glorious attributes. He is the
Just, Merciful, Wise, Oft-returning to Mercy, Kind to His servants who
sin, Truthful, etc.

Man works to reflect the coloring of these attributes on his life, and
to build human society and relations on the basis of these attributes.
Consequently, he objectifies justice, love, mercy and grace in his life.

Islamic rites of worship have, moreover, educational and reformatory
effects on the life of the individual and the group.

Supplication
------------

*O Lord! Make us firm in monotheism throughout our life.*

*O Lord! Polytheism, like monotheism, has many branches. Being saved
from polytheism is not possible but by Your Grace; envelop us in Your
Mercy and Your Grace.*

*O Lord! Keep us alive with monotheism, put us in death with monotheism,
and unite us on the Resurrection Day with the reality of monotheism.*

[^1]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 564.

[^2]: Al-Mizan, vol. 20, p. 546.

[^3]: Atyab-ul-Bayan, vol. 14, p. 259.

[^4]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 561 (and other commentary sources).

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 699-715.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 1 Chapter Nesbat, tradition 3.

[^8]: Bihar-al-Anwar. vol. 3, p. 221, Tradition 12.

[^9]: Ibid. , p. 222.

[^10]: Ibid.

[^11]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 3, p. 222.

[^12]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol. 3, p. 223.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 565.

[^15]: Surah Tauba, No. 9, verse 30

[^16]: Surah An'am, No. 6, verse 100

[^17]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, vol, 3, p. 224, and Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p.
566.

[^18]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Sermon 186 (Arabic version).

[^19]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Sermon 1.

[^20]: Surah Ikhlas, No. 112, verse 4

[^21]: Surah Ra'd, No. 13, verse 13

[^22]: Surah A'raf, No. 7, verse 180

[^23]: Surah Fatiha, No. 1, verse 2

[^24]: Surah Saffat, No. 37, verse 180

[^25]: Surah Ta-Ha, No. 10, Verse 14

[^26]: Surah Fatiha, No. 1, Verse 5


