Surah Nas, Chapter 114
======================

**(Mankind)**

**Number of Verses: 6**

Contents of the Surah
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

The human is always exposed to devilish temptations and the Satans, of
Jinn and men, try to penetrate into his heart. The higher the standard
of his knowledge and degree of his social position, the more intense the
temptations of the Satans will be until they divert him from the
straight way and send him astray.

This Surah commands the holy Prophet (S), as a leader and as an example,
to seek refuge with Allah from the evil of any temptations.

The content of this Surah corresponds with the previous one, Surah
Falaq.

The subject is supplementary to that of the previous Surah. In both of
them, Man is asked to take refuge with Allah by using His name

***/rabb/, 'the Lord',***

with a difference that in Surah Falaq various kinds of external evil are
mentioned, but in this Surah the evil of internal, hidden tempters is
emphasized.

Opinions are divided as to whether this Surah is Meccan or Medinan, but
the tone of the statements is more agreeable with other Meccan Suras.

Regarding the fact that this Surah and Surah Falaq, according to the
Islamic narrations, have been revealed together, and in many
commentators' opinions Surah Falaq is Meccan, this Surah can be
considered Meccan, too.

The Virtue in Studying -Surah Nas
---------------------------------

There are numerous traditions on the virtue of reciting this Surah; for
example, a tradition says that the holy Prophet (S) became gravely ill.
Gabriel and Michael, two great angels of Allah, came to him. Gabriel sat
beside the head of the holy Prophet (S) and Michael sat near his feet.
Gabriel recited Surah Falaq and by it placed the Prophet (S) in the
refuge of Allah; and Michael recited Surah Nas. [^1]

In a tradition from Imam Baqir (as), which was formerly mentioned, it is
said:

*"He who recites Surah Falaq, Nas, and Ikhlas in his Watr*[^2] *prayer
he will be told*

*'O servant of Allah, rejoice that Allah accepted your Watr prayer’.*
[^3]

Surah Nas, Verses 1-6
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَلِكِ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَهِ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن شَرِّ الْوَسْوَاسِ الْخَنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي يُوَسْوِسُ فِي صُدُورِ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “Say: I take refuge with the Lord of Mankind,"***  
***2. “The King of Mankind,"***  
***3. “The God of Mankind,"***  
***4. “From the evil of the slinking whisperer,"***  
***5. “Who whispers evil into the hearts of Mankind,"***  
***6. “From among Jinn and Mankind.”***

### I Take Refuge With the Lord of Mankind

In this Surah, which is the last Surah of the Holy Qur'an, the Prophet
(S), again, is personally addressed, as an example to and a leader of
people, and the command is:

***"Say: I take refuge with the Lord of Mankind,"***

***“The King of Mankind,"***

***“The God of Mankind,"***

It is interesting that, here three attributes of the magnificent
attributes of Allah; Lordship, Ownership, and Divinity, are emphasized,
all of which are directly concerned with the training of Man, and his
rescue from the grips of the tempters.

Of course, the objective of 'taking refuge with Allah' is not that a
person says this phrase merely with his tongue, but he should accomplish
it with his thoughts, Faith, and actions. He should avoid devilish
routes, devilish programs, devilish minds and communications, and
devilish societies and meetings; and travel the divine paths; otherwise,
the person who follows those devilish ways and lets himself fall into
the hands of those temptations cannot be safe by only reciting this
Surah.

With saying

***'the Lord of Mankind',***

he confesses His Lordship and places himself under His guidance.

By saying

***'the King of Mankind',***

he knows himself as His object, and His obedient servant.

By saying

***'the God of Mankind',***

he goes on the path of worshipping Him, and avoids worshipping others
but Him. Undoubtedly, the person who is actually qualified with these
three attributes, and truly believes in them, will be safe from the
mischief of the tempters.

In fact, these three attributes are three important lessons of
instruction and three means of rescue from the evil of temptations which
keep Man safe.

***"From the evil of the slinking whisperer,"***

***"Who whispers evil into the hearts of Mankind,"***

***"From among Jinn and Mankind.”***

The term /waswas/ has the infinitive meaning 'to tempt' and sometimes it
is used, as in this verse, with the subjective meaning, 'tempter'.

The term /xannas/ is derived from /xunus/ with the meaning of 'to
gather, to remain behind', and /xannas/, here means 'Satan', because he
hides himself at the name of Allah and hiding is with the action of
remaining behind, so, the word has been used in the sense of 'to hide'.

Therefore, the meaning of the verses are: 'Say I take refuge with Allah
from the devilish tempter who runs away and hides himself from the name
of Allah'.

Basically, the devilish ones act hiddenly, and sometimes they murmur
temptations into our ears so that we believe that the ideas are our own
thoughts. This very kind of thinking causes us to go astray.

The method of Satan is alluring and shows injustice in the form and
under the guise of justice; lies inside a shell of truth; sin in the
semblance of worship, and aberration in the appearance of guidance.

In short, they, themselves, and their affairs, both, are hidden, and
this is a warning to all followers, of the right and the path of truth,
not to expect to see Satans in their real form, or observe their
activities in their true, crooked shape, No it will never be so. They
are 'slinking whisperers' and their job is to plot, lie, be mischievous,
be hypocritical, commit fraud and deceit, simulating truth, and hiding
the right.

If they appear on the scene in their real form, if they do not mix wrong
with right, and if they speak clearly and honestly, the truth would
become apparent; as Hazrat Ali (as) says:

*“The fact is, had falsehood been allowed to appear separately from
truth, seekers of truth would have easily discerned it and would have
kept away from falsehood...”* [^4]

They always take parts of truth and falsehood and mix them together to
get control over people; as Amir-al-Mo'mineen Ali (as), continuing the
above sermon, says:

*“...and Satan took advantage of this situation and gained complete
control over the minds of its followers.”*[^5]

The words

***'whispers'***

and

***'hearts'***

used in the verse:

***"Who whispers evil into the hearts of Mankind"***

are an emphasis on this idea.

All of these are on the one hand, and on the other hand the phrase:

***"From Jinn and Mankind"***

informs us that

***'the slinking whisperer'***

is not among only a group of people or a special class of Man with a
particular sign, but they can be found here and there among Jinn and Man
with any form and in any society. We should be careful of them and take
refuge with Allah from the evil of all of them.

### Explanation: Why Do We Take Refuge With Allah?

At any moment it is possible that one may go astray, and when Allah bids
His Apostle to take refuge with the Lord from the evil of the 'slinking
whisperer', it is an evidence that becoming involved in the trap of the
tempters, who whisper evil in people's minds, is possible.

So, everyone must seek refuge to Allah, with His name /rabb/, i.e., the
Lord of Man, i.e., the Cherisher and Sustainer. By invoking this great
attribute, Man can be hopeful and expect an especially particular
retreat.

Everyone should seek refuge with Allah as their King and Owner, invoking
His authority over the affairs of Man, i.e., He is the One Who can
independently act over His creation to seek the protection by invoking
the divinity of the Lord as the God of Mankind, for it is His authority
which must necessarily be obeyed, i.e., it is His command or His Will
which is always done.

Therefore, against the evil of these whisperers, there are heavenly
angels, for the believing servants of Allah and seekers of Truth, to
come to help them; as Surah Fussilat, No. 41, Verse 30 says:

***"In the case of those who say: 'Our Lord is Allah', and further,
stand straight and steadfast, the angels descend on them (from time to
time)...”***

But, in any case, we should never be proud and feel that we are not in
need of the Divine lessons, admonishments and assistance. We should
always take refuge with Him and be aware and prepared.

Supplication
------------

*O Lord! Protect us all from the evil of every tempter and dark
inspiration.*

*O Lord! The trap is deep, the enemy is wakeful, his plots are hidden,
and rescue is impossible but with Your Grace.*

An Expressive Tradition
-----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عنه، عن أبي الجارود قال: قلت لأبي جعفر (عليه السلام): يا ابن رسول الله
هل تعرف مودتي لكم وانقطاعي إليكم وموالاتي إياكم؟ قال: فقال: نعم، قال:
فقلت: فإني أسألك مسألة تجيبني فيها فإني مكفوف البصر قليل المشي ولا
أستطيع زيارتكم كل حين قال: هات حاجتك، قلت: أخبرني بدينك الذي تدين الله
عز وجل به أنت وأهل بيتك لأدين الله عز وجل به قال: إن كنت أقصرت الخطبة
فقد أعظمت المسألة والله لأعطينك ديني ودين آبائي الذي ندين الله عز وجل
به، شهادة أن لا إله إلا الله وأن محمدا رسول الله (صلى الله عليه وآله
وسلم) والإقرار بما جاء به من عند الله والولاية لولينا والبراءة من
عدونا والتسليم لأمرنا وانتظار قائمنا والاجتهاد الورع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abil-Jurud said:

*"I asked Imam Baqir (as) whether he knew about my love and sincerity
for him and he answered he did. Then, I said I had a question for him to
answer me, for my eyes were blind and I scarcely* *walked, so I could
not always go to visit him. He wanted me to express my question. I
requested him that he informed me of the creed by which he and his
household adored Allah, Almighty and Glorious, so that I could worship
Him, too, by it.*

He responded:

*'You asked a great thing, though you stated a short expression.*

*By Allah, I give you (your answer of) my religion and the religion of
my fathers by which we worship Allah, Almighty and Glorious.*

*It is the confession of faith that there is no god but Allah, that
Muhammad (S) is the Messenger of Allah, with affirmation that what has
come to him (the Quran) is from Allah, having affection for us and the
lovers and obedients of us (Ahlul-Bayt) and hatred to our enemies,
surrender to our cause, awaiting our Gha'im (the twelveth Imam, for whom
there is a domination that will come whenever Allah wills), and
struggles (for establishing divine obligatories and lawful matters) and
is pious, (he avoids unlawful things)’.”*[^6]

[^1]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 7645, and Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10,
p. 569.

[^2]: ‘watr ' means 'odd number rak'at'.

[^3]: Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p. 7645, and Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10,
p. 569.

[^4]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Sermon 50, (Arabic Version).

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Sermon 50, (Arabic Version).

[^6]: Al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 34


