Surah Shams, Chapter 91
=======================

**(The Sun)**

**Number of Verses: 15**

The Contents of the Surah
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

This Surah, which is in fact a Surah on the purification of the 'carnal
soul' and sanctification of the heart from vice and impurities',
explains the same themes as in previous Suras, but at the beginning of
the Surah eleven great subjects from the world of creation and Divine
essence are mentioned and to prove that salvation depends upon
'purification of the carnal soul' some oaths are made. These oaths
envelop most of the Qur'anic oaths collectively.

At the end of the Surah, the Thamood, as an example or a disobedient
people, are briefly pointed out. They defied Allah's sacred Law and His
prophet, Salih (as), and were destroyed for their crime; which was the
fruit of neglecting 'the purification of the carnal soul’.

This short Surah, in fact, restates one of the most important
instructive points for the destiny of Man's life, and leads him to true
Islamic values.

The Virtue in Studying this Surah
---------------------------------

On the virtue of reciting this Surah, we refer to a tradition narrated
from the Prophet (S) who said:

*"He who recites it (Surah Shams) is like he who has given charity (in
the way of Allah) to all things that the sun and the moon shine
upon.”*[^1]

And certainly, this great excellence belongs to the one who keeps the
sublime content of this short Surah alive in his spirit and knows that
the 'purification of the carnal soul' is his constant duty.

Surah Shams, Verses 1-10
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالشَّمْسِ وَضُحَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْقَمَرِ إِذَا تَلَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالنَّهَارِ إِذَا جَلَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّيْلِ إِذَا يَغْشَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاء وَمَا بَنَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْأَرْضِ وَمَا طَحَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن زَكَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَدْ خَابَ مَن دَسَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “By the Sun and its Brightness,"***  
***2. “By the Moon when it follows it (reflects the Sun's light),"***  
***3. “By the day when it unfolds its glory,"***  
***4. “By the night when it enshrouds it,”***  
***5. “By the heaven and He Who made it,"***  
***6. “By the Earth and He Who spread it,"***  
***7. “And by the soul and He Who perfected it,"***  
***8,”Then inspired it to understand what is wrong and (what is) right
for it,"***  
***9. “Indeed he succeeds who purifies it,"***  
***10. “And indeed he fails who corrupts it.”***

### 'Salvation is Due To 'the Purification of the Carnal Soul'

There are some considerable oaths pointed out at the beginning of this
Surah. By one consideration, they are eleven oaths, and by another one,
they are seven. In any case, in this position the number of oaths is the
largest throughout the Qur'an and this shows that in these verses the
solemn appeal is made to something very splendid. The matter is as
important as the solemnity of the heavens, Earth, sun, and moon; that
which is effective in the fate of Man.

First, the oaths will be described and commented on and then, attention
will be paid to the great subject that these oaths are made to.

***"By the Sun and its brightness",***

As it was mentioned earlier, Qur'anic oaths are generally for two
purposes. First, the oaths pertain to the importance of the subject
which the oath is made to. Second, they pertain to the importance of the
affairs themselves, since oaths are always made to great matters. In
this way, the oaths make Man contemplate and evoke his thoughts to work
on the great objects of Allah's sublime creation through which he may
find a path to Him.

The sun plays a most important role in Man's life and in the life of all
living creatures on the earth, because it is not only a source of heat
and energy; the essential factors necessary for life, but also it is the
origin of some other life giving factors such as; winds, rains, plants,
running rivers and waterfalls, and even the energy mineral sources; oil,
coal, and the like, all depend on the sunlight so that if this world-
illuminating-lamp ceased one day, darkness, silence and death would
dominate everywhere.

The term /duha/ originally means 'those hours of the morning which
follow shortly after sunrise', and here it means 'the full brightness of
the sun’.

The particular emphasis put on the term /duha/ is for its importance,
when the glory of sunlight dominates the land.

***"By the Moon when it follows it (reflects the sun's light)”,***

This sense, as some commentators have said, refers to the full moon,
i.e. on the fourteenth night of the lunar month; since on this night the
moon appears on the eastern horizon nearly at the time of sunset and
with its silver light, introduces itself in the sky and to the world
when the world is in its most beautiful state to which swearing is done.

It is also probable that the above mentioned meaning refers to the
constant dependence of the moon on the sun and getting light from it,
but in this case the sentence: “...when it follows it" will be an
adverbial time clause.

There are also other commentaries cited about this verse, however, this
discussion will conclude here.

***"By the day when it unfolds its glory",***

The term /jalla ha/ is based on /tajliyah/ which means 'revealment’.

The commentators are divided on the meaning of the pronoun / ha/ in the
term /jalla ha/. Many of them believe it refers to the earth (as was
mentioned earlier).

Some also believe that the pronoun refers to the sun, that is; 'by the
day when it makes the sun manifest'. It is true that the sun makes the
day appear, but, figuratively speaking, it can be said that the day
makes the sun apparent. However, the first commentary seems more
appropriate.

At any rate, the swearing is done in the names of these great celestial
phenomena, because they are extremely effective both in the life of Man
and of all living creatures, and day, itself, is the sign of movement
and struggle; a mystery to any intelligent, active mind.

***"By the night when it enshroud it,"***

Night, with all its blessings and effects, which, on the one hand,
moderates the heat of the sun and on the other, brings quietude to
living things, is completely necessary for life. It provides Man, and
the majority of living creatures, with rest. If the darkness of night
did not exist and the sun were to shine, continuously, there would be no
tranquility, because the piercing heat of the sun would destroy
everything.

Even if the regularity of day and night were not as it is, now the same
situation would exist. For instance, like the moon whose one night is
equal to two weeks time on our globe, as well as in the middle of one of
its days, the heat of its atmosphere; almost three hundred degrees
centigrade, or at midnight when the weather is so cold no living
creature, that we know of, could live there.

It is noteworthy that the verbs, in the former verses, were in the past
tense while, in this verse, the verb is in the present tense. This
variety of tenses may be for the fact that some phenomena, such as day
and night, are not peculiar to a definite time; they belong to both the
past and the future to show the generality of these incidents over a
length of time.

In the sixth and seventh oaths heaven and its Creator is referred to.

It says:

***"By the heaven and He Who made it,”***

The creation of the glorious heaven with its beautiful heavenly bodies
and their wonderful regularities, is one of the manifestations of
Allah's might and wisdom which none else, besides Him, could ever
produce.

It is worthy to note that /ma/, in Arabic, usually refers to
non-intellectual beings and using it for Allah, All-knowing, is
inappropriate.

Then, some had to consider it 'ma masdariyah' (the word after 'ma' is
infinitive), and construed the verse as: 'by the heaven and its
structure'.

But, regarding verses 7 and 8, whose commentaries will be dealt with
later, we have to consider / ma/ as a relative pronoun that refers to
Allah, the Creator of all heavens.

Using /ma/, for intelligent persons, referring to the word 'women' in
the following verse, is not uncommon in the Arabic language, either, as
in Surah Nisa, No. 4, verse 3:

***“...Marry women of your choice...”***

A group of commentators believe that the term /ma/ with the meaning of
'something', here is for mentioning the origin of the world in an
ambiguous form and consequently later, after careful study some become
familiar with His Knowledge and Wisdom and can change the concept of
'something' to 'someone'. But, the commentary on 'He' is more fitting.

Continuing with the eighth and ninth oaths the reference is to the Earth
and the Producer of the Earth.

It says:

***"By the Earth and He Who spread it,"***

The Earth, which is a cradle of life for Man and all living creatures,
with all its wonders; mountains, seas, valleys, forests, springs,
rivers, mines, and other precious sources, is a collection of the Divine
Signs, each of which if studied intelligently, is an evidence of His
might and wisdom, and more important than the Earth is the Creator of
the Earth Who spreads it out.

The term /taha ha/ is derived from /tahw / used with the sense of 'to
spread, spread out' and also with the meaning of 'to repel or to
destroy' and here it means 'spread or expand', because:

1) the earth was totally submerged under water at the beginning and
then, gradually the water subsided into the low lands causing high
points of land to appear and spread which is called /dahw-ul-ard/,

2) At first the earth was totally in the form of high and low lands with
steep slopes that were uninhabitable.

Continuous heavy rains washed the high lands and thereby, filled the
valley, so, little by little, dry level lands appeared, becoming
suitable for Man to live and farm on.

Some commentators believe that there is also a slight hint, in this
sense, to the movement or the Earth, because one or the meanings of
/tahw/ is 'repel' and it may point to the 'driving' or the Earth around
the sun or around itself or both or them.

Finally, attention is paid to the tenth and eleventh oaths, the last
oaths or this portion, saying

***"And by the soul and He Who Perfected it,"***

Man is an essence or the world or creation; the best on the earth and in
the heavens. The human soul is one or the greatest mysteries of the
universe. Its importance is so much so that Allah swears by it and by
its Producer, both.

Commentators have delivered some different probabilities as to whether
the term /nafs/, here means Man's 'soul' or his 'body and soul'.

If it means 'soul' the term /sawwa ha/ (based on /taswiyah /) refers to
the proportion and order of Man's soul and his spiritual faculties
including his external and internal senses such as comprehension,
memory, apprehension, imagination, faculty of origination, love, will,
and the like, all of which can be studied in psychology.

If it means 'soul and body', both, it covers all the wonders and
regularities found in the body and its different systems and these can
be studied in anatomy and physiology.

However, the term /nafs/, in the Qur'an, refers to both of them.
Regarding the use of /nafs/ for both the soul and the body the Qur'an
says about the

***'soul':***

***"It is Allah that takes the souls (of man) at death...”,***[^2]

and about the body (a man) it says

***"He said, 'O my Lord! I have slain a man among them, and I fear lest
they slay me'.***[^3]

But, here both meanings are involved since the wonders of the Divine
Power are seen in both the soul and body not in only one of them.

It is interesting that the

***'soul'***

is mentioned, here in an indefinite form which may refer to the
importance of Man's soul something which is beyond the imagination and
also full of ambiguity that introduces him as an 'unknown being'; the
very title that some scientists have used for Man.

In the next verse, concerning the creation of Man, one of the most
important things is referred to. It says:

***“Then inspired it to understand what if wrong and (what if) right for
it,"***

Yes, when the creation of Man was completed and he came into being,
Allah taught him how to discriminate between right and wrong. This is
the most precious gift of all granted exclusively to Man. Thus, an
entity out of clay and Allah's spirit, into which He breathes an
understanding of what is sin, impiety, and wrong doing and what is piety
and right conduct, in the special circumstances in which it may be
placed, was formed as Man.

By those faculties and talents, and these various tokens, Man should
learn that his success, prosperity, salvation, and position, where he
can be in a rank higher than the angels, depends on himself, on his
keeping his soul pure as Allah has made it, and his failure, his
decline; to the lowest degree even lower than the beast, and his
perdition depends on himself soiling his soul by choosing evil.

The term /alhamaha/ derived from /ilham/ originally means 'to
ingurgitate, swallow up something greedily', then, it has been used with
the sense of 'to inspire a matter from Allah to the soul of Man', as if
Man's soul ingurgitates the matter with all its entity.

Sometimes, it has also been used in the sense of 'revelation' while some
of the commentators believe that the difference between 'inspiration'
and 'revelation' is that in the former, the one to whom something is
inspired does not understand where he has gotten it from, but in the
latter, he knows well where he has received the revelation from and how.

The term /fujur/ is based on /fajr /and as it was said before, it means
'break open', and since the light of dawn breaks the gloom of night it
is called /fajr/, and also, since committing sin breaks the curtain of
piety and religion, it is called /fujur/.

Of course, the purpose of using the term /fujur/ in the verse under
discussion, is to denote the means of this breaking and also the means
and ways of its occurrence.

And the purpose of using the term /taqwa/ based on /wiqayah/ with the
meaning of 'protection', is that Man protects himself from sin, crime,
corruption and vice.

It is necessary to note that verse 8 does not mean, as some have
considered, that Allah put the means of committing / fujur/ and /taqwa /
inside the soul of Man; the very means which cause him to do wrong
actions and break the curtains of piety, or the means and ways that push
him towards piety and good actions.

They have thought of the verse as an evidence for the existence of some
contrariety in the entity of Man.

It says that Allah inspired him and taught him these two facts.

In simpler words, He showed him the difference between right and wrong,
as is mentioned in Surah Balad, No. 90 verse 10:

***"And showed him the two ways (of good and evil)".***

And expressively, the soul is inspired by Allah; its Almighty and
All-wise Author, with the consciousness and the faculty of discretion to
distinguish between piety and impiety, right conduct and the wrong ways
in life, by the means of his 'wisdom' and 'primordial nature'.

This is why some commentators believe that this verse, in fact, refers
to the proposition of the idea of 'rational goodness and rational
badness' and that Allah has gifted Man with the ability to distinguish
between them.

It is noteworthy that Allah has given Man many blessings, but, among all
of them the Qur'an emphasizes, here on the inspiration of understanding
'piety' and 'impiety' and the recognition of right and wrong, because
this is the most important factor in the destiny of Man.

Finally, after these numerous important oaths, attention is paid to the
result of them and says:

***"Indeed he succeeds who purifies it,"***

The term /zakkaha/ is based on /tazkiyah/ which originally means 'to
grow’; and /zakat / basically means 'growth'.

This meaning is used in a narration from Hazrat Ali (as), thus:

*“...wealth decreases if you keep spending it and knowledge increases
the more you make use of it”.*[^4]

Later, the term was used to mean 'to purify', perhaps because the
purification of wealth from putridity causes it to increase. In the
current verse both meanings are suitable.

Yes, 'salvation' depends upon preserving the soul in its original purity
against its getting soiled, polluted and clouded from' carnal desires,
by submitting it to the will and the pleasure of the Lord. This is the
main, right goal in the life of every human individual, male and female,
to succeed in salvation by the way of /tazkiyah/, otherwise, he or she
will be in perdition.

Then, our attention is directed to the contrary group of people and
says:

***"And indeed he fails who corrupts it.”***

The term /xaba/ is based on /xibah/ which means 'to be in a hopeless
state, deprived, damaged'.

The term /dassaha/ is based on /dass/ which basically means 'to foist
something unwillingly', as the Holy Qur'an says about the pagan Arabs
who hatefully buried the baby girls alive:

***“...Or bury it (alive) in the dust...”***[^5]

And hidden, harmful actions, in Arabic, are termed /dasisah/.

It is also said that the term refers to sin and corruption because
wrongdoers and sinners hide themselves.

Further, it has been said that the objective meaning of the term is that
sinners conceal themselves amongst the good-doers, or one conceals his
soul in vice, or, yet still, one hides vice and corruption inside his
soul.

In any case, it refers to sin and evil which contrasts with piety.

It is also possible to gather all these ideas in the vast meaning of the
verse.

Thus, those who are successful and those who fail in their lives, in
this world are defined here. The characteristic of these two groups is
only the following: Piety and the growth in the spirit of virtue and
obeying Allah, or impiety and polluting the soul with sin and
corruption.

A tradition from Imam Baqir and Imam Sadiq (as) commenting on this
verse, says:

*"Indeed he succeeds who obeys and he is deprived who disobeys.”*[^6]

Again, commenting on these two verses, the Messenger of Allah (S) is
narrated to have said in a tradition:

*“The soul succeeds that Allah purifies, and the soul is deprived that
Allah deprives of every goodness”.*

### Explanation

Discussion on the relation of the Qur'anic oaths and their solemn
affirmations follows:

What relation is there between these eleven highly important oaths and
the truth for which the adjurations are fulfilled?

It seems that the main purpose is that Allah wants to tell Man that
everything, either material or spiritual, was made ready for him to
enable him to reach his salvation. On the one hand, He made the world
illuminated and fruitful with sunshine and moonlight for him to live in,
and brought the regularity of day and night into existence on the Earth
to make his life calm and useful.

On the other hand, He created him with a soul gifted with all applicable
talents and merits necessary for this aim, such as; a wakeful conscience
and a sense of understanding piety and impiety for paving the way to
felicity. Yet, he does not purify his soul, but, follows the intrigues
of Satan.

Surah Shams, Verses 11-15
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَذَّبَتْ ثَمُودُ بِطَغْوَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذِ انبَعَثَ أَشْقَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَالَ لَهُمْ رَسُولُ اللَّهِ نَاقَةَ اللَّهِ وَسُقْيَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَذَّبُوهُ فَعَقَرُوهَا فَدَمْدَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ رَبُّهُم بِذَنبِهِمْ
فَسَوَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولَا يَخَافُ عُقْبَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***11. “The Thamood (people) rejected (their prophet) through their
inordinate wrong doing,"***  
***12. “When rose up the most reprobate of them,"***  
***13. “Then the Messenger of Allah (Salih) said to them: 'It is a
she-camel of Allah and (bar her not from) having her drink!"***  
***14. “But they rejected him and hamstrung her, so their Lord crushed
them for their sin and levelled them (with the ground),"***  
***15. “And for Him if no fear of its consequences.”***

### The Fatal End of the Wrongdoers!

Following the previous awakening verses about the end of those who
pollute their soul, in the next verses one of the clear examples of
these people, of the past, is referred to and the destiny of the Thamood
is explained with some short, expressive, decisive sentences.

It says:

***“The Thamood (people) rejected (their prophet) through their
inordinate wrong doing,"***

The terms /taqwa/ and /tuqiyan / both have the same meaning, which is
'transgression'; and here it means 'exceeding all the Divine bounds and
disobeying His Law'.

The Thamood people, whose prophet was Salih (as) are the most ancient
people to have lived in a zone between Hijaz and Sham (Syria). They
lived comfortably and care-free on a fertile, level land in strong,
splendid castles.

They not only showed ingratitude for the abundant blessings they had,
but disobeyed their Lord by acting rebellious to the instruction of the
Apostle Salih (as) and mocked His Sign, the she-camel. This conduct
brought perdition to the people by means of a sudden, violent blast from
heaven which was accompanied by an earthquake.

Then, the Qur'an illustrates one of the clear examples of this
rebellious group and says:

***"When rose up the most reprobate of them,"***

The term /asqa/ means 'the most wretched' among them, referring to the
person who hamstrung the she-camel which was sent to them as a trial and
whose murder was a sign of rebellion against their divine Prophet (S).

Some commentators and historians have said that the most wicked man
among them, who dared to commit that heinous crime, was Qudar-ibn-Salif.

In some traditions it is narrated that the holy Prophet (S) of Islam
said:

*“The most wicked person among the ancient ones was the murderer of the
harmless she-camel of Salih (as), and the most wicked person of the
latter age is the murderer of Ali-ibn-Abi-Taleb. A wicked one, who will
make his beard dyed (red) from the blood of his forehead.”*[^7]

In the next verse there is more about the rebellious impieties of the
Thamood people.

It says:

***“Then the Messenger of Allah (Salih) said to them: 'It is a she-camel
of Allah and (bar her not from) having her drink.”***

The meaning of

***‘the Messenger of Allah',***

here is Salih (as), the prophet of the Thamood people; and

***'a she-camel of Allah'***

refers to the fact that it was no ordinary she-camel, but it was a
miracle from Allah sent to those people to prove that the prophet was a
true prophet and from Allah. One of the specialities of the camel,
according to a known narration, was that she exiled from inside the
mountain to be a clear miracle for the arrogant disbelievers.

It is well understood from other verses of the Qur'an that Salih (as)
told the people that they should divide the water of the town between
the camel and themselves so that on one day they could drink the water
and in turn the next day the camel could drink, without them bothering
each other:

***"And tell them that the water is to be divided between them: Each
one's right to drink being brought forward (by suitable
turns)”***[^8]***.***

And he particularly told them:

***"Touch her not with harm, lest the Penalty of a Great Day seize
you,"***

***"But they rejected and hamstrung her, so their Lord crushed them for
their sin and levelled them (with the ground).”***

The term /aqaruha/ is based on /uqr/ which basically means 'origin,
basis' and then 'to cut the basis, or to kill'.

Some have said that the objective meaning here is 'to hamstring an
animal', that is to cut the legs of the animal and make it fall so that
it consequently dies.

It is interesting to note that the man who was deputed to do the impious
deed of hamstringing the she-camel was only an individual whom the
Qur'an considers 'the most reprobate' but had of course the sympathy and
cooperation of the whole people as the verse too mentions the subjective
pronoun of the verb in the plural form / aqaruha/ ‘they hamstrung her'
which means that others of the Thamood tribe had a share in committing
the act also.

An action like that is usually plotted by a group and then is fulfilled
by one or a few definite individuals. Furthermore, they are content to
do it and pleased with it, which unequivocally introduces the group as
participants.

That is why Hazrat Ali (as) has said:

*"…for only one individual killed the camel of Thamood, but Allah
punished all of them, because all of them joined him by their
acquiescing in their contentment to it. Thus, Allah, the glorified has
said:*

***‘Then they hamstrung her, and turned (themselves)
regretful,’***[^9]***”***[^10]***.***

But, it was too late for that regretfulness.

It was the fruit of their own rejection and impiety that destroyed them
and then they were buried in their houses by the punishment of Allah.

The term /damdama/ is based on the term /damdamat/ which is sometimes
used in the sense of 'to destroy' and sometimes 'to make shared
punishment fall upon people' or 'to cut the roots of them', or 'to
pound, crush' and sometimes 'to disfavor' or 'to surround, involve', all
or which can be applicable, in this verse, because that penalty
originated from the wrath of Allah due to their sin which resulted in
their being made level with the ground.

The term /sawwaha/ is based on /taswiyah/ which means 'to make level or
equal', and it may mean that their houses were levelled to the ground,
Allah sent an equal destruction upon them all so that no one could
escape. All these meanings can also be accepted.

The pronoun /ha/ in the term /sawwaha/ refers to the tribe of Thamood or
to their cities and buildings which Allah destroyed and levelled with
the ground.

Some have said that the pronoun refers to the term /damdama/
‘destruction' which is understood from the next sentence, i.e. Allah
divided this wrath and destruction equally between them all.

However, the first commentary seems more appropriate. By the way, this
verse denotes that their penalty was the fruit of their sin and was in
proportion to it and this adopts to Divine Justice and Wisdom.

It is said about many nations that when they felt that they were
receiving punishment and saw its preliminary signs, they became
regretful and repented; but as some narrations denote, the situation
about the Thamood is different.

They decided to find Salih (as), their sincere prophet and kill him when
they saw the first signs of the Divine penalty for their disobedience.
This shows the depth of their rebellion and disobedience, against Allah,
and the Messenger of Allah (S), Salih (as), whom He saved by His Mercy
and then destroyed all the rejectors.

Finally, in the last verse of the Surah, in order to clearly warn all
those who go on the same path, it says:

***"And for Him is no fear of its consequence",***

There are many rulers who have the authority and power to punish others,
but, they fear the consequence that it may have and the reactions of the
people. For this very reason they do not use their power completely or
putting it more directly, their power is based on weakness and
inability, and their knowledge is mingled with ignorance hence they fear
of being unable to afford the unknown results that they will face with.

Allah, the Almighty, the All-knowing, has created and can create at
will, and there can be no question of any such apprehension in His case,
that is why He does decisively what He pleases.

Transgressors and wrongdoers should be careful of their conditions, lest
they will be involved in the wrath of Allah for their evil actions.

The term /uqba/ means 'end, finite', and the pronoun /ha/, at the end of
the Arabic word, refers to

***/damdamah/ ‘destruction'.***

### Explanation: The Brief Story of the Thamood

As it was mentioned before, the Thamood flourished in a territory
between Medina and Sham (Syria). The plain was known as 'wadi-ul-Qura’
which forms the southern boundary of Syria. They worshipped a part of a
mountain when Salih (as) was sent to them as an Apostle of Allah.

He preached to those people and tried his best to correct their faith
and conduct, but it was to no avail at all. At last the people
challenged Salih (as) saying that they would believe in Allah and obey
His Apostle, Salih, if Salih could cause a she-camel to come out of the
mountain with a young one.

Salih (as) did cause the miracle and yet the people did not believe and
correct themselves. It was then fixed that on one day the she-camel
would drink of the water of the town and on the next day the people
would have the water.

As some narrations denote, even on the day the she-camel drank the
water, she gave so much milk that the whole town was supplied.

Salih (as) had already warned them that if they caused the least harm or
hurt to her a chastisement from Allah would overtake them. But, the cup
of their inequities was full enough to plan to kill both Salih (as) and
the she-camel who were obstacles to their carnal desires.

They cruelly hamstrung the poor, harmless she-camel by the hand of the
most wretched man among them, Qudar-ibn-Salif. But, they failed to find
Salih (as) to slay.

After that he had warned them that they had only three days time in
which to enjoy themselves in this world:

***"But they did hamstring her. So he said: ‘Enjoy yourselves in your
homes for three days. (Behold) there is a promise not to be
belied!’"***[^11]***.***

Just three days time for further thought and repentance! However, they
were not only heedless, but also increased their impiety.

Then, by night came a terrible earthquake as a Divine punishment, and
buried them in their own fortress homes which they thought to be such
places of security:

***“The (mighty) Blast overtook the wrongdoers, and they lay prostrate
in their homes before the morning.”***[^12]

They were destroyed and the light of life in their land was extinguished
so that no one there remained alive, but, Allah saved Salih (as) and his
believing followers:

***"When Our Decree issued, We saved Salih and those who believed with
him, by (special) Grace from Ourselves...”***[^13]

Supplication:

*O Lord! You are our hope in avoiding carnal desires; please help us.*

*O Lord! You inspired in us the understanding of what is 'piety' and
what is 'impiety'. Bestow upon us the success of taking benefit from
this inspiration.*

*O Lord! The temptations and intrigues of Satan are mysteriously
concealed in the soul of Man. Open their mysteries to us so that we may
know them and be able to avoid them.*

[^1]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol, 10. p. 496

[^2]: Surah Zumar, No. 39, verse 42

[^3]: Surah Qasas, No. 28, verse 33

[^4]: Nahj-ul-Balagha. Saying 147.

[^5]: Surah Nahl, No. 16, verse 59

[^6]: Majma-al-Bayan. vol, 10. p. 498

[^7]: Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 499; and also in Tafsir-e-Qartabi,
vol. 6, p. 7168.

[^8]: Surah Qamar, No. 54 verse 28

[^9]: Surah Shu'ara, No. 26, verse 157

[^10]: Nahj-ul-Balagha, Sermon 201 (Arabic Version).

[^11]: Surah Hud, No. 11, verse 65

[^12]: Surah Hud, No. 11, Verse 67

[^13]: Surah Hud, No. 11, Verse 66


