Al-tawhid a Criticism of the Idea of Arab Nationalism
=====================================================

Dr. Muhammad Yahya Vol III No. 2 , 1406 AH This article was presented
as a paper at the World Seminar on "The Impact of Nationalism on the
Ummah," London, Dhu al-Qi'dah 13 -- 16, 1405 (July 31 -- August 3,
1985), held by the Muslim Institute. The author is a scholar from Cairo,
Egypt. The Arab nationalist propaganda has been increasingly voiced in
recent months from many organs in several Arab countries, particularly
Egypt.

It was quite evident to observers of the Islamic movement that a
re-vitalization of that idea was in order in view of the current
hysterical building of defensive strategies in the Arab region against
the famous danger of Islamic 'fundamentalism'.

It is only appropriate that an idea which originated at the hands of
Christian Levantine writers to serve as a weapon of disintegration
against the 'Uthmani State, should now be unearthed to be of service
once more in the face of rising Islam.

In its latest form, Arab nationalism is put to a different use than its
employment by Nasir or the Ba'thists as a means of masking personal or
party ambitions. It is presented as a secular political creed that draws
upon certain Western concepts as its frame of reference.These concepts
(viz. modernity, progress, socialism, besides other minor ones)
represent both its slogans of appeal and its intellectual categories of
viewing Arab reality.

The leading feature in the renewed nationalist propaganda is the
repeated emphasis on the term 'Arab' as opposed to that of ' Islamic'.
The indubitable aim of this calculated shift is to substitute the former
for the latter term as an inclusive and prime category for analysing and
describing political and social facts. The limited 'Arab horizon' is
designed to replace, and take precedence over, the Islamic horizon in
the thinking and feelings of those toward whom the nationalist
propaganda is directed.

The insistence on the category 'Arab' as an alternative for, or at
least as a higher, more primary and inclusive mode than the category
'Islamic', gives the entire game away. It is clear that in the recent
presentations of the idea of Arab nationalism, a confrontation with
Islam is envisaged, not merely an 'innocent' revival of a century-old
view.

Advocates of Arab nationalism do not hide the fact that it is Islam
that they counter with their idea.They use that idea as a weapon of
attack within a certain anti-Islamic climate that is now prevailing in
many Arab countries notwithstanding the fact that its presentations are
riddled with logical contradictions, which this paper proposes to
expose. It seems that those who recalled the nationalist idea for use
against Islam were hard pressed for a tool of intellectual
confrontation.

The idea of Arab nationalism suffers from two main contradictions,
which make its edifice of slogans shaky and which are reflected in its
various presentations. The first is the exclusion of Islam as a defining
and constitutive element of that nationalism; and the second, a related
one, is the completely Westernized content of an avowedly 'Arab'
movement that supposedly wants to revive 'Arab' values and culture.


