The First Contradiction
=======================

The Arab nationalist message seems simple and consistent. The Arabs
from the Gulf to the Atlantic are one people united by the ties of
blood, history, language, and interests. They ought to be united in one
political entity which is socially and culturally modern and
progressive. This programme can be achieved by the Arab nationalists in
the face of various imperialist and "reactionary' forces of whom the
Islamic movement is the most prominent.

Now, the appeal to ties of blood or the argument from ethnography and
race has been rather eclipsed by scientific discussions and has largely
fallen into disrepute after Hitler. Still it is not quite clear how one
can speak of a pure Arab race after the long process of mingling between
the original Arabs of the Peninsula and such peoples as the Egyptians,
Mesopotamians, Berbers, or Negroes.

The Arabic phrase 'ties of blood' comes in conveniently to cover the
weakness of the nationalist views on this matter by its double reference
to both race and kinship. The latter is usually the meaning which is
immediately suggested by normal usage and saves the nationalists from
getting involved in a losing ethnographic debate.

The invocation of geographic facts is not of much help in advancing the
nationalist argument. The Gulf-Atlantic axis is a rather arbitrary
projection which overlooks other areas to which the original Arabs
ventured. Moreover, it is the 'imperialist' view of the Arab-land which
the nationalists now come to adopt, rather uncritically in the light of
their high-flown anti-imperialist slogans. The crucial fact in this
regard is that it was Islam that created this 'grand Arab homeland', as
it is called, and which impelled the original Arabs to conquer that area
and much more besides it to spread its teachings.

The Arab nationalists perform a sleight of hand in that they
arbitrarily carve out of the grand Islamic homeland, which was made
possible by the Arabs' spread of their own religion, a small area--the
'Arab homeland' -- which is then separated from the larger body and made
to stand against or to take priority of allegiance' vis-a-vis it.

If we adopt the same secularist stance, for the sake of argument, which
the nationalists adhere to, we can say that Islam is an Arabic cultural
and social phenomenon which has been propagated by the Arabs throughout
a large part of the known world at the time. In this sense, the Muslims
of the world can be said to have been 'Arabized' by the mere fact of
embracing Islam.

The Arab nationalists play the trick of separating a section of the
'Arabized' (the Muslims) which happens to possess one added feature of
'Arabism', the language, and place it as an independent entity and
identity against the rest of Muslims (the 'Arabized' in our sense). It
is to be noted that they do not include in their nationalism some
Arabic-speaking minorities while they ignore the vital role that
Arabic -- with its script -- plays in the languages and culture of the
other Muslims.

The nationalists are indicted of contradiction according to their own
secular view of Islam as a social growth. For, if it is the 'religion of
the Arabs', their prize acquisition as well as the main motive for
issuing out of their limited homeland in Arabia, this religion should be
the defining feature of Arab nationalism.

It is Islam, and not those cultural factors transformed by it beyond
recognition, such as language or history, that should be set up as the
emblem and sine qua non of Arab nationalism. Yet, the nationalists are
out and out secularists who exclude Islam altogether or assign it a
servile existence within their creed as a vaguely defined 'spiritual
factor', a thing which negates Islam's own claims.

This same criticism applies to the nationalists' call about joint
interests -- presumably economic -- as a unifying factor of the 'Arabs'
so ambiguously defined. It is to be asked, why shouldn't common
interests, of whatever sort, exist among the Muslims, as they have
always done? Once again we meet with the same trick.

An arbitrary carving out of a certain section within the general
Islamic context and its setting up as an independent entity. The keyword
here is 'arbitrary', which strips nationalism from any rational claims
and exposes its bare ideological bias, which it tries to mask under
pretexts of modernity or by appeal to similar specious terms.

The major contradiction in Arab nationalist thinking is seen in its
most flagrant form in the adoption of certain cultural elements as
language, common history and heritage, and tradition as defining
features of that nationalism, while ignoring Islam out of a deep-seated
secularist bias. Before Islam, the Arabs were living in what may be
called their pre-history. A warring collection of tribes with various
dialects and with none or very little of cultural life, especially on
the intellectual plane.Islam introduced such an unimaginable qualitative
change into the life of the Arabs that it would hardly be an
exaggeration to say that it ' created ' the Arab identity anew.

The Qurayshi dialect was turned into the richest language in the world
and one of the most wide-spread. Islam won for that tongue adherents
that came from non-Arab cultures and it was responsible for turning it
into a tool of thought and expression in many fields of science and
scholarship. It spread it far beyond its original home and speakers.

Similarly, the Arab society was totally transformed in its structures,
customs, aims, and outlooks by Islam. This religion is a constitutive
principle of Arab social and intellectual life for the past fourteen
centuries, and the attempt to posit an 'Arab nationalism' without Islam
or in confrontation with it is inconceivable if not utterly absurd.

At the same time, an Arab nationalism that tries to take account of
Islam will find itself in an impossible position; for the universal
claims of Islam and its insistence on full allegiance to its tenets, as
well as its priority over other attachments, ensure that it rejects
nationalism as a modern form of ancient tribalism or hamiyyat
al-jahiliyyah (the fanatical clinging to pre-Islamic loyalties).

The Arabic language and culture have been made by and contained within
Islam and not the reverse. Islam has not been a passing and limited
stage occurring to an otherwise independent and developed history or
tradition of Arab culture and society that had their own line of growth.
The same view applies to Arab history, which is Islamic history along
with the history of the many peoples that accepted Islam.

In fact, Islam is the common denominator that ties the life and history
of a great mass of humanity together. As a total religion, Islam has
shaped all the aspects of the societies that embraced it and linked them
together in a vast entity which often found a political expression in
the caliphate system. A non-clerical creed, Islam does not have a
separate, isolated history within a church, for instance.

The strategy adopted by the propagandists of Arab nationalism in view
of the above state of affairs is as follows: They take certain cultural,
social, and historical facts or elements and cite them both as factors
of 'Arab nationalism' and as reasons or arguments supporting that idea.
They, however, ignore the decisive role played by Islam not only in
shaping these elements but in bringing them into existence as well, as
with regard to culture and history.

Islam is forgotten and deliberately banished from the consideration of
the Arab nationalists. It is excluded according to the principle of
secularism, which is, indeed, the real defining feature of that
nationalism. Nevertheless, the cultural, social, and historical facts
forged by Islam are wrested from it and made to stand as supports and
features of an Arab nationalism.

Moreover, the same facts that can in all validity and legitimacy be
adduced to substantiate the idea of Islamic 'nationalism', unity, or
identity are arbitrarily 'stolen' from the Islamic framework and forced
to become constituents of a secular idea that sets aside one group of
Muslims----the so-called Arabs---and puts them in confrontation with or,
at least, in contradiction with the rest of the Muslims who, still,
share with this separated group the same cultural, social, and
historical unifying elements.

This may well be described as an exercise in deception and it continues
the same misleading attitude noticed earlier of artificially defining
and extracting an 'Arab' identity from within the Islamic matrix. If a
separate Arab identity existed, there would not be any problem. But to
take the unification and identification features forged by Islam and
designed for all Muslims and then to separate them from Islam, their
forming principle, and confine their applicability to an ambiguously and
arbitrarily defined group of Muslims -- this can rightly be called
intellectual dishonesty.

In their much-vaunted slogans about the unity of culture, heritage,
customs, feeling, outlooks, and hopes, the Arab nationalists use fruits
from the tree of Islam while disowning the tree. This position,
paradoxically enough, is their only logical move. For, to recognize the
claims and priority of Islam is to negate their own existence, their own
attempt at breaking Muslim ranks and at setting up a higher authority
than religion. The Arab nationalists have to deny Islam even at the cost
of devastating logical inconsistencies.

Accepting Islam demolishes their own raison d detre. Islam would not
allow a higher, or even another, locus of allegiance, of authority, or
of guidance. It would not tolerate a breach of unity among the believers
or a limitation of its universal message and validity. Hence, it rejects
nationalism and is in turn rejected by it.


