The Second Contradiction
========================

The term 'Arab nationalism' sets up a certain expectation which is
violently contradicted by the content of the idea carrying that name. It
should be reasonable to expect that such an idea will seek its content
from peculiarly Arab intellectual and cultural premises and
fundamentals, whatever those may be.

Yet, the plain fact is that apart from some superficial slogans about
the glory of the Arabs, etc., the entire content of this idea is of
Western origin; i.e. from the same source that is referred to in
nationalist rhetoric as the imperialist West.It is not a question of
borrowing certain ideas or terms.

It is, rather, a matter of wholesale adoption, assimilation, or
'internalization' of attitudes, weltanschauungen, methods of analysis,
frames of reference, etc. Arab nationalism is, indeed, a Western
phenomenon not just in the familiar sense of being induced by European
sources but on the deeper level of being a mere extension of Western
concerns and modes of thinking.

It should, however, be hastily added that presentations of Arab
nationalism rarely, if ever, reach the degree of sophistication that may
be suggested here. It remains a crude and immature rehearsal of certain
set formulas designed primarily for mass consumption. What is attempted
here is to sound the roots and backgrounds of these formulas.

The major Western "import" is the principle of secularism which Arab
nationalists go out of their way to emphasize as their defining factor.
Secularism is not an Islamic idea and it has not been invariably present
in conjunction with nationalist thinking and its practice in Europe
itself. One thinks, for instance, of the role played by Protestantism in
west European nationalisms or that played by Eastern Orthodoxy in
Serbian or Bulgarian ones.

The insistence of Arab nationalists on an indissoluble bond between
secularism and nationalism highlights their premeditated intentions
against Islam which were examined under our 'First Contradiction' and
which betray that movement's nature as a weapon of attack against Islam.
Secularism has been deliberately cultivated by Arab nationalists
although it does not spring naturally from any ' Arab ' source, except,
perhaps, that of the anti-Islamic Arabs of the Prophet's time.

This is not the place to discuss secularism, and it is only the first
of a long chain of Western intellectual goods appropriated by the
'purist' Arab nationalists. The most outstanding of these is the idea of
nationalism itself, not as the recognition of the existence of tribes or
races or peoples, but as a call for the establishment of a secular
political entity around a vaguely defined nation, which in the event
turns out more often than not to be those people governed by a central
authority that sets out to legitimize and mask its authority by
fostering the 'national' myth of a historic, glorious past and a unique
identity with a future-oriented mission.

Thus, a phenomenon which was deeply embedded in local European
religious, cultural, and political conditions and which often came to
reinforce certain power interests, is imported by the Arab nationalists,
or rather, is purposely exported by the West to the Islamic world, after
being abstracted from its distinctive and unique historical matrix and
transformed into an abstract, prescriptive programme according to which
certain entities are to be created and certain existing power interests
are to be encouraged to repeat European experiments and Europe's
historical developments.

With regard to this last point one thinks of the attribution, after the
fact, of nationalist tendencies to some rulers in the Muslim world in
the nineteenth century who sought independence from the 'Uthmani State,
for example. Mere power-seeking was responsible for such 'famous'
nationalist examples as the Muhammad 'Ali rule in Egypt.

The Arab nationalists usually forget that European nationalism which
they so readily imitate dealt with individual entities or 'peoples'
within the larger European entity. Applied to Arab conditions, this
justifies the division of the so-called 'Arab world' into such
constituent nationalisms as the Egyptian, Syrian, Iraqi, Sudanese, etc.
This logical 'nationalist' move is, however, bitterly rejected by Arab
nationalists, who choose, for no apparent reason, to halt their process
of dividing the Muslim world at the 'Arab' frontier rather than carry
the nationalist principle to the legitimate level of
'sub-nationalities'.

For sure, a true believer in nationalism would wish to see that
principle carried to its logical conclusion, and the local peoples of
the Middle East region have more unity and common identity factors than
can be adduced for the nebulous 'Arab' variety of nationalism -- if we
exclude Islam, of course.

The secret behind the arbitrary halting at the Arab level is that the
real concern behind this call is not the application of the nationalist
principle as such but rather its employment as a tool to hit at the
unity of the larger Islamic entity. It is a good tactic to hide the
disintegrative aims of that tool by pretending that it is still a
unity-seeking idea -- among the 'Arab peoples', that is. Besides, an
idea directed originally against the 'Uthmani State will have a better
chance of success if it brought the combined weight, real or imaginary,
of the 'Arabs' to bear, rather than an attempt to invoke heterogeneous
local nationalisms.

It is clear that the Arab nationalists, both old and new, have not even
been faithful to the principle of nationalism which they borrowed from
Europe to plant in an Islamic environment, which owes allegiance to a
more inclusive political expression than that of race or 'nation'
defined in vague tribal terms.

Secularism and nationalism represent the outer frame which includes and
determines the various other borrowings from the West by the Arab
nationalists. Having rejected Islam and having posed themselves as the
carriers of a certain cause, they found themselves obliged to fill the
vacuum and boost their claims by a programme of action or a project,' as
it is now fashionably called in their circles.Upon inspection this
'project' turns out in its various presentations and developments to be
no more than a weaker version of the dominant Western ideologies also
removed from their social matrix and imposed as abstract rules of action
on the totally different Arab environment.

The strangely protean content of Arab nationalism has passed the entire
gamut of Western ideologies from liberal to fascist to socialist to
Quasi-Marxist to social-democrat. It has a tendency to be coloured by
the ideology of the particular Western power that happens to be dominant
in the Middle East at a certain time or that patronizes the Arab
nationalist factions.

In the light of this view, incidentally, the emergence nowadays of a
right-wing, capitalist-oriented, anti-Islamic brand of Arab nationalism
based in certain "moderate" regimes can be explained in terms of
American influence in the region.

The Western ideologies which came into being in response to certain
social, political, and cultural conditions and challenges in Europe were
successively adopted by Arab nationalist propagandists and uncritically
presented as a 'project' for the renaissance of the 'Arab nation',
which, according to their own claims, was passing through a different
path of development and has not yet attained to a stage equalling that
of the European Renaissance because of the retarding effects of Islam
and the 'Uthmani State.

Aside from superficial or cosmetic modifications in phrasing and
emphasis to suit political conditions and guard against charges of
Westernization, the Arab nationalists kept the main body of the
ideologies they imported intact. Frequently, two or more incompatible
Western doctrines are to be found side by side in ignorant or uneasy
contiguity in the thought of Arab nationalists. The socialist and
liberal mix that is echoed in the present revival of the idea is a case
in view.

Not only were the Western ideologies appropriated in the manner
sketched above but their peculiar terms, frames of reference, and
methods of examining facts were also whole-heartedly adopted. This
attitude is seen most clearly in that Arab nationalists see Islam, for
instance, with European eyes. They ignore the immense scholarship on
Islam that exists in their own cultural environment and look at their
own religion, in name at least, through Western spectacles.

In fact, Islam as well as all the other aspects of Arab reality are
defined, examined, reinterpreted, and judged in terms of one Western
ideology or another by the Arab nationalists. Favourite ideologies in
this regard have been the secular-liberal, a diluted form of Marxism
referred to as Arab socialism, and a collection of socio-political ideas
of American origin. Thus, Islam is usually seen by Arab nationalist
writers as a socio-economic projection from a certain base', or a
flowering of the enlightened emancipatory spirit of the Arab nation, or
as a human revolution' against, the reactionary and exploiting forces of
the Quraysh.

The purpose here is not to study what Arab nationalism has adopted from
the West. It is rather to expose one of its major contradictions. With
its present content, terms, principles, and method of analysis it is
neither Arab nor nationalist for that matter. It is, rather, Western and
internationalist.

Looked at from its intellectual angle it is simply a tool for
propagating and universalizing Western ideologies.The terms 'Arab' and
'nationalist' are convenient masks facilitating the acceptance of the
surreptitiously smuggled Western contents among the suspicious Muslims.
Arab nationalism is not condemned here for failing to completely adopt
the ideas, directions and the general social and cultural heritage of
the Arabs (the Muslims).

It would have been unreasonable to tax the nationalists for not using
the old traditions of the Arabs as their guiding programmes of action
just to make themselves deserving of the epithet 'Arab'. Nevertheless, a
continuation, revival, and renewal of Arab heritage in all fields of
life is certainly the natural attitude to expect from those who base
their idea on Arabism and build a huge emotional aura around that term,
putting it at the centre of their propaganda.Instead, they have
abandoned the Arab heritage altogether and opted for a Westernized
content for their idea.

The Arab (Islamic) heritage certainly offers a viable wealth of major
values, premises, concepts, ideas, etc. for anyone who wishes to
undertake a revival project for the 'Arab nation' even if he has
reservations on what, may be called the purely "religious" part of that
corpus.

Islamic jurisprudence, social and moral values, concepts or principles
of government, and practical experience in running a flourishing
civilization for many centuries are valid and fruitful bases that can be
developed, modified, and enriched even by a secularly-bound Arab
nationalism to yield a genuinely Arab project for renaissance and
progress.

Yet, that Arab (Islamic) heritage is completely neglected by Arab
nationalists, except for being mentioned in propaganda contexts, in
favour of the Western doctrines. The only reason that can be advanced
for this attitude is the inherent anti-Islamic nature of the idea of
Arab nationalism and its being essentially foreign to the Islamic
heritage and beliefs of the Arabs. This idea cannot envisage an Arab
renaissance from within the Arabs' creed simply because that creed
happens to be Islam and because the adherents of nationalism have set
themselves from the outset against that religion and aligned themselves
with the West.


