3. the Position Towards Islam
=============================

Various hints have already been made about the attitude of Arab
nationalist writings towards Islam. That religion's claims to full
allegiance to it from the Muslims are rejected. All aspects of Islam
that contradict the secularist outlook, such as the Shari'ah, the
concepts of jihad or the Islamic State, are interpreted away as mere
historical growths that were attached to the body of Islam in 'ages of
backwardness.'

Call for Islamic unity or revival are condemned as dangerous deviations
from the nationalist path. Islam itself is subjected to various
"interpretations" (i.e., revisions and distortions) to prove that it
really approves of and even encourages nationalism.

In the process, Islam is turned into what the nationalists call turath
(heritage).This turath is viewed by them as a cumbersome corpus of
writings, beliefs, attitudes, etc., which has no place in the 'modern
world' or in the project of Arab nationalism unless it is 'sifted,'
'purified' and 'reinterpreted' to be ready for use. From what point of
view will the turath be sifted, by whom, for what purpose, under what
conditions, and what will be left of it, are questions that the
nationalists prefer to ignore.

The attitude of Arab nationalism to Islam can be summed up by saying
that an intellectual violence is exercised against all aspects of that
religion to make it amenable to their secular views of it and to justify
its exclusion from the place of prominence in the Arabs' lives in favour
of nationalism. Here once more the nationalists fall into contradiction.
The natural course would have been for them first to find Islam
inadequate or empty of content and then to set about building a social
and political creed to replace it, or, at least, to compensate its
deficiencies.

On the contrary, the strategy of Arab nationalism was to attack the
fullness and validity of Islam and to deny or throw doubt on its
programmes so that it can justify its own project or doctrine. This is
more like putting the cart before the horse; but it seems that sound
logic must give way if "

hitting at Islam is in question.This nationalist attitude towards Islam
has revealed itself in yet another contradiction relating to political
practice this time. The Arab nationalists show intense jealousy in
guarding the 'Arab entity' they carved out of the body of Islam from
re-uniting with or reverting once more back to that body.

All political movements that call even for lukewarm and formal
cooperation between Muslim Nation-States are scoffed at by the Arab
nationalists as reactionary steps which would only hinder the
crystallization of the desired Arab entity. Even empty organizations run
by some Arab regimes in the field of Islamic action are not acceptable
to the Arab nationalists.

However, the nationalists do not show any reservations in linking or
even incorporating that precious Arab entity into other international
entities or movements not only in the political but in the cultural and
economic spheres as well. The majority speak, in the current revival of
their thought, about a unified front of all the progressive,
freedom-loving forces of the world, which primarily include the Soviet
Union and its satellites, in addition to the left in Europe and the
other continents. Other Arab nationalists speak of close ties between
the 'Arab entity' and western Europe as a cultural and political body
that balances the two super-powers.

Some of these speak more specifically about a 'Mediterranean' entity
which fuses the Arabs and the southern Europeans in a primarily
cultural-economic system. This last variety is now adopted by wide
sections of the Arab nationalists and it is flagrantly anti-Arab in its
implications of merging the Arab identity into an essentially Western
culture. The Egyptian writer Taha Husayn, who first suggested this idea
in radical terms in the late thirties, was bitterly criticized by Muslim
thinkers for proposing that servile form of Westernization.

On the political front, the Arab nationalists envisage merging their
cherished entity into such world movements as that of the non-aligned,
the Third World, and the 'South'. These movements are really
Western-defined and inspired despite their high-sounding rhetoric about
imperialism, a just economic order, etc.

The argument that I am trying to put across here is that while the Arab
nationalists do not find any problem in cooperating with or even merging
into internationalist movements of every kind, they completely stand
against any form of Islamic action even if it were mere window-dressing
that does not bear upon the existing nationalist entities.

The reason cannot be that Islamic action relates to a religion while
the other world movements are of political or economic nature.The
communist or the 'Mediterranean' ideals are redolent of 'belief' and
cultural implications; and Islamic action includes 'worldly' fields in
its purview. Once again, Arab nationalism faces us with a contradiction
that can only be explained by its anti-Islamic stance.


