Three Arguments of Arab Nationalism
===================================

Arab nationalism is not a well-argued or defined doctrine, as has
already become clear in the previous sections of the present paper. Its
advocates usually have a limited repertoire of arguments that derive
their only strength from being tirelessly repeated by their propaganda
and uncritically circulated as self-evident truths.These arguments are
weak and they reveal the stress of the contradictions we have examined.
I now propose to round off this criticism of the idea of Arab
nationalism by discussing three of such arguments that are frequently
advanced.

**1. The Argument of 'National Unity:'**

The most powerful argument proudly displayed in the arsenal of Arab
nationalists is that their doctrine will solve the problems of the
non-Muslim minorities in the Arab countries by abolishing the principle
of religious rule by the Muslim majority and substituting it with
nationalist rule in which the higher authority will be secular and under
which the minorities will regain their 'rights.'

There are no religious minorities in the 'Arab world' except the Copts
in Egypt, who have been assimilated into the Muslim majority in all
walks of life and who live in harmony with it unless provoked from the
outside, and the Christians and some deviant sects in the Levant. The
latter have been hostile to Islam for centuries and have cultivated
close ties with the imperialist powers and world Christendom in modern
times.

It is among them that the idea of Arab nationalism emerged to serve as
an instrument of attack upon the Caliphate and Islam and to separate the
Arab countries from the rule of Islam to be an easy prey for the
European imperialists and their clients -- the Westernized elite. It was
these early pioneers', who could not write Arabic proficiently, that
called for Arab' nationalism with their entire inspiration coming from
the West and their sentiments drawn to it.

In the light of the confinement of disaffected minorities to a narrow
corner of the Arab world, the primacy given to this issue by Arab
nationalism raises doubts about this movement. It has very wide claims
over all aspects of life and it declares its intention to replace Islam
as the guiding project' of the Arabs.

When the major justification given to these bold claims turns out to be
the solution of a limited minority's problems that only exist in the
minds of some members of those minorities themselves, suspicion is
naturally aroused.Religious minorities in the Arab world did not suffer
from persecution under Islam or the 'Uthmani State.

Barring the usual tensions that may occur, they have attained a secure
and advanced status that made them ambitious for more, particularly with
the penetration of European influence into the Ottoman-ruled Arab
provinces. The Maronites in Lebanon used their links with France to
agitate against the 'Uthmani State calling for an independent
Christian-dominated enclave in Lebanon which was actually realized
almost a century later under Western auspices.

This agitation and similar rebelliousness by other Levantine minorities
against a tolerant Islamic rule were primarily motivated by religious
sentiments and were coupled with enthusiastic entry into alliances with
such colonial powers as the French and the British in the nineteenth
century. There was no talk initially about an Arab dimension or
'nationalism' when this minority first began its plotting against the
'Uthmani State.

Into this context the 'Arab' dimension was suddenly introduced to serve
both as a cover for these moves towards minority secession with Western
backing and as a skilful tool to engage the Arab Muslims in a struggle
against Islam and its rule. For, 'Arab' is a critical and sensitive term
to use. It has been indissolubly tied to Islam as almost to become
synonymous with it. At the same time, it does not clearly indicate Islam
and may be filled with non-Islamic, if not anti-Islamic, content, such
as the reference to the pre-Islamic age. In this way, it can be used for
deception and propaganda purposes with the first meaning displayed and
the second implied or intended.

This is how it came to serve the conspiring minorities of the Levant
and disguise their far from 'nationalist' ties to the West. It dragged
with it the idea of nationalism with its secular essence as a further
aid in disguise and in luring the unsuspecting Arab away from his
Islamic allegiances.

This basically religious agitation against Islam and its rule is
exposed fully in the insistence by Arab nationalism on the argument of
'national unity.' It explains to us why a movement that is supposedly
secular and engrossed in a wide-ranging 'project' for the renaissance of
the Arabs should pay such exaggerated attention to an imaginary problem
that does not arise in Islam either theoretically or in practice,

and that, if it arose, can easily find a solution within the tolerant
and humane precepts of Islam. This argument only reveals that the main
concern of the Arab nationalists is to continue that plan of the Levant
minorities---independence from Islam and ties with the West---and to
place before the other quiescent minorities the prospect of a similar
project.

It is ironic that the Arab nationalists, who come to the Muslim
majority and ask them to shed their allegiance to Islamic teachings on
unity and to Islam's priority and authority over their lives, come also
with a call for more commitment by the non-Muslims towards their own
creeds. They completely ignore that their alleged championship of the
very small minorities comes at the expense of the overwhelming majority
of Muslims whom they address.

This is because their definition of minority rights has been of the
negative type. These rights will be secured only against Islam, when
Islamic rule has been abolished, and when the Muslims have been
secularized and Westernized. In fact, the last words point to the
paradox involved in this Arab nationalist view.The rights of the
minorities will be guaranteed and their problems solved only when the
majority of Muslim Arabs have become like the Christians of Europe; that
is, like the Christian minorities in the Arab world. This can only be
described as a form of sectarian blackmail.

The nationalists, who are so enthusiastic for minority rights, do not
attempt to search for them in Islam or to work for them, supposing that
they have been violated under its rule. They do not even care to define
these rights and problems except in the negative sense mentioned above:
the rights of the non-Muslims will be guaranteed and their problems
solved when Islam itself is liquidated.

Thus, Arab nationalism poses itself primarily as the solution of
certain undefined problems occurring to some small minorities at the
expense of the Muslim majority. Their proposed 'nationalist entity,'
which has so far failed to solve the minority problems, as witnessed by
the renewed sectarian tensions in some Arab countries, will also create
other problems.

It will clash with the strongly entrenched local nationalisms in many
Arab countries, it will come into conflict with racial and linguistic
minorities in these countries, and it will collide with the
universally-oriented movements like the Islamic and, to some extent, the
communist.The grand scheme of Arab nationalism boils down to a
suspicious obsession with a so-called minority problem for the solution
of which a host of other problems will be created, foremost amongst
which is the obliteration of the identity of the Muslim majority of
Arabs. In practice, these problems have actually been created and Arab
nationalism has, in that sphere, proved itself a mere tool for achieving
the hegemony of religious and political minorities.

In Syria it was the Christians and then the Alawites who used Arab
nationalism as a cover ideology to disguise their power-seeking that
ended in tragedy for the Muslim majority. In Iraq it is the
secularist-Christian minority that rules under the banner of Arab
nationalism and leads the Muslim people of their country to attack the
Muslims of Iran.In Lebanon the Christians raised the same nationalist
slogans only to drop them in recent times and uncover their real designs
and alliances with the enemies of Arabs and Muslims alike.

The Arab nationalist argument concerning the minorities, often
disguised by the positive-sounding phrase of 'national unity,' betrays
much about the backgrounds, intentions, and inconsistencies of this
idea.


