2. the Argument of 'modernity
=============================

There is a constellation of words that are always present in the Arab
nationalist propaganda and which are produced as arguments in favour of
this idea. These words include 'modernity,' 'progress,' 'the age,'
'reason,' 'enlightenment,' and similar phrases that supposedly support
the Arab nationalist doctrine against its Islamic opponents, who are
usually described by a counter-group of words like 'reactionary,'
'backward,' etc.

It is obvious that the mere repetition of a handful of favourable terms
does not in-itself constitute an argument, but may be of some propaganda
value. However, when these words are used in Arab nationalist writings
they usually carry a Westernized content of a leftist character. This is
another evidence to the essentially dependent nature of a doctrine that
brags about being 'Arab' and 'independent.''Modernity,' in nationalist
usage, means to establish a society similar to that of the West, and
'progress' is measured with reference to that model. 'Enlightenment' and
'reason' mean thinking and behaving in the secularist, materialist modes
of Europe.

Islamic thought has come in recent years to analyze and criticize the
arsenal of favourable terms circulated by the Arab nationalists and,
indeed, by all sections of the secularist spectrum. It is usually
pointed out that these terms are relative and abstract and must be
placed in a certain frame of reference when used. The critics often
indicate the confused use by the nationalists of these terms.

However, it can easily be demonstrated that even in the Western context
the content of the Arab nationalists' terms cannot be described as
modern, progressive, rational, or enlightened. Nationalism of the kind
that prevailed in Europe has been superseded by 'the modern age.' An
'enlightened' and 'progressive' socialism or Marxism, from which the
Arab nationalists borrow much of their ideas, thinks in global terms and
defines man in universal material terms that are basically
socio-economic and not racial or even cultural.

A new 'nationalism' has been created in the Soviet Union (I am only
speaking here about the ideal claims) that cuts across old nationalist
lines and unites and merges them on the basis of an internationalist
creed.

The 'enlightened' and 'rational' secular ideas or attitudes that the
Arab nationalists display are more often than not hackneyed remnants of
nineteenth century positivist-materialist thought which are now dead
museum pieces. It is certainly not rational or enlightened to present
vague emotional formulations mixed with outmoded racist thought as the
basis for Arab nationalism. It is equally far from reason to steal the
cultural unification factors created by Islam to join all those who
believe in it and make them constitutive of an Arab nationalism that
ignores Islam or sets itself against it.

The Arab nationalists usually argue that they are working in the spirit
of the age to create a larger entity out of local nationalisms in the
Middle East area just as is now being attempted in Europe through
various 'unions.' This, however, does not hide the fact that their call
is essentially disintegrative and not unifying.

To unite some local nationalisms, a task in which Arab nationalists
have failed miserably, is surely a paltry game compared to the serious
cleavage which Arab nationalism has caused in the Muslim world along
with non-Arab chauvinism. It should also be mentioned that the claimed
unity will be in a secularist, Westernized framework which is a loss to
Islam.

In fact, Arab nationalism has a chronic tendency to degenerate into
local nationalism which in its turn keeps the old Arab slogans to
legitimize the local tyrants' claims to leadership outside their own
countries.The Arab nationalists ignore the fact that religion -- Judaism
and Christianity -- is now a strong unifying force in the West.

The rational, enlightened, and modernist Westerners to whom the
nationalists owe so much are now flocking back in increasing numbers to
their religion which is employed to establish a world-wide identity and
entity through the activities of the big churches. The other Westerners
are engaged in a similar universal quest through the other Western
creeds: liberalism, socialism, and Marxism.

This argument of Arab nationalism turns out to be a mere empty rhetoric
that only reveals the depth to which that doctrine is attached to Europe
in contradiction to its declared principles, at least from the
theoretical point of view.


**3. The Argument of 'Practicality**

With the weakness of their ideas being felt more and more, the Arab
nationalists have developed this argument in the face of criticisms from
Islamic quarters. Islam, which they view in a secular perspective, is
seen by them as an unfit alternative for nationalism. Its civilization
has failed many centuries ago and its political expression, the
caliphate, has gone for ever after displaying its inherent
defects.Moreover, according to views propagated by some orientalists,
Islam does not really have anything to offer beyond some general moral
tenets. The social and political spheres are thus open before an Arab
nationalism that offers a practical alternative.

It is tempting to quash this argument by citing the practical record of
Arab nationalist forces that have ruled most Arab countries for
different periods throughout the last thirty years or more. They have
ruled in dictatorial fashion liquidating all other political tendencies
and singling out the Islamic for particular harshness to prevent the
evolving of a credible Islamic removement and, hence, a viable
alternative to their rule. However, their failures in the social,
economic, and political fields have been resounding.

All of the famous 'socialist experiments' introduced by the Arab
nationalist regimes and elites have ended in ruin and their political
and military efforts have been unable either to unify the Arabs or face
Israel except in one war---that of Ramadan -- which was won in its
initial stages only by Islamic fervour and slogans.

Arab nationalist regimes led by military, intellectual, and sectarian
elites of a secularist and Westernized bent have practised dictatorship
at its worst, strangling all sorts of liberties and human rights. They
enforced Western ideas and values on Islamic societies, causing chaos
and deterioration in them, Their much-vaunted development schemes were
mostly ill-conceived and badly planned as well as incompetently and
corruptly managed.

In contrast, one can point to many practical successes of Islamic rule
throughout its history though the comparison would be unjust to it
because the Arab nationalists have such power in their hands that not
even the most despotic Muslim ruler could have dreamt of. It may be more
to the point to refer to the contemporary success of Islamic movements
on many social and intellectual levels even when they have been
subjected to severe persecution and distortion of their ideas and
goals.

The case of the Muslim Brothers in Egypt as well as that of the Islamic
Societies in recent years may be considered in this connection.Arab
nationalism is in a worse condition, in the estimation of viability,
than what it thinks Islam is in. If we grant that both movements
currently exhibit signs of failure or weakness, Islam has at its credit
the fact that it has been forcefully excluded from the sphere of action
in its own countries for more than a century now by repeated colonialist
and, then, nationalist attacks.

Islam is viable as a living creed which shapes the believers' values
and view of life and it is not, as Arab nationalism, a travesty of
certain nineteenth century European ideas which have outlived their
interest there. If both Islam and Arab nationalism are seen, for the
sake of argument, to be in an equal state of failure from the political
point of view, the decision to opt for one or the other reflects a value
judgement.

The Muslim can have many arguments to justify his choice of Islam, some
of them appealing to Arab heritage. The Arab nationalist, on the other
hand, can only argue by reference to Western or non-Arab terms and views
to defend his doctrine.

The argument from practicality is reduced, in fact, to the contention
by Arab nationalists that since their elites are in possession of power
and influence, their idea is more practicable than Islam which has been
excluded by them from the spheres of action. It is the old 'status quo'
argument that the nationalists must have imported from bourgeois Europe
of the last century. In this attitude, they do not only attribute
revolutionary (and, hence, 'progressive') tendencies to Islam but
also.


