An Introduction To 'irfan
=========================

by : Martyr Murtada Mutahhari

This short introduction to irfan is a part of the author's book Ashnai
ba ulum e Islami (An Introduction to the Islamic Sciences) written in
seven parts,

1) logic,
2) philosophy,
3) kalam,
4) irfan,
5) fiqh,
6) usul al fiqh,
7) hikmat e amali (ethics).

'Irfan is one of the disciplines that originated within the realm of
Islamic culture and developed there to attain a high level of
sophistication. But before we can begin to discuss 'irfan, we must
realize that it can be approached from two viewpoints: the social and
the academic. Unlike the scholars of other Islamic disciplines - such as
the Quranic commentators (mufassirun), the scholars of hadith
(muhaddithun), the jurisprudents (fuqaha'), the theologians
(mutakallimun), the philosophers, the men of literature,

and the poets - the 'urafa' are a group of scholars who have not only
developed their own science, 'irfan, producing great scholars and
important books, but have also given rise within the Islamic world to a
distinct social grouping.

In this the 'urafa' are unique; for the scholars of the other Islamic
disciplines - such as the jurisprudents, for instance - form solely
academic groupings and are not viewed as a social group distinct from
the rest of society.

In view of this distinction the gnostics, when referred to as belonging
to a certain academic discipline, are called 'urafa' and when referred
to as a social group are generally called Sufis (mutasawwifah).

The 'urafa' and sufis are not regarded as forming a separate sect in
Islam, nor do they claim themselves to be such. They are to be found
within every Islamic school and sect, yet, at the same time, they
coalesce to form a distinct social group. The factors that set them
apart from the rest of Islamic society are a distinctive chain of ideas
and opinions, a special code governing their social intercourse, dress
and even, sometimes, the way they wear their hair and beards, and their
living communally in their hospices. (Pers. Khaniqah; Ar-ribat, zawiyah;
Turk. tekkiye)

Of course, there are and have always been 'urafa' - particularly
amongst the Shi'ah - who bear none of these external signs to
distinguish them socially from others; yet, at the same time, they have
been profoundly involved in the spiritual methodology of 'irfan (sayr wa
suluk). It is these who are the real gnostics; not those who have
invented for themselves hundreds of special mannerisms and customs and
have brought innovations into being.

In this series of lectures, in which we are taking a general look at
Islamic sciences and disciplines, we will not be dealing with the social
and sectarian aspect of gnosis, that is to say, tasawwuf (sufism).

We will limit ourselves to an examination of 'irfan as a discipline and
branch amongst the branches of Islam's scientific culture. To look
thoroughly at the social aspects of sufism would require us to examine
its causes and origins, the effects - positive and negative, beneficial
and detrimental - it has and has had upon Islamic society, the nature of
the relations between the sufis and other Islamic groups, the hue it has
given to the whole of Islamic teachings, and the role it has played in
the diffusion of Islam throughout the world.

This is far beyond the range of these lectures, and here we will
consider the tradition of 'irfan only as a science and as one of the
academic disciplines of Islam.

'Irfan, as a scientific and academic discipline, itself has two
branches: the practical and the theoretical. The practical aspect of
'irfan describes and explains the relationship and responsibilities the
human being bears towards itself, towards the world and towards God.
Here, 'irfan is similar to ethics (akhlaq), both of them being practical
sciences. There do exist differences, however, and later we will explain
them.

The practical teaching of 'irfan is also called the itinerary of the
spiritual path (sayr wa suluk; lit. 'traveling and journeying'). Here,
the wayfarer (salik) who desires to reach the goal of the sublime peak
of humanness - that is to say, tawhid - is told where to set off, the
ordered stages and stations that he must traverse, the states and
conditions he will undergo at these stations, and the events that will
befall him.

Needless to say, all these stages and stations must be passed under the
guidance and supervision of a mature and perfect example of humanity
who, having traveled this path, is aware of the manners and ways of each
station. If not, and there is no perfect human being to guide him on his
path, he is in danger of going astray.

The perfect man, the master, who must necessarily accompany the novice
on the spiritual journey according to the 'urafa', has been called in
their vocabulary as Ta'ir al-quds (the Holy Bird) and Khidr:

Accompany my zeal on the path, O Ta'ir al-Quds,
The path to the goal is long, and I new to the journey.
Leave not this stage without the company of Khidr,
There is darkness ahead; be afraid of losing the way.

Of course, there is a world of difference between the tawhid of the
'arif and the general view of tawhid. For the 'arif, tawhid is the
sublime peak of humanness and the final goal of his spiritual journey,
while for the ordinary people, and even the philosophers, tawhid means
the essential Unity of the Necessary Being. For the 'arif, tawhid means
that the ultimate reality is only God, and everything other than God is
mere appearance, not reality. The 'arif's tawhid means that 'other than
God there is nothing'.

For the 'arif, tawhid means following a path and arriving at the stage
when he sees nothing but God. However, this view of tawhid is not
accepted by the opponents of the 'urafa', and some of them have declared
such a view to be heretic. Yet the 'urafa' are convinced that this is
the only true tawhid, and that the other stages of it cannot be said to
be free of polytheism (shirk).

The 'urafa' do not see the attainment of the ideal stage of tawhid to
be the function of reason and reflection. Rather they consider it to be
the work of the heart, and attained through struggle, through the
journeying, and through purifying and disciplining the self.

This, however, is the practical aspect of 'irfan, which is not unlike
ethics in this respect, for both discuss a series of things that 'ought
to be done'. However, there are differences, and the first of these is
that 'irfan discusses the human being's relationship with itself, with
the world and with God, and its primal concern is man's relationship
with God.

Systems of ethics, on the other hand, do not all consider it necessary
for the relationship between man and God to be discussed; it is only the
religious ethical systems that give importance and attention to this
matter.

The second difference is that the methodology of spiritual progression,
sayr wa suluk, as the words sayr (traveling) and suluk (journeying)
imply, is a dynamic one, while ethics is static. That is, 'irfan speaks
about a point of departure, a destination, and the stages and stations
which, in their correct order, the wayfarer must traverse in order to
arrive at the final destination.

In the 'arif's view, there really is a path before the human being - a
path that is actual and not in the least a metaphor - and this path must
be followed stage by stage, station by station; to arrive at any station
without having traversed the preceding one is, in the 'arif's view,
impossible.

Thus the 'arif views the human soul to be a living organism, like a
seedling or like a child, whose perfection lies in growth and maturation
in accordance with a particular system and order.

In ethics, however, the subjects are handled solely as a series of
virtues, such as righteousness, honesty, sincerity, chastity,
generosity, justice, and preferring others over oneself (ithar), to name
but a few, with which the soul must be adorned. In the view of ethics,
the human soul is rather like a house to be furnished with a series of
beautiful objects, pictures and decorations, and no importance is
attached to a particular sequence.

It is not important where one begins or where one ends. It is of no
consequence whether one starts at the ceiling or at the walls, at the
top of a wall or at the bottom and so on. On the contrary, in 'irfan the
ethical elements are discussed in a dynamic perspective.

The third difference between these two disciplines is that the
spiritual elements of ethics are limited to concepts and ideas that are
generally commonplace, while the spiritual elements of 'irfan are much
more profound and expansive.

In the spiritual methodology of 'irfan, much mention is made of the
heart and the states and happenings it will experience, and these
experiences are known only to the wayfarer of the path during the course
of his struggles and his journey on the path, while other people have no
idea of these states and happenings.

The other branch of 'irfan is related to interpretation of being, that
is, God, the universe, and the human being. Here 'irfan resembles
philosophy, for both seek to understand existence, whereas practical
'irfan seeks, like ethics, to change the human being. However, just as
there are differences between practical 'irfan and ethics, so also there
exist differences between theoretical 'irfan and philosophy, and in the
following section we will explain these differences.

**Theoretical Irfan**

Theoretical 'irfan, as said before, is concerned with ontology, and
discusses God, the world, and the human being. This aspect of 'irfan
resembles theological philosophy (falsafeh-ye ilahi), which also seeks
to describe being.

Like theological philosophy, 'irfan also defines its subject, essential
principles and problems, but whereas philosophy relies solely upon
rational principles for its arguments, 'irfan bases its deductions on
principles discovered through mystic experience (kashf) and then reverts
to the language of reason to explain them.

The rationalistic deductions of philosophy can be likened to studying a
passage written originally in the same language; the arguments of
'irfan, on the other hand, are like studying something that has been
translated from some other language in which it was originally written.
To be more precise, the 'arif wishes to explain those things which he
claims to have witnessed with his heart and his entire being by using
the language of reason.

The ontology of 'irfan is in several ways profoundly different from the
ontology of philosophers. In the philosopher's view, both God and other
things have reality, with the difference that while God is the Necessary
Being (wajib al-wujud) and Existing-By-Himself, things other than God
are only possible existents (mumkin al-wujud), existing-
through-another, and are effects of the Necessary Being.

However, the 'arif's ontology has no place for things other than God as
existing alongside Him, even if they are effects of which He is the
cause; rather, the Divine Being embraces and encompasses all things.
That is to say, all things are names, qualities, and manifestations of
God, not existents alongside Him.

The aim of the philosopher also differs from that of the 'arif. The
philosopher wishes to understand the world; he wishes to form in his
mind a correct and relatively complete picture of the realm of
existence.

The philosopher considers the highest mark of human perfection to lie
in perceiving, by way of reason, the exact nature of existence, so that
the macrocosm finds a reflection within his mind while he in turn
becomes a rational microcosm. Thus it is said when defining philosophy
that: [Philosophy is] the (final) development of a rational knower
('alim) into an actual world ('alam).

This means that philosophy is a study whereby a human being becomes a
rational microcosm similar to the actual macrocosm. But the 'arif, on
the other hand, would have nothing to do with reason and understanding;
he wishes to reach the very kernel and reality of existence, God, to
become connected to it and witness it.

In the 'arif's view, human perfection does not mean having a picture of
the realm of existence in one's mind; rather it is to return, by means
of treading the spiritual path of progression, to the origin from which
one has come, to overcome the separation of distance between oneself and
the Divine Essence, and, in the realm of nearness, to obliterate one's
finite self to abide in Divine Infinitude.

The tools of the philosopher are reason, logic and deduction, while the
tools of the 'arif are the heart, spiritual struggle, purification and
disciplining of the self, and an inner dynamism.

Later, when we come to the world-view of 'irfan, we shall also discuss
how it differs from the world-view of philosophy.

'Irfan, both practical and theoretical, is closely connected with the
holy religion of Islam. Like every other religion - in fact more than
any other religion - Islam has explained the relationships of man with
God, with the world, and with himself; and it has also given attention
to describing and explaining existence.

Now, the question inevitably arises here about the relation between the
ideas of 'irfan and the teachings of Islam. Of course, the 'urafa' never
claim that they have something to say that is above or beyond Islam, and
they are earnest in their denials of any such imputations. In fact, they
claim to have discovered more of the realities of Islam, and that they
are the true Muslims. Whether in the practical teaching of 'irfan or the
theoretical, the 'urafa' always support their views by referral to the
Quran, the Sunnah of the Prophet and the Imams, and the practice of the
eminent amongst the Prophet's Companions.

However, others have held different views about the 'urafa', and these
may be mentioned:

(a) A group of muhaddithun and jurisprudents has been of the view that
the 'urafa' are not practically bound to Islam, and that their referrals
to the Quran and the Sunnah are merely a ruse to deceive the
simple-minded people and to draw to themselves the hearts of the
Muslims. This group is of the view that 'irfan, basically, has no
connection with Islam.

(b) A group of modernists who do not have favourable relations with
Islam and are ready to give a tumultuous welcome to anything that gives
the appearance of freedom from the observances prescribed by the
Shari'ah (ibahah) and which can be interpreted as a movement or uprising
in the past against Islam and its laws, like the first group, believe
that in practice the 'urafa' had no faith or belief in Islam, and that
'irfan and tasawwuf was a movement of the non-Arab peoples against Islam
and the Arabs, disguised under the robes of spirituality.

This group and the first are united in their view that the 'urafa' are
opposed to Islam. The difference between them is that the first group
considers Islam to be sacred and, by banking on the Islamic sentiments
of the Muslim masses, wishes to condemn the 'urafa' and, in this way, to
hoot them off from the stage of the Islamic sciences. The second group,
however, by leaning on the great personalities of the 'urafa'- some of
whom are of world-renown - wishes to use them as a means of propaganda
against Islam.

They detract Islam on the grounds that the subtle and sublime ideas of
'irfan found in Islamic culture are in fact alien to Islam. They
consider that these elements entered Islamic culture from outside, for,
they say, Islam and its ideas thrive on a far lower level. This group
also claims that the 'urafa's citations of the Quran and hadith were
solely due to dissimulation and fear of the masses. This, they claim,
was a means for them to save their lives.

(c) Besides the above two, there is also a third group which takes a
rather neutral view of 'irfan. The view of this group is that 'irfan and
sufism contain many innovations and deviations that do not accord with
the Quran and the traditions; that this is more true of the practical
teaching of 'irfan than its theoretical ideas, especially where it takes
a sectarian aspect.

Yet, they say, the 'urafa', like the Islamic scholars of other ranks
and the majority of Islamic sects, have had the most sincere intentions
towards Islam, never wishing to make any assertions contrary to its
teachings. It is quite possible that they have made mistakes, in the
same way as the other types of scholars - theologians, philosophers,
Quranic commentators, and jurisprudents - have made mistakes, but this
has never been due to an evil intention towards Islam.

In the view of this group, the issue of the 'urafa's supposed
opposition to Islam was raised by those who harbored a special prejudice
either against 'irfan or against Islam. If a person were to
disinterestedly study the books of the 'urafa', provided that he is
acquainted with their terminology and language, although he might come
across many a mistake, he will not doubt the sincerity of their complete
devotion to Islam.

Of the three views, I prefer the third. I do not believe that the
'urafa' have had evil intentions towards Islam. At the same time I
believe that it is necessary for those having specialized knowledge of
'irfan and of the profound teachings of Islam to undertake an objective
research and disinterested study of the conformity of the issues of
'irfan with Islamic teachings.

**Shari'ah, Tariqah and Haqiqah**

One of the important points of contention between the 'urafa' and the
non-'urafa', especially the jurisprudents, is the particular teaching of
'irfan regarding the Shari'ah, the Tariqah (the Way) and the Haqiqah
(the Reality). Both agree in saying that the Shari'ah, the body of
Islamic laws, is based upon a series of realities and beneficial
objectives.

The jurisprudents generally interpret these goals to consist of certain
things that lead the human being to felicity, that is, to the highest
possible level of benefit from God's material and spiritual favors to
man. The 'urafa', on the other hand, believe that all the paths end in
God, and that all goals and realities are merely the means, causes and
agencies that impel the human being towards God.

The jurisprudents say only that underlying the laws of the Shariah is a
series of benign objectives, that these objectives constitute the cause
and spirit of the Shari'ah, and that the only way of attaining these
objectives is to act in accordance with the Shari'ah. But the 'urafa'
believe that the realities and objectives underlying the laws of the
Shari'ah are of the nature of stations and stages on the human being's
ascent towards God and in the process of man's access to the ultimate
reality.

The 'urafa' believe that the esoteric aspect of the Shari'ah is the
Way, the Tariqah, at whose end is the Reality (al-Haqiqah), that is
tawhid (in the sense mentioned earlier), which is a stage acquired after
the obliteration of the 'arif's self and his egoism. Thus the gnostic
believes in three things: the Shari'ah, the Tariqah, and the Haqiqah,
and that the Shari'ah is the means to, or the shell of the Tariqah, and
the Tariqah again is the means to or the shell of the kernel of
Haqiqah.

We have explained how the jurisprudents view Islam in the lectures on
kalam. 1 They believe that the Islamic teachings can be grouped into
three branches. The first of these is kalam, which deals with the
principal doctrines (usul al-'aqa'id). In matters related to the
doctrines it is necessary for the human being to acquire, through
reason, shakeless belief and faith.

The second branch is ethics (akhlaq). It sets forth the instructions
about one's duty in regard to ethical virtues and vices.

The third branch, fiqh, deals with the laws (ahkam), which relate to
our external actions and behavior.

These three branches of Islamic teachings are separate from each other.
The branch of kalam is related to thought and reason; the branch of
akhlaq is related to the self, its faculties and habits; and the branch
of fiqh is related to the organs and limbs of the body.

However, on the subject of doctrines, the 'urafa' do not consider
merely mental and rational belief to be sufficient. They claim that
whatever is to be believed in must be arrived at; one must strive to
remove the veils between oneself and those realities.

Similarly, with respect to the second branch they do not consider
ethics to be adequate on account of its being static and limited. In
place of a philosophical ethics, they suggest a spiritual methodology
(sayr wa suluk) with its particular composition.

Finally, in the third branch, they have no criticisms; only in specific
instances do they express opinions that could, possibly, be taken as
being opposed to the laws of fiqh.

These three branches are, therefore, termed by the 'urafa' as Shari'ah,
Tariqah, and Haqiqah. Yet they believe that in exactly the same way as
the human being cannot be divided into three sections, that is, the
body, the self, and reason, which are not separate from each other and
form an indivisible whole of which they constitute inward and outward
aspects, so it is with the Shari'ah, the Tariqah, and the Haqiqah.

One is outward shell, another is inward kernel, and the third is the
kernel of the kernel. There is a difference, however, in that the
'urafa' consider the stages of human existence to be more than three;
that is, they believe in a stage that transcends the domain of reason.
God willing, this shall be explained later.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
1. Murtada Mutahhari, An Introduction to Ilm al Kalam, transl. By Ali
Quli Qarai, Al-Tawhid, vol II No. 2.


