The Origins of Islamic 'irfan
=============================

In order to understand any discipline or science, it is essential to
study its history and the historical developments associated with it.
One must also be acquainted with the personalities who have originated
or inherited it and with its source books. In this lecture, and the
fourth one, we will turn to these matters.

The first issue to arise is whether Islamic 'irfan is a discipline that
originated in the Islamic tradition, such as fiqh, usul al-fiqh, tafsir,
and 'ilm al-hadith. That is, is it one of those disciplines that were
originated by the Muslims who, having received in Islam the original
inspiration, sources and raw material, developed them by discovering
their rules and principles?

Or is it one of those sciences that found their way into the Islamic
world from outside, like medicine and mathematics, which were then
developed further by the Muslims in the environment of Islamic
civilization and culture? Or is there a third possibility?

The 'urafa' themselves maintain the first of these alternatives, and
are in no way ready to admit any other. Some orientalists, however, have
insisted - and some still insist - on the second view that 'irfan and
its subtle and sublime ideas have come into the Islamic world from
outside. Sometimes they maintain a Christian origin for it, and claim
that mysticism in Islam is the result of early contact of the Muslims
with Christian monks. At other times they claim it to be a result of the
Persians' reaction against Islam and the Arabs.

Then again sometimes they make it entirely a product of Neo-Platonism,
which itself was composed of the ideas of Plato, Aristotle and
Pythagoras, influenced by Alexandrian gnosticism and the views and
beliefs of Judaism and Christianity. Sometimes they claim it to be
derived from Buddhism. Similarly, the opponents of 'irfan in the Islamic
world also strive to show the whole of 'irfan and sufism as being alien
to Islam, and for this purpose they too maintain that gnosis has
non-Islamic origins.

A third view admits that 'irfan, whether practical or theoretical,
draws its primary inspiration and material from Islam itself; having
taken this material, it has tried to give it a structure by devising
certain rules and principles and in this process has also been
influenced by external currents, specially the ideas of scholasticism
and philosophy, especially of the Illuminationist school. Now there are
a number of questions which arise in this context.

Firstly, to what extent have the 'urafa' been successful in developing
correct rules and principles for structuring their material? Have the
'urafa' been as successful in carrying this out as the jurisprudents? To
what extent have the 'urafa' felt themselves bound not to deviate from
the actual principles of Islam? And, similarly, to what extent has
'irfan been influenced by the ideas of outside traditions?

Has 'irfan assimilated these external ideas by shaping them in its
particular moulds, and used them in its development? Or, contrarily,
have the waves of these foreign currents carried away 'irfan in their
flow?

Each of these questions requires a separate study and careful research.
But that which is certain is that 'irfan has derived its basic sources
of inspiration from Islam itself and from nowhere else. Let us consider
this point.

Those who accept the first view, and to some extent also those who take
the second view, see Islam as being a simple religion, popular and
unsophisticated, free of all sorts of mysteries and difficult or
unintelligible profundities.

To them, the doctrinal system of Islam rests on tawhid (monotheism),
which means that just as a house has a builder other than itself, so the
world has a transcendent Creator other than itself. Also, the basis of
man's relationship with the enjoyments of this world is, in their view,
zuhd (abstinence). In their definition of zuhd, it means refraining from
the ephemeral pleasures of this world in order to attain the everlasting
enjoyments of the Hereafter. Besides these, there are a series of simple
and practical rituals and laws that are handled by fiqh.

Therefore, in this group's view, that which the 'urafa' call tawhid is
an idea that goes beyond the simple monotheism of Islam; for the 'arif's
view of tawhid is existentialist monism in the sense that he believes
that nothing exists except God, His Names, Attributes, and
manifestations.

The 'arif's conception of the spiritual path (sayr wa suluk), likewise,
they say, also goes beyond the zuhd enjoined by Islam, for the spiritual
path of 'irfan involves a number of ideas and concepts - such as love of
God, annihilation in God, epiphany - that are not to be found in Islamic
piety.

Similarly, the 'arif's concept of the Tariqah goes beyond the Shari'ah
of Islam; for the practice of the Tariqah involves matters unknown to
fiqh.

Furthermore, in the view of this group, the pious among the Holy
Prophet's Companions whom the 'urafa' claim to be their precursors were
no more than pious men. Their souls knew nothing of the spiritual path
of 'irfan and its tawhid. They were simple otherworldly people who
abstained from worldly pleasures and directed their attention to the
Hereafter and whose souls were dominated by mixed feelings of fear and
hope - fear of the punishment of Hell and hope of the rewards of
Paradise. That is all.

In reality this view can in no way be endorsed. The primal sources of
Islam are far more extensively richer than what this group - out of
ignorance or knowingly - supposes. Neither the Islamic concept of tawhid
is as simple and empty as they suppose, nor Islam limits man's
spirituality to a dry piety, nor were the pious Companions of the Holy
Prophet simple ascetics, nor is the Islamic code of conduct confined to
the actions of bodily limbs and organs.

In this lecture, brief evidence will be produced that will suffice to
show that Islam's fundamental teachings are capable of having inspired a
chain of profound spiritual ideas, both in the theoretical and the
practical realms of 'irfan. However, the question of the extent to which
the Islamic mystics have used and benefited from Islam's fundamental
teachings and the extent to which they may have deviated, is one that we
cannot go into in these short lectures.

On the subject of tawhid, the Holy Quran never likens God and the
creation to a builder and a house. The Quran identifies God as the
Creator of the world, stating at the same time that His Holy Essence is
everywhere and with everything:

Wither so ever you turn, there is the Face of God ... . (2:115)
... And We are nearer to him than the jugular vein. (50:16)
He is the First and the Last, the Outward and the Inward; ... .
(57:3)

Evidently, these kind of verses represent a call to the thinking minds
to a conception of tawhid which goes beyond commonplace monotheism. A
tradition of al-Kafi states that God revealed the opening verses of the
Sura al-Hadid and the Sura al-'Ikhlas because He knew that in future
generations there will emerge people who will think profoundly about
tawhid.

As to the spiritual path of 'irfan, in which a series of stages leading
to ultimate nearness to God are conceived, it suffices to take into
account the Quranic verses which mention such notions as liqa 'Allah
(meeting with God), ridwan Allah (God's good pleasure), or those which
relate to revelation (wahy), ilham (inspiration), and the angels'
speaking to others who are not prophets - for instance, Mary - and
especially the verses relating to the Holy Prophet's Ascension (mi'raj;
17:1).

In the Quran there is mention of the 'commanding self' (al-nafs
al-'ammarah; 12:53), the 'self-accusative self' (al-nafs al-lawwamah;
75:2), and the 'contented self' (al-nafs al-mutma'innah; 89:27). There
is mention of 'acquired knowledge' (al-'ilm al-'ifadi) and inspired
knowledge (al-'ilm al-ladunni; 18:65), and of forms of guidance
resulting from spiritual struggle:

And those who struggle in Us, We will surely guide them to Our paths
... (29:69)

Mention is made in the Quran of the purification of the self, and it is
counted as one of the things leading to salvation and deliverance:

(By the self) ... verily he who purifies it has succeeded, while he who
corrupts it has indeed failed. (91:7-10)

There is also repeated mention there of love of God as a passion above
all other human loves and attractions.

The Quran also speaks about all the particles of creation glorifying
and praising God (17:44), and this is phrased in a way to imply that if
one were to perfect his understanding, he would be able to perceive
their praise and magnification of God. Moreover, the Quran raises the
issue of the Divine breath in relation to the nature and constitution of
the human being (32:9).

This, and much more besides, is sufficient to have inspired a
comprehensive and magnificent spirituality regarding God, the world, and
man, particularly regarding his relationship with God.

As previously mentioned, we are not considering how the Muslim 'urafa'
have made use of these resources, or whether their utilization has been
correct or incorrect. We are considering whether there did exist such
great resources that could have provided effective inspiration for
'irfan in the Islamic world.

Even if we suppose that those usually classed as 'urafa' could not make
proper use of them, others who are not classed as such did make use of
them. In addition to the Quran, the traditions, sermons, supplications
(du'a'), polemical dialogues (ihtijajat)\* and the biographies of the
great figures of Islam, all show that the spiritual life current in the
early days of Islam was not merely a lifeless type of asceticism blended
with a worship performed in the hope of the rewards of Paradise.

Concepts and notions are found in the traditions, sermons,
supplications, and polemical dialogues that stand at a very high level
of sublimity. Similarly, the biographies of the leading personalities of
the early days of Islam display many instances of spiritual ecstasy,
visions, occurrences, inner insights, and burning spiritual love. We
will now relate an example of it.

Al-Kafi relates that one morning after performing the dawn prayer, a
young man (Harithah ibn Malik ibn Nu'man al-'Ansari) caught the
Prophet's eye. Lean and pale, his eyes sunken, he gave the impression of
being unaware of his own condition and of being unable to keep his
balance. "How are you?" inquired the Prophet . "I have attained certain
faith," the youth replied. "What is the sign of your certainty?" the
Prophet asked.

The youth replied that his certainty had immersed him in grief. It kept
him awake at night (in worship) and thirsty by day (in fasting), and had
separated him from the world and its matters so completely that it
seemed to him as if he could see the Divine Throne already set up (on
the Judgement Day) to settle the people's accounts, that he together
with all of mankind were raised from the dead.

He said that it seemed to him that even at that moment he could see the
people of Paradise enjoying its bounties, and the people of hell
suffering torments and he could hear the roar of its flames.

The Holy Prophet (S) turned to his Companions and told them, "This is a
man whose heart has been illuminated with the light of faith by God".
Then he said to the youth, "Preserve this condition you are in, and do
not let it be taken away from you." "Pray for me," the youth replied,
"that God may grant me martyrdom."

Not long after this encounter, a battle took place, and the youth,
taking part, was granted his wish and was martyred.

The life, utterances and prayers of the Holy Prophet (S) are rich with
spiritual enthusiasm and ecstasy, and full of the indications of gnosis,
and the 'urafa' often rely on the Prophet's supplications as reference
and evidence for their views.

Similarly, the words of Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali (A), to whom nearly all
the 'urafa' and sufis trace the origin of their orders, are also
spiritually inspiring. I wish to draw attention to two passages of the
Nahj al-balaghah. In Khutbah No. 222, 'Ali states:

Certainly, God, the glorified, has made His remembrance the means of
burnishing the hearts, which makes them hear after deafness, see after
blindness, and makes them submissive after unruliness. In all the
periods and times when there were no prophets, there have been
individuals with whom God - precious are His bounties - spoke in
whispers through their conscience and intellects.

In Khutbah No. 220, speaking about the men of God, he says:

He revives his intellect and mortifies his self, until his body becomes
lean and his coarseness turns into refinement. Then an effulgence of
extreme brightness shines forth for illuminating the path before him,
opening all the doors and leading him straight to the gate of safety and
the (permanent) abode. His feet, carrying his body, become fixed in the
position of safety and comfort on account of that which engages his
heart and on having won the good pleasure of his Lord.

The Islamic supplications, especially those of the Shi'ah, are also
replete with spiritual teachings. The Du'a' Kumayl, the Du'a' Abi
Hamzah, the supplications of al-Sahifat al-Kamilah and the group of
supplications called Sha'baniyyah, all contain the most sublime
spiritual ideas.

With the existence of all these resources in Islam, is there a need for
us to search for the origin of Islamic 'irfan elsewhere?

This reminds us of the case of Abu Dharr al-Ghifari and his protest
against the tyrants of his time and his vocal criticism of their
practices. Abu Dharr was severely critical of the favoritism, partisan
politics, injustice, corruption and tyranny of the post-Prophetic era in
which he lived. This led him to suffer torture and exile, and finally it
was in exile, deserted and alone, that he passed away from this world.

A number of orientalists have raised the question of what motivated Abu
Dharr to act as he did. They are in search of something foreign to the
world of Islam to explain his behavior.

George Jurdaq, a Lebanese Christian, provides an answer to these
orientalists in his book al-'Imam 'Ali, sawt al-'adalah al-'insaniyyah
(Imam 'Ali, the Voice of Human Justice). There he says that he is amazed
at those who wish to trace Abu Dharr's mentality to an extra-Islamic
source. He says it is as if they see someone standing at the side of a
sea or river with a pitcher of water in his hands, and begin to wonder
from which pool he has filled his pitcher, and then, completely ignoring
the nearby sea or river, go off in search of a pool or pond to explain
his full pitcher of water.

What other source other than Islam could have inspired Abu Dharr? Which
source could have the power of Islam in inspiring the likes of Abu Dharr
to rise against the tyrants of this world such as Mu'awiyah?

Now we see a similar pattern in regard to 'irfan. The orientalists are
in search of a non-Islamic source of inspiration of 'irfan, while they
completely overlook the great ocean of Islam.

Can we really be expected to overlook all these resources - the Holy
Quran, the traditions, the sermons, the polemical dialogues, the
supplications, and the biographies - simply in order to give credence to
the view of a group of orientalists and their Eastern followers?

Formerly, the orientalists took great pains to project the origins of
Islamic 'irfan as lying outside the original teachings of Islam. Lately,
however, such individuals as the English R.A. Nicholson and the French
Louis Massignon, after having made extensive studies in Islamic 'irfan,
without being unacquainted with Islam in general, have expressly
admitted that the principal sources of 'irfan are the Quran and the
Prophet's Sunnah.

We will conclude this lecture by quoting a passage by Nicholson from
the book The Legacy of Islam:

(Though Muhammad left no system of dogmatic or mystical theology, the
Qur'an contains the raw materials of both. Being the outcome of feeling
than reflection, the Prophet's statements about God are formally
inconsistent, and while Muslim scholastics have embodied in their creed
the aspect of transcendence, the Sufis, following his example, have
combined the transcendent aspect with that of immanence, on which,
though it is less prominent in the Qur'an, they naturally lay greater
emphasis.) 2

'Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth' (xxiv:35);

'He is the first and the last and the outward and the inward'
(lvii:3);

'there is no god but He; everything is perishing except His Face'
(xxviii:88);

'Have breathed into him (man) of My spirit' (xv:29);

'Verily, We have created man and We know what his soul suggests to him,
for We are nigher unto him than the neck-artery' (1:15);

'wheresoever ye turn, there is the Face of Allah' (ii:114);

'he to whom Allah giveth no light hath no light at all' (xxiv:40).

Surely the seeds of mysticism are here. And, for the early Sufis, the
Qur'an is not only the Word of God: it is the primary means of drawing
near to Him. By fervent prayer, by meditating profoundly on the text as
a whole and in particular on the mysterious passages (xvii:1; liii:1-18)
concerning the Night journey and Ascension, they endeavored to reproduce
the Prophet's mystical experience in themselves. 3

... The doctrine of a mystical union imparted by divine grace goes
beyond anything in the Qur'an, but is stated plainly in apocryphal
traditions of the Prophet, e.g. God said, "My servant draws nigh unto Me
by works of supererogation, and I love him; and when I love him, I am
his ear, so that he hears by Me, and his eye, so that he sees by Me, and
his tongue, so that he speaks by Me, and his hand, so that he takes by
Me." 4

As repeatedly said before, we are not concerned here with the question
whether the 'urafa' have succeeded in correctly utilizing the
inspiration provided by Islam; our purpose was to consider whether the
main source of their inspiration lay within Islam or outside it.


**A Brief History**

The previous lecture dealt with the question of locating the principal
origin of Islamic 'irfan, that is, whether there exists in the teachings
of Islam and the lives of the Holy Prophet and the Imams a precedent
that could have inspired a series of profound and subtle mystical ideas,
on a theoretical level, and which could have prompted spiritual
enthusiasm and mystical elation on a practical level. The answer to this
question was seen to be positive. Now we will continue this
discussion.

The genuine teachings of Islam and the lives of its spiritual leaders,
so rich with spirituality and spiritual splendor, which have provided
the inspiration for profound spirituality in the Islamic world, are not
encompassed by that which is termed as 'irfan or sufism. However, it is
beyond the scope of these lectures to discuss other parts of Islamic
teachings that do not bear this name.

We will continue our discussion on the branch that is labeled as 'irfan
or sufism, and obviously the limited scope of these lectures does not
permit us to go into a critical research.

Here we will try to give an outline of the currents and events that
have occurred within this branch. For this purpose, it appears to be
appropriate that we begin by providing a simple history of 'irfan or
Sufism from the beginnings of Islam until at least the 10th/16th
century, before turning, so far as is practical in a venture such as
this, to an analysis of the issues of 'irfan.

What seems certain is that in the early era of Islam, that is
throughout the 1st/7th century at least, there existed no group amongst
the Muslims known as 'urafa' or sufis. The name sufi was first used in
the 2nd/8th century.

The first person to be called by the name sufi is Abu Hashim al- Kufi.
He lived in the 2nd/8th century and he it was who first built at Ramlah,
in Palestine, a hospice for worship by a group of ascetically- minded
Muslims. 5 The date of Abu Hashim's death is not known, but he was the
teacher of Sufyan al-Thawri who died in 161/777.

Abu al-Qasim Qushayri, himself an eminent 'arif and sufi, states that
the name sufi had appeared before the year 200/815. Nicholson also
states that the name appeared towards the end of the 2nd century H. From
a tradition contained in kitab al-ma'ishah (vol. V) of al-Kafi, it
appears that a group - Sufyan al-Thawri and a number of others - existed
in the time of al-'Imam al-Sadiq (A) (that is to say, during the first
half of the 2nd century H.) who were already called by this name.

If Abu Hashim al-Kufi was the first to be called sufi, then, since he
was the teacher of Sufyan al-Thawri who died in 161/777, this name was
first used during the first half of the 2nd century H., not at its end
(as Nicholson and others have stated). Nor does there appear to be any
doubt that the reason for the name being sufiyyah was their wearing of
wool (sufi: wool). Due to their asceticism, the sufis abstained from
wearing fine garments, and instead followed a practice of wearing
clothes made of coarse wool.

As for the date this group first began to call themselves 'urafa',
again there is no precise information. All that is certain, as confirmed
by the remarks quoted of Sari Saqati (d. 243/867) 6, is that the term
was current in the third century H. However, in the book al-Luma' of Abu
Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi, one of the reliable texts of 'irfan and sufism,
a phrase is quoted of Sufyan al-Thawri which gives the impression that
this term appeared sometime in the second century. 7

At all events, there was no group known as sufis during the first
century H. This name appeared in the 2nd century H., and it seems that
it was during the same century that the sufis emerged as a particular
group, not in the third century as is the belief of some people. 8

However, even though no special group existed in the first century by
the name of 'urafa' or sufis or any other name, it does not imply that
the eminent Companions were merely pious and ascetic persons and that
all of them led lives of simple faith devoid of spiritual depth.

Perhaps it is true that some of the pious Companions knew nothing more
beyond mere piety and worship, yet a group of them possessed a powerful
spiritual life. Nor were they all of the same level. Even Salman and Abu
Dharr were not of the same degree. Salman enjoyed a degree of faith that
Abu Dharr could not have withstood. Many traditions have come to us
telling us:

If Abu Dharr knew what was in Salman's heart, he would (considering him
a heretic) have killed him. 9

Now we will list the different generations of the 'urafa' and sufis
from the 2nd/8th to the 10/16th century.

'Urafa' of the Second/Eighth Century:

**1. Al-Hasan al-Basri**

The history of what is termed as 'irfan, like kalam, begins with
al-Hasan al-Basri (d. 110/728). He was born in 22/642 and lived for
eighty-eight years, having spent nine-tenths of his life in the first
century H.

Of course, al-Hasan al-Basri was never known by the term sufi, but
there are three reasons for counting him amongst the sufis. The first is
that he compiled a book called Ri'ayah li huquq Allah (Observance of the
Duties to Allah) 10, which can be recognized as the first book on
sufism. A unique manuscript of this book exists at Oxford. Nicholson has
this to say on the subject:

The first Muslim to give an experimental analysis of the inner life was
Harith al-Muhasibi of Basrah ... 'The Path' (tariqah), as described by
later writers, consists of acquired virtues (maqamat) and mystical
states (ahwal). The first stage is repentance or conversion; then comes
a series of others, e.g. renunciation, poverty, patience, trust in God,
each being a preparation for the next. 11

Secondly, the 'urafa' themselves trace their orders back to al- Hasan
al-Basri; and from him to 'Ali (A), such as the chain of the shaykhs of
Abu Sa'id ibn Abi al-Khayr. 12 Similarly, Ibn al-Nadim, in his famous
al-Fihrist, traces the chain of Abu Muhammad Ja'far al-Khuldi back to
al-Hasan al-Basri, stating that al-Hasan al-Basri had met seventy of the
Companions who had fought at Badr.

Thirdly, some of the stories related of al-Hasan al-Basri give the
impression that he was in fact part of a group that in later times
became known as sufis. We will relate some of these stories when
appropriate later on.

**2. Malik ibn Dinar:**

He was one of those who took asceticism and abstinence from pleasure to
the extreme. Many stories are told about him in this regard. He died in
the year 130/747.

**3. Ibrahim ibn Adham:**

The famous story of Ibrahim ibn Adham resembles that of Buddha. It is
said that he was the ruler of Balkh when something happened that caused
him to repent and enter the ranks of the sufis.

'Urafa' attach great importance to this man, and a very interesting
tale is told about him in Rumi's Mathnawi. He died around the year
161/777.

**4. Rabi'ah al-'Adawiyyah:**

This woman is one of the wonders of her time (d. 135/752 or 185/801).
She was named Rabi'ah because she was the fourth daughter of her family
(rabi'ah: fem. gender of fourth). She is not to be confused with Rabi'ah
al-Shamiyyah, who was also a mystic and a contemporary of Jami and lived
in the 9th/15th century.

Lofty sayings and soaring mystical verses are recorded of Rabi'ah
al-'Adawiyyah,' and she is noted for amazing spiritual states (halat).

**5. Abu Hashim al-Sufi of Kufah:**

The date of this man's death is unknown. All that we can say is that he
was the teacher of Sufyan al- Thawri; who died in 161/777. He appears to
be the first person to have been called sufi. Sufyan says about him: "If
it were not for Abu Hashim I would not have known the precise details of
ostentation (riya')."

**6. Shaqiq al-Balkhi:**

He was the pupil of Ibrahim ibn Adham. According to the author of
Rayhanat al-'adab, and others quoted in Kashf al-ghummah of 'Ali ibn
'Isa al-'Arbili and Nur al-'absar of al-Shablanji, he once met al-'Imam
Musa ibn Ja'far (A) and has given an account of the Imam's great station
and miracles. Shaqiq died in 194/810.

**7. Ma'ruf al-Karkhi:**

He is one of the famous 'urafa'. It is said that his parents were
Christian and that he became a Muslim at the hands of al- 'Imam al-Rida
(A), learning much from him.

The lines of many orders, according to the claims of the 'urafa', go
back to Ma'ruf, and through him to al-'Imam al-Rida, and through al-
'Imam al-Rida to the preceding Imams and thus to the Prophet himself.
This chain is therefore termed the 'golden chain' (silsilat al-dhahab).
Those known as the Dhahabiyyun generally make this claim.

**8. Al-Fudayl ibn 'Iyad:**

Originally from Merv, he was an Iranian of Arab descent. It is said of
him that at first he was a highwayman, and that as he was preparing to
carry out a robbery one night he heard the voice of his potential
victim, reciting the Quran. This had such an effect on him that he
experienced a change of heart and repented.

The book Misbah al-Shariah is attributed to him and it is said to
consist of a series of lessons that he took from al-'Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq (A). This book is considered reliable by an erudite scholar of
traditions of the last century, the late Hajj Mirza Husayn Nuri, in the
epilogue to his Mustadrak al-Wasa'il. Fudayl died in 187/803.


