'urafa' of the Third/ninth Century
==================================

**1. Abu Yazid al-Bistami (Bayazid):**

One of the great mystics, it is said Bayazid was the first to speak
openly of 'annihilation of the self in God' (fana fi 'Allah') and
'subsistence through God' (baqa' bi 'Allah).

He has said "I came forth from Bayazid-ness as a snake from its
skin."

His ecstatic ejaculations (shathiyyat) have led others to call him a
heretic. However, the 'urafa' themselves consider him one of those given
to mystical 'intoxication' (sukr), that is, he uttered these words when
he was beside himself in ecstasy.

Abu Yazid died in 261/874 or 264/877. Some have claimed that he worked
as a water carrier in the house of al-'Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (A).
However, this claim is not supported by history; Abu Yazid was not a
contemporary of the Imam.

**2. Bishr ibn al-Harith al-Hafi:**

One of the famous sufis, he was another who led a corrupt life and then
repented.

In his book Minhaj al-karamah, al-'Allamah al-Hilli has related an
account that depicts Bishr's repentance as being at the hands of
al-'Imam Musa ibn Ja'far (A), and because at the moment of his
repentance he was barefoot in the street, he became known as 'al- Hafi'
(hafi=barefooted). However, others have given a different reason for his
being known as al-Hafi.

Bishr al-Hafi (born near Merv c. 150/767) died in 226/840 or 227/841 in
Baghdad.

**3. Sari al-Saqati:**

One of the friends and companions of Bishr al-Hafi, Sari al-Saqati was
one of those who bore affection for the creatures of God and of those
who preferred others above themselves.

In his book Wafayat al-'a'yan, Ibn Khallikan writes that Sari once
said, "It is thirty years that I have been seeking forgiveness for one
phrase, Praise be Allah's, that I allowed to pass my lips." When asked
to explain he replied, "One night the bazaar caught fire, and I left my
house to see if the fire had reached my shop. When I heard that my shop
was safe, I said, 'Praise be Allah's'. Instantly I was brought to my
senses with the realization that, granted my shop was unharmed, should I
not have been thinking about others'?"

Sa'di is referring to this same story (with slight variations) where he
says:

One night someone's chimney kindled a fire, And I heard that half of
Baghdad had burnt down. One said, thank God that in the smoke and ashes,
My shop has not been damaged. A man who had seen the world replied, O
selfish man, Was your grief for yourself and no other? Would you be
satisfied that a town should burn down by fire, If your own dwelling
were left unscathed?

Sari was the pupil and disciple (murid) of Ma'ruf al-Karkhi, and the
teacher and maternal uncle of Junayd of Baghdad. Sari has many sayings
on mystical unity (tawhid), love of God and other matters. It was also
he who said: "Like the sun, the 'arif shines on all the world; like the
earth, he bears the good and evil of all; like water, he is the source
of life for every heart; and like fire he gives his warmth to all and
sundry." Sari died in 253/867 at the age of ninety-eight.

**4. Harith al-Muhasibi:**

He was one of the friends and companions of Junayd. He was called
'al-muhasibi' due to his great diligence in the matter of
self-observation and self-reckoning (muhasabah). He was a contemporary
of Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who, being an opponent of 'ilm al-kalam, rejected
Harith al-Muhasibi for entering into theological debates, and this led
to the people avoiding him. Born in Basrah in 165/781, he died in
243/857.

**5. Junayd of Baghdad:**

Originally from Nahaw and, the 'urafa' and sufis have given Junayd the
title Sayyid al-Ta'ifah, just as the Shi'ah jurisprudents call al-Shaykh
al-Tusi Shaykh al-Ta'ifah.

Junayd is counted as one of the moderate mystics. The kind of ecstatic
ejaculations uttered by others were never heard from his lips. He did
not even put on the usual dress of the sufis, and dressed like scholars
and jurisprudents. It was suggested to him that for the sake of his
associates he should wear the sufi dress. He replied: "If I thought
clothes were of any importance I would make an outfit of molten iron,
for the call of truth is that:

There is no significance in the (sufi) cloak, Importance lies only in
the (inward) glow.

Junayd's mother was the sister of Sari Saqati and Junayd became his
pupil and disciple. He was also the pupil of Harith al-Muhasibi. It
seems that he died in Baghdad in 298f910 at the age of ninety.

**6. Dhu al-Nun al-Misri:**

An Egyptian, he was the pupil in jurisprudence of the famous
jurisprudent Malik ibn Anas. Jami has called him the leader of the
sufis. He it was who first began to use symbolic language and to explain
mystical matters through the use of a symbolic terminology which only
the elect could understand.

Gradually this became the standard practice, and mystical concepts were
expressed in the form of love-poetry (ghazal) and symbolic expressions.
Some believe that Dhu al-Nun also introduced many Neoplatonic ideas into
'irfan and sufism. 13 Dhu al-Nun died in 246/860 in Cairo.

**7. Sahl ibn 'Abd Allah al-Tustari:**

He is one of the great 'urafa' and sufis. A sect of gnostics who
consider the main principle of spirituality to be combatting the self is
named 'Sahliyyah' after him. He associated with Dhu al-Nun of Egypt at
Mecca. He died in Basrah in 282/895. 14

**8. Husayn ibn Mansur al-Hallaj:**

Now famous simply as al-Hallaj, he is one of the most controversial
mystics of the Islamic world. The shathiyyat uttered by him are many,
and he was accused of apostasy and claiming divinity. The jurisprudents
pronounced him an apostate and he was crucified during the reign of the
'Abbasid caliph al-Muqtadir. The 'urafa' themselves accuse him of
disclosing spiritual secrets. Hafiz has this to say about him:

He said, that friend, who was raised high on the cross,
His crime was that he used to reveal secrets.

Some consider him no more than a juggler, but the 'urafa' themselves
absolve him and say that the statements of al-Hallaj and Bayazid that
gave the impression of unbelief were made when they were beside
themselves in the state of 'intoxication'.

Al-Hallaj is remembered by the 'urafa' as a martyr. He was executed in
309/913. 15


**'Urafa' of the Fourth/Tenth Century**

**1. Abu Bakr al-Shibli:**

A pupil and disciple of Junayd of Baghdad and one who had met
al-Hallaj, al-Shibli is one of the famous mystics. He was originally
from Khurasan. In the book Rawdat al-jannat, and in other biographies,
many mystical poems and sayings have been recorded of him.

Khawajah 'Abd Allah al-'Ansari has said: "The first person to speak in
symbols was Dhu al-Nun of Egypt. Then came Junayd and he systematized
this science, extended it, and wrote books on it. Al-Shibli, in his
turn, took it to the pulpit." Al-Shibli; died in 334/846 at the age of
87.

**2. Abu 'Ali al-Rudbari:**

He traced his descent to Nushirwan and the Sasanids, and was a disciple
of Junayd. He studied jurisprudence under Abu al-'Abbas ibn Shurayh, and
literature under Tha'lab. Due to his versatile knowledge, he was called
the 'collector of the Law, the Way, and the Reality' (jami' al-Shari'ah
wa al-Tariqah wa al-Haqiqah). He died in 322/934.

**3. Abu Nasr al-Sarraj al-Tusi:**

Abu Nasr al-Sarraj is the author of the book al-Luma', one of the
principal, ancient and reliable texts of 'irfan and sufism. Many of the
shaykhs of the sufi orders were his direct or indirect pupils. He passed
away in 378/988 in Tus.

**4. Abu Fadl ibn al-Hasan al-Sarakhsi:**

He was the pupil and disciple of Abu Nasr al-Sarraj, and the teacher of
Abu Sa'id ibn Abi al-Khayr. He was a mystic of great fame. He died in
400/1009.

**5. Abu 'Abd Allah al-Rudbari:**

He was the son of Abu 'Ali al-Rudbari's sister. He is counted as one of
the mystics of Damascus and Syria. He died in 369/979.

**6. Abu Talib al-Makki:**

The fame of Abu Talib al-Makki rests largely on the book he authored on
'irfan and sufism, Qut al-qulub. This book is one of the principal and
earliest texts of 'irfan and sufism. He passed away in 385/995 or
386/996.


**'Urafa' of the Fifth/Eleventh Century:**

**1. Shaykh Abu al-Hasan al-Khurqani:**

One of the most famous 'urafa', the 'urafa' relate amazing stories
about him. Amongst these is one according to which he would go to the
grave of Bayazid and converse with his spirit, taking his advice in
solving his difficulties. Rumi says:

After many years had passed since the death of Bayazid Bu'l-Hasan
appeared. Now and then he would go and sit By the side of his grave in
his presence, Until came the spirit of his shaykh, And as soon as he
uttered his problem, it was solved Rumi has remembered Shaykh Abu
al-Hasan a lot in his Mathnawi, which shows his devotion and attachment
to him. It is said that he met with Abu 'Ali Sina, the philosopher, and
with Abu Sa'id ibn Abi al- Khayr, the famous 'arif. He died in
425/1033-34.

**2. Abu Sa'id ibn Abi al-Khayr:**

One of the most famous of all mystics, Abu Sa'id ibn Abi al-Khayr is
also one of those most noted for their spiritual states (halat). When
once asked the definition of tasawwuf, he replied: "Tasawwuf is that you
give up whatever is on your mind, give away whatever is in your hand,
and to give over yourself to whatever you are capable of."

He met with Abu 'Ali Sina. One day Abu 'Ali participated in a meeting
at which Abu Sa'id was preaching. Abu Sa'id was speaking about the
necessity of deeds, and about obedience and disobedience to God. Abu
'Ali recited these verses (ruba'i):

We are those who have befriended your forgiveness,

And seek riddance from obedience and disobedience.

Wherever your favour and grace is to be found,

Let the not-done be like the done, the done like the not-done.

Abu Sa'id immediately replied:

O you who have done no good, and done much bad,

And then aspire after your own salvation,

Do not rely on forgiveness, for never

Was the not-done like the done, the done like the not-done.

The following ruba'i is also of Abu Sa'id:

Tomorrow when the six directions fade away,

Your worth will be the worth of your awareness.

Strive for virtue, for on the Day of Retribution,

You shall rise in the form of your qualities.

Abu Sa'id passed away in the year 440/1048.

**3. Abu 'Ali al-Daqqaq al-Nishaburi:**

He is considered one of those who combined in himself the expertise of
the Shari'ah and the Tariqah. He was a preacher and an exegete
(mufassir) of the Quran. To such an extent did he use to weep while
reciting supplications (munajat) that he was given the title 'the
lamenting shaykh' (shaykh-e nawhahgar). He passed away in 405/1014 or
412/1021.

**4. Abu al-Hasan 'Ali ibn 'Uthman al-Hujwiri:**

He is the author of Kashf al-Mahjub, one of the famous sufi books and
one which has recently been published. He died in 470/1077.

**5. Khwajah 'Abd Allah al-'Ansari:**

A descendant of the great Companion of the Prophet, Abu Ayyub
al-'Ansari, Khwajah 'Abd Allah is himself one of the most famous and
pious of all 'urafa'. His fame rests largely on his elegant aphorisms,
munajat, and ruba'iyyat.

Amongst his sayings is this:

When a child you are low, when a youth you are intoxicated, when old
you are decrepit; so when will you worship God?

He has also said:

Returning evil for evil is the trait of a dog; returning good for good
is the trait of a donkey; returning good for evil is the work of Khwajah
'Abd Allah al-'Ansari.

The following ruba'i is also his:

It is a great fault for a man to remain aloof,

Setting oneself above all the creation.

Learn thy lesson from the pupil of the eye,

That sees everyone but not itself.

Khwajah 'Abd Allah was born in Herat where he died and was buried in
481/1088. For this reason he is known as 'the Sage of Herat' (Pir-e
Herat).

Khwajah 'Abd Allah authored many books, the best-known of which,
Manazil al-sa'irin, is a didactic manual on sayr wa suluk. It is one of
the most well-written works of 'irfan, and many commentaries have been
written on it.

**6. Imam Abu Hamid Muhammad al-Ghazali:**

One of the best-known scholars of Islam whose fame has penetrated the
East and the West, he combined in his person the knowledge of the
rational and traditional sciences (ma'qul wa manqul). He became head of
the Nizamiyyah Academy in Baghdad and held the highest position of his
age accessible to any scholar. However, feeling that neither his
knowledge nor his position could satisfy his soul, he withdrew from
public life and engaged in disciplining and purifying his soul.

He spent ten years in Palestine, far from all who knew him, and it was
during this period that he became inclined towards 'irfan and sufism. He
never again accepted any post or position. Following his period of
solitary asceticism, he wrote his famous Ihya' 'ulum al-Din ('Reviving
the Sciences of Religion'). He died in his home city of Tus in the year
505/1111.


