Iblis does not have Power on the Vicegerents of Allah on the Earth
==================================================================

The Almighty Allah has informed us in Surah Hijr that Iblis (Satan) does
not have any power upon His righteous servants (Prophets, Messengers and
Imams). The conversation between Allah and Iblis is mentioned in the
following verses:

***“So the angels made obeisance, all of them together,***

***But Iblis (did it not), he refused to be with those who made
obeisance.***

***He said: O Iblis! What excuse have you that you are not with those
who make obeisance?***

***He said: I am not such that I should make obeisance to a mortal whom
Thou hast created of the essence of black mud fashioned in shape.***

***He said: Then get out of it, for surely you are driven away. And
surely on you is curse until the Day of Judgment.***

***He said: My Lord! Then respite me till the time when they are
raised.***

***He said: So surely you are one of the respited ones, till the period
of the time made known.***

***He said: My Lord! Because Thou hast made life evil to me, I will
certainly make (evil) fair seeming to them on earth, and I will
certainly cause them all to deviate except Thy servants from among them,
the devoted ones.***

***He said: This is a right way with Me: Surely, as regards My servants,
you have no authority over them except those who follow you of the
deviators.” [Holy Quran, al-Hijr; The Rocky Tract, Shakir 15:30-42]***

Similarly, the Almighty Allah has explained how He has protected his
righteous servants from satanic deviations. In Surah Yusuf is mentioned
such an incident involving Hazrat Yusuf (A) and Zuleykha:

***“And certainly she made for him, and he would have made for her, were
it not that he had seen the manifest evidence of his Lord; thus (it was)
that we might turn away from him evil and indecency, surely he was one
of Our sincere servants.” [Holy Quran, al-Yusuf; Joseph, Shakir
12:24]***

We must know that this is also a necessary quality of Imamat. In Surah
Baqarah we have the following ayat in connection with the Imamat of
Hazrat Ibrahim (A):

***“And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled
them. He said: Surely I will make you an Imam of men. Ibrahim said: And
of my offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust said He.” [Holy
Quran, al-Baqarah; The Cow, Shakir 02:124]***

We also must know that those whom Allah has appointed as the Imams are
those who guide the people by His command. As mentioned in Surah
al-Anbiya:

***“And We made them Imams who guided (people) by Our command, and We
revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of prayer and the
giving of the alms, and Us (alone) did they serve.” [Holy Quran,
al-Anbiyaa; The Prophets, Shakir 21:73]***

In the same Chapter we can read about the details of various Prophets
also, like Nuh, Ibrahim, Lut, Ismail, Ayyub, Zulkifl, Yunus, Musa,
Haroon, Dawood, Sulaiman, Zakaria, Yahya and Isa, Peace upon Them all.

We realize that in the above ayats the people associated with the
exalted status of Imamat are the prophets, the messengers, the
vicegerents and the legatees. Therefore, it becomes clear that the
Almighty appoints as Imams only those who are just.

Allah has informed that these are the vicegerents of Allah upon the
earth. In Surah Saad Allah says to Dawood (A):

***“O Dawood! surely We have made you a ruler in the land; so judge
between men with justice and do not follow desire, lest it should lead
you astray from the path of Allah; (as for) those who go astray from the
path of Allah, they shall surely have a severe punishment because they
forgot the day of reckoning.” [Holy Quran, Saad, Shakir 38:26]***

Similarly Quran says in connection with the appointment of Hazrat Adam
(A):

***“And when your Lord said to the angels, I am going to place in the
earth a Khalif, they said: What! Wilt Thou place in it such as shall
make mischief in it and shed blood, and we celebrate Thy praise and
extol Thy holiness? He said: Surely I know what you do not know.” [Holy
Quran, al-Baqarah; The Cow, Shakir 02:30]***

Let us study the meaning of the terms used in the above ayats:

### Explanation of Terms

(A) Aghwaitani (Deviation): This word with its variations denotes the
state of being astrayed from the straight path or to wander away into
disbelief etc. The deviators also denote those who have been cursed by
the Almighty. For example the words preceding this ayat are: “and surely
on you is curse till the day of judgement.”

Satan was cursed for to his disobedience in prostrating before Adam (A).
Due to this disobedience the Almighty had deprived him from His mercy.

It is mentioned in Surah Baqarah:

***“He causes many to err by it and many He leads aright by it! But He
does not cause to err by it (any) except the transgressors.” [Holy
Quran, al-Baqarah; The Cow, Shakir 02:26]***

(b) Le-uzaiyyanannalahum (To make fair-seeing): This term describes how
the Satan defrauds people by showing evil deeds in a favorable light.
The Satan suggests to the wrong doers that their sinful acts are some
kinds of good works. The phrase is also used in other verses of the Holy
Quran. For example, Surah Anfal, Verse No. 48; Surah Nahl, Verse 24;
Surah Ankaboot, Verse 37; and Surah Taubah, Verse 37.

(c) Al- Mukhlaseen (Sincere): The sincere servants of Allah are those
whom Allah has selected for Himself after they had devoted themselves
completely to Allah. They think of nothing except Allah.

(d) Ibtala (tried): To test or to examine; subject someone to an
examination. This test could be through goodness and evil or bounty and
scarcity etc.

(e) Bekalemaat (Certain words): The term “certain words” denote the
different tests and trials that Ibrahim (A) had to undergo; like the
stars, idols, burning in the fire and sacrificing his son etc.

(f) Fa-atammahunna (Fulfilled them): Performed the tests in a perfect
way.

(g) Ja’eloka (I will make you): It stands for creating, to bring into
existence, to make, to order, to appoint etc. Here it is used in the
sense of making.

(h) Imam: An Imam is the one whom the people follow in words and deed.

(i) dhalemeen (the unjust): Injustice denotes the action of putting a
thing at other than its proper place. It also indicates the usurpation
of rights. Injustice is of three types.

Firstly: Between man and his Lord. The chief of them are polytheism and
disbelief. As mentioned in the ayat:

***“Most surely polytheism is a grievous iniquity (injustice).” [Holy
Quran, al-Luqman, Shakir 31:13]***

And also:

***“Who then is more unjust than he who rejects Allah’s
communications.....” [Holy Quran al-An’aam; The Livestock, Shakir
06:157]***

The second type of injustice is between men. For example the Quran says:

***“… Those who oppress men … unjustly;” [Holy Quran, as-Shura; The
Counsel, Shakir 42:42]***

Finally when a person inflicts injustice on himself. The Almighty Allah
says:

***“And whoever does this, he indeed is unjust to his own soul.” [Holy
Quran, al-Baqarah; The Cow, Shakir 02:231]***

Also in another ayat we have:

***“and whoever goes beyond the limits of Allah, he indeed does
injustice to his own soul.” [Holy Quran, at-Talaq; The Divorce, Shakir
65:01]***

Every type of injustice is ultimately an injustice upon one’s own self.
One who does an injustice at any stage of his life is a dhalim (unjust).

(j) Hammatbehi wa Hamma beha (She made for him and he made for her): To
make for something, it indicates an intention to perform an act before
one actually performs it.

(k) Raa-a (he had seen): Seeing implies looking with one’s eyes or
realization through ones heart; understanding etc.

(l) Burhaan (manifest evidence): An acceptable proof, an irrefutable
argument. The “manifest evidence” seen by Yusuf (A) was more clear.

### Explanation of the Ayat

Iblis said to the Lord of the Worlds: “My Lord, since You have cursed me
and deprived me of Your mercy I will make fair-seeming to the people
their evil acts.”

Similar examples are to be found in the following ayats:

(A) ***“Most certainly We sent (apostles) to nations before you, but the
Shaitan made their deeds fair-seeming to them.” [Holy Quran, an-Nahl;
The Bees, Shakir 16:63]***

(b) ***“And when the Shaitan made their works fair seeming to them, and
said: No one can overcome you this day.” [Holy Quran, al-An’aam; The
Livestock, Shakir 08:48]***

(c) ***“I found her and her people adoring the sun instead of Allah, and
the Shaitan has made their deeds fair-seeming to them and thus turned
them from the way.” [Holy Quran, an-Naml; The Ant, Shakir 27:24]***

The Satan also said:

“I will make fair seeming to the people their deeds and mislead them
all, except those of Yours servants whom You have selected for
Yourself.”

The Almighty Allah replied:

“You have no power except on those who follow you in a state of
deviation and astrayal.”

The Almighty says regarding His sincere servant Yusuf (A):

***“And certainly she made for him, and he would have made for her, were
it not that he had seen the manifest evidence of his Lord.” [Holy Quran,
al-Yusuf; Joseph, Shakir 12:24]***

The incident involving Hazrat Yusuf (A) and Zuleykha occurred when both
of them were in a room alone. Zuleykha was the wife of the ruler of
Egypt and the most popular woman of her country. She was infatuated with
Hazrat Yusuf (A) and tried to entice him. Her intention was to commit
fornication, whereas Yusuf (A) intended to kill her if she forces him to
commit the sin. However, Yusuf (A) saw the manifest evidence of his Lord
and refrained from killing her.

Her murder would have been an evil as also the fornication. Since he was
young and unmarried he would have fallen for the young woman who had
been brought up in a royal family and there was no one to see them. But
he saw the proof of his Lord and prayed for refuge from Allah. So Yusuf
(A) was from those who had been purified by Allah.

Then what was that proof which Yusuf (A) saw and how he saw that? Yusuf
(A) perceived two effects upon himself. As we shall see in the following
pages.


