The Effect of an Action, its Permanence; the Dispersal of Blessings and Evils of an Action upon a Particular Time and Place
===========================================================================================================================

In order to understand the meaning of the infallibility of the Prophets
Peace upon Them, it is necessary, first of all, to know how the action
of man affects his life in the Hereafter; and how these actions are
instrumental in the dispersal of blessings and evils without any barrier
of time and space. We pray to the Almighty to help us in this endeavor.
Allah remarks:

(A) In Surah Baqarah:

***“The month of Ramadhan is that in which the Quran was revealed, a
guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance and the distinction;
therefore whoever of you is present in the month, he shall fast
therein.” [Holy Quran, al-Baqarah; The Cow, Shakir 02:185]***

(b) In Surah Qadr:

***“Surely We revealed it on the grand night. And what will make you
comprehend what the grand night is? The grand night is better than a
thousand months. The angels and Ruhul Qudus descend in it by the
permission of their Lord for every affair, Peace! it is till the break
of the morning.” [Holy Quran, al-Qadr; The Glory, Shakir 97:1-5]***

The Almighty Allah has revealed the Quran on His Last Prophet (S) on a
night of the month of Ramadhan. So, that night became the night of power
(a grand night). On this night every year the angels and Ruhul Qudus
(The Holy Spirit) descend by the order of the Almighty. They shall
continue to do so till the Day of Qiyamat. Moreover, the blessings of
this night have spread to cover the whole month of Ramadhan and this
shall also continue forever.

In another discussion Insha Allah, we shall study how the day of Friday
has become blessed since the time of Hazrat Adam (A), when the Almighty
showered His bounties upon him. The ninth night of Zilhaj is also one of
the blessed nights. On this night too, the Almighty has bestowed His
blessings upon Adam (A) at Mina. He also forgives the sins of His
servants on this night. Since that time on the 9th and 10th of Zilhaj,
blessings descend upon the people at Mashar, Arafat and Mina. This will
also continue till the day of Qiyamat.

Similarly the place where Ibrahim (A) stood while raising the walls of
Kaaba has also become blessed. The Almighty has ordered that prayers
must be performed at this blessed spot for all the time to come.

He says,

***“Appoint for yourselves a place of prayer on the standing place of
Ibrahim.” [Holy Quran, al-Baqarah; The Cow, Shakir 02:125]***

In the same way evil and ill luck is also caused by the descent of
Divine Chastisement on those who perpetrate evil. For example the land
where the People of Aad were punished by the hail of stones from the
sky. The Messenger of Allah (S) pointed out this fact when he passed
this place during his expedition to Tabuk. The remark of the Messenger
of Allah (S) concerning this has been preserved in many books of
traditions and biography.

Let us read about this interesting incident:

In the year 9 A.H. the Holy Prophet (S) passed by the area of Hijr
during his expedition to Tabuk. Hijr is in the valley of Qura the home
of the tribe of Thamud on the route from Madinah to Syria. As the army
of the Holy Prophet (S) crossed this terrain some of the soldiers drew
out water from a well. The Messenger of Allah (S) ordered a caller to
announce that no one should drink water from any of the wells in this
area and neither should they perform wudhu’ (ablution) with it. The
people emptied their water bags and asked, O Messenger of Allah (S)
shall we knead (the camel feed?). The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Feed your
camels, it should not be that whatever ill luck they had should inflict
you too.”

When he left that place and passed by the area of Hijr he covered his
face with a cloth and spurred his camel.[^1] The soldiers followed suit.

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “Do not enter the houses of unjust people,
except that you weep.” A person came to the Holy Prophet (S) with a
ring. It was found in the houses of the people of Aad at the place
called Hijr.

The Holy Prophet (S) turned his face away and hid his face behind his
hands so that it may not be seen. He said: “Throw it away!”[^2] And this
example has been related by Imam Ali (A) as Nasr Ibn Mujahid has
narrated. The words of Nasr in Waqaatul Siffin are:

He says: Muknaf bin Sulaym was walking with Imam Ali (A) at Babel.[^3]
Ali (A) said:

“There is a place in Babel where people had sunk into the earth.” Saying
this he spurred his animal saying, “We shall recite the Asr prayers
beyond this valley.” The people followed suit. When he crossed the
Bridge of Siraat he halted and led the people in Asr prayers.[^4]

After the Asr prayers he Peace upon Him said: “This is a place where
Chastisement had descended. It is not proper for a prophet or a legatee
of a prophet to pray at this place.”[^5]

In the same way the spread of bounty (barakat) in the world is connected
with a particular period and in the same way the retribution is also
associated with a period when the Almighty Allah sent His Chastisement
on evil people.

[^1]: Covering the face with one’s clothes in haste.

[^2]: Mojamul Buldan, Sirat Ibn Hisham, Vol.4, Pg.164-165, Maghazi of
Al-Waqidi, Imtail Asmaa, Pg.454-456, Musnad Ahmad, Vol.2., Sahih
al-Bukhari, Vol.3, Sahih Muslim, Kitab uz-Zuhud.

[^3]: Babel is in Iraq between Kufa and Baghdad. The Bridge of Siraat is
over the river of Siraat near Baghdad. Refer to Mojamul Buldan for Babel
and Siraat.

[^4]: Siffeen: 135.

[^5]: Beharul Anwaar, Vol.41, Pg.168, Ilalush Sharaae, Page 124,
Basaerud Darajaat, Pg.58.


