False Tradition Regarding the Holy Prophet (S) and Hazrat Dawood (A)
====================================================================

In this Chapter we shall study the reports covering the marriage of
Hazrat Dawood (A) with the widow and also the marriage of the Holy
Prophet (S) with the divorced wife of Zayd.

The Marriage of Hazrat Dawood (A) is mentioned in the Quran as follows:

***Bear patiently what they say, and remember Our servant Dawood, the
possessor of power; surely he was frequent in returning (to Allah).***

***Surely We made the mountains to sing the glory (of Allah) in unison
with him at the evening and the sunrise,***

***And the birds gathered together; all joined in singing with him. And
We strengthened his kingdom and We gave him wisdom and a clear
judgement.***

***And has there come to you the story of the litigants, when they made
an entry into the private chamber by ascending over the walls?***

***When they entered in upon Dawood and he was frightened by them, they
said: Fear not; two litigants, of whom one has acted wrongfully towards
the other, therefore decide between us with justice, and do not act
unjustly, and guide us to the right way. Surely this is my brother; he
has ninety-nine ewes and I have a single ewe; but he said: Make it over
to me, and he has prevailed against me in discourse.***

***He said: Surely he has been unjust to you in demanding your ewe (to
add) to his own ewes; and most surely most of the partners act
wrongfully towards one another, save those who believe and do good, and
very few are they; and Dawood was sure that We had tried him, so he
sought the protection of his Lord, and he fell down bowing and turned
time after time (to Him).***

***Therefore We rectified for him this, and most surely he had a
nearness to Us and an excellent resort.***

***O Dawood! surely We have made you a ruler in the land; so judge
between men with justice and do not follow desire, lest it should lead
you astray from the path of Allah, they shall surely have a severe
punishment because they forgot the day of reckoning. [Holy Quran, Saad,
Shakir 38:17-26]***

Interpretation of this Ayat According to the School of Caliphate
----------------------------------------------------------------

There are many traditions in the School of Caliphate regarding the
marriage of Hazrat Dawood (A). We present three examples and hope they
would suffice by the permission of Allah.

### (A) Tradition of Wahab Ibn Munabbah

When the Bani Israel rallied around Dawood (A), the Almighty revealed
Zaboor (Psalms) and taught Dawood (A) the manufacture of steel (through
the process of melting). He ordered the birds and mountains to glorify
Him when Dawood (A) glorified. Allah had not bestowed anyone with such a
sweet voice. When he used to recite the psalms the wild animals used to
come near him and Hazrat Dawood (A) could even hold them by their necks.
It was such a sweet voice the satans copied it for making musical
instruments like flute, harp and sitar etc. He was, however, ever busy
in worship. He remained among the Bani Israel as a Prophet and guided
the people to the Divine Path.

The most striving of the Prophets was Hazrat Dawood (A) and the one who
wept the most. Then he became attracted to a woman. He had a small
prayer room where he used to sit alone and recite the Psalms and pray.
Below the room was a garden, which belonged to a man of Bani Israel. It
was with the wife of this man that Hazrat Dawood (A) had an encounter.
One day he entered his prayer room and ordered that no one should
disturb him. So he sat in the prayer room, opened the Zaboor, and began
to read it. There was a window in that room overlooking the garden. When
he was reciting the Zaboor a golden bird came and sat at the window. He
rose up his head and was surprised to see it, but he reminded himself
that he must not be distracted. He shook his head and continued reciting
the Zaboor.

This female pigeon was a test for him. It came and sat before him. He
tried to catch it but it moved away. He followed her and she moved
further away. When he continued to pursue she turned to the garden. His
eyes followed the bird. Suddenly, he saw a woman taking a bath. She had
a natural beauty and grace. When the woman saw him she bowed down her
head in embarrassment and hid her body, but Dawood (A) had lost his
heart. He returned to recite his Zaboor as was his practice; that his
heart may not be distanced from it.

It became a severe test for him till he sent the husband of that woman
to fight in a battle. He ordered the chief of the army (as per the claim
of the Jews) to keep him at the war-front where it would be most risky.
Eventually this man was killed. Dawood (A) was having 99 wives. When
this man died Hazrat Dawood (A) sent the proposal to his widow and
married her. The Almighty sent two angels who pretended to fight among
themselves when he was sitting in his prayer room. They presented a
hypothetical problem.

***“When they entered in upon Dawood and he was frightened by them, they
said: Fear not; two litigants, of whom one has acted wrongfully towards
the other, therefore decide between us with justice, and do not act
unjustly, and guide us to the right way. Surely this is my brother; he
has ninety-nine ewes and I have a single ewe; but he said: Make it over
to me, and he has prevailed against me in discourse. He said: Surely he
has been unjust to you in demanding your ewe (to add) to his own ewes;”
[Holy Quran, Saad, Shakir 38:22-24]***

Hazrat Dawood (A) looked at the other angel angrily and said, “I will
pull out your eyes.” Then he realized that they had been alluding to his
own affair with the woman whose husband he had caused to be killed. He
was ashamed and fell down in prostration and began to beseech Allah for
forgiveness. He remained in this state for forty days; fasted and prayed
and did not partake any food till the Almighty accepted his repentance.

Some people claim that Hazrat Dawood (A) said: “My Lord has forgiven me
the sin that I had committed. So what is the compensation of the slain
man. (According to the people of the book) the Almighty said, “The Lord
has not imposed a Diyah on you but soon He will ask you and keep the
slain one in your place.

However, the Almighty removed this sign of the sin from his head but
wherever he was presented food and drink he wept and when he stood among
the people to preach they tried to see the sign of the sin.[^1]

### (b) Tradition of Hasan al-Basri

Tabari and Suyuti have narrated from Hasan al-Basri the tafsir of this
tradition:

He said: Certainly Hazrat Dawood (A) divided his time into four parts.
One part for his wives, one for worship, one for administering justice
and one for Bani Israel. When he used to speak with them and discuss he
used to make them weep and they used to make him weep. When it used to
be the turn of Bani Israel. He used to say remind me. They used to says,
“A time will come on man when he will commit a sin.” Hazrat Dawood (A)
understood it for himself that it was with regard to his own sin. When
it was the time for worship he used to lock his door and order that no
one should come to him.

Then he used to be busy in reciting the Taurat. At the time he was
reciting Taurat he saw a golden pigeon sitting in front of him which was
extremely attractive. So he tried to catch it but it flew away and sat
close by to lure him. He continued to follow till he reached the woman
who was bathing. He became attracted and was fascinated by her beauty.
When the woman saw the shadow of Hazrat Dawood (A) she tried to hide
herself with her hair. This action of hers fascinated Hazrat Dawood (A)
more. He sent her husband on the war front and sent a written order to
employ him at particularly dangerous places from where it would be
impossible to return. Finally the man was killed on the battlefield.
Hazrat Dawood (A) proposed to his widow and married her in the due
course.[^2]

### (c) Tradition of Anas bin Malik as reported by Yazid-Ar Raqqashi:

Tabari and Suyuti have related this tradition through two chains of
narrators leading to Yazid Ar-Raqqashi. Yazid Ar-Raqqashi is reported to
have quoted Anas bin Malik as saying: The Holy Prophet (S) said:
Certainly when Hazrat Dawood (A) saw the woman he ordered the Chief of
the army to deploy a particular person near taboot. (At that time help
was sought from Taboot, and those accompanying it had no choice except
to lay down their lives or vanquish the enemy.)

The worst happened and the man was thus killed. Dawood (A) married his
widow. Two angels descended upon Hazrat Dawood (A). For forty nights he
was in prostration till his tears caused plants to grow on his head and
the earth mixed with his forehead. And he continued to say, “O Allah
forgive this (sin) of Dawood.”

Hazrat Dawood (A) prayed with such sincerity that it was greater than
the distance between the east and west. “O Allah if you do not have
mercy upon Dawood and if you don’t forgive him, then after him the sin
would be always mentioned among the people.” After forty nights Jibraeel
(A) came and said: O Dawood, certainly Allah has forgiven you and you
know that Allah forgives completely. There is no deficiency in it so the
man comes on the Day of Qiyamat (absolutely free).”

He asked: “What will be the Blood-money (Diyat) for this.” Jibraeel
said: “I have not asked anything about this from the Lord.” Dawood (A)
told him to ask the Lord. So Jibraeel (A) departed and Hazrat Dawood (A)
fell down in prostration of thanks. He remained in this position as long
as Allah wished then Jibraeel (A) returned and said: “O Dawood I have
asked Allah whatever you wanted to know. He said: Tell Dawood certainly
Allah will bring together both of them. The man will say: ‘Give me that
Diyat which Dawood owes.” Hazrat Dawood (A) will say, “O my Lord give it
to this man.” Allah will say, “Whatever is in the Paradise is for you,
take whatever you may like in lieu of it (the Diyat).”[^3]

Other tafsirs have also mentioned similar narrations with regard to
Prophet Dawood (A). Let us now examine the chain of narrators of this
tradition.

A Study of Narrators
--------------------

### (A) Wahab Ibn Munabbah

His father belonged to the tribe of Banu Furs. Kisra (Caesar) had sent
him towards Yemen. The following is mentioned in Tabaqaat Ibn Saad from
Wahab:

“I have studied 92 revealed books. 72 of them are in the church and
among the people. 20 of them are not known to any except a few people.”

Dr. Jawad Ali says: Wahab Ibn Munabbah was a confirmed Jew who claimed
that he was proficient in the study of Egyptian, Syrian and Himyari
languages and ancient books.

In his book Kashful Zanoon he has mentioned the stories of the
prophets.[^4]

### (b) Al Hasan al-Basri

Abu Saeed’s father was the slave of Zaid bin Thabit al-Ansari who lived
till the time of Umar’s Caliphate and died in Basra in 110 A.H. He was
most eloquent person. He had great influence on the people and the
rulers also had respect for him. He was considered to be the Imam of the
School of Caliphate in Basra.[^5]

His biography as mentioned in Tabaqaat Ibn Saad indicates that he used
to contemplate deeply before saying anything. He never considered it
permissible to revolt against an unjust ruler.

#### Importance of his narration

In the book Mujamul Etedaal[^6] it is written that:

Al Hasan used to be careless in narrating traditions. He used to omit
some names of narrators. He used to say, “A certain person has said so”,
and especially with regard to those from whom he had not heard directly;
like Abu Hurayra and other companions. In his digressions he used to
mention hadith of other people also from whom he had not directly heard
it. Allah knows best!

When Al Hasan relates a hadith saying I have heard from so and so, this
hadith used to be considered weak when he related traditions from those
from whom he had not heard directly. For example from Abu Hurayra and
similar other types of numerous traditions. He has narrated from those
whom he had not even met.

Tabaqaat Ibn Saad also has the following explanation from Ali bin Zaid:
He says:

I related one hadith of to Al Hasan and he began to recount this
narration in the following manner. I asked, “O Abu Saeed who has
mentioned this tradition to you?”

Saeed said, “I don’t know.”

Ali bin Zaid said, “I had myself narrated this tradition to you.”

Another report says that he was told, “What do you say about your giving
fatwa (verdict) to people regarding those things which you have heard
and also about those which you have not heard?”

He replied, “No by Allah No! Whatever verdicts I give, I have not heard
them all. But these things I considered beneficial for the people and I
consider my opinion to be better than that of the people
themselves.”[^7]

Wasil bin Ata was a student of Hasan al-Basri. He was the founder of the
Mutazila School of thought. (He died in 131 A.H.). Ibn Abil Awjaa was
also one of his students.

He was told: “O you who have left the religion of your mentors and
entered into a faith which has no firm base.”

He was murdered by the ruler of Kufa , who was a zindiq, in 155 A.H.

He said at the time of his murder, “If you intend to kill me I will
narrate 4000 traditions and these traditions will have reports decreeing
halaal things as haraam and make haraam, those things, which are halaal.
On days of fasting I will order you to eat and on the days of eating I
will order you to fast.”[^8]

### (c) Yazid bin Abaan Ar Raqqashi

He was a traditionalist and a storyteller of Basra. He was pious and
often wept in piety but he used to narrate these things without much
thought.

With regard to his biography the following thing are mentioned in the
books, Tahzibul Kamal of Muzzi and Tehzibut Tehzib of Ibn Hajar:[^9]

(A) His piety: He starved himself and consequently his body became weak
and the complexion paled. He used to weep and make others in his company
weep too. He used to say: “Let us weep for the weeper on a day of
thirst.” He also said, “The cool water in the day contains goodness.”

Ibn Hajar says: “He did what the Messenger of Allah (S) never ordered or
did.”

Almighty Allah has clearly announced:

***“Say: Who has prohibited the embellishment of Allah which He has
brought forth for His servants and the good provisions? Say: these are
for the believers in the life of this world...” [Holy Quran, al-A’raaf;
The Heights, Shakir 07:32]***

(b) His credibility: He was weak and a guesser.[^10]

(c) Value of his traditions: It is narrated from Shoaba that he said: “I
prefer it to omit the links of chain of narrations rather than relate a
hadith from him. I consider committing adultery better than narrating a
hadith from him.”

It is also mentioned: He was a denier of traditions, one who abandoned
traditions. He did not write down the hadith.

Abu Hatim says: He was an orator and wept much. Most of his traditions
are from Anas bin Malik and they require careful investigation. His
traditions have weaknesses.

It is mentioned in Tehzibut Tehzib: “Ibn Hibban says: He was of the
beloved creatures of Allah who wept at night (due to the fear of Allah)
but he was careless in memorizing the traditions because he remained
ever busy in prayers. Till the time he completely changed the words of
Hasan al-Basri and attributed these words to Anas bin Malik and the Holy
Prophet (S). It is not permitted to relate traditions from him and it
can be done only to express astonishment (That such a thing has been
said by him).”

(d) His death Yazid bin Abaan died before 120 A.H.[^11]

A Study of the Text of Tradition
--------------------------------

### Firstly: Tradition of Wahab (in Brief)

Dawood (A) was sitting alone to read the Taurat one day, when a golden
pigeon sat down in front of him. He moved forward to catch it. It moved
away from him and he continued to follow her till it went near the wife
of his neighbor Ooriya. She was bathing without clothes. He was
fascinated by her beauty. When the woman saw the shadow of Hazrat Dawood
(A) she tried to hide herself with her hair. This action of hers
fascinated Hazrat Dawood (A) more and he decided to have her husband
killed on the battle- front. Ultimately Hazrat Dawood (A) married his
widow. Two angels came to him... as mentioned in the Holy Quran.

One tradition says that Wahab has related it, while another narration
says that Wahab has related from the people of the book. For this reason
this narration is considered weak.

When we refer to the Taurat we find in the book Samuel: 2 an incident of
Dawood (A) seeing the wife of Ooriya his neighbor from the roof of his
house. He became attracted after seeing her and he brought her home and
slept with her. She became pregnant from him in an adulterous manner....

By comparing this incident to the one related by Wahab it becomes
evident that he has borrowed some parts of his narration from Taurat and
some from the Jewish books which he had studied. As he himself used to
claim proficiency in books of Jews. Such traditions are termed as
Israeliyaat in the hadith terminology.

### Secondly: Report of Hasan al-Basri

The import of the tradition of Hasan al-Basri is the same as that of
Wahab Ibn Munabbah except for the beginning portion. Hasan al-Basri has
also added the words: “Dawood (A) had divided his time into four
parts...” We do not know whether he had added these of his own account
or he has borrowed them from some other narrators of Israeliyaat
traditions. It is however certain that Hasan al-Basri has not mentioned
the chain of narrators. It is one of the mursal (without chain of
narrators) traditions. If he had mentioned the source of his report,
i.e. Wahab Ibn Munabbah etc., it would have been beneficial for those
who are in pursuit of this study. However, since Hasan al-Basri has not
mentioned the source it remains a mystery.

As he is the Imam of the beliefs of the School of Caliphate his
traditions would have exercised a greater influence on those who wished
to understand the beliefs.

All the well-known narrators of Israeliyaat also do what Hasan al-Basri
has done (Relate without chain of narrators). They do not mention the
chain of narrators; they report the traditions directly and also relate
the hadith without any mention of the sources. For this reason, those
who have no knowledge of traditions are unable to evaluate the
authenticity of these narrations.

### Thirdly: Tradition of Yazid bin Raqqashi

Yazid Ibn Abaansays: “Certainly we heard these traditions from our
Companion Anas bin Malik who heard the Messenger of Allah (S).” In this
way, he attributed lies to Anas bin Malik and the Messenger of Allah (S)
though he was a pious and God-fearing person. How great is the influence
of his traditions! Is it possible for the laymen to find the truth of
the traditions related by Yazid Raqqashi from Hasan al-Basri attributed
to Anas bin Malik and the Holy Prophet (S)?

After the death of these traditionalists came the exegetists like Tabari
(died 310 A.H.) and Suyuti (died 311 A.H.). They have all quoted these
fabricated traditions in their books.

The matter does not end here. It continues towards the Companions and
their companions (tabaeen). Some of them are mentioned below.

(1) Abdullah bin Amr al-Aas: He used to quote traditions from two people
whom he had met during a war. They both had knowledge of the books of
Jews and Christians.

(2) Tameen al-Daari: He was a Rabbi prior to accepting Islam. He used to
narrate stories before the Friday prayer sermon of Umar Ibn Khattab.
During the reign of Usman he used to relate stories twice a week.

(3) Kaab al-Ahbaar: He accepted Islam during the time of Umar. In the
period of Umar and Usman he was counted among the Muslim scholars.

Some of those who have interpreted the Holy Quran by the help of these
fabricated traditions.

(4) Maqatil Ibn Suleman al-Maruzi al-Azdi (died 150A.H.): He was
well-known interpreter of Quran. Shafei says, “All the people rely on
three people. In the matter of Tafsir on Maqatil bin Suleman, in the
matter of poetry on Zohair bin Abi Salmah and in the matter of
scholasticism on Abu Hanifah.”

Though Maqatil had fabricated traditions and popularized the
Israeliyaat, people have reposed faith his traditions which he narrated
without a mention of the chain of narrators.[^12]

### Conclusion of this study

Wahab has fabricated a tradition and made allegations on the Prophet
Dawood (A) based on traditions of Ahle Kitab and has explained the
sources. It has been narrated by Hasan al-Basri without quoting the
chain of narrators. Yazid bin Abaan the pious narrator has also related
it without authority. He said, “Anas bin Malik had heard the Holy
Prophet (S) say so.” Such kinds of narrations are not restricted to the
Companions; and not restricted Anas bin Malik. Such kinds of chains of
narrations have also been attributed to Abdullah Ibn Abbas. We must make
a detailed study of these traditions to get to the root of the problem.
We must also study the last page of Tafsir Durre Manthur of Suyuti so
that we can arrive at the truth.

In this way, we shall come to know the false allegations that are heaped
upon Dawood (A) in the Old Testament. The commentaries of the Holy Quran
are replete with such traditions which are false and degrade the
Prophets Peace upon Them, in the eyes of the Muslims. All these
traditions are with regard to the marriage of Dawood (A) to the widow of
Ooriya. Moreover, there are traditions concerning the marriage of the
Holy Prophet (S) to Zainab binte Jahash the divorced wife of Zaid. Some
of these are fabricated too.

Traditions Concerning the Marriage of Holy Prophet (S) with Zainab bint Jahash
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Regarding the ayat ***“...and you concealed in your soul...” [Holy
Quran, al-Ahzaab; The Confederates, Shakir 33:37)*** it is mentioned in
Tafsir al-Khazin of Alauddin Baghdadi that:

The most authentic tradition in this Chapter is one narrated by Sufyan
bin Uyayna from Ali bin Zaid bin Judan: “Zainul Abedin Ali bin Husain
asked, ‘What does Hasan Ibn al-Basri think about the ayat, and you
concealed in your soul that Allah would bring to light, and you
feared...’?”

I replied, “He says, ‘When Zaid came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said O!
Messenger of Allah I wish to divorce Zainab. The Prophet (S) was
surprised and he said: Retain your wife and fear Allah.’” Ali Ibn Husain
said, “It is not so, certainly Allah the High and the Mighty had
revealed to the Prophet (S) that Zainab will be one of his wives and
that Zaid is soon to divorce her. So when Zaid came and said, ‘I wish to
divorce.’ The Holy Prophet (S) said, ‘Retain your wife.’ Allah became
angry with the Holy Prophet (S) and said: “why did you tell Zaid to
retain her when I had informed you that she will be one of your wives?’”

Khazin says: It is the most appropriate explanation and compatible with
the recitation of this Ayat.

The details of the Holy Prophet’s (S) marriage to Zainab are given in
the following manner in the verses and traditions.

Verses on the Subject of the Prophet’s Marriage with Zainab bin Jahash
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah says in Surah Ahzaab:

***“And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle, have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle, he surely
strays off a manifest straying.***

***And when you said to him to whom Allah had shown favor and to whom
you had shown a favor: Keep your wife to yourself and be careful of
(your duty to) Allah; and you concealed in your soul that Allah would
bring to light, and you feared men, and Allah had a greater right that
you should fear Him. But when Zaid had accomplished his want of her, We
gave her to you as a wife, so that there should be no difficulty for the
believers in respect of the wives of their adopted sons, when they have
accomplished their want of them; and Allah’s command shall be
performed.***

***There is no harm in the Prophet doing that which Allah has ordained
for him; such has been the course of Allah with respect to those who
have gone before; and the command of Allah is a decree that is made
absolute:***

***Those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and do not fear
any one but Allah; and Allah is sufficient to take account.***

***Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Apostle
of Allah and the last of the prophets; and Allah is Cognizant of all
things.” [Holy Quran, al-Ahzaab; The Confederates, Shakir 33:36-40]***

The Explanation of these Ayats according to the School of Caliphate
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Tabari has taken the interpretation from Wahab bin Munabbah: The
Messenger of Allah Peace upon Him had married his adopted son (Zaid) to
his cousin Zainab bin Jahash. One day, the Messenger of Allah Peace upon
Him came out to meet Zaid. The curtain of his door blew away due to the
wind and Zainab bin Jahash was inside without a (chest) covering. He saw
her and became attracted towards her. So when Zainab began to dislike
Zaid and he came to the Holy Prophet (S) and said: ‘O Messenger of
Allah, I wish to divorce my spouse.’ The Holy Prophet (S) asked, ‘Why,
have you seen something about her that has made you doubt?’

He said, ‘No By Allah! I have not seen anything in her except goodness
...’[^13]

Other traditions have also been mentioned from Hasan al-Basri on the
same topic. We shall study them in connection with the tradition of Ahl
al-Bayt (A) which explains the above ayats correctly, Insha-Allah.

Study of the Two Traditions
---------------------------

These two traditions have been narrated from Wahab bin Munabbah and
Hasan al-Basri. In addition to the life history of these two, we also
say the following: Both of them were born years after the passing away
of the Holy Prophet (S). So how can they relate the circumstances of the
Prophet (S)? They were not present at that time so how can they mention
these reports without citing the sources?

### Text of the Two Traditions

The central idea of this tradition is the infatuation of the Holy
Prophet (S) to Zainab binte Jahash when he saw her without covering and
wished Zaid would divorce her. He concealed these feelings in his heart.

The following arguments shall falsify the above report. Zainab was the
cousin of the Holy Prophet (S) and the order for Hijab was promulgated
after his marriage to Zainab. The Holy Prophet (S) had seen Zainab
often, before he got her betrothed to Zaid. Whoever says that the Holy
Prophet (S) was attracted to her later has made a false allegation
against him. The correct incident is related from the books of Biography
of the Holy Prophet (S) in the following pages.

### The Report of Zainab’s Marriage to Zaid, and then to the Holy Prophet (S) after Zaid Divorced Her

Zaid bin Harith was taken as a slave in the days of ignorance and he was
sold in the slave market. He was purchased by Khatija, and presented the
Holy Prophet (S) before the declaration of Prophethood. At that time
Zaid was eight years old. He grew up with the Holy Prophet (S). When his
parents came to know that he was staying with the Holy Prophet, his
father and uncle came to Mecca to take him home. They came to the Holy
Prophet (S) and said: “O son of Abdul Muttalib, O son of Hashim, O the
son of Chief of the people! We have come to you with regard to our son.
Please oblige us by giving back our son.”

He Peace upon Him & His Family asked, “Who is it?”

They replied, “It is Zaid bin Harith.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said: “No one other than him?”

They said, “Who else?”

He said, “Call him, and free him. If he wishes, you can take him home.”

He said: “I like the one who likes me.” The Holy Prophet (S) asked Zaid
if he knew the two men. Zaid said, “Yes, this one is my father and that
my uncle.”

The Holy Prophet (S) said, “You know me and have lived with me. Choose
me or choose them.”

Zaid said: “I don’t choose them. I will never prefer anyone over you.
You are in the place of my father and my uncle.”

His father and uncle said: “Do you choose slavery over freedom? Prefer
slavery over your family and relatives?”

He said: “Yes! I have seen something in this man and I can never prefer
anyone over him.” When the Holy Prophet (S) saw this he took Zaid
towards Hijr near the Kaaba and said: “O people! Witness! Zaid is my
son; he inherits from me and I from him.” When the father and the uncle
saw this, they became happy and returned home.[^14]

After this Zaid was related to the Holy Prophet (S) and he began to be
called Zaid bin Muhammad. He married him to his slave girl named Barrah
as-Sawdah, the Negress. Before this she had been married to Ubaid
al-habashi and had a child named Aiman from him. It is for this reason
that she was called Umme Aiman. Usama bin Zaid was born in Mecca from
Zaid.[^15]

This was the report of Holy Prophet’s Peace upon Him adoption of Zaid
bin Harith. Now we shall mention the report of the marriage of Zainab
with Holy Prophet (S).

### Marriage of Zaid with Zainab, the Prophet’s Cousin

After Hijrat to Madinah, Zainab the cousin of the Prophet (S) sent her
marriage proposal to various Companions of the Holy Prophet (S). She
sent her brother to the Holy Prophet (S) for his advice. The Holy
Prophet (S) asked, “Where is the one who will teach her the book of
Allah and the Sunnat of Holy Prophet (S).” They said, “Zaid.” Zainab
became angry and said, “You wish to marry your cousin to your slave? I
will not marry him. I am of a superior lineage than him and a
virgin[^16] in my family.” So Allah revealed the ayat.

***“And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle, have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle, he surely
strays off a manifest straying.” [Holy Quran, al-Ahzaab; The
Confederates, Shakir 33:36]***

Zainab finally agreed to it and the Holy Prophet (S) married her to Zaid
after Umme Aiman Sauda the Negress who later gave birth to Usama bin
Zaid. Zainab used to dominate over Zaid and used to argue and misbehave
with him. Zaid often complained to the Holy Prophet (S) and wanted to
divorce her. The Almighty intended that Zainab should marry the Holy
Prophet (S) after being divorced from Zaid.

So that after this the system of adoption will be abolished among the
Muslims. The adopted son will never be considered as a natural son.
Allah revealed this to the Holy Prophet (S) but he feared to say this
among the people. That people might say: “He has married the wife of his
son.” He concealed the revelation and told Zaid, “Fear Allah and retain
your wife.” When Zaid became extremely fed up with his wife, he divorced
her. Then the iddah also came to an end. Subsequently the following
ayats were revealed to the Holy Prophet (S) regarding this matter and
the order of adopted son was also mentioned.

***“But when Zaid had accomplished his want of her, We gave her to you
as a wife, so that there should be no difficulty for the believers in
respect of the wives of their adopted sons, when they have accomplished
their want of them; and Allah’s command shall be performed.***

***There is no harm in the Prophet doing that which Allah has ordained
for him; such has been the course of Allah with respect to those who
have gone before; and the command of Allah is a decree that is made
absolute:***

***Those who deliver the messages of Allah and fear Him, and do not fear
any one but Allah; and Allah is sufficient to take account.***

***Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Apostle
of Allah and the last of the prophets; and Allah is Cognizant of all
things.” [Holy Quran, al-Ahzaab; The Confederates, Shakir 33:37-40]***

In the foregoing pages we have presented the ayats where the scholars
have erred in interpretation due to the fabricated traditions which make
false allegations against the Prophets (A)

We shall also present verses where people have erred without even
referring to the traditions.

[^1]: Tafsir of Tabari, Vol.23, Pgs.95-96, Published from Daaral
Marifah, Beirut.

[^2]: Tafsir of Tabari, Vol.23, Pg.16, Published from Daaral Marifah,
Beirut, Suyuti, Vol.5, Pg.148.

[^3]: See the interpretation of this verse in Tafsir of Tabari, Vol.23,
Pg.96; Suyuti, Vol.5, Pg.300-301.

[^4]: Tabaqaat Ibn Saad Vol.5, Pg.395, Kashful Zanoon, Tarikhul Arab
Qablal Islam of Jawad Ali, Vol.1, Pg.44.

[^5]: Wafayatul Ayaan of Ibn Khallikan, Vol.1, Pg.354, Tabaqaat Ibn
Saad, Vol.7, Pg.120.

[^6]: Volume 1, Pg.527, Biography no.1968.

[^7]: Tabaqaat Ibn Saad, Vol.8, Pg.120.

[^8]: Refer to the life sketch of Wasil bin Ata in Wafayaatul Ayaan of
Ibn Khallikan. For details on Ibn Abil Awjaa refer to the discussion on
heretics in the first part of the book, "One hundred and fifty Imaginary
Companions."

[^9]: Tafsirul Kamal of Muzzi and Tehzib at-Tehzib of Ibn Hajar Vol.11,
Pg.309-311.

[^10]: Tabaqaat Ibn Saad, Vol.7.

[^11]: Tehzib at-Tehzib, Vol.11, Pg.309-311.

[^12]: Tarikh al-Baghdad Vol.12, Pg.160-169, Biography no.7142,
Wafayaatul Ayaan, Vol.4, Pg.240-242, Tehzib at-Tehzib Vol.10,
Pg.279-285, Mizaanul Eatedaal Vol.4, Pg.172, Biography no.7841.

[^13]: Tafsir of Tabari Vol.22, Pg.10-11, Beirut.

[^14]: Usud al-Ghaba, Vol.2, Pg.224-227.

[^15]: Biography of Umme Aiman in Usud al-Ghaba Vol.7, Pg.303, Al Istiab
Pg.765, Al Isabah Vol.4, Pg.415-417, Biogrpahy no.1145.

[^16]: Spinster or Bachelor


