Publisher’s Word
================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإني لا أرى الموت إلا سعادة والحياة مع الظالمين إلا برماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الإمام الحسين (ع)
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Indeed I do not see death [for freedom] as but happiness, and living
with unjust people as nothing but grief.”

Imam Husayn  
 61/680 CE

This book holds a brief yet documented narrative of events that took
place in Medinah, Mecca, *Karbāla’*, Kufah, and Syria, and began in
Rajab, 60 A.H. (680 CE) and ended in Muharram 61. These events
represented the ever greatest revolution against tyranny and
oppression—a revolution led by Imam Husayn, son of Imam ′Ali Ibn Abi
Talib and Lady Fatimah az-Zahra, and grandson of Prophet Mohammad, peace
be upon them all.

The Ansariyan Publications, as being always asked by the gentle readers
to publish a book relating the whole story of Imam Husayn’s revolution
and martyrdom, is pleased to introduce this work of Mr. ′Ali Husayn
Jalali who looked into the most considerable reference books dealing
with the events of the battle of *Karbāla’* and chose the most important
chapters of this tragic saga in a simple, comprehensive way.

As a matter of fact, the book was first published, in a form of a
pamphlet, by The Open School, Chicago, but because of its opulent
material, the Ansariyan Publications has thought proper to republish it
in this semblance.

Hence, the pamphlet has been reprinted in a new form, and the famous
Ziyarahs (etiquettes of the pilgrimage to the holy shrines of the
prophets and saints) of Ashura’ and Warith were added at the end of the
book.

Finally, we pray to God to guide all of us to follow the path of Imam
Husayn with pure intents so as to gain the pleasures of this life and
the life to come, Inshallah.

Ansariyan Publications  
 Qum, 2002


