Map of Imam Husayn’s Journey to Karbāla′
========================================

![](/sites/default/files/image002_0.gif)

About the Map
-------------

This map shows Imam Husayn’s journey from Medinah to *Karbāla’* in
60/680 CE, and the journey of his family from *Karbāla’* to Damascus and
back to *Karbāla’*. The route of the Imam’s journey was determined by
cities mentioned in *Maqtal al‑Husayn* by ′Abdul Razzaq Muqarram. Some
of the cities are positioned according to locations given by Tavo in a
map of Islamic Arabia until the death of the Prophet. The route that the
Imam took from Mecca to *Karbāla’* follows, in reverse, a popular
pilgrim route from Kufah to Mecca, which later became Tariq Zubayda. The
Imam followed this route until prevented by Hurr from continuing towards
Kufah. Thereupon, he deviated from the route and headed towards
*Karbāla’*. However, due to difficulty in determining the exact
location, not all cities mentioned in *Maqtal al‑Husayn* appear on the
map

The journey of the Imam’s family after the massacre of *Karbāla’* in
10th Muharram 61/680 is described as going through major cites and the
only names mentioned are Aleppo and Hamah. At that time two main routes
existed from Kufah to Damascus. One followed the Euphrates Northwest to
Aleppo and then South to Hamah, then Damascus. The other goes west
across the desert directly to Damascus. It was concluded that the army
took the Imam’s family on the river route through Aleppo and Hamah, and
upon leaving Damascus the family used the desert route in order to reach
*Karbāla’* on the occasion of ‘Arba’in, 20th of Safar.

The following sources were consulted:

Al-Faruqi, Isma’il Ragi. *Historical Atlas of the Religions of the
World.* New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., 1974.  
*Iraq: Official Standard Names Approved by the U.S. Board on Geographic
Names*. Washington, D.C.: Office of Geography, Department of the
Interior, 1957.  
 Powell, Grace L. *Atlas of the Middle East.* Dubuque, Iowa:
Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 1975.  
 Rebstock, Ulrich. “Das Islamisch Arabien his zum Tode des Propheten” in
*Tubinger Atlas des Vorderen Orients (TAVO).* Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig
Reichert Verlag, 1987.

**Hasan Hussain Jalali**  
**Chicago, 1994**


