Preface
=======

Historical Background
---------------------

Muharram is the first month of the Islamic calendar, during which
Muslims commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Husayn, grandson of the
Prophet Muhammad. Husayn was born on the 3rd of Sha’ban, in the fourth
year of Hijrah (625 CE). His grandfather, Muhammad, named him Husayn,
which means ‘one of beautiful character.’

The Holy Quran refers to the Prophet Muhammad, his daughter Fatimah, her
husband ′Ali, and their two sons Hasan and Husayn, in the Verse,

***“Indeed, Allah wants to take away pollution from you, O, People of
the House, and purify you [by a special kind of] purification.***”[^1]

The Prophet indicated many times that the people of his House were the
most qualified for leadership. Referring to Hasan and Husayn, he said,
“These two are my sons. They are two Imams (leaders).”

During the lifetime of the Prophet, Abu Sufyan, his family, and other
influential families of Mecca tried to stop the Prophet in any way they
could. They even attempted to murder him, but they failed. Later, after
the Prophet’s death, Abu Sufyan’s son—Muawiyah claimed to be the leader
of the Islamic Nation. ′Ali, the cousin of the Prophet and the true
leader of Muslims after the Prophet’s death, defended the Islamic Nation
against Muawiyah who formed an alliance with the Byzantine Empire and
waged war from his capital, Damascus. Although ′Ali challenged Muawiyah
to settle their dispute one‑on‑one rather than with armies, Muawiyah
always refused. Eventually, ′Ali was murdered during his prayers.

To attempt justice and peace, Imam Hasan, the true leader of Muslims
after ′Ali’s death, signed a peace treaty with Muawiyah on the 5th of
Jumada I, in the year 41 Hijrah (661 CE). The following is a translation
of the original treaty:

“In the name of God, the Most Kind, the Most Merciful. The following
shows how Hasan Ibn[^2] ′Ali Ibn Abi Talib made peace with Muawiyah Ibn
Abu Sufyan. He made peace with him on the condition that he takes over
the command of the Muslims, rule them according to the Book of God and
the tradition of His Prophet; that Muawiyah would not pledge the
Caliphate to anyone; that the people would have peace wherever they live
in the land of God, whether in Syria, the Yemen, Iraq or the Hijaz; that
′Ali’s companions and his followers, their persons, their money, their
wives, and their children would be safe wherever they were; that
Muawiyah pledges this before God; that he would harbor no evil or
harmful schemes, whether in secret or in the open, towards Hasan Ibn
′Ali, his brother Husayn or any of the People of the House of the
Messenger of God; that he would not terrorize then in any respect.”[^3]

However, immediately after signing the treaty, Muawiyah said, “I trample
this treaty under my feet!” He announced that he is creating the Umayyad
dynasty and that when he dies, his son Yazid would succeed him as a
king.

This goes against Islamic principles of election and justice in
leadership in accordance with the Holy Quran and the tradition of the
Prophet. Even though Muawiyah broke his agreement in the treaty and was
going against Islamic principles, he warned his son, Yazid, not to kill
Imam Husayn. Although Yazid wanted to rule the Islamic Nation and
perpetuate his father’s Umayyad dynasty, he chose to ignore his father’s
advice about Husayn. Muawiyah and his Umayyad dynasty operated by
deception, bribery, bloody violence, and fear, and that is how his son
Yazid forced the people to obey him as king.

Imam Husayn
-----------

After examining all of the facts involved, it becomes very clear that
Imam Husayn was fully aware of his situation. Because he was the
grandson of Prophet Muhammad and the spiritual leader of the community,
and Yazid was a drunkard, womanizer, and cold‑blooded murderer, the Imam
had no choice but to stand up to the unjust Umayyad Dynasty.

The Imam even mentioned that if everyone were to pay allegiance to
Yazid, “Say goodbye to Islam.” There can be no doubt that the Imam knew
that if he had paid allegiance to a drunkard who was not qualified for
leadership, the Islamic Nation would have fallen apart. That is why the
Imam made it very clear to everyone that his mission was to save the
pure principles of Islam and fight against the evil people who try to
destroy its purity.

The Imam’s acute awareness of the political and social situation at that
time is clear from his many sayings to the people and his sermons. Many
times people tried to convince the Imam not to go to Kufah, but he
always refused, even though he knew he would be killed. Also, on several
occasions when the Imam’s camp was faced with a military confrontation,
Imam Husayn refused the requests of his people to initiate a battle and
kill the enemy. The Imam refused and chose to avoid bloodshed by any
means possible. Furthermore, the Imam repeatedly insisted upon his
followers to leave and save their own lives.

So, we can see that the Imam was not being manipulated by forces out of
his control. As a matter of fact, he was conscious of every decision he
made and he always thought carefully before making any decision, because
his main concern was to preserve the pure spirituality of the Islamic
Nation. In short, the Imam knew that the people did not fully understand
how evil Yazid was, and he knew that the only way to awaken the people
was by showing them how far Yazid would go to stay in power that he
would even spill the blood of the grandson of Prophet Muhammad.

In fact, the martyrdom of Imam Husayn marked the beginning of the end of
the Umayyad dynasty.

The Text
--------

The following text is a free translation of portions of authentic
historical documents into English, focusing primarily on English
language equivalence of the subject, in meaning, rather than literal
translation. The translation consists mainly of selections of text from
*Maqtal al‑Husayn,* by ′Abdul Razzaq al‑Muqarram, but also includes
portions of *al-′Amali* by Shaykh Abu Ja′far al‑Sadiq, and *Mazarat Ahl
al‑Bayt*. Al‑Muqarram’s work, *Maqtal al‑Husayn,* was compiled from a
variety of sources. It was chosen for translation because the author
includes extensive references to his sources. For translation, the *Hans
Wehr Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic* was consulted, and the Library
of Congress System was used for transliteration of Arabic words.

The texts have been rearranged to conform to accurate chronological
order and have therefore been divided into three sections: Before
*Karbāla’*, At *Karbāla’*, and After *Karbāla’*. The only break in the
order of events is chapter six, Muslim’s sons. Although they were
captured after the massacre of *Karbāla’*, I feel it is appropriate to
place them with the chapter of their father. Also, all references in the
original to the Arabic words “Ahl al‑Bayt (literally ‘people of the
house’) has been translated as “People of the House of the Prophet,” or,
“the Prophet’s House.” The word Shi′a (literally, ‘followers’, referring
to followers of the Prophet’s House) has been translated as “the
Followers”, as a collective name for the group. For consistency, all
references to the Holy Quran are detailed in a footnote by mentioning
the Chapter (Sura) number and Verse (ayah) number. Sayyid Muhammad
Husayn Jalali was consulted for accurate English translations of the
original Arabic text. The map, by Hasan Husayn Jalali, is included to
improve geographical understanding of the movement of Imam Husayn, as
well as probable routes of the Umayyad Army between *Karbāla’*, Kufah,
Damascus, and Medinah.

′Ali H. Jalali

Chicago, 1994

[^1]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of Ahzab 33:33.

[^2]: Ibn means ‘son of’.

[^3]: See: al‑Fusul al‑Muhimmah by Ibn al‑Sabbagh, p. 163


