Muslim Meets Ibn Ziyad
======================

They brought him to Ibn Ziyad and when Muslim saw water he asked for
some. Bahili said to him, “You are not going to taste this water until
you taste the fire of Hell.”

Muslim said, “Who Are You? You are the one who deserves the fire!” And
sat at the wall of the castle. Later, a woman named ‘Umarah gave him a
bowl of water. Whenever Muslim tried to drink, the bowl became filled
with his own pouring blood. After the third time trying to drink the
water, all of his teeth fell into the bowl. He gave up and put the bowl
down. Then, the guards took him inside and ordered him to say ‘Salaam
Alaykum’ to the new governor, Ibn Ziyad. Muslim replied, “Shut up! He is
your governor. I say Salaam to whoever follows the truth!”

Ibn Ziyad laughed and said, “If you say ‘Salaam Alaykum’ or not, you are
going to die anyway.”

Muslim said, “If you kill me, there have been better people than me
killed by worse people than you.”

Ibn Ziyad said, “You have rebelled against your leader, you have divided
Muslims and have created disorder.”

Muslim said, “Indeed, Muawiyah and his son Yazid have divided Muslims
and created disorder. And your father is the beginning of disorder! I
wish to reach martyrdom at the hands of the worst person in the world.”

Then Muslim asked someone in the court to write a will for him. He
looked at the people and recognized ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d[^1] and asked if he
would carry his will but ‘Umar refused. Ibn Ziyad ordered him to take it
because he wanted to find out for himself what Muslim would write.

Muslim went to ‘Umar and said, “First pay the loan I took when I came to
Kufah, six hundred Dirhams. Second, take my body from Ibn Ziyad and give
it an Islamic burial. Third, write to Imam Husayn and tell him what
happened to me.”

‘Umar Ibn Sa’d immediately went to Ibn Ziyad and revealed it to him. Ibn
Ziyad said to ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d, “The trustworthy one never betrays you but
sometimes you trust a liar.”

Then, he came to Muslim and said, “You came to people and divided them.”

Muslim replied, “No! Never! I did not come for that, but people of this
city claim that your father has killed their best people and we came to
bring justice and to implement the Quran.”

Ibn Ziyad said, “That is not your business, we were giving them
justice.”

Muslim said, “God knows that you are not truthful and you kill people
without justice.”

Then Ibn Ziyad cursed Imam ′Ali and Imam Husayn, and Muslim said, “You
and your father deserve that more than anyone else.” Ibn Ziyad ordered a
man from Syria to take Muslim to the roof, cut his head off, and throw
his body down into the street. He took him to the roof while Muslim was
saying, “Subhanallah![^2] O God, judge between us and these people who
betrayed us, deceived us, and denied us.” Then he turned his face to
Medinah and said, “Assalamu ′ala al‑Husayn.”[^3] The Syrian killed him
and dropped his head and his body to the ground.

When he killed Muslim, he saw a strange and horrifying vision. After he
killed Muslim, the man came to Ibn Ziyad, afraid, and said, “When I
killed him I saw a man pointing to me, and it scared me.”

Ibn Ziyad waved him away and ordered Hāni to be taken to the market.
They tied Hāni up and took him, and no one helped him. Hāni struggled
and managed to untie the ropes. He got out of the ropes, picked up a
stick, and fought with it, but the guards lunged at him all at once and
killed him with their swords.

Ibn Ziyad ordered the bodies of both Muslim and Hāni to be dragged up
and down the streets of Kufah, and then hung upside down in a place
called Kunnasah. He sent their heads to Yazid who hung them at the city
wall of Damascus, his capital.

With the heads, Ibn Ziyad sent a letter to Yazid, “Thank God that the
leader of the faithful (Amir ul-Mu’minin)[^4] was successful. We
captured Muslim in the house of Hāni. I scattered spies around them
until I found them. I cut off their heads and sent them to you by two
people who are reliable, and the Leader of the faithful can ask them
about the details.”

Yazid replied to Ibn Ziyad, “You did what a wise man has to do, you
spoke the truth, as I believed in you. I asked the two messengers the
details and I have heard that Husayn Ibn ′Ali has gone towards Iraq.
Keep your eyes open and kill people whom you are suspicious of. Do not
wait for any proof. Husayn is the problem. Either you fight him or you
send him to me.”

[^1]: Both ‘Umar and Muslim were from Medina

[^2]: Subhanallah –Praise be to God- is an expression of surprise.

[^3]: Salaam –peace- be upon Hussayn.

[^4]: This title, which means ‘the leader of the faithful ones’, though
Prophet Mohammad said it to Imam ‘Ali exclusively, was used to every one
to come to power in the Islamic State.


