The Imam’s Journey to Karbāla’’
===============================

While in Mecca, Imam Husayn received the news that Yazid had sent ‘Umar
Ibn Sa’d Ibn al‑As as delegate of the caliph to the Hajj pilgrims and
that among his duties was to kill Imam Husayn, on the spot, wherever he
finds him. Because of this, the Imam decided to leave Mecca before the
pilgrimage season. Before he left, he gave a sermon:

“In the name of God. All Praises to God... Death is written on the
children of Adam as a necklace is designed for the neck of a girl. I see
myself to be torn by beasts between *Karbāla’* and Nawawis. Whatever Cod
likes, we will do. We are patient with His test. We are not going to
deviate from the teachings of the Messenger of God. Whoever wishes to
come with us, he may. I am going to leave tomorrow morning.”

He left Mecca on the 8th of Dhul-Hijjah, 60 of Hijrah (680 CE). With him
were his family, his followers from the Hijaz area, Basrah, and Kufah.
Many dignitaries of Mecca tried to change his mind. His cousin ′Abdullah
Ibn ′Abbās asked him to wait, and warned him, “You might be killed, and
the people of Iraq are not reliable. At least go some other place, such
as Yemen, where your father had followers.”

The Imam replied, “O my cousin! I know that you are sincere, but I have
decided on this journey.”

Ibn ′Abbās said, “Then, do not take your children and your family, I am
afraid if you take them, they may see you die.”

Imam Husayn replied, “By God, they are not going to leave me. If they
leave me, they are going to be victims of someone who would not have
mercy on them.”

Then, the Imam mentioned that he did not want any blood spilled in Mecca
and he wanted the family to be united, and whatever happens would happen
to them together. And, if he leaves them, they would not be under
anyone’s protection.


