After Karbāla’
==============

The Night of the Tenth
----------------------

That night, the sky was red like blood. It was the hardest night for the
family of the Prophet. In the emptiness of the desert, they faced the
darkness and loneliness of night. During the night, they could hear a
voice coining from the darkness. The disguised person recited the
following lines of poetry:

“O those who killed Imam Husayn!

Be prepared for the punishment

You are cursed by every Prophet and every religion.

This was not the reward for the Messenger of God.

If he was alive now, he would have cried.”

Also oh this night, Umm Salamah had a dream in which she saw the
Prophet. He was upset and dust was on his head. When Umm Salamah asked
him why he was so dusty, the Prophet replied, “My son was killed and I
was digging a grave for him.”

Then, the army of ‘Umar marched towards the women and children and
looted whatever was in the tents. When they were done, they set the
remaining tents on fire. The soldiers fought over the women, but they
resisted, and ran in all different directions.

The soldiers took their robes, rings, and earrings. One of them ripped
Umm Kulthum’s earrings out of her ears and they bled. A soldier
approached Fatimah, daughter of Husayn, crying as he took her ankle
bracelet.

She asked him, “Why are you crying?”

He answered, “Because I am stealing this from a daughter of the family
of the Prophet.”

She asked, “Then, why are you taking it?”

He said, “Because if I do not take it, somebody else will!”

A man came with his spear and herded all the women together. When he
looked at Fatimah, he put his eyes on her to snatch her for himself. She
ran in the middle of the herd. He went after her and hit her with his
spear, knocking her unconscious. Zaynab protected her, drove away the
soldier, and then took Fatimah in her lap until she woke up.

There was a woman with Bakr Ibn Wa’il in ‘Umar’s army. When she saw what
was happening to the women, she yelled, “The children of the Prophet of
God in this Situation? What is your answer to the Prophet of God? There
is no Law but God’s. We must take revenge for the Prophet of God!”

Her husband hurried and took her away.

They captured ′Ali al‑Sajjad, son of Imam Husayn, while he was lying in
bed unable to move. Some of them said, “Kill him. Do not leave anyone of
them alive.”

Others said, “No, wait until we hear our orders from ‘Umar.”

Shimr took his sword and moved to kill him.

Hamid Ibn Muslim said to him, “Shame on you! Killing a young boy!”

Shimr said, “Ibn Ziyad has ordered to kill all of the children of
Husayn.”

Hamid sent a messenger to ask ‘Umar if it was true, and ‘Umar denied.
Zaynab put her body on ′Ali and said, “You cannot kill him without
killing me!”

‘Umar went to check the aftermath and see the women and the battlefield.
When the women saw him they cried in his face and cursed him.

The army wanted to hurt them but he refused. He ordered them to restrain
themselves, and assigned a group to guard them.

He called and asked his army, “Who would be willing to come forward and
run his horses on the chest of Husayn?’’

Ten of them replied, and they trampled over the bodies of the Imam and
his followers.

‘Umar ordered the heads to be cut off, and all of them were cut off. He
distributed them among the chiefs of the various tribes.

The tribe of Hurr saved his head from being cut, and took his body away
from the battlefield before the army rode their horses over the bodies.

Then ‘Umar sent the head of Imam Husayn with Khuwali Ibn Yazid and Hamid
Ibn Muslim; and the rest of the heads were sent with Shimr. Khuwali took
the head and hid it in Kufah away from his wife because he knew that she
was a Follower. When she heard women crying for the Imam, she realized
that it was the head of Imam Husayn and never put on perfume again.

In the morning he took the head to Ibn Ziyad, and recited this poem,

“O governor! You should fill my sacks with gold or silver!

I have killed the most honorable master.

The one who is best in genealogy

And who had the best father and mother.”

Ibn Ziyad said, “If you know he was like that, why did you kill him? By
God, I am not going to give you anything!”

‘Umar remained in *Karbāla’* with the rest of his army and the women
until noon of the eleventh day. He gathered all of his dead, buried
them, and prayed on them. He left the Imam’s body and his followers
without burial.

After noon he left towards Kufah carrying all of the women and children.
They were twenty women all together.

′Ali al‑Sajjad was twenty‑three years old. He was on a camel without
saddle. His son, Imam Mohammad Baqir, was two years old. The women
begged for the army to let them see the dead bodies on their way. The
army agreed and took them. When they saw the scene they fell on the
bodies, each one kissing and crying on the bodies.

Suddenly, Zaynab yelled, “O Muhammad! This is Husayn, stoned by
catapults, mixed with blood and sand! His body parts cut off! O,
Muhammad! Your children are taken captives and your descendants are
killed!”

Then, she put her hand under the body of Imam Husayn, and said, “O God!
Accept this sacrifice from us!”

When the army saw this, they cried. Sukaynah dropped onto the body of
her father and heard someone saying:

“O my followers! Whenever you drink water, remember me.

And whenever you hear of a stranger or a martyr, cry for me.”

Suddenly, Zaynab looked at ′Ali, the only surviving male. She saw him
very weak and almost about to faint. She went to him and said, “O the
memory of my grandfather, my father, and my brothers! This is the
covenant of God to your grandfather and your father. The tyrants of this
earth do not understand that. Indeed, the followers of the Prophet’s
House will come and honor these decapitated bodies, and the parts and
limbs that were cut off, and raise a flag on this land, a flag which
would never be lowered. The tyrants work day and night to eradicate his
name, but whatever they do only increases the respect for his name.”

The women and children did not want to leave the bodies. Finally, Zajr
Ibn Qays came and whipped them with lashes, and they were forced to
leave.

In Kufah
--------

When the captured prisoners went into Kufah on their way to Ibn Ziyad’s
castle, people were gathering to look and see whom the prisoners were. A
lady came and asked, “Which war are you prisoners of?”

They said, “We are the prisoners from the House of Prophet Muhammad.”
They paraded them in the streets to show the people that the army was
victorious. People asked questions as they passed and some people gave
food. More people gathered giving them food and bread. Zaynab and Umm
Kulthum took the food from the kids and gave it back to the people,
saying, “Charity given to the Prophet’s House is a sin.”

When Zaynab reached a large group of people, she stood and pointed to
the people to be silent. When everyone became quiet to hear what she
wanted, she said:

“All praises to God and blessings to our forefather Muhammad! O, people
of Kufah; people of treachery and deception! You cry? May you never end
your crying!”

And she quoted:

***“You are like women who untie what they have woven.”***[^1]

“You have no one among you but dirty, stubborn, liars, and you have done
what will bring the wrath of God!

May you never end your crying! And may your laughs be very few! You
carry all of the shame that cannot be washed away again! You have killed
the descendants of the Prophet, the Lord’s Claim (against you) of your
time, and the light of your world. Woe onto you, and you will be
humiliated forever!

O, people of Kufah! Do you not know what heart of the Prophet you have
cut out? Do you not know what honored women of the Prophet’s House you
have enslaved and dishonored? Do you not know what blood of the Prophet
you have shed? Indeed, you have done so grave an error that nothing will
be able to take its place! It will be no wonder if the sky rains blood!
And the punishment of the Hereafter is the worst punishment.”

′Ali al‑Sajjad noticed some movement among the troops and said to her,
“O, my aunt! Please be silent. Indeed you are knowledgeable without
being taught.”

Then Fatimah, daughter of Husayn, spoke:

“Praise God! I bear witness that there is no god but Allah and Muhammad
is his Messenger, and that the children of the Prophet were killed at
the Euphrates without any help. O, God! You know that I speak the truth
and I do not say anything but what is according to the teaching of ′Ali,
son of Abi Talib, who was killed in your house. And his son was killed
yesterday. He returned to his Lord without any blame. O, God! You have
chosen him for Islam when he was a child, and he helped your Prophet
when he was young. O, people of Kufah, people of deceit, treachery and
arrogance! We are the People of the House of the Prophet. God has made
this a trial for you and for us. God has honored us by our Prophet
Muhammad.

You called us liars and unbelievers. You looted our wealth as if we were
the children of Turk or Kabul. Your swords shed our blood—blood of the
People of the House of the Prophet. You think you are smart, but God is
smarter than you! Whatever reaches us from God is the best.”

Then she quoted: “Allah says,

***‘so you do not grieve over what has missed you, and you may not be
happy with what has come to you. Indeed, God does not like proud,
arrogant people.”***[^2]

“Woe unto you! Wait for the punishment and the curse of God! You have
hard hearts and Satan has captured you!”

When they heard this, the people started crying and yelling. Umm Kulthum
said, “Be silent, people of Kufah! Your men kill us and your women cry
for us. The judge between you and us is God on the Day of Judgment. O,
people of Kufah! Woe unto you! What is the matter with you? You kill
Imam Husayn, loot his wealth, capture his women, and then cry for him?
Do you know what kind of catastrophe you have brought upon yourselves?
You have killed the best person after the Prophet! Indeed, the party of
God is the successful and the party of Satan is the losers!”

People tried to cry and yell more and more. When ′Ali’s camel came
forward, all the people gathered in the street and saw him in chains
bleeding on the unsaddled camel. He pointed to them to be silent, and
every one became quiet to hear what he would say. Imam Sajjad began:

“Praises and thanks to God. Bless the Prophet. O, people! Whoever knows
me knows me, and whoever does not know me, I am ′Ali son of Husayn son
of ′Ali son Abi Talib. I am son of the one whose women are taken
captives. I am son of the one whose wealth was looted. I am son of the
one whose honor was humiliated. I am son of the one who was killed at
the Euphrates and that is a great honor for us.

O, people! I ask you, by God, do you know that you wrote to my father
and deceived him? That you gave him a promise and broke it? That you
fought against him? Woe unto you! By what eyes can you look at Prophet
Muhammad when he tells you: You have killed my family and humiliated my
honor. You are not from my nation!”

The people cried intensely and all of their faces were wet with tears.
The Imam said:

“May God bless the person who listens to me and honors my will.”

The crowd answered: “Yes, O son of the Prophet of God! We hear you and
we obey you. We await your order, for war or peace. We reject anyone who
dishonors you.”

The Imam said, “Hayhat! Hayhat! (Never again! Never again!) You, the
deceivers! Do you want to do the same to me as you did to my father? The
wound has not even healed yet. My father was killed yesterday and we
still hear the cries of the People of the House.”

The Prisoners Meet Ibn Ziyad
----------------------------

Ibn Ziyad sat on his throne and the head of the Imam was between his
hands. He had a stick and he hit the lips of the Imam with it.

Zayd Ibn Arqam was standing nearby and suddenly said, “O, governor! Take
away your stick from those lips! Indeed, I have seen the Prophet kissing
those lips!” And he cried.

Ibn Ziyad said, “Indeed, you are a hallucinating old man. You have no
mind. If you were not senile, I would have killed you!”

Zayd left the meeting saying, “O, people of Arabs! You are slaves after
today! You are slaves of the son of Marjanah (Ibn Ziyad)! He is going to
kill the best of you, and he is going to humiliate you, and that is the
worst possible life!”

Zaynab was with the women, on the side, but not visible to the public.

Ibn Ziyad pointed to her and asked, “Who is this woman?”

Someone replied, “This is Zaynab, daughter of ′Ali, Amir al‑Mu’minin,
the Leader of the Faithful.”

Ibn Ziyad wanted to humiliate her. He walked towards the group of women,
faced her, and said, “Praise God that He has exposed you and killed you
and eradicated your caused.”

Zaynab replied, “Praise God Who has honored us by His Prophet Muhammad
and purified us from filth. Indeed, only the guilty will be exposed, and
the sinners will lie, and they are not we. They are someone else, not
us.”

Ibn Ziyad asked, “What do you think of what God did to your family?”

She said, “I did not see anything but good. These are people on whom
martyrdom is written. They went where God wanted them to go. God will
gather you and them on the Day of Judgment. Then, you will see what God
does to you on the Day of Judgment. Woe unto you, O, son of Marjanah!”

Ibn Ziyad became very angry and was about to kill her, but ‘Amr Ibn
Harith stopped him and said, “This is a woman, and a woman is not
responsible for her emotions.”

Ibn Ziyad thought for a moment, still staring furiously at Zaynab, then
moved away from her and said, “God has made me satisfied with your
tyrant and the opposition of your household.”

Zaynab answered, “Indeed you have killed the head of my family! You have
exposed the women! You have cut all of the roots! If this is what
satisfies you, then yes you are satisfied!”

Ibn Ziyad ignored her, but turned his face to ′Ali al‑Sajjad and said,
“What is your name?”

Imam Sajjad answered, “My name is ′Ali son of Husayn.”

Ibn Ziyad said, “Did God not kill ′Ali? (′Ali al‑Akbar in *Karbāla’*)”

Imam Sajjad replied, “I had another brother older than me named ′Ali.
People killed him.”

Ibn Ziyad said, “No! God killed him!”

Imam Sajjad calmly told him, “God makes people die when it is time for
their death.”

Ibn Ziyad became very angry. He could not stand it any longer, and
ordered Sajjad to be killed.

When Zaynab heard this, she ran to where Sajjad was chained and used
herself to protect his body, saying, “Is it not enough for you to shed
our blood? Have you left anyone else of us alive? If you want to kill
him, you have to kill me with him!”

Sajjad said, “Indeed, death is our custom [it has happened to us
before], and martyrdom is an honor for us, from God.”

When Ibn Ziyad saw Zaynab attached to Sajjad he said, “What a strong
family relationship they have! She is willing to die for him!” And he
walked away.

The people started talking about what happened, and Ibn Ziyad became
afraid. He ordered the chief of the guards to imprison Imam Husayn’s
family in a special house near the castle, and people gathered to see
them.

Because people were trying to get close to the prisoners so they could
use them as political pawns, after the governor gave that order, Zaynab
announced, “No one should come to see us but slaves, because they are
like us.” The women and children, and Imam Sajjad were taken to their
holding place.

‘Abdullah al-Azdi
-----------------

Later, while the People of the House were imprisoned, Ibn Ziyad made a
speech, saying, “The liar of liars, Husayn, was killed.”

′Abdullah Ibn ′Afif al‑Azdi, an old, blind man, interrupted him and
said, “You are the liar of liars! You kill the children of the Prophet
and you call yourself a Muslim?”

Ibn Ziyad became angry and ordered the guards to capture him and put him
in jail. That night many of the people of his tribe went and forcibly
took him out of the jail. When Ibn Ziyad found out what happened, he
sent troops to go to ′Abdullah’s house and burn it down.

The troops came to his home and when they set it on fire, he asked his
daughter to bring him his sword. She was crying and wailing. She said,
“I wish I were a man so I could fight for you!”

He told her not to worry and ran out of the house with his sword. His
daughter was behind him, giving him directions. He was an old, blind
man, but she told him where to swing, and ′Abdullah slashed at them with
his sword, injuring the guards.

Finally, when they captured him and brought him to Ibn Ziyad, Ibn Ziyad
said, “God has exposed you!”

′Abdullah asked, “Exposed me of what?”

Ibn Ziyad did not answer him, and asked him, instead, “What do you think
of ′Uthman (The third caliph]?”

′Abdullah said, “What does that have to do with anything? Good or bad,
God is going to be the judge. If you want to ask me questions, ask me
about your father and your mother, I can tell you.”

After the insult, the fatherless Ibn Ziyad said, “No, I will not ask you
any more, but I will kill you with a unique and original form of death.”

′Abdullah said, “I knew I would be martyred before you were born from
your mother. When I became blind, I lost that hope, but it seems that
hope still exists. Even if you kill me, I am not better than Imam
Husayn.”

Ibn Ziyad ordered him to be killed and hanged.

Mukhtar in Prison
-----------------

Mukhtar was imprisoned since the time of Muslim Ibn ‘Aqil, but when the
prisoners of Imam Husayn’s camp in *Karbāla’* arrived in Kufah, Ibn
Ziyad ordered the guards to bring Mukhtar from prison and see. When the
guards brought him to the governor, Mukhtar was bad mannered and there
were harsh words between them. Ibn Ziyad became angry, hit him on his
eye with a lash, and ordered him to be returned to prison.

After Ibn Ziyad killed ′Abdullah Ibn ′Afif al‑Azdi, Mukhtar was brought
from the prison again. This time, when the guards brought him, Mukhtar
said to Ibn Ziyad, “You are the liar, and the Imam is the victorious one
in heaven!”

Ibn Ziyad hit him with a pole, broke his forehead, and returned him to
prison. Ibn Ziyad did not kill him because the sister of Mukhtar was the
wife of ′Abdullah Ibn ‘Umar Ibn Kattab who wrote directly to the “king”
Yazid, interceding for Mukhtar.

While Mukhtar was in prison with two of his friends, one of them said,
“We are going to be killed by Ibn Ziyad

Mukhtar answered him, “Indeed, by God, he cannot kill you nor can he
kill me.”

Then, Maytham al‑Tammar, who was in jail with them, said, “You, Mukhtar,
are going to take revenge for the blood of Imam Husayn, and you are
going to kill Ibn Ziyad!”

The Journey to Damascus
-----------------------

Ibn Ziyad sent a messenger to Yazid telling him of the events and
waiting for his orders. Then he wrote a letter, tied it to a rock, and
threw it into the place where the people of the House of the Prophet
were imprisoned. It said, “A messenger has been sent to Yazid and he
will be back on such and such a day. When he comes back and you hear
‘Allahu Akbar, write your will. If you do not hear it, you have your
life.” The messenger came back with Yazid’s reply that Ibn Ziyad should
immediately send the prisoners and the heads to Damascus.

Ibn Ziyad sent the heads with some of his troops, ordering them to put
the heads on spears and parade them in front of the caravan, and he
ordered them to pass through the cities on the way, and humiliate the
family of the Prophet in every city they pass through. On their way they
saw some writing painted on a wall, saying, “Is it possible for a nation
that killed Husayn to have the intercession of his grandfather on the
Day of Judgment?”

On their way, they stopped and a drop of blood fell from the head of the
Imam onto a rock and that place is known as Mashhad al‑Nuqtah (Place of
the drop of blood) near Hamah.

Also near Aleppo, there is another place called Mashhad al-Sayrah,
because Imam Husayn’s wife was pregnant and when they reached that spot,
the baby miscarried. He was named Muhsin.

When they came near Damascus, Shimr was leading the caravan. Umm Kulthum
asked him not to go from the main road, so people do not look at them
with evil eyes. Shimr did exactly the opposite, ordering the caravan to
march through the city from the main road, and for all of the heads to
be in the middle of the caravan.

Arrival in Damascus
-------------------

They arrived in Damascus on the first day of the month of Safar. The
prisoners were kept in Bab al‑Sa′at and people went to see them, dancing
and using the drums.

Somebody asked Sukaynah, “What prisoners are you?” She answered, “We are
prisoners of the family of Muhammad.”

Yazid was sitting on his throne in his castle at Jiran when he saw the
heads on spears and the prisoners. He recited a poem:

“When I saw the caravan and the heads near Jiran

The crow crowed, and I said,

Whether you crow or not,

I have gotten even with the Messenger of God.”

Because of this poem and other displays of hatred to the Prophet, some
Sunni scholars believe that Yazid was kafir (unbeliever) and deserves to
be cursed.

Sahl Ibn Sa′id came to Sukaynah, daughter of Imam Husayn, and asked, “Is
there anything I can do for you?”

She asked him, “Can you tell the one who carries the head to go farther
from the women, so people do not look at the women?”

Sahl honored his word and granted her request.

An old man came to Imam Sajjad and said, “Praise God that He perished
you and made the leader overcome you!”

Sajjad replied, “Have you ever read the Quran, O, old man?”

The old man answered, “Yes.”

Sajjad asked, “Have you read the verse:

***Say: I do not ask you any reward but love for the near in
kin?***”[^3]

He said, “Yes.”

Imam Sajjad asked, “Have you read the verse:

***So, give the near in kin their rights?***”[^4]

He said, “Yes, of course.”

Sajjad asked, “Have you read the verse:

***And know that whatever you gain, a fifth of it is for God, and for
the Messenger, the near of kin, orphans, the poor, and
wayfarers?”***[^5]

The old man answered, “Yes, I have read all of these.”

Sajjad said, “Indeed, by God, we are them.” Then he asked, “Have you
read the verse:

***Indeed, God wants to take away pollution from you, O, People of the
House?***”[^6]

The old man answered, “Yes.”

Sajjad said to him, “We are the People of the House whom God has
purified.”

The old man’s eyes opened wide as he asked, “Are you them?”

Sajjad said, “Yes, (I swear it) by our grandfather Prophet Muhammad. We
are them without any doubt.”

The man fell to the ground, kissed Sajjad’s feet, and said, “I repent to
God and reject those who killed you.”

When Yazid found out about this, he ordered the man to be killed.

The Prisoners Meet Yazid
------------------------

The prisoners were ordered to go to Yazid’s main hall, and they were all
tied together with one long rope. While they were marched towards the
castle, they were beaten if they did not go fast.

When they entered the castle and were in Yazid’s presence, Sajjad asked
Yazid “What do you think the Prophet of God would say if he sees us in
this situation?”

The people started to cry and Yazid ordered the rope to be cut. The head
of Imam Husayn was in front of him. He looked at Numan Ibn Bashir and
said, “Praise God that He killed him.”

Numan replied, “Muawiyah, your father, did not want to have Husayn
killed.”

Yazid answered, “That was before Husayn’s movement. If Husayn had
started his movement before, my father Muawiyah would have killed him.”

Then Yazid faced Sajjad and said, “What do you think of what God has
done to your father, Husayn’’

Sajjad replied, “I saw what God has written.”

Yazid consulted with his advisors about killing Sajjad and most of them
agreed to having him killed.

Sajjad said, “O, Yazid! These people are deceiving you. Unlike the
people of Pharaoh did when he asked them about Moses and Aaron. They
said, ‘Leave Moses and Aaron, because the children of Prophets should
not be killed.”‘

Yazid thought and pondered, then Sajjad asked him for permission to
speak. Yazid said, “You may speak, but do not talk any nonsense.”

Sajjad said, “I am in a position in which I can not talk nonsense. What
would you think if the Prophet sees us in this position?”

Yazid ordered Sajjad’s chains to be removed, then faced his royal
announcers, and told them to praise Muawiyah and humiliate Husayn. When
they continued cursing ′Ali and Husayn, Sajjad interrupted them and
yelled, “You are trying to please humans against God. You are going to
end up in Hell!”

Then Sajjad said calmly, “O, Yazid! Let me go stand in the same place as
this man (the announcer) and say what would please God and what would
benefit these people.”

Yazid refused, but the people insisted on allowing him. The people
persisted, and Yazid did not want to anger the people, so he allowed it.

Sajjad said, “Praise God Who has no beginning, Who is eternal. No one
was before Him and no one will be after Him. He will remain after the
destruction of the whole world.

O, people! We are given six characteristics and we were honored by
seven. We are given knowledge, patience, generosity, eloquence, bravery,
and love in the hearts of believers; and we are honored that the Prophet
is from our family, the friend, Siddiq Tayyar, the Lion of God and the
lion of the Messenger, and the two grandsons of this nation.

O, people! Who knows me knows me, and who does not know me, I will tell
him who I am in genealogy and character.

O, people! I am the son of Mecca and Mina. I am the son of Zamzam and
Safa. I am the son of the one who carried the Black Stone with his robe.
I am the son of the best of those who wear clothes [are civilized]. I am
the son of the best of those who made Tawaf [circumambulating the
Ka′bah] and Sa’y [walking between Mount Safa and Mount Marwa, as one of
the Hajj pilgrimage rite]. I am the son of the man who rode the Buraq
[winged horse] to the end of the horizon, and reached his Lord, and was
two bow’s shots away from Him. I am the son of the one who prayed with
the angels. I am the son of the one who received the revelation.

I am the son of the one who fought with the Prophet of God at the
battles of Badr and Hunayn and he [′Ali] did not disbelieve in God even
for the blink of an eye. I am the son of the best of believers and the
heir of the Prophets and the leader of Muslims, the knight of fighters,
the father of Hasan and Husayn, ′Ali son of Abi Talib. I am the son of
Fatimah al‑Zahra′, the leader of women, and the great Khadijah. I am the
son of the one who was killed and covered with blood. I am the son of
the one who was killed in *Karbāla’*. I am the son of the one for whom
the Jinn cried, and even the birds on the wind.”

When Sajjad said this, people yelled and wailed in an uproar of grief.

Yazid began to fear that the situation would escalate, so he ordered the
Muažžin[^7] to recite the Ažan[^8] even though it was not prayer time.

The Muažžin yelled, “*Allahu Akbar*! (God is great)” and Sajjad said,
“God is greater and more honored than anything I fear!”

Then the Muažžin said, “*Ashhadu anla ilaha ilallah* [I bear witness
that there is no god besides Allah]” and Sajjad said, “Yes, I bear
witness with everyone who witnesses that there is no god but Him!”

When the Muažžin said, “*Ashhadu anna Muhammadan rasulullah* [I bear
witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of God]”, Sajjad said to the
Muažžin, “I ask you by the right of Muhammad to be silent for one
minute!”

He faced Yazid and said, “This Messenger of God, is he your grandfather
or my grandfather? If you say he is your grandfather, people who are
present and all people will know you are a liar, and if you say he is my
grandfather, then why did you kill my father unjustly? Why did you loot
his wealth? Why did you capture his women? On the Day of Judgment my
grandfather will be against you.”

Yazid interrupted Sajjad and yelled at the Muažžin to start the prayer,
even though it was not time. Some left to pray and others simply left
the scene.

Then, he asked for the head of Imam Husayn to be brought to him in a
golden washbasin. The women of the family of the Prophet wanted to see
what is in the basin, but Yazid did not want them to. When he uncovered
it and they saw the head, everyone cried.

Yazid ordered others to enter the room. He took his stick, hit the lips
of Imam Husayn, and said, “Now I am getting even for the battle of
Badr!” And then recited some poetry.

One of his people yelled that ‘‘Al al-Mustafa’ (the family of Heavenly
Selected—Prophet Muhammad) are cut into pieces. Yazid hit him in his
chest, told him to shut up, and cursed him, saying, “You have no
mother!”

Another stood up and asked Yazid to give him Fatimah, daughter of
Husayn, as a gift. Fatimah became very scared and clung tightly to
Zaynab.

Zaynab raised her voice and said, “Impossible! You cannot have this!”

Yazid replied, “If I want it, I can...

Zaynab said to him, “If you do not believe in our religion, you can.”

Yazid barked at her, “Your father and your brother were not of our
religion!”

Zaynab said, “It was by the religion of God, my grandfather, and my
father, that you and your father became Muslims!”

Yazid screamed, “You are a liar and an enemy of God!”

Zaynab said, “You are governor. You curse us unjustly and you govern by
force.”

The man repeated his request for the daughter of Husayn as a gift.

Yazid yelled at him, cursed him, and then said to everyone:

“I wish my ancestors were here to see

How their enemies are in fear.

They would be happy

And they would tell me: Yazid, you did a good job!

We have taken their heads, and gotten even

For the battle of Badr.

The Hashim (family of the Prophet Muhammad] played with politics.

There is no revelation and no Messenger.

They lied just to get the leadership.

I am not from my tribe

If I do not take revenge on the descendants of Ahmad.”

When Zaynab heard Yazid, she said, “Praises to God and the Messenger of
God,” and quoted:

***“Then, the end result of those who have done evil was evil, because
they denied the signs of God, and mocked them.”***[^9]

Then she continued, “O, Yazid! You think you have turned the whole world
against us, and you have driven us like slaves. You think that you have
honor, and you are important. You are holding your nose high, and you
are happy, for the world is easy for you, and your kingdom is secure.
But, you just wait and see!

Have you forgotten the saying of God:

***‘And let not those who disbelieve think that whatever we increase for
them is the best for them. Indeed, We increase for them so they increase
in sin, and they have a humiliating punishment?’***[^10]

Is it just, O, son of Tulaqa,[^11] to honor your slaves and drive the
children of the Prophet as slaves? You exposed their privacy and exposed
their faces. You paraded them from city to city. They had no one to
protect them and everyone, near or far, examining their faces! What can
we expect from a descendant of those who tried to eat the livers of the
righteous people[^12] whose flesh grows from the blood of martyrs. What
can we expect from someone who grew up with hatred of the Prophet’s
family?”

Then, she quoted his poem and said, “While hitting the lips of the son
of the Messenger of God, how could you say such a thing? Someone like
you has to say such things, while you shed the blood of the descendants
of Muhammad and the stars of the family of ′Abdul Muttalib. You call
your ancestors. Indeed, you will soon go the same way as them. Indeed,
you will wish you were mute and did not say what you said and did not do
what you did.

O, God! Secure our rights and take revenge on those who treated us
unjustly who shed our blood and killed our protectors. O, Yazid, you
have not cut anything but your own skin. You have not chopped anything
but your own flesh. Indeed, you will face Prophet Muhammad by what you
have shed, the blood of his descendants and humiliated his honor!” Then
she quoted:

***“Do not think of those who have been killed in the way of God as
dead. No! They are alive, with their Lord, and bestowed
blessings.***”[^13]

“And God is the best Judge and Muhammad is the plaintiff and (Archangel)
Gabriel is the supporter. And those who made you come to power over
Muslims will know what a worse alternative they have chosen and what a
weak army they have. Though it is hard for me to speak to you, I
belittle you. It is hard for me to look in your face, but the eyes are
weeping and the chests are tight.

O! The wonder of wonders is that the party of God, the honored are
killed by the party of Satan, those who were given freedom by the
Prophet. Their hands are dripping with our blood, their mouths are
filled with our flesh, and the bodies of the righteous are scattered on
the ground. You took us as prisoners as gains of the war, but soon you
will be the loser, when you enter the Judgment of God. We have only Him
as our protector. Do whatever you want and plan and scheme whatever you
want.

But, by God you cannot eradicate our memory, and you cannot eradicate
the revelation (of God) and the shame of this will not leave you. Your
view is in vain, and your days are numbered, and your groups will be
scattered, on a day in which a caller will call and announce the curse
of God on those who are unjust. Praised be the Lord, the One who gave
the first of us forgiveness and the last of us martyrdom. And we ask
Almighty God to complete the reward for them, and increase for them, and
make us the successful ones. Indeed, He is merciful and kind, and God is
sufficient, and the Best Protector.

Later
-----

The historian al‑Bayruni says:

“These actions taken against the Imam were not done to any nation in the
world. Using all cheap means possible, such as killing by sword,
spearing, catapults, and running the horses on the bodies of the
victims.”

After the massacre at *Karbāla’*, ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d, the leader of the
army, asked the governor, Ibn Ziyad, for the written promise to make him
governor of the city of Ray. Ibn Ziyad said he lost it.

One year after the death of Yazid, Mukhtar revolted against Ibn Ziyad
and killed all those who participated in killing Imam Husayn, such as
Harmalah ibn Kahil, Shimr ibn dhil‑Jawshan, and eighteen thousand others
who participated in the massacre at *Karbāla’*. Mukhtar ordered then to
be killed by cruel and unusual methods of painful torture and death.

Mukhtar did not kill ‘Umar Ibn Sa’d, but he ordered the women of the
city to sit by the door of his house and cry and wail every night. They
did this, and after some time, he became crazy.

[^1]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of an-Nahl 16:92

[^2]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of al-Hadīd 57:23

[^3]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of ash-Shūrā 42:23

[^4]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of ar-Rūm 30:38

[^5]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of al-Hashr 59:7

[^6]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of al-Ahzāb 33:33

[^7]: Muažžin is caller for prayer.

[^8]: Ažan is the call to prayer.

[^9]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of ar-Rūm 30:10

[^10]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of Ali-’Imrān 3:178

[^11]: People of Koreish (The Prophet’s rivals) allied each other
against Prophet Mohammad and showed him various sorts of bitterness that
obliged him to flee his hometown. When God gave him victory against
them, they were quite sure he would revenge himself upon them. He said
nothing to them but, ‘what do you think I am going to do with you?’
‘Only the good, for you are a noble brother and the son of a noble
brother,’ answered they. He said: ‘I will repeat the same wording of my
brother Joseph the prophet: (Today, you are not condemned.) Go, you are
released (Tulaqa).’

[^12]: After the Battle of Uhud, Hind—wife of Abu Sufyan and Yazid's
grandmother tried to eat the liver of Hamzah Ibn ‘Abdul Muttalib
(Prophet Muhammad’s uncle) after he had been martyred in the battle.

[^13]: The Holy Qur’an; Sura of Ali-’Imrān 3:169


