Ismat
=====

Meaning of Ismat
----------------

‘***Ismat***’ literally means 'Protection ' In Shia terminology it means
‘A special Grace (*Lutf*) of Allah to a person which enables the said
person to abstain from sins by his own free will.' Such a person is
called 'Maasum.’

This *Lutf* (grace) does not make the Maasum person incapable of
committing sin. He refrains from sins and mistakes by his own power and
will.

Here is an example which will make its meaning clear:

It is within the power of any person to go naked on the streets. (And,
for that matter, in many 'civilized' countries women practise the 'art'
of discarding all their clothes in packed halls!). But have you ever
thought of doing so? No. Why? Because it is far below your dignity to
behave like it. Mind it, you do not say that it is 'impossible' for you
to do so. Surely, it is within your power, but you will never even
imagine of doing so. Why? Because you think that such foolishness would
tarnish your honour in your society.

Similarly, though a Maasum person (Prophet or Imam) has the ability to
commit sin, but he never even imagines of doing so, because it is far
below his dignity to stoop to the sins and mistakes

According to the Shia Ithna-asheri belief all Prophets and imams were
Maasum, i.e., sinless and infallible; they could commit no sin— neither
a capital sin nor a minor one; neither intentionally nor inadvertently;
and this applies from the beginning of their lives up to their last
breath.

So far as the Sunnis are concerned, they admit that the prophets could
not tell a lie, neither intentionally nor by mistake, and they could not
be Kafir whether before or after the declaration of the prophethood. As
about other sins, their opinion is widely divided. Most of them say that
the prophets could not commit other sins intentionally.

About committing capital sins unintentionally the majority says that it
was possible, a minority holding that it was not possible about minor
sins, they say that it was possible for the prophets to commit minor
sins, though they could not commit such minor sins which would have
degraded them in the people's eyes, like stealing a loaf of bread. Thus
it is clear that the Sunnis have no clear idea about the *Ismat* of the
prophets.

Why Ismat? Logical Reason
-------------------------

What are our reasons to believe that all prophets were Masum (Sinless)?
The reason is very simple: God sent the prophets to lead their people
onto right path. But this goal could not be achieved if the prophets had
not been sinless.

Suppose there is a man who, just like ordinary people, commits sins or
wrongs. And suppose such a man claims that he has been sent by God to
lead his people to the right path and provide with his life a model of
all that is good and virtuous in human nature. How can the people be
sure that he is saying the truth, the whole truth and nothing but truth?
He cannot command from his people the unreserved respect and undo table
obedience which is his due. Therefore, to carry on the work of God, the
prophets must have been sinless and immune from committing mistakes?

Proof From Qur'an
-----------------

This logical reasoning is supported by the Holy Qur'an also. Look, for
example, to the following verses:

1st Verse: God says:

***"We sent not an Apostle, but to be obeyed, in accordance with the
Will of God." (Qur'an, Sura 4, Verse 64).***

The prophets and the apostles were to be obeyed and followed, not that
the followers were expected to check every action of the prophet to
decide what was to be obeyed and what not to be obeyed. How could this
be true unless the prophets and apostles are believed to be free from
errors, sins and mistakes?

2nd Verse: God commands us to obey the Prophet:

***"O ye who believe! Obey God, and obey the Apostle." (Sura an-Nisa’,
4:59).***

Again He says:

***"All who obey God and the Apostle......" (Sura an-Nisa’, 4:69).***

In the same Sura it is asserted:

***"He who obeys the Apostle, obeys God." (Sura an-Nisa’, 4:80)***

In all these verses of Qur'an, as well as in numerous other Verses, the
obedience of God is made synonymous with the obedience of the prophet.
Such assertion would have been impossible if the prophets were not Masum
and infallible Just imagine what impossible situation would have been
created if any prophet began exhorting his followers to commit a mistake
or sin.

The wretched followers would have been condemned to the displeasure of
God in any case. If they obeyed the prophet and committed that sin they
disobeyed the command given by God and thus were disgraced. If, on the
other hand, they disobeyed the prophet, they again disobeyed the command
of God mentioned above about obeying the prophet. So, it appears that a
non-Maasum prophet could bring nothing but disgrace and condemnation to
his people.

3rd Verse: Add this verse to the above verses:

***"Do not obey those who do wrong."***

Now the picture is complete. The prophets were to be obeyed the
wrongdoers were not to be obeyed, the only conclusion is that the
prophets were not wrongdoers.

4th Verse: Now comes the prayer of Prophet Ibrahim (a.s.) and its answer
from God:

***"And remember when Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
commands, which he fulfilled: He said: I will make thee an Imam to the
people. He pleaded: 'And also from my offspring.' God said: 'But my
promise will not reach to the wrongdoers."(Sura al-Baqarah, 2:124)***

This verse clearly shows that the promise of God to appoint Imams (This
word means here religious leader, including both the prophet and Imam of
Muslim terminology) will not reach the sinners.

This much will be sufficient to show that our belief is based on the
clear understanding of Qur'an, concerning the authority and duty of the
prophet towards God and towards his people.

Some Allegorical Verses
-----------------------

It should be mentioned here that there are some Verses in the Qur'an
which give, to some minds, an impression that Prophet Adam (a.s.) and
some other prophets committed some sins.

Qur'an itself declares that some of its Verses are clear ones which are
the basis of the Book and others are allegorical. Then it goes on to say
that the true interpretation of allegorical Verses is known only to
Allah and to those who are firmly grounded in knowledge.

Therefore, it is necessary, first of all, to decide which verse has
clear meaning, and which one is an allegorical, whose meaning must be
decided upon in the light of the clear verses under guidance of the
Prophet or Imam (who were firmly grounded in knowledge). Then, and then
only, can we save our beliefs from conflicts.  
 To sum it up:

(1) Reason says that the Prophets should be sinless and infallible;  
 (2) Many verses of Qur'an support this view, as mentioned earlier;  
 (3) But still some other verses of Qur'an appear to attribute sins and
wrongs to some prophets

What is a Muslim supposed to do? The old-established rule and practice
demand that we must accept those verses, which are supported by reason,
as the clear one. And as regards other verses (which show that they were
sinner) we should seek what is their true and valid interpretation,
within the framework of the Arabic language and grammar, as taught by
the Prophet and Imams.

Did Adam Commit a Sin?
----------------------

Let us look at the phrases used for the first man and the first Khalifa
of Allah, i.e., Prophet Adam (a.s.). Qur'an describes in several places
how he was advised by God not to go near a certain tree when he was in
heaven; how Satan deceived Adam and his wife Hawwa through his false
oath and how Hawwa, becoming convinced of his truth, persuaded Adam; and
how he, inadvertently, ate from that tree, and then was sent to Earth.

This is the gist of those narratives. First of all, Qur'an clearly says
that Adam was created as Khalifa of Allah for this Earth. Before being
sent here, he was put in the paradise. It must be accepted that that
paradise was not his permanent place of residence, because, even before
his creation, he was destined to come to earth.

Secondly, according to Islamic *Shariah*, every order is not obligatory.
There are orders, for instance, to pray five times a day; and orders to
pray 11 rikats after midnight. Every Muslim knows that the first is
obligatory, while the second is desired but not obligatory. In the same
way, there are some restrictions which are compulsory, while others are
not so. A Muslim is forbidden to drink wine, and also he has been
forbidden to eat by left hand. The first is حرام (forbidden), while the
other is مكروه(Undesirable) but not Haram. So, the restriction against
going near a certain tree does not necessarily mean that it was Haram to
go near it.

Thirdly, the place where man is to be tested by the rules of *Shariah*
is this world, not the paradise. Man is sent here so that his worth may
be tested. After that test, the successful person will be sent to
paradise to enjoy the Grace of Allah. There will be no test there.
Examination is here in this world. Answers are to be written here, not
in the paradise. Paradise is the prize of success in the examination.

Therefore, any order given in heaven, must be, by nature of the place,
of an advisory nature, not an obligatory command. If we go against the
advice of a wise person, we may put ourselves into inconvenience and
trouble; but surely it cannot be said that we committed a crime. The
result will be a loss for us and that's all.

Verse of Qur’an About Adam
--------------------------

Now let us examine some verses of Qur'an about Adam one by one:

(1) ***"We said: O Adam! Dwell thou and thy wife in the Garden; and eat
of the bountiful things therein as ye will, but approach not this tree,
or ye run into harm.”(Sura al-Baqarah, 2:35, al-A’far, 7:19).***

The word used is ظالمين‘Dhalemeen’, which is derived from ظلم ‘Dhulm’.
Dhulm means:  
 1. to misplace a thing;  
 2, to come to harm;  
 3, oppress;  
 4 to make haste before time.

Which of these meanings is suitable here? Here are a few sentences:  
 Cow eats; tiger eats; dog eats; man eats- But we never think that the
cow is eating a zebra and the tiger is eating grass, or that the dog is
eating the cakes and the man is eating the dog's food.

Though the verb 'Eating' is the same everywhere; but we supply its
meaning according to the subject of our conversation. Likewise, as the
word 'Dhulm' has at least 4 meanings, when it is used for a prophet and
khalifa of Allah (who we have reason to believe must be sinless) we can
apply only those meanings which do not imply sin.

If we take the meaning of 'coming to harm', it is clear that God told
Adam that if he went near that tree, he would put himself in troubles
and hardship; but corning to harm is not a sin or crime. We may apply,
with equal force, the meaning of 'making haste before time.' In that
case it will mean that though Adam was destined to ultimately come on
earth, but if he went near that tree, he would be sent there earlier and
with much haste, it must be recognised that we have not invented any new
meanings, but, at the same time, we have not declared Adam to be a
sinner.

One more note of explanation. 'Sin' is not the actual meaning of
‘Dhulm.’ It is just because a sinner misplaces his faculties and misuses
the power given him by God that he is called, metaphorically, ‘Dhalim’

(2) ***"Then did Satan make them slip from that (Garden) and get them
out from the state (of felicity) in which they had been."( Sura
al-Baqarah, 2:36)***

The word used is ‘Azalla’ (أزَلَّ ) which literally means 'made
(someone) slip.' It is used, metaphorically, for mistake and sin. But
the metaphorical meaning is not the real meaning. Therefore, we may
safely translate it that as Adam and Hawwa were sent from a high place
to the Earth, as the word in the next sentence 'lhbitu' (go down)
indicates, the word slip is more appropriate in this context

(3) ***“We said: Get ye down, all (ye people), with enmity between
yourself, on Earth will be your dwelling place and your means of
livelihood — for a time. Then learnt Adam from his Lord some Words, and
his Lord turned towards him.”(Sura al-Baqarah, 2:36-37)***

Here the word used is ( (تاب عليه‘taba alaihe’. This verb is from (توبة)
Tauba’, which is used for ‘repentance.’ Thus the word, as is generally
used, suggests some mistake. But the literal meaning of Tauba is 'to
return.' Using in metaphorical sense, it will mean 'God accepted Adam's
repentance'; but in literal way, it will mean 'God turned towards Adam
(with His Grace and Mercy).' And why should not we translate it in this
way? After all, actual meaning must have precedence over the
metaphorical one.

(4) The arguments about above verses become clear when we see the
following verses in Sura XX:

“***Then we said: O Adam! Verily this is an enemy to thee and thy wife-
So let him not get you both out of the Garden, so that thou art landed
in misery. There is therein for thee not to go hungry nor to go naked,
nor to suffer from thirst, nor from the sun's heat.”(Sura Ta Ha,
20:117-119).***

The word used is (تشقى) 'Tashqua.' In Muslim books of sermons, it is
used for Disgrace in the eyes of Allah. Thus many people are tempted to
connect it with the so-called sin of Adam and his coming into disgrace.
Actually, this word means 'misery'. The spiritual meaning is just an
allegory.

That is why Abdullah Yusufali translated it in these words: 'so that
thou art landed into misery'. Strong proof of it is just in the
following sentences where the food and shelter etc. have been mentioned-
It is clear that God meant that if Adam did not remain on guard and
allowed Satan to tempt him, Satan would put him out from heaven and he
would remain in misery, because upon Earth he would not get his needs
provided for.

This list of the felicities of the Garden supports our view that the
word ‘Dhulm’ used in previous ayat also means to come to harm, not sin.

(5) “Thus did Adam disobey his Lord, and allow himself to be seduced.”

The words used are (عصى)‘asa’ and (غوى)‘Ghawa’. The-literal meaning of
‘asa’ is 'disobeyed' and the literal meanings of (غوى) 'Ghawa' are 1)
Lost the way, 2) became disappointed, 3) died.  
 Disobedience is not necessarily sin. Because if the order was of an
advisory nature, its disobedience would not amount to sin-And I have
explained earlier that the orders in the Paradise cannot be deemed as
Wajib or Haram.

Now we may translate it safely: 'Adam did not follow the advice of his
Lord, and became disappointed, disenchanted.

Other Prophets
--------------

Prophet Musa (Moses) is recorded in Qur'an as saying: (When Pharaohh
rebuked him that he (Moses) had killed one Egyptian, and that he was an
ungrateful man) "I did it then when I was unaware." (XXVI:20). Hence the
word used is ضالين (Dhalleen), which is derived from ضل (Dhalla). It
means: i) To forget the way; 2) To wander and wonder; 3) To disappear in
search of a thing, whether that thing be good or bad; 4) To go astray
from truth; 5) To be destroyed.

Prophet Musa (a.s.) had not killed the Egyptian intentionally. He wanted
to prevent him from beating an Israelite. Prophet Musa (a.s.) hit him
with his fist and he succumbed and died.

When Prophet Musa was sent by God to Pharaoh, Pharaoh reminded Musa of
that action. Even by the standard of the worldly government it was not a
murder. Still Prophet Musa used the word Dhall (ضلّ) for himself. There
is no need to suppose that he meant that at that time he was 'On wrong
path.' He merely says that he did not know his own strength before that
time and was unaware that his one slap would kill that man.

There are three or four more references of this kind about other
prophets. As I have given above all the meanings of the words used in
those verses you can apply your own judgement when searching for their
meanings.

Tark-ul-Awla
------------

If this was not a sin, as I have explained so far, then why God has used
such strong words? There is a line of poetry in Urdu; which means:
"Those whose place is higher, their difficulty is greater." We, the
ordinary men, may disregard the advice (not the order) of God several
times in a day and it may not be counted against us. Why?

Because the moral or religious standard expected from us is not very
exacting. But a prophet is the Vicegerent of God, he is nearer to God,
he receives revelations and gets inspirations from God. God wants him to
be the model of perfection. Then if he does act in such a way which,
though not a sin, is not in keeping with the high standard set for them,
God uses the same words which are, ordinarily, used for common people
who would have committed a sin. It is beneath their high prestige to
ignore even a simple indication of the pleasure of God. It is not sin;
but they should not do such acts which may, even apparently, resemble a
sin.

And if they do such acts, it is called 'Tark-ul awla' (To leave the
better thing). They have left the better way though have not gone
astray. This word sums up the whole position. And these hard words serve
another purpose also: that is to impress the minds of the believers that
when a prophet is put to task in such a way for such a minor act which
was not even a sin, how much should we strive to refrain from sins and
mistakes. Anybody who will read Qur'an with open eyes will see that
those narratives have always been used as examples in a sermon.

Ismat of the Holy Prophet
-------------------------

Now we come to some verses which concern our Holy Prophet in
particular:  
 1st Verse:

***''Verily God intends but to keep off all abomination from you, ye
Members of the Family, and purify you a thorough purification." (Qur'an,
33:33).***

This verse clearly shows that 'Family of the Prophet' was made clean and
spotless by Allah Himself.  
 2nd Verse:

***"So take what the Apostle gives to you, and refrain from what he
forbids you." (Qur'an, 59:7).***

It means that the permission or forbiddance by the Holy Prophet was
always liked by God. Can anybody be so sure about the commands of a man
who is not infallible?

3rd Verse:

***"Say: If you do love God, follow me: God will love you and forgive
you your sins" (Qur'an, Sura Ali-Imran, 3:31).***

Here the love of God is made dependent upon following the Prophet of
Islam. Both sides of love are included ;n it. If you are loving God
follow the Prophet; when you will follow the Prophet, God will love you.
Was this imaginable if the Prophet were not free from every type of
blemish?

4th Verse: Not only his actions, but even his words were the commands of
God. God says in Qur'an:

***"Nor does he say (aught) of (his own) desire. It is but the
inspiration sent to him." (Sura an-Naj, 53:3-4).***

Here we are reminded of the prophecy of the Prophet Jesus Christ,
recorded in John, 16:7-13:

“It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away the
Comforter will not come unto you...... for he shall not speak of
himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak......."

5th Verse: There are several verses in which the following words have
been used for the Holy Prophet:

***"An Apostle from among themselves...... to purify them and to
instruct them in the Book and to teach them Wisdom." (Sura al-Jumu’a,
62:2).***

How could a prophet purify others from sins and blemishes if he himself
was not pure? How could a man teach others wisdom if he had no wisdom to
distinguish right from wrong, or, worse still, no will power to resist
from wrong when he knew it.

The Prophet was to teach people the Book of God; It means that he knew
the commandments of God. He was to purify them and teach them wisdom: it
means that he had wisdom and purity himself. Can a man be called wise if
he knew what was not liked by Allah and still committed it?

6th Verse: The witness to the perfection of his character is found in
the Qur'an where it says:

***"Verily; thou art on great character." (Sura al-Qalam, 68:4)***

A man committing mistakes cannot deserve such compliments. These and
many other verses of Qur'an clearly show that the Holy Prophet of Islam
was absolutely sinless and Masum.

Some Misinterpreted Verses
--------------------------

There are some verses in Qur'an about our Prophet which have been
grossly misinterpreted by Muslims and non-Muslims alike.  
 1st Verse: There are three verses in Sura 93, which say,

***"Did He not find thee an orphan and give shelter (and care)? And He
found thee lost and He guided. And He found thee in need and made
independent. (Sura adh-Dhuha, 93:6-8).***

Our Prophet was an orphan; his father died before he was born, his
mother died when he was 6 years old; his grandfather died when he was 8
years of age He finally came under the loving care of his uncle
Abu-Talib. In all the places mentioned above, he found more love and
care showered upon him than could be expected from a father.

In ayat no. 6 Allah reminds the Prophet about His Grace which was
bestowed upon him in the house of Abdul Muttalib and Abu Talib, the Holy
Prophet was a poor man; but after his marriage with Khadija (one of the
four chosen women in the world, according to the traditions of the
Prophet), the pure and sincere love of Khadija not only raised him above
want, but made him independent of worldly needs in his later life. In
verse no. 8 God reminds the Prophet about His Grace in the person of
Khadija.

In between these two Graces, he reminds the Prophet that he was lost and
Allah gave guidance. The word used is “Dhaall” (ضلّ ) and it has been
mentioned earlier that 'Dhaall' means among other things, 'to be lost,'
'to wander in search of anything.' Thus it may be translated as, "And He
found thee wandering in search of truth and He gave thee guidance” There
is no implication whatever of sin or error on his part.

But even if we insist upon the meaning of "being lost," it does not mean
that the Holy Prophet had gone astray. Ibn-e-Abbas and Imam Raza (a.s.)
both have interpreted this verse as meaning that "you were lost among
your people (i.e., the Meccans did not know your actual position, your
spiritual excellence), so He guided" (them to know you).

This meaning is in conformity not only with the reason and other verses
mentioned above, but also conforms with the second verse of 53rd Sura
where it declares: "Erred not your companion (i.e., the Holy Prophet)
nor was he led astray”

2nd Verse:

There are some verses ordering the Prophet to ask forgiveness:

***"And ask forgiveness for thy fault." (40:55).***

***"That God may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those to
follow" (48:2).***

Its true significance will be understood when we remember that the
Exalted Excellence of Allah, according to Islam, is beyond human
imagination. Nobody, however perfect, can think, in Islamic world, that
he had perfected his love and obedience to God. Thus, our Holy Prophet
used to pray whole nights till his feet became swollen by remaining
standing in the prayers, and God in His Love and Kindness told him:

***"We have not sent down the Qur'an to thee so that thou should put
thee in trouble." (20:2).***

Still, he used to say: "I did not worship Thee as much as befitting Thy
Excellence." And: "I did not worship Thee which would have been
befitting Thy Perfectness." There is no question of sinning here but
there is a feeling, which comes from true Love of Allah, that one is not
doing enough for God, one is not doing what may be deemed befitting to
the highest position of the Almighty Creator. It was because of this
feeling that the Holy Prophet (and Imams) used to "repent" before God
for their "shortcomings." But, in fact, there was no short-coming at
all.

3rd Verse: Third type of the verses are those in which the Qur'an uses
the style of "I am telling thee, but I want the neighbour to hear." It
means that to emphasize a point, God addresses a rebuke directly to the
Holy Prophet, while in fact the topic does not concern him at all. In
such verses, though the pronoun used is the second person singular, but
the topic is intended for the Muslims (or the whole mankind) in general.

One example is:

***"If though committed polytheism surely thy good deeds would be
forfeited." (39:66).***

It is a warning to the mankind in general; not a rebuke to the Holy
Prophet, who had never committed polytheism. Such verses cannot be used
to say that the Holy Prophet had, God forbid, committed any sin. These
verses were addressed to him; but were actually meant for his Ummat
(people).


