Prophecies About The Holy Prophet
=================================

Prophecies About The Holy Prophet
---------------------------------

As the Holy Prophet of Islam was to bring a universal religion for the
whole mankind and as that religion was to continue up to the end of the
world, all prophets in all regions of the world informed their followers
of his advent and told them to accept his religion without any 'ifs' and
'buts.' In many instances, they also gave the details of his personal
and family life, so that the people may easily recognise him.

It is not possible to mention in this small booklet all the prophecies
from all the books. Still, I intend to give here a few prophecies from
the religious books of the Hindus, Jews, and Christians.

It is necessary to point out that in many places, the good tiding about
the Holy Prophet of Islam is followed by description of his
family-members who were his successors, i have given some of such
prophecies in full to emphasize the truth of the prophecies, it must be
mentioned that several useful books have been written on this subject m
past centuries Important among them are:

1. **Mir’aat ‘ul-Makhlu’quat,** by late Molvi Abdur-Rahman Chishti of
India.This book was written in 1041 Hijri (=1631-32 C.E.). It contains
translations from relevant parts of the sacred books of Hinduism.

2. **Basharat-e-Ahmadi,** by late Molvi Abdul-Aziz, of Lucknow.

3. **Anisus-Aalaam,** by late Fakhrul-lslam, Muhammad Sadiq. He was an
Armenian and formerly a Christian priest. He knew Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
Syrian, Armenian, Persian and Arabic He accepted Islam because of his
research in the meaning of 'Paracletos' whose coming is forecasted in
the Gospel of St. John. He was convinced that it refers to the Holy
Prophet of Islam

His book in two volumes, in Persian, was published in 1891 A.D. It is a
treasure of valuable research for all those who are interested in
comparative religion; and almost all books written afterwards are based
upon it, though few people have acknowledged this debt.  
 The prophecies given here have been taken from these books.

Barm Uttar Khand
----------------

Barm Uttar Khand is a book of Hindu religion. Late Abdurrahman Chishti
(11th century of Hijra) translated it into Urdu, in his
'Miraatul-Makhluquaat.' According to that book, the famous Hindu Avtar,
Mahadewji told his wife, Parbati, all the events of future, while they
were on the mountain, Kailash Parbat; and Bishist Muni, his disciple,
wrote it down The relevant parts are translated here from Muqaddama
Anwarul-Qur'an (by late Maulana Seyyid Rahat Husain Gopalpuri) pp.
40-43. Mahadewji says:

“After six thousand years, the Almighty (God) will create a wonderful
person among the children of Adam in Mundarne, which is between the
seas.[^1] …….O Parbati, he will be from the loin of Kant Bunjh; [^2] and
he (Abdullah) will have the piety and knowledge of God like a river; so
(from that river) will emerge a pearl. And the name of his wife will be
'Sank Rakhiya ' [^3]

   
 And he (i.e. Abdullah) will have read three books; and he will leave
the fourth book after reading only: 'Alif Lam Mim'… … O Parbati, he
(i.e. Abdullah) will be a chief in his tribe; people from all villages
will come to his door and will follow him. (Abdullah's son) will have no
fear of the creatures; he will be very brave and having the knowledge of
Allah, and his name will be 'Mahamat'.

   
 People will be astonished to see his style… … And he will not worship
as the people of his tribe will be worshipping and he will tell the
people that “I have been told by that Almighty and Only One (God) not to
indulge in such senseless worship; and I am not turning but to Allah;
therefore, you should follow me.”[^4]

   
 O Parbati, Mahamat will teach his own shari'at to all the creatures, by
abrogating all ways of worship and all previous shari'ats; and he will
try to make all people follow him. Gradually, countless people will come
into his religion, and many of them will reach God. And as people use
our Sakh era, likewise, upto the end of Kaljug (the last era) people
will use the era of Mahamat.[^5]

   
 .. … O Parbati, after him (after the death of Muhammad's son) the
Almighty who has none like Him, will give a daughter[^6]  to Mahamat who
will be better than 1000 sons, and she will be very beautiful and
matchless, and very perfect in the worship of God. Never shall she utter
any wrong, and she will be protected from every sin—big or small; and
through her father she will reach nearer to God. That Almighty (God)
will give two sons[^7] to the daughter of Mahamat, both will be handsome
and beloved of God, strong, having the knowledge God, courageous, brave
and matchless in the …of virtuous deeds. And the Almighty will not
create, after them, any human being having such perfection in hidden and
known virtues.

The same two sons of Mahamat will be his successors; and they will have
numerous children; and they will bring people into the religion of
Mahamat day by day by their true arguments; and they will illuminate the
religion of Mahamat. And Mahamat will love them more than all his
people, even more than his own daughter. And these two sons will be
perfect in the religion of Mahamat; they will not do any work for their
own pleasure, and all their utterances and deeds will be for the
pleasure of the Almighty.

O Parbati, a few years after the death of Mahamat, some evil man will
unjustly murder these grandsons of Mahamat without any cause; just for
the sake of worldly greed; the whole world will become 'headless' by
their death. Their killers will be ' Maliksh' (atheists), cursed in both
worlds; they will have no love for Mahamat and will never get
deliverance from ' Nark' (i.e. Hell).

But in appearance, they will remain in the religion of Mahamat, and
gradually others also will follow them, and stubbornly will do many
deeds against the way of Mahamat and his sons. Only a few people will
remain on the path of Mahamat. Majority will follow the path of those
who killed the sons of Mahamat; yet in appearance they will be called
the followers of Mahamat; and in the last days of Kajug (last era) there
will be many of those hypocrites and will create disturbance in the
whole world.”

   
 After that Mahadevji explains the appearance of Imam Mahdi; coming of
Quiyamat and arrival into Paradise of Bibi Fatima together with her
followers.

Kalki Puran
-----------

In many holy books of Hindus, mention has been made of coming of ten
*Avatars* . So far nine have come and tenth is awaited by Hindus. The
name which is ascribed to this tenth *Avatar* is ”*Kalki Avatar* ”
(Kalki Prophet).

Description and symptoms, which are found in the books exactly
correspond with those of Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a)

   
 Kalki Puran is one of the holy books of the Hindus. It is written in
this book that the reason why this Prophet will be known as “Kalki”
Avatar, is that he will remove Kalki (rust and darkness) from the hearts
of the people, and will prevail over all the artifices of the evil
people.  
 It is also written that people of his community will be worshippers of
God.

   
 The name of the father of Kalki Prophet is written as “Vishnuais” a
combination of two words, *Vishnu* (God) and *ais* (Servant): both put
together mean “Servant of God”. This is the meaning of Abdullah, the
name of the father of Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.).

   
 The name of Kalki Prophet's mother is “Somti” which means
“Trustworthy”. And the name of Prophet Muhammad's (s.a.w.a.) mother was
Amina, which also means “Trustworthy”.  
    
 Further it is written that Kalki Prophet will have three brothers named
Kavi, Samati, and Parak.  
    
 (1)   “Kavi” means 'wise' and same is the meaning of 'Aqeel'.  
    
 (2)   “Samat” means 'Knowledge' and same is the meaning of 'Ja'far'.  
    
 (3)   “Parak” means “One who commands high position” and same is the
meaning of 'Ali'.  
    
 Aqeel, Ja'far and Ali were three (cousin) brothers of Prophet Muhammad
Mustafa (s.a.w.a.)  
    
 The birth-place of Kalki Prophet is mentioned as “Shambhal Nagari”— a
name given to the Hijaz in Arabia. “Shambhal” means, “Sand” and
“Shambhal Nagri” means a country of sand or “desert” which fits Arabian
peninsula perfectly.

   
 Regarding Kalki Prophet, it is also written that he will worship in
cave. It is well known in Islamic world that Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.)
got his first “Revelation” in the cave of mount Hira - a desert hill and
his chosen place of retreat near Mecca.

   
 Further in “Kalki Puran”, it is written that he will receive education
through “Prash Ram” which means “Soul of God.” It is well known by all
Muslims that it was the Angel Gabriel who brought the first “revelation”
to Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) in the cave of the mount Hira.
Gabriel i.e. Jibra'il is called “Ar-Ruh-al-Amin” (The Trustworthy
Spirit) in Islam.

   
 Further it is written that Kalki Prophet will marry the daughter of the
king of Shambhal Deep. Thus Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) married the
wealthiest woman of Arab, named Khadijah.  
 It is also written that Kalki Prophet will migrate to the hills of
North. Thus on the command of God, Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a)
had to migrate from Mecca to Medina which is in the North.

   
  

From Other Books
----------------

Late Molvi Abdurrahman Chishti has given many quotations from other
Purans and even Veds. Some of them are translated here from Muqaddama
Tafsir Anwarul-Qur'an:

(a) Athruben Ved: Lailaha Harni Papan Illallaha Param Padam Janm
Baikunth Birap newti to jane nam Muhammadam.

Translation: Saying 'La Hah' removes the sins Saying 'Illallah' bestows
Parm Padwi. If you want Paradise eternal Always recite the name
'Muhammad'

(b) The founder of Arya Samaj, Dyanand Sarswati, had to admit in his
book, 'Satyarth Parkash' (Chapter 14; p. 739) that Alloo Upni-shad
mentions the name of 'Muhammad' as Rasul. He contends that someone, in
the days of Akbar (the Moghal emperor), must have added it in the
Athrubin Ved.

Then he writes: "Someone may say that how can you claim it when nobody
has said or written so in all these days; how can we accept your claim
(of later addition) without any proof? But this claim cannot be wrong by
non-acceptance of anyone." What a claim! And what a proof!

(c) Bhonik Uttar Puran: Vyas Rishi, the author of Ramayan, writes in
Bhonik Puran: "In the days to come **Mahamat** will come; and it is his
sign that cloud will always protect him from the sun; his body will have
no shadow; fly will not sit on his body; the earth will be folded for
him (i.e. he will journey to far away places in very short time); ......
whatever he will earn, will spend in the way of God, and himself will
eat but a little....Whoever will follow that book (i.e., Qur'an) will
reach to God. At that time there will be no other path to reach to God."

Pothi Ram Sing Ram
------------------

This is one of the 18 Purans. Its author was above mentioned Vyas Rishi.
It has been translated in Bhakha by Goshain Tulsi Das In its Khand 12,
Kandi 6 Tulsiji writes as follows :

"In the land of Arab, direction of the Star of Friday is good, and the
place of that star is Western country which is beautiful and glorious,
hear O Khag Rai (Leader of crows).

"There will appear unusual events (miracles) and Vicegerent of God will
be established.  
 "He will be born in the seventh century of 'Bikarmi Samvat', as if four
moons rising in dark night.

"He will frighten you by Royal command, and will show you love and
behaviour. And will preach his religion to all.

"Four wise and true Vicegerents of God will be his servants, with whom
His progeny will spread." The original is as follows:

"Chitra sundaram sat chare, Tan kar bans huwe bahubhare".  
 (This refers to Ali, Fatema, Hasan and Husain a.s.).

'His glory will be like a boundless ocean, and his religion will spread
as the fire spreads in all directions in the furnaces.

"So long as his religion continues, anyone desirous of reaching to God,
will not reach without the help of Muhammad." The original is as
follows:

"Tab lag sundaram chahe koe, Bina Muhammad par na hoe".  
 "Worshippers and have-nots will gain honour by reciting his name  
 "O Wealthy! who leaves the false worship and accepts him, will have no
worries.  
 "He will shine as a light and will enlighten others. His spark is not
like that of the firestone which rarely catches.

"Surrender to God, which includes 'Will of God,' 'Knowledge of God', and
His Existence, Destiny of Soul, creation of mankind, and creation of
Angels, these will be the four points in this religion-

"People will recite his name with boundless pleasure and absolute faith
for fifteen hundred years.  
 "His people will sacrifice themselves for the love of God, and will
receive deliverance; this is what Veda says.

"Then will appear an influential man whom all will call 'Mehdi.'  
 The original is as below:

"Tab hue nahak lank utara, Mahdi kahain shakal sansara."  
 "After that there will be no birth, says Tulsidas truly "

All these predictions in clear words from beginning to end are about
Mohammad Mustafa (s.a.w.). They have not been applicable to any other
person, nor there can be any objection from Hindus regarding its
consistency.

Old And New Testaments
----------------------

Now we come to the Jewish and Christian scriptures. Before giving some
of the prophecies from the Bible, one important thing should be made
clear from the start.

It is the common practice of the Jews and Christians to translate even
the proper names. Thus wherever they find the name 'Muhammad', they
translate it as 'the praiseworthy', 'lovely', or words like that. This
practice has helped them in 'hiding the truth' from the world, as the
people reading the translations can never suspect that the sentence
refers to a certain person. Now, if that practice is followed by others,
a non-English speaking man will translate the name of 'Livingstone' as a
'stone which was alive' Then he will elaborate on this theme and will
try to prove that in 19th century, stones in Europe had life, and one of
such stones had come to Africa and had travelled up to Kigoma and Ujiji!

Add to it, the frequent changes and alterations which the Christians are
so wont to make in the Old and New Testaments, and then you can
appreciate the true position.

Book of Genesis
---------------

   
 Anyhow, let us begin from Genesis. I will use the King James version
throughout this chapter.  
    
 Genesis 17:20, records the promise of God to Prophet Ibrahim: “And as
for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will
make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes
shall be beget, and I will make him a great nation.”

   
 The prayer referred to in this sentence, is given in detail in many
places in the Qur'an, which runs as follows:

   
***”And remember when Ibrahim and Ismail raised the foundations of the
House (with this prayer): “Our Lord! Accept this (service) from us for
Thou art the Hearing, the Knowing.***  
***”Our Lord; and raise amongst them a Messenger of their own who shall
recite Thy communication to them and instruct them the Book and Wisdom,
and purify them, for Thou art the Mighty, the Wise.” (Qur'an,
2:127-129)***

Now coming to the wordings of Genesis: In this present form. This
sentence mentions only 12 Imams- But in its original language it clearly
gives the name of the Holy Prophet also. The Hebrew is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتو دهربتي اتو بماد شينم اسار نسى ام
  </p>
</blockquote>

which means "I will make him fruitful with **Madmad** and 12 princes
shall he beget......" The translators either by habit, or to hide the
truth, translated it as "and will multiply him exceedingly."

Deuteronomy
-----------

God promised to Prophet Musa (a.s.):

   
**”The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of
thee, of thy brethren, like unto me; unto him ye shall hearken.”
(18:15)**

** **  
**”I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren, like unto
thee, and will put my words into his mouth; and he shall speak unto them
all that I shall command him. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever
will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I will
require it of him.” (18:18-19)**  
** **

Christians try to fit this prophecy on Prophet 'Isa (a.s.). But it fits
nobody except Prophet Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) because:-

   
 1. The Prophet was to come from among the breathen of Israel. Any
Prophet coming from Bani Israel is therefore excluded from this good
tiding. Now, as we know, Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) was from Bani Israel, while
Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) was from Bani Ismael who were the brethren
of Bani Israel.

   
 2. The Prophet was to be 'like unto Moses.' Prophet Musa (a.s.) had to
make war, and Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) also had to defend himself
through war. But Prophet Isa (a.s.) did never enter a war.

   
 3. Prophet Musa (a.s.) had a brother Haroon (Aaron), who was to succeed
him. No such brother was to Prophet 'Isa (a.s.), while Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) had Ali ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) to whom he said “Thou art to me
as Aaron was to Moses, expect that there is no prophet after me.”

   
 4. Prophet Musa (a.s.) left the religious leadership to the children of
Aaron. Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) did not make any such arrangement. Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) made similar arrangement in his Ummah by leaving
Islam in the hands of Ali and his children Hasan and Husayn (a.s.)

   
 5. ”…… and will put my words in his mouth; and he shall speak upto them
all that I shall command him.” This criterion fits Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) only, because Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) did not claim it for
himself, while Allah (s.w.t.) said in the Qur'an for Prophet Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.):

”***And he doesn't speak (aught) on his own accord; it is naught but a
revelation revealed (unto him).” (Qur'an, 53:34)***

   
 6. Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) did never claim that he was the promised Prophet
of this sentence, while Allah (s.w.t.) mentioned this similarity between
Prophet Musa (a.s.) and Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) in the Qur'an in the
verse,

”***Verily, we sent unto you a Messenger, a witness on you, as we sent a
messenger unto Pharaoh.” (73:15)***

   
 7. Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) did not claim that he was the like of Moses
(a.s.), while Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) said to Ali ibn Abi Talib
(a.s.) “Thou art to me as Aaron was to Moses, expect that there is no
prophet after me.”

   
 8.      Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) himself said that the Prophet who was to
come after him will fulfil this prophecy. See the following sentences of
John:  
 “Howbeit when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into
all truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall
hear, that shall he speak.” (John, 16:13)

 

Other Prophecies
----------------

Dueteronomy
-----------

   
    
 “And he (i.e. Moses) said, The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from
Seir unto them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten
thousands of saints; from his right hand went a fiery law for them.”
(Duet, 33:2)  
  

The coming of Lord means coming of God's Representatives. Now the
prophet of God who came from Sinai was Prophet Musa (a.s.); that who
rose from Seir (a mountain in Palestine.) is Prophet 'Isa (a.s.). But
who is the Prophet who shined forth from mount Paran? Paran is the name
of a mountain in Mecca. The Prophet of God who shined forth from there
is none other than Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.).

Isaiah
------

   
 “Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the
earth….” (42:10)

   
 The old malady of translating proper names has made this prophecy
meaningless. In an Armenian translation, written in 1666 and published
in 1733, it has been translated as follows: “They sing unto the Lord a
new song; and his kingdom continues after him; and his name is Ahmad.”
(Now the name Ahmad has been translated as meaning 'his praise')

   
 Anyhow, in this prophecy, a new song unto the Lord means a new Shari'at
from God, which fits the Holy Prophet of Islam; but not so much on
Prophet 'Isa (a.s.).  
    
  

Habakkuk
--------

The vision of Nabi Habakkuk says:

   
 “God came from Teman and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah … … his
ways are everlasting.” (3:3-6).

   
 I believe there is no need to interpret this prophecy, which is so
clear. The representative of Lord who came from Paran was Prophet
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and all other attributes can easily be applied to
him.

Allamah Fakhrul-Islam Muhammad Sadiq (formerly a Christian priest) has
explained more than 30 prophecies from the Old Testament. But as this is
a short booklet, I have quoted only some of them here.

  

From New Testament
------------------

“That Prophet”
--------------

   
 “And this is the record to John (i.e., the Baptist) when the Jews sent
priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?  
 “And he confessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the
Christ.  
 “And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he saith, I am not.
Art thou that Prophet? And he answered, No.” (John,1:19-21).

   
 This talk clearly shows that just before the advent of Prophet 'Isa
(a.s.) (Jesus Christ), the Jews were waiting for three Prophets: Christ,
Elias and 'that Prophet.'

   
 And when John said that he was none of the three, then:  
 “And they asked him, and said unto him, why baptizest thou then, if
thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that Prophet?” (John, 1:25)

   
 It also shows that 'that Prophet' commanded such a high respect that
his name was not uttered and his adjective 'Prophet' is written with a
capital 'P'. And his advent was so well-understood that simply
addressing him as 'that Prophet' was enough to know him.

   
  

“Comforter”
-----------

   
    
 Prophet 'Isa (.s.) is recorded as saying to his twelve disciples:

“It is the expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto
you. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgement: Of sin because they believe not on me;
of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; of
judgement, because the prince of this world is judged.

“I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
How be it when he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear,
that shall he speak: and he will show you things to come

“He shall glorify me; for he shall receive of mine, and shall shew it
unto you.”(John 18:7-14)  
    
 Similar references have been recorded in John, 14:26 and 15:26.

   
 I do not think there is any need to explain how perfectly these
prophecies of Prophet 'Isa (a.s.) fit on the Holy Prophet of Islam
(s.a.w.a.)

   
 There are more than thirty prophecies mentioned in *“Anisul-Aalaam.”*
Now you may clearly understand the meaning of the following verses of
the Qur'an:

***“The people of the Book know him (i.e. Muhammad s.a.w.a.) as they
know their own sons; but some of them conceal the truth which they
themselves know.” (Qur'an, 2:146)***

***”Those who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet, whom they
find mentioned in their own scriptures in the Torah and the Injil…….”
(Qur'an, 7:157)***

*** ***  
***”Although from old days they (the Jews) had prayed for victory
against those without faith, when there came to them that {i.e.,Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.)} whom they did recognise, they refused to believe in him…”
(Qur'an, 2:89)***

 

[^1]: The Arab peninsula is surrounded on 3 sides by the sea.

[^2]: Kant Bunjh' means 'Servant of God, which, in Arabic becomes
“Abdullah”. Abdullah was the name of the father of the Holy Prophet.

[^3]: Sank Rakhiya' means 'Peaceful' which in Arabic is 'Amina.' Name of
the mother of the Holy Prophet was 'Amina.'

[^4]: Compare it with the ayat of the Qur'ãn: “Say: I am commanded to
worship God, and not to join partners with Him. Unto Him do I call, and
unto Him is my return.” (13:36)

[^5]:   i.e. era of Hijra.

[^6]: Fatimah, the lady of Paradise, the Chief of all the women.

[^7]: Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husain (a.s.).


