Mourning and Lamentation
========================

Mourning and Paying Homage to Allah’s Awliya’
---------------------------------------------

One of the precepts strongly recommended by the divine law of Islam
[*shari‘ah*] is holding ceremonies with the intention of paying homage
to the signs of Allah. Upholding this precept is considered an act
resulting from the piety of the hearts.

There is no dispute or disagreement among the various schools of thought
regarding the essential verdict pertaining to this precept.
Disagreement, however, lies in the question of whether application of
this verdict must be determined by divine decree alone or whether
instances of its application can also be determined by common sense and
wisdom.

In this chapter regarding mourning and paying homage to Allah’s saints
[*awliya’*], we will examine this difference of opinion.

Different types of religious rites and ceremonies
-------------------------------------------------

Religious rites, which have been subject to objection or disagreement by
certain sects of Islam, are of diverse kinds listed as follows:

1. Celebrating the birth anniversaries of the great personalities of the
religion, such as birth anniversaries of the Noble Prophet (S) and the
Holy Imams of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as). The Wahhabi sect considers such
celebrations to be acts of innovation in religion. They contend that
celebrating these days amounts to heresy [*bid‘ah*], straying and
deviation.

2. Celebrating memorable days in the history of Islam like days on which
great events happened, such as the day when the Holy Prophet (S) was
appointed to prophethood, the day the glorious Battle of Badr took
place, the day the Battle of Khandaq occurred, the day of the Conquest
of Mecca, the night of the Prophet’s (S) ascension to heaven [*laylat
al-mi‘raj*], the night of his migration to Medina, the Day of
*Mubahalah*,[^1] the Day of *Ghadir*[^2], and other similar events.

3. Another level of holding religious rites and paying homage to the
signs of Allah occurs, for example, when followers of the Fourteen
Infallibles (as) inhabit and improve the areas around the graves and
shrines of the religious *awliya’*. The followers of these infallible
people build domes and minarets over their shrines in order to serve as
a declaration to mankind that the people buried there are the true Imams
and divine leaders for mankind. Therefore, the act of raising shrines on
their graves serves to invite people to follow the Fourteen Infallibles
(as).

4. Yet another way of paying homage to the signs of Allah is when
Muslims make diligent efforts to preserve geographical places where
important events took place. For instance, Muslims have preserved the
sacredness of the location where the event of *Ghadir* took place, the
Cave of Hira’,[^3] the place where the Battle of Badr occurred, the
mosques wherein the Holy Prophet (S) performed prayers, and various
other places of this kind. Nowadays, many Muslims visit these sacred
places with the hope of seeking gifts of divine favor.

5. Organizing mourning ceremonies in memory of Imam al-Husayn (as) and
the other *awliya’* of Allah is another way of paying homage to the
signs of Allah. This takes the form of establishing memorial gatherings
to commemorate the lives and the struggles against oppression of these
great people. Muslims all over the world establish memorial ceremonies
to honor Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom and recite accounts of his
sufferings and the hardships imposed upon him, his family and all his
companions in an attempt to keep alive his battle against corruption and
oppression.

6. Another type of religious ceremony is gathering to recite group
prayers and supplications with a common intention.

Reasons for the preference for holding ceremonies
-------------------------------------------------

People who believe that it is permissible and even desirable to hold
religious ceremonies have resorted to a number of proofs. We will now
refer to some of them:

### A. Verses of the Holy Qur’an that permit ceremonies

There are many verses in the Holy Qur’an which talk about organizing and
holding ceremonies:

1. ***“O you who believe! Do not violate the signs (rites) appointed by
Allah nor the sacred month, nor interfere with the offerings, nor the
sacrificial animals with the garlands, nor those going to the Sacred
House seeking the grace and pleasure of their Lord.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا تُحِلُّوا شَعَائِرَ اللهِ وَلاََ
الشَّهرَ الحَرَامَ وَلاَ الهَدي وَلاَ القَلائِدَ وَلا آمِّينَ
الْبَيْتَ الحَرَامَ ...﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

We can infer two possibilities from this verse:

a. One possibility is that the verdict is affirmative; meaning that
Allah has in fact ordered believers to pay homage and reverence to
religious signs and rites.

b. The other possibility is that the verdict is prohibitive, meaning
that Allah intends to prohibit laziness when it comes to organizing
divine rites. In other words, Allah has forbidden negligence as regards
holding religious rites when we have distinguished their instances of
application.

2. ***“That shall be so [the rites of the pilgrimage to Mecca], and
whoever respects the signs of Allah, this is the outcome of the piety of
the hearts.”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ذَلِکَ وَمَن يُعَظِّمْ شَعَائِرَ اللهِ فَإِنَّهَا مِنْ تَقوَي
الْقُلُوبِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is the most clear and indisputable verse of the Holy Qur’an which
proves the permissibility of holding religious rites. This verse denotes
in a general and explicit way that paying homage to divine rites is an
act beloved by Allah.

3. ***“And as for the camels (of sacrifice), We have made them of the
signs of Allah for you,*** ***for you therein is much good.”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَالْبُدْنَ جَعَلْنَاهَا لَکُمْ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللهِ لَکُمْ فِيهَا
خَيرٌ ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this verse, the discriminate [*tab‘idiyyah*] preposition “of” [*min*]
(of the signs) has been employed. It denotes that the camels brought for
sacrifice during the days of the *hajj* are also considered the signs of
Allah.

4. ***“Surely, Safa and Marwah are among the signs appointed by Allah;
so whoever makes a pilgrimage to the House or pays a visit to it, there
is no blame on him if he goes around them both.”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالمَرْوَةَ مِنْ شَعَائِرِ اللهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ
الْبَيْتِ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلا جُنَاحَ عَلَيهِ أَنْ يَطَّوَّفَ
بِهِمَا... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. ***“There is no blame on you seeking bounty from your Lord, so when
you hasten on from ‘Arafat, then remember Allah near the Holy
Monument…”***[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَإِذا أَفَضْتُمْ مِنْ عَرَفاتٍ فَاذکُرُوا اللهَ عِنْدَ المَشْعَرِ
الحَرامِ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

This Qur’anic verse intends to pronounce and hence permit holding
religious ceremonies, but it has employed the Arabic word “*mash‘ar*”
instead of the word “*sha‘a’ir*”, which has been used in the other
previously cited verses. Both these words connote ‘upholding the signs
of Allah’.

### B. Analogous verses permit celebrating signs of Allah

Analogous verses are verses which allude to celebrating the signs of
Allah but the word “*sha‘a’ir*” has not been explicitly used in the
wording of the verses.

1. ***“And proclaim among men the Pilgrimage: they will come to you on
foot and on every lean camel, coming from every remote path, that they
may witness advantages for them and mention the name of Allah during
stated days over what he has given them of the cattle quadrupeds, then
eat of them and feed the distressed one, the needy. Then let them
accomplish their needed acts of shaving and cleansing, and let them
fulfil their vows and let them go around the Ancient House. That (shall
be so); and whoever respects the sacred ordinances of Allah, it is
better for him with his Lord.”***[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَأَذِّنْ فِي النَّاسِ بِالحَجِّ يأْتُوكَ رِجَالاً وَعَلَي کُلِّ
ضَامِرٍ يأْتِينَ مِنْ کُلِّ فَجٍّ عَمِيقٍ \* لِيشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ
لَهُمْ وَيذْکُرُوا اسْمَ اللهِ فِي أَيَّامٍ مَعْلُومَاتٍ عَلَی مَا
رَزَقَهُمْ مِنْ بَهِيمَةِ الأَنْعَامِ فَکُلُوا مِنْهَا وَأَطْعِمُوا
الْبَآئِسَ الْفَقِيرَ \* ثُمَّ لْيَقْضُوا تَفَثَهُمْ وَلْيُوفَُوا
نُذُورَهُمْ وَلْيَطَّوَّفُوا بِالْبَيْتِ الْعَتِيقِ \* ذَلِكَ وَمَنْ
يعَظِّمْ حُرُمَاتِ اللهِ فَهُوَ خَيرٌ لَهُ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Scholars of the divine message and commentators of the Glorious Qur’an
regard the above mentioned verse—which indicates veneration of divine
ordinances—as an enjoinment to perform religious rights.

This is because according to principle, just as one can reason using a
rationale regarding a specific subject so also may one reason using
rationales regarding similar subjects or subjects that have something in
common with the intended subject. However, this is only valid when the
subject is generic or of a general type that includes many objects;
otherwise, there would be an invalid analogy.

In other words, although this verse is specifically about the *hajj*
ceremony, at the end of the verse ‘sacred ordinances of Allah’ are
mentioned generally, so the verse can be applied generally.

2. ***“They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not consent save to perfect His light, though the unbelievers
may be averse.”***[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يُطْفِئُوا نُورَ اللهِ بِأَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَيأْبَي
اللهُ إِلاّ أَنْ يُتِمَّ نُورَهُ وَلَوْ کَرِهَ الْکَافِرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

Because this verse comes along with verses about holy war [*jihad*],
inviting people to the Oneness of Allah [*tawhid*], and propagating
religion, it can be inferred that the part of the religion that the
enemies of Islam want to extinguish is, in fact, the divine signs and
rites which have been alluded to in the verse, *“And whoever respects
the signs of Allah, this is the outcome of the piety of the
hearts.”*[^11]

3. ***“In houses which Allah has permitted to be exalted and that His
name may be*** ***remembered in them; glorify Him therein in the
mornings and the evenings.”***[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ في بُيُوتٍ أَذِنَ اللهُ أَنْ تُرْفَعَ وَيُذْکَرَ فِيهَا اسمُهُ
يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ فِيهَا بِالغُدُرِّ وَالآصَالِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

If we take the verse that comes before this verse, the Verse of Light
[*ayat al-nur*], into consideration, it shows that “in houses” [*fi
buyutin*] means those houses wherein the light of Allah shines and the
centres where the light of religion radiates. These places are the
sources of radiation of the light of religion. They are centres of
guidance and venues of observing the divine law of Islam [*shari‘ah*].

Allah, the Exalted, has willed that these radiant houses should be
revered and elevated in status. These places deserve to be venues of
continuous remembrance, worship and obedience of Allah.

We can deduce from this Qur’anic verse that Allah has willed that every
place which serves as a custodian for the exposition of Islamic laws and
divine teachings (the light of Allah) has to be honored and revered.

We can also infer from the same above-mentioned verse that *sha‘a’ir*
(the signs and rites of Allah) are not confined to any particular place;
that is to say, they are not confined only to the rites and ceremonies
of the *hajj* or other rites of worship specifically mentioned. On the
contrary, everything that serves to spread and propagate divine laws is
included in the meaning of *sha‘a’ir*, and anything that propagates
Islamic knowledge and teachings is also included in the meaning of this
word.

4. ***“And He made lowest the word of those who disbelieved; and the
word of Allah, that is the highest; and Allah is Mighty, Wise.”***[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَجَعَلَ کَلِمَةَ الَّذِينَ کَفَرُوا السُّفلَي وَکَلِمَةُ اللهِ
هِيَ العُلْيَا وَاللهُ عَزِيزٌ حَکِيمٌ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

It can be understood from this verse that those things that serve to
honor the word of Allah and to exterminate unbelief [*kufr*] are among
the goals and objectives of divine law and religion.

5. ***“And Allah will by no means give the unbelievers a way (to
triumph) against the believers.”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلَنْ يجعَلَ اللهُ لِلْکَافِرينَ عَلَی المُؤْمِنِينَ سَبِيلاً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

This blessed verse alludes to another dimension of the reality of the
word *sha‘a’ir* and that reality is the aspect of proliferation of the
glory and esteem of Islam and Muslims. Another aspect of *sha‘a’ir* is
veneration of the Word of Allah [*kalimat Allah*] and attaching special
importance to Muslims in general.

### The meaning of sha‘a’ir

1. Khalil ibn Ahmad Farahidi says, “*Sha‘artuhu* (from the same root as
*sha‘a’ir*) means: I contemplated and reasoned it out and I understood
it…”[^15]

2. Jawhari says, “*Sha‘a’ir* are the deeds and rites of the *hajj*, and
anything which is a standard of obedience and banner of submission to
Allah, the Exalted, is a part of *sha‘a’ir*… and the *sha‘a’ir* of a
group of people in war is their banner which distinguishes them from
their enemies. Also, *ash‘artuhu fasha‘ara* means, ‘I explained it to
him, and he understood’.”[^16]

3. Firuzabadi says, “*Ash‘arahu’l-amr* means that ‘an order/command was
made known to him’… and the *shi‘ar* of *hajj* are rites, ceremonies and
manifestations of the *hajj*…”[^17]

4. Ibn Faris says, “*Ish‘ar* means ‘manifesting and making something
known by means of the senses’, and *masha‘ir* means ‘things that are
apparent and known’. Its singular is *mash‘ar*, which means ‘position,
situation or place which has been made manifest and apparent by means of
certain signs’.”[^18]

5. Qurtubi says, “Anything which is intended for Allah, the Exalted, and
comprises a command serving as a sign of manifestation and declaration
is called *shi‘ar* or *sha‘a’ir*. *Shi‘ar* means ‘a sign or indication’
and *ash‘artu* means ‘I declared’. *Sha‘irah* means ‘a sign’, and the
*sha‘a’ir* of Allah refer to the signs and symbols of the religion of
Allah.”[^19]

What we can deduce from the preceding discussion is that the word
*sha‘a’ir* can be employed for sensory declarations. Also, according to
the usage employed by the Holy Qur’an, this word indicates ceremonial
declarations and propagation of religion and spreading the Light of
Allah.

This word has an additional aspect though and can also be employed to
include the dimension of reverence and exaltation. Even though this
dimension is not found in the essence and substance of the word
*sha‘a’ir*, it exists in the essence of words which are affiliated to
the word *sha‘a’ir*.

In conclusion, *sha‘a’ir* does not merely mean rites and ceremonies of
the *hajj* as such. True, the ceremonies and rites of the *hajj* are
called *masha‘ir* because there is an aspect of declaring and
manifesting in them. However, to put it another way, the *sha‘a’ir* are
not the religion of Allah in and of themselves, but exist as dimensions
of honoring and revering the religion of Allah.

Implementation according to common sense and wisdom
---------------------------------------------------

When Allah, the Divine, has not intervened in the meaning of a given
word, it means that the Divine Legislator has entrusted the duty of
applying the meanings and themes of that word as is deemed relevant
according to common parlance, common wisdom and based upon the judgement
of pious people who are well-versed in the religious law [*shari‘ah*].

The term ‘*sha‘a’ir* of religion’ which has been exhorted and encouraged
by Allah belongs to the above-mentioned group. For further clarity, we
refer to three important points:

a. Terms which are used in the language of divine law and there is no
reason for them to convey and transmit any new meaning apart from their
literal meanings, retain their original and literal meanings.

b. If the Divine Legislator has supplied the meaning of a certain word,
and has explicitly stipulated the manner of applying it, we must apply
that word in the same manner He has stipulated. If Allah has not
explicitly stipulated the meaning of a word, we must apply the meaning
that is understood according to common practice and common sense.

c. Things exist in two ways: genetically (relating to origin) and
contractually. For example, the terms used for most transactions such as
buy, sell and rent are forms of contractual existence. Correspondingly,
the word *sha‘a’ir*, which is often combined with words like *Allah* or
*religion* to form compound words such as *sha‘a’irullah* (the signs of
Allah) or *sha‘a’iruddin* (the signs of religion), can exist in these
two ways. This is due to the fact that the genuine meaning of the word
*sha‘a’ir* is manifestation or propagation, and because the Divine
Legislator has not assigned a specific meaning for this word, we must
return to the two previous points (a and b above); that is to say, all
compound words made from this root word retain their commonly understood
meanings and the genuine meaning of such words must be interpreted
through religious custom.

On the other hand, since *sha‘a’ir* of religion indicate other issues,
even though they are considered to be intrinsically genetic, *sha‘a’ir*
indicate contractual meanings, not genetic ones.

Consequently, because the Divine Legislator (Allah) has not supplied the
meaning of this word, *sha‘a’ir*, it therefore means what is understood
from it by religious parlance.

To put it briefly, we adopt anything which the Divine Legislator has
stipulated and apply it in the way He has specified. However, with the
passage of time, new instances will appear which are deemed an instance
of *sha‘a’ir* by religious parlance, common wisdom and pious people who
are well-versed in divine law.

Therefore, there is no reason to shun acting upon these cases. With all
certainty, we include them among the general meanings which denote
revering and exalting the signs of Allah.

Responses to doubts
-------------------

Opponents of holding mourning ceremonies for Imam al-Husayn (as), such
as the Wahhabis, have put forward some objections. In this section, we
will discuss these doubts and skepticisms.

### 1. Only the Divine Legislator can originate laws

Some sceptics of holding religious ceremonies say, “Every ceremony that
is based on religion has to be devised by the Divine Lawgiver (Allah).
In cases where Allah has not devised a religious ceremony, holding such
ceremonies will amount to innovation, heresy, deviation and attributing
falsehood to Allah.”

***Response***

With recourse to the exhaustive explanations which have already been
given, there remains no room for doubt or skepticism about this issue
because:

Firstly, originating or officializing laws is of two kinds: exclusive
and general. In the case of exclusive origination by Allah, the laws
must be followed. Regarding general origination of laws, we adopt all
dictates that Allah has specified, and in instances where the Divine
Lawgiver has not mentioned specific religious rites and their instances
of application, we adopt and act upon religious parlance.

Secondly, it has been stated in the principals of jurisprudence of Islam
that if Allah orders his servants to carry out a general act and does
not place any limitations on performing it, man is at liberty to apply
that act in every way he likes so long as there is no specific
restriction placed on it by divine law.

A suitable example would be the place of prayer. Man is at liberty to
pray in every place he likes so long as the place is not specifically
prohibited by the religious law. The same rule is applied regarding
revering and honoring the signs and rites of religion.

### 2. The necessity of delegation of auhtority by Allah

Some doubters say that if the Divine Lawgiver entrusts the matter of
deciding when and how to hold religious rites to common parlance it
follows that Allah has delegated religious lawmaking. They contend that
this type of relinquishment is null and void.

***Response***

Application of a general rule to a current specific instance does not
amount to entrusting or delegating one’s lawgiving authority. Delegation
in this sense is only true when the general rule has been obtained by
common parlance. To put it another way, secondary meanings are of two
types:

a. Predicate secondary meaning: in which the essence is consequential;
hence, the predicate is also consequential, such as loss, sin,
forgetfulness, disinclination, anxiety, etc.

b. Subject secondary meaning: which is defined as an instance that
occurs to the subject, not to the predicate. The essences of these
accompanying instances are not secondary but primary and only their
subjects are secondary; such as instances which pertain to holding one’s
parents in high respect and paying due honor to a guest and other topics
of this kind.

Their predicates are primary, but their subjects are secondary; that is
to say, different conditions apply in various instances.

About this particular matter, we say: paying due respect is a primary
concept that is demanded by wisdom and divine law, but the customs and
common practices that apply to paying due respect to others are subject
to change and only originate in the subject of the predicate, not in the
predicate itself.

In other words, respect itself is a constant, but the customs regarding
respect vary. These customs have been entrusted to common parlance so
long as there is no specific prohibition placed on the particular
subject by divine law.

### 3. The halal (lawful) will be mistaken to be haram (unlawful) and vice versa

Some sceptics say that if Allah has ceded the command of holding
religious ceremonies and other religious customs to common sense and
wisdom, there will be mistakes in distinguishing what is unlawful
[*haram*] as proscribed by Islamic law from the lawful [*halal*] because
common sense and wisdom are not infallible. People are liable to make
mistakes in perception and hence discern mistakenly.

With use of common sense and wisdom, we are at risk of perceiving
wrongly and of failing to distinguish correctly what is *halal* from
what is *haram* and vice versa. Sometimes, something can be perceived to
be *halal* when in actual fact it is *haram*. Sometimes the opposite
could happen and an act that is *halal* will wrongly be perceived to be
*haram*.

***Response***

Legalising that which is *haram* and making illegal that which is
*halal* can only happen when one that is duty-bound makes a judgement
about an act without presenting any sound reason, evidence or proof. In
this instance, the above-mentioned protest put forth by the skeptics
could be acceptable.

However, if the act of putting forth new edicts is based on proper
evidence which conforms to divine law, even when that evidence is
general in nature, there is no problem with such a decree because the
evidence offered is correct.

### 4. This amounts to playing with basic doctrines of shari‘ah

Some maintain that if creation or establishment of religious ceremonies
has been entrusted to the discernment of common sense and wisdom, the
result will be vain sporting with the fundamental doctrines of Islam and
futile play with the fixed bounds of the religious law [*shari‘ah*].

***Response***

It seems that one who raises such an objection desires to reject the
holding of religious ceremonies and perhaps harbours fears about acts
which actually amount to spreading and publicizing the *shari‘ah* not
distorting it as they contend. In fact, propagating the *shari‘ah* is an
act that Qur’anic verses have emphasized.

Allah, the Exalted, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... اَللهُ مُتِمُّ نُورِهِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has willed to spread His light and religion and shari‘ah.”***

He also says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَکَلِمَةُ اللهِ هِيَ الْعُليا ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah has willed that His religion should be high and
honored.”***

Holding religious ceremonies is one of the many ways of propagating the
*shari‘ah*. It is one way of exalting the divine law and completing the
light of Allah. This is something that Allah has willed in a general
way.

If the intended goal of propagating the religion and *shari‘ah* is to
bring about some change and transformation in these two, then without
doubt this act is null and void. However, applying the general concept
of the signs of Allah to new cases and different themes does not
automatically change or transform the religion and *shari‘ah*.

### 5. Extension of the concept to all instances

The skeptics also ask the following questions: if holding religious
ceremonies and honoring the signs of Allah has been entrusted to people
to decide, what difference is there with the different topics and
instances of the *shari‘ah*?

We know that common sense and wisdom do not have any right to interfere
in instances such as prayer, fasting, *hajj*, *zakat*, *khums*, and
other similar instances. We know that no group of people can set up
conditions and limitations for themselves regarding these topics. How
then could Allah entrust the issue of deciding about religious
ceremonies to common sense and wisdom, and yet forbid it from
interfering in the above-mentioned instances?

***Response***

The difference here lies in the restriction of certain instances; that
is to say, one must differentiate between ‘the reality of the
*shari‘ah*’ and its lexical meaning. In instances where the subject is
the reality of the *shari‘ah*, the law of restriction to certain
instances applies in full. This is opposed to instances where Allah has
intervened in their subjects and meanings and has determined that the
meaning of a particular word has to depend on its literal meaning.

It is in such instances where Allah puts the instance and meaning to
general application in its entirety when He legislates and makes a law
applicable. For example, when Allah commanded us to be kind and
beneficent to our parents, he did not place the reality of the
*shari‘ah* in this instance. He did not fix specifications or details
regarding its exact performance.

Therefore, that which is incumbent upon man is to do anything which is
an instance of kindness and altruism to his parents. Allah has not
placed limitations on this instance and has left it to retain its
literal meaning.

This is opposed to those instances that Allah has categorized as part of
‘the reality of the *shari‘ah*’ like the five daily prayers, *hajj*,
fasting and other issues that pertain to submission and servitude
[*‘ubudiyyah*]. These are instances where we can not of our own accord
add limits and conditions, but have to follow the limits and conditions
which Allah has placed on them up to the Day of Resurrection.

However, as regards details which are outside the essence of that
action, we are at liberty to do as we wish, like when deciding in which
place we would like to perform our prayers, unless we know that there is
a particular prohibition on a particular place. In Islamic
jurisprudence, this is called ‘reasonable and logical choosing’
[*takhyir-e ‘aqli*].

### 6. Desecration of fundamentals of Islam and pillars of the shari‘ah

The doubters say that if those things pertaining to the laws of Islam
are entrusted to people to decide, it will lead to irreverence [*hatk-e
hurmat*] and insult to the foundations of Islam as well as the pillars
of the *shari‘ah*. It is clear that this is not compatible with the
lofty aims and teachings of Islam.

***Response***

The literal meaning of *hatk* (the Arabic term for dishonor and
violation), is tearing the veil of modesty or the covering over a hidden
affair.[^20] In Islam, the intended meaning is attempting to discover
the weak points of Muslims.

Regarding the above scepticism, we agree that allowing people to freely
decide issues of the *shari‘ah*, such as issues and duties that are
restricted, will doubtlessly lead to violating the honor of religion and
the *shari‘ah* and result in the foundations of Islam being held in
mockery and scorn.

However, in instances where the reality of the *shari‘ah* are not
stipulated by the Divine Legislator, the duty of identifying the
applicability of a general instance to individuals has been left to the
wisdom and the common sense of the people.

### 7. Some rites and rituals are harmful

Some people say that performing certain rites and celebrating certain
signs of Allah will bring about a lot of harm for Islam and Muslims,
especially holding mourning rites for Imam al-Husayn (as) the
performance of which necessitates bearing a lot of sorrow and grief.
They say that, according to the laws of Allah, repelling harm by
whatever means is incumbent upon man.

***Response***

Regarding religious rites whose general instances are not from the
category of restricted instances, we apply it in such a way that will
not lead to unlawful acts. Non-confined instances consist of such issues
as respect for one’s parents.

They can only be applied on the meaning that verifies and ascertains the
general instance. This is because we do not claim that in general and in
every circumstance every instance of non-confinement is applicable to
every meaning.

In other words, that meaning has not been particularly prohibited. On
the contrary, it has been specifically made lawful or encompassed in a
general law. Otherwise, what harm can holding mourning ceremonies and
explaining Islamic laws pose for Islam?

### 8. Ridiculing the shari‘ah

Some say that entrusting the application of the *shari‘ah* in some
instances to common sense will result in deriding and making fun
[*istihza’*] of the *shari‘ah*. And because it is incumbent upon every
Muslim to protect the honor of the *shari‘ah*, it is therefore clear
that the issue of applying the *shari‘ah* in all its aspects should be
entrusted to none other than Allah.

***Response***

Making fun of something is of several kinds:

1. **Derision which is not right and so null and void**

This type of *istihza’* is not of concern because it involves mockery of
something that is right and just in one ideology but misunderstood by
those of other ideologies. For instance, sometimes people of other
religions or ideologies ridicule or sneer at Islamic acts of servitude
like prayer. This type of derision does not prove any deficiency or
defect in the believers or in Islam itself.

2. **Customary derision**

This type of derision is a result of social differences in different
environments and common practices that pertain to them.

The actions of every group of people depend on their interpretation of
their environment, but it is always possible to find other groups of
people who understand things in a very different way. However, these
differences should not make us prohibit the application of what we
understand to be the truth.

3. **Derision in a true sense**

Some kinds of derision have true aspects and will therefore lead to true
violation of the honor of the *shari‘ah* and the religion. However,
reason is capable of perceiving this kind of derision, because it is a
matter of distinguishing decency from indecency. Therefore, in instances
where the application of the general instance leads to real derision and
scorn, we condemn and forbid such practices.

[^1]: Mubahalah was the day when the Noble Prophet (s) received orders
from his Lord to challenge the Christians to come forward and engage in
calling upon Allah to curse the liars. The Prophet was ordered to come
with his near ones and the Christians too were supposed to bring their
near ones. The Prophet came with al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Fatimah and ‘Ali.
The Christians changed their minds about engaging in this encounter and
backed down. The Qur’an says, “But whoever disputes with you in this
matter after what has come to you of knowledge, then say, Come let us
call our sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near
people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray
for the curse of Allah on the liars.” (Surat Al ‘Imran 3:61) [Trans.]

[^2]: The day that Imam ‘Ali (as) was appointed as the Prophet’s
successor. [Trans.]

[^3]: Hira’ is the name of a cave where the Noble Prophet (s) used to go
on retreat for meditation before being appointed to the prophethood. It
was actually while he was in the cave of Hira’ when the first revelation
from Allah was revealed to him: “Read in the name of your Lord who
created. He created man from a clot. Read and your Lord is Honourable,
who taught (to write) with the pen, taught man what he knew not.” (Surat
al-‘Alaq 96:1-5) [Trans.]

[^4]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:2.

[^5]: Surat al-Hajj 22:32.

[^6]: Surat al-Hajj 22:36.

[^7]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:158.

[^8]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:198.

[^9]: Surat al-Hajj 22:27-30.

[^10]: Surat al-Tawbah (or Bara’ah) 9:32.

[^11]: Surat al-Hajj 22:32.

[^12]: Surat al-Nur 24:36.

[^13]: Surat al-Tawbah (or Bara’ah) 9:40.

[^14]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:141.

[^15]: Kitab al-‘Ayn, vol. 1, p. 251.

[^16]: Sihah al-Lughah, vol. 2, p. 699.

[^17]: Qamus al-Muhit, vol. 2, p. 60.

[^18]: Mu‘jam Maqa’is al-Lughah, vol. 3, pp. 193-194.

[^19]: Tafsir Qurtubi, vol. 12, p. 56.

[^20]: Sihah al-Lughah.


