Mourning from the Viewpoint of Reason
=====================================

One of the objections put forward by certain skeptics, such as the
Wahhabis, is why the Shi‘ahs and lovers of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) mourn
or wail for the distresses which befell Allah’s *awliya’* [*awliya’*]
and why they cry for their sufferings and hold mourning ceremonies for
them.

They ask: why do the Shi‘ahs hit their chests in lamentation? Why do
they dwell on past events? Do *awliya’* of Allah need us to mourn them
or is it we who are in need of mourning for them?

The Wahhabis consider mourning for the *awliya’* of Allah to be an act
of innovation and heresy and say that there is no evidence in Islam to
prove that it is permitted to hold mourning ceremonies. Therefore, they
contend that mourning ceremonies are not a part of the *shari‘ah* and
must be abandoned.

We will now examine this topic on different levels.

1. Mourning and the revival of the culture of ‘Ashura
-----------------------------------------------------

With recourse to sound reasoning, we come to know that holding mourning
ceremonies for Allah’s *awliya’*, especially the master and leader of
all the martyrs Imam al-Husayn (as), is in accordance with logic because
honoring Allah’s *awliya’* through various ceremonies amounts to
revering their great personalities and reviving their messages.

Without doubt, any nation or community which does not honor the great
personalities of its history is condemned to failure and doomed to
destruction. It is often a few great people who build history.

**Some of Imam al-Husayn’s (as) messages**

1. “In circumstances like these, I do not see death to be anything save
prosperity and life with the oppressors is nothing but shame and
distress.”[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اِنِّي لا أری الموتَ إلاّ سعادة، وَالحياةَ معَ الظالمينِ إلاّ برماً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. “Death with honor is nothing but eternal life while life with
abjectness is nothing but death.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ليسَ الموتُ في سبيلِ العزِّ إلاّ حياة خالدة، وليست الحياةُ معَ الذلِّ
إلاّ الموت الذي لاحياة معه. »
  </p>
</blockquote>

3. “Beware that the illegitimate son of an illegitimately born man (Ibn
Ziyad) has given me two options: either to draw my sword and fight, or
to wear the dress of abjectness by swearing allegiance to Yazid.
However, acceptance of abjectness is very far from us.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ألا وإنَّ الدعي ابن الدعي قدْ رکز بينَ اثنتين، بينَ السلّةِ والذلّةِ
وهيهات منّا الذلّة... »
  </p>
</blockquote>

4. “We are from Allah and to whom is our return. When the Islamic
community is afflicted by the governance of the like of Yazid, we have
to bid farewell to Islam.”[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إِنّا للهِ وَإِنّا إِلَيهِ راجِعُونَ وعلی الاسلامِ السلام إذ قد بليت
الأمة براع مثل يزيد. »
  </p>
</blockquote>

5. “I have risen not to create disunion and inequity nor oppression and
corruption among the Muslims, but to rectify and reform the *ummah* of
my ancestor the Holy Prophet (S). I want to enjoin what is good and
forbid what is evil. I desire to revive the way of my grandfather, the
Holy Prophet (S), and my father ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib.”[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«... إنّي لم أخرج أشراً ولا بطراً ولا مفسداً ولا ظالماً، وإنّما خرجت
لطلب الاصلاحِ في أمةِ جدّي صَلَّی اللهُ عَلَيهِ وآله، أريد أنْ آمر
بالمعروفِ وأنهی عن المنکرِ وأسير بسيرةِ جدّي وابي علي بن ابي طالب
عليهِ السّلام. »
  </p>
</blockquote>

2. The affectionate relationship between the Islamic community and Allah’s awliya’ (as)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the most effective ways to prove people’s beliefs is inciting
their sentiments. Stirring up people’s feelings is an important way of
explaining or justifying their political and social beliefs. Man is more
liable to be influenced when he looks at issues from the emotional point
of view than from logical or other viewpoints. In other words, when it
comes to proving man’s beliefs, the emotional or psychological
perspective is more effective than other methods.

Now, when we pay attention to the issue of the martyrdom of Allah’s
*awliya’* (as), especially the Doyen of Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn (as), we
come to the conclusion that reminding people about the sad event of
‘Ashura and refreshing their memories about what transpired in the
history of Islam will result in incitement of their feelings.

In this way, we can take those great people to be our role models in
life. We can thus communicate their messages to the people, because the
messages and orders we receive from Allah’s *awliya’* (as) are in actual
fact messages and commands of Allah.

It is for this reason that after the event of ‘Ashura, Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin (as) used to weep and mourn for the martyrs of Karbala,
especially for his father Imam al-Husayn (as).

The issue of mourning the *awliya’* of Allah becomes clearer when we
bear in mind the tribute paid by the Holy Prophet (S) to Imam al-Husayn
(as).

The Holy Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«حسين منّي وأنا من حسين، أحبّ الله من أحبّ حسيناً. »
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Al-Husayn is from me and I am from al-Husayn, Allah loves the one who
loves al-Husayn.”[^4]

Similarly, the Holy Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الحسنُ والحسينُ سيِّدا شبابِ أهلِ الجنَّةِ. »
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two masters of the youths of
Paradise.”[^5]

**3. Spiritual benefits derived from the atmosphere at gatherings where
mourning for Allah’s** ***awliya’*** **takes place**

Whenever mourning ceremonies are held for Imam al-Husayn (as), his
heavenly spirit and divine soul is always present at the gatherings.
This is also true of the other *awliya’* of Allah (as); wherever
mourning ceremonies are held for them, their divine souls are present in
those gatherings.

Therefore, people from all walks of life can benefit spiritually by
attending such mourning ceremonies. Elderly people and children alike
can derive vast spiritual benefits from the graces and favors present in
these ceremonies.

It has been narrated that one of the great people had said, “For the
first few months after birth, take the cradles of your newborns to
academic gatherings and assemblies where invocation of Allah takes
place.

Take them to *Husayniyyah*s[^6]. Carry them with you when you go to
places of mourning where the name of the Doyen of Martyrs, Imam
al-Husayn (as), is mentioned because the souls of the newborns are like
magnets; they easily absorb knowledge and the invocations which are
recited. They easily absorb the sacred soul of Imam al-Husayn (as).

Even though the newborn cannot speak, it still perceives and absorbs
what occurs around it. And if it is taken to a place or places where sin
is committed during the period of its childhood, the sins which are
committed there corrupt the baby. If it is, on the contrary, taken to
places of worship and knowledge, the newborn perceives the purity and
serenity of those places.”

That same great man also said, “You should place the cradles of your
newborns next to the rooms of commemoration of the martyrs of Karbala
and the rooms where invoking Allah takes place. This was the custom of
the scholars of past times. The effects which the newborn absorbs during
this period remain firm and stable in its soul up to the end of its
life.

They become a part of its instincts and natural attributes, because the
newborn has absolute ability to perceive during the period of its
infancy, even though simple or ordinary people do not comprehend this
important secret.”

**4. Reform and guidance of the community**

In addition to the fact that people gathering in mourning ceremonies
where the name of the Doyen of Martyrs is mentioned express and feel
love for Imam al-Husayn (as), they also attain to great graces from
these gatherings because eulogy of Imam al-Husayn (as) is presented
along with discussion of Islamic sciences including beliefs, laws and
morals.

By participating in such gatherings, people can achieve spiritual
prosperity and stimulate perfection of their faith, and that is exactly
what Imam al-Husayn (as) sacrificed his life for.

[^1]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, vol. 14, p. 218.

[^2]: Khwarazmi, Maqtal al-Imam al-Husayn (as), vol. 1, p. 184.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 328.

[^4]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, vol. 1, p. 51, Fada’il Ashab Rasul Allah (s).

[^5]: Al-Tirmidhi, Al-Sahih, vol. 5, p. 617; Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
Al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 369.

[^6]: Places of assembly specially built for mourning Imam al-Husayn.
[trans.]


