The Psychology of Mourning
==========================

The most important benefits derived from mourning ceremonies are its
psychological effects. Most people who take part in mourning gatherings
do so with the desire of gaining psychological and emotional benefits.

Nevertheless, some people say that holding mourning ceremonies and
having many sorrowful rites during the course of a year deprives the
society of happiness and joy. They contend that these practices cause
people to feel more unhappy and downcast and in effect bring about more
discouragement and depression in the society. In this section, we will
examine and analyze this issue.

The stages of mourning
----------------------

Mourning or crying has an exterior (outer manifestation) and an interior
(inner manifestation). Its outer appearance is physiological, and is a
result of psychological influences by means of external or internal
stimuli, such as thought and reflection. These psychological effects
enter the physiology of the brain and the nerves and activate a special
part of the brain which sends messages to the lachrymal glands to
stimulate the eyes to become active. The result is that tears flow and
this is what is known as crying.

The interior or mental manifestation of crying comprises its internal
psychological effects. The psychological view, to which we concur, is
that crying establishes affectionate and benevolent feelings.

Crying is emphasized in the traditions [*hadith*s], to the extent that
it has been said that crying, causing others to cry or even being in a
mood of lamentation when a person attends mourning ceremonies for Imam
al-Husayn (as) is a source of both worldly and heavenly benefits. Here
that which is implied is the internal effects.

The internal psychological consequences of crying are divided into four
types. The first is directed at the self and its repressed needs. This
type of crying can intensify depression and can also cause an
individual’s social abilities to be disturbed or confused.

However, the other three types of crying are encouraging and
motivational because they have an inverse relationship with sorrow and
depression. The first kind of crying is as a result of real sorrow
caused, for example, by death; but the other three types do not possess
real sorrow for present events, even though they take place in
present-day mourning ceremonies. The four types of crying are as
follows:

1. **Crying as a result of relationship and affection**

This type of crying takes place due to problems or when tragic events,
like bereavement of a beloved, come to pass. Crying of this kind does
not usually happen out of one’s own volition, but occurs involuntarily.
This type of crying, in the terminology of psychologists and mental
therapists, is termed psychological emptying or emotional release of the
aroused feelings and is related to the individual and his repressed or
unfulfilled needs.

2. **Crying as a result of belief**

This type of crying is that of a person who sheds tears during
supplication while evaluating his present and future deeds and
circumstances. This type of crying has its roots in faith and ideology
and is not related to fears about this world and our day to day life.

3. **Crying to seek perfection and excellence**

Sometimes crying is a result of seeking virtue and moral perfection,
like the crying which takes place when a teacher, a moral adviser, a
prophet, an *imam* or anyone of high moral calibre departs this life.
This type of crying views things from this perspective that we, in the
deepest recesses of our hearts, have a strong admiration for perfection
and spiritual growth.

We are overwhelmed when these types of perfection are available, and we
become distressed when they are lost. The crying that takes place in
mourning ceremonies is sometimes of this type.

4. **Crying for the persecuted and oppressed**

In this type of crying, we feel sympathy for one who is being treated
unjustly or inhumanely like when we cry because of the harsh oppression
that was imposed upon the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (as),
especially the brutal oppression which was committed against the Doyen
of Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn (as), and other numerous hardships that the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (as) suffered.

Mourning ceremonies and depression
----------------------------------

Depressive disorders are divided into three main groups:

1. Major depression.

2. Habitual depression.

3. Circumstantial depression.[^1]

Major depression is the most intense type of depression. Some of its
signs include:

a. Feelings of sorrow, emptiness or purposelessness for the greater part
of the day or even the whole day.

b. Visible and apparent decrease of interest in and enjoyment of daily
activities for the better part of the day.

c. Visible decrease in body weight without abstaining from food or
noticeable increase in body weight in the course of one month.

d. Inability to sleep (insomnia) or sleepiness throughout the day.

e. Fatigue and loss of energy for most of the day.

f. Lack of self-worth or excessive feelings of guilt.

g. Decrease in mental capacity, lack of concentration and inability to
make decisions.

h. Recurring thoughts about death.

Upon consideration of these three types of depression, it is clear that
the first and third types are not intended by those who say that
mourning ceremonies are a cause of sorrow and depression in the society.

The first type is extreme and it is clearly invalid to claim that the
Shi‘ah societies are widely afflicted by major or chronic depression and
sorrow.

The third type of depression is also not intended by the sceptics
because it is related to special and particular instances like
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) or depressive disorders that follow
psychological distress like schizophrenia.

Therefore, habitual depression and sorrow is that which is intended by
critics. Habitual depression is relatively minor and has the following
features:

a. Lack of appetite or excessive appetite.

b. Lack of sleep (insomnia) or excessive sleepiness.

c. Lack of energy or excessive fatigue.

d. Difficulty in decision making or feelings of helplessness.

e. The appearance or manifestation of these symptoms for the greater
part of the day or for most days for a period of at least two years.

f. The symptoms are not a result of physiological effects due to
inappropriate use of medicines, etc.

g. The symptoms result in disruption of the individual’s work and social
activities.

Now, we will examine whether or not mourning ceremonies bring about the
symptoms of habitual depression in man, and therefore cause social
despondency.

In order to make this issue clear, it is necessary to scrutinize the
factors which cause depression and despondency from the viewpoint of
psychology. Psychologists have enumerated three main factors that cause
depression: existential, hereditary and environmental stimulants.[^2]

The surroundings or situation alone do not cause depression. In fact,
negative stimuli in the environment are only effective in people who
have a background of hereditary depression or biological disorder in the
brain affecting its normal function.

In addition, mourning ceremonies cannot be classed as environmental
causes that generate intense stress. Real grief and sorrow resulting
from current tragic events can cause extreme distress and depression,
but mourning ceremonies for the *awliya’* of Allah play no part in
producing intense stress.

On the contrary, and with due attention to issues discussed in social
psychology about the characteristics of religious rituals, it can be
said that mourning ceremonies play a strong part in stress relief.

In cases where tears and sorrow arise as a result of belief, because of
seeking moral perfection and excellence, or due to sympathy for the
persecuted and oppressed, they can produce tranquillity in man and
remove agitation from his soul. To substantiate this issue, we will
refer to an example in this regard.

Doctor Tayjani Tunisi says, “My friend called Mun‘im came and together
we traveled on pilgrimage to Karbala. There, like the other Shi‘ahs, I
came to understand the hardships and sufferings which befell our master
al-Husayn (as).

That was when I understood that Imam al-Husayn (as) had not really ever
died. The people were crowding and pressing upon one another all round
his shrine. They were crying with unmatched grief and anguish the like
of which I had never seen before. They showed so much agitation that it
seemed like al-Husayn (as) had just been martyred.

I heard clergymen reviving the tragic event of Karbala. Their retelling
of what came to pass on the day of ‘Ashura was arousing the people’s
emotions and causing much wailing and lamentation. No one could listen
to the story and bear its intense sorrow. On the contrary, some who
listened to the account would involuntarily pass out. I, too, cried. I
cried and cried.

I cried so much that it seemed as though grief had been trapped in my
throat for years, and it was now exploding out.

After that wailing though, I felt inner peace. I felt tranquillity like
I had never felt before. It seemed as though previously I had been one
of the enemies of Imam al-Husayn (as), and in a split second I had been
converted and become one of his companions. In a moment, I had become a
follower of that great man who had sacrificed his life for the
preservation of Islam.

Even more interesting is that at that very moment, a clergyman was
giving an account of the story of Hurr. Hurr was one of the leaders of
the enemy troops who had come to Karbala with the intention of fighting
Imam al-Husayn (as). All of a sudden, Hurr started shaking and trembling
on the battlefield.

His friends asked him, ‘What is wrong with you? Are you afraid of
death?’ He answered: ‘I swear upon Allah! I do not fear death at all,
but I see myself having the option to choose between eternal bliss in
heaven and eternal perdition in hell.’ Suddenly, Hurr mounted his horse
and started riding towards al-Husayn (as).

He hastened to meet the Holy Imam (as) and, as he was crying, said, ‘O
son of the Holy Prophet! Is there repentance for me?’

Believe it when I say that this was the very moment when I could not
bear it any more. I started wailing and threw myself on the ground. It
seemed as though I was reliving Hurr’s part and was asking al-Husayn, ‘O
son of the Prophet! Is there repentance for me? O son of the Prophet!
Forgive me!’

The preacher’s voice had such a strong impact on the listeners that it
caused the wailing voices of the people to raise to unprecedented
levels. My friend, who had heard my wailing voice, took me in his arms
while he himself was crying. He embraced me in the same way that a
mother embraces her child. He, too, was shouting, ‘O al-Husayn! O
al-Husayn!’

Those were moments when I perceived and understood what real crying was.
I felt that my tears were cleaning and cleansing my heart. My entire
body was being cleaned right from the core. It was at that moment when I
understood the meaning of the Prophet’s words when he said, ‘If you knew
what I know, then you would laugh less and cry more.

’ I spent that whole day in deep sorrow. My friend wanted to console me,
so he brought some juice and cookies, but I had lost my appetite. I
refused to eat and instead asked my friend to repeat the story of the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as), because I did not know anything about
it at all…’”[^3] 

The Religious Verdict Concerning Attending Mourning Ceremonies for the Awliya’ of Allah
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

On his own chain of transmission, Bukhari narrates that ‘A’ishah said,
“When the news of the martyrdom of Zayd ibn Harithah and Ja‘far and ‘Abd
Allah ibn Rawahah was brought to the Holy Prophet (S), he entered the
mosque and sat there with signs of grief and sorrow showing on his
face.”[^4]

Ibn Hisham recounts, “When the Noble Prophet (S) returned to Medina, he
heard sounds of crying and mourning. His eyes filled with tears. Then,
the Noble Prophet (S) said, ‘But no one cries for Hamzah.’ When they
heard this, the women of Bani Ashhal came out and started crying for the
uncle of Allah’s Prophet (S).”[^5]

Holding Mourning Ceremonies in the Interest of Unity
----------------------------------------------------

It is sometimes said that holding mourning rites is not compatible with
Islamic unity because these ceremonies include protest against and
condemnation of some of the Muslim caliphs. Therefore, it is felt by
some that discontinuation of such protests and cursing for the sake of
creating unity among the Muslims is binding and necessary.

***Response***

Firstly, remembering the uprising of Imam al-Husayn (as) is not only in
the interest of Shi‘ah Muslims, but also in the interest of all Muslims
and freedom-seekers of the world, because holding mourning rites in
memory of Aba ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn (as) establishes in man the spirit of
seeking martyrdom for the sake of securing and establishing freedom and
faith. This orientation can help free human societies which are now
living under the yoke of captivity and exploitation.

Secondly, when the suffering of Imam al-Husayn (as) is kept alive there
is no negative mention of the Prophet’s faithful companions. It must be
realized that the Prophet’s loyal companions loved and respected Imam
al-Husayn (as). Some of them were even with him at Karbala and they
attained martyrdom. The Prophet’s companions who were martyred include
Habib ibn Mazahir, Muslim ibn ‘Awsajah, Burayr ibn Khadir Hamadani,
‘Urwah Ghaffari and others.

Commemorating the ‘Ashura uprising of Imam al-Husayn (as) has not been
and will never be a cause of disagreement and disunity among Muslims.

Commemorating the struggle of Imam al-Husayn (as) against those
hypocrites that desired to blot out the religion of Islam can only bring
about more unity among Muslims and create division and discord between
the Muslims and such deceitful tyrants as Yazid, Ibn Ziyad, ‘Umar ibn
Sa‘d and others that wish to destroy Islam, but, then again, this is
precisely what the tyrants and oppressors fear.

Beating the Chest to Mourn Imam al-Husayn (as)
----------------------------------------------

It can be understood from Shi‘ah and Sunni traditions [*hadith*s] that
there is no prohibition for beating the chest when mourning and grieving
for Imam al-Husayn (as), even though it may cause redness of the chest.
On the contrary, the action of beating the chest is in fact preferred.

### A. The Shi‘ah traditions

The following traditions show that it is permissible and legitimate to
hold different types of mourning ceremonies, including beating the
chest.

1. Shaykh Tusi recounts that Imam al-Sadiq (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا شيءَ في اللطم علی الخدود سوی الاستغفارُ والتوبةُ، وقد شققنَ
الجيوبَ ولطمنَ الخدودَ الفاطمياتُ علی الحسين بن علی عليهما السَّلام
وعلی مثلهِ ُتلطُم الخدودُ وتُشقُّ الجيوبُ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Hitting the face is nothing but seeking forgiveness and repentance,
because the women from among the descendants of Fatimah (as) tore their
clothes and hit their faces when mourning for Imam al-Husayn (as). For
people like al-Husayn (as), we should hit our faces and rend our
clothes.”[^6]

2. A part of the holy prayer of “*Ziyarat* *Nahiyah Muqaddasah*”
(Pilgrimage to the Holy Places) reads,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلمّا رأيْنَ النساءُ جوادك مخزياً... برزْنَ من الخدودِ ناشراتِ
الشعورِ، على الخدودِ لاطماتٌ وبالعويل ناحياتٌ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Like wounded horses, the women saw you… they came from behind their
curtains with their hair disheveled and they were hitting their faces
and wailing in loud voices.”[^7]

3. In the same prayer, we read that the Imam of the Age, Imam al-Mahdi
(as), addresses Imam al-Husayn (as) in this way,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ولأندبنّك صباحاً ومساءاً، ولأبکينَّ عليك بدلَ الدموعِ دماً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I weep for you every mourning and evening, and instead of shedding
tears, I cry blood.”[^8]

4. It is narrated that Imam al-Rida (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«انّ يومَ الحسين اقرحَ جفونَنا وأسبلَ دموعَنا وأذلَّ عزيزَنا بأرضِ
کربٍ وبلا، واورَثنا الکربَ والبلاءَ الى يومِ الانقضاءِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily the day of al-Husayn (as) has lacerated our eyes and made our
tears flow. It has made our beloved one (Imam al-Husayn) become forlorn
in the land of affliction and grief. Al-Husayn (as) has left grief for
us to inherit and sorrow to accompany us until the Day of
Resurrection.”[^9]

5. Shaykh Mufid recounts, “When Zaynab heard her brother, al-Husayn
(as), reciting verses,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا دهرُ افٍّ لك من خليلِ...»
  </p>
</blockquote>

She slapped her face, rent her clothes and passed out.”[^10]

6. Sayyid ibn Tawus narrates, “When the captives reached Karbala on
their return from Sham to Medina, they saw that Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah
Ansari along with a number of people of Bani Hashim had come for
pilgrimage to the grave of Imam al-Husayn (as). All of them reached the
place at the same time and started crying. They were grieving and
hitting themselves. They mourned bitterly. The women of that land joined
them and copied their mode and they mourned for Imam al-Husayn (as) for
three days.”[^11]

7. Ibn Quluyah narrated that the houris of paradise in the high heavens
hit their breasts and faces for the sake of Imam al-Husayn (as).[^12]

8. On his authorized chain of transmission, Kulayni relates that Jabir
asked Imam al-Baqir (as) to explain what grief [*jaza‘*] meant. He (as)
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«أشدُّ الجزعِ الصراخُ بالويلِ والعويلِ، ولطمُ الوجهِ والصدرِ...»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The most intense grief is yelling, crying, shouting and hitting the
face and chest…”[^13]

### B. Sunni traditions

Sunni Muslims have also recounted a number of traditions which prove the
desirability of beating the chest when mourning over the *awliya’* of
Allah, especially the Doyen of Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn (as).

Now, we will refer to some of these *hadith*s,

1. Ibn Kathir narrates that when the captives passed by Karbala on their
way back to Medina and remembered Imam al-Husayn (as), the women started
crying and hitting their faces. Zaynab raised her voice and said, “O
Muhammad!”[^14]

All this took place in the presence of Imam al-Sajjad (as), who was in
their company, but he showed no protest against their behavior.

2. Imam al-Husayn (as) recited the following epic verse at Karbala,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا دهرُ افّ لك من خليلِ کم لك في الاشراقِ والاصيلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

When Zaynab heard his words, at that moment she rent her clothes, hit
her face and and came out of the tent bareheaded and cried out loudly,
“O my sorrow! O my misery!”[^15]

3. Among the reasons cited to substantiate the permissibility of hitting
one’s chest and face when mourning for the prophets, the *awliya’* and
their descendants, especially unique and unparalleled people in the
history of mankind, is a *hadith* which Ahmad and other historians have
recounted on authentic chains of transmission. They have recounted that
‘A’ishah said, “… The soul of the Prophet of Allah (S) was taken […],
then I put his head on a pillow and the other women and I arose and
started hitting ourselves. I was hitting my face…”

Regarding the chain of transmission of this tradition, Muhammad Salim
Asad says, “This chain of transmission is correct and authentic.” (It
must be mentioned, that the Shi‘ahs do not consent to the truth of all
parts of this tradition, but that argument is reserved for another place
and time. The current argument is in regard to the acceptability of
hitting oneself to show grief.)[^16]

4. It cannot be said that hitting oneself due to an affliction that has
befallen him is prohibited, because Ahmad ibn Hanbal, on his own chain
of transmission, has recounted through Abu Hurayrah that an Arab man
came to see the Prophet of Allah and started hitting himself on the
face. He was pulling out his hair while saying, “I see myself delivered
to destruction and perdition.” The Prophet of Allah asked him, “What is
it that has delivered you to destruction and perdition?” He answered,
“In the holy month of Ramadan, my wife and I had intimate relations!”
The Holy Prophet (S) asked him, “Are you able to free one slave?”[^17]

We notice from this *hadith* that the Holy Prophet (S) did not protest
against this man’s action of hitting himself and pulling out his hair.
In addition, he did not announce a particular prohibition regarding
hitting the face and pulling one’s hair out. Instead he only told the
man what to do to atone for his sin.

5. Ibn ‘Abbas narrates about the Holy Prophet’s (S) divorce from some of
his wives, ‘Umar said, “I went to see Hafsah at her house. I noticed
that she was standing and hitting herself, and the other wives of the
Holy Prophet (S) were standing and hitting themselves.” I asked Hafsah,
“Has the Prophet of Allah granted you a divorce?”[^18]

6. Sibt ibn al-Jawzi says, “When al-Husayn was killed, Ibn ‘Abbas was
constantly crying for him until finally his eyes became blind.”[^19]

7. Jurji Zaydan says, “There is no doubt that Ibn Ziyad committed a
great crime when he killed al-Husayn, a crime whose atrociousness has
never before been seen nor occurred in the whole universe. Therefore, it
is not a matter of concern if the Shi‘ahs expose the oppression which
characterized the killing of Imam al-Husayn. It is not a cause of worry
if the Shi‘ahs weep or cry for him every year, and rend their collars
while showing their remorse and sorrow, because he was killed in an
unjust way.”[^20]

Examination of the reasoning of opponents
-----------------------------------------

Those who oppose beating the chest in intense grief for Allah’s
*awliya’* have resorted to a number of *hadith*s recorded by different
Islamic sects and schools of thought:

### Hadith recounted by Sunni Muslims

Bukhari quotes from ‘Abd Allah that the Holy Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ليس منّا من لطمَ الخدودَ وشقَّ الجيوبَ ودعا بدعوی الجاهليةِ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A man who slaps his face, rends his collar and promotes the legacy of
the Age of Ignorance (before the advent and rise of Islam) is not from
us.”[^21]

Some have made use of this *hadith* to prohibit beating the chest and
mourning for the *awliya’* of Allah, including the Doyen of Martyrs, Aba
‘Abd Allah al-Husayn (as).

***Response***

This *hadith* views the act of beating the chest as an objection to
Allah’s decree and mourning as a means of protesting against one’s
destiny when a beloved one dies. This is the view which most of the
commentators of the book of *hadith* of *Sahih Bukhari* have adopted;
among them ‘Asqalani, Mulla ‘Ali Qari, Kirmani and Qastalani.[^22]

Kirmani writes, “If a person says that rending one’s collars and hitting
one’s face will not cause man to be banished from this *ummah* (Islamic
community), what therefore is the meaning of such a prohibition?” In
response, we say that this prohibition is a result of intensity and
severity. If the statement regarding the Age of Ignorance is interpreted
to mean disbelief [*kufr*], like making lawful what is unlawful
[*haram*] or the lack of submission to and acceptance of divine decree,
then the prohibition is correct.[^23]

Manawi adds a footnote to this *hadith* saying, “The above
interpretation denotes lack of contentment, and assumes a lack of
satisfaction with devine decree.”[^24]

In conclusion, this *hadith* is not proof against beating the chest on
the day of ‘Ashura while mourning over the sufferings of Imam al-Husayn
(as) and the other *awliya’* of Allah, because in this case beating the
chest is a deed which is meant to show homage and paying tribute. It is
done to show reverence to the religion and as a manifestation of love
for the *Ahl al-Bayt*.

This sorrow and grief is in no way a display of discontentment with
Allah’s decree. Such grief, in fact, is in one aspect exhibition of
intense sorrow over the failure of Muslims to support Imam al-Husayn
(as) in his struggle to keep alive Allah’s law and decree.

### B. The traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (as)

There are some traditions in Shi‘ah sources of *hadith* which appear to
prohibit beating the chest and mourning.

1. Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah Ansari says, I asked Imam al-Baqir (as) about
grief [*jaza‘*]. He (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«أشدُّ الجزعِ الصراخُ بالويلِ، ولطمُ الوجهُ والصدرِ وجزُّ الشعرِ من
النواصيَ، ومن أقامَ النواحةَ فقد ترك الصبرَ، واخذ في غيرِ طريقةٍ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The most intense grief is wailing while saying “woe”, slapping the face
and pulling the front hair out. Anyone who mourns and expresses grief
has certainly lost his patience and is on the path of impatience.”[^25]

2. It has been recounted that Imam al-Sadiq (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«نهی رسول الله صَلَّی اللهُ عَلَيهِ وَآله عن الرنة عند المصيبة، ونهی
عن النياحةِ والاستماعِ اليها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Prophet of Allah forbade crying loudly when one is afflicted with a
misfortune. He also forbade mourning or listening to it.”[^26]

3. ‘Amru ibn Abi Miqdam narrates that I heard Imam al-Baqir (as)
commenting on the Qur’anic verse, *“And will not disobey you in what is
good.”*[^27] He said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إذا أنا متُّ فلا تخمشي عليَّ وجهاً، ولا تُرخي عليَّ شعراً، ولا تنادي
بالويل، ولا تقيمَنَّ على نائحةٍ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Prophet of Allah (S) told his daughter, Fatimah (as), ‘When I die,
do not scratch your face, dishevel your hair nor mourn or cry
loudly’.”[^28]

***Response***

Firstly, this type of *hadith*s does not prohibit the holding of
mourning ceremonies. On the contrary, they intend to restrain or
prohibit any action that is not compatible with submission to divine
decree and the will of Allah because some people lose their control when
a beloved one dies or when they are afflicted with calamity.

They complain and grumble in protest, and question Allah’s decree.
However, when holding mourning ceremonies involves the recounting of the
virtues and good deeds of the deceased through elegies and mournful
poems, there is no problem with this.

Secondly, the traditions which apparently prohibit mourning and the
reading of mournful poems are related to instances that do not have
positive practical effects. However, mourning for the *awliya’* of Allah
is reasonable and rational. We have previously shown that mourning for
Allah’s *awliya’* (as) is reasonable under stated general rationales.

It has also been shown that mourning for Allah’s *awliya’* was the
conduct of the Prophet of Allah (S), the pure and chaste *Ahl al-Bayt*
(as) and the Prophet’s companions. Even the generation which came after
the Noble Prophet and Muslims throughout the entire history of Islam
have been holding mourning ceremonies for the *awliya’* of Allah,
especially for the sufferings of Imam al-Husayn (as).

We have also shown that such ceremonies have practical positive results
for Muslim individuals and society.

Thirdly, in some *hadith*s, it has been explicitly stated that holding
mourning ceremonies is permissible and that it is even quite desirable
and preferable to grieve and express sorrow over the sufferings of Imam
al-Husayn (as).

1. A *hadith* has been recounted that Imam al-Sadiq (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«کلُّ الجزعِ والبکاءِ مکروهٌ سوی الجزعَ والبکاءَ على الحسينِ عليه
السّلام.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Every kind of despondency and crying is disapproved [*makruh*], except
grieving and crying for Imam al-Husayn (S).”[^29]

2. Imam al-Rida (as) told his son,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«... إنّ يومَ الحسينِ عليه السّلام اقرحَ جفونَنا واسبلَ دموعَنا واذلَّ
عزيزَنا بأرضِ کربٍ وبلا واورثَنا الکربَ والبلاءَ الى يومِ
الانقضاءِ...»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“… Verily, the day of al-Husayn (the day of ‘Ashura) has lacerated eyes
and made them swollen. It has caused our tears to flow because our
beloved one has been exposed to abjectness in the land of Karbala. He
has left for us to inherit sorrow and afflication for as long as we are
to live in this world…”[^30]

3. Imam al-Sadiq (as) told ‘Abd Allah ibn Hammad, “News has reached me
that a group of people around the area of Kufah and other places and
also a group of women gather on the 15th of Sha‘ban near the holy shrine
of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali and mourn the loss of al-Husayn (as). They recite
the Holy Qur’an, and some among them recount the story of ‘Ashura and
the events that came to pass while the rest of them weep and wail.”

Hammad told the Imam (as), “I witnessed these mourning ceremonies
myself.” Imam al-Sadiq (as) said, “Praise be to Allah that He has made
some men inclined and affectionate towards us (the *Ahl al-Bayt*), so
that they may praise and extol us. They mourn for us and rebuke our
enemies, and in this way clearly expose the ugly and unacceptable deeds
of those who oppose us.”[^31]

4. Ibn Quluyah quotes Masma‘ Kardin recounting that Imam al-Sadiq (as)
asked him, “Do you commemorate the events of Karbala?” I answered, “Yes,
I do.” He asked, “Do you grieve and express sorrow?” I said, “Yes, I
swear upon Allah that I cry!” The Imam (as) said, “May Allah accept your
crying and reward you for it. Be aware that you are one of those people
who express sorrow for our sake, and show joy for our joy.”[^32]

Wearing Black Clothes
---------------------

There is no doubt that wearing black clothes, especially during
recitation of prayers, is widely considered as disapproved [*makruh*].
Muslim scholars have unanimous agreement on this verdict. The question
here is whether or not this aversion to black is inherent? In other
words, are black clothes disapproved just because they are black in
themselves or are they disapproved for a specific reason, such as
because they were the banner of the tyrannical caliphs of Bani
‘Abbas[^33] or because they are the clothes of the people dwelling in
hell?[^34]

### Shi‘ah traditions

1. On his authentic chain of transmission, Barqi recounts that Imam
al-Baqir (as) said, “When my forefather al-Husayn was killed, the women
of Bani Hashim wore black clothes while mourning him. They did not
change this practice whether in the hot summer or in the cold winter. My
father ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn prepared their food during this period of
mourning.”[^35]

1. On his authentic chain of transmission, Ibn Quluyah recounts that an
angel from heaven landed on the sea and spread its wings. Then, she
yelled and cried out aloud, “O inhabitants of the sea! Wear morning
clothes, because the child of the Prophet of Allah has been killed
(today). Then, he took some of the holy soil from Karbala, and took it
with himself to heaven. Every angel it passed by stopped it in order to
smell the holy soil. Spiritual effects and graces derived from it
remained on them.”[^36]

### Sunni traditions

1. Ibn Abi al-Hadid quotes Mada’ini saying, “When ‘Ali (as) passed away,
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib came to the people and said,
‘Verily, Amir al-Mu’minin (as) has passed away. He has left someone to
succeed him. If you endorse him, he will come to meet you. If you are
displeased with him, you will not be coerced to accept his leadership.’
The people broke down crying and said, ‘Let him come to meet us because
we endorse him.’ Al-Hasan (as) came to meet the people and gave a sermon
while wearing black clothes’.”[^37]

2. Abi Mukhnaf recounts that Nu‘man ibn Bashir communicated the news of
Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom to the people of Medina… All the women of
Medina came out of their houses wearing black clothes and started
mourning.[^38]

3. ‘Imad al-Din Idris Qurashi quotes Abi Na‘im Isfahani recounting on
his authentic chain of transmission that when the news of Imam
al-Husayn’s death reached Umm Salamah, she made a black tent in the
Prophet’s Mosque and wore black clothes.[^39]

4. Ibn Abi al-Hadid recounts that Asbagh ibn Nabatah said, “After the
martyrdom of Amir al-Mu’minin (Imam ‘Ali) (as), I entered the Mosque of
Kufah. I saw al-Hasan and al-Husayn wearing black clothes.[^40]

[^1]: Anjuman-e Rawanshenasi-ye Amrika (American Psychological
Association), p. 602.

[^2]: Anjuman-e Pezeshki-ye Amrika (The American Medical Association),
Trans. Mahdi Ganji, pp. 67-88.

[^3]: Thumma Ahdaytu (Then, I was Guided), pp. 96-98.

[^4]: Irshad al-Sari, vol. 2, p. 393.

[^5]: Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, vol. 3, p. 105.

[^6]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 8, p. 325.

[^7]: Kamil al-Ziyarat, pp. 260-261.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 284.

[^10]: Shaykh Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 232.

[^11]: Luhuf, pp. 112-113; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 146.

[^12]: Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 80; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 201.

[^13]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p. 915.

[^14]: Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 210; Khwarazmi, Maqtal
al-Imam al-Husayn (as), p. 39.

[^15]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 319; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 4, p. 59; Mufid, Al-Irshad, vol. 2, p. 94.

[^16]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, vol. 6, p. 274; Abu Ya‘la,
Al-Musnad, note written in the margin, vol. 5, p. 63.

[^17]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad, vol. 2, p. 516.

[^18]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 2, p. 534.

[^19]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 152.

[^20]: Tarikh al-Niyahah, vol. 2, p. 30, as narrated by Jarji Zaydan.

[^21]: Sahih Bukhari, no. 1220.

[^22]: Fath al-Bari, vol. 3, p. 195; Sharh al-Kirmani ‘ala al-Bukhari,
vol. 7, p. 88; Irshad al-Sari, vol. 2, p. 406; ‘Umdah al-Qari, vol. 8,
p. 87.

[^23]: Sharh al-Kirmani ‘ala al-Bukhari, vol. 7, p. 88.

[^24]: Fayd al-Qadir, vol. 5, p. 493.

[^25]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p. 915, Bab Kirahat al-Sirakh
bi’l-Wayl wa’l-‘Awil.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Surat al-Mumtahanah 60:12.

[^28]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p. 915.

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 289.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 285.

[^31]: Ibn Quluyah, Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 539, section [bab] 108.

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 289.

[^33]: Man la Yahdaruhu al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 252.

[^34]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 3, p. 281, section [bab] 20 from among
the sections on clothing of one reciting prayer [libas musalla], hadith
3.

[^35]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 188; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p.
890.

[^36]: Kamil al-Ziyarat, pp. 67-68; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, pp.
221-222.

[^37]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 16, p. 22.

[^38]: Abi Mukhnaf, Maqtal, pp. 222-223.

[^39]: ‘Uyun al-Akbar wa Funun al-Athar, p. 109.

[^40]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah.


