The Effects of Crying
=====================

Religious scholars and academics have mentioned a number of beneficial
effects derived from crying, some of which we will now mention.

1. Inner purification and refinement
------------------------------------

People who shed tears as an instrument of devotion to their Lord benefit
from numerous spiritual and intellectual rewards because every tear that
is shed for Allah while grieving for His *awliya’* have extraordinary
spiritual effects. That is why the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali
(as), in the Prayer *al-Kumayl*, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا الهي وربّي وسيدي ومولاي، لأي الأمور اليك اشکوا ولما منها اضجّ
وأبکي.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O my Lord, Master and Protector! For which of my affairs should I
complain to you! And for which of them should I lament and weep?”

And elsewhere, he says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ولأبکينّ عليك بکاء الفاقدين.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And (due to separation from you) I will weep before You with the
weeping of the bereft.”

And in the last part of the prayer, he says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إرحم من رأس ماله الرجاء، وسلاحه البکاء.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Have mercy on one whose only capital is hope and whose weapon is
tears.”

2. Tears are a means of self-building
-------------------------------------

Crying and shedding tears is a strong and cutting weapon that can help
us tremendously along the way of self-knowledge and self-building.
Again, this is why Imam ‘Ali (as) in the Prayer *al-Kumayl* says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إرحم من رأس ماله الرجاء وسلاحه البکاء.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Have mercy on one whose only capital is hope and whose weapon is
tears.”

In the inner spiritual struggle against our internal enemy (egotism),
that is to say the Greater Holy War [*Jihad Akbar*], crying is the
weapon used, not the sword. That is to say, in the battlefield of
self-building, shedding tears is the tool, not steel blades.

There are some people who attend gatherings where mourning over Imam
al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) takes place, but they do not possess that deep
perception and discernment which is needed to bring about the flow of
tears.

Assuming that they do possess the needed perception and discernment
which is needed to cry, if they cannot cry it suggests that they are not
blessed with the necessary compassion or softness of heart. Of course,
acquiring softness of heart is not easy and is granted by Allah in
accordance with our capacity.

From the viewpoint of scholars of ethics, the root cause of most crimes
is hardheartedness. When man is afflicted by hardheartedness and lacks
compassion, he loses a lot of his natural blessings and talents. The
result is that neither will the sufferings of others affect him, nor
will his heart beat in love and affection for others.

A heartless man finds no inclination in himself to pray silently and
present his needs to Allah. He does not feel in himself the
compassionate disposition to give and receive love and affection.
Clearly, one of the best ways to prevent and treat the affliction of
hardheartedness is shedding tears and crying.

3. Tears are a means of attaining love
--------------------------------------

Love literally means fond affection and devotion. The renowned
traditionalist Muhaddith Qummi says, “Love is an excess of
affection.”[^1]

After gaining knowledge and enlightenment, it is beyond doubt that
crying or shedding tears is one of the best tools or means required for
man to bond with true love—which is devotion to the Beloved of the
Worlds, Allah the Most High.

It is for this reason that no matter how eager a person might be to
reach out and find reality and truth, he will never bring about a
successful and effective spiritual transformation within himself unless
he seeks help from tears.

The tongue expresses wisdom and intellect while the eyes express the
love that is felt in the heart and dwells in the soul. Love is always
present where tears, arising from feelings of pain and heartache, are
shed whereas the mind is the active agent wherever the tongue searches
for orderly and logical sentences to express itself.

Therefore, just as logical and compelling discourses can show the unity
that exists between the aims of the leaders of a particular school of
thought and the speaker, a tear too can declare an emotional war against
the enemies of a school of thought.

William Shakespeare, the erudite English writer and poet, says that
thoughts, dreams, heartache, hopes, and tears are inseparable from love.

In another place, he says, “Love that is cleansed by tears will forever
remain pure, clean and beautiful.”[^2]

Victor Hugo, the famous western writer, says, “Happy and prosperous is
he whom God has granted a heart that has the capacity for burning love
and compassion.”[^3]

4. The effects of crying on man’s health
----------------------------------------

Researchers of the empirical and medical sciences believe that tears
possess special medical properties, some of which we will now mention:

1. As tears flow, an enzyme is released that disinfects the eyes and all
the surrounding parts.

2. According to conducted medical tests, those who cry more suffer less
from gastritis and ulcers.

3. Scholars are of the belief that crying has very beneficial and
surprising effects in reducing inner pain and spiritual, mental or
psychological pressures.

4. Some diseases can be identified through examination of tears because
tears that flow from the eyes are a substance that has been filtered or
sieved from the body’s blood, and therefore making use of this substance
can help us identify different types of disorders. 

[^1]: Safinah al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 197.

[^2]: Chekideh-ye Andisheh-ha (A Summary of Thoughts), p. 250.

[^3]: Ibid.


