Imam al-Husayn’s Personality
============================

Imam al-Husayn (as) in Sunni Books
----------------------------------

With recourse to Sunni books of tradition [*hadith*] and biography, it
can be seen that most Sunni scholars hold Imam al-Husayn (as) in great
esteem and high respect.

We will now refer to certain parts of Imam al-Husayn’s (as) history
according to narratives which have been recorded in Sunni books of
*hadith*.

Imam al-Husayn’s (as) birth
---------------------------

1. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr writes, “Al-Husayn (as) is the son of ‘Ali ibn Abu
Ṭalib (as) and Fatimah (as), the Prophet’s (S) daughter. His nickname is
Aba ‘Abd Allah. He was born on the 5th of Sha‘ban in either the third or
fourth year of the Islamic calendar [*hijrah*]. This is the popular
opinion which is held by a majority of his companions.”[^1]

2. It is thus recounted in the book entitled, “*Akhbar al-Duwal*”**,**
“When al-Husayn was born, the Prophet (S) was informed about this happy
occasion. He came to al-Zahra’s (as) house, requested to see al-Husayn
(as) and held him in his arms.  
 The Prophet (S) recited first the *adhan* (the call to prayer) in the
newborn’s right ear and next the *iqamah* (the prelude to prayer) in his
left ear. The Archangel Gabriel [*Jibra’il*] appeared to the Noble
Prophet (S) and brought Allah’s orders that the newborn child should be
named al-Husayn (as). This was an exact repetition of what had earlier
taken place when al-Hasan (as) was born.”[^2]

3. Sibṭ ibn al-Jawzi says, “His nickname is Aba ‘Abd Allah. He was also
endowed with the titles Sayyid Wafiyy, Waliyy, Sibṭ, and the Martyr
[*shahid*] of Karbala.”[^3]

Imam al-Husayn’s (as) acts of worship
-------------------------------------

1. Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih recounts that it was asked of ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn
(as), “Why are your father’s progeny few?” The Imam (as) answered, “I am
surprised at how he managed to sire children at all because he was
constantly engaged in prayer every day and night. He used to perform a
thousand units [*rak‘ah*s] of prayer per day. How could he find free
time for women?”[^4]

2. Ibn Ṣabbagh Maliki narrates, “Whenever al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) was in
a state of prayer, his color would turn pale.” They asked him, “What is
this state which arises in you whenever you stand in prayer?” The Imam
(as) replied, “You do not comprehend He whom I stand before.”[^5]

3. Zamakhshari recounts that some people saw al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as)
performing the circumambulation of the Ka‘bah [*tawaf*]. When he came to
the station of Ishmael [*Isma‘il*], he said his prayers. After praying,
he put his face on the station of Ishmael and began weeping and said,
“Your humble slave is at the doorstep of your house! Your humble servant
is at your doorstep! A destitute is at your doorstep!”

For a long time, he kept repeating these statements. After a while, as
he was leaving that place, his sight fell upon some poor people eating
crumbs and pieces of bread. Imam al-Husayn (as) went over to them and
greeted them with the ceremonial Islamic greeting of ‘*salam*’. They
answered his greeting and invited him to their meal. He sat with them
but did not partake of their food. He said, “If your food had not been
from charity [*sadaqah*], I would have partaken of it.” He said to them,
“Arise and come with me to my house.” When they arrived at his house,
Imam al-Husayn (as) provided them with food and clothes.[^6]

4. It has been narrated that ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Ubayd ibn ‘Umayr said,
“Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) performed the *hajj* twenty five times on foot,
despite being accompanied by his fine and noble horses.”[^7]

6. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr says, “Al-Husayn (as) was a highly scholarly and
religious man. He performed prayer, fasting and *hajj* a lot.”[^8]

8. On his own chain of transmission [*sanad*], Tabari narrates that
Ḍaḥḥak ibn ‘Abd Allah Mashriqi said, “When darkness fell at Karbala,
al-Husayn (as) and his companions spent the whole night praying, seeking
forgiveness, supplicating and entreating Allah…”[^9]

Imam al-Husayn’s (as) forbearance
---------------------------------

1. It has been recounted that Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) said,
“Al-Husayn used to say, ‘If someone vilifies me in my right ear and then
apologizes for it in my left ear, I will surely accept his apology
because I heard Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali ibn Abi Ṭalib (as) narrate a
*hadith* from my grandfather the Prophet of Allah (S) that,[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا يرد الحوض من لم يقبل العذر من محقّ او مبطل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The one who does not accept apologies, whether the apology is true or
not, will not pass the*** ***pond [hawd] of*** ***al-Kawthar’.”***

2. It has been recounted that one of Imam al-Husayn’s (as) slaves had
committed an offence that required discipline. The Imam (as) ordered
that the slave should be punished for the offence. The slave implored
Imam al-Husayn’s forgiveness. He appealed to the Imam (as) by quoting
verses of the Holy Qur’an. He said, “O my master! God, the Exalted, has
revealed: *‘And those who restrain their anger’*.”[^11]

Imam al-Husayn (as) replied, “Let him go. I have restrained my anger.”
The slave continued, *“And pardon men.”* The Imam *(as)* said, “I have
pardoned you.” The slave further implored, *“And Allah loves the doers
of good.”* The Imam (as) said, “You are freed in the way of Allah.”
After this, Imam al-Husayn (as) gave orders that a gracious and handsome
gift should be given to the freed slave.[^12]

Imam al-Husayn’s (as) virtues in the words of the Prophet (S)
-------------------------------------------------------------

1. On his own chain of transmission [*sanad*], Bukhari quotes Na‘im
saying, “Ibn Umar was asked, ‘What is the verdict of a *muḥrim* (a
person visiting the holy and inviolable House of Allah) who kills a
fly?’ Ibn ‘Umar answered, ‘The people of Iraq are more concerned to ask
about killing flies ignoring the fact that they killed the son of the
Prophet’s daughter (as).’ Then he added, ‘The Noble Prophet (S) has
said, ‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are my sweet smelling flowers in this
world’.”[^13]

2. On his own chain of transmission, al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi recounts
that, “Salman Farsi said, ‘Allah’s Prophet (S) used to say,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الحسن والحسين إبناي، من أحبّهما احبّني، ومن أحبّني أحبّه الله، ومن
أحبّه الله أدخله الجنة، ومن أبغضهما أبغضني، ومن أبغضني أبغضه الله، ومن
أبغضه الله أدخله النار.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are my two children. Whoever loves them has in
fact loved me. Whoever loves me is loved by Allah and whoever is loved
by Allah will enter Paradise. Anyone who hates these two has in fact
hated me. Anyone who hates me is hated by Allah, and whoever is hated by
Allah will be cast into the hell fire.’’”[^14]

3. Also on his own chain of transmission, al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi has
narrated that, “Ibn ‘Umar said, ‘The Prophet of Allah (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الحسن والحسين سيدا شباب أهل الجنة وأبوهما خيرٌ منهما.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the chiefs of the youths of Paradise, and
their father is better than these two.’’”[^15]

4. On his own chain of transmission, al-Tirmidhi quotes from Yusuf ibn
Ibrahim from Anas ibn Malik, “The Prophet (S) was asked about whom among
the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) was more beloved to him. He answered, ‘Al-Hasan
and al-Husayn.’ The Prophet (S) always used to tell Fatimah (as), ‘Bring
my two children to me.’ He would then press them against his chest and
smell their sweet scent.”[^16]

5. Ya‘la ibn Marrah says, “The Holy Prophet (S) and I left the house to
attend a social gathering we had been invited to. Along the way, the
Prophet (S) caught sight of al-Husayn (as). He was busy playing. Allah’s
Prophet (S) quickly went to al-Husayn (as) and spread his arms wide open
in order to embrace him, but al-Husayn (as) teasingly kept running from
side to side in a playful manner. Both of them started laughing.
Finally, the Prophet (S) managed to catch al-Husayn (as).  
 He put one of his hands under al-Husayn’s (as) chin and the other one
on his head. Finally, they embraced and kissed each other. The Prophet
(S) then said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسين منّي وأنا منه، أحبّ الله من أحبّه، الحسن والحسين سبطان من
الأسباط.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Al-Husayn is from me and I am from al-Husayn. Allah loves whoever loves
al-Husayn. Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are two of my grandchildren’.”[^17]

We interpret the sentence ‘Al-Husayn is from me and I am from
al-Husayn,’ as follows:

a) The first part of the *hadith* which says, ‘Al-Husayn is from me,’
means that al-Husayn (as) descends from and is a product of the Prophet
of Allah (S). Although his biological father is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as),
the explicit wording of the Qur’anic Verse of *Mubahilah* clearly states
that Imam ‘Ali (as) is a part of the soul of Allah’s Prophet. For this
reason, Imam al-Husayn (as) is rightly considered as the Prophet’s (S)
child.

b) Commenting on the second part of the *hadith* which says, ‘And I am
from al-Husayn,’ it can be said, after proclaiming his prophetic
mission, the Noble Prophet (S) cannot be regarded as an ordinary person
anymore. On the contrary, he is looked upon as a man with a divine
mission. Allah’s Prophet (S) is the epitome of the prophetic mission.
His life is his prophetic mission and his prophetic mission is his life.

c) Also, we all know that every father makes an effort to have a child
who will succeed him, defend his father’s character, and protect and
revive his mission. The child is the one who is charged with the duty of
continuing his father’s way. Regarding Imam al-Husayn (as), the reason
why the Holy Prophet (S) says, ‘I am from al-Husayn,’ is that
al-Husayn’s (as) uprising and martyrdom kept alive the mission of the
Holy Prophet (S).

For this reason, the Holy Prophet (S) conferred the dignity of ‘I am
from al-Husayn,’ on him. This implies that the continuity of the
prophetic mission depends on al-Husayn (as). It is for this reason that
it has been said, “Islam transpired through Muhammad (S) and survived
through al-Husayn (as).”

6. Yazid ibn Abi Yazid says, “Fatimah’s (as) house was located along the
Prophet’s way from ‘A’ishah’s house. One day, as the Prophet (S) was
leaving ‘A’ishah’s house, he heard al-Husayn (as) crying. The Noble
Prophet (S) said, ‘O Fatimah! Do you not know that I am bothered and
pained when I hear him crying?’”[^18]

7. Al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi recounts that he personally heard Abu Hurairah
saying, “I saw Allah’s Prophet embracing al-Husayn. He kept saying, ‘O
my Allah! I love him. Love him too!’”[^19]

Al-Husayn (as) as described by the Prophet’s (S) companions
-----------------------------------------------------------

1. Anas ibn Malik recounts, “After the martyrdom of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali
(as), they brought his severed head to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad. Ibn Ziyad
started hitting Imam al-Husayn’s (as) teeth with a piece of wood. I was
thinking to myself, ‘What an ugly and distasteful act he is doing! I saw
with my own eyes Allah’s Prophet (S) kissing that same place which he is
now hitting’.”[^20]

2. Zayd ibn Arqam says, “I was sitting in the presence of ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad when they brought Imam al-Husayn’s (as) head for him. Ibn
Ziyad lifted his staff and hit between the lips of Imam al-Husayn (as).
I said to him, ‘You are hitting your staff at a place that was
constantly kissed by Allah’s Prophet (S).’ Ibn Ziyad said to me, ‘Arise
and leave! You are just an old man who has lost his mind’.”[^21]

3. Isma‘il ibn Raja’ narrates that his father said, “I was sitting in
the Prophet’s (S) Mosque together with a number of people. Among them
were Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri and ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar. Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali
(as) passed and greeted all of us gathered there. Everyone responded to
his greeting except ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar. He remained quiet for some
time waiting for everyone to finish responding and become silent.

After everyone became quiet, and there was no longer any noise to
interrupt him, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar raised his voice very high and said,
‘May God’s peace and blessings be upon you!’ [*wa ‘alayka salam wa
rahmatullah wa barakatuh*!] After that, he turned towards the people and
asked, ‘Do you want me to inform you about a man from among the
inhabitants of the earth who is the most beloved of the inhabitants of
the heavens?’

The people answered, ‘Yes!’ ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar said, ‘In the heavens,
the most beloved man is that Hashimite man who just passed by us. He has
not talked to me since the Battle of Siffin. If he forgives me, it is
far better for me than a host of fine red camels’.”[^22]

4. Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah Ansari says, “Whoever wants to catch a glimpse
of the dwellers of paradise should look at al-Husayn (as), because I
heard that the Holy Prophet (S) used to inform people to do this.”[^23]

In his book entitled “*Majma‘ al-Zawa’id*”, Haythami has also narrated
this same *hadith*. At the end he adds, “The narrators of this *hadith*
are all classified and categorized among the truthful reporters of
*hadith*, except Rabi‘ ibn Sa‘d, who is classified among the very
trustworthy and reliable.”[^24]

5. ‘Umar ibn Khattab addressed Imam al-Husayn (as) in this way, “That
which has sprung up and grown over our heads (i.e. Islam) was done
through you the people of the Prophet’s (S) Household (i.e. the *Ahl
al-Bayt*).”[^25]

6. It has been recounted that, “‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas held the straps of
Imam al-Hasan’s and Imam al-Husayn’s (as) horse. Some people rebuked him
for doing so. They said, ‘You are older than these two. It is not
befitting of you to hold the straps of their horse.’ Ibn ‘Abbas
answered, ‘These two are the Holy Prophet’s (S) children. Is it not
equal to prosperity for me to hold the straps of their horse?’”[^26]

Imam al-Husayn (as) in the words of the tabi‘in
-----------------------------------------------

**Imam al-Husayn (as) in the words of the** **tabi‘in**[^27]

1. Mu‘awiyah said to ‘Abd Allah ibn Ja‘far, “You are the chief of Bani
Hashim!” ‘Abd Allah replied, “The chiefs of Bani Hashim are al-Hasan and
al-Husayn (as).”[^28]

2. When Marwan ibn Hakam suggested killing Imam al-Husayn (as) to the
general governor of Medina, Walid ibn ‘Utbah ibn Abi Sufyan, he
answered, “I swear to Allah, O Marwan! I would not desire to own the
world and all its possessions as long as my conscience knows that I bear
the responsibility of killing al-Husayn (as). Praise Allah! Should I
kill al-Husayn (as) just because he has refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah? I am certain that on the Day of
Judgement, the bad works of the person that kills al-Husayn (as) will
outweigh his good works.”[^29]

3. Ibrahim Nakha‘i says, “If I were one of al-Husayn’s (as) killers and
still managed to enter Paradise in one way or another, I would be
ashamed and embarrassed to look upon the face of Allah’s Prophet
(S).”[^30]

Imam al-Husayn (as) from the viewpoint of Sunni scholars
--------------------------------------------------------

Upon referral to Sunni books of history and biography, we can see that
Imam al-Husayn (as) is held in high esteem and praise by a number of
Sunni scholars including:

### 1. Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani

“Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) is a Hashimite, popularly known
as Abu ‘Abd Allah, a native of Medina, and the grandson of Allah’s
Prophet (S). He was the Holy Prophet’s flower in this world and one of
the two chiefs of the youths of Paradise.”[^31]

### 2. Zarandi Hanafi

“Al-Husayn (as) prayed, fasted, went on pilgrimage to Mecca and
performed other acts of worship a great deal. He was a very generous and
noble man. He went to the *hajj* twenty five times on foot.”[^32]

### 3. Yafi‘i

“Abu ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Ali (as) was the Holy Prophet’s (S) flower and
grandchild. He was the epitome of the prophetic mission, the summation
of high moral values and the venue of noble virtues…”[^33]

### 4. Ibn Sirin

“The sky has never wept again since the martyrdom of Yahya ibn Zakariyya
(John the Baptist), save when it wept for al-Husayn (as). When al-Husayn
(as) was killed, the sky turned black and the stars came out. The stars
could be seen shining during the day to such an extent that the Gemini
Star (the Twins) appeared in the sky at noontime! Red soil fell from the
sky and the sky looked like congealed red blood for seven days.”[^34]

### 5. ‘Abbas Mahmud ‘Aqqad

“Courage is a characteristic that is not alien to al-Husayn (as). It is
a quality that arises from the source of all virtues (the Noble
Prophet). Al-Husayn (as) inherited this perfect attribute from his
ancestors and later passed it on to his progeny. In the entire history
of humankind, no one has been found to be braver than al-Husayn (as).

Among all the children of Adam, no one has undertaken a braver action
than the measure al-Husayn (as) undertook at Karbala. I will not go into
all the details but suffice it to say that the honor of being a martyr,
the son of a martyr and the father of martyrs is reserved only for him
in the entire history of mankind, and will remain so for hundreds of
years to come…”[^35]

### 6. Doctor Muhammad ‘Abduh Yamani

“Al-Husayn (as) was a devoted and humble man. People always witnessed
him fasting. He used to stay awake at night worshiping and always took
precedence in helping and granting favors to others…”[^36]

### 7. ‘Umar Rida Kahalah

“Al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) was the greatest among the people of Iraq in
Islamic law, spiritual states, generosity and munificence.”[^37]

[^1]: Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 143.

[^2]: Akhbar al-Duwal wa Athar al-Awwal, p. 107.

[^3]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 232.

[^4]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 2, p. 220.

[^5]: Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 183.

[^6]: Rabi‘ al-Abrar, p. 210.

[^7]: Sifat al-Safwah, vol. 1, p. 321; Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 3, p. 20,
Egyptian print.

[^8]: Al-Isti‘ab, vol. 1, p. 393.

[^9]: Tarikh Ṭabari, vol. 5, p. 421.

[^10]: Zarandi, Naẓm Durar al-Samṭayn, p. 209.

[^11]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:134.

[^12]: Haḍrami, Wasilah al-Ma’al, p. 183.

[^13]: Ṣaḥiḥ Bukhari, vol. 5, p. 33, the Book [kitab] on Fada’il
al-Sahabah (Virtues of the Companions, the Section [bab] on Manaqib
al-Hasan wa al-Husayn (The Virtues of al-Ḥasan and al-Husayn).

[^14]: Al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi, Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 3, p.
166.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 167.

[^16]: Al-Tirmidhi, Sunan, vol. 5, p. 323, no. 3861.

[^17]: Al-Tabarani, Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 22, p. 274; Al-Hindi, Kanz
al-‘Ummal, vol. 13, p. 662; Ibn ‘Asakir, Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, vol.
14, p. 150.

[^18]: Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p. 201.

[^19]: Al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi, Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 3, p.
177.

[^20]: Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqba, p. 126.

[^21]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 110; Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 2, p. 21.

[^22]: Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 3, p. 5.

[^23]: Zarandi, Naẓm Durar al-Samṭayn, p. 208; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah,
vol. 8, p. 225.

[^24]: Majma‘ al-Zawa’id, vol. 9, p. 187.

[^25]: Al-Iṣabah, vol. 1, p. 333.

[^26]: Al-Iṣabah, vol. 1, p. 333.

[^27]: After the death of the Holy Prophet (s), there came a generation
called the tabi‘in. This generation did not personally meet or see the
Holy Prophet (s), but they met his companions.

[^28]: Al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as), Kamil Sulayman, p. 173.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 147.

[^30]: Al-Isabah, vol. 1, p. 335.

[^31]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 299.

[^32]: Nazm Durar al-Samtayn, p. 208.

[^33]: Mir’at al-Jinan, vol 1, p. 131.

[^34]: Ibn ‘Asakir, Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, vol. 4, p. 339.

[^35]: Abu al-Shuhada’, p. 195.

[^36]: ‘Allimu Awladakum Mahabbata Al-i Bayt-i al-Nabi (as), p. 133.

[^37]: A‘lam al-Nisa’, vol. 1, p. 28.


