The Reasoning behind Crying about the Sufferings of the awliya’ of Allah
========================================================================

Crying out of sorrow for the *awliya’* of Allah, especially the Doyen of
Martyrs, Aba ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn (as), is compatible with sound logic
and reason. Shedding tears for the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) has many positive
effects and benefits, some of which we will now refer to:

1. Crying for the *Ahl al-Bayt*, especially Imam al-Husayn (as), is one
of the important ways of manifesting one’s love for them, which (as
shown in previous chapters) has been ordered by Allah and is also
confirmed by logic and reason.

2. Shedding tears is one of the ways to venerate the signs of Allah,
because by crying we show our compassion and acceptance of the purpose
and struggle of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as).

3. Crying for al-Husayn (as) is a means of repentance. Shedding tears
for Imam al-Husayn (as) is a means of returning to that which is
all-good and pure, because there is no personal interest involved in
crying for Imam al-Husayn (as). On the contrary, we shed tears for him
because he is the child of Allah’s Prophet (S) and because his essence
and nature possesses all the beautiful attributes.

We cry for Imam al-Husayn (as) because he was oppressed, wronged and
martyred on a mission to revive the religion of Allah. Crying for such
people is in reality an act of repentance and gaining proximity with
that which is all-good and pure. It has been recounted in Islamic
traditions [*hadith*s] that Paradise becomes incumbent upon every person
who cries, incites others to cry, or forces oneself to cry for Imam
al-Husayn (as) because this type of crying is an act of remorse and
returning to Allah, the Exalted.

4. As long as man has not examined his inner conscience and spirit and
by means of such introspection gotten in contact with the *awliya’* of
Allah, especially Imam al-Husayn (as), his heart cannot break and his
tears cannot flow. Crying for Imam al-Husayn (as) is a means for a
limited human being to get in contact with an infinite being by way of
internal intuition. It is clear that through such connection, a limited
being can become unlimited. A good example of this is a limited amount
of water that collects in a place. If it is not attached to an unlimited
sea, it either becomes polluted or dries up, due to the intensity of
heat, in a very short period of time. However, if it is connected to an
unlimited sea, it will acquire the properties of the sea water and will
become immune and unsusceptible to microbes, contamination and drying
up.

5. Crying for the oppressed moves man’s emotions and awakens his
compassion. It makes him a defender of the downtrodden. Shedding tears
is more effective when a person cries for is an infallible person and a
‘Trust of Allah’ on earth or a successor of the Holy Prophet (S), who is
the possessor of divine law [*shari‘ah*]. In this case, man becomes a
defender of divine law. Such a man is able to defend the oppressed and
downtrodden. It is for this reason that the Shi‘ahs of the *Ahl al-Bayt*
(as), by utilizing and benefiting from this great elixir of
life—shedding tears for the oppression and wrong committed against the
Doyen of Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn (as)—have historically been the
persistent helpers and protectors of the oppressed.

6. Crying for the *awliya’* and trustees of Allah, especially Imam
al-Husayn (as), is a tranquilizer for those sick at heart. Crying for
the *awliya’* of Allah soothes the soul because the oppression and
sufferings that were imposed upon the *awliya’* of Allah are like hot
flames of fire and tears shed for them are gifts from a heart which is
burning with love and affection. These drops go far in extinguishing
those flames.

7. Shedding tears, especially for the *awliya’* of Allah, causes the
heart to become tender and keeps man away from hardheartedness. It lays
the foundation for the light of Allah to enter freely and settle in the
heart, because tears that are shed for good reason polish the rust out
of man’s heart.

8. Shedding tears for Imam al-Husayn (as) is a kind of practical
struggle against tyrants; that is to say, by crying we express our
disgust with the tyrants’ ways, just like when Fatimah al-Zahra (as)
cried a lot after her beloved father (S) passed away and the event of
“Saqifah” came to pass. The purpose of her crying was to make the people
contemplate the reason for the sadness and tears of the daughter of the
Holy Prophet (S) and ask themselves why Fatimah al-Zahra (as) was crying
in spite of the fact that the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) had been, up to that
time, role models of forebearance, firmness and perseverance.

9. Shedding tears for *Ahl al-Bayt* (as), especially the Doyen of
Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn (as), is an announcement of support for the
continuation and revival of the way of those great people. It is also a
clear announcement that throughout history we are and will continue to
be opposed to Yazid and all tyrants like Yazid and also that we are
aligned with and obey Imam al-Husayn (as) and those like al-Husayn in
our own time, as well as their ideals and mottos.


