A Historical View of Crying for the Sufferings of Allah’s Awliya’
=================================================================

Crying for the *awliya’* of Allah is included in the previously
mentioned precept of permissibility [*ibahah*]. The precept of
permissibility is applicable so long as there is no dictate or decree
that opposes permissibility; that is to say, all actions are permissible
so long as there is no evidence to prove that they are forbidden by the
divine law [*shari‘ah*] of Islam.

In the following discussions, we will refer to this issue and show that
there is no proof for prohibiting crying when mourning for the
afflictions that befell the *awliya’* of Allah. On the contrary, we will
prove that crying is preferred and encouraged. First, we will refer to
some historical examples of crying for the *awliya’* of Allah.

1. Prophet Adam (as) cried for Abel
-----------------------------------

Tabari on his chain of transmission narrates from ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
that he said, “When the child of Adam was killed by his brother, Adam
cried for him.”[^1]

2. Jacob (as) cried due to separation from Joseph
-------------------------------------------------

On his own chain of transmission, Tabari recounts the following
statement of al-Hasan Basri while interpreting the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... تَاللهِ تَفتَؤُا تَذْکُرُ يُوسُفَ حَتَّى تَکُونَ حَرَضاً أَوْ
تَکُونَ مِنَ الْهلِکِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They said: By Allah! You will not cease to remember Yusuf until you
are a prey to constant disease or until you are of those who
perish.”***[^2]

Al-Hasan Basri said, “Eighty years elapsed from the time that Prophet
Yusuf (Joseph) (as) left his father up to the time that they next saw
each other. During this time, sorrow and grief did not leave the heart
of Ya‘qub (Jacob).

He cried so much that his eyes became blind.” He also said, “I swear
upon Allah! There was no creature on earth at that time that Allah
looked upon with generosity more than Jacob.”[^3]

3. The Holy Prophet (S) cried for Hamzah
----------------------------------------

Ibn Hisham says, “When the Holy Prophet (S) returned from the Battle of
Uhud, he heard voices crying for those who had been martyred. The
Prophet’s (S) eyes filled with tears. Then, he said, “But Hamzah has no
one to cry for him.” When the women of Bani ‘Abd al-Ashhal heard this,
they started weeping for the uncle of the Holy Prophet (S).”[^4]

He also narrates from Ibn Mas‘ud saying, “We had never seen the Noble
Prophet (S) cry so much save when he cried for Hamzah. He put his corpse
in the direction of the *Qiblah*, stood over his dead body and cried. He
wept so much that he was close to passing out.”[^5]

4. The Noble Prophet (S) cried for his progeny
----------------------------------------------

On his own chain of transmission, Ibn Abi Shaybah recounts that Mas‘ud
said, “One day, we were in the presence of the Prophet of Allah (S),
when suddenly a group of people of Bani Hashim arrived. When the Holy
Prophet saw them, his eyes were filled with tears. His color, too,
changed. I said to him, ‘We see something in your face showing that you
are in pain.’ The Prophet said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«انّا اهل بيت اختار الله لنا الآخرة على الدنيا، وانّ أهل بيتي سيلقون
بلاء.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Verily, we are the *Ahl al-Bayt*, for whom Allah has preferred the
afterlife over this worldly life. And verily, soon it shall be that
suffering should afflict my *Ahl al-Bayt*’.”[^6]

5. The Prophet (S) cried for his grandfather, ‘Abd al-Muttalib
--------------------------------------------------------------

Umm Ayman says, “I saw the Prophet of Allah (S) at the foot of ‘Abd
al-Muttalib’s coffin crying as he moved.”[^7]

6. The Prophet (S) cried for martyrs of the War of Mu’tah
---------------------------------------------------------

Bukhari recounts, “News that Zayd, Ja‘far and Ibn Rawahah had been
martyred was brought to the people by the Prophet (S) himself before
anyone else. He said, ‘Zayd had the banner, and then he fell to the
ground (got martyred). Then, Ja‘far took the standard, and he too fell
to the ground. After that Ibn Rawahah got the banner, and he too fell to
the ground.’ The Prophet was saying all this while crying.”[^8]

7. The Holy Prophet (S) cried for Ja‘far
----------------------------------------

When Ja‘far and his companions were martyred, the Prophet of Allah (S)
went to his house and requested to see Ja‘far’s children. He smelt their
sweet scent and his eyes became tearful. Ja‘far’s wife Asma’ said to the
Prophet (S), “May my parents be your ransom! Why are you crying? Has any
news come to you from Ja‘far and his companions?”

The Noble Prophet (S) answered, “Yes, they were martyred today.” Asma’
says, “I got up and started crying. A number of women also surrounded
me. Then, Fatimah (as) came in, while she was crying and saying, ‘O
uncle! O uncle!’”

The Prophet of Allah said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على مثل جعفر فلتبك البواکي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“People ought to shed tears for people like Ja‘far.”[^9]

8. The Noble Prophet (S) cried for his mother
---------------------------------------------

Abu Hurayrah says, “The Prophet (S) went to visit his mother’s grave.
There he cried and made everyone around him cry, too.”[^10]

9. The Holy Prophet (S) cried for Fatimah bint Asad
---------------------------------------------------

It has been recounted that the Noble Prophet (S) recited prayers for
Fatimah, the mother of ‘Ali (as), and put her in the grave. Then, he
broke down and cried. He said, “May Allah rewards you goodly for your
motherhood. Verily, you were a good mother.”[^11]

10. The Noble Prophet (S) cried for ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un
------------------------------------------------------

On his chain of transmission, Hakim narrates from ‘A’ishah that the Holy
Prophet (S) kissed the dead body of ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un and cried.[^12]

11. The Holy Prophet (S) cried for his child Ibrahim (as)
---------------------------------------------------------

Anas ibn Malik says, “When Ibrahim (Abraham), the son of the Noble
Prophet (S), died the Prophet (S) cried and told his companions,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تدرجوه في اکفانه حتّى انظر اليه.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Do not put him in the shroud until I see him’.”[^13]

12. The Noble Prophet (S) gave permission to cry
------------------------------------------------

Ibn Mas‘ud, Thabit ibn Ziyad and Qarzah ibn Ka‘b say, “The Holy Prophet
(S) gave us permission to cry at the time of affliction and
trouble.”[^14]

On his chain of transmission, al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi narrates that Abu
Hurayrah said, “There was a corpse that was being taken to its burial
place. ‘Umar ibn Khattab was among the people taking it for burial. He
heard the voices of women crying, and commanded them to stop. The Holy
Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا عمر! دعهنّ، فانّ العين دامعة، والنفس مصابة والعهد قريب.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘O ‘Umar! Leave them alone, because tearful eyes, a troubled soul and
the promise are near’.”[^15]

13. Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (as) cried mourning Fatimah
-----------------------------------------------------

Ibn Sabbagh Maliki recounts that Ja‘far ibn Muhammad (as) said, “When
Fatimah (as) passed away, ‘Ali used to visit her grave every day. One
day he went to visit her and threw himself on her grave while crying. He
recited this poem,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مالي مررتُ على القبورِ مسلّماً قَبر الحبيبِ فلم يردِّ جوابي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا قبرُ مالك لا تجيبُ منادياً أمللتَ بعدي خلّةَ الأحبابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*What has happened to me that I visit the graves and give my greetings
and peace [salam] to my friend and beloved but I do not hear a reply!?*

*O grave! What has happened to you that you do not answer the calls of
those who cry out!? Is it that you are tired of associating with the
weary after associating with me?*”[^16]

14. Amir al-Mu’minin (as) cried mourning over ‘Ammar
----------------------------------------------------

Ibn Qutaybah says, “When ‘Ammar was killed, Imam ‘Ali (as) said to
‘Uday,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«يا عدي! قتل عمار بن ياسر؟»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘O ‘Uday! Has ‘Ammar ibn Yasir been killed?’

‘Uday replied, ‘Yes.’ Then, Imam ‘Ali (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«رحمك الله يا عمار! استوجب الحياة والرزق الکريم...»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘May Allah forgive you, O ‘Ammar. You were worthy of a bountiful life
and sustenance…’”[^17]

15. Imam ‘Ali (as) cried mourning for Hashim ibn ‘Utbah
-------------------------------------------------------

Sibt ibn Jawzi says, “… on that day, viz. Siffin, Hashim ibn ‘Utbah ibn
Abi Waqas also got killed. Imam ‘Ali cried for both of them, and prayed
for them. He placed ‘Ammar in his direction and Hashim ibn ‘Utbah in the
direction of the *Ka‘bah*. He did not perform the ritual ablution
[*ghusl*] for these two.”[^18]

16. Imam ‘Ali (as) cried for Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr
--------------------------------------------------

Sibt ibn Jawzi says, “When the news that Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr was
killed reached ‘Ali, he cried and showed sorrow, and cursed his
killer.”[^19]

17. Fatimah al-Zahra (as) cried for her father (as)
---------------------------------------------------

Sibt ibn Jawzi says, “Then Fatimah (as) withdrew from the people. She
was always crying for the Holy Prophet (S) until she joined him in the
afterlife.”[^20]

Anas ibn Malik says, “When we were returning from burying the Holy
Prophet (S), Fatimah came forward and addressed me,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«کيف طابت انفسکم ان تحثوا على وجه رسول الله (ص) التراب؟»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘How did you manage to drop dirt on the Prophet’s face?’

Then she cried, ‘O my beloved father…’”[^21]

18. Fatimah al-Zahra (as) cried for her mother
----------------------------------------------

Ya‘qubi says, “When Khadijah (as) passed away, Fatimah (as) was crying
when she came to the Prophet and asked, ‘Where is my mother? Where is my
beloved mother?’”[^22]

19. Fatimah al-Zahra (as) cried for Ruqayyah
--------------------------------------------

Ibn Shubbah narrates on his chain of transmission that Ibn ‘Abbas said,
“When Ruqayyah, the Prophet’s daughter, passed away, the Prophet said,
‘May you be joined to our good predecessor ‘Uthman ibn Maz‘un…’ It was
then that Fatimah cried beside her grave and the Holy Prophet wiped away
her tears with the corner of his shirt.”[^23]

20. Fatimah al-Zahra (as) cried for Ja‘far
------------------------------------------

Ibn Athir narrates, “The Prophet of Allah came to see Asma’ and gave her
the news that Ja‘far had been martyred, and offered her his condolences.
Fatimah came in and started to cry.”[^24]

21. Al-Hasan (as) and people of Kufah cried for Imam ‘Ali (as)
--------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Abi al-Hadid says, “Al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as) gave a sermon on the
night when Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (as) was martyred. After praising and
glorifying Allah, he sent peace and blessings upon the Noble Prophet
(S).

Then he said, ‘Tonight, a man has passed away who is unsurpassable both
by those who came before and will come after him. Those who will come in
the future will never understand nor perceive him. He was always
fighting in the way of Allah during the holy *Jihad*s alongside the
Noble Prophet (S). Amir al-Mu’minin (as) used to protect the Prophet (S)
with all his soul.

The Prophet of Allah used to entrust him with his banner while he was
accompanied by the Archangel Jibra’il (Gabriel) on his right side and
the Angel Mika’il (Michael) on his left side. He never returned from war
until Allah gave him victory and made him triumphant over the enemy. He
has been martyred on the night when Jesus, son of Mary, was taken to the
heavens and Yusha‘ (Joshua), the son of Nun, passed away.

He did not keep any gold or silver for himself except seven hundred
*dirham*s which he intended to use for employing a servant for his
family.’ Then, an overflow of painful feelings choked his throat and he
broke down crying, and the people cried also…”[^25]

22. Imam al-Husayn (as) cried for his brother ‘Abbas (as)
---------------------------------------------------------

Al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi narrates, “… A man hit the blessed head of ‘Abbas
with an iron club that caused a deep cut to his skull. He dropped to the
ground and then he cried, ‘O Aba ‘Abd Allah! O al-Husayn! Peace be upon
you!’ When Imam al-Husayn (as) heard this, he said, ‘O my ‘Abbas! O
blood of my heart!’

Then Imam al-Husayn (as) made a fierce attack on the enemy’s army and
pushed them aside making way for himself to reach ‘Abbas. Then, he got
off his horse and put ‘Abbas up on his horse and took him to the camp.
Imam al-Husayn cried bitterly and said, ‘May Allah, for my sake, give
you the best of rewards’.”[^26]

23. Imam al-Husayn (as) cried for Muslim ibn ‘Aqil
--------------------------------------------------

Ahmad ibn A‘tham Kufi writes, “A man came from Kufah and brought the
news to Imam al-Husayn (as) that Muslim ibn ‘Aqil had been killed. Imam
al-Husayn (as) asked, ‘Where are you from?’ He answered, ‘I am from
Kufah.

I escaped Kufah after seeing that Muslim ibn ‘Aqil and Hani ibn ‘Urwah
Madhhaji had both been killed and hanged. I saw that their bodies were
dragged on the ground in streets around the butcher shops. They also
sent their heads to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. Imam al-Husayn sighed deeply
and cried. He then said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
« إِنّا لِلّهِ وَإِنّا إِلَيْهِ راجِعُونَ»
  </p>
</blockquote>

***‘We are from Allah and to Him is our return.’’”***[^27]

24. Imam al-Husayn (as) cried for his breastfeeding newborn
-----------------------------------------------------------

Sibt ibn Jawzi narrates from Hisham ibn Muhammad saying, “When Imam
al-Husayn (as) realized that the army of ‘Umar ibn Sa‘d was insistent on
killing him, he got the Holy Qur’an, put it on his head and said, ‘Let
the Book of Allah brought for mankind by my grandfather the Prophet (as)
judge between us.

O people! What crime have I committed that you deem shedding my blood a
permissible act? Am I not the son of your Prophet’s daughter? Have not
the Prophet’s (S) words reached you about my brother and I when he said,
‘Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two leaders of the youths of Paradise’?
If you do not acknowledge what I say, then ask Jabir, Zayd ibn Arqam and
Abu Sa‘id Khudri. Is Ja‘far Tayyar not my uncle?’

At that moment, Imam al-Husayn’s (as) newborn who was fretful due to
thirst took his attention. He shouted, ‘O People! If you do not have
mercy on me, then at least have mercy on this infant.’ A man from among
the army shot an arrow at the newborn’s neck piercing it and killing the
infant. Imam al-Husayn (as) started to cry and said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الّلهم احکم بيننا وبين قوم دعونا لينصرونا فقتلونا. فنودي من الهواء:
دعه يا حسين! فانّ له مرضعاً في الجنّة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘O my Lord! Jugde between us and the people who invited us on the
pretext that they would help us but have instead betrayed and killed
us.’ A voice was heard from the heavens, ‘O al-Husayn! Deliver the child
because he will be given milk in heaven’.”[^28]

25. Imam al-Husayn (as) cried for Qays ibn Musahhar
---------------------------------------------------

When Imam al-Husayn (as) was informed that Qays had been killed, he
cried out and shed tears. Then he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اللهم اجعل لنا ولشيعتنا منزلاً کريماً عندك واجمع بيننا وايّا هم في
مستقرّ رحمتك، انّك على کلّ شيء قدير.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O my Lord! Give us and our Shi‘ahs a generous abode near Thyself, and
gather us and them in Thy abode of mercy, because Thou art powerful over
all things.”[^29]

26. Imam al-Husayn (as) cried for Hurr ibn Yazid Riyahi
-------------------------------------------------------

Al-Qunduzi al-Hanafi recounts, “… Hurr carried out an attack on the
people from Kufah and killed fifty of them before attaining martyrdom.
They cut his head off and threw it in the direction of Imam al-Husayn.
Imam al-Husayn put Hurr’s head on his lap and as he cried, he wiped
blood from Hurr’s face and said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«والله ما اخطأت أمّك اذ سمّتك حرّاً فانّك حرّ في الدنيا وسعيد في
الآخرة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘I swear upon Allah! Your mother did not make a mistake when she named
you Hurr, because you were a free man in this world and one who has
gained salvation in the next world’.”[^30]

27. The people of Medina cried mourning the Prophet (S)
-------------------------------------------------------

Abu Dhu’ayb Hudhali says, “I entered Medina and heard wailing and
crying, just like when the pilgrims at the *hajj* are leaving the Holy
Shrine. I asked, ‘What has happened?’ The people answered, ‘The Prophet
of Allah (S) has passed away’.”[^31]

28. The people of Medina cried for Imam al-Hasan (as)
-----------------------------------------------------

On his own chain of transmission, Ibn ‘Asakir narrates that Ibn Abi
Najih quoted his father saying, “The people of Mecca and Medina, all of
them, including the children, cried for Imam al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as) for
seven days.”[^32]

29. Abu Hurayrah cried for Imam al-Hasan (as)
---------------------------------------------

On his own chain of transmission, Ibn ‘Asakir recounts that Musawir
Mawla Bani Sa‘d said, “I saw Abu Hurayrah in the Prophet’s Mosque on the
day when al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as) was martyred. He was crying out while
standing and shedding tears, ‘O People! Today the beloved one of the
Prophet has passed away.’ He made every one cry with these words.”[^33]

30. Sa‘id ibn ‘As cried while mourning Imam al-Hasan (as)
---------------------------------------------------------

Hakim narrates on his chain of transmission that Muslimah ibn Muharib
said, “Al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali passed away when fifty five days from the first
of Rabi‘ al-Awwal had passed and he was forty six years of age. Sa‘id
ibn ‘As was crying while sending greetings to Imam al-Hasan.”[^34]

31. Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah cried for Imam al-Hasan (as)
--------------------------------------------------------

Ibn ‘Abd Rabbah and other historians have narrated, “When al-Hasan ibn
‘Ali (as) was buried, his brother Muhammad ibn Hanafiyyah stood at the
head of his grave while crying and said, ‘May Allah have compassion and
mercy on you, O Aba Muhammad!’”[^35]

32. People of Medina cried remembering the Prophet (S)
------------------------------------------------------

Jazri recounts, “Bilal saw the Noble Prophet in a dream telling him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«ما هذه الجفوة يا بلال؟ اما اَن لك اَن تزورنا؟»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘What kind of unkindness and disloyalty is this, O Bilal? Has not the
time come for you to come and visit us?’

Bilal woke up feeling very sad. He mounted his horse and rode to Medina.
He went directly to the Prophet’s (S) tomb and started crying. He was
pressing himself against the Prophet’s (S) grave. Al-Hasan (as) and
al-Husayn (as) came by. Bilal started kissing these two and pressing
them to himself.

They said to Bilal, ‘We want you to recite the call to prayer [*adhan*]
at sunrise.’ Bilal went on top of the Mosque roof and said, ‘Allah is
Greater than to be perceived.’ [*Allah-u Akbar! Allah-u Akbar!*] Medina
vibrated and trembled with yells of crying.

When he said, ‘I testify that there is no god but Allah.’ [*ashhadu an
la ilaha illa Allah!*] The wailing of the people increased. When he
said, ‘I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah!’ [*ashhadu
anna Muhammadan rasulullah!*], the women came out of their homes, and
there has never been a day since that the men and women cried so
much.[^36]

[^1]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 1, p. 37.

[^2]: Surat Yusuf 12:85.

[^3]: Tafsir Tabari, vol. 13, p. 32.

[^4]: Al-Sirah al-Halbiyyah, vol. 3, p. 105.

[^5]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 323.

[^6]: Al-Musannaf, vol. 8, p. 697.

[^7]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 7.

[^8]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 2, p. 240; Kitab Fada’il al-Sahabah, Bab
Manaqib Khalid.

[^9]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 90.

[^10]: Muslim, Al-Sahih, vol. 2, p. 671; Kitab al-Jana’iz, section [bab]
36, hadith 108.

[^11]: Dhakha’ir al-‘Uqaba, p. 56.

[^12]: Al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi, Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 1, p.
361.

[^13]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, vol. 1, p. 473; Kitab al-Jana’iz, Bab Ma Ja’a
fi al-Nazar ila al-Mayyit.

[^14]: Al-Musannaf, vol. 3, p. 268.

[^15]: Al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi, Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 1, p.
381; Al-Nassa’i, Sunan, vol. 4, p. 190; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad,
vol. 2, p. 333.

[^16]: Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, p. 130.

[^17]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 110.

[^18]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 94.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 107.

[^20]: Ibid., p. 318.

[^21]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 194; Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 261;
Suyuti, Musnad Fatimah, p. 30.

[^22]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 35.

[^23]: Tarikh al-Madinah al-Munawwarah, vol. 1, p. 103.

[^24]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 90.

[^25]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, vol. 4, p. 11.

[^26]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 409.

[^27]: Al-Futuh, vol. 5, p. 110.

[^28]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 252.

[^29]: Al-Futuh, vol. 5, p. 145.

[^30]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawaddah, p. 414.

[^31]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 7, p. 265; Hayat al-Sahabah, vol. 2, p. 371.

[^32]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, trans. Imam al-Hasan (as), p. 235.

[^33]: Siyr A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 3, p. 277; Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq,
trans. Imam al-Hasan, p. 229.

[^34]: Al-Hakim al-Neyshaburi, Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 3, p.
173.

[^35]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 2, p. 8; Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 213.

[^36]: Usd al-Ghabah, vol. 1, p. 208.


