Examining Opposing Claims
=========================

Some Muslim sects have denied the permissibility of shedding tears for
Imam al-Husayn (as). In their denials, they have cited and held fast to
a number of proofs which we will now discuss and examine:

1. Hadiths which prohibit crying for the dead
---------------------------------------------

Muslim and other historians have recounted that ‘Abd Allah said, “Hafsah
cried for ‘Umar.” ‘Umar said to her, “Keep quiet, my little daughter.
Don’t you know that the Prophet of Allah said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إنّ الميت يعذّب ببکاء اهله عليه.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The crying of the family tortures the dead person’.”[^1]

It has also been narrated that when ‘Umar was hit by a spear, he
fainted. They started yelling and crying for him. When he became
conscious again, he said, “Don’t you know that the Prophet of Allah
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«إنّ الميت ليعذب ببکاء الحي.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Verily, the dead get tortured by the crying of the living’.”[^2]

***Response***

Firstly, these traditions contradict all the previously related
traditions which prove that crying is not only permissible but also
preferred. Secondly, it can be shown by citing other traditions that
‘Umar made a mistake in applying the Prophet’s tradition, because Suhayb
says, “After hearing this tradition from ‘Umar, I went to see ‘A’ishah
and told her what I had heard from ‘Umar. ‘A’ishah said, ‘No, I swear
upon Allah! The Prophet of Allah never said that the crying of a person
tortures the dead. On the contrary, he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ الکافر يزيده الله ببکاء اهله عذاباً، وانّ الله لهو اضحک وأبکي، ولا
تزر وازرة وزر اخري.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Verily Allah increases the torture and pain of an unbeliever [*kafir*]
when his family cries for him. Verily it is Allah that makes people
laugh and cry. No one bears the burden of another.’’”[^3]

Hisham ibn ‘Urwah narrates from his father that the saying (words) of
Aba ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn ‘Umar were repeated to ‘A’ishah, that the dead
get tortured by the crying of his family. ‘A’ishah said, “May Allah have
mercy on Aba ‘Abd al-Rahman. He heard something but did not commit it to
his memory. One day the corpse of a Jew was passed near the Prophet of
Allah while his family was crying. The Holy Prophet said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انتم تبکون وانّه ليعذب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘You are crying while he is getting tortured’.”[^4]

Thirdly, as previously mentioned ‘Umar forbade women from crying in the
presence of the Holy Prophet (S). The Noble Prophet (S) said to him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دعهنّ يا عمر! فانّ العين دامعة والقلب مصاب والعهد قريب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O ‘Umar! Leave them alone, because tearful eyes, grieving hearts and
the promise are near.”

Fourthly, this tradition is not compatible with the apparent meanings of
many verses of the Holy Qur’an because Allah says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلا تَزِرُ وازِرَةٌ وِزْرَ أُخْري ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A burdened soul shall not bear the burden of another.”***[^5]

2. ‘Umar made a prohibition against crying for the dead
-------------------------------------------------------

Some people say that ‘Umar ibn Khattab forbade crying for the dead. They
say that ‘Umar’s verdict is proof that it is not permissible to cry for
the dead.

***Response***

Firstly, ‘Umar’s prohibition is opposed to explicit tenets or statements
that prove not only the permissibility, but the preference for crying.

Secondly, ‘Umar’s way of life is not credible when it is opposed to the
words and actions [*sunnah*] of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S).

Thirdly, he was opposed by the Holy Prophet (S) when he disallowed
crying, as has already been mentioned.

Fourthly, how is it possible that ‘Umar made crying for the dead
unlawful when he himself cried for Nu‘man ibn Muqran,[^6] Zayd ibn
Khattab[^7] and Khalid ibn Walid[^8]. He even ordered other people to
cry for Khalid ibn Walid.[^9]

### The Torah forbade crying for the dead

If one ponders the Tawrat (Torah or the Old Testament), he understands
that the prohibition for crying for the dead has roots in this book.
‘Umar was known to have good relations with the People of the Book [*ahl
al-kitab*], especially the Jews, and he read their books. Therefore, it
can be surmised that he may have applied this Jewish law in Islam.

In the Jewish books, we read, “O child! I will get the desire of your
two eyes with one stroke. Therefore, do not weep and cry, and do not
shed your tears. Keep cool and quiet, and do not weep or wail for the
dead.”[^10]

[^1]: Muslim, Al-Sahih, vol. 2, p. 639; Kitab al-Jana’iz, Bab al-Mayyit
Yu‘adhdhabu bi-Buka’i Ahlihi ‘Alayh.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Sahih Bukhari, Kitab al-Jana’iz, vol. 1, p. 155; Muslim, Al-Sahih,
Kitab al-Jana’iz, section [bab] 9, hadith 22-23.

[^4]: Muslim, Al-Sahih, Kitab al-Jana’iz, section [bab] 9, hadith 25;
Sahih Bukhari, vol. 1, p. 156.

[^5]: Surat Fatir 35:18.

[^6]: Al-Musannaf, vol. 3, p. 344.

[^7]: Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 191.

[^8]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, vol. 15, p. 731.

[^9]: Al-Musannaf, vol. 7, p. 175.

[^10]: Sifar Hazqiyal, ishah 24, faqarah 16-18.


