The Effects of Ashura
=====================

‘Ashura from the Viewpoint of Great Thinkers of the World
---------------------------------------------------------

Any person who reads about the event of Karbala and carefully ponders
what came to pass on the day of ‘Ashura, or hears about it from another
person, will certainly be deeply saddened by what befell Imam al-Husayn
(as), his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) and the rest of his companions.

When a person with a sound conscience and healthy mind truly comprehends
the heartrending occurrence, he will definitely decide to undertake a
spiritual journey. He will embark on an inner pilgrimage and expedition
towards Imam al-Husayn (as).

He will find Imam al-Husayn (as) and the purpose of his uprising
captivating and concur with the objectives. In fact, this is exactly
what has happened to many people who have read or heard about this event
and we will now mention a few examples of such people:

### The English author and explorer, Freya Stark

In her famous book entitled, “*The Faces of Baghdad*” [*Suwar
Baghdadiyyah*], Freya Stark has assigned a short chapter to the event of
‘Ashura. At the beginning of that chapter she says, “Shi‘ahs from all
corners of the Muslim World remember al-Husayn and the site of his
execution.

They publicly follow up on this event for the first ten days of the
month of Muharram**.** Sorrow and grief is so predominant over them that
on the last day, they parade mourning dramas and engage in public
wailing and group weeping…”[^1]

In a separate chapter of this book, and in a more detailed manner, she
has talked about the holy city of Najaf. She recounts, “And at a
distance not far from the mausoleum, his son al-Husayn arrived from the
other side of the desert. He rode his horse and crossed the desert until
he reached the land of Karbala.

There, he pitched a tent. His enemies surrounded him and closed all
access to water from him. The events which came to pass have been
retained in the memories of people. Detailed accounts about the sad
events that occurred at Karbala have been passed from one generation to
the next for the last 1257 years.

There is no possibility of deriving benefit from this holy city unless
one has enough knowledge and information about this event, because the
tragedies which befell al-Husayn penetrate and seep through every
existing being to the extent that it shakes the very roots of their
inner conscience and the foundations of their beliefs. This event is one
of those rare occurrences which make men shed tears involuntarily.”

She then says, “When these tragic events came to pass, history stopped
at Karbala and Najaf because people migrated to settle in these two
cities with the intention of renouncing Yazid and washing their hands of
the enemies of al-Husayn, the oppressed.”[^2]

### Proffessor Edward Granville Browne (1862-1926)

The famous orientalist Edward Browne, professor of Arabic and oriental
studies at the University of Cambridge, recounts the appalling events
which befell Imam al-Husayn (as) at Karbala in this way, “… a reminder
of the blood-stained field of Karbala, where the grandson of the Apostle
of God fell at length, tortured by thirst and surrounded by the bodies
of his murdered kinsmen, has been at anytime since then sufficient to
evoke, even in the most lukewarm and heedless, the deepest emotions, the
most frantic grief, and an exaltation of spirit before which pain,
danger and death shrink to unconsidered trifles.”[^3]

He also says, “Is it possible to find a person who hears about the event
of Karbala and is at the same time not overwhelmed by sorrow and grief?
Even non-Muslims cannot refute the purity of spirit and morality which
accompanied this Islamic holy war.”[^4]

### Charles Dickens

This English Writer says this about the uprising of ‘Ashura, “If
al-Husayn fought to quench his worldly desires, then I do not understand
why his sisters, wives and children accompanied him. It stands to reason
therefore that he sacrificed purely for Islam.”[^5]

### Thomas Masaryk

While comparing Imam al-Husayn (as) with Prophet Jesus (as), Thomas
Masaryk says, “The sufferings of Jesus Christ, when compared to the
sufferings of al-Husayn, are like feathers made out of straw in the face
of a huge mountain.”[^6]

### Justice A. Russell

This English poet describes the sorrowful event of ‘Ashura in this way:

“… they hit the blessed mouth of Imam al-Husayn (as) with their wooden
sticks. O holy body that has been crushed under hooves! You are that
same body which used to charm every person who cast a glance at you.

Blood that has been shed from your blessed veins and has dried is a
heavenly mixture which no horse hoof has ever had the opportunity to be
painted with such a holy mixture (or color) up to now. O bare and barren
earth of Karbala! There is neither grass nor herbs growing on you!
Forever the song of sorrow will be chanted for you and the dress of
sorrow put on you because it was on your land that the holy body of
Fatimah’s son was torn to pieces. He dedicated his spirit to God.”[^7]

### Captain H. Niblet

While describing the night of ‘Ashura, he recounts, “That night, when
the camp fires were burning all around him, the Imam called his
followers and gathered them around him. In one long speech, he addressed
them, ‘Those who will stay with me are going to be martyred tomorrow.’

Then, he acted in a very gracious manner; a manner which proves that he
possessed complete knowledge about the weaknesses of mankind, which
shows the strength which his sacrificial soul possessed and is a sign of
how generous and kind that great man was.

He said to his followers, ‘Anyone who does not find in himself the
courage and strength for steadfastness and martyrdom should secretly
sneak out under the cover of darkness towards the east, and there is no
reason whatsoever for anyone to feel ashamed.’

When the morning of ‘Ashura emerged, purple clouds gathered in the
eastern sky, and seventy one people possessing strong faith and
certainty surrounded Imam al-Husayn (as). All of them were ready for
death and martyrdom.”[^8]

### Gibbon, the English historian (1737-1794)

He writes, “Notwithstanding that a long period of time has elapsed since
the event of ‘Ashura occurred, and we too are not countrymen with the
main actors in that event, nevertheless the unbearable hardships which
Imam al-Husayn endured still arouse emotions in the most cold and
stonehearted of readers; so much so that every reader finds in himself a
kind of affection and love towards that great man.”[^9]

### Morris Duxbury

This American historian has written about mourning for Imam al-Husayn
(as). He recounts, “If our writers of history could percive the reality
of the day of ‘Ashura, they would not view mourning ceremonies which are
held for Imam al-Husayn to be something queer or unusual.

Al-Husayn’s followers know that by means of mourning for their Imam,
they are refusing to go under the yoke of oppression, lowliness and
foreign domination because the message of their Imam and leader was that
they should never surrender to oppression and tyranny.

Al-Husayn deliberately overlooked his own life, possessions and children
for the sake of morality, principle, the people and the integrity of
Islam. It is for this reason that he did not go under the yoke and
adventurousness of Yazid.

Therefore, come and let us all imitate his way of life and free
ourselves from the oppression of Yazid and those like Yazid. Let us
prefer honorable death to living our lives in lowliness. In a nutshell,
these are the basic teachings of Islam.

It is clear what status such a community will attain; a community which
has been trained on such values from their cradles to the graves. Such a
people possess every kind of honor and dignity, because all the people
of that community are soldiers fighting for what is right, honorable and
dignified.”[^10]

### Borris Salama

This Christian poet says, “On nights when I stayed awake, I could not
but spend them with pain. The cause of my mental torment was my own
thoughts and imagination about the people of the past.

I especially thought about the two great martyrs of history: Imam ‘Ali
and his son Imam al-Husayn. At one moment, I cried a lot because of the
affection and fondness which I felt for those two great men. Finally, I
composed a poem for ‘Ali and al-Husayn.”[^11]

### Gabriel Dankiri

He describes the savagery and barbarity of Yazid’s army in this way,
“Yazid’s soldiers on the day of ‘Ashura showed so much cruelty and
ravenousness that no one can call to mind a day (in the history of
mankind) equal or parallel to it in barbarity. They did not even have
mercy on breast feeding newborns and minors.

They went so far as to take the bloody head of Imam al-Husayn to
Damascus. Yazid imagined that with this apparent victory, he would live
forever in peace and tranquility, but memories of that day have been
revived every day from the day when that sad event occurred up to today,
by way of shedding tears, mourning and grieving…”[^12]

### George Jordaq

This Lebanese Christian Writer recounts, “Yazid was a man who had
inherited all the evil qualities of his ancestors, the Bani Umayyah. He
even exceeded them. Yazid shared in all the vice, iniquity and mischief
of Bani Umayyah in general…

There was no one more deprived of human values than Yazid… and in
comparison, there was no one more perfect in human values and morality
than al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, the martyr in this event. Yazid possessed all
the ugly traits imaginable; he was a spineless power seeking opportunist
who lacked strength and a man who would never hesitate to commit murder.

And on the opposite side, that is to say on the side of ‘Ali’s children,
was to be found all the lofty and praiseworthy human attributes in the
best sense of the word; such traits as a generous disposition, courage,
liberality and martyrdom…”[^13]

### Doctor Joseph

This French historian narrates, “During the days of ‘Ashura, the Shi‘ahs
mention and listen to the sufferings of al-Husayn. They make every
effort to recount the virtues of the Prophet’s family and Household in
the best possible manner…”[^14]

### Claudine Rulu

He is a news commentator for the Le Monde Newspaper who has written
about Imam al-Husayn (as) and the event of ‘Ashura. He recounts, “In the
month of Muharram of every year, the Shi‘ahs procced to remind one
another about the event of ‘Ashura and revive the sufferings of Imam
al-Husayn, who is the symbol of courage and justice, as opposed to
Yazid, the incarnation of abomination and villainy. They draw
similitudes between the tyrants of their time and Yazid.”[^15]

### Mahatma Gandhi

Mahatma Gandhi was the architect of Indian independence. He was the
leader of the national liberation struggle of the people of India during
their quest for freedom from British colonization.

He has been quoted as saying, “I have not brought anything new for the
people of India; I just brought for them the results which I obtained
from my researches about the history of Karbala and that of the
champions of the event of ‘Ashura. If we want to free India, it is
incumbent upon us to traverse the same path which al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali
(as) traversed.”[^16]

### Sawir Jiny Naid

This Indian poet believes that the mourning ceremonies of Imam
al-Husayn’s (as) followers bring about revival of the heart-rending
event of Karbala. He says that the uprising of Imam al-Husayn (as)
strengthens the religion of Muhammad.

This poet believes that by this uprising, Imam al-Husayn (as) proved his
ultimate love and affection for Allah. He says, “During the night
preceding that of al-Husayn’s martyrdom, his disciples wear black
shirts, remain bare footed and congregate to remember the heart-rending
event of ‘Ashura with tearful eyes.

While describing the incidents which took place that night, they all
shout with one voice, ‘O al-Husayn! O al-Husayn! Why do your thousands
of thousands of friends shed tears like this for you? O holy one
possessing a high status! Is all this not because of your matchless
sacrifices? Because you raised the banner of Muhammad’s great religion
and proved to the amazed world your wonderful love for Allah’.”[^17]

### Irunick

This American historian recounts, “I do not like to make the account of
al-Husayn’s martyrdom long because of the distastefulness and revulsion
of the nature of that event. No incident uglier than this event came to
pass in the entire history of Islam.

Even though the martyrdom of the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali,
is considered as a great calamity, the incident of al-Husayn consisted
of atrocious killings, mutilations and taking people into captivity;
acts which listening to send a shiver down a man’s spine… because it is
the most outstanding account of what suffering means.”[^18]

### Al-Jamili

Even though he expresses sorrow for both sides of the confrontation on
the day of ‘Ashura, he says this about Yazid’s apparent regret, “His
remorse was false. Had it been real, he would have punished ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad, ‘Umar ibn Sa‘d and Shimr ibn Dhi al-Jawshan.

If he showed apparent remorse, it was because he realized that he had
inflamed the anger of the Muslims throughout eternity, not because of
the actual crimes which he had committed.”[^19]

### The German researcher Martin

He recounts, “… al-Husayn was the only person in the last fourteen
centuries to stand up against an oppressive and tyrannical government…
He remains the only politician in the entire history of mankind to
employ such effective politics through uprising and revolution.
Al-Husayn’s unchanging motto was ‘I will die in the way of truth and
virtue, but I will not pay allegiance to iniquity…’

Al-Husayn realized that Bani Umayyah, who had changed the caliphate to
an absolute monarchy and authoritative sultanate, were deliberately
disregarding and even purposefully trodding upon the laws of Islam. He
could foresee that very soon the foundations on which Islam was founded
would fall. He perceived that nothing would remain of Islam and the
Muslims if he delayed any more. Therefore, he decided to stand up
against oppression and tyranny.

By sacrificing his most beloved ones, proving how right he was and
exposing the wrong which was committed against him by Bani Umayyah,
al-Husayn taught mankind valuable lessons in self-sacrifice and risking
one’s life for what is right. He recorded the name of Islam in history
and made it renowned in the world. If such a heart-rending event had not
taken place, Islam and the Muslims would certainly have been effaced and
completely wiped out.”[^20]

### Jurji Zaydan

He narrates about Imam al-Husayn in this way, “… The sight of Imam
al-Husayn’s head affected all, making everyone sorrowful… When Yazid’s
eyes fell on the cut head of Imam al-Husayn, he shivered from head to
foot and realized what an abominable act he had committed.”[^21]

### Nicholson

He recounts, “The event of Karbala caused regret and remorse for Bani
Umayyah because it united the Shi‘ahs, who became unanimous in their
agreement to avenge the blood of Imam al-Husayn.”[^22]

‘Ashura and Religious Transformation
------------------------------------

The event of Karbala has not only been influential on the hearts of
mankind in general, but has also been the reason for many individuals
who did not even profess Imam al-Husayn’s (as) beliefs to become
attracted to him. It has also become a cause for makind to denounce the
religion and customs of Mu‘awiyah, and to be led towards that great Imam
(as).

The Frenchman, Dr. Joseph, in his research work entitled, “*The Shi‘ahs
and Their Astounding Progress*” writes, “Portraying and depicting the
leaders of their religion as oppressed is one of the things which has
served to prove the rightfulness of the Shi‘ahs.

This, too, has managed to leave an effective impression on other sects.
And this is natural, because the nature of every man is inclined to
assist the oppressed. Every man wants to see the weak overpower the
strong and iniquitous, because man’s natural inclination is towards the
weak…

Despite apparently not believing in Imam al-Husayn (as) and his
companions, such European authors have written detailed accounts about
the battle and martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as) and his companions.

They have acknowledged the oppression which was committed against Imam
al-Husayn (as) and the barbarity of his killers and have, as a result of
all this, been led to hold the names of Imam al-Husayn’s (as) killers in
contempt. Nothing can stand against these natural forces, and this is
the point which proves the rightfulness of the Shi‘ite sect…”[^23]

Now, we will mention some of the people who have undergone a kind of
religious transformation and hence gained discernment after reading or
hearing about the event of ‘Ashura.

### 1. The Egyptian instructor, Abu Sharif, known as ‘Abd al-Majid

In one of the letters he has written to an orator specializing in
preaching about Imam al-Husayn (as), Abu Sharif says, “One day, I was
holding a small portable radio in my hands and searching for a Cairo
radio frequency to listen to. I was alone in my room and I was tuning my
radio in search of the frequency. Suddenly, I heard a pleasant and
touching voice. I kept the tuner of my radio on that frequency.

This voice was unique and different from all the voices I had previously
heard. Gradually, my whole attention was absorbed by it. When I paid
careful attention, I found out that a man was talking about Imam
al-Husayn (as). He was recounting the bitter events which came to pass
at Karbala in detail. I do not know for sure what month that was, but I
guess it was the month of Muharram.

Up to that day, I had not understood the issue of crying for Imam
al-Husayn (as). However, when I heard a part of the events of ‘Ashura, I
cried bitterly. Tears flowed from my eyes spontaneously.

The tears I shed were hot and intense. I cried with such bitterness like
I have never cried before in all my life. My tears continued to flow to
the last words of the preacher. This condition overwhelmed me and
affected my whole being…”

Continuing his narrative he said, “… After this experience, new and wide
horizons were opened to me regarding the issue of shedding tears for the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as).”[^24]

After this occurrence, he converted to the Shi‘ism and moved to Iran
where he became a television presenter.

### 2. Professor Sa’ib ‘Abd al-Hamid

In his book entiltled, “*Manhaj fi al-Intima’ al-Madhhabi*”, he recounts
the story of his religious transformation and spiritual insight in this
way, “Yes, the beginning was like this. The actual beginning was the
guiding light of al-Husayn.

The ship of salvation began with al-Husayn; a beginning that I had not
intended, but one which he had intended. Allah granted me success by
giving me the wisdom to welcome al-Husayn. Allah held my hand and took
me to al-Husayn’s doorstep… and this happened on the day when a sad
voice touched my ears.

How often before had that voice reached my ears, but I had passed by
paying no attention to it. I had placed veils over this voice and, as a
result, it paid no attention to me either. However, this time, al-Husayn
himself had invited me, at a time when I was near seclusion or something
like that. Because of that voice, all my senses trembled, and I
surrendered all my feelings, affections and will to him...

That voice captivated all my attention… its stormy waves and scattered
flames were affecting me every moment as it narrated, to the extent that
my whole being melted into it. All my being was entirely attentive to
this voice. I started to move along with the voice and started to relive
the events which was relating.

I melted into all these events with my imagination, picturing everything
as the voice was narrating. I was moving with the caravan of Imam
al-Husayn, and wherever they camped, I camped too. I followed them from
the beginning to the end of the journey. Step by step, I traversed the
way.

The incident which was being described by the voice was the story of
Imam al-Husayn’s martyrdom. The voice belonged to Shaykh ‘Abd al-Zahra
Ka‘bi. The day was the tenth of Muharram, the year 1402 of the Islamic
calendar.

I was listening to the calls and mottos of Imam al-Husayn and my whole
body was shaking. I was shedding tears and learning lessons as all this
occurred. Then, something occurred in my blood… it seemed as if there
was a call and a revolution in my being… here I am, O my master! Here I
am, O son of the Prophet! Here I am, O al-Husayn (as)...

There were endless questions in my mind. It seemed as if I were seeing a
light within myself; a light that had been veiled in my soul all this
time. This light had now been incited, and in a split second, the light
had opened up and lit my whole inner being.

This luminosity was acquired from imitating al-Husayn. Al-Husayn, a gift
for mankind and a remembrance from the Chosen One of Allah, Mustafa
Muhammad (S), was one of the great leaders of religion.

The light of Islam was newly incited in me in the best sense of the
expression; a light which the Prophet of Allah (S) guided me to through
a religious preacher and one of his own family members, Imam al-Husayn.

Wherever the call of Islam is made, it spreads and everyone recognizes
it. There is no other meaning for Islam than this.

Yes, the places where the Prophet’s children fell…”[^25]

### 3. Professor Idris Husayni Maghribi

In his book entitled, “*Laqad Shayya‘ani al-Husayn* *(as)*” (Al-Husayn
Made Me a Shi‘ah), he writes, “One of the people close to me asked, ‘Who
made you a Shi‘ah and what books did you trust and find reliable for
your research?’ I answered, ‘As regards who made me a Shi‘ah, I must say
that my ancestor al-Husayn made me a Shi‘ah.

The atrocious injustices which were imposed on him at Karbala converted
me to the Shi‘ism. And, as regards which books I found reliable while
pursuing this, I must say that the books are *Sahih Bukhari* (the
Authentic Book of Bukhari) and the other *Sahih*s (other authentic Sunni
books of tradition). These are the books which made me a Shi‘ah.’

He asked, ‘How is this possible?’ I said, ‘Read the authentic books of
Sunni *hadith*, and do not ignore any contradictions. Note all the
discrepancies down and reflect upon them. Count all the inconsistencies
you can find in these books and do not bypass anything unless you have
deliberated and reflected upon it… This is when you will obtain the
object of your desire.’

With all certainty, the people who killed al-Husayn and took his chaste
family into captivity are not at all trustworthy. There is no
justification whatsoever for their abominable actions. For a free
thinking mind liberated from religious bigotry, there is no way of
justifying the event of ‘Ashura in the same way that it is unthinkable
to interpret pure blood as being natural water.

This pool of blood which flowed was not a river of water. On the
contrary, it was the blood of the most honorable people. These people
were the ones about whom the Holy Prophet (S) expressed his will and
desire that Muslims should love them. This community, the Islamic
*ummah*, is responsible for losing its own credibility.

Whatever they say, they cannot convince me as regards why a certain
group of Sunni scholars have good relations with the people on whose
hands there is so much blood. I cannot understand why some so-called
Sunni scholars maintain good ties with the criminals who shed the blood
of al-Husayn for the sake of gaining predominance and rule over the
Muslim community [*ummah*].

After the Holy Prophet’s (S) departure, this community did not assist
the Holy Prophet’s children. They even abandoned the *sunnah* and did
not observe or follow the Prophet’s way of conduct. You can say whatever
you wish in your endeavors to justify these distasteful actions; you can
say what you always say, that the Muslims strove hard in reaching
consensus regarding the application of religious law in the first era
after the departure of the Holy Prophet (S) when they killed al-Husayn!

And that narratives which are found in Shi‘ah books are all products of
wild imagination and do not correspond with the real history of Islam.

However, can anyone ever be found in the world who refutes the fact that
Imam al-Husayn (as) was killed in an oppressive manner on direct orders
issued by Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah by means of an official *fatwa* (religious
edict) passed by Sharih Qadi? Can anyone in the whole world be found
denying the sad reality that Imam al-Husayn (as) was killed by the
revengeful swords of Bani Umayyah’s armies?

It is more saddening when we realize that all this barbarism occurred in
a community where the thinking of the common man had made considerable
advances! It was in this very community where another unparallel event
came to pass; this occurred when the caliphate was reduced to a monarchy
and sultanate. After that, Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah was tyrannically imposed
over the Muslims…

Never and a thousand times never… has anyone had the courage to refute
or the ability to justify this heartrending event because history is
never negligent as regards the oppression which is committed against the
weak? I say so in spite of the fact that the mischief-makers hate to
hear this truth.”[^26]

He continues, “Imam al-Husayn’s (as) desire was to free the *ummah*
(Islamic community) from the stiffness it had acquired and to incite a
revolution against the depraved kings of Bani Umayyah who depended on
repression to rule. This kind of revolution needed self-sacrifice. It
was necessary to shed blood in order to bring about a revolution in the
people’s hearts and souls.”[^27]

He adds, “Imam al-Husayn (as) was eager for the prominence of the
Islamic community and desired to protect its interests. That is why he
stood up against Yazid and his misguidance… Yes indeed! Al-Husayn was
left forlorn at a time when he was in grave need of help from the
people.”[^28]

After briefly recounting the event of ‘Ashura, he reaches this
conclusion, “Al-Husayn made me a Shi‘ah.” Then he adds, “I swear upon my
soul! This place is a holy place for one who always calls out to the
innermost recesses of my conscience and has made all my states and
actions sorrowful.

I did not feel satisfied with short accounts about the killings of
Karbala; I kept delving deeper until an uprising took place in my heart;
a revolution against all the doctrines and teachings which I had
inherited from my ancestors. Yes, al-Husayn’s revolution entered my mind
and soul…

The people of Sham and Kufah came with their swords but Imam al-Husayn
(as) came with his blood; and blood was victorious over the sword. Blood
triumphed over deviated history. Therefore, al-Husayn (as) is a light
which will never be overcome by the darkness of distortion.

We exalt this event because we know that Imam al-Husayn (as) was killed
for standing up for what was right. We also know and are proud that only
a drop of his blood burried all of his enemies in the annals of history.

We cry for those negligent people who either killed al-Husayn or
abandoned him. We regard those who helped as our role-models and
leaders. We take al-Husayn’s (as) helpers to be our examples of
self-restraint and we imitate them in our lives… we hate the people who
killed Imam al-Husayn (as) while they knew that he was better than their
King, and that he was the rightful leader for the Muslims.

We detest those who martyred al-Husayn (as) because of the material
rewards which Yazid had promised them. Did not these people have the
motivation to distort Islam and the power to forge traditions
[*hadith*s] for the sake of earning rewards from Yazid?

Yes, it was al-Husayn (as) who made me Shi‘ah because of the whole truth
of his sufferings and the sufferings of his *Ahl al-Bayt*. He made me
Shi‘ah with his blood; fresh blood shed on orange gravel stones in the
land of Taff (Karbala).

He made me a Shi‘ah with the cries of newborn children and the wailing
of women. I was shouting out loudly as I remembered that day, while hot
tears were falling from my eyes because of the sorrow which I felt deep
inside my heart. With a heart torn by deep sorrow, I said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ويرثي ربابك دنيا السّجون ودمع النواح وفيض الدما
  </p>
</blockquote>

What did the enemies of al-Husayn (as) achieve, except digging their own
graves?! Their crushed bodies got buried in the annals of history in a
disgraceful and lowly manner. O Aba ‘Abd Allah! You are the greatest man
in the history of mankind! Life has become enlightened by your pure and
sweet-smelling blood!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سطعتَ بريقاً کوَمْضِ الشموس وشاعَ سناك کبر السما
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whenever I read detailed accounts about Karbala, they attracted me from
afar. Then, my breathing would quicken. I used to see al-Husayn next to
myself covered in blood. I wish I were with him so that I could attain
great success.

O how I wish I could disappear into the attraction and captivation I
feel for al-Husayn! Yes, there is someone in this place who understands
what I percieve. But, is it possible that others might not understand
what I understood and that great historical event might not leave an
impression upon him?

Yes, Karbala is the place of my entry into history and the time of my
admission into proper Islam. How can I not be attracted to this reality
like a sensitive [*raqiq al-qalb*] mystic? Or like the attraction of an
erudite person whose intelligence led him to fall in love and perish
with reality?

Yes, this is the path I came along and the road I traversed. I have
briefly mentioned the sufferings imposed upon Imam al-Husayn (as) and
the historical crimes committed against the prophets’ descendants. Now,
I would like to end my words.”[^29]

### 4. Dr. Muhammad Tijani of Tunisia

In his book entitled, “*Thumma Ahdaytu*” (Then, I was Guided), he says,
“My friend Mun‘im and I traveled together to Karbala and there I
understood the sufferings of our leader al-Husayn, like the Shi‘ahs do.
I understood that Imam al-Husayn is not dead. The people were crowding
and pressing together all around his resting place, going round it with
grief and anguish the like of which I had never seen before.

They were crying and expressing restlessness as if Imam al-Husayn had
just recently been martyred. I heard preachers who were arousing
people’s emotions by retelling the tragic event of Karbala. These
accounts made the people cry, grieve and wail. No one who hears these
accounts can endure it.

On the contrary, he spontaneously loses himself. I too cried. I cried
and cried. I cried so much that it seemed as if for years sorrow had
accumulated in my throat and it was now exploding out.

After crying, I felt peace like I had never felt before. It seemed as if
I was previously one of the enemies of Imam al-Husayn and, in a split
second, I had now transformed into one of his friends. I now felt like I
was one of the helpers and followers of the man who had sacrificed his
life, Imam al-Husayn.

I became calm. It was amazing that, at that very moment, the preacher
was narrating and explaining the story of Hurr. Hurr was one of the
soldiers who had come with the opposing army to battle Imam al-Husayn,
but suddenly, right on the battlefield, he trembled. His friends asked
him, ‘What is wrong with you?

Are you afraid to die?’ He answered, ‘I swear upon Allah! I have never
feared death, but I see before myself the option to choose either
paradise or hell.’ Suddenly, he rode his horse towards al-Husayn and
hastened to see him. He was crying as he asked, ‘O son of the Holy
Prophet! Is repentance from me acceptable?’

At that very moment, I could not bear it anymore and I threw myself down
on the ground crying and wailing. It seemed as though I was replaying
the part of Hurr and was pleading with Imam al-Husayn thus, ‘O son of
the Holy Prophet! Is repentance from me acceptable? O son of the Holy
Prophet! Overlook my sins and pardon me.’

The preacher’s voice had produced such an effect on the listeners that
it caused the people’s crying voices to become louder. My friend, who
had heard my cries, embraced me while he too cried. He held me the way a
mother holds her child, and he was repeating, ‘*Ya al-Husayn!* *Ya
al-Husayn*!’ (O al-Husayn! O al-Husayn!)

This was the moment that I understood and perceived what real crying
was. I felt as if my tears were washing my heart and cleansing my entire
body from inside. It was then that I understood the real meaning of the
Prophet’s tradition, when he used to say, ‘If you knew what I knew, then
you would surely laugh less and cry more.’

I spent the whole of that day in sorrow. My friend wanted to console me,
so he brought some cookies for me, but I had lost my appetite entirely.
I requested that my friend retell the story of Imam al-Husayn’s
martyrdom, because I did not know much about it…”[^30]

### 5. Ahmad Husayn Ya‘qub of Jordan

Ahmad Husayn Ya‘qub had traveled to Iran on the anniversary of the death
of Imam Khomeini. He says, “One of the things on my programme during the
death anniversary was to visit the shrine of Imam Khomeini. In the
morning of that day, I went to visit his shrine. I found a large number
of pilgrims.

Not less than three million men and women altogether. They had
surrounded the shrine in such a way that they seemed to form a chain.
Their hands were spread to the sky and were shouting together Persian
poetry. I asked my translator to accurately translate what those people
were saying. He said, ‘They are saying, ‘We are not like those people
who deserted and left their Imam alone. We are with you, O Imam!’’

I broke down crying and I understood that the Imam who was left alone
and was killed by the caliph’s huge army was Imam al-Husayn. On that
day, it occurred to me that I should write a book about the event of
Karbala.

I reached the conclusion that informing the people about this event was
necessary. Therefore, I dedicated a part of my time to this issue and
started reading, collecting data and keeping records of whatever I found
out in this field with the intention to publish the results…

When I was busy writing my book on this issue, there were times when I
was definitely sadder than other days. I would be affected by the events
which took place and would cry a lot during the day. What kind of man
would not cry as he passes through the varying parts of the event at
Karbala…”

Ahmad Husayn Ya‘qub is a person who possessed foresight and was guided
to the right path. He became a Shi‘ah and has written a number of books
in defence of the Shi‘ism.[^31]

### 6. ‘Allamah Dr. Muhammad Hasan Shahhatah

He is one of the professors and scholars of al-Azhar University. After a
lot of research about the Shi‘ahs, he understood the legitimate claims
of this sect and traveled to Iran. In a speech to the people of Ahwaz, a
province in Iran, he said, “My love for Imam al-Husayn was the reason
that I left all the worldly opportunities that I had.”

In another part of his speech, he said, “If you ask me, ‘Can you find
Imam al-Husayn in the east or in the west?’ I will answer you that you
will see Imam al-Husayn in my heart. Allah has also granted me the
fortune and honor that I should be favored with visiting the holy
presence of Imam al-Husayn.”[^32]

[^1]: Suwar Baghdadiyyah, pp. 145-150.

[^2]: Ibid., as narrated by Mawsu‘ah al-‘Atabat al-Muqaddasah.

[^3]: ‘Ali Pasha Salih, Adab al-Kalam, p. 199, from the book Tarikh
al-Adab al-Irani (A Literary History of Persia) by Brown, London, 1919.

[^4]: Rahbar-e Azadegan, p. 53.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 52. See also The Martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as) by
Yusuf Lalljee.

[^6]: Ibid., p. 53.

[^7]: Husayn (as), Pishva-ye Insan-ha, pp. 11-12.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 46.

[^9]: Rahbar-e Azadegan, p. 51. See also The Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire, London, 1911, vol. 5, pp. 391-392.

[^10]: Zendegi-ye Pishva-yan, pp. 84-85.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 86.

[^12]: Shahsavar-e Islam, pp. 267-268.

[^13]: George Jordaq, Al-Imam ‘Ali (as), trans. Abu al-Hasan Shahrani;
see also ‘Ali (as), the Voice of Human Justice, trans. M. Fazal Haq,
Qum: Ansariyan Publications, 1990.

[^14]: Rahbar-e Azadegan, p. 56.

[^15]: Zendegi-ye Pishva-yan, p. 87.

[^16]: Husayn (as), Pishva-ye Insan-ha, p. 30.

[^17]: Jawaharlal Nehru, Negahi be Tarikh-e Jahan, vol. 1, p. 298,
trans. Mahmud Tafadduli.

[^18]: Tarikh-e Fakhri, p. 5.

[^19]: Al-Jamili, Istishhad al-Husayn (as), p. 13.

[^20]: Husayn (as), Pishva-ye Insan-ha, pp. 37-40.

[^21]: Jurji Zaydan, Faji‘ah-ye Karbala, p. 143, trans. Muhammad ‘Ali
Shirazi.

[^22]: Dr. Hasan Ibrahim Hasan, Tarikh-e Siyasi-ye Islam, p. 352.

[^23]: Sayyid Amin, Iqna‘ al-La’im, p. 356.

[^24]: Dr. Muqaddasi, Dawr al-Manbar al-Husayni fi al-Taw‘iyah
al-Islamiyyah, pp. 112-113.

[^25]: Sa’ib ‘Abd al-Hamid, Minhaj fi al-Intima’ al-Madhhabi, pp. 31-32.

[^26]: Idris Maghribi, Laqad Shayya‘ani al-Husayn (as) (Al-Husayn made
me a Shi‘ite), pp. 63-65.

[^27]: Ibid., p. 297.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 303.

[^29]: Ibid., pp. 313-315.

[^30]: Thumma Ahdaytu (Then, I was Guided), pp. 96-98.

[^31]: Ahmad Husayn Ya‘qub, Karbala, al-Thawrah wa al-Ma’sah, pp. 7-8.

[^32]: As narrated in the Newspaper Jumhuri-ye Islami, no. 6771.


