Why Did Imam al-Husayn (as) Bring his Family to Karbala?
========================================================

Another question brought forth for discussion is why Imam al-Husayn (as)
brought his family to Karbala while he knew very well that a brutal
battle would ensue between him and the army of Kufah and that this
battle would end with his martyrdom and his family being taken into
captivity. Why would he bring his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) along on this
dangerous journey?

First response
--------------

There have been various responses provided for the above-mentioned
question. One of the answers is that it was a prevalent custom among the
Arabs of that time to bring their families and wives to the battlefield.

Objection
---------

This response does not meet the needs of our question because it brings
other questions to mind: Why did the Arabs bring their families to the
battlefield? Even if it is true that this custom did exist among the
Arabs, what benefit and gain would there be in bringing one’s household
to a battlefield?

Was it usual for Imam al-Husayn (as) to follow or imitate the customs
and social practices of the Arabs? Was Imam al-Husayn (as) not following
Allah’s decree when he brought his family and newborn children to the
battlefield?

Second response
---------------

Another answer put forward as a possibly correct response is that Imam
al-Husayn (as) knew that he bore a great divine mission on his
shoulders. The mission was to bring about social awareness and
consciousness in the Muslim *ummah*. For fulfillment, this mission had
to traverse different stages.

One of those stages was fulfilled by the martyrdom of certain
individuals. Another stage would have to reach fulfilment after the
martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as) and his companions, and was
accomplished by way of speeches and open and public display of the
oppression imposed upon Imam al-Husayn (as) and his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as)
by Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah’s government.

Only with the manifestation of this second stage does the divine mission
of Imam al-Husayn (as) become complete.

This second aspect was well fulfilled by the household of Imam al-Husayn
(as) and the captives of Karbala. Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah wanted to secure
his position and government by killing Imam al-Husayn and then later
claiming that he had only been compelled to do so because Imam al-Husayn
(as) had strayed from the religion.

It was by means of the speeches given by the captives of Karbala, led by
Imam al-Sajjad (as) and Zaynab al-Kubra, that the oppression and crimes
committed by Yazid were exposed. It was because these crimes were
publicly disclosed by the captives that Yazid could not achieve his
sinister and ominous objectives.

Imam al-Husayn (as) knew very well that if he and all his children and
companions were killed, and some of his household members were not
present to witness his martyrdom, no one would disclose the oppression
committed against him to the public.

There had to be some family members who should remain alive and be taken
into captivity so that they could disclose the oppression that was
committed against him, or all the blood which would be shed would have
been futile. This is why Imam al-Husayn (as) brought the womenfolk of
his household along with him and why this act was considered necessary.

It can therefore be said that the public speeches which were given by
the womenfolk of Imam al-Husayn’s (as) household shook the foundations
of Yazid’s government and eventually brought about its collapse.

Objection
---------

This possibility, although rational, does not completely meet the needs
of our question either because still a second question comes to mind:
Why did Imam al-Husayn (as) bring even the newborns of his household?
The duty of divulging the events of Karbala could be left to certain
older members of his household, as was done by Imam al-Sajjad (as) and
Zaynab al-Kubra, and the other women who were in Imam al-Husayn’s (as)
caravan.

There was no need to bring the children and newborns to accomplish this
duty. Therefore, this argument does not explain the entire cause for
bringing all the members of his household, although it can be cited as
one of the philosophies behind bringing his family along.

Third response
--------------

Some people, while trying to provide a response to this question, have
focused on the human tragedies of this event, and have emphasized that
Imam al-Husayn (as) intended to prove and expose Yazid’s inner self and
the crimes he had committed against Islam and the Prophet’s *Ahl
al-Bayt* (as).

That is why Imam al-Husayn (as) brought all the members of his
household, including the women and children. Even though he knew what
Yazid would do to his family members, Imam al-Husayn (as) brought them
along in order to prove the true nature and identity of Yazid and his
government. In this way, he could substantiate that Yazid was not worthy
of being the caliph for the Muslim *ummah*.

This response can also be cited as one of the causes of Imam al-Husayn’s
(as) bringing his household along, but is still not a complete reason
for this act.

Fourth response
---------------

Others say: the reason for bringing all his household members to Karbala
was that Imam al-Husayn (as) wanted to incite people to come to his
help, because when the Imam is seen with all his children and womenfolk,
his friends and supporters would be persuaded to join him out of mercy
and compassion, and the hearts of his enemies would become sympathetic.

However, this possibility does not seem correct because:

Firstly, Imam al-Husayn (as) could use other means of persuading both
his friends and enemies, like making speeches and sending
representatives to different cities and countries.

Secondly, Imam al-Husayn did not want to create a state of anxiety and
uneasiness in the *ummah*. He did not desire to obtain the people’s help
at all costs by arousing their emotions and sympathies. On the contrary,
he wanted the people to choose their way by their own volition.

Fifth response
--------------

Another answer, which is probably a better answer to this question, is
that Imam al-Husayn (as) brought his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as), womenfolk and
newborns because he was worried about them. If Imam al-Husayn (as) had
gone on his own and left his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) in Medina when he rose
up against Yazid, there was the fear that the caliphate apparatus would
arrest and imprison them.

The Imam saw it to be in everyone’s interests to take his *Ahl al-Bayt*
(as) along with him so that, on the one hand, he could keep them under
his own protection and, on the other, they could be charged with
continuing the mission by sermonizing and divulging the oppression
suffered by the pure and chaste *Ahl al-Bayt* (as). This possibility can
also be confirmed as follows:

a. When we take Yazid’s government’s way of conduct into consideration,
it is probable that Yazid would have arrested and taken the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (as) into custody.

b. On the night before the day of ‘Ashura, Imam al-Husayn (as) told all
his companions to feel free to leave him alone at Karbala, but he did
not give permission for his *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) to do the same.

c. The governor of Medina at that time was ‘Amru ibn Sa‘id Ashdaq. When
the news of Imam al-Husayn’s (as) death reached him, he rejoiced. At a
time when the whole of Medina was engulfed in sorrow and everyone was
crying and feeling miserable, he said, “This cying and weeping should be
for ‘Uthman.” And also in another speech, he severely criticized the
people for mourning over Imam al-Husayn (as), and rejoiced at their
misfortune.[^1]

Now, if the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) and womenfolk of Imam al-Husayn (as) had
remained in Medina, no one can imagine what such a vile man would have
done to them? Would he not have arrested, tortured and imprisoned them?
Sa‘id was the one who gave orders that all the houses of Bani Hashim
should be destroyed. And he was very stubborn in his enmity and hatred
of Imam ‘Ali (as).[^2]

[^1]: Muqarram, Maqtal al-Husayn (as), p. 334.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 335.


