Is Obeying a Tyranical Ruler Incumbent upon Muslims?
====================================================

One of the issues about which the Sunnis and the Imamate Shi‘ahs differ
is obedience to a corrupt ruler or submission to a tyrannical
government. Is it permissible to dismiss the caliph from office if he is
corrupt or becomes corrupt? Is it permissible to rise up in arms against
him or is it never permissible?

The Sunnis have reached consensus that the caliph cannot be dismissed
and removed from office, even if he is corrupt and perverted. Therefore,
they say it is not permissible to revolt against him. The only thing
Muslims can do is to advise him to change his corrupt ways.

In contrast, the Imamate Shi‘ahs not only regard obeying a tyrannical
and corrupt ruler not to be incumbent, but consider it to be forbidden
[*haram*] by the Islamic law to submit to such a leader. In certain
circumstances, it is obligatory [*wajib*] to rise up against a
tyrannical ruler.

In this discussion, we intend to prove the truthfulness of the Shi‘ah
standpoint.

Religious edicts [fatwas] issued by the Sunnis about obeying a corrupt and oppressive ruler
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Imam Nuwi says, “The Sunnis have reached consensus that the sultan
and caliph cannot be dismissed from office, even though he is
corrupt…”[^1]

2. Qadi ‘Ayad says, “All the Sunnis from different fields of
specialization such as Islamic jurisprudence, *hadith*, history and
theology believe that the sultan cannot be dismissed from office, even
if he is corrupt, perverted, oppressive and tramples the rule of law
underfoot.”[^2]

3. Qadi Abu Bakr Baqilani writes, “All the Sunnis believe that an *imam*
cannot be dismissed from office even if he is corrupt, oppressive, or
seizes people’s property by force. He cannot be removed from power
although he hits or slaps people in their faces and does not respect the
honor of others, and even though he tramples the rule of law underfoot.
It is not permitted to rise up against him.

The Muslims can only go so far as to advise and warn him about the
negative consequences of his actions. It is of course not binding upon
the people to obey him when he invites them to participate in his sinful
actions, but they cannot dismiss him from office. There are a number of
narrations which assert that it is incumbent to obey an *imam* and
caliph, even though he might be an oppressor or even if he forcibly
usurps and seizes people’s property. Because the Prophet (S) has said,
‘Listen to and obey your ruler, even if he is a slave with a flat nose
or an Ethiopian. Also, pray behind every person, virtuous or perverted.’
He also said, ‘Follow and obey your rulers, even if they loot your
property and break your backs’.”[^3]

However, some Sunni scholars have opposed this point of view, and
instead believe that a corrupt ruler should not be obeyed. Some of those
who have opposed obeying the corrupt ruler are Mawardi in his book
“*Al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyyah*”[^4], ‘Abd al-Qahir Baghdadi in his book
“*Usul al-Din*”[^5], Ibn Hazm Zahiri in his book “*Al-Fisal fi al-Millal
wa al-Ahwa’ wa al-Nihal*”[^6], and Jurjani in his book “*Sharh
al-Mawaqif*”.[^7]

Edicts regarding illegality of rising up against a tyrant
---------------------------------------------------------

Many Sunni scholars [‘*ulama’*] have agreed that rising up against a
corrupt ‘*imam*’ or caliph who is an oppressor is not permissible.

Among those of old, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar and Ahmad ibn Hanbal are some
of the most headstrong opposers of rising up against the Muslim caliph
even if he is an oppressor and a perverted man. Abu Bakr Marwazi
narrates that Ahmad ibn Hanbal used to advocate preventing bloodshed and
strongly denied the legitimacy of uprising against the Muslim
caliph.[^8]

Dr. ‘Atiah al-Zahrani adds a footnote at the bottom of Abu Bakr
Marwazi’s narration saying, “The chain of transmission of this narration
is correct. This is the true belief of the Salafi sect.”[^9]

Imam Nuwi, while expounding on the agreement of the Sunni scholars on
this issue, says, “According to the consensus of the scholars, rising up
against the Muslim caliph is forbidden [*haram*], even though he is
corrupt and oppressive.”[^10]

However, this claim is not correct and, as we will explain later, the
Imamate Shi‘ahs oppose it and believe that not only is obeying a corrupt
and oppressive ruler not permissible, but it is also obligatory
[*wajib*] to rise up against him under certain circumstances.

Dr. Muhammad Faruq Nahban attributes the edict [*fatwa*] which forbids
rising up against a corrupt and oppressive caliph to the majority of
Sunni scholars and says, “Sunni scholars have two opinions regarding
revolution and rising up against a tyrannical and perverted ruler:

The first opinion is that rising up against the ruler and dismissing him
from power is permissible. This opinion is held by the Mu‘tazilites, the
Khawarij, the Zaydis, and a number of sects. They even say that it is
incumbent to rise up against an oppressive ruler. They have resorted to
the following Qur’anic verses to prove their claim,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَتَعَاوَنُوا عَلَى البِرِّ وَالتَّقْوَي ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… and help one another in goodness and piety…”***[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... فَقَاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّى تَفِيءَ إِلَى أَمْرِ اللهِ
... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that
which acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah’s command…”***[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... لاَ يَنَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… My covenant does not include the unjust.”***[^13]

The second opinion is that drawing one’s sword and rising up against the
caliph is not permissible, because it brings about sedition [*fitnah*]
and bloodshed. This is the opinion held by most Sunnis and the *Rijal*
*al-Hadith*[^14] as well as a number of the Prophet’s (S) companions
like Ibn ‘Umar, Sa‘d ibn Abi Waqqas and Usamah ibn Zayd.”[^15]

Reasons put forward by the Sunnis
---------------------------------

### A. Traditions [hadiths]

In order to prove the illegality of rising up against a corrupt ruler
and the incumbency of obeying him, Sunni scholars have resorted to a
number of traditions narrated through Sunni sources. Now, we will
mention some of these *hadith*s:

1. In his book “*Al-Sahih*”, Muslim quotes from Hudhayfah that the Holy
Prophet (S) said, “There will come after me *imam*s who will not be
guided to what I have been guided, and who will not act according to my
*sunnah* (way of life). Soon it will come to pass that people will rise
up against them. Some of the people revolting will possess hearts like
those of the satans [*shayatin*] in their bodies.” Hudhayfah says, “I
asked the Noble Prophet (S), ‘What should I do, O Prophet of Allah, if I
experience such a period?’ The Noble Prophet (S) said, ‘You must listen
to the rulers. Obey them even if they break your back and take your
property by force. You should listen to the ruler and obey him’.”[^16]

2. Muslim also quotes from Ibn ‘Abbas that the Holy Prophet (S) said,
“Anyone who witnesses something from his *imam* which is displeasing to
him should exercise patience, because a person who separates himself
from the community and then dies in that state has died the death of the
Age of Ignorance [*‘asr al-jahiliyyah*].”[^17]

3. Muslim recounts another *hadith* from the Holy Prophet (S) saying,
“Anyone who turns his back for just a span on his sultan and dies in
that state has died the death of the Age of Ignorance [*‘asr
al-jahiliyyah*].”[^18]

4. Muslim narrates yet another *hadith* from ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar ibn
Khattab. He says that when the event of Harrah occurred, ‘Abd Allah ibn
‘Umar ibn Khattab used to say, “I heard the Noble Prophet say, ‘Anyone
who quits obeying his sultan will meet Allah without any plea or appeal
for themselves. And anyone who dies in a state where he has not paid
allegiance to the sultan has died the death of the Age of Ignorance
[*‘asr al-jahiliyyah*]’.”[^19]

### B. Political and social structures of Muslim affairs

In order to prove the illegality of rising up against a corrupt and
perverted ruler, some Sunni scholars have resorted to reasoning that
preserving the standing structures of Muslim affairs is the most
important duty of all, and hence rising up against the ruler will cause
sedition [*fitnah*], chaos, anarchy and bloodshed among the Muslims.

Therefore, they say it is not permissible to rise against any ruler.
Rather, it is forbidden [*haram*].

Dr. Muhammad Faruq Nahban says, “… the majority of Sunnis believe that
it is not permissible to rise up against a corrupt and oppressive ruler
because this will lead to sedition [*fitnah*] and much bloodshed…”[^20]

Incongruities in this argument
------------------------------

### A. Response regarding traditions

The belief that it is obligatory [*wajib*] to obey and follow the caliph
and sultan, even if he is corrupt and oppressive, and that rising up
against him is forbidden [*haram*], has a lot of faults and weaknesses
according to Islamic thought.

We will now mention some of those faults:

#### 1. Opposition with the explicit wording of the Holy Qur’an

It can be understood from Qur’anic verses that the Imamate and caliphate
are not bestowed upon or granted to oppressive and corrupt people, and
that if the ruler is a corrupt man, it is not at all permissible to obey
him.

a. ***“And when his Lord tried Ibrahim with certain words, he fulfilled
them. He said: Surely I will make you an imam of men. Ibrahim said: And
of my offspring? My covenant does not include the unjust: said
He.”***[^21]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَإِذِ ابْتَلَي إِبْرَاهِيمَ رَبُّهُ بِکَلِمَاتٍ فَأَتَمَّهُنَّ
قَالَ إِنِّي جَاعِلُکَ لِنَّاسِ إِمَاماً قَالَ وَمِنْ ذُرِّيتِي قَالَ
لا ينَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

b. ***“Say: Is there any of your associates who guides to the truth?
Say: Allah guides to the truth. Is He then who guides to the truth more
worthy to be followed, or he who himself does not go aright unless he is
guided? What then is the matter with you; how do you judge?”***[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... أَفَمَنْ يَهْدِي إِلَي الحَقِّ أَحَقُّ أَنْ يُتَّبَعَ أَمَّنْ
لاَ يَهِدِّي إِلاَّ أَنْ يُهْدَي فَمَا لَکُمْ کَيْفَ تَحْکُمُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

It can be deduced from this verse that a person who does not guide
towards the truth of Allah is not worthy of being followed and obeyed.

c. Some Qur’anic verses have said that submission and inclination
towards oppressors will make man taste the fire of Hell. One verse says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلا تَرْکَنُوا إِلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّکُمُ النَّارُ ...
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest the fire touch
you…”***[^23]

d. The Holy Qur’an has called a ruler who does not rule and judge
according to what Allah has revealed to be an unbeliever [*kafir*]. It
says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَمَنْ لَمْ يحْکُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللهُ فَأُولَئِکَ هُمُ
الْکَافِرُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… and whoever did not judge by what Allah revealed, those are they
that are the*** ***kafirs.”***[^24]

All Muslims agree that obeying and following an unbeliever is not
permissible.

#### 2. These hadiths are opposed to Qur’anic verses which prove that it is forbidden to follow and obey sinners

There are a lot of verses in the Holy Qur’an which have unconditionally
and generally (in such a way that no limitations are mentioned)
forbidden obeying anyone who is well-known for sin, regardless of
whether he is a caliph, sultan and *imam* or otherwise.

a. Allah, the Exalted says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَلا تُطِعِ المُکَذِّبِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So do not yield to the rejecters.”***[^25]

**b.** ***“And yield not to any mean swearer.”***[^26]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تُطِعْ کُلَّ حَلّاَّفٍ مَهِينٍ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**c.** ***“And be not compliant to the unbelievers and the
hypocrites.”***[^27]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تُطِعِ الکَافِرِينَ وَالمُنَافِقِينَ ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**d.** ***“And do not obey the bidding of the extravagant.”***[^28]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تُطِيعُوا أَمْرَ المُسرِفِينَ \* الَّذِينَ يفْسِدُونَ فِي
الأَرْضِ وَلاَ يُصْلِحُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**e.** ***“Therefore wait patiently for the command of your Lord, and
obey not*** ***from among them a sinner or an ungrateful one.”***[^29]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ فَاصْبِر لِحُکْمِ رَبِّکَ وَلاَ تُطِعْ مِنْهُمْ آثمِاً أَوْ کَفُوراً
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**f.** ***“And do not follow him whose heart we have made unmindful to
Our remembrance, and he follows his low desires and his case is one in
which due bounds are exceeded.”***[^30]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ ... وَلا تُطِعْ مَنْ أَغْفَلْنَا قَلْبَهُ عَنْ ذِکْرِنَا وَاتَّبَعَ
هَوَاهُ وَکَانَ أَمْرُهُ فُرُطاًَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**g.** ***“On the day when their faces shall be turned back into the
fire, they shall say: O would that we had obeyed Allah and obeyed the
Apostle! And they shall say: O our Lord! Surely we obeyed our leaders
and our great men, so they led us astray from the path; O our Lord! Give
them a double punishment and curse them with a great curse.”***[^31]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ يومَ تُقَلَّبُ وُجُوهُهُمْ فِي النَّارِ يقُولُونَ يا لَيْتَنَا
أَطَعْنَا اللهِ وَأَطَعْنَا الرَّسُولا \* وَقَالُوا رَبَّنَا إِنَّا
أَطَعْنَا سَادَتَنَا وَکُبَرَاءَنَا فَأَضَلُّونَا السَّبِيلا \*
رَبَّنَا آتِهِمْ ضِعْفَيْنِ مِنَ الْعَذَابِ وَالْعَنْهُمْ لَعْناً
کَبِيراً ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

**h.** ***“And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest the fire
touch you, and you have no guardians besides Allah, then you shall not
be helped.”***[^32]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلاَ تَرْکَنُوا إِلَى الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا فَتَمَسَّکُمُ النَّارُ ...
﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

#### 3. These hadiths are opposed to the Qur’anic verses which prove that enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is incumbent upon Muslims

In the Holy Qur’an, Allah, the Exalted, has ordered people in general or
specific ways that they should enjoin the good and forbid the evil. This
generality covers all people from all walks of life, the rulers and the
ruled alike. Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil [*amr
bi’l-ma‘ruf wa nahy ‘an al-munkar*] takes various forms, among them:

Allah, the Exalted, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَلتَکُنْ مِنْکُمْ أُمَّةٌ يَدْعُونَ إِلَى الخَيْرِ وَيَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْمَعرُوفِ وَيَنْهَونَ عَنِ المُنْکَرِ وَأُولئِکَ هُمُ
المُفْلِحُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And from among you there should be a party who invite to good and
enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong, and these it is that shall be
successful.”***[^33]

And, He also says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ کُنْتُمْ خَيْرَ أُمَّةٍ أُخْرِجَتْ لِلنّاسِ تَأْمُرُونَ
بِالمَعْرُوفِ وَتَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ المُنْکَرِ وَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِاللهِ ... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You are the best of nations raised up for the benefit of mankind;
you enjoin what is right and forbid the wrong and believe in
Allah...”***[^34]

And He also says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لُعِنَ الَّذينَ کَفَرُوا مِنْ بَني إِسْرائيلَ عَلي لِسانِ داوُدَ
وَعيسَى ابْنِ مَرْيَمَ ذلِکَ بِما عَصَوا وَکانُوا يَعْتَدُونَ \*
کانُوا لا يَتَناهَونَ عَنْ مُنْکَرٍ فَعَلُوهُ لَبِئْسَ ما کانُوا
يَفْعَلُونَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who disbelieved from among the children of Israel were cursed
by the tongue of David and Jesus, son of Mary; this was because they
disobeyed and used to exceed the limit. They used not to forbid each
other the hateful things they did; certainly evil was that which they
did.”***[^35]

#### 4. These hadiths are opposed to other hadiths narrated by the Sunnis themselves

This belief is opposed to another set of *hadith*s which have been
recounted in Sunni sources. This other set of *hadith*s forbids
following a corrupt and perverted ruler.

It also must be taken into account that:

Firstly, every *hadith* must be compared with the Holy Qur’an; if it is
opposed with the verses of the Holy Qur’an, it cannot be considered
authentic because all Muslims believe the Holy Qur’an to be completely
authentic and unchanged.

In addition, from the previous section we can see that the *hadith*s
which say that it is incumbent to obey a corrupt ruler are opposed to
the verses of the Holy Qur’an; therefore, they are not acceptable.

Secondly, there is obvious contradiction and disagreement between
*hadith*s which prohibit following a corrupt ruler and those which say
that it is incumbent to follow the Muslim ruler whether he is corrupt or
not. In accordance with the law of incongruity, the final judge is
Allah’s Book, the Holy Qur’an.

When faced with such a dilemma as having discrepancies in the wordings
of *hadith*s, we act upon those *hadith*s which are in accordance with
the Holy Qur’an and reject those *hadith*s which disagree with the Book
of Allah. In this case, it means we must follow the *hadith*s which have
forbidden obeying and following a corrupt ruler.

Thirdly, if there are no contradictions between *hadith*s and hence
there is no seeming need to refer to the Holy Qur’an, we still must
suspend all the *hadith*s and only refer to the general verses of the
Holy Qur’an if they prohibit obeying a corrupt leader.

We will now mention a few *hadith*s which have been recounted in Sunni
sources of *hadith* prohibiting obedience to a corrupt leader.

a. Allah’s Prophet (S) said, “The spinning wheel of Islam is soon to
roll. Wherever the Holy Qur’an is, you must revolve around it. A day
shall come when sultans and the Holy Qur’an will be separated from each
other. With all certainty, soon it will come to pass that kings will
rule over you.

They will judge for themselves in one way and for others in another way.
If you obey them, they will mislead you. If you do not follow them they
will kill you.” The people asked, “O Prophet of Allah! What should we do
if we experience that period?” The Noble Prophet (S) said, “You should
be like Jesus’ followers, whose bodies were cut to pieces or they were
hung to death, but they never followed the corrupt rulers. Death in the
way of obedience to Allah is better than life in sin.”[^36]

b. ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar says, “Allah’s Prophet (S) said, ‘It is
incumbent upon every Muslim man to follow his caliph in things he likes
and things he dislikes, except when he is ordered to sin. In this case,
obeying the caliph is not permissible’.”[^37]

c. ‘Abd Allah ibn Mas‘ud says, “Allah’s Prophet (S) said, ‘Soon it will
come to pass after me that custodians who will extinguish the *sunnah*
and act according to their own innovations will take charge of your
affairs.

They will delay the prayers from being said at their right times.’ I
asked, ‘O Prophet of Allah! What should I do if I experience that
period?’ He said, ‘Are you asking me what you ought to do, O son of Umm
‘Abd!? A person who commits sins against Allah is not supposed to be
followed or obeyed’.”[^38]

#### 5. These hadiths are opposed to hadiths of the Ahl al-Bayt (as)

a. In interpreting the Qur’anic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ لاَ ينَالُ عَهْدِي الظَّالِمِينَ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“My covenant does not include the unjust: said He.”***[^39]

Suyuti quotes ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (as) saying, “Obedience is only in good
and virtuous acts.”

b. Tabari and other historians narrate that while Imam al-Husayn (as)
was on his way towards Kufah, he stopped at Baydah’s house. There, he
addressed the people in this way, “O People! Allah’s Prophet (S) said,
‘Any person who sees an oppressive sultan making illegal that which is
lawful [*halal*], breaking Allah’s covenant, opposing the *sunnah* of
Allah’s Prophet (S), conducting himself in a sinful and tyrannical way
among Allah’s servants (the people) and does not speak out against such
a sultan in order to bring about change; it becomes binding upon Allah
to throw this apathetic person where he belongs, in Hell’.”[^40]

c. Tabari and other historians narrate that in his reply to the letter
which the people had written to him, al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) wrote, “I
swear upon my own soul! No one is an *imam*, unless he acts according to
the Book of Allah, and is equitable and just. He does what is right, and
restrains his passions for the sake of Allah.”[^41]

d. Tabari and other historians have also narrated that al-Husayn ibn
‘Ali (as) addressed Walid in this way, “O Amir! We are the *Ahl al-Bayt*
of the Holy Prophet, the abode of the prophetic mission, the place of
frequentation of the angels, and the place of divine revelation. It is
through us that Allah begins and ends things. Yazid is a drinker of wine
and a killer of innocent people. He publicly commits sins and
immorality; a person such as I cannot pay allegiance to him.”[^42]

#### Who is Imam al-Husayn (as)?

Imam al-Husayn (as) is a person who, according to the explicit wording
of the Qur’anic Verse of Purification [*ayah al-tathir*], is infallible
[*ma‘sum*]. Allah’s Prophet (S) said this about him,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الحسن والحسين سيدا شباب اهل الجنة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the two leaders of the youths of
Paradise.”[^43]

The Holy Prophet (S) also said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«حسين منّي وأنا من حسين.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Al-Husayn is from me and I am from al-Husayn.”[^44]

Elsewhere, he said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«خير رجالکم علي بن أبي طالب، وخير شبابکم الحسن والحسين، وخير نساءکم
فاطمة بنت محمد.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The best man among you is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. The best youths among you
are al-Hasan and al-Husayn. The best woman among you is Fatimah, the
daughter of Muhammad.”[^45]

Ibn ‘Abbas says, “The Holy Prophet (S) said, ‘On the night that I went
on the ascension [*mi‘raj*], I saw it written in heaven,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا إله إلاّ الله، محمّد رسول الله، علي حبّ (حبيب) الله، الحسن والحسين
صفوة الله، فاطمة أمَة الله (خيرة الله)، على باغضهم لعنة الله.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is his Prophet, ‘Ali is Allah’s
beloved, al-Hasan and al-Husayn are Allah’s chosen ones and Fatimah is
Allah’s servant. Allah’s curse and wrath be upon anyone who harbors
hatred in their heart for them’.”[^46]

#### The reality behind hadiths that permit obeying a corrupt ruler

The presence of so many *hadith*s (traditions) in Shi‘ah and Sunni books
which forbid obeying a corrupt and perverted ruler points to the fact
that the other set of *hadith*s, which contradict these *hadith*s and
the Holy Qur’an and permit following a corrupt leader and forbid rising
up against him, are all fabrications.

These *hadith*s were forged by the dynasties of Bani Umayyah and Bani
‘Abbas for the sake of justifying their perverted and oppressive ways of
conduct. They fabricated these *hadith*s in order to preserve the
people’s loyalty to themselves and encourage the masses to follow the
rulers’ orders no matter what the circumstances. They intended to
prevent any kind of uprising against their dynasties by the people, so
they were left with no option but to invent false *hadith*s.

It is regrettable that some scholars chose to record these forged
*hadith*s in their books without considering their contents and
comparing these sayings with the verses of the Holy Qur’an and other
*hadith*s.

Unfortunately, as a result, some jurisprudents have issued religious
edicts [*fatwa*s] based on these fabricated *hadith*s that have caused
great harm to the Muslim *ummah*. It must be borne in mind that if an
enemy desires to forge a *hadith*, it is possible to fabricate chains of
transmission which are ‘correct’.

### B. Response to the false claim that it is binding upon all Muslims to preserve the system

That which can be inferred from the reasons put forward by those who
oppose rising up against a corrupt and perverted caliph is that
preserving political and social structures of the Muslims is binding and
incumbent [*wajib*]. However, it has to be borne in mind that preserving
any kind of power structure is not *wajib*.

The only political system that must be preserved is an Islamic
government whose leader is just and acts according to Allah’s orders as
noted in Qur’anic verses. This kind of government and its ruler must be
preserved. There is no reason to oppose such a government. However, if
the political system rules ‘in the name of Islam’ but its leaders are
corrupt and perverted, then preserving such a power structure is not
*wajib* at all.

On the contrary, an uprising must take place in order to establish an
Islamic political system and exterminate a corrupt and oppressive
political system. That is exactly what Imam al-Husayn (as) did: he rose
up against the corrupt and oppressive political system of Yazid, the son
of Mu‘awiyah, and kept true Islam alive.

[^1]: Nuwi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, vol. 12, p. 229.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Baqilani, Al-Tamhid.

[^4]: Al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyah, p. 17.

[^5]: Usul al-Din, p. 190, 278.

[^6]: Al-Fisal fi al-Millal wa al-Ahwa’ wa al-Nihal, vol. 4, p. 175.

[^7]: Sharh al-Mawaqif, vol. 8, p. 353.

[^8]: Al-Sunnah, vol. 1, p. 131

[^9]: Ibid., hashiyah.

[^10]: Nuwi, Sharh Sahih Muslim, vol. 12, p. 229.

[^11]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:2.

[^12]: Surat al-Hujurat 49:9.

[^13]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:124.

[^14]: Those who interpreted the hadiths literally, and did not believe
in esoteric meanings of the hadiths. [trans.]

[^15]: Nizam al-Hukm fi al-Islam, pp. 527-529.

[^16]: Muslim, Al-Sahih, Kitab al-Amarah, Bab al-Amr bi-Luzum
al-Jama‘ah, section [bab] 13, hadith 52.

[^17]: Ibid., hadith 55; Sahih Bukhari, Kitab al-Fitan, hadith 6530.

[^18]: Ibid., hadith 56.

[^19]: Ibid., hadith 58.

[^20]: Nizam al-Hukm fi al-Islam, p. 527.

[^21]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:124.

[^22]: Surat Yunus 10:35.

[^23]: Surat Hud 11:113.

[^24]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:44.

[^25]: Surat al-Qalam 68:8.

[^26]: Surat al-Qalam 68:10.

[^27]: Surat al-Ahzab 33:48.

[^28]: Surat al-Shu‘ara’ 26:151,152.

[^29]: Surat Insan (or Jathiyah) 76:24.

[^30]: Surat al-Kahf 18:28.

[^31]: Surat al-Ahzab 33:66-68.

[^32]: Surat Hud 11:113.

[^33]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:104.

[^34]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:110.

[^35]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:78-79.

[^36]: Durr al-Manthur, vol. 3, p. 125; Similar hadith in: Kanz
al-‘Ummal, hadith 1081.

[^37]: Sahih Bukhari, Kitab al-Ahkam, Bab al-Sam‘ wa al-Ta‘ah, vol. 3.

[^38]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, vol. 2, p. 956; Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Al-Musnad,
vol. 1, p. 400.

[^39]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:124.

[^40]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 7, p. 300; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 280; Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 3, p. 171.

[^41]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 7, p. 235; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 267.

[^42]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 7, pp. 216-218; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi
al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 263.

[^43]: Ibn ‘Asakir, Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, section [bab] Imam
al-Husayn (as), p. 41.

[^44]: Ibid., p. 80.

[^45]: Ibid., p. 122.

[^46]: Ibid., p. 130.


