What is the Ruling Regarding the Fast of ‘Ashura?
=================================================

There are deep and intense divisions among jurisprudents about fasting
on the day of ‘Ashura. Some jurisprudents believe that it is highly
recommended to fast on the day of ‘Ashura. Others say it is prohibited
[*haram*] to fast on the day of ‘Ashura and some believe that fasting on
the day of ‘Ashura is disapproved but not absolutely prohibited.

There are also other questions related to this issue. For example, has
the fast of ‘Ashura been enacted or legalized for the sake of appeasing
and being in agreement with the Jews? Was it enacted before the fast of
the holy month of Ramadan and later suspended when the fast of Ramadan
was enacted?

Did the Holy Prophet (S) and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) ever fast on the day
of ‘Ashura? Did Bani Umayyah put emphasis on this fast to show their
happiness and pleasure? These are some of the questions that will be
discussed in this chapter.

Enacting and enforcing the fast of ‘Ashura before the fast of the holy month of Ramadan
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jurisprudents differ in their opinions about whether the judgement of
the fast of the day of ‘Ashura was enacted before the Qur’anic verse
which enacted the fast of the holy month of Ramadan and whether it was
obligatory [*wajib*] to fast on that day or not.

According to certain opinions put forth by some Shi‘ah scholars and the
purport of some Islamic traditions, the first possibility is that it was
*wajib* to fast on the day of ‘Ashura before the Qur’anic verse enacting
the fast of the holy month of Ramadan was revealed. Also, some Sunnis,
among them Abu HHanifah, believe that it was *wajib* to fast on the day
of ‘Ashura.

The Shafi‘i sect apparently believe that it was not *wajib* to fast on
the day of ‘Ashura. Two opinions have been quoted from Shafi‘i and two
*hadith*s have been quoted by Ahmad. We will now mention some of the
opinions expressed by jurisprudents belonging to different sects.

Opinions put forth by Shi‘ah scholars
-------------------------------------

1. The renowned researcher Muhaqqiq Qummi says, “What can be deduced
from the wording of *hadith*s is that apparently the fast of the day of
‘Ashura was enacted before the fast of Ramadan and was later
abandoned.”[^1]

2. Sayyid ‘Amili writes, “There are a lot of differing opinions about
fasting on the day of ‘Ashura. Was it *wajib* or was it not? That which
has been recorded in our *hadith*s is that fasting on the day of ‘Ashura
was *wajib* before the enactment of fasting in the holy month of
Ramadan. Among the people who narrated these *hadith*s are Zurarah and
Muhammad ibn Muslim.”[^2]

3. Allamah Majlisi relates from the book, “*Al-Muntaqi*” that in the
first year of migration to Medina, Allah’s Prophet (S) fasted on ‘Ashura
and the other people followed suit.”[^3]

Upon study of the sayings of the Shi‘ah scholars, we infer that they
have not put forward a definite opinion about fasting on the day of
‘Ashura. They have contented themselves with narrating the differences
which exist among the scholars and in *hadith*s. Only the renowned
researcher Muhaqqiq Qummi has cited *hadith*s that apparently indicate
the necessity of fasting on this day.

The opinions of Sunni jurisprudents
-----------------------------------

1. Qadi ‘Ayni says, “They have differed about the judgement of fasting
during the early days of Islam. Abu Hanifah has said that it was *wajib*
to fast on the day of ‘Ashura in the past. Shafi‘i’s companions have
given two opinions: the most famous opinion is that it was highly
recommended [*mustahabb-e mu’akkad*] right from the beginning of Islam
and Islamic law and never has it been *wajib* for the Islamic *ummah*.

After the revelation of the Qur’anic verse enacting the fast of Ramadan,
it remained *mustahabb*, but lost the recommendation and emphasis it
enjoyed before. The second opinion of Shafi‘i’s companions is similar to
that of Abu Hanifah.

‘Ayad has said that some predecessors used to believe that this fast was
*wajib* and remained *wajib* without any abrogation even after the verse
enacting the fast of Ramadan, but supporters of this opinion have been
weakened and vanquished and hence common consensus is that this fast is
not *wajib*, and they maintain that it is *mustahabb*.”[^4]

2. Ibn Qudamah says, “There are differing opinions about the fast of the
day of ‘Ashura as to whether it was *wajib* or not. Qadi says that it
was *wajib* and this is as a result of religious deduction and
conclusion. He has deduced this using two rationales. It has also been
quoted from Ahmad ibn Hanbal that the fast of the day of ‘Ashura was
*wajib*.”[^5]

3. Kasani writes, “The fast of the day of ‘Ashura was *wajib* during
those days.”[^6]

4. ‘Asqalani says, “It can be deduced from the total sum of reported
*hadith*s that this fast was *wajib*.” After this, he has listed six
reasons to support and prove his claim.[^7]

A critique of ‘Asqalani’s statements
------------------------------------

Ibn Hajar writes, “In matters where Allah’s command and law had not yet
been revealed, the Holy Prophet (S) preferred to follow the Jewish ways,
especially in matters where the Jews were opposed to the ways of the
idol-worshipers.”[^8]

### Problem

This claim is opposed to *hadith*s quoted from the Holy Prophet (S)
because he said the following about opposing the Jews,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«صوموا عاشوراء وخالفوا فيه اليهود.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Fast on the day of ‘Ashura and by doing so oppose the Jews.”[^9]

Also, Ya‘la ibn Shaddad narrates that he heard from his father that Holy
Prophet (S) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«صلّوا في نعالکم وخالفوا اليهود.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Pray your prayers in your slippers and in this way oppose the
Jews.”[^10]

And it has been reported in another *hadith* that the Holy Prophet (S)
said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تشبّهوا باليهود.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not resemble the Jews in any way.”[^11]

In light of the above traditions, it cannot be claimed that the fast of
the day of ‘Ashura was enacted for the sake of imitating or resembling
the Jews.

### Jews and fasting on the day of ‘Ashura

When we study history, we come to know that the Jews organized their
traditions around their own calendar. The Jews had their own months
which did not coincide with the Islamic calendar. There is no logic in
saying that they ‘fasted on the 10th of Muharram’, unless it could be
proven that this date always coincided with the Jewish day of fast.
Their fasting did not take place every year on the day of ‘Ashura and
certainly not in the holy month of Muharram.

Apparently, the tradition of the Jews at the time of the Holy Prophet
(S) was that on the 10th of the month of Tishri of the Jewish calendar,
Yom Kippur, the Jews observed a fast. They say God delivered Moses and
his people and drowned Pharaoh and his forces on that day. It cannot be
said, however, that Pharaoh was drowned on the day of ‘Ashura.

On the contrary, these events are said to have taken place on the 10th
of Tishri which does not correspond to the day of ‘Ashura. Therefore,
that which has been said about the fast of ‘Ashura having its roots in
Judaism and that it has been imported from the Jews is baseless and not
founded on truth.

Abu Rayhan says, “Tishri lasts thirty days… and on the tenth day of that
month, the Jews start their fast of Yom Kippur, which some call ‘Ashura.
This fast carries more virtues for the Jews than the other fasts. That
is why it is *wajib*.”[^12]

Hasan ibn ‘Ali Saqqaf Shafi‘i says, “We do not find any evidence to
prove that the Jews used to fast or hold a festival on the tenth of
Muharram. There is no written historical evidence to suggest this. On
the contrary, they used to fast on the tenth of Tishri.”[^13]

He also says, “The Jews have their own special calendar which has very
apparent differences with the Islamic calendar. This calendar begins
with the month of Tishri, which is followed by the month of Heshvan, and
ends with the twelfth month called Elul…

The number of days in a normal year is either 353 or 354 or 355 days.
However, in a leap year, the number of days is either 383 or 384 or 385.
And therefore, the calendar that is now observed by the Jews is such
that the months are lunar but the years are solar.”[^14]

About the Arab calendar that was used before the Islamic calendar came
into effect, Mahmud Pasha Falaki says, “It can be gathered and deduced
from history that the Arab Jews also had ‘Ashura, but their ‘Ashura was
on the tenth of Tishri which is the first month of their calendar
according to Jewish civil law and the eighteenth month of their
religious calendar. Also, the Jews follow a solar calendar.

Therefore, the day of ‘Ashura on which Pharaoh was drowned is not at all
connected to Muharram. In addition to that, it was merely accidental
that it coincided with the Holy Prophet’s (S) entry into Medina.”[^15]

The verdict of fasting on the day of ‘Ashura
--------------------------------------------

There is a number of *hadith*s that have mentioned the fast of ‘Ashura:

With recourse to Shi‘ah sources of *hadith*s, we come to know that it
has been narrated in some *hadith*s that the one who quits this fast has
to atone and expiate for his actions for up to one year. It has also
been reported that the Holy Prophet (S) himself used to fast on the day
of ‘Ashura, and strongly advised everyone, even children, to fast on
that day.

This demonstrates and proves that the day of ‘Ashura and its fast are
overflowing with heavenly blessings.[^16]

In other reported *hadith*s, the opposite has been narrated; that is to
say, the fasting on the day of ‘Ashura has been forbidden and is one of
the prohibited actions. Some other *hadith*s say it is an act of
innovation, and fasting on that day is not a part of the religion.

Others have gone so far as to say that the reward of fasting on the day
of ‘Ashura is the fire of Hell. It has been reported in other *hadith*s
that the Holy Prophet never used to fast on that day.

As regards the conduct of the Infallible Imams (as), it is important to
mention that no *hadith* has reached us suggesting that they or their
companions used to fast on the day of ‘Ashura. If fasting on this day
were *mustahabb*, the Infallibles would not fail to fast on that
day.[^17]

The *hadith*s which have been recorded in Sunni books regarding this
issue are also varied. The meaning of many of these *hadith*s is that it
is highly recommended [*mustahabb-e mu’akkad*] to observe the fast of
‘Ashura.

However, another group of *hadith*s contradict the first, in the sense
that they say that the Holy Prophet (S) never used to fast on that day
and never at all ordered anyone to fast on that day after the Qur’anic
verse enacting the fasting of the month of Ramadan.[^18]

Hadiths which prevent fasting on the day of ‘Ashura
---------------------------------------------------

1. On his own chain of transmission Shaykh Saduq narrates that Imam
al-Baqir (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«کان صومه قبل شهر رمضان، فلمّا نزل شهر رمضان ترك.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The fast of the day of ‘Ashura used to be observed before the Qur’anic
verse about the fast of the holy month of Ramadan, but after that it was
discontinued.”[^19]

2. Kulayni on his own chain of transmission narrates from both Imam
al-Baqir (as) and Imam al-Sadiq (as) that they said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تصم في عاشوراء، ولا عرفة بمکة، ولا في المدينة، ولا في وطنك، ولا في
مصر من الامصار.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“On the days of ‘Ashura and ‘Arafah, do not fast whether you are in
Medina, your hometown, or any other city.”[^20]

3. Kulayni has also narrated that he asked Imam al-Baqir (as) about
fasting on the day of ‘Ashura. Answering his question, Imam al-Baqir
(as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«صوم متروك بنزول شهر رمضان، والمتروك بدعة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“This is a fast which was discontinued after the Qur’anic verse enacting
the fast of the holy month of Ramadan was revealed. Doing that which is
abandoned is an act of innovation.”[^21]

The narrator (Kulayni) says, “I asked this same question from Imam
al-Sadiq’s (as) father, too. He gave the same answer as Imam al-Sadiq
(as) and added,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«أما انّه صوم يوم ما نزل به کتاب، ولا جرت به سنّة، الاّ سنّة آل زياد
بقتل الحسين بن علي.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Beware! This is a fast about which no Qur’anic verse has been revealed
and is not an observed way of conduct. It was only the way of conduct
for the partisans of Ziyad when they killed al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as)’.”

4. Kulayni again on his own chain of transmission narrates that ‘Abd
al-Malik said, “I asked Imam al-Sadiq (as) about fasting on the ninth
day of Muharram and the day of ‘Ashura. Imam al-Sadiq said, ‘The ninth
day is the day when al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) and his companions got
besieged and surrounded by the enemy.

It was the day that the mounted soldiers of Sham were enlisted and
brought to Karbala where they camped. Ibn Marjanah and ‘Umar ibn Sa‘d
were very pleased because of the great numbers of mounted soldiers and
considered al-Husayn (as) and his companions as weak. They believed that
no help would come for al-Husayn (as) because the people of Iraq would
not help him.

O my Father! May I be sacrificed for you, O you who were oppressed in a
foreign land!’ Then, Imam al-Sadiq continued, ‘However, the day of
‘Ashura is the day when al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) fell to the ground (was
martyred) along with all his companions. Should fasting be observed on
such a day? Never at all!

I swear upon the Lord of the Sacred House (the *Ka‘bah*)! Such a day is
not a day for fasting. That day is only reserved for sorrow and mourning
that has been inflicted on the inhabitants of the skies and the earth
altogether. It is a day of happiness and pleasure for the son of
Marjanah and Ibn Ziyad’s partisans and the people of Sham.

Allah’s curse be on them and their offspring. The day of ‘Ashura is a
day when all the tombs and mausoleums of the earth except the tombs of
Sham cry for al-Husayn. Therefore, Allah will unite on the Day of
Resurrection anyone who fasts on that day or looks upon that day as a
day of celebration with Ibn Ziyad and his partisans, discontent with a
transformed heart…’”[^22]

5. Kulayni also quotes from Ja‘far ibn ‘Isa that he said, “I asked Imam
al-Rida (as) about fasting on the day of ‘Ashura. I also asked his
opinion about what people say about this fast. The Imam (as) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«عن صوم ابن مرجانة تسألني.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘You are asking me about the fast of the son of Marjanah?’”[^23]

6. On his own chain of transmission, Kulayni quotes from Zayd Narsi that
he said, “I heard ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Zurarah asking Imam al-Sadiq about
fasting on the day of ‘Ashura. Imam al-Sadiq (as) replied saying,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«من صامه کان حظّه من صيام ذلك اليوم حظّ ابن مرجانة وآل زياد.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘The reward for anyone fasting on that day will be given to the son of
Marjanah and Ibn Ziyad’s partisans’.”[^24]

Zayd says, “I asked what the reward of fasting on that day is.’ The Imam
(as) replied,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«النار، اعاذنا الله من النار، ومن عمل يقرب من النار.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The Fire, may Allah save us from the Fire. Anyone who fasts on the day
of ‘Ashura has made himself nearer to the Fire.”[^25]

Preference for traditions which prevent fasting on ‘Ashura
----------------------------------------------------------

Although the chains of transmission of *hadith*s which denote that
fasting on the day of ‘Ashura is prohibited have been disputed by some
jurisprudents, we can nonetheless vindicate them and make up for their
weak forms and aspects:

1. These *hadith*s have been recorded in reliable and credible books.
Naraqi is quoted to have said, “The weaknesses of chains of transmission
for these *hadith*s cannot prevent us from utilizing them because these
*hadith*s have been recorded in authoritative and credible books,
especially those that are situated among authentic *hadith*s.”[^26]

2. These *hadith*s are common; perhaps they are even close to a state of
successive transmition. Sayyid ‘Ali Tabataba’i writes, “Texts that
exhort and encourage fasting on the day of ‘Ashura, because of the
weaknesses of their chains of transmission and the absence of someone to
put them to general practical application, contradict many *hadith*s.
These are contradictory *hadith*s that are near to successive
transmission; as such it is not at all possible to act upon them even
out of laxity…”[^27]

3. *Hadith*s which prevent fasting on the day of ‘Ashura have credible
chains of transmission because Shaykh Tusi has proven that there is
opposition and discrepancy between these *hadith*s and *hadith*s that
encourage and exhort fasting on the day of ‘Ashura. This denotes the
credibility of *hadith*s which prevent fasting on the day of ‘Ashura
because contradictions are secondary to the credibility and
dependability of the chain of transmission.

4. *Hadith*s which prevent fasting on the day of ‘Ashura are very
credible because they conform with the way of life of the Infallibles
(as) and their companions and also the way of life of all those
committed and faithful to the religion.

In conclusion, it is preferable to avoid fasting on the day of ‘Ashura.

The aversion of fasting on the day of ‘Ashura
---------------------------------------------

Some contemporary Shi‘ah jurisprudents have issued religious edicts
[*fatwa*s] that fasting on the day of ‘Ashura is undesirable [*makruh*]
but not absolutely prohibited [*haram*]. Other Shi‘ah jurisprudents,
such as Bahrani and Majlisi, have gone so far as to say that it is
*haram* to fast on the day of ‘Ashura.

We will now examine the proofs put forward as reasons for the abhorrence
[*kirahat*] of fasting on the day of ‘Ashura:

1. Fasting on the day of ‘Ashura was a way of life for the enemies of
Islam and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) which Muslims should not revive and
imitate.

2. *Hadith*s which denote the permissibility or even the incumbency of
fasting on the day of ‘Ashura can be interpreted as staying hungry as a
result of deep sorrow on the day of ‘Ashura, not for the sake of ritual
fasting, and/or can be interpreted as instances of dissimulation
[*taqiyyah*].

3. Fasting on the day of ‘Ashura was not customary among the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (as) and their companions. It was not their way of life.

4. We interpret the *hadith*s that appear to prohibit fasting on the day
of ‘Ashura to denote abhorrence, not absolute prohibition, because there
is unity of conjecture and analogy between them and those *hadith*s
which prohibit fasting on the day of ‘Ashura, especially that some of
those prohibitive *hadith*s appear to denote abhorrence.

Many Shi‘ah jurisprudents have issued religious edicts that it is
recommended [*mustahabb*] to abstain from food from morning up to
mid-afternoon on ‘Ashura, but not with the intention of fasting. Among
those who have issued this *fatwa* are Shahid Thani[^28], Muhaqqiq
Kurki[^29], ‘Allamah Hilli[^30], Muhaqqiq Ardabili[^31], Shahid
Awwal[^32], Shaykh Baha’i[^33], Sabzevari[^34], Fayd Kashani[^35], Hurr
‘Amili[^36], Majlisi[^37], Kashif al-Ghita’[^38], Naraqi[^39], Muhaqqiq
Qummi[^40], and others.

‘Ashura, a festival for Bani Umayyah
------------------------------------

Bani Umayyah not only opposed holding mourning ceremonies for the Doyen
of Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn (as), but they also went so far as to
introduce it as a day for festivities and happy celebrations. They did
this as a practical measure of opposing mourning for Imam al-Husayn
(as).

Abu Rayhan Biruni writes, “Muslims believed that it was ominous and a
cause of bad omens to burn tents or cause fires, carry the heads of dead
people on spears, making horses race or run over dead bodies on the day
of ‘Ashura because that was the day when the child of the Holy Prophet
was killed.

These ominous actions have never at all occurred in the history of
mankind, even among the most corrupt and perverted peoples. However,
Bani Umayyah used to decorate and adorn themselves and hold festivities
on the day of ‘Ashura. They used to invite guests to participate in
their happy celebrations.

This custom was prevalent during their reign, and continued to exist
even after their decline. On the other hand, the Shi‘ahs used to mourn
and weep and visit the holy land, Karbala, where Imam al-Husayn (as) was
killed.”[^41]

Maqrizi writes, “The ‘Alavis, followers of Imam‘Ali (as), in Egypt used
to mourn and cry on the day of ‘Ashura. After the fall of the Fatimids
and their government, the Ayyubis ascended to power and started holding
joyful celebrations in the same way and custom as the Shamis.

This vile custom was established by Hajjaj ibn Yusuf during the reign of
‘Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan for the sake of opposing the Shi‘ahs of ‘Ali
(as) who used to mourn and express sorrow on the day of ‘Ashura.” Then,
he adds, “I myself have experienced and witnessed the celebrations held
by the Ayyubis.”[^42]

Ibn Hajar Haythami says, “The first person who instituted and
inaugurated celebrations on the day of ‘Ashura was Hajjaj ibn Yusuf
Thaqafi. He did this in the presence of ‘Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan and a
number of the Holy Prophet’s (S) companions and *tabi‘in*. It was then
that it was announced that remembering al-Husayn (as) and his
afflictions in sermons was forbidden [*haram*].[^43]

Hasan ibn ‘Ali Saqqaf Shafi‘i says, “In the book called, “*Al-Amir*”,
Makiyafilli has written about these issues and derived the contents of
this book from facts regarding political survival. One of the strategies
for political survival that he has adapted is the logic that “the end
justifies the means”.

According to this principle, it is permissible for political leaders to
bury the event of ‘Ashura for the sake of achieving their political
aims; even though this is inconsistent with religion and acceptable
moral standards; they have tried to extinguish the fire of ‘Ashura and
have endeavored to bury the event of Karbala in this manner.

It is for this same reason that they resorted to fabricating and forging
*hadith*s and attributing them to al-Husayn’s (as) ancestor, the Holy
Prophet (S). Because the government propaganda apparatus was not
consistent, discrepancies and contradictions appeared. They forged
numerous *hadith*s for the sake of burying the event of Karbala, but
none of these were successful.

The only thing that continued to hold and survive against all the odds
was the event of Karbala. The issue of considering shedding the blood of
al-Husayn (as) to be permissible [*halal*] is truly significant…”[^44]

Accounting for hadiths which oppose each other
----------------------------------------------

We can interpret the Shi‘ah *hadith*s which permit or even order fasting
on the day of ‘Ashura to have been said out of dissimulation
[*taqiyyah*] for the sake of bringing about agreement and conformity
with *hadith*s narrated by the Sunnis and avoiding hostility and
conflict. Therefore, the contradiction of these *hadith*s should not be
considered.

Even if we consider these inconsistencies in Shi‘ah *hadith*s, we should
put into practice those *hadith*s which oppose the Sunni belief of
fasting on the day of ‘Ashura; that is to say, those *hadith*s which
prevent fasting on this day.

Regarding those *hadith*s which say that the Holy Prophet (S) used to
fast on the day of ‘Ashura, we interpret them to mean that the Holy
Prophet (S) used to do this before the Qur’anic verse enacting the fast
of the holy month of Ramadan.

In addition, those *hadith*s that have permitted fasting on the day of
‘Ashura and consider this fast to be recommended [*mustahabb*] do not
seem to be correct because the *hadith*s narrated by Hasan ibn Abi
Ghandar indicates that it is not acceptable to fast on a day of
affliction and sorrow, but on the contrary fasting is done for the sake
of thanksgiving and good fortune.

When we consider these *hadith*s together, we understand that it is
recommended to abstain from food on the day of ‘Ashura up to the
afternoon, but without the intention of fasting, and that we have to eat
before the evening prayers. This is the purport and meaning of the
*hadith*s narrated by Ibn Sanan.

*Hadith*s in this regard narrated by the Sunnis can also be justified
and explained:

First of all, recently the Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia have published an
encyclopedic collection of fifteen volumes about weak [*da‘if*]
*hadith*s arranged according to subject in a comprehensive manner.

A group of renowned instructors including ‘Ali Hasan ‘Ali Halabi, Dr.
Ibrahim Taha Qaysi and Dr. Hamdi Muhammad Murad have done this extensive
job. Twelve volumes of this work are about weak *hadith*s and three
volumes are a table of contents of the *hadith*s. Some of the *hadith*s
shown to be weak in this extensive work are about the event of ‘Ashura.

They have arranged these particular *hadith*s under various topics, such
as: the heavens and the earth were created on the day of ‘Ashura; the
event of ‘Ashura was on the ninth day; the fast of ‘Ashura atones for
sins for a period of one year; anyone who provides the needs of his
family on the day of ‘Ashura will be provided for a period of one year;
on the day of ‘Ashura Allah divided the Red Sea for the Children of
Israel [Bani Isra’il].

Secondly, the contents of *hadith*s narrated about fasting on the day of
‘Ashura are various: some denote that the Holy Prophet (S) ordered that
we should fast on the day of ‘Ashura, but they have not made it clear
when this order was issued; some denote that the Holy Prophet (S) gave
this order in Medina;

some denote that the Holy Prophet (S) used to observe this fast before
the advent of Islam and that it was abrogated after the Qur’anic verse
which enacted the fast of the holy month of Ramadan; some say that this
fast was begun when the Holy Prophet (S) entered Medina and this was
done just for the sake of appeasing the Jews; some say that fasting on
the day of ‘Ashura was instituted for the sake of opposing the Jews;

some say that the Holy Prophet (S) did not order anyone to fast on the
day of ‘Ashura after the Qur’anic verse which instituted the fast of the
holy month of Ramadan; some say that the fast of ‘Ashura continued to be
observed up to the time when the Holy Prophet (as) passed away.

The many inconsistencies noted weaken the dependability of these
*hadith*s.

Thirdly, many of these *hadith*s have either weak or false chains of
narration, in spite of the fact that they have been narrated in the most
dependable books of Sunni *hadith*s.

Fourthly, some of these *hadith*s have problems and weaknesses of
denotation.

[^1]: Ghana’im al-Ayyam, vol. 6, p. 78.

[^2]: Madarik al-Ahkam, vol. 6, p. 268.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 19, p. 130.

[^4]: ‘Umdah al-Qari, vol. 11, p. 118.

[^5]: Al-Mughni, vol. 3, p. 174.

[^6]: Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘, vol. 2, p. 262.

[^7]: Fath al-Bari, vol. 4, p. 290.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 288.

[^9]: Al-Sunan al-Kubra, vol. 4, p. 475.

[^10]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 7, p. 290, hadith 7165; Al-Mustadrak
‘ala al-Sahihayn, vol. 1, p. 260.

[^11]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, vol. 7, p. 290, hadith 7164.

[^12]: Al-Athar al-Baqiyah, p. 277.

[^13]: Al-Hadi Magazine, no. 2, p. 37.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 36.

[^15]: Bustani, Da’irah al-Ma‘arif, vol. 11, p. 446.

[^16]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 4, pp. 299 -300, hadith 895, 906-908;
Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, section [bab] 20.

[^17]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, section [bab] 21; Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p.
146, hadith 4-7.

[^18]: Sahih Bukhari, vol. 1, p. 341.

[^19]: Man la Yahduruhu al-Faqih, vol. 2, p. 51, hadith 224; Wasa’il
al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p. 452, hadith 1.

[^20]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 146, hadith 3; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p.
462, section [bab] 41, hadith 6.

[^21]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 146, hadith 4; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p.
461, section [bab] 21, hadith 5.

[^22]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 147, hadith 7; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p.
459, section [bab] 21, hadith 2.

[^23]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 146, hadith 5; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p.
460, section [bab] 21, hadith 3.

[^24]: Al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 147, hadith 6; Wasa’il al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p.
461, section [bab] 21, hadith 4.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Mustanad al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p. 492.

[^27]: Al-Riyad al-Masa’il, vol. 5, p. 467.

[^28]: Masalik al-Afham, vol. 2, p. 78.

[^29]: Jami‘ al-Maqasid, vol. 3, p. 86.

[^30]: Tadhkirah al-Fuqaha’, vol. 6, p. 192; Taharir al-Ahkam, vol. 1,
p. 84.

[^31]: Majma‘ al-Fa’idah wa al-Burhan, vol. 5, p. 188.

[^32]: Al-Durus al-Shar‘iyyah, vol. 1, p. 382; Ghayah al-Murad, vol. 1,
p. 329.

[^33]: Jami‘ ‘Abbasi, p. 106.

[^34]: Kifayah al-Ahkam, p. 520.

[^35]: Al-Wafi, vol. 11, p. 76; Mafatih al-Shara’i‘, vol. 1, p. 284.

[^36]: Bidayah al-Hidayah, vol. 1, p. 238.

[^37]: Mir’at al-‘Uqul, vol. 16, p. 361.

[^38]: Kashf al-Ghita’, p. 323.

[^39]: Mustanad al-Shi‘ah, vol. 10, p. 487.

[^40]: Ghana’im al-Ayyam, vol. 6, pp. 78-79.

[^41]: Biruni, Al-Athar al-Baqiyah, p. 524.

[^42]: Maqrizi, Al-Khitat, vol. 2, p. 385.

[^43]: Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqah, p. 221.

[^44]: Al-Hadi Magazine, 7th year, no. 2.


