Ibn Taymiyyah’s defence of Yazid
================================

Driven by undisguised hostility against the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as), Ibn
Taymiyyah rose in defence of Yazid. He endeavored by all means to
exonerate Yazid of all corruption and unscrupulousness including his
guilt in the killing of Imam al-Husayn (as). He has done so by
shamelessly resorting to guile and deceit to justify Yazid’s actions.

Ibn Taymiyyah writes, “Yazid was not pleased with the killing of
al-Husayn. He even expressed his displeasure at this action.”[^1]

He also repudiates the truth of the events in which the Sham army
carried the head of Imam al-Husayn (as) on a lance to Sham.[^2] At one
point, he even denies that Imam al-Husayn’s (as) Household, the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (as), were taken into captivity by Yazid’s soldiers.[^3]

At another juncture, Ibn Taymiyyah says, “Yazid did not issue orders to
kill al-Husayn. Yazid’s soldiers did not bring the heads of those killed
at Karbala on lances to Sham to be presented to Yazid. Yazid did not hit
the teeth of al-Husayn with his stick. In fact, it was ‘Ubayd Allah ibn
Ziyad who did all these actions.”[^4]

In this section, evidence will be cited to substantiate the fact that
when Ibn Ziyad killed Imam al-Husayn (as), he was acting under strict
and direct orders issued by Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah.

1. Yazid appointed Ibn Ziyad governor of Kufah
----------------------------------------------

Upon examination of historical evidence, it is apparent that it was
Yazid that appointed ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad to the post of governor of
Kufah. Before then, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad was the governor of Basrah.

This appointment sheds light upon the view that Yazid intended to
confront Imam al-Husayn (as). Appointing Ibn Ziyad to the position of
governor of Kufah was a premeditated plan because he was the only person
Yazid deemed capable of carrying out the duty of killing al-Husayn (as).

It is worth noting that Yazid did not, previous to that time, have a
good relationship with ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad. He had even considered
dismissing him from the governorship of Basrah.

However, because he did not deem Nu‘man ibn Bashir, who was the
incumbent governor of Kufah, capable of confronting Muslim ibn ‘Aqil and
Imam al-Husayn (as), Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah was left with no option but to
appeal to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad for help.

He not only expressed his sudden pleasure with Ibn Ziyad, but also
appointed him to the governorship of both Kufah and Basrah as well. In a
letter to Ibn Ziyad, Yazid wrote, “Put Muslim ibn ‘Aqil under strict
surveillance. Follow and track him down. If you arrest him, put him to
death.”[^5]

Muslim ibn ‘Aqil had come to Kufah as Imam al-Husayn’s (as) envoy. His
mission was to inform the people that Imam al-Husayn (as) was on his way
to Kufah.

2. Yazid and Ibn Ziyad were in constant contact
-----------------------------------------------

History bears witness to the fact that when Yazid appointed ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad as the governor of Kufah, he ordered Ibn Ziyad to be in
constant consultation with him on every matter, large or small, that
involved Imam al-Husayn (as).

From this, one can rightly infer that all the crimes which the son of
Ziyad committed, including the killing of Imam al-Husayn (as), were
carried out on direct orders from Yazid.

Tabari writes, “After martyring Muslim ibn ‘Aqil and Hani, ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad cut their heads from their bodies and sent them together with
a letter to Sham for Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. In his reply to ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad’s letter, after mentioning various issues, Yazid pointed out,
‘News has reached me that al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali has set off towards Kufah.
Enlist spies to keep anyone allied to al-Husayn under strict
surveillance and employ armed men to arrest his followers.

Imprison al-Husayn’s followers on any accusation you can trump up, and
inform me about everything that takes place. May God’s peace, mercy and
blessing be upon you’.”[^6]

We can deduce from this historical evidence that Yazid not only
entrusted the city of Kufah and confrontation with Imam al-Husayn (as)
to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad, but that Yazid himself was also personally
involved in the events that took place and in direct command of all
affairs. Consequently, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad kept reporting whatever he
did to Yazid.

Additional evidence to substantiate that Yazid had complicity in all the
crimes committed by ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad is that Yazid extolled Ibn
Ziyad for every decision and action he took.

3. Yazid’s order: allegiance or death
-------------------------------------

History bears witness that Yazid was determined to kill Imam al-Husayn
(as) in the case that he refused to pay him allegiance. In his book of
history, “*Tarikh Ya‘qubi*”, Ya’qubi writes, “In a letter which he wrote
to Walid ibn ‘Aqabah ibn Abi Sufiyan, his agent and governor in Medina,
Yazid commanded,

‘When my letter reaches you, summon al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali and ‘Abd Allah
ibn Zubayr. Make sure that you get allegiance from them on my behalf. If
they refuse to pay allegiance, cut their necks and send their heads to
me’.”[^7]

It is obvious from this historical record that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah had a
premeditated intention to kill Imam al-Husayn (as) if the Holy Imam (as)
refused to pay allegiance.

### Question

Of course, it is true that some historians have recorded Yazid’s letter
in a different manner. For example, Tabari has recorded the letter in
this way: “Yazid wrote to Walid, ‘Adopt extreme harshness when you
confront al-Husayn, ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar and ‘Abd Allah ibn Zubayr. Do
not permit them leave until they pay allegiance. May God’s peace be upon
you’.”[^8]

In this version of the letter, there is no talk of killing Imam
al-Husayn (as) or his followers.

### Response

Firstly, there is no real inconsistency between these two historical
texts, because killing Imam al-Husayn (as) has not been explicitly
prohibited in the wording of the text recorded by Tabari. Both letters
are quite strong except that the ultimate order in the text quoted by
Tabari does not mention killing Imam al-Husayn (as).  
 It is therefore possible that Yazid wrote both letters; the first one
was recorded by Tabari while the second and stronger one in tone was
recorded by Ya‘qubi. Bearing this in mind, we can accept both records.

Secondly, in the letter which Tabari has recorded, the expression that
has been used is “adopt extreme harshness”. This might mean that the
people mentioned in this letter should not be given permission to leave
until they have paid allegiance. From this expression, three
possibilities come to mind:

A. That “adopt extreme harshness” means a kind of sharp and hot-tempered
verbal encounter with these people to insist on getting allegiance from
them.

B. That the intention was to put pressure on Imam al-Husayn (as) so that
he would be left with no option but to pay allegiance, but this
encounter should not culminate in killing Imam al-Husayn (as). (Neither
of these two possibilities seems logical, because Yazid knew Imam
al-Husayn’s (as) character and personality well. He knew with certainty
that Imam al-Husayn (as) would never pay allegiance to him no matter
what the cost.)

C. The third possibility; the possibility which conforms to what really
happened, is that “adopt extreme harshness” means Yazid had given Walid
complete jurisdiction over the issue of Imam al-Husayn (as) and he was
free to deal with Imam al-Husayn (as) in whatever way he deemed suitable
to get the job done. If Walid felt compelled to kill Imam al-Husayn
(as), should he refuse to pay allegiance to Yazid, it would have been
acceptable.

This possibility is confirmed by the following points:

1. When Marwan ibn Hakam ordered Walid to kill Imam al-Husayn (as) in
the case that he refused to pay allegiance to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah, Walid
excused himself from carrying out this abominable act. The reason he put
forth was not that killing Imam al-Husayn (as) was not compatible with
orders from Yazid, but because killing Imam al-Husayn (as) was *haram*
and therefore forbidden by Islamic dictates.[^9]

2. When Walid called Imam al-Husayn (as) to the governor’s palace, Imam
al-Husayn (as) knew that Walid had been ordered to kill him if he
refused to pay allegiance. Therefore, he went to the governor’s palace
accompanied by a number of young men from the tribe of Bani Hashim. He
also advised ‘Abd Allah ibn Zubayr to do the same.[^10]

3. In the holy month of Ramadan of the same year in which he ascended to
the caliphate, Yazid dismissed Walid ibn ‘Aqabah from his post as
governor. It is important to mention that this happened only about two
months after Yazid claimed the caliphate. Yazid discharged Walid despite
reinstating in their posts all the governors who had worked for his
father. The reason for dismissing Walid was that Yazid knew that Walid
was not capable of carrying out his orders as regards killing Imam
al-Husayn (as). So he dealt with him in the same manner that he had
previously dealt with Nu‘man ibn Bashir, the governor of Kufah. Nu‘man
ibn Bashir had been ordered to have a harsh and violent encounter with
Muslim ibn ‘Aqil. When he did not do this, Yazid replaced him with
‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad.[^11]

Yazid discharged Walid ibn ‘Aqabah just like he had previously dismissed
Nu‘man ibn Bashir. Therefore, it can be deduced that Yazid wanted Walid
to kill Imam al-Husayn (as) if necessary. Since Walid was not ready to
do so, he paid the price and was dismissed.

4. Yazid’s second letter to Walid ibn ‘Aqabah
---------------------------------------------

Ibn A‘tham recounts that Walid wrote a letter to Yazid informing him
about the events that had transpired between him and Imam al-Husayn (as)
and between him and Zubayr. Yazid was infuriated by what had taken
place. In a reply to Walid, he wrote, “When my letter reaches you, get a
second allegiance from the people of Medina.

Let ‘Abd Allah ibn Zubayr go free, because he cannot escape us. However,
send the head of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) to me together with the reply
of this letter. If you do so, I will provide you with well-bred horses
along with greater gifts and better rewards…”[^12]

5. Exposing Imam al-Husayn (as) to death
----------------------------------------

Ibn ‘Asakir recounts, “When Yazid was informed about Imam al-Husayn’s
exodus towards Kufah, he wrote a letter to his governor, ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad, in which he ordered him to battle Imam al-Husayn (as) and
send the Imam to Sham.”[^13]

Ibn A‘tham narrates, “Ibn Ziyad addressed the people of Kufah in this
way, ‘Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah has sent a letter to me. Along with it, he has
sent four thousand *dinar*s and two hundred thousand *dirham*s for me to
distribute among you. Yazid has ordered me to send you to war with his
enemy al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali. Therefore, follow Yazid’s orders and obey
him’.”[^14]

Suyuti says, “In a letter to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad, Yazid’s governor in
Iraq, he ordered him to engage in battle with al-Husayn and kill
him.”[^15]

Ibn A‘tham writes, “When Ibn Ziyad killed Imam al-Husayn, Yazid paid him
a reward of one million *dirham*s.”[^16]

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as), the brother of ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad, Salam ibn Ziyad, went to visit Yazid. When Yazid saw him, he
said, “O household of Ziyad, love and friendship has become obligatory
upon you from the household of Abu Sufiyan.”[^17]

When Ibn Ziyad went to see Yazid after killing Imam al-Husayn (as),
Yazid came forward to welcome him. He embraced Ibn Ziyad and kissed him
on the forehead. Yazid had Ibn Ziyad sit on the throne and even brought
him his womenfolk.

He ordered a singer to sing a beautiful song for Ibn Ziyad. Yazid
addressed his butler, “Make us drunk with wine!” Then, he gave Ibn Ziyad
and ‘Umar ibn Sa‘d a reward of one million *dirham*s each from the
public treasury. He even ceded the revenue of Iraq to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn
Ziyad for a period of one year.”[^18]

6. While in Mecca, Imam al-Husayn (as) foretold that the enemies of Allah were planning to kill him
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tabari recounts that Imam al-Husayn (as) publicly addressed the people,
“Do you know what Ibn Zubayr says?” The people said, “No, we don’t know.
May Allah sacrifice us for you!” Imam al-Husayn (as) said, “Ibn Zubayr
says, ‘Stay in this mosque. I will gather a group of fighters for you’.”

Then the Imam (as) said, “I swear upon Allah! It is better for me to be
killed an inch outside Mecca than to be killed an inch inside it. I
swear upon Allah! Even if I hide and seek refuge in caves, they will
never rest until they pull me out and do to me what they have already
decided to do.”[^19]

We can conclude from this historical information that Imam al-Husayn
(as) was aware of Bani Umayyah’s malicious intentions. He knew that the
government headed by Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah had no other objective but to
kill him.

7. Yazid issued the order to put Imam al-Husayn (as) to death
-------------------------------------------------------------

Ya‘qubi recounts, “By the time al-Husayn started off towards Iraq, Yazid
had appointed ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad to be the governor of that land.
Yazid wrote to his newly appointed governor, ‘News has reached me that
the people of Kufah have written a letter to al-Husayn inviting him to
come to them. At this very moment as I write, he is moving towards
Kufah…

If you kill him, then so much the better; there will remain no more duty
on you. However, if you do not put him to death, I will send you to join
your dead ancestors. So beware, and do not lose this opportunity’.”[^20]

From this historical text, we can conclude that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah had
charged ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad with the duty of killing Imam al-Husayn
(as). He had even gone so far as to intimidate Ibn Ziyad with death if
he dared disobey his orders.

8. Ibn Ziyad’s letter to Imam al-Husayn (as)
--------------------------------------------

Ibn A‘tham narrates that Hurr ibn Yazid and his companions had descended
upon Imam al-Husayn with the intention of encountering him at war. Hurr
wrote a letter to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad informing him that Imam
al-Husayn (as) had arrived at Karbala. The son of Ziyad decided to write
a letter to Imam al-Husayn (as), in which he said, “... and after this,
O al-Husayn!

News has reached me that you have arrived at Karbala. Amir al-Mu’minin
Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah has written a letter to me ordering that I should
not be content with anything save sending you to the Omniscient one or
dealing with you in whatever way I wish...”[^21]

This is yet another document that shows that Yazid himself had given
‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad the responsibility of killing Imam al-Husayn (as)
if he refused to pay allegiance.

9. Ibn ‘Abbas’s letter to Yazid
-------------------------------

One of the documents which serves as evidence to prove that Yazid played
a direct role in the killing of Imam al-Husayn (as) is a letter which
‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas wrote to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. In this letter, Ibn
‘Abbas admonished Yazid to kill Imam al-Husayn (as). A Part of the
letter reads, “From ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. And
after this…

O illegitimate child! It is you who killed al-Husayn with your
contaminated and filthy hands. Do not suppose that I have forgotten that
you have blood on your hands and that you have martyred al-Husayn and
the youths of Bani Hashim who were bright shining lights and stars of
guidance for those in darkness…”[^22]

It is important to note that Ibn ‘Abbas was known as a man that would
not accuse any person falsely.

10. Yazid publicly boasted about killing Imam al-Husayn (as)
------------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Athir narrates, “After al-Husayn’s martyrdom, Yazid called for a
general meeting. The people of Sham were coming in to meet him while the
blessed head of Imam al-Husayn (as) was placed next to him. He had a
wooden stick in his hands with which he was hitting Imam al-Husayn’s
throat (as) while reciting poems composed by al-Husayn ibn Hamam. These
actions made his arrogance and pride at killing Imam al-Husayn (as)
obvious.”[^23]

If Yazid were in fact not pleased about killing Imam al-Husayn (as), why
would he hit the throat, and according to narrations of other historians
the lips and teeth, of the severed head of Imam al-Husayn (as)?
Moreover, why would he recite poems which alluded to his pride at having
done such a deed?

Suyuti writes, “After al-Husayn (as) and his father’s progeny were
massacred, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad sent their heads on lances to Sham for
Yazid. At first, Yazid became very happy, but when he realized that the
Muslims had started to regard him as their enemy and had begun to hate
him with all their hearts for what he had done, Yazid showed superficial
remorse and regret.

It was appropriate that the people had every right to hate him.”[^24]

Sibt ibn al-Jawzi recounts, “When they brought the head of Imam
al-Husayn (as) to Yazid, he invited the people of Sham to come to his
palace. He then started hitting Imam al-Husayn’s (as) head with a staff
while reciting poems composed by Ibn Zab‘ari.

The purport of these poems was: By killing the elders of Bani Hashim, we
have taken revenge for our forefathers who were killed in the Battle of
Badr. By killing the elders of Bani Hashim, we have gotten even.”[^25]

11. Ibn Ziyad, highly regarded after killing al-Husayn (as)
-----------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Athir writes, “When Imam al-Husayn’s (as) head was brought for
Yazid, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad gained high esteem before Yazid. Yazid
bestowed numerous favors upon him. He was extremely pleased with him.
However, it did not take long before Yazid learnt that the people had
been angered by what he had done, and were cursing and insulting him. He
subsequently feigned remorse about Imam al-Husayn’s (as) killing…”[^26]

Tabari narrates, “When ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad killed al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali
(as) and his father’s progeny, he sent their heads on lances to Sham for
Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. Yazid was initially pleased by this and the son of
Ziyad acquired an excellent position before Yazid…”[^27]

12. Declaration of one present in Yazid’s court
-----------------------------------------------

Tabari recounts, “Then Yazid gave permission to the people to come to
visit him. The people entered the king’s court and saw Imam al-Husayn’s
(as) head placed opposite Yazid. Yazid was hitting Imam al-Husayn’s (as)
head with a wooden stick in his hands. A man from among the Prophet’s
(S) companions named Abu Bazrah Aslami addressed Yazid protestingly,
‘Are you hitting the throat of al-Husayn with your staff?

Be aware that your stick is hitting a place that I personally saw the
Holy Prophet (S) kissing. O Yazid! You will arise on the Day of
Resurrection without an intercessor save Ibn Ziyad, but al-Husayn will
come on the Day of Resurrection with Muhammad (S), Allah’s Prophet, as
his intercessor.’ Then, Abu Bazrah Aslami rose up, turned his back to
Yazid and left the gathering.”[^28]

13. Yazid was informed about everything
---------------------------------------

History testifies to the fact that Yazid was completely aware of
everything Ibn Ziyad did regarding Imam al-Husayn (as) even after his
martyrdom. Ibn Athir narrates, “When the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as) of Imam
al-Husayn reached Kufah, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad imprisoned them and sent
the news of what had taken place to Yazid… Afterwards, a reply letter
came from Yazid to Ibn Ziyad containing orders that the captives should
be brought to Sham…”[^29]

From this historical information, along with other information
previously mentioned, we can deduce that the son of Ziyad did not
perform any significant action without Yazid’s permission.

14. Yazid’s son admitted his father’s guilt
-------------------------------------------

Ya‘qubi relates from Mu‘awiyah ibn Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah, Yazid’s son,
that after inheriting his father’s position and ascending to the
caliphate, he addressed the people in this way, “And after praising
Allah…

Be informed that my grandfather Mu‘awiyah ibn Abi Sufiyan had quarrelled
and disputed about the caliphate with a person who was more deserving
and worthy of it as regards blood relationship and proximity to the Holy
Prophet (S).

Then, after him, my father got the reigns of power while he did not
possess an acceptable moral character at all. In fact, he was overridden
by his carnal desires.” Then, Mu‘awiyah, the son of Yazid, started
crying and said, “One of the hardest things for us to bear is that we
know what affliction and tragedy he was caught up in, and what a
terrible fate he has endorsed for himself. He killed and disregarded the
honor of the Holy Prophet’s (S) progeny with impunity and set the Ka‘bah
on fire…”[^30]

This historical text is excellent evidence to substantiate that Yazid
had total involvement in the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as). There was
no one closer to Yazid than his own son, and he publicly announced that
his father was Imam al-Husayn’s (as) killer.

15. Ibn Ziyad was not censured for killing Imam al-Husayn (as)
--------------------------------------------------------------

If one were to assume, as some people say, that Yazid did not issue
orders to kill Imam al-Husayn (as) and that Imam al-Husayn (as) was in
fact killed as a result of ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad’s independent actions
and that Yazid was displeased by Ibn Ziyad’s deeds, Yazid should have
confronted him strongly with intense opposition to his insubordinate
behavior. He ought to have reproached him in a way that suited his
appalling act.

Even in the case that Yazid was opposed to Imam al-Husayn (as), if he in
fact did not issue orders to kill the Imam and ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad
committed this hideous crime without Yazid’s authorization, he should
have been sharply censured for overstepping his authority and defying
the central government. However, what historians have recorded is that
not only Ibn Ziyad was not rebuked by Yazid in the slightest, but was
instead rewarded handsomely on many occasions.

Yazid’s unanticipated behavior under the circumstances casts grave doubt
on the veracity of the idea that Ibn Ziyad was acting independently
rather than under direct orders from Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah.

16. Ibn Ziyad retained his high governmental post
-------------------------------------------------

History bears witness to the fact that even after killing Imam al-Husayn
(as), ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad was retained in his position of authority
as the governor of both Kufah and Basrah. This in itself demonstrates
that Yazid was satisfied with the actions of ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad.

Ibn Athir writes, “When Yazid died, news of his death was brought to Ibn
Ziyad... a call for congregational prayer was made. The people gathered
for prayer, and ‘Ubayd Allah went on the pulpit and informed the people
about the death of Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah.”[^31]

This shows that ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad remained in his position of
authority as the governor of Kufah and Basrah up to the time of Yazid’s
death. We also know that if ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad had acted in an
independent manner when killing Imam al-Husayn (as), a manner which was
displeasing to Yazid, he certainly would have relieved him of his post
just as he had previously dismissed Nu‘man ibn Bashir and Walid ibn
‘Aqabah. Yazid had dismissed Nu‘man ibn Bashir from the governorship of
Kufah and Walid ibn ‘Aqabah from the governorship of Medina because he
was displeased with both of them.

17. Yazid sent rewards for ‘Ubayd Allah in Ziyad
------------------------------------------------

After the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as), Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah sent
numerous rewards for ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad and he gained a very special
proximity to Yazid.

1. Ibn Athir recounts, “When the head of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali was sent for
Yazid, ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad was raised in stature. He was now regarded
with high esteem by Yazid. A lot of rewards and gifts were bestowed on
him by the son of Mu‘awiyah ibn Abu Sufiyan. Yazid made strenuous
efforts to be sure that ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad was happy with his
rewards for killing Imam al-Husayn (as).”[^32]

2. Tabari narrates, “When ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad killed al-Husayn ibn
‘Ali (as) and his father’s progeny, he sent their heads on lances to
Sham for Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. At first Yazid was pleased and held ‘Ubayd
Allah ibn Ziyad in great esteem.”[^33]

18. Yazid protected ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad from criticism
---------------------------------------------------------

Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah not only did not reprimand ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad
for killing Imam al-Husayn (as), he even went so far as to prevent
others from reproaching him.

Tabari and other historians recount “When the captives were brought to
Yazid, Yahya ibn Hakam verbally reproached ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad for
what he had done in two verses of poetry... but Yazid punched him on the
chest and said, ‘Keep Quiet!’”[^34]

This behavior, along with his obstinate defence and support of ‘Ubayd
Allah ibn Ziyad, is a sign of approval that Yazid was pleased with him
for killing Imam al-Husayn (as) and that it is highly likely that the
crime of killing Imam al-Husayn (as) was carried out under direct orders
from Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah.

19. ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad was Yazid’s courtier and advisor
-----------------------------------------------------------

Mas‘udi and other historians have recounted, “Yazid was always a
pleasure-seeking man… One day after killing al-Husayn Ibn ‘Ali (as), he
was seated in a gathering where liquor was being served with ‘Ubayd
Allah ibn Ziyad on his right hand side. Yazid said to his bartender in
verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسقني شربةً تروّي مَشاشي ثمّ مِل فَاسقِ مثلَها ابن زيادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صاحبَ السرّ والامانةِ عندي ولتسديدِ مغنمي وجهادي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Give me liquor that is strong enough to completely satisfy my whole
being.*

*After you have served me, turn to Ibn Ziyad, and quench his thirst in
the same way.*

*He is the possessor of my secrets and trusts.*

*And do it for the purpose of confirming his awards and
endeavors.”*[^35]

Sibt ibn al-Jawzi writes, “Yazid called for the son of Ziyad and gave
him many rewards. He made him a close companion and elevated his
position. Yazid even brought his womenfolk for Ibn Ziyad and gave him
his goblet of wine. Then, he said to his private musician, ‘Play a
song.’ Then, he himself recited the two previous verses.”[^36]

Ibn A‘tham recounts that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah gave a reward of one
million *dirham*s to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad for killing Imam al-Husayn
(as).[^37]

20. Choosing one of two options
-------------------------------

In his book “*Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh*”, Ibn Athir narrates that ‘Ubayd
Allah ibn Ziyad addressed Musafir ibn Sharih Yashkari thus, “I killed
al-Husayn because Yazid made it clear that I had to choose between
killing al-Husayn or myself being killed. I preferred killing al-Husayn
to being killed.”[^38]

Ya‘qubi writes, “In a letter addressed to ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad, Yazid
wrote, ‘News has reached me that the people of Kufah have written to
al-Husayn inviting him to come to them. I have been informed that right
now, as I write, he has left Mecca and is traveling towards Kufah in
order to join them.

Your territory, from among all other territories, is being put to the
test and your life is on the line. If you kill al-Husayn, there will be
no problem. However, if you do not kill him, you will join your
forefathers. So beware that you do not lose this opportunity’.”[^39]

21. Imam al-Sajjad (as) made the truth clear
--------------------------------------------

On various occasions, Imam al-Sajjad (as) made it clear that Yazid ibn
Mu‘awiyah was Imam al-Husayn’s (as) killer.

1. When they brought Imam al-Sajjad (as) to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah, the son
of Mu‘awiyah addressed Imam al-Sajjad (as) in this way, “Are you the son
of that man who has been killed by Allah?” Imam al-Sajjad (as) replied,
“I am ‘Ali, the son of the man whom you have killed.” Then, Imam
al-Sajjad (as) recited this verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ وَمَن يقتُل مُؤمِناً مُتَعَمِّداً فَجَزآؤُهُ جَهَنَّمُ خالِداً فيها
... ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is hell;
he shall abide in it forever.***[^40]***”***[^41]

2. At another time, Imam al-Sajjad (as) said, “O Yazid! It is enough of
your shedding our blood…”[^42]

3. Ibn A‘tham relates, “Imam al-Sajjad (as) addressed Yazid as follows,
‘If only you could perceive what you have done against my father, if
only you could comprehend what you have done against my Household, and
if only you could understand what you have done against the rights of my
brothers and uncles, then you would run away to the hills and mountains.
There, you would spread gravel stones and roll yourself upon them. You
would raise your voice high weeping for yourself. How is it possible
that the head of al-Husayn (as), the son of Fatimah (as) and ‘Ali (as),
has been hung on the city gates when he was Allah’s trust among you, the
people?’”[^43]

4. There is also Imam al-Sajjad’s (as) address to Yazid in his famous
sermon in Damascus, when he said, “Is the Muhammad that you talk about
your ancestor or my ancestor? If you want to pretend that he is your
ancestor, you have undoubtedly lied and become a disbeliever. And if you
say that he is my ancestor, then why have you killed his progeny?”[^44]

22. Yazid expressed pleasure at killing Imam al-Husayn (as)
-----------------------------------------------------------

When we pay careful attention to diverse historical documents, it
becomes clear that Yazid was very happy with killing al-Husayn (as).
There are many historical documents which provide evidence beyond doubt
that Yazid was pleased with what had transpired. We also have to pay
attention to the *hadith* which says, “Anyone who is pleased with an
action of a group of people is one of those people.” Let us now refer to
some evidence to prove our assertion.

1. While talking to Nu‘man ibn Bashir, Yazid said, “Praise Allah because
He has killed al-Husayn.”[^45]

2. Ya‘qubi writes, “Yazid was in his garden when the news that Imam
al-Husayn had been killed was brought to him. He shouted out aloud,
‘*Allah-u Akbar*!’”[^46]

3. When the captives were brought to Sham, Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah called
the elders of Sham to come and congratulate him for the victory.[^47]

4. Maqrizi and other historians have recounted that when ‘Ubayd Allah
ibn Ziyad placed the head of Imam al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) before Yazid
ibn Mu‘awiyah, he started hitting Imam al-Husayn’s (as) teeth with a
rod. He was doing this while reciting poetry. Then, he gave orders that
Imam al-Husayn’s (as) head should be hung in the palace for three
days.[^48]

Many Sunni scholars have opposed Yazid due to his pleasure at killing
Imam al-Husayn (as), and even cursed him.

5. Suyuti narrates, “May Allah curse al-Husayn’s (as) killers. May Allah
curse Ibn Ziyad and Yazid.”[^49]

6. Some people asked al-Jawzi what his opinion was regarding cursing
Yazid. He answered, “Ahmad ibn Hanbal permitted cursing him, and we say
that we do not like Yazid because of what he did to the son of the
Prophet’s daughter (as) and because he sent the Prophet’s (S) Household
in a state of captivity to Sham aboard camel litter.”[^50]

7. Dhahabi says, “Yazid was a cruel and hardhearted man. He used to
drink wine and commit forbidden acts [*munkarat*]. His reign began with
killing al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali and ended with the event of Harrah.”[^51]

8. Ibn Khaldun recounts the killing of Imam al-Husayn (as) thus,
“Without doubt, Imam al-Husayn was killed by Yazid. Killing Imam
al-Husayn (as) is an action that underscores Yazid’s immoral nature. In
this event, al-Husayn is a martyr in Allah’s way.”[^52]

23. Yazid’s actions correspond with his personality
---------------------------------------------------

For anyone who examines historical accounts, it becomes clear that Yazid
had a treacherous personality. When one understands Yazid’s real
personality, he can easily see why he could not refrain from killing
such a revered person as Imam al-Husayn (as), and why doing so was an
easy task for him.

Mas‘udi narrates, “Yazid was a pleasure-seeking person who owned slave
girls, dogs, monkeys, leopards and drunken jesters. Whatever ugly act he
committed was imitated by those close to him. During the three years of
his caliphate, music became widespread both in Mecca and Medina.
Instruments of pleasure and amusement were commonplace. The people
openly and publicly engaged in wine drinking.”[^53]

A group of people from Medina, among them ‘Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah and
other noble men of Medina, went to see Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. Yazid agreed
to meet them. When they returned to Medina, some of the people of the
group began talking ill of and castigating Yazid.

They announced that they were returning from the presence a man who
lacked religion, drank wine and played the tambourine. They said that
Yazid played with dogs. They reported to the people that Yazid also had
singers who sang seductive music for him…[^54]

‘Umar ibn Sabi‘ah says, “During his father’s reign, Yazid went to Mecca
for the *hajj*. When he reached Medina, he sat at a wine drinking
gathering and recited poetry.”[^55]

Suyuti writes, “The reason the people of Medina retracted the allegiance
they had made to Yazid was that he used to exceed limits in committing
transgressions.”[^56]

24. Yazid in the viewpoint of Sunni scholars [‘ulama’]
------------------------------------------------------

As previously mentioned, many Sunni scholars have strongly criticized
Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah for killing Imam al-Husayn (as) and for numerous
other crimes he committed. We will now mention some of these scholars
and some of their criticisms:

1. Alusi says, “Anyone who says that Yazid did not sin, and hence
cursing him is not permissible, should be considered as one of Yazid’s
helpers and partisans.”[^57]

2. Ibn Khaldun writes, “Ibn al-‘Arabi Maliki erred when he said,
‘Al-Husayn was killed by his grandfather’s sword.’ By making such a
statement, he openly declared his consent to Yazid’s iniquitous and
immoral life.”[^58]

3. Taftazani writes, “Yazid’s satisfaction and pleasure at the killing
of Imam al-Husayn (as), and his contempt towards the *Ahl al-Bayt* (as),
are among his many vices detailed in the traditions. We have no
hesitation about his true status. On the contrary, we do not hesitate in
saying that he was a man who lacked faith. May Allah’s curse be on him
and his partisans.”[^59]

4. Jahiz says, “The crimes Yazid committed including killing al-Husayn
ibn ‘Ali, taking the members of his household into captivity, hitting
Imam al-Husayn’s (as) teeth and severed head with a staff, intimidating
and terrorizing the people of Medina, and destruction of the Ka‘bah are
all evidence of his cruelty, wickedness, hypocrisy and apostasy. Without
doubt, he is corrupt and cursed and anyone who prevents the damning of
such a man is damned himself.”[^60]

5. Doctor Taha al-Husayn, the Egyptian author, writes, “Some people
suppose that Yazid is exonerated from the heinous massacre of al-Husayn
(as). They make ‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad the scapegoat for the savage
killing. If Yazid is innocent of wrongdoing and Ibn Ziyad the guilty
party, why did Yazid not reproach ‘Ubayd Allah? Why did he not punish
him? Why did he not relieve him of his post?”[^61]

Responses to doubts
-------------------

Now that Yazid’s role in killing Imam al-Husayn (as) has been examined,
we will now analyze some of the objections put forth by Yazid’s
supporters.

### 1. Mu‘awiyah’s last will and testament to Yazid

Some people say that Mu‘awiyah ibn Abu Sufiyan had ordered his son in
his last will and testament not to offend al-Husayn (as) nor to
interfere with him in any way whatsoever because al-Husayn (as) had a
greater right of kinship and nearness to the Holy Prophet (S). They
believe that it is therefore impossible and unreasonable to imagine that
Yazid would have dared act against his father’s wishes.

***Response***

Firstly, the text of Mu‘awiyah’s reads, “... If al-Husayn revolts
against you and you become triumphant over him, forgive and overlook
because he has ties of relationship and kinship to you, and hence has a
great right due from you...”[^62]

We can deduce from this text that Mu‘awiyah ibn Abu Sufiyan requested
his son to forgive al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) if Yazid were to be
militarily victorious over the Holy Imam, but we cannot conclude that
Yazid was ordered not to have any conflict with Imam al-Husayn (as) at
all.

Secondly, we have previously cited abundant evidence to substantiate
that Yazid was responsible for Imam al-Husayn’s (as) martyrdom.
Therefore, there is no room left for doubt or skepticism about who Imam
al-Husayn’s killer is.

Thirdly, when we refer to history with special attention paid to Yazid’s
corrupt personality, it is obvious that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah was not at
all bound or obligated to act according to his father’s will. There is
no historical evidence to substantiate that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah felt a
strong obligation to act according to his father’s last wishes.

It is worthy reminding skeptics that Mu‘awiyah ibn Abu Sufiyan had
commanded his son Yazid in his last will and testament to consent to the
people’s wishes if they asked him to dismiss and change the governor of
Iraq. Yazid did not act according to his father’s wishes in this case.

### 2. Yazid exonerated himself of the killing of al-Husayn (as)

According to some texts, Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah claimed himself to be
innocent of killing Imam al-Husayn (as). They say Yazid cursed ‘Ubayd
Allah ibn Ziyad and laid the blame on him for this heinous crime.[^63]

***Response***

Firstly, according to evidence previously cited regarding this issue,
there is convincing testimony to substantiate that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah
played a direct role in killing Imam al-Husayn (as). It has already been
pointed out that some people have made intense efforts to deceive others
by inventing stories for the sake of justifying Yazid’s despicable
actions.

The fantasy that Yazid was not responsible for killing Imam al-Husayn
(as) must be regarded as an effort by ill-intentioned people to deceive
others because, after the event of Karbala, there were numerous public
disclosures of Yazid’s flagrant atrocities given by eye witnesses.

These public disclosures caused the people to become disgusted with
Yazid. As a result, they rebelled against him. Yazid therefore found
himself forced to lay the blame on another. By making Ibn Ziyad the
scapegoat, he intended to exonerate himself from this savage crime and
dissipate the people’s anger.

Secondly, according to historical documents, a number of the Prophet’s
(S) companions such as Imam al-Husayn (as), ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Abd
Allah ibn Hanzalah and most of the nobles of Medina have associated
Yazid with moral corruption and debauchery. When we have indubitable
testimony from such a group of highly respected companions of the Holy
Prophet (S) confirming Yazid’s immoral and corrupt nature, baseless
claims of his innocence cannot be accepted.

### 3. The long distance between Sham and Kufah

Some opponents say that because there is a long distance between Kufah
and Sham, which was then the administrative centre of the Umayyad
government, it is unreasonable to imagine that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah could
have been getting accurate reports and detailed accounts of the events
that were taking place. For this reason, they claim that Yazid was not
able to issue direct orders to Ibn Ziyad.

***Response***

Firstly, abundant historical testimony has already been presented to
substantiate that Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah did in fact receive regular
reports from Kufah and write direct orders to Ibn Ziyad regarding the
killing of Imam al-Husayn (as), such that there can remain no room for
doubt about his role as the main player in this hideous crime. So,
although there was a considerable distance between Sham and Kufah, Yazid
ibn Mu‘awiyah was in fact in constant consultation with his agents
through letter carriers and deliverers and in this way was able to issue
all the necessary orders.

[^1]: Ra’s al-Husayn, p. 207.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 206.

[^3]: Minhaj al-Sunnah, vol. 2, p. 226.

[^4]: Su’al fi Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah, p. 16.

[^5]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 258; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 268; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 164.

[^6]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 285.

[^7]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 241; Al-Futuh, vol. 5, pp. 10-11.

[^8]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 250.

[^9]: Ibid., vol. 4, p. 251; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3,
p. 264; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, pp. 157-158; Al-Akhbar
al-Tawal, p. 228.

[^10]: Ibid.; Al-Muntazam, vol. 5, p. 323; Al-Futuh, vol. 5, pp. 15-18.

[^11]: Ibid.

[^12]: Ibn A‘tham, Al-Futuh, vol. 3, section [bab] 5, p. 18.

[^13]: Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, vol. 14, p. 208.

[^14]: Ibn A‘tham, AlFutuh, vol. 3, section [bab] 5, p. 89.

[^15]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 193.

[^16]: Ibn A‘tham, Al-Futuh, vol. 3, section [bab] 5, p. 135.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 136.

[^18]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 290; Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 67.

[^19]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 289; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 276.

[^20]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 242; Mukhtasar Tarikh Damishq, vol.
28, p. 19.

[^21]: Ibn A‘tham, Al-Futuh, vol. 5, p. 150; Khwarazmi, Maqtal al-Imam
al-Husayn (as), vol. 1, p. 140.

[^22]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 248; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 318.

[^23]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 298.

[^24]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 208.

[^25]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 235.

[^26]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 300.

[^27]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, pp. 388-389; Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 238.

[^28]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 356; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 298.

[^29]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 298; Tarikh Tabari,
vol. 4, p. 254.

[^30]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 254.

[^31]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, pp. 319-320.

[^32]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 300; Tarikh Tabari,
vol. 4, p. 388; Tarikh Khulafa’, p. 208; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol.
8, p. 254; Kitab al-Futuh, vol. 5, p. 252.

[^33]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 288.

[^34]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 301; Tarikh Tabari,
vol. 4, p. 252; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 209.

[^35]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 77.

[^36]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 260.

[^37]: Kitab al-Futuh, vol. 5, p. 252.

[^38]: Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 324.

[^39]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 242.

[^40]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:93.

[^41]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, p. 63, as narrated by Ghazali.

[^42]: Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 120.

[^43]: Ibn A‘tham, Al-Futuh, vol. 3, section [bab] 5, p. 132.

[^44]: Ibid., p. 133; Khwarazmi, Maqtal al-Imam al-Husayn (as), vol. 2,
p. 242.

[^45]: Khwarazmi, Maqtal al-Imam al-Husayn (as), vol. 2, p. 59.

[^46]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 222.

[^47]: Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 197; Siyr A‘lam al-Nubala’,
vol. 3, p. 309.

[^48]: Maqrizi, Al-Khitat, vol. 2, p. 289; Siyr A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol.
3, p. 319.

[^49]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 207.

[^50]: Mir’at al-Zaman, vol. 8, p. 496; Sawa‘iq al-Muhriqah, vol. 2, p.
634.

[^51]: Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 69.

[^52]: The Introduction of Ibn Khaldun, p. 181.

[^53]: Muruj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 77.

[^54]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 368; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 307; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 238.

[^55]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 317; Mukhtasar
Tarikh Damishq, vol. 28, p. 24.

[^56]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 209.

[^57]: Ruh al-Ma‘ani, vol. 26, p. 73.

[^58]: The Introduction of Ibn Khaldun, p. 254.

[^59]: Sharh ‘Aqa’id Nasfiyyah, p. 181.

[^60]: Risa’il Jahiz, p. 298.

[^61]: Al-Fitnah al-Kubra, vol. 2, p. 265.

[^62]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 238.

[^63]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 300.


