Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah and the Massacre of the People of Medina
============================================================

Some biased scholars and partisans of Bani Umayyah such as Ibn Taymiyyah
have endeavored to come to the defence of Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah. They have
gone so far as to recognize him as the legitimate Muslim caliph of his
time.

However, in the end, reality compelled most scholars to admit Yazid’s
atrocious crimes because his entire life was full of abominable actions
and he was the cause of numerous calamities for the Muslims, especially
during the three years of his usurped caliphate.

In the long term, biased adherents of Bani Umayyah could not continue to
overlook Yazid’s many atrocities. Therefore, some schemed to either
completely deny or justify Yazid’s brutal crimes.

One of the acts of sheer barbarity and inhumanity Yazid brought down on
the Muslims was the event of Harrah. This incident resulted in the
brutal killing of thousands of the Muslim people of Medina. The order
for this massacre was issued by Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah himself. The event
of Harrah is a well-known incident which has been discussed either
briefly or in detail by numerous historians.[^1] Now, let us examine
this event.

The event of Harrah
-------------------

The deplorable atrocity of Harrah, which blackened the pages of history,
took place in the sixty-third year of the Islamic calendar during the
reign of Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah between the powerful armies of Sham and the
people of Medina.

Harrah literally means a rocky and uneven terrain full of black stones
passage through which is quite difficult. This well-known event acquired
its name because the assault, which the government armies of Sham made
on the ordinary people of Medina, began in a rocky eastern region of
Medina.[^2]

The event of Harrah is in all truth one of the most savage and horrible
crimes of human history and the most appalling incident which occurred
during the reign of Bani Umayyah. Ibn Mushkuwiyyah narrates, “The
incident of Harrah is one of the most dreadful and formidable events of
history.”[^3]

Origins of the uprising of the people of Medina
-----------------------------------------------

The uprising by the people of Medina occurred in 63 AH. Besides being an
uprising against Yazid’s authoritative reign and Bani Umayyah’s
tyrannical sultanate, it was more a peoples’ uprising against government
policies. The uprising of the people of Medina was a popular and
self-perpetuating social movement rooted in the people’s unanimous
rejection of the rule of Yazid and Bani Umayyah.

The group of the Helpers [*ansar*] had chosen ‘Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah to
be their army commander and leader in the confrontation with Bani
Umayyah and the Quraysh appointed ‘Abd Allah ibn Matih to be their
commander.[^4]

This revolution and uprising was caused by various factors, some of
which we will now discuss:

### Religious sentiments

Medina has always been an exceptionally important city because it is the
city of Allah’s Prophet (S) and the land where the divine message grew,
developed and flourished. It is the land where divine knowledge and
wisdom where introduced. It was in Medina where the Prophet’s way of
life was explained and people were instructed regarding it.

Medina is the land where people learned Qur’anic commentary and
interpretation of the divine message from the Holy Prophet (S) himself.
The Prophet’s (S) distinguished companions, including the Helpers
[*ansar*] and the Immigrants [*muhajirin*], had lived there since the
Holy Prophet’s (S) time. After the Prophet’s (S) death, some of his most
renowned companions preferred to stay in that city because of the fond
memories they held about Allah’s Prophet (S).

It is evident why the people of Medina had a fervent inclination towards
Islamic tenets and stronger religious sentiments than the people of
Sham; they were more familiar with the Prophet’s (S) conduct [*sunnah*]
and that of his successors and companions. It was for this reason that
they were able to discern the wrong ways of Bani Umayyah earlier than
others.

It was the people of Medina who previously were the first to voice their
objections to ‘Uthman ibn ‘Uffan. Now, these same people were
experiencing the rule of a raw inexperienced youth called Yazid ibn
Mu‘awiyah. He knew absolutely nothing about politics and failed to
uphold the sanctity of the tenets of religion. Accordingly, their
disapproval and protest against Yazid sprang up.

‘Uthman ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Sufiyan, the governor of Medina, had sent a
group of men consisting of Immigrants and Helpers to meet with the
caliph in Damascus, so they could present their grievances to Yazid and
so Yazid could bestow gifts upon them to silence them.[^5] During this
meeting, not only did Yazid fail to win them over to his side, but his
ignorant behavior proved his incompetence to them.[^6]

When they returned to Medina, they explained what they had seen from
Yazid. They gathered in the Holy Prophet’s (S) Mosque and started
shouting to the people, “We have come from meeting a person who is
depraved of religion, drinks wine, plays the tambourine and spends the
night with base men, slave girls and female singers and as a result has
abandoned prayer.”[^7]

The people asked ‘Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah what news he had brought from
the caliph. He replied, “I am coming from meeting a man whom, I swear by
Allah, I would have fought if no one were present except my sons.” The
people said, “We have heard that Yazid has given you money and gifts.”

‘Abd Allah answered, “It is true, but I accepted his money and gifts
only for the purpose of using it to acquire and prepare an army against
Yazid himself.” In this way, ‘Abd Allah started inciting and instigating
the people against Yazid and the people responded positively to his
calls for an uprising.[^8]

Suyuti writes, “The reason for the uprising of the people of Medina was
that Yazid had exceeded all bounds and every limit in committing
sins.”[^9]

### Karbala and the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn (as)

Ibn Khaldun recounts, “When Yazid’s tyranny and the oppression by his
deputies became widespread, and after he killed the Prophet’s (S) son,
the people of Medina started a rebellion and uprising.”[^10]

When Bashir ibn Jadhlam brought the news of the martyrdom of Imam
al-Husayn (as) and the taking of captives, it seemed in Medina as though
the trumpet had been blown announcing the Day of Resurrection. The women
of Medina came out of their homes and marched towards the city gates.
Men, women and children, came out of their houses barefoot and shouting,
“O Muhammad! Alas Muhammad! O al-Husayn! O al-Husayn! O al-Husayn!” It
was very similar to the day the Holy Prophet (S) passed away.[^11]

Imam al-Sajjad (as) made a sermon and his words had a strong effect on
the people of Medina. In addition to that, Zaynab Kubra and other women,
all mothers who had lost children in the battle against Yazid, gave
public speeches and detailed what had occurred at Karbala. Each of the
survivors was explaining the event of ‘Ashura and what had transpired at
Karbala. They also gave comprehensive accounts of what had taken place
for the captives on the way from Kufah to Sham and their meeting with
Yazid. All this news had a deep impact on the community of Medina.

### Political chaos and disorganization

One of the main causes for the uprising by the people of Medina against
the Umayyad government was the immoral behavior and corruption that
characterized political decisions. ‘Abd Allah ibn Zubayr wrote a letter
to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah in which he criticized Walid ibn ‘Aqabah, Yazid’s
governor and representative in Medina.[^12]

Ibn Zubayr wrote, “You have sent a harsh and brutal man for us. He does
not pay the least attention to what is right and just. He does not pay
any attention to the advice of well-wishers, nor does he heed the words
of the wise. If you had sent a flexible person, we could be hopeful that
complicated work might be made easier.”

Later, Yazid relieved Walid ibn ‘Aqabah of his post and replaced him
with ‘Uthman ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Sufiyan. ‘Uthman, too, was an arrogant
and vain youth who lacked experience.[^13] It was during his time as
governor of Medina that the event of Harrah took place.[^14]

The accumulation of the mentioned factors laid the groundwork for an
explosion; the only thing that was needed was a spark and it came as
follows: Ibn Mina, Yazid’s financial representative and the man
responsible for collecting tax, made the intention of taking all the
wealth he collected from Harrah to Sham for Yazid.

A group of protesters from Medina blocked his way. They confiscated all
the tax and wealth which Ibn Mina was carrying. Ibn Mina reported the
issue to ‘Uthman ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Sufiyan, the governor of Medina.
‘Uthman reported the issue to Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah in a letter he sent to
Sham. As a result of this, Yazid was incited against the people of
Medina.[^15]

Yazid became very angry when he heard this news. He said, “I swear by
Allah! I will send a large army towards them, and in this way I will
crush them under the feet of horses.”[^16]

Direct confrontation
--------------------

‘Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah invited the people for the ultimate
confrontation and battle with Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah and the whole of Bani
Umayyah. His good public standing was the reason the people trusted him
and organized around him. They even elected him to be the governor of
Medina and paid their allegiance to him and deposed Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah
from the caliphate.[^17]

After this, the people expelled Yazid’s agent, ‘Uthman ibn Muhammad ibn
Abu Sufiyan, from the city of Medina. This happened on the first day of
the month of Muharram, the year 63 of the Islamic calendar (*hijrah*).

Then, they imprisoned all the family members of Bani Umayyah and their
partisans among the Quraysh in the house of Marwan Hakam. They did not,
however, harm the prisoners in any way.[^18]

The deposed governor of Medina sent his torn shirt along with a letter
to Sham imploring for help. He wrote to Yazid, “Answer our call for
help. The people of Medina have driven our clan out of the city.”[^19]

This letter reached Yazid at night. Yazid went to the mosque
immediately, got on the pulpit and called out, “O people of Sham.
‘Uthman ibn Muhammad ibn Abu Sufiyan, the governor of Medina, has
written to me saying that the people of Medina have expelled the family
members of Bani Umayyah and all our partisans out of the city. I swear
upon Allah, swallowing this news is harder for me than living without
the beauties and pleasures of the world.”[^20]

Dispatching the army to Medina
------------------------------

At first, Yazid chose Dahhak ibn Qays Fihri to be the army commander
responsible for carrying out the attack on Medina, but he declined to
accept this responsibility. Then Yazid chose ‘Amru ibn Sa‘id Ashdaq. He
also declined to accept the responsibility. After him, Yazid chose
‘Ubayd Allah ibn Ziyad. However, all three men, in one way or another,
refused to carry out this responsibility.[^21]

Finally, a man named Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah accepted to be responsible for
carrying out the attack on Medina. Yazid appointed him as army commander
for this confrontation. This man agreed to carry out this responsibility
in spite of the fact that he was an ill person aged over ninety
years.[^22]

Government heralds called out, “O people! Mobilize for war with the
people of Hijaz[^23] and come to collect your reward.” The government
was handing out a hundred *dinar*s in cash to every person who was ready
to go to war. It was not long before nearly twelve thousand people were
gathered. According to another report, twenty thousand mounted soldiers
and seven thousand ground forces were mobilized.[^24]

Yazid paid two hundred *dinar*s to every mounted soldier and one hundred
*dinar*s to every soldier of the ground forces. He then ordered them to
march towards Medina in company with Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah.[^25]

Yazid himself accompanied the army for a distance of about three
kilometres before he bade them farewell.[^26] Sham Christians eager to
fight the Muslims of Medina could also be seen among the soldiers of
Yazid’s army.[^27]

Yazid gave the following orders to Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah, “Invite the
people of Medina to pay allegiance to me three times. If they respond
positively and pay allegiance, let them go free. However, if they do not
respond positively and refuse to pay allegiance, fight them. If you
triumph over them, continue the massacre for three days.

Anything that belongs to that city will be permissible for your army to
loot. Do not stop the Sham army from doing whatever it wishes with its
enemy. After three days, stop the killing and pillaging. Then, again ask
for allegiance from the people. They should promise to be Yazid’s slaves
and servants. When you leave Medina, move towards Mecca for another
attack and confrontation.”[^28]

Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah marched from Wadi al-Qura’ towards Medina with his
soldiers. They camped at a place called “Jurf”, which was three
kilometers from Medina.[^29]

On the other side, the people of Medina were preparing themselves for
confrontation and defence. They had been informed that the people of
Sham were moving towards Medina.

When the army of Sham gained proximity to Medina, ‘Abd Allah ibn
Hanzalah called the people to the Prophet’s (S) Mosque. The people
assembled near the Prophet’s (S) pulpit. ‘Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah
requested that anyone who concurred with him about this uprising should
pay allegiance and promise to stand by him to the death. The people
responded positively and paid allegiance to him. They promised to stand
by his side to the death.

‘Abd Allah went on the pulpit. After praising Allah and mentioning a few
other issues, he said, “O people of Medina! We have rebelled for no
other reason save that Yazid is a fornicating and adulterous man. He is
a drunkard who does not pray. Tolerating his reign will bring Allah’s
punishment and tribulation upon us...”[^30]

Confrontation between Sham army and forces of Medina
----------------------------------------------------

To protect Medina, the Islamic resistance forces of Medina used a trench
which had remained since the Prophet’s (S) time. They neglected the
eastern part of the city because they believed that there was a remote
possibility that the Sham army would begin their attack from the rugged
rocky area.

They thought that even if the Sham army were to begin their attack from
this area, it was still improbable for them to achieve any success.
However, the Sham army took them by surprise and began its attack on
Medina from that same stony area which the Islamic resistant forces had
ignored.

The battle continued from morning up to afternoon. The Islamic forces of
Medina were fighting and resisting fiercely. At noon, ‘Abd Allah ibn
Hanzalah asked one of his slaves to watch and protect him from behind so
that he could recite his prayers. ‘Abd Allah then recited his prayers
and returned to the battlefront to lead the valiant resistance against
the Sham army. [^31]

Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah asked Marwan to help him enter Medina. Marwan went to
Medina and visited the tribe of Bani Harthah. There, he called for a man
he was acquainted with and in the process of a secret conversation,
Marwan managed to persuade this traitor to show him the way for the Sham
army to penetrate Medina in return for generous rewards.

He showed Marwan a way which passed through the area of the tribe of
Bani al-Ashhal and the Sham army used this route to infiltrate
Medina.[^32]

The first line of the Islamic resistant fighters responsible for
defending Medina suddenly heard the shout of ‘*Allah-u Akbar*’ by the
Sham army from right inside Medina. It was not long before they realized
that they were being attacked from behind by the Sham army. Many of the
Islamic resistance fighters left the battlefield and returned to Medina
in order to defend their women and children.

The Sham army attacked and killed innocent civilians from every
direction. When ‘Abd Allah ibn Hanzalah was finally killed, the Sham
army gained the upper hand against the resistance movement of Medina.
Finally, they gained complete control of the whole city.[^33]

Massacre and looting of property in Medina
------------------------------------------

Ibn Qutaybah recounts that, “‘The Sham army entered Medina on the twenty
seventh day of Dhu al-Hijjah in 63 AH. For three days Medina was
plundered by the Sham army up to the appearance of the new moon of the
month of Muharram.”[^34]

Following Yazid ibn Mu‘awiyah’s orders, and after the seizure of Medina,
Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah told his soldiers, “Your hands are open and you are
free to do whatever you want. You must plunder and loot Medina for three
days.”[^35]

Thus, the city of Medina was subjected to wholesale murder and plunder
by the Sham army. Everything was permissible for the Sham soldiers. No
man or woman remained safe from their harm. The civilians of Medina were
killed and their property was looted.[^36]

The brutal and wholesale massacre of the people of Medina was
detestable. It was loathsome to see the descendants of the Prophet’s (S)
companions, the Helpers and the Immigrants being butchered. The looting
was despicable. However, the wholesale violation of females by the
depraved and reckless soldiers of Sham was more contemptible and
disgraceful than all else.

In this invasion of the Prophet’s city, thousands of women were
violated. Thousands of children were born whose fathers were not known
and these children later became known as ‘the Children of Harrah [*awlad
al-harrah*].’[^37]

The streets of Medina were filled with dead bodies. Blood flowed on the
ground up to the Prophet’s (S) Mosque.[^38] Children were mercilessly
killed in their mothers’ arms.[^39] The elderly companions of the Holy
Prophet (S) were exposed to torture and dishonor.[^40]

The scale of the killings was so great that because of his extravagance
in killing people, Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah was from then onwards nicknamed
“Musrif” ibn ‘Aqabah which in the Arabic language means ‘the one who is
extravagant’. After this horrendous event, the people of Medina wore
black mourning clothes and the sounds of their weeping could be heard
from their homes for up to one year.[^41]

Ibn Qutaybah narrates, “On the day of Harrah, eighty companions of the
Prophet (S) were killed and after that day there was no *Badri* (person
that took part in the Battle of Badr) left. Seven hundred members of the
Quraysh and *ansar* were put to death and ten thousand innocent people
of the community were killed from among Arabs, the *tabi‘in* and other
virtuous people of Medina.”[^42]

Suyuti writes, “In the year 63 of the Islamic calendar, the people of
Medina rebelled against Yazid. They even dismissed him from the
caliphate. In retaliation, Yazid sent a huge army towards them with
orders to kill anyone who had rebelled. After that, the army was
commanded to go to Mecca and kill Ibn Zubayr.

The Sham army came to the holy city of Medina and the event of Harrah
came to pass. But what can make one comprehend what the event of Harrah
was? Al-Hasan once narrated, ‘I swear upon Allah! There was no man who
was spared in that event. A large number of the Prophet’s (S) companions
and other people were killed. Medina was looted and a thousand virgin
girls were violated. *We are from Allah and to whom is our return!*’

Allah’s Prophet (S) had said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«من أخاف أهل المدينة اخافه الله وعليه لعنة الله والملائكة والناس
أجمعين.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Anyone who terrorizes and intimidates the people of Medina will be
terrorized by Allah and may the curse of Allah, the angels and all the
people be upon him.’

This *hadith* has been narrated by Muslim’.”[^43]

Ibn Qutaibah recounts, “When Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah finished his killing and
looting in Medina, he wrote to Yazid, ‘Peace upon thee O leader of the
believers… I did not recite the noon [*zuhr*] prayers until I conquered
Medina and prayed right in the Prophet’s Mosque. This was, however,
after a lot of killing and extensive looting. In keeping with your
command, we followed anyone who escaped and killed all those who were
wounded. We looted their houses three times just as you, the commander
of the faithful, had ordered.”[^44]

Sibt ibn al-Jawzi narrates from Mada’ini in a book named “*Harrah*”,
that Zuhri said, “On the day of Harrah, seven hundred people, among them
the elders of the Quraysh, the Helpers, the Immigrants, and the well
known and honored of Medina were killed.

In addition to this, ten thousand others including men, women and slaves
were killed. There was so much bloodshed in Medina that blood reached
the Prophet’s (S) tomb, and his mosque and garden were filled with
blood.”

Mujahid says, “The people of Medina even took refuge in the Prophet’s
(S) quarters and at his pulpit but there were swords that would even
enter these places.”

Mada’ini quotes from Ibn Qarrah who quotes Hisham ibn Hisan, “After the
event of Harrah, a thousand unmarried women gave birth to children whose
fathers were not known.” Apart from Mada’ini, other historians too have
narrated that a thousand women without husbands gave birth after this
event.[^45]

Some well-known people who were executed
----------------------------------------

After gaining victory over the people of Medina, Muslim ibn ‘Aqabah
called for an assembly of some of the well-known personalities of the
uprising. After a special and summary trial, he condemned all of them to
death. The significance of these trials was to force these prominent
people to promise publicly to be Yazid’s loyal slaves and servants.[^46]

Some of the most prominent people that were tried and executed include:

1. Abu Bakr ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn Ja‘far ibn Abu Talib,[^47]

2. Two daughters of Zaynab (daughter of Umm Salamah),[^48]

3. Abu Bakr ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar ibn Khattab,[^49]

4. Ma‘qul ibn Sanan (One of the standard-bearers of the Prophet during
the conquest of Mecca),[^50]

5. Fadl ibn ‘Abbas ibn Rabi‘ah ibn Harith ibn ‘Abd al-Muttalib,[^51]

6. Abu Sa‘id Khudri (One of the Prophet’s companions that had
accompanied the Prophet in twelve of the holy wars [*ghazwah*s]),[^52]

7. ‘Abd Allah ibn Muti‘.[^53]

Jabir and the event of Harrah
-----------------------------

Ibn Qutaybah writes, “Jabir was a blind man when the event of Harrah
took place. He used to walk in the streets of Medina and say, ‘May the
person who tormented Allah and the Holy Prophet (S) perish!’ A man asked
him, ‘Who terrorized Allah and his Prophet?’

Jabir answered, ‘I heard Allah’s Prophet (S) say, ‘Anyone who terrorizes
the people of Medina has tormented that which I hold dear.’’ A man from
Sham who happened to hear this conversation attacked Jabir with a sword
intending to kill him. Marwan stopped that man and ordered Jabir to be
taken home.”[^54]

It has to be mentioned, however, that one of the houses which was
attacked and looted by the Sham army was that of Jabir. All of his
household property was plundered

[^1]: Minhaj al-Sunnah, vol. 4, p. 575.

[^2]: Ibn Qutaybah, ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, vol. 1, p. 238.

[^3]: Tajarub al-Umam, vol. 2, p. 79.

[^4]: Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5, p. 106; Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 368.

[^5]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 368; Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 5, p. 135.

[^6]: Al-Futuh, vol. 3, p. 179.

[^7]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 368; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 6,
p. 233.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 209.

[^10]: Ibn Khaldun, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 37.

[^11]: Maqtal Abi Mukhnaf, p. 200.

[^12]: Nihayah al-Arab, vol. 6, p. 216.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Al-Ma‘arif, p. 345.

[^15]: Tarikh Ya‘qubi, vol. 2, p. 250; Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1,
p. 206.

[^16]: Wafa’ al-Wafa’, vol. 1, p. 127.

[^17]: Ibn Sa‘d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5, p. 47.

[^18]: Ibid., Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 111; Ibn
Khaldun, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 37.

[^19]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 114; Wafa’ al-Wafa’,
vol. 1, p. 127.

[^20]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 2, p. 9; Al-Mahasin wa al-Masawi,
vol. 1, p. 46.

[^21]: Al-Futuh, vol. 3, p. 179; Ibn Sa‘d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5,
p. 176; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 11.

[^22]: Al-Futuh, vol. 3, p. 180.

[^23]: The area now considered as the Arab Peninsula where Medina lies.

[^24]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 112; Wafa’ al-Wafa’,
vol. 1, p. 128.

[^25]: Tarikh Tabari, vol. 4, p. 371; Akhbar al-Tuwal, p. 310.

[^26]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 56.

[^27]: Tarikh al-‘Arab, vol. 1, p. 248.

[^28]: Akhbar al-Tuwal, p. 310; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol.
4, p. 112; Al-Futuh, vol. 3, p. 180.

[^29]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 211.

[^30]: Ibn Sa‘d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, vol. 5, p. 47.

[^31]: Ibid., p. 48; Al-I‘lam, vol. 4, p. 234.

[^32]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 211; Akhbar al-Tuwal, p. 310;
Wafa’ al-Wafa’, vol. 1, p. 129.

[^33]: Wafa’ al-Wafa’, vol. 1, p. 130.

[^34]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, pp. 220-221.

[^35]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 10.

[^36]: Al-Futuh, vol. 3, p. 181; Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol.
4, p. 17.

[^37]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 2, p. 10; Al-Futuh, vol. 3, p. 181;
Al-Bada’ wa al-Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 14; Wafiyyat al-A‘yan, vol. 6, p. 276;
Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 209.

[^38]: Ibn Athir, Al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 113.

[^39]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 215.

[^40]: Akhbar al-Tuwal, p. 314.

[^41]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 220.

[^42]: Ibid., p. 216; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 242.

[^43]: Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 209; Siyr A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, pp.
37-38.

[^44]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 218.

[^45]: Tadhkirah al-Khawass, pp. 259-260; Al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah, vol.
8, p. 242; Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 316.

[^46]: Al-Futuh, vol. 2, p. 182.

[^47]: Al-Nihayah al-Arb, vol. 6, p. 227.

[^48]: Ibid.

[^49]: Al-Ma‘arif, p. 187.

[^50]: Wafa’ al-Wafa’, vol. 1, p. 133.

[^51]: Al-Nihayah al-Irb, vol. 6, p. 227.

[^52]: Hilyah al-Awliya’, vol. 1, p. 369.

[^53]: Nasab al-Quraysh, p. 384.

[^54]: Al-Imamah wa al-Siyasah, vol. 1, p. 214.


