Foreword
========

In *The Heart of Man: Its Genesis for Good and Evil, in Religious
Perspectives* (1964. p 93), Erich Fromm argues that ‘’our conscious mind
represents mainly our own society and culture, while our unconscious
represents the universal man in each of us.’’ If we could conclude the
project of Allama Jafari in one sentence that would be what Erich Fromm
stated about the role of unconscious and its relation to the universal
in each of us. In other words, Allama Jafari was working on the poetry
of awakening the ‘universal being’ in the heart of human self in a
dialectical fashion that the unconscious would turn conscious and the
universal would get fused with the conscious heart in a dynamic mode.

In 2010, I wrote a book on Allama Jafari entitled *Reflections on the
Social Thought of Allama M. T. Jafari: Rediscovering the Sociological
Relevance of the Primordial School of Social Theory*, which was
published by University Press of America.

There I attempted to reconstruct the theoretical significance of Allama
Jafari within the broad parameters of social theory by arguing that he
belongs to a school of thought which has been undertheorized in the
Iranian context as well as not known in the global context of social
theory.

While thinking over the repercussions of such bold assertions in regard
to a thinker who, is not even recognized within Iran as a relevant
social philosopher (let alone a social thinker or social theorist and
sociologist), I came across an unpublished manuscript by Allama Jafari
entitled *Sociology and Human Being* dated 1976.[^1]

In these unpublished lectures, he precisely takes issue with sociology
as a field of knowledge and mentions the works of Western sociologists
and even quotes Durkheim and other classical sociologists at length.
Reading this work I realized that we are faced with a thinker who is a
many-sided theoretician that is indispensable for all who are interested

in alternative sociological imaginations. In other words, the
sociological works of Allama Jafari represents a novel fashion in doing
sociology based on primordial school of social theory. To put it
differently, we who studied disciplinary sociology and grew within the
parameters of discursive rationalized imagination have come to believe
that reflections over the destiny of humanity is tantamount to the
principles of disciplinary rationality.

However, as Syed Farid Alatas has demonstrated cogently the alternative
sociology is desirably possible when the students of social sciences get
in touch with their respective traditions which enable them to build new
concepts for explaining ‘other’ *historical experiences* and *social
realities*. (2006) One creative mode of relating to alternative
traditions is to build upon the works of thinkers who belong to an
intellectual tradition in an intellectual fashion and not long for a
tradition in a fetishistic manner.

In other words, Allama Jafari is rooted in the soil of perennial
tradition of religio perennis but that has not stopped him to establish
constructive dialog with other traditions such as European, Russian,
Chinese, Indian, and many other schools of thought.

In this work, I have attempted to demonstrate the contours of an
alternative approach to sociological problematiques within the work of
Allama Jafari which is aimed at reviving the ‘’universal’’ within the
parameters of human sciences. In other words, the revival of alternative
discourses is only possible when one’s classics are different than the
disciplinary canonical paradigm but this does not mean to exclude other
streams of thought such as disciplinary discourses embodied in the
pantheon of sociological temple.

Last but not least, I would like to emphasize that any attempt to
identify the thread that runs through Allama Jafari’s writings will soon
uncover an unequivocally *humaneistic* [^2] worldview. From the 194os on
to the end of his life in 1998, this was Allama Jafari’s guiding
principle.

[^1]: This work is composed of 180 pages in Persian. At the Center for
Allama Jafari Studies in Iran the lectures have been edited by one of my
students at Sharif University of Technology namely Vahide Sadeghi who
has gone through all the papers and edited them in a presentable
fashion. The book has not been published yet but the director of the
Center for Allama Jafari Studies, i.e. Ali Jafari is intending to carry
out the task by this year. In other words, the reason I have not given
page numbers whenever I have quoted from this work is that it has not
been paginated yet. Therefore I have referred to chapters rather than
pages in these lectures. Additionally, the lectures were conducted in
Persian and the translations are mine and I have not rendered literally.
On the contrary, I have translated freely and used aspects of these
lectures. However, I should mention that I have looked at other works of
Allama Jafari in regard to sociological questions too.

[^2]: I used by purpose this term as humanism has come to refer to
secularized inclinations. Although I have argued elsewhere that humanism
in the pristine sense of the term cannot be but a revival of humane
tendencies in the heart of human being and in the body of human
community. Nevertheless I have decided to employ another term to remove
any trace of confusion in regard to the universe of Allama Jafari’s
thought. In other words, by humaneistic I intended to emphasize the
humane dimensions of the work of Allama Jafari which could be
interpreted as an antidote against alienating forces of modernism by
paving the road towards realization of wonderful possibilities of human
spirit.


