Prologue
========

Rudolf J. Siebert[^1]

Professor of Religion and Society

Department of Comparative Religion

Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA

Seyed Javad Miri’s book “Alternative Sociology Probing into the
Sociological Thought of Allama M. T. Jafari’’ deals fundamentally with
the modern antagonism between the religious and the secular, the sacred
and the profane, religious revelation and profane enlightenment, faith
and autonomous reason.

Erich Fromm and the critical theorists of the Frankfurt School defined
religion as non-authoritarian, non-dogmatic humanistic X-experience, as
movement toward Universality and Wholeness, as longing for the totally
Other than the horror and terror of nature and history, for perfect
justice, for unconditional love, and as the hope, that the murderer
shall not triumph over the innocent victim, at least not ultimately.

They defined enlightenment with Sigmund Freud as the attempt to put Ego,
where Id is, and as making the Unconscious conscious, as the effort, to
free people from their fears, and to make them masters of their fate.

Seyed Javad Miri and his great teacher Allama M. T. Jafari stand on the
humanistic, scientific side, being at the same time open toward the
religious side. Both humanistic scholars have contributed much in theory
and praxis to the prevention of alternative Future I - the entirely
administered society, and of alternative Future II - the fully
militarized society, and to the arrival of a possible alternative Future
III - a free and just society, in which not only personal autonomy and
universal, i.e., anamnestic, present, and proleptic solidarity, but also
religion and enlightenment would be reconciled.

Seyed Javad Miri, reflects in his new book on the life work of Allama
Jafari including mysticism, philosophy, jurisprudence, art, literature
natural and social sciences and poetry.

He introduces Allama Jafari’s work and its great Iranian wisdom, which
reached a climax in Cyrus, and was different from Jerusalem, Athens, and
Rome, their mythos, logos, and ethos, the seedbed societies of the
Western civilization, into the globalizing modern Occident: Europe and
America. Doing so, he identifies the limits of the present day secular
natural and social sciences in understanding and comprehending reality.

To be sure, he is well educated in and takes most seriously Western
secular psychology, social psychology, sociology, anthropology, and
philosophy as “tools” to understand and comprehend “human being”. But he
is also fully aware, that secular sociology fragments and
compartmentalizes the human being, and thus doubles up the extreme
division of labor and its alienating effects in modern civil society.

The secular methodology loses the totality of man, as once projected by
Plato and the Neo-Platonists, and most recently by Allama M. T. Jafari:
the unified tripartite framework of “human being” - body, psyche, and
soul. Persia (Iran) and Europe are not only different; they also have
much in common. However, Seyed Javad Miri is correct in his observation,
that positivistic sociology is unable to account for human “wholeness”
or “integratedness,” not to speak of bringing it about.

Seyed Javad Miri is aware that the dominance of positivistic sociology
has damaged the study of human society. Since August Comte, the inventor
of the names “positivism” and “sociology”, positivism means the
anti-metaphysical metaphysics of “what is the case.”

As positivistic sociology describes, categorizes, mathematizes and puts
into statistical form, what is the case in modern civil society, it
fails to see and is blinded against what ought not to be, and what in
terms at least the Abrahamic religions – Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam - is against God and his will, and should therefore be changed.

The Mosaic Decalogue, which all three Abrahamic religions have in
common, and which could be summed up in the Golden Rule, which all
living world religions share, is revolutionary. Without stealing,
murdering, and lying, no modern ruling class could possibly establish
bloody retaliation and revenge among individuals as well as among
nations.

Seyed Javad Miri is fully conscious of the fact that in the secular
positivistic sociology instrumental or functional rationality dominates
mimetic or communicative rationality. Secular modernity once promised
more than instrumental rationality. But as it was immensely successful
in terms of the functional natural sciences and technology, it neglected
communicative rationality: It sold and lost its soul, including psyche
and body.

Modern people travel in the technologically most advanced cars and
airplanes, while their families fall apart at home, and the inner cities
turn into wastelands, and the neighborhoods are without neighbors, and
the wars, which are so costly in terms of human lives and property, take
no end.

The life world, which includes family, neighborhood, friends, lovers,
aesthetic and religious associations, and which is sometimes still
characterized by communicative rationality, and which is still sometimes
steered over the medium of religious or secular ethics and morality,
suffers inner colonization from the economic subsystem of the total
system of human condition and human action system, characterized by
functional rationality and steered over the medium of money, and by the
political subsystem, which is also characterized by instrumental
rationality, and is steered over the medium of power.

Sometimes spontaneous social movements like “Occupy: Wall Street” turn
against such inner colonization of the life-world, and try to stop and
to break it more or less successfully.

Seyed Javad Miri understands the “humanities” as a methodology of
thought, which does not separate physicality from spirit or from
metaphysics, or from religion, as the positivistic social sciences have
done since the end of German idealism, and its last great metaphysicians
and their transcendental or dialectical logic, the first new one after
Aristotle, of which Marx became the heir, turning it upside down and
secularizing it, and which Lenin transformed into the likewise profane
ABC of revolution and liberation. Of course, secular liberation is not
against the theology of the three Abrahamic religions.

Theology is rather the necessary source and precondition of liberation,
as Ernst Bloch, Walter Benjamin, and Erich Fromm have made clear enough.
A theology, which while it aims at religious redemption, remains,
nevertheless, still open for the secular happiness of the people as the
goal of politics, alone can help historical materialism to solve its
metaphysical and religious problems in terms of an anamnestic solidarity
with all those victims, who became martyrs of freedom, without ever
experiencing alternative Future III - the realm of freedom on the basis
of natural and economic necessity, and without ever having had their day
in court as they fought against the arrival of alternative Future I -
the totally administered society, and of alternative Future II - the
entirely militarized society.

It is not without good reasons, that there exist today Jewish, Christian
and Islamic liberation theologies on all continents, which are of
greatest actuality.

Seyed Javad Miri observes rightly, that there are individualistic and
collectivistic schools present in modern sociology. The division of
these schools reflects the antagonism of individual and collective in
bourgeois society. So far positivistic sociology has not been able to
reconcile this discrepancy.

Liberalism, the philosophy of civil society, is atomistic even still
when it is socially modified by the principle of subsidiarity as it is
the case in the Roosevelt or New Deal liberalism, which is practiced
today in America by the Obama Administration. What is missing in modern
liberal capitalist society is universal solidarity.

The unresolved antagonism between the individual and the collective as
well as the discrepancy between the rich and the poor classes, the
bourgeoisie and the “precariat,” drives civil society beyond itself into
alternative Future I, II or III.[^2]

Seyed Javad Miri is right, when he identifies, what Max Weber called
“rationalization” as “falsely assumed progress.” The sociologies who
follow Weber, e.g. structural functionalism, overlook the dialectic of
enlightenment. Enlightenment does indeed mean rationalization. However
in the real historical process this rationalization often turns against
itself. More rationalization of a corporation often means also more
irrationality. Enlightenment also means integration.

But often integration leads to more disintegration historical
materialism. It is accepted in most forms of sociology, on the Right and
on the Left. It cannot be denied, that projection takes place in
religion, like in any other domain of human life, e.g. between lovers.
However, all projections need a screen against which the projection
takes place. That is also true for religion.

The existential theologian Paul Tillich, the friend of Max Horkheimer,
the founder of the critical theory of society of the Frankfurt School,
and the teacher and friend of Theodor W. Adorno, and the friend of Fromm
argued correctly, that from the fact, that anthropological projection
takes place in religion it cannot be concluded, that there is no more
place for theology any longer: Also religious projection needs a screen,
which has elicited it throughout many world religions for centuries: the
totally Other than the phenomenal world with all its injustices.

Seyed Javad Miri would like to reconcile humanistically humano-centered:
and theo-centered world views. If it is true, that on one hand the
humano-centered secularization process of the past four centuries in the
Western civilization, which today is even globalized, cannot really be
stopped, and on the other hand, that the world religions have greatly
contributed to the humanization of the human species at least in the
past 6000 years, then the question arises, how the progressive elements
in these religions can be rescued through their inversion or translation
into the secular discourse of the expert cultures, i.e. sociology,
anthropology, psychology, political economics, philosophy, etc., and
through it into the communicative action of the life world, and through
social movements even into the behavior in the economic and political
subsystems of modern and post-modern action systems.

Such inversion of semantic materials and potentials of religion into the
discourse of the expert cultures could lead to a reconciliation of
humano-centered and theo-centered world views on the secular side.

Seyed Javad Miri differentiates between a first and second nature of
man, between instincts and social survival. Here the problem is how to
relate adequately the first nature of instincts and the second nature,
which individuals receive through cultural socialization.

The massive, explosive breakthrough of the libidinous aspects- porno
industry - and the aggressive aspects - war industry - of the Id, the
will to life in individuals and collectives, in the modern Western
culture, leads us to speak with Freud of the “discontents of
civilization”, if not of a failed civilization.

The solution may lay with what the mystics suggested, and what Marx took
up: the idea of the humanization of nature and the naturalization of
man. So far the bourgeois drive to control and exploit selfishly and
absolutely the external as well as the internal nature in the interest
of capitalism and of private property and profit, has prevented such
reconciliation between the first and the second nature and has promoted
their further alienation.

There are ecological catastrophes going on in the ecology of nature and
of man. Reconciliation between man and nature could take place in
alternative Future III-a classless and free society. If man’s killer
instinct, as it is expressed in one retaliation or thievery war after
the other, and in the always growing and always more sophisticated
weapon industry cannot be sublimated and humanized, the survival of
humanity on this planet mat very well be threatened.

What Seyed Javad Miri calls the humanistic and naturalistic approaches
to the study of society could be combined in the effort to achieve
alternative Future III - a free society, in which not only the
antagonism between the sacred and the profane, and the discrepancy
between the personal autonomy and the universal solidarity, but also the
contradiction between nature and man could be reconciled.

Those sociological approaches can, of course, not be value-free in Max
Weber’s sense. To be sure, already the intentional or unintentional
interference of the sociologist into his or her own object of study
renders a value - free sociology impossible. In any case, the humanistic
and naturalistic sociological approaches could not be satisfied with the
mere positivistic study of what is the case, but would also have to
point out its potential and what ought to be in a positive or negative
way, and initiate the consequent, necessary practical changes. Seyed
Javad Miri’s new book, inspired by the great work of his teacher Allama
M. T. Jafari, is doing precisely that in the most excellent way, as he
is building a strong bridge between the great Iranian culture and the
West.

[^1]: Rudolf J. Siebert was born in Frankfurt, Germany. He studied
history, philology, philosophy, sociology, psychoanalysis, and theology
at the University of Frankfurt, the University of Mainz, the University
of Munster, and the Catholic University of America, Washington D.C. from
1947 - 1955. Professor Siebert has taught, lectured, and published
widely in Western and Eastern Europe, the United States, and Canada. He
is a professor of Religion and Society in the Department of Comparative
Religion at Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA. He is
the director of the Center for Humanistic Future Studies at Western
Michigan University since 1980, the director of the international course
on the "Future of Religion" in the Inter-University Center for
Post-Graduate Studies in Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia / Croatia since 1975, and
the international course on "Religion and Civil Society" in Yalta,
Crimea, and Ukraine since 1999. The Inter-University Center is sponsored
by the University of Simferopol, Simferopol, Ukraine, and Western
Michigan University. Professor Siebert's main works are The Critical
Theory of Religion: Frankfurt School, and From Critical Theory to
Critical Political Theology: Personal Autonomy and Universal Solidarity.
From 1955 to the present, Professor Siebert has developed the critical
or dialectical theory of religion out of the critical theory of society,
from the endeavors of the Institute for Social Research at the
University of Frankfurt, globally known as the "Frankfurt School," and
in continual discourse with sociologists, psychologists,
anthropologists, economists, philosophers, religiologists, and
theologians from the United States, Canada, England, Belgium, Holland,
France, Germany, Yugoslavia / Croatia, Israel, and Columbia. The
dialectical theory of religion emphasizes the three global alternative
futures of society: Future I - the totally administered society; Future
II - the entirely militarized society; and Future III - the reconciled
society. It stresses the three global alternative futures of religion:
Future I - religious fundamentalism; Future II - total secularization;
Future III - the open dialectic between the religious and the secular
aiming at a post-modern reconciliation between a reformed religion and a
transformed secular enlightenment. Rudolf Siebert and his late wife
Margaret nee Noyes had eight children and, now, 14 grandchildren.

[^2]: The economist Guy Standing coined the term “precariat” to try to
describe the reality of low wage workers in our modern, global economy.


