Introduction
============

How could local thinkers be globally presented? Is there any specific
mechanism to carry out such a task? Of course, I do not mean that
thinkers such as Allama Jafari are not globally significant but the
matter of the fact is that in despite of the global significance of his
thought the paradigm of Allama Jafari is not known globally.[^1] The
question of ‘’relevance’’ in the global context could be approached in
two different but interrelated sense, i.e. substantially and
formally.[^2]

Here the question of relevancy is not related to the substantial
dimension of Allama Jafari as this aspect could be intellectually
appraised and critically assessed by anybody who knows the Persian
language and is well-versed in human sciences and philosophy. On the
contrary, the question is of formal significance as it seems the
disciplinary rationality by being the dominant mode of reflexivity it
does inhibit the presence of other forms of wisdom which struggle
against reductionism of soft or hard kinds.

In other words, to present the body of Allama Jafari’s thought is not
only a matter of translation or interpretation of parts or all aspects
of his writings into globally significant languages such as English,
French, German, Spanish, Russian, Chinese or Japanese and so on and so
forth. Because the act of translation may at its best convey the
epistemological dimensions of Allama Jafari’s thought and concerns but
it cannot transmit the pre- epistemological concerns of his traditions
across the cultures which are of crucial importance in re-presenting a
scholar of his caliber in a global stage.

Generally speaking, the frame of Allama Jafari’s discourse is consisted
of seven broad streams of philosophy, jurisprudence, mysticism, art,
literature, natural and social sciences, and poetry.

In other words, to understand the landscape of Allama Jafari’s body of
thought one need to take into consideration these complex dimensions
within the Irano-Islamic context in a multicultural fashion. In
addition, the incessant dialog of Allama Jafari with other global
traditions such as European, Russian, Indian and Chinese philosophies
and literary discourse should not be disregarded as the totality of what
he has left behind is inseparable from all these various streams.
Anyhow, to know all these intricate issues will not enable us to fathom
the very spirit of Allama Jafari and the traditions which have come to
be materialized in the body of his thought as the *ethos* is very
different than *logos* and both seem to be not very close to *pathos*
and *mythos*.

One could argue that the question of translation is impossible if we do
not adopt a hermeneutic approach to the world of Allama Jafari which is
a conceptualized text embedded in a textualized ‘’conceptic universe’’
of complex structures. In addition, one could ask about the prospected
concept where the body of Allama Jafari’s thought is supposed to be
transmitted in a meaningful fashion.

If we have chosen the English as the medium of dialog then we have
tacitly accepted the rules of engagement which are operating in the
context of modern worlds. In other words, the four dimensions of ethos,
logos, pathos and mythos within the modern world should be taken into
consideration and contrasted before we can think of a conceptual
re-presentation of Allama Jafari’s intellectual system in a global
context which is not based on the background assumptions of *religio
perennis*.

There are many concepts which we use very carelessly across intellectual
traditions without realizing the pre-conceptual textures of these
concepts which may be similar lexically but different pre-conceptually.
One of those crucial concepts which has been incessantly employed by
Allama Jafari is the concept of ‘’human being’’ and, as a matter of
fact, constitutes the very ground of pre-epistemological concern of his
thought.

When the translation is based on the ‘’lexical accuracy’’ without
realizing the ‘’pre- conceptual truthfulness’’ the result will be a
transmission of words without worlds which lie at the heart of any
systematic discourse that is aimed at restoration of humanity as a
universal reality.

Why do we speak? What happens when we are unable to talk? It seems we
speak because we need to establish relationships and when we are unable
to talk the process of relating gets disrupted. The disruption of
relation does not only affect the flow of words but distorts the
constitution of worlds in the minds of those who are engaged in the
dialog.

When you are incapable of getting your message across the ‘’other’’ then
the world between you and the ‘’other’’ becomes completely other in a
conflicting sense which may lead to a totally incomprehensible state of
incommunicado – where communication with the ‘other’ (who is now turned
into an out-sider) is not possible.

To translate a text in a lexical sense without taking into consideration
all those fundamental aspects would lead to incommunicado which is the
opposite of communication where a sense of communion may be achievable.
In other words, if a sense of unity between the text and the reader is
established then we may hope to reach to some kind of relationship where
the message of Allama Jafari along with the universe of his thought
reach across at a global stage.

To put it differently, what we need to do is the recreation of ingenious
creativity which has grown in the soil of tradition and embedded in the
textures of Allama Jafari’s thought. However, a thinker is not only
confined by his words and the words cannot express the worlds of a
scholar in an integrated fashion. In other words, the appropriate
question is how to bridge between the world of theory and the context of
praxis? To work out the broken bridge when the world of the author has
broken into myriad pieces and only kept intact in the body of words is
not an easy task.

This is where the question of multiple readings and interpretations set
in. In other words, at the global stage, what kind of Allama Jafari or
what type of tradition we would like to present and re-present? Where
does our allegiance lie? To what direction does our heart aim? Are we
trying to exegete Allama Jafari or the task is to recreate a tradition
in a new global context where the audience could establish a meaningful
relationship with the message?

What is the message of religio perennis tradition? If you are looking at
human existence from the heights of the wings of Gabriel then the
message is to realize the potentials of intellect in the bosom of human
self. But the wings of Gabriel have lost its mythos within the global
context where religio perennis is not the dominant modality of relevance
as well as relatedness.

In other words, what should be done in a context where Gabriel is not
present in the textures of cogito? Maybe a detour on history of
civilization would be appropriate in order to understand the
complexities of ideas and the nature of social theories at
metatheoretical levels.

Through late 14th century Old French *magique*, the word ‘’magic’’
derives via Latin *magicus* from the Greek adjective *magikos* used in
reference to the ‘’magical’’ arts of the Magicians i.e. the Zoroastrian
astrologer priests. This is the etymological background of the term
which goes back to the land of Iran. In the modern context, magic has
been conceptualized in contrast to science and by certain scholars as an
extension of religion.

In other words, this concept in current English refers to the art of
manipulating aspects of reality either by supernatural means or through
knowledge of occult laws unknown to science. It is in contrast to
science, in that science does not accept anything not subject to either
direct or indirect observation, and subject to logical analysis, whereas
practitioners of magic claim it is an inexplicable force beyond logic.

Magic has been practiced in all cultures, and utilizes ways of
understanding, experiencing and influencing the world somewhat akin to
those offered by religion, though it is sometimes regarded as more
focused on achieving results than religious worship.

This is what is claimed by modern historians who view the scientific
rationality as the criterion of reasonability. In other words, the land
of magic is Iran. Magus resided in Iran. Iran is the locus of
incantation or enchantment. The world has been disenchanted in the
Occident. Orient is where the sun rises. The enchantment of the world
comes from Iran.

How could one distinguish between styles of thought? In the contemporary
context, one could make a distinction between paradigms which fall
within either the parameters of ‘disenchantment paradigm’ or
‘enchantment paradigm’. What does these terms mean within the context of
sociology? By disenchantment, we refer to *Entzauberung* which is a term
in the social sciences that describes the cultural rationalization and
devaluation of *Das Heilige* apparent in modern society.

The concept was originally coined by Max Weber to describe the character
of modernized, bureaucratic, secularized Western society, where
scientific understanding is more highly valued than intellectual
knowledge, and where processes are oriented toward rational goals rather
than eschatological significance. (Bell, 1997) The disciplinary
sociological imagination is the map whereby we can trace the
disenchantment of the world which has confined us to the walls of the
‘Iron Cage’.

But the term ‘enchantment’ which is used less in the context of
disciplinary sociology refers to an existential approach that enlivens
the sense of ‘wonder’ or *wunder* in the contemporary world. The word
enchantment is related to incantation and magic and both

are etymologically related to the ideas of Iran (the land of
incantation) and Magus (practitioners of wonder). Allama Jafari belongs
to a tradition which could be classified as the seer of enchantment. As
Max Weber lays out the contours of the disenchanted world of ‘’Iron
Cage’’, the work of Allama Jafari could be seen as the roadmap towards
how to redeem humanity from the ‘’Dungeon of Necrophilia’’.

As the ancient Greeks did not understand the paradigm of illuminated
magus in Iran by ascribing to them acts of hocus pocus the modern
scholars have not comprehended the enchanting character of
intelligibility which is aimed at reviving the *Das Heilige* by making
the ‘’Iron Cage’’ a passé. In other words, to re-present the world of
Allama Jafari in the context of modern mind is a challenging task as the
boundaries of modern imagination is based on the textures of
disenchantment rather than enchantment.

To put it otherwise, *Verzauberung* in the world of Allama Jafari is a
mental construction which is reflected in his work solely. This mental
construction which is based on the poetical union between realms of
body, mind and spirit is not accessible to everyone who has no access to
the world beyond the confines of disenchanted cage.

In other words, the act of translation needs to go beyond lexical
transmission of concepts by opening novel avenues. Of course, I should
add that by Iran, I do not refer to the political reality on the
contemporary world map but to the idea that does not distinguish between
the path of intellect and the course of incantation where word (*Logos*)
and world (*Kosmos*) merge into a united reality in the heart of human
self. In brief, disciplinary rationality could be concluded as an
attempt to reduce the self into an index of the ‘social’ while the
primordial intelligibility is aimed at elevation of the self as a mirror
of the ‘cosmos’ without disregarding the ‘social’ *per se*.

What does ‘transplantation’ as a concept mean? What does philosophic
transplantation mean? Is it possible to transplant an idea? By
transplantation I refer to the act of removing something from one
location and introducing it in another location. To put it otherwise, in
the very texture of transplantation there are two momentous episodes of
‘’removal’’ and ‘‘introduction’’.

The first one refers to the spatial dimension while the second episode
refers to the mental aspect. In order to be able to transplant an idea
within the mental location of the
‘’other’’ the totality of the *stranger* should be recognized and this
recognition cannot be realized if the cognition is not involved in a
comprehensibly intersubjective fashion. Although it is a hard task but
the transplantation of ideas has repeatedly happened in the course of
human history. For instance, Locke’s ideas were transplanted to America
by Madison and Jefferson.

To put it differently, the doctrines of the Socinians represent a
rational reaction to a medieval theology based on submission to the
Church’s authority. Though they retained Scripture as something *supra
rationem*, the Socinians analyzed it rationally and believed that
nothing should be accepted *contra rationem.*

Their social and political thought underwent a significant evolutionary
process from a very utopian pacifistic trend condemning participation in
war and holding public and judicial office to a moderate and realistic
stance based on mutual love, support of the secular power of the state,
active participation in social and political life, and the defense of
social equality. They spoke out against the enserfment of peasants, and
were the first Christians to postulate the separation of Church and
state.

The spirit of absolute religious freedom expressed in their practice and
writings, determined, more or less immediately, all the subsequent
revolutions in favor of religious liberty. The precursor ideas of the
Socinians on religious freedom later were expanded, perfected, and
popularized by Locke and Pierre Bayle. Locke’s ideas were transplanted
to America by James Madison and Thomas Jefferson who implemented them in
American legislation.

The rationality of the Socinians set the trend for the philosophical
ideas of the Enlightenment and determined the future development of many
modern intellectual endeavors. (Hillar, 1994. Pp 22-57)

In other words, the transplantation of Allama Jafari’s episteme is
possible provided one is conscious about the differences between
disciplinary and primordial epistemes or textures of disenchantment
paradigm and enchantment framework. To put it otherwise, if we attempt
to reconstruct the image of Allama Jafari as a scientist then we are
playing in a ground which is constructed by architects of disenchantment
and additionally is not what Allama Jafari intended to achieve.

Said differently, we need to resuscitate the *imago magus* as Allama
Jafari is a contemporary magus which in the context of Islam is
equivalent to ‘’Hakim’’. Last but not least, it should be emphasized
that there is no specific mechanism in globalizing local thinkers as
what is needed is a recreation of magical poetry or *magikos poiesis*
embedded in the universe of religio perennis which targets the inner
tapestry of human soul as its subject-matter in re-presenting *perennial
ideals*.

Said differently, we cannot solely rely on translation of ideas based on
lexical accuracy without realizing the poetry of intellection which is
the fundamental principle of coherency in the body of background
assumptions underlying Allama Jafari’s universe.

Apart from the question of incommensurability which may exist when the
coherency principle is based on rationality vis-à-vis intelligibility
there is the issue of dialectics of temporality and spatiality in Allama
Jafari. In other words, if we assume that each thinker formulates
her/his thought in accordance to a context and the text is defined in
regard to an audience then what is left for future?

Futurologists argue that humanity will enjoy increasing political and
economic liberty, as well as increasing freedom from ignorance and
superstition. Humanity will enjoy increasing prosperity and steady
progress within the limits defined by the laws of physics. Effective
immortality may result from technology allowing the human mind to
sustain its brain or perhaps reincarnate itself as an intelligent
artifact.

Human civilization will experience neither salvation nor extermination
by nature, machines, aliens, or gods. Humanity will spread throughout
the Solar System and into the Milky Way, and be enriched by contact with
other intelligent species and artifacts. Eventually humanity's
descendants will so improve their genes and minds that Homo sapiens will
exist primarily as a revered memory.

Religion will decline due to the ongoing loss of faith. In other words,
world religions such as Christianity will be hollowed out and diluted
into a bland mysticism. Islam will follow along the same track but about
150 years behind. Being already more mystical, Hinduism and especially
Buddhism will linger as phenomena more ethnocultural than religious,
much like Judaism and Shintoism already are.

The interesting issues in these predictions are the concepts of
‘’liberty’’, ‘’immortality’’, ‘‘humanity’’, ‘‘human being’’,
‘‘sapience’’ and ‘’religion’’ which in the eyes of futurologists would
lose their essential connotations. Now the question in relation to
religio perennis, enchantment paradigm and the universe of Allama Jafari
is what could be offered to a world that has lost its soul? In other
words, if the future of *homo sapiens* is ominous as predicted by
futurologists then is there any chance the flapping of Gabriel’s wings

will not fall on deaf ears of reincarnated intelligent post-human
artifacts? To answer this question, we need to write another long
treatise but the short answer is:

***… that man can have nothing but what he does … and his deeds will be
seen. Then he will be recompensed with a full and the best recompense …
and to your Lord is the End*** ***(Return of everything). (Koran,
Chapter 53. Verses*** ***39-42)***

[^1]: In a private talk that I had with my Irish colleague (Peter Stone
at the Department of Political Science at Trinity College in
Dublin-Ireland he rightly emphasized that … Allama Jafari’s work, no
doubt deserves a serious attention … [but] I am pretty confident that
most English-language speakers [are] unfamiliar with [Allama] Jafari. We
are responsible for this state of affairs as Iranian scholars and
intellectuals have not taken any step in presenting the works of such
celebrated contemporary thinkers to non-Iranian audience in a systematic
fashion. This is, as stated earlier, my second work on Allama Jafari in
English but these kinds of projects require the efforts of a team of
scholars who discern the destructive challenges of market-driven
corporative imperialistic ideologies of global oligarchies – and seize
the opportunities in mobilizing conscientious souls across the world in
working for the establishment of a sane society (a la Erich Fromm) or
intelligible world (a la Allama Jafari). To those who argue that word
cannot change the world, I should tell that … in the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. (John 1:1). Or …
surely we belong to God and to God shall we return. (2: 156)

[^2]: In the course of his extensive research into the nature of social
reality, human action, and social interaction, Alfred Schutz returned
repeatedly to the phenomenon of relevance. Any attempt to analyze
Schutz’s crucial concepts (e.g. the Life-world, Intersubjectivity,
Typification, Meaningful Action, and Ideal Types) or to use those
concepts in the course of phenomenological social-scientific research
will similarly call for an understanding of this underlying phenomenon.
Schutz’s theory f relevance is one of the most paradoxical concepts
which reflect the nature of social reality in a very paradoxical
fashion. (Cox, 1973) Here I have not been concerned with this aspect of
phenomenological research as such but touched slightly upon the
‘’relevance’’ of Allama Jafari’s relevance in a global context. In other
words, the relevance of Allama Jafari’s relevance itself could be a
relevant problematique which may be examined by phenomenologist scholars
who are interested in relevance of non-Eurocentric social theories in a
Eurocentric context in Europe and America.


