Chapter 1: Relocating Scientific Rationality in Humanities
==========================================================

Science in Retrospection
------------------------

Once upon a time the term science was associated with prestige, status,
kudos, power, superiority, and truth. However today it is very difficult
to associate all these wonderful aspects with scientific enterprise due
to intellectual turns which have brought havoc upon the pantheon of
science.

In particular, the truth-claim of science is not shared by all members
of scientific community today. In other words, issues of truth and
feasibility in both ontological and epistemological fashions have
separated their paths and each has become the sources of many
controversies and conflicts as well as ideological battles and
*methodenstreit*.

This is not to argue that the scientific enterprise is *passé* but
nobody can deny the crisis of *western scientific enterprise* in 21st
century. Of course, by western we don’t refer to an ethnic group,
ideological camp or geographical location but to a mode of doing science
and conceptualizing reality in all its multifaceted dimensions which is
built upon the *Cartesian* philosophy.

Another way of talking about the crisis of modern science is to talk
about the end of hegemony of logical empiricism which resulted in the
births of various post-positivistic philosophies in science and social
sciences as well as diversified discourses of postmodernisms along with
hermeneutic approaches as well as phenomenological philosophies.

Looking retrospectively one could easily discern that there was a great
time when science was considered as the cream of human intellectual
achievement and science was equivalent to natural science and among them
the physics was the towering model in rationalistic approach to reality.
In other words, to approach the gamut of reality in any dimension, one
was inescapably dependent upon the natural scientific models which
provided the best mathematical pattern in conceptualizing as well as
quantifying the complexities of realities in any field.

To put it differently, the authenticity of an intellectual activity was
appraised in reference to its propinquity to available models and
patterns in the discipline of physics. When the social sciences entered
the stage in late 19th and early 20th centuries their relevance in terms
of scientificity was measured by their compliance to the established
norms in the disciplines of natural sciences such as physics, biology,
chemistry, and so on and so forth.

The reign of quantification and the inherent disability of humanities
and social sciences to succumb to total demand of quantification put
them under incessant suspicion by naturalistic-oriented authors who
ruled out the possibility of *scientification* of humanities unless they
turn humanities into natural scientific fashions.

Of course there were thinkers who opposed these conformist pressures but
the mainstream social scientists took up the challenge of turning
humanities into *science of man*, *science of society*, and *behavioral
approaches* in psychology and discourses on mental and spiritual
dimensions of human leben. In other words, reductionism was justified
both on philosophical grounds and institutional demands in all academic
discourses by all parties in West and East.

However what is of significance for us in this context is how in Iran
science was received by thinkers who happened to be outside the modern
academic institutions such as Tehran University or centers for
sociological researches. In other words, how a social thinker such as
Allama Jafari looked at science, the scientific enterprise and more
importantly conceptualized the sociological enterprise while not being a
sociologist in the disciplinary meaning of the term.

Schools of Sociology
--------------------

Within the discipline of sociology we have various paradigms and
schools. For instance, we can speak of Marxist sociology versus academic
sociology or positivistic sociology versus post-positivistic sociology
and interpretative sociology versus legislative sociology. However these
distinctions are not exhaustive and still we can categorize sociological
orientations in a different fashion by classifying theories based on
their respective traditions such as ‘Conservatism’, ‘Liberalism’,
‘Socialism’, ‘Libertarianism’, ‘Anarchism’, ‘Communitarianism’,
‘Islamism’, and so on and so forth. Again this manner of categorization
could not be taken as the sole form of classifying sociological
orientations.

For instance, we can talk about theories based on their ontological
characters such as positivism versus transcendentalism or on
metatheoretical basis such as collectivism versus individualism or
primordialism. In other words, there are various ways of looking at the
sociological enterprise and each is debatable and open to negotiation.

For example, we can look at sociology based on existing perspectives
such as functionalism, structuralism, structurationism, conflict theory,
and so on and so forth. All these different fashions in categorizing
sociological imagination lead us to the problem of paradigm within
sociological field.

The word paradigm has been employed in science to describe distinct
concepts. In despite of the historical usage of the term,

‘’paradigm’’ has come to refer very often now to a thought pattern in
any scientific discipline or other epistemological context. Thomas Kuhn
gave *paradigm* its contemporary meaning when he adopted the term to
refer to the set of practices that define a scientific discipline at any
particular period of time. Nevertheless in *The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions* Kuhn defines a scientific paradigm as: ‘’universally
recognized scientific achievements that, for a time, provide model
problems and solutions for a community of researchers.’’ (1996. p 12)

Kuhn himself did not consider the concept of paradigm as appropriate for
the social sciences. He explained in his preface to *The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions* that he concocted the concept of paradigm
precisely in order to distinguish the social from the natural sciences
(1996. p *x*). While writing his book Kuhn observed that social
scientists were never in agreement on theories, methodologies,
background assumptions or concepts.

He explains that he wrote this book precisely to demonstrate that there
are no, nor can there be any, paradigms in the social sciences. Ritzer,
on the contrary, applies the Kuhnian idea of scientific paradigms to
sociology and demonstrates that sociology is a science consisting of
multiple paradigms. (Ritzer, 1974)

In other words, we have, on one hand, many philosophers of science who
argue stridently against the possibility of social science as a
scientific paradigm, while, on the other hand, we can easily witness
many social scientists who applaud the existing
theoretical/methodological/conceptual diversities as indications of
multi-paradigmaticality within the context of social sciences, in
general, and sociology, in particular.

To put it otherwise, the question of classification is not separated
from the problematique of classics and the latter is very much
intertwined with the problem of classicality and all are related to the
project of canonization in sociological context. What do, in concrete
terms, all these entail? When a scholar attempts to classify an issue
the act of classification is carried out in reference to a framework.

This framework is not a sole product of an instant imagination without
any precedent or antecedent as everybody works within parameters of
existing situations. In other words, within the context of disciplinary
sociology there are certain *paragonic scholars* who have been
appropriated as models for doing sociology in a disciplinary fashion.
Analogous to the process of canonization within the context of Catholic
Church there is a disciplinary form of canonization which influences the
fabric of sociological enterprise in a meaningful fashion, i.e. shared
symbolically by all those who are initiated in the pantheon of
sociological temple.

Said differently, the classicality is not a sole product of imaginative
reworking of existing conceptual frameworks but constructed in a
dialogical manner in relation to complex historical trajectories where a
scholar happens to be situated in the multifaceted cross-roads of all
these diverse factors. Put it differently, the act of classification
within scientific context may look as a pure intellectual enterprise but
the rational tool of mental reorganization is shaped in a
pre-intellectual space which is conditioned by various para-discursive
elements.

Having said this, I would like to turn to the problem of classification
in Allama Jafari’s work now. He comes from an Iranian context where the
disciplinary sociology was approached from a non- disciplinary
perspective. The alternative outlook has colored the contours of his
classificatory schemes and sometimes one may feel irritated as it seems
Allama Jafari is talking about two different things without
distinguishing them conceptually in a feasible fashion. However this
irritation is constructive as alerts us to realize what

could ‘’alternativity’’ mean in practical terms. In other words, Allama
Jafari classifies the disciplinary sociology in an undisciplinary
fashion and this paradox is of crucial importance for all who are
interested in working within alternative paradigms as this
*paradoxicality* is the *raison d'être* of many contemporary
incommensurability between competing discourses in Iran and outside Iran
in relation to human sciences.

In brief, Allama Jafari divides sociology into two broad orientations:
1) Positivistic Sociology and 2) Theoretical Sociology. This distinction
may seem to be rooted in the context of Iranian metaphysical tradition
where philosophy is divided into theoretical and practical orientations.
However this is not the whole story of Allama Jafari’s metatheoretical
narrative as one could discern elements of discursive positivistic
tendencies within the parameters of his classificatory paradigm.[^1]

Positivistic Sociology
----------------------

This school of sociology is a branch of science where the logic behind
the assumptions is based upon sound reasons, explicit laws and inferred
directly. In other words, the methodology in the context of this school
is designed in a manner that any well-versed researcher in this branch
of science and conscious about causality relation between a cause and
its social effect (phenomenal effect in a social context) could be able
to deduce the assumption in regard to the object under sociological
analysis.

For instance, when a sociologist approaches the problem of *multiple
personality* in a society s/he would probably need to inquire about the
societal impact of contrasting ideas which could create the effective
factors for generation of *multiple personality*. (Jafari, 1976. Ch.
3)
When individuals are exposed to different ideas and ideologies their
personalities could be-come glassy, fragile and brittle.

This brittle state could become even more aggravated when a person is
exposed to towering personalities or fascinating ideas and ideologies.
(1976. Ch. 3) In other words, in the shadow of totalitarian ideologies
one may lose and give up her/his autonomy and be under the tutelage of
others. This is to state that in a context where opposing ideas or
ideologies rule supreme it could lead to the breakup of *glace* of human
personality. (1976. Ch. 3) One may fall in a denial pattern by refusing
to admit that s/he has lost her/his autonomy and instead turn into a
cracked and fragmented personality and finally lead to herd-mentality.

There is, in Allama Jafari’s view, a deep correlation between
fragmentation of personality and the question of truth. Individuals who
refuse to conform to dominant social norms based on their autonomous
views regarding fundamental issues of human existence they may be able
to assert themselves above the herd- mentality.

It seems Allama Jafari is touching upon the question of socialization
and taking a position on debates such as ‘nature versus nurture’ or
‘heredity versus environment’ by arguing that personality is a reality
which could be realized and when the individual takes seriously the call
of conscience then this may lead to forms of truth. In other words, the
reality of human being is consisted of what Allama Jafari terms as
‘unification of being’ that underlies the very core of human personality
which makes possible *… the act of discernment, the yearning for
free-will and the desire for freedom. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 3)*

In Allama Jafari’s words, the positivistic sociology is a branch of
science where phenomena and facts are observed in a systematic fashion
and interpreted in reference to established laws. This methodology
reigns in other branches of science too. Thus, in a nutshell, it could
be argued that positivistic sciences are those branches of knowledge
where the laws have been verified and currently dominant in academia.
(1976. Ch. 3)

Theoretical Sociology
---------------------

We have certain theoretical issues that fall within the scope of
theoretical sociology. Allama Jafari believes that in the theoretical
context, we are faced with problems which have not been verified
scientifically. The main task of theoretical sociology is to present
grand theories related to social phenomena and aspects of society. In
the theoretical sociology, the sociologist is looking for quantitative
and qualitative laws and principles which are beneficial for the
betterment of social life.

In other words, the difference between the theoretical sociology and the
former paradigm which was discussed earlier is that within the
theoretical paradigm, theories are presented to the scientific community
without being considered as science. To put it otherwise; problems
discussed within this paradigm will be subjected to the high court of
verification and if the theory is verified then it is considered as a
scientific fact.

This is a danger that threatens science and additionally reduces its
value/significance. For instance, the importance of *Freudian Libido* or
*Malthusian Catastrophe* was discussed initially as a theoretical matter
but later it was considered as a scientific fact which inhibited the
realization of inquiring spirit in vital matters of humanity. (Jafari,
1976. Ch. 3) It seems Allama Jafari refers to the dominant spirit of
scientism which has disarmed many intellectuals in asking serious
questions in regard to the fundamentally significant dimensions of human
destiny.[^2]

Disciplinary Turns and Intelligible Approach
--------------------------------------------

Today there are many thinkers and various discourses where all aspects
of science and the scientific enterprise are critiqued in a very
detailed fashion but four decades ago in a developing country such as
Iran where science, technology and social sciences were held in high
regard to speak critically about scientific study of society, if not
considered as an audacious adventure surely it could be seen as a sign
of intellectual integrity where *fads and foibles* ruled supreme.

In other words, to critique science in 60s and 70s were unthinkable for
Iranian intellectuals who appraised the development of human knowledge
by reference to the western achievement in science and the scientific
models which were produced in Europe and America. In other words, the
ceiling of knowledge was not measured by intellectual criteria but by
reference to *eurocentirc* vision of reality in all its dimensions.

Of course, European thinkers and philosophers were deeply involved in a
critical dialog with science as a novel way of doing rational
conceptualization of reality but these dialogs took the shape of a
revolutionary movement when the reign of logical positivism was
questioned by many celebrated philosophers and historians of science
along with many distinguished scientists.

In brief, one could state that Logical Positivism, also called logical
empiricism, was a philosophical doctrine formulated in Vienna in the
1920s, according to which scientific knowledge is the only kind

of factual knowledge and all traditional metaphysical doctrines are to
be rejected as meaningless. (Beckwith, 1957) In addition, it should be
emphasized that the logical positivist school differs from earlier forms
of empiricism and positivism (e.g., that of David Hume and Ernst Mach)
in holding that the ultimate basis of knowledge rests upon public
experimental verification rather than upon personal experience.

The main figures included Rudolf Carnap (1891-1970), considered the
leading figure of logical positivism, Herbert Feigl (1902-88), Philipp
Frank (1884-1966), Kurt Grelling (1886-1942), Hans Hahn (1879-

1934), Carl Gustav Hempel (1905-97), Victor Kraft (1880-1975), Otto
Neurath (1882-1945), Hans Reichenbach (1891-1953), Moritz Schlick
(1882-1936), and Friedrich Waismann (1896-1959). They were primarily
concerned with the logical analysis of scientific knowledge, which
affirmed that statements about metaphysics, religion, and ethics are
void of cognitive meaning and thus nothing but expression of feelings or
desires; only statements about mathematics, logic and natural sciences
have a definite meaning.

According to logical positivism, all meaningful statements can be
divided in two classes, one containing the statements that are true or
false in virtue of their logical forms or in virtue of their meaning
(these statements are called analytic a priori), the other containing
the statements whose truth or falsity can be ascertained only by means
of the experience (called synthetic a posteriori).

Logic and mathematics belong to the class of analytic a priori
statements, since they are true in virtue of the meaning ascribed to the
logical constants (the words 'and', 'or', 'not', 'if') and to the
mathematical terms. The class of synthetic a posteriori statements
includes all genuine scientific statements, like those of physics,
biology, and psychology.

A statement is meaningful if and only if it can be proved true or false,
at least in principle, by means of the experience or in virtue of its
meaning. Moreover, the meaning of a statement is its method of
verification; that is, we know the meaning of a statement only if we
know the conditions under which the statement is true or false (i.e. the
verifiability principle).

Thus statements about metaphysics, religion and ethics are meaningless
and must be rejected as nonsensical. Also traditional philosophy is
often regarded as meaningless. (Nagel, 1961) Many alleged philosophical
problems, like the controversy between realists and instrumentalists,
are indeed pseudo-problems, the outcome of a misuse of language.
(Carnap, 1974)

They do not concern matters of fact, but the choice between different
linguistic frameworks. Thus the logical analysis of language was
regarded by logical positivism as a major instrument in resolving
philosophical problems. (Friedman, 1999) Characteristic of this aspect
was the intense analysis of scientific language performed by Carnap and
Hempel.

Practical aspects of scientific research were not considered by logical
positivism, which was not interested in the real process of discovering,
but was concerned with the rational reconstruction of scientific
knowledge, that is the study of the logical (formal) relationships
between statements, hypothesis, and empirical evidence.

When others such as Karl Popper (refusal of verifiability as scientific
criterion and replacement of falsifiability as criterion of scientific
norm), A. J. Ayer (distinction between strong and weak verification),
Hilary Putnam (meaninglessness of distinguishing between theoretical and
observational), W. V. O. Quine (critique of the distinction between
analytic and synthetic statements and the reduction of meaningful
statements to immediate experience), and Thomas Kuhn (impossibility to
provide truth conditions for science independent of its historical
paradigm) paved the way for the fall of Logical Positivism, this
generated a benign climate for social sciences which suffered for years
from inferiority complex vis-à-vis ruling natural sciences which
happened to be framed within the parameters of positivism and its
various naturalistic schools.

For instance, sociologists start to talk about paradigms in social
sciences and the multi-paradigmatic character of sociology which has
been lacking in natural sciences.

In other words, a *sociologization* or *culturalization* of scientific
enterprise set in and the self-image of social sciences came to be
interpreted in novel fashions rather than aspiring to look similar to
natural sciences of any kind. George Ritzer, for instance, argued that
sociology is a multiple paradigm science and this multi-
paradigmaticality has a deep impact upon sociological enterprise.

By applying Kuhn's idea of scientific paradigms to sociology and
demonstrating that sociology is a science consisting of multiple
paradigms Ritzer attempted to prove the falsity of historical claim
against social sciences and humanities. He further discussed that the
fall of logical positivism and the rise of multi-paradigmaticality had
deep-rooted implications for the field of sociology and the very notion
of science as we have understood it in the past two centuries. (Ritzer,
1974)

On the other hand, the disintegration of scientific rationality led to a
deeper crisis of metatheoretical nature, i.e. the collapse of notion of
‘law’ in the frame of scientific worldview.

In the memorable word of distinguished Polish-British sociologist
Zygmund Bauman, we are now in a state of *liquid modernity* (Bauman,
2000. p 8) where the whole human value of the scientific worldview (i.e.
the legislative character of scientific inquiry) is being questioned
once again- and instead we have entered into a time where science is
better off to take on the mantle of understanding (i.e. the
interpretative character of academic investigation) where
phenomenological approaches should be embedded in a particular
‘life-world’ or ‘communal tradition’. In other words, Bauman makes a
pitch for interpretive reason rather than legislative reasoning.

Having said the aforementioned about the ‘Disciplinary Turns’ within
academia in the past two decades one would achieve a better
understanding of Allama Jafari’s intellectual project in regard to
sociology and human being. I do not intend to suggest that there has
been a direct relationship between the two traditions in East and West
but it is doubtless that there seems to be at some level some kind of

‘Confluence of Thought’ in regard to interpretive approaches in academic
social sciences and the *intelligible approach* proposed by Allama
Jafari. For instance, what Jurgen Habermas says about the distinction
between *lebenswelt* and *systemwelt* finds an appropriate echo in
Allama Jafari who seems to reject the idea of reduction of human
experience into a reified episode. Based on this *intelligible refusal*
Allama Jafari approaches science and sociology with a great emphasis on
the indispensability of being of human individual in epistemic
problematique.[^3]

For Allama Jafari, the *leben* of human being has a qualitative
importance which could not be reduced to any other kinds of lifestyles.
In his sociological understanding, the life of human self is the
fundament for all epistemological inquiries. As in parallel universes
theories, it seems there are profound similarities between proponents of
continental phenomenology and Allama Jafari on the importance of ‘life’
in the context of human self.

For instance, the importance of phenomenological concept of *erlebt* and
intelligible idea of *being* have not been explored thoroughly yet but
could have profound consequences for conceptualization of sociological
analysis as both are pre-epistemological stepping stone for
interpretative analyses and configurations.

[^1]: Allama Jafari speaks of episteme and the nature of knowledge in a
fashion which seems to be similar to positivist outlook. Of course we
need to see his epistemological position in an integrated fashion but
this does not rule out the possibility of positivistic tendencies in
Allama Jafari’s sociological theory. He argues that … original science
should result in gnosis (i.e. integrated knowledge) and the scientific
enterprise should lead to the establishment of scientific laws. In other
words, the science should lead to generalization and also provide
reasonable answers for our quests. A scientific enterprise which does
not lead either to scientific laws or abstain from generalization it
could not be qualified as a branch of science. For instance, if someone
travels around Iranian cities and villages by reporting about
communications systems, transportations systems, ethnic diversities and
cultural diversities and so on and so forth this mere observation and
sheer reporting could not be qualified as a scientific approach to
sociological issues of Iran. In other words, by having statistical data
and observing group relations one could not be considered as a
sociologist. To obtain the merit of scientificity, the sociologist
should unearth reasons, discover factors, infer conclusions and
establish scientific laws which could enable us to interpret phenomena
in reference to the established laws. To put it otherwise, observation
of phenomena is one step in the process of scientific inquiry but if it
does not lead towards constitution of laws it cannot be considered as
scientific inquiry. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 3)

[^2]: Scientism is the view that all real knowledge is scientific
knowledge—that there is no rational, objective form of inquiry that is
not a branch of science. There is at least a whiff of scientism in the
thinking of those who dismiss ethical objections to cloning or embryonic
stem cell research as inherently “anti-science.” There is considerably
more than a whiff of it in the work of New Atheist writers like Richard
Dawkins and Christopher Hitchens, who allege that because religion has
no scientific foundation it “therefore” has no rational foundation at
all. It is evident even in secular conservative writers like John
Derbyshire and Heather MacDonald, whose criticisms of their religious
fellow right-wingers are only slightly less condescending than those of
Dawkins and co. Indeed, the culture at large seems beholden to an
inchoate scientism—“faith” is often pitted against “science” (even by
those friendly to the former) as if “science were synonymous with
“reason.’’ (Feser, 2010)

[^3]: It would be very interesting to compare Allama Jafari and Jurgen
Habermas as both thinkers seem to be worried about the existential state
of humanity in a world that is in transition. Of course, by
‘’transition’’ I do not refer solely to the global changes in the
contexts of politics and economics. On the contrary, I view the concept
in a different light where the existential position of humanity as a
species, within the context of modern world-system, is changing
dramatically. In other words, within a system where religio perennis has
been absent in its makeup we are witnessing a gradual return of all that
matters in the sojourn of human self. In our upcoming work we shall look
at religion based on the works of Allama Jafari and Jurgen Habermas.


