Chapter 2:  Human Sciences and Being
====================================

Normativity versus Descriptivity
--------------------------------

Allama Jafari is one of the contemporary Iranian thinkers who have
looked at the nature of scientific inquiry in a very systematic fashion.
Very little is known by the scientific community around the globe about
his metatheoretical engagements on the nature of science and the
relation of scientific rationality in natural sciences and the
distinction of the former from humanities and all branches of knowledge
that touch upon the question of human existence.

What is science? This has been one of the most perplexing questions in
contemporary era as the building-blocks of rationality have undergone
serious metamorphoses. For instance, Chalmers argues that science is not
equivalent solely with empiricism.

In *What Is This Thing Called Science?* (1976) he outlines the
shortcomings of naive empiricist accounts of science, and describes and
assesses post-positivist attempts to replace them. Allama Jafari in Iran
during 70s in a series of lectures on *Sociology and Human Being*
approaches the questions of science, human sciences and the most crucial
of all concepts within humanities, i.e. ‘human being’ in a very novel
fashion, which will be unfolded along the course of this research.

Allama Jafari talks about ‘scientific inquiry’ in the context of his
sociological debates. One may pause and ask what does it mean and how
did Allama Jafari define the inquiry in a scientific framework?

In the philosophy of science, models of scientific inquiry have two
functions: first, to provide a descriptive account of *how* scientific
inquiry is carried out in practice, and second, to provide an
explanatory account of *why* scientific inquiry succeeds as well as it
appears to do in arriving at genuine knowledge of its objects. Such
accounts tend to reflect different philosophical positions in
epistemology.

In other words, the search for scientific knowledge extends far back
into antiquity. At some point in the past, at least by the time of
Aristotle, philosophers recognized that a fundamental distinction should
be drawn between two kinds of scientific knowledge — roughly, knowledge
*that* and knowledge *why*.

It is one thing to know *that* each planet periodically reverses the
direction of its motion with respect to the background of fixed stars;
it is quite a different matter to know *why*. Knowledge of the former
type is descriptive; knowledge of the latter type is explanatory. It is
explanatory knowledge that provides scientific understanding of the
world. (Salmon, 1990)

Allama Jafari agrees that our inquiry should not only lead to
explanation but also be based on certain rules. In other words, he
argues that there is a fundamental rule in any scientific enterprise
which is unchallengeable due to the nature of epistemological inquiry in
relation to subject.

The issues which are discussed over have very general or common natures
that are not appropriate to be considered as a subject for the
scientific inquiry. (Jafari, 1976. Chapter 1) Said differently, in any
scientific inquiry one needs to have a subject-matter and a set of
problematiques as well as appropriate methods for analyzing the field of
inquiry. To put it differently; within human sciences we need to
distinguish between two broad realms of normative and descriptive
fields.

This distinction would enable us to elaborate on the specificities of
human sciences in contrast to other fields of knowledge such as physics,
biology and mechanics or chemistry. In Allama Jafari’s view, the general
issue that is discussed within the context of human sciences is ‘human
being’. (Jafari, 1976. Chapter 1) This is to argue that the
subject-matter does have deep- rooted effects upon the nature of
problematiques and even how we approach the issues within the field of
inquiry.[^1]

By looking at the history of ideas one could easily discern that the
study of human cultural life is not an easy task and as a matter of fact
fraught with many serious controversies and heated debates which, some
would suggest, could cast doubt upon the very possibility of having a
*science* *of man*.

A cursory look at the terms which are related to the study of human life
would reveal the complexity of this field of inquiry: *human science*,
*humanistic social science*, *moral science*, *behavioral sciences*,
*social science*, and *Geisteswissenschaften* or *spiritual sciences*.

In other words, we have different discourses whereby some prefer to
emphasize on the moral aspect of human existence while others choose the
behavioral dimensions of human activities and again some others
influenced by the Romantic Movement favor to view the spiritual
significance of human leben and still other scholars who endorse the
scientific over against the humanistic approach to the study of human
society.

In *Explanation and Understanding*, Georg Henrik von Wright, argues that
human science (also, humanistic social science, moral science and human
sciences) refers to the investigation of human life and activities via a
phenomenological methodology that acknowledges the validity of both
sensory and psychological experience. It includes but is not necessarily
limited to humanistic modes of inquiry within fields of the social
sciences and humanities, including history, sociology, anthropology, and
economics.

It’s use of an empirical methodology that encompasses psychological
experience contrasts to the purely positivistic approach typical of the
natural sciences which exclude all methods not based solely on sensory
observations. Thus the term is often used to distinguish not only the
content of a field of study from those of the natural sciences, but also
its methodology. (von Wright, 1971. Pp 4-8) To complicate the question,
one could take into consideration the very concept of science in the
context of, what Rene Guenon terms as ‘The Reign of Quantity’.

To put it differently, ambiguity and confusion regarding usage of the
terms 'science', 'empirical science', and 'scientific method' have
complicated the usage of the term 'human science' with respect to human
activities. The term 'science' refers to ‘*scientia*’ i.e. 'knowledge'.

'Science' may be appropriately used to refer to any branch of knowledge
or study dealing with a body of facts or truths systematically arranged
to demonstrate the operation of general laws. Nonetheless, according to
Positivists, the only authentic knowledge is scientific knowledge which
comes from positive affirmation of theories through strict scientific
method. As a result of the positivist influence, the term *science* is
frequently employed as a synonym for *empirical science*.

Empirical science is knowledge based on the scientific method, a
systematic approach to verification of knowledge first developed for
dealing with natural physical phenomena and emphasizing the importance
of experience based on sensory observation. However, even with regard to
the natural sciences, significant differences exist among scientists and
philosophers of science with regard to what constitutes valid scientific
method. (Popper, 2002)

In the course of the 20th century, usage of the term has been extended
to the study of human social phenomena as well. Thus, the natural
sciences and social sciences are commonly classified as science, whereas
the study of classics, languages, literature, music, philosophy,
history, religion, and the visual and performing arts are referred to as
the humanities.

Imprecision in regard to the meaning of the term *science* is aggravated
by the common employment of the term formal science with reference to
any one of several sciences that is largely concerned with abstract form
that cannot be validated by physical experience through the senses, such
as logic, mathematics, and the theoretical branches of computer science,
information theory, and statistics.

We can even make the situation more complex by relating other
conceptions on the study of human being such as the approach endorsed by
people like Droysen, Windelband, and Dilthey who firmly opposed what
they considered as the Comtean intrusions into traditionally humanistic
areas.

Partly in reaction to the establishment of positivistic philosophy and
the latter's Comtean intrusions into traditionally humanistic areas such
as sociology, non- postivistic researchers in the humanistic sciences
began to carefully but emphatically distinguish the methodological
approach appropriate to these areas of study, for which the unique and
distinguishing characteristics of phenomena are in the forefront (e.g.
for the biographer), from that appropriate to the natural sciences, for
which the ability to link phenomena into generalized groups is foremost.

In this sense, Droysen contrasted the humanistic science's need to
*comprehend* the phenomena under consideration with natural science's
need to *explain* phenomena, while Windelband coined the terms
idiographic for a descriptive study of the individual nature of
phenomena, and nomothetic for sciences that aim to define the
generalizing laws. (von Wright, 1971. Pp 4-8)

Geisteswissenschaften and the Intelligible Model
------------------------------------------------

Dilthey brought nineteenth-century attempts to formulate a methodology
appropriate to the humanistic sciences together with Hume's term ‘’moral
science’’, which he translated as Geisteswissenschaft - a term with no
exact English equivalent. Dilthey attempted to articulate the entire
range of the moral sciences in a comprehensive and systematic way.
Meanwhile, his conception of “Geisteswissenschaften” encompasses also
the abovementioned study of classics, languages, literature, music,
philosophy, history, religion, and the visual and performing arts. He
characterized the scientific nature of a study as depending upon:

1) The conviction that perception gives access to reality

2) The self-evident nature of logical reasoning

3) The principle of sufficient reason

But the specific nature of the *Geisteswissenschaften* is based on the
*Erleben*, the *Verstehen* of the meaning of expressions and
*understanding* in terms of the relations of the part and the whole – in
contrast to the *explanation* of phenomena by hypothetical laws in the
*natural sciences*. Thanks to the recent developments, ‘’human science’’
has been used to refer to a philosophy and approach to science that
seeks to understand human experience in deeply subjective, personal,
historical, contextual, cross-cultural, political, and spiritual terms.

Human science is the science of qualities rather than of quantities and
closes the subject-object split in science. In particular, it addresses
the ways in which self-reflection, art, music, poetry, drama, language
and imagery reveal the human condition. By being interpretive,
reflective, and appreciative, human science re- opens the conversation
among science, gnosis, poetry, theology, religion, art, and philosophy.

In other words, to study the being of human self in an individual and
collective fashion have sensitized us to be conscious about the
intricate nature of human societal dimensions which are deeply
fugacious. Allama Jafari has been conscious about this fugacious nature
of human self and vehemently emphasized on indivisible mode of being in
the fabric of human personality.

However, he is conscious that to study a subject one needs to have an
appropriate approach as well as logic of categorization which would
enable us to comprehend the question in a systematic fashion. Allama
Jafari argues that if this broad concept (i.e. human being) is to be
considered within the scientific realm then it should be broken down
into more specific issues and categorized into more detailed
problematiques.

This is tantamount to argue that the subject matter of human sciences is
this particular aspect of human being and within this specific field of
inquiry we are concerned solely with this peculiar dimension of human
being. For instance, when we take into consideration the subject of
jurisprudence as a field of scientific inquiry it will be evident that
human individuals in their social relations are engaged in a reciprocal
process of right and debt which constitutes the frame of human agency in
the middle of social action, which, in turn, is the subject of science
of law.

On the other hand, human being is capable of expressing her/his own
emotions in a creative fashion which could be the subject matter of art
that is an aspect of human reality. As perceiving art and being an
artist are aspects of being a human being then art and issues related to
creative cognitions are surely parts and parcels of human sciences.
(Jafari,1976. Chapter 1)

Human Being and the Myth of Creation
------------------------------------

Allama Jafari regards ‘’human being’’ in an integral fashion where all
dimensions of being should be integrally incorporated within the body of
self. To understand the integral approach of Allama Jafari vis-à-vis the
pre-epistemological notion of human person one needs to reread the
multilayered features of modern mythological conception of ‘’Man’’. In
other words, what is the dominant archetype of modernist narrative of
human being within the body of disciplinary episteme? The modern concept
of ‘Man’ is deeply intertwined with the mythical image of *Prometheus*.

The mythical character of Prometheus has a mythological importance which
does not concern us in this context. On the contrary, the modernist
interpretation of this myth is what makes this mythological story of
profound significance in our comparative sociological studies.

The question that interests us is not the mythologem of *Prometheus* but
the prophecy concerning the *liberation* of *Prometheus*, which is
developed into a *poesis* on the future of humankind. This liberation
has been interpreted as Enlightenment which came to be synonymous to
man's release from his self-incurred tutelage in the Kantian
perspective.

In other words, the modern liberty in the Western context has taken a
mythical dimension where Zeus and Prometheus waged war against each
other and finally Reason (metaphysical interpretation) or Fire (mythical
construal) won over religion (as the ecclesiastical establishment) or
God (as the epitome of transcendental values).

This story which runs over, between and under the modern stream of
disciplinary weltanschauung is not shared by Allama Jafari. In other
words, we are faced with two cosmogonies and myths of creations: the
Euro- Hellenic cosmogony and genesis and the Koranic cosmogony and
genesis.

In the former, Prometheus stands against Zeus and brings the torch of
gnosis to humanity where Zeus has kept humanity in the darkness while in
the latter *Iblis* is working against Adam and Eve – whereas Allah
endows upon Adam (the person who is made from clay without having any
gender attributes) the ability to contemplate and think. In other words,
in the former the road to redemption is to stand against God while in
the latter the path to realization is to embrace God.

These archetypical images and myths run through these disciplinary and
primordial discourses and at metatheoretical levels cause deep-rooted
differences which one should take into consideration if we agree that
sociology is about to found the parameters of ‘sane society’ and
‘self-realized personality’.

Two of the most important demarcating factors in the context of human
sciences discourses are *scientia imago* and *homo imago*, namely what
kind of images of science and human person we hold in the frame of our
discursive paradigm. There are scholars who argue that the human being
becomes dehumanized when studied “scientifically”.

Prominent sociologists and psychologists have charged that any “natural
science” of persons either must, or usually does, “depersonalize” or
“reify” the subject of study. Specific issues have been raised about the
image or concept of the human being (“determined” “free” etc.) and about
the appropriateness of applying a natural science perspective to the
study of persons.

The charges are serious and mounting day by day in all corners of the
globe where non-Eurocentric or alternative discourses are taken
seriously by theorists, for instance, in Iran and other parts of the
Islamic World. In other words, the contemporary theories on self does
not consider the being of human person embedded in any kind of
‘permanent selfhood’ equipped by a ‘universal conscience’ which is
capable of discerning the ‘path of transcendental realization’ beyond
the ‘boundaries of socio-cultural constructions’.

Of course, one should take into consideration that the concept of
‘depersonalization’ is a very multifaceted notion within human science
discourses. While in psychiatric context the concept of
*depersonalization*, for instance, refers to an anomaly of the mechanism
by which an individual has self-awareness (Radovic & Radovic, 2002. Pp
271-9) nevertheless the idea of depersonalization within the context of
social psychology, in general, and identity- theories, in particular,
has a different meaning by referring to ‘’the stereotypical perception
of the self as an example of some defining social category’’. (Turner &
Oakes, 1986. p 238)

However, it seems that when social theorists speak about
depersonalization they refer to a subjective experience of unreality in
one's sense of self. In addition, there is another state related to
‘self’ where the sense of lack is not connected to the inner tapestry of
being but aimed at the external dimensions of reality.

In other words, while depersonalization is about the unreality of one’s
sense of self, the unreality of the external world is what social
psychologists call *derealization*, i.e. feelings of *déjà vu* or
*jamais vu*. Although most authors currently regard depersonalization
(self) and derealization (surroundings) as independent constructs, many
do not want to separate derealization from depersonalization. (Radovic &
Radovic, 2002) How would Allama Jafari view these problems?

As one may note, at the bottom of these debates on self is the question
of reality and how we perceive reality and what we consider as the nub
of realness. In other words, when we reduce the concept of reality into
a discursive construction and treat it as an epiphenomenon then what is
at stake is not a psychological question but the loss of metaphysics of
self which is of essential nature. To put it differently; the question
is not the loss of self but the self which has been lost in the midst of
constructive policies in a city where soul has no place in its universe.

Allama Jafari has focused on human identity based on the spiral theory
of human self where there is no dissociation between various levels of
being. In current theories of self, one comes across a dissociative
picture of human self where body, psyche and soul are in a
disintegrative state of relationship. In other words, a human reality in
the discursive paradigm is characterized by partial or complete
disruption of tripartite reality which constitutes the very basis of
human self.

Allama Jafari argues that human being is constituted of three dimensions
of body, psyche and soul. Of course it should be noted that the psyche
as such cannot be the subject of scientific inquiry as itself is
constituted of various different dimensions and each is the domain of
distinct field of disciplinary investigation such as psychology (and its
various sub-disciplines), psychiatry (and its different sub-
disciplines), and psychoanalysis (and its diverse schools of inquiry).
(Jafari, 1976. Chapter 1)

The Scientific Inquiry and The Concept of Human Being
-----------------------------------------------------

One of the most important tasks in any scientific inquiry is how to
classify various fields of knowledge into different disciplines and
domains. Allama Jafari has paid a systematic attention to sociology
based on the subject matter of sociological inquiry, i.e. ‘human being’.

He argues that in the sociological investigation, the subject matter of
the inquiry is ‘human being’ and for this reason one should clarify the
specific domain of sociological analyses within the fields of human
sciences. In order to reach at the nub of our research we should leave
broad generalizations aside and look at the question in a specific
fashion.

This is an immemorial tradition in all branches of knowledge which is
not only a productive approach but also a scientific prerequisite.
Because if the topics overlap each other this would lead to a chaotic
epistemological state of affairs which would finally divert us from
adequate understanding of the subject matter in a substantive fashion.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

To put it otherwise; when we, for instance, working within the field of
jurisprudence and law we should conceptualize specific kinds of
relationships based on the concepts of right and debt among social
agents as to discuss abruptly in the middle of a legal debate problems
related to anatomy would, to say the least, seem ridiculous and bizarre.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1) In other words, it may seem to the uninitiated
scholars that Allama Jafari takes side with individualists over against
collectivists or vice versa.

The debates on the primacy of agency over against structures or the
difference between the proponents of individualism versus collectivism
are part and parcel of Allama Jafari’s emphasis on ‘’Human Being’’ in
metatheoretical reflections. We need to elaborate at some lengths these
terms before deciding the overall position of Allama Jafari in this
regard.

In a nutshell, one could argue that the term individualism refers to the
moral stance, political philosophy, ideology, or social outlook that
stresses the moral worth of the individual. Individualists promote the
exercise of one's goals and desires and so value independence and
self-reliance while opposing most external interference upon one's own
interests, whether by society, family or any other group or institution.
(Gray, 2008) On the other hand, the concept of collectivism is defined
as the theory and practice that makes some sort of group rather than the
individual the fundamental unit of political, social, and economic
concern.

In theory, collectivists insist that the claims of groups, associations,
or the state must normally supersede the claims of individuals. (Ratner
& Lumei, 2003. p 72) The quarrel over the primacy of individualism
versus collectivism is not over yet and in current sociological
discourses one may encounter aspects of these debates under different
names such as the problem structure versus agency.

Central to sociological theory are the concepts of structure and agency.
Structures are typically seen as the more fixed and enduring aspects of
the social landscape. As used by Durkheim and others working within a
similar tradition, structure is a metaphor that denotes qualities of
society that are akin to the skeleton of a body in the field of anatomy,
or to the frame of a building in architecture.

Durkheim's work was heavily influenced by his desire to establish a
sphere of study for sociology that was distinct from both biology and
psychology. To this end he insisted that there are structured ways of
acting, thinking, and feeling that are general throughout a society and
that act as external constraints over its members.

This was to emphasize the role of society in the process of causation,
as opposed to individual or group agency. Some writers taking issue with
this position went to the other extreme. Weber, for example, emphasized
the role of individuals and rejected the idea that terms such as
“society” or “group” could refer to any reality other than that of
individuals and their actions. For writers seeking to include both
structure and agency in their analytic frameworks, the Durkheimian
emphasis on structures is maintained.

Now, however, agency is conceived as the more processual, active,
dimension of society – analogous to the physiology of an organism.
However, these quarrels have not been solved within social theoretical
discourses yet. In other words, the problematique has undergone some
changes and the most notable position is the one presented by Anthony
Giddens who argues for the *structuration theory* rather than
conventional rivalries.

The theory of structuration, proposed by Anthony Giddens (1984) in *The
Constitution of Society*, is an attempt to reconcile theoretical
dichotomies of social systems such as agency/structure,
subjective/objective, and micro/macro perspectives. The approach does
not focus on the individual actor or societal totality but social
practices ordered across space and time. Its proponents adopt this
balanced position, attempting to treat influences of structure (which
inherently includes culture) and agency equally. *See structure and
agency.*

Simply put, the theory of structuration holds that all human action is
performed within the context of a pre-existing social structure which is
governed by a set of norms and/or laws which are distinct from those of
other social structures. Therefore, all human action is at least partly
predetermined based on the varying contextual rules under which it
occurs.

Although Giddens attempted to overcome the dilemmas of structure versus
agency but the question is not settled considering the multifaceted
critiques leveled at the very project of structuration by scholars such
as Gregor McLennan. Now, one could look at the position presented by
Allama Jafari who seems to lean towards the individualist position while
not ruling out the importance of collectivist critiques.

In other words, one could briefly state that Allama Jafari believes in
the existence of intrinsic rights of the individual. He believes in the
intrinsic value of the felicity of the individual, which gives rise to
the rights of the individual. To put it otherwise, he does not either
endorse individualism or collectivism but the communal right of
individuated self-realized people in the context of human society. To
put it differently, Allama Jafari argues that:

*… if someone, for instance, puts emphasis on the role of society then
this kind of researcher may argue for the position of collectivism over
against individualism ... . A* *collectivist may argue that there is no
such a thing as individual or autonomy of individual before the pivotal
position of society. But how could one argue that there is no individual
and everything is reducible to the ‘social’? Just tell me who discovered
the law of gravity? Wasn’t Newton?*

*Weren’t only Newton and no other person who discovered the law of
gravity? In every person there are characteristics which belong to the
milieu we are from; there are other features which are very personal and
unique; and again there are qualities which belong to our personalities
in a very unique fashion … all these could interfere in the pursuit of*
*knowledge in a very peculiar manner … .*

*Of course, this is not to argue that these interferences are
detrimental for the sanity of humanity’s culture … and neither against
the values dominant in the cultures of scientific enterprises …. As
aforementioned a person who has chlorosis and sees everything in yellow
… is not guilty … as this is a state s/he finds her/himself in …. As far
as the condition of chlorosis is concerned the person in question is not
guilty but when s/he attempts to draw conclusions based upon this state
and generalize that yellowness is an aspect of reality … then we may be
in epistemological danger …. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 4)*

[^1]: Within disciplinary social sciences, one could mention the works
of Clifford Geertz who attempted to turn anthropological concerns
towards the frames of meaning within which various peoples live out
their lives. In other words, the role of meaning in the universe of
human person is an issue which could be compared in the works of Allama
Jafari and Clifford Geertz. Very little is known about the similarities
between these two thinkers in relation to the constitutive role of
meaning in the makeup of human self and human community.


