Chapter 3: The Perils of Reductionism
=====================================

Compartmentalization of Mind
----------------------------

Within modern context of knowledge one should bear in mind that
‘specialization’ is a necessary dimension of scientific enterprise. It
seems Allama Jafari is not opposed to specialization as such but this
does not mean that he supports mental compartmentalization which looks
like to be an outcome of disciplinary rationality.

He argues, for instance, if someone is interested in sociology of law
s/he may need to spend three or four decades in order to master
intricate aspects of problems which are of vital importance within the
field. To embark upon the path of knowledge with a specialist
orientation is a constructive approach. But too deeply inclined towards
specialization without having a rounded picture of reality would lead to
unidimensionality in the context of thinking.

Thus a jurist could be considered as a specialist in law and treated as
an authority when s/he knows not only about legal issues but other
fields of knowledge such as psychology too. Because all fields of
knowledge are interconnected to each other and without realizing this
integral aspect of knowledge one would be lost when studying
multifaceted dimensions of human existence.

Human being is, in general, not the subject of any science but it is a
very important subject in branches of knowledge which are related to
human being. Now and again a specialist delves into the subject of
her/his study that s/he may forget everything including the pivotal
problem of her/his research, i.e. human self.

For example, an economist may be so infatuated with economic issues that
s/he may not take into consideration the human factor in her/his
economic analyses. In other words, compartmentalization of knowledge
seems to be very deeply connected to disintegration of mental capacity
of modern human self which could have grave consequences for life as we
have known it for centuries. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 3)

In other words, the birth of ‘’expertism’’ and the professionalization
of scientific enterprise as well as the disciplinarization of knowledge
inquiry have constituted the backbones of modern weltanschauung on
reality and the organization of cogito in relation to the external
world. In other words, the institutionalization and professionalization
of science that has taken place in the past century has been called the
second scientific revolution.

Seen historically, this revolution has resulted from the fusion of
rapidly maturing scientific disciplines with western organizational and
administrative techniques, enabling large numbers of scientists with
varying interests and abilities to be marshaled for massive projects of
research and development.

However, this process has had some side-effects upon the very vision of
humanity on fundamental issues of life, reality, world, environment,
eco-system, morality, and all that matters to be a humane human self.
(Beer & Lewis, 1963. p 764) One of these deep-rooted backlashes is the
peril of compartmentalization which has been dealt with by thinkers such
as Herbert Marcuse in Germany, Jacques Ellul in France and Allama Jafari
in Iran.

What does ‘compartmentalization’ mean? The term has been employed
differently by different scholars in distinct fields of inquiry. For
instance, within the psychotherapeutic context, the concept refers to:

*…people with a borderline level of organization... [people who should]
have to compartmentalize people into "all good" and "all bad"', on the
principle that* *'compartmentalizing experiences... prevents conflict
stemming from the incompatibility of the two polarized aspects of self
or other. (Gabbard, 2010. Pp 34-9)*

The compartmentalization is fragmentary by nature as it is the act of
splitting an idea or concept up into parts, and trying to enforce
thought processes which are inhibiting attempts to allow these parts to
mix together again.

This process is performed in an attempt to simplify things, and to
defend against angst in a complex world where human self may find
her/himself as a *thrown away* being. In other words, what is considered
as a psychological state of mind is, as a matter of fact, a metaphysical
modality which could affect the mode

of being in relation to knowledge and all other aspects of leben. To put
it otherwise, the compartmentalization prior to its demonstration on
cognitive plane should be dealt with as an existential modality which
has to do with metaphysics rather than cognition.

In Allama Jafari’s parlance, one could argue that while the
classification of knowledge in terms of management of scientific inquiry
is a benevolent act of intellectual clarity nevertheless when one pushes
towards compartmentalization of knowledge then we are faced with an
anomic state of affairs. Because the cognitive act is an expression of
existential modality and based on this the compartmentalized
relationship towards reality could cause grave harms for the being and
living of human self both individually and collectively as well as
metaphysically.

To put it differently, one of the thorniest issues within human sciences
is the question of compartmentalization of knowledge which needs to be
taken seriously. Within disciplinary frame of reference each branch of
human sciences is concerned with a particular aspect of human activity
but this compartmentalized approach towards human existence has obscured
the integral vision of reality of human *leben*.

In other words, the discontent among distinguished philosophers who are
concerned about the destiny of humanity is due to this myopic approach
towards human life which is based on empiricism and epistemic
compartmentalization. To perceive the gamut of human existence based on
these two principles would deprive us from obtaining an integral
understanding of human destiny. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

In a nutshell, it could be argued that the compartmentalization of mind
is a reflection of ‘spiritual disintegration’ which has overshadowed all
aspects of modern self.[^1] In the primordial school of social theory
there is a long-debated problematique on human self in relation to unity
versus diversity which could be employed in unlocking the dead-end of
disciplinary outlook on anthropology of modern self which is a
*torn-apart ego*.

The most significant problem in approaching the question of human being
within the parameters of disciplinary rationality is the very being of
human person that appears before us as an indivisible whole in an
indissoluble totality. By breaking the subject matter of human sciences
into various different disciplines which would, in the course of
academic progress, grow into compartmentalized paradigms in an
incommensurable fashion the very question seems to be lost, namely the
indissoluble totality called human being.

In other words, how could we construct a human science that is supposed
to inquire about the intricacies of human existence without taking into
consideration the very essence of human life which is expressed by terms
such as ‘I’, ‘Conscience’ or ‘Self’? (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1) What is the
subject matter of disciplinary sociology? The first answer could be
‘society’ or ‘community’.

Of course, there are differences between society and community within
sociological parlance as indicated by Tonnies who argued that
*Gemeinschaft* and *Gesellschaft* are sociological categories for two
normal types of human association. However within the paradigm of
disciplinary rationality, there has been a long-term shift from
community to market that is often described as modernization, progress,
and the triumph of rationality.

In other words, the subject matter of sociology is explicitly ‘society’
but as a matter of fact the main body of research has been engaged on
the mechanisms of market rather than poetry of communal relationships
between human beings. Anarchists, communitarians, libertarians and
primordial theorists such as Allama Jafari have extensively explored
this theoretical dimension which has been deeply relegated by
disciplinary social theorists and sociologists as well as social
scientists.

The Perils of Reductionism
--------------------------

One of the main problems within the disciplinary paradigm is the
question of reductionism. The *perils of reductionism* are profoundly
paradoxical within naturalistic human sciences. Proponents of naturalism
have fallaciously tried to reduce entities with complex interdependent
parts to mere constituent parts.

Since every piece of truth must pass through the brain in order to be
understood, the human brain has been the biggest target. But, the mind
is not physical; it is metaphysical. The mind has a separate realm of
mental states and cannot be explained in merely physical terms. The mind
is capable of willing action, thinking, predicting, comprehending, and
even controlling the brain and the body.

These are acts that are qualitatively different from their constituent
neurons. And what of the notion that abstract concepts, such as
thoughts, can act on natural things? That is completely out of the realm
of the cause and effect relationship that most of the natural world
appears to be operating under. There is in reality a dualism with
separate orders of phenomena that at its core is very counter-intuitive
and problematic for science alone to uncover.

Reductionism is, therefore, self-defeating at its core. Allama Jafari
has reflected upon this problematique by arguing that the subject matter
of humanity could not be reduced to the object of investigation in
natural sciences. To argue that human sciences should follow the model
of natural sciences has been one of the grave mistakes of disciplinary
social scientists which have brought profound havocs upon humanity at
large.

Because the subject matter of natural sciences lacks cogito or
subjectivity while the very substance of human existence is its
subjectivity. In other words, how could a sociologist dare to talk about
the totality of life in regard to human being without taking into
consideration the indissoluble totality? The major difference between
disciplinary social sciences and undisciplinary approach is the question
of reductionism which disregards the profound distinction between the
realm of nature and the domain of human.

To put it otherwise, when one compares the particular themes within
human realm with specific problems within physics by arguing that
compartmentalization has not caused any disturbance in this realm so it
would not do any harm if we approach human issues based on a
naturalistic approach.

It is exactly here that Allama Jafari differs from the proponents of
disciplinary rationality as it is evident that the overriding chaos in
contemporary civilization is due to this misconception. (Jafari, 1976.
Ch. 1)

Is it possible to think on social issues and human dilemmas in the
context of society and in relation to the world and reality without
following the logic of disciplinary rationality? This is a worthy
question for all the students of social sciences who aspire to view the
‘social’ on *uneurocentric grounds*. It could be argued that Allama
Jafari is or could be used as a paradigmatic model in crafting
‘sociological concepts’ –as, for instance, Ibn Khaldun has been used by
scholars such as Syed Farid Alatas in the context of *Alternative*
Sociology and non-Eurocentric concept-formation- within the parameters
of the primordial school of social theory. In other words,

Allama Jafari distinguishes between disciplinary and undisciplinary
sociology and further argues that the disciplinary outlook on human
issues has caused severe damages in the body of human societies and
civilizations across the globe. In his view, human being has a core
which is termed as ‘conscience’ and functions as an integrative faculty
in a holistic fashion. In other words, Allama Jafari believes that:

*… the modern disciplinary sociology is unable to fathom* *‘human
integratedness/wholeness’ which separates human being from the subject
matter of philology or physics. By neglecting this integratedness
dimension of human reality the disciplinary sociology has caused severe
damage in regard to the wholeness as a fundamental principle in
deciphering human existence with its diverse complex layers.*

*For instance, we have sociologists who look at the historical aspects
of human life while the* *others are interested in religious dimensions
of humanity without taking the historical or other indices very
seriously in their overall analyses. The products of these researches
are interesting but disregard the principle of integratedness which is
of inalienable importance in conceptualizing human existence and without
as if we have lost touch with the humane aspect of human destiny.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)*

This, in Allama Jafari’s view, is a serious challenge. Of course, to map
out the contours of this serious challenge has been one of the motives
behind the sociological enterprise since its early disciplinary days in
19th century.

For instance, August Comte is a prime example of this tradition which
has aimed to map out the ills of modern society based on the conviction
that the birth of derisive individualism would destroy the social
fabric. In other words, society is a possibility where there are
feelings of solidarity, togetherness and philanthropy which would enable
members of a community to coexist in a societal fashion. Sociology or
the sociological imagination was the answer which was crafted by Comte
within the parameters of positivism.

He believed that human society follows certain patterns which result in
solidarity, togetherness and philanthropic modalities within and without
as well as between human beings and communities. However the rapid
expansion of industrialization has destructed these bonds which were
nourished within the bosom of religion (i.e. Catholic Church) and
consequently left individuals in an arid land without any sacred canopy
to turn to.

In other words, sociology took the challenge seriously and embraced the
task of building a canopy where people could feel the warmth of
religious sacrality without being dedicated to any specific religion.
This led to a novel tradition within sociological understanding where
sacrality was switched into sociality and *theodicy* metamorphosed into
*sociodicy*.

To put it otherwise, the dehumanizing effects of modernity was admitted
by some strata within French sociology but the panacea was sought in the
soil of positivism both as an epistemology and weltanschauung. Although
positivists argued that ontology is not the prime concern of
sociologists who work within the parameters of science but this
*negative metaphysics* did not inhibit them to rule out any
meta-rational concerns as *meaningless* and *nonsense*.

Some sociologists such as Pareto believed that modernity has triumphed
over all other forms of civilizations but this accomplishment has not
reached its zenith yet as we still witness the *residuals* of pre-modern
modalities in the midst of modern context.

To put it differently, rationalization was the inevitable goal of all
societies even that meant to live within the parameters of ‘Iron Cage’
or ‘*stahlhartes Gehäuse*’ for sociologists such as Max Weber.

He introduced this concept into sociological discourse in order to refer
to the increased rationalization inherent in social life, particularly
in capitalist societies where communities have been replaced by markets.
The ‘Iron Cage’ thus traps individuals in systems based purely on
teleological efficiency, rational calculation and control. Weber also
described the bureaucratization of social order as ‘the polar night of
icy darkness’. (1994. p xvi)

Unidimensionality and Human Personality
---------------------------------------

Human being is an integral whole but the compartmentalization of
knowledge when is moved into the ontological level then the problem is
not solely of epistemological nature. On the contrary, the reduction of
human existence would lead to the loss of many wonderful possibilities
which without human self would lose its humanity. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 3)

Rationalization and the Question of Religare
--------------------------------------------

Rationalization is, in other words, the euphemistic term for a
dehumanizing process which has led to a compartmentalized state of human
existence where human beings and societies move fast towards
depersonalization and absence of conscientious rules.

Sociologists argue that rationalization refers to a process in which an
increasing number of social actions become based on considerations of
teleological efficiency or calculation rather than on motivations
derived from religion, intellect, morality, emotion, custom, or
tradition. Many sociologists regard it as a central aspect of modernity,
manifested especially in depersonalized societies; as a behavior of the
capitalist market; of rational administration in the state and
bureaucracy; of the extension of modern science; and of the expansion of
modern technology.

However, many sociologists, critical theorists and contemporary
philosophers have argued that rationalization, as falsely assumed
progress, has a negative and dehumanizing effect on society, moving
modernity away from the central tenets of enlightenment. (Habermas,
1985. p 2) Allama Jafari agrees that when human motivational patterns
are divorced from religion, morality, intellect and conscience the
results would be very detrimental on the fabric of human society and
human individuals but does not share the optimism of Habermas who
endorses the Enlightenment project.

As a matter of fact, Allama Jafari seems to suggest that the death of
conscience came about by thinkers and encyclopedia writers who viewed
religion (i.e. *religare*: connecting humanity to God) as fable and a
tale of past as expressed in Comtian philosophy of history. Based on
Allama Jafari’s reading of history and study of human psychology, the
modernist narrative on humanity and its history are based on unsupported
assumptions.

Because, human being is possible when there is a conscience which he
terms as ‘integratedness principle’ and the history of humanity is the
story of conscience which oscillates between the poles of permanent and
contingency as embedded in the bosom of human soul.

Now the questions related to dehumanization could differ from those who
share the background assumptions of modernity in a metaphysical sense
where Man is considered as emancipated when God is relegated to the
periphery rather than working wholeheartedly towards a *religare telos*.

In other words, could one argue that the loss of ‘integratedness
principle’ in human vision is tantamount to dehumanization of human
destiny? If the answer is affirmative then what does dehumanization mean
in the eyes of Allama Jafari? In addition, how could one perceive in
intellectual terms the destiny of humanity? These and many other
questions could be posed within the paradigms of the *Primordial School
of Social Theory* which Allama Jafari is one of its most vocal
exponents.

To tackle all such questions one needs to revisit Allama Jafari’s
multifaceted discourse on fundamental questions of humanity in general
as the modern paradox is not confined solely to epistemological plane.
On the contrary, the plague of modernity is anthropological in the sense
Feuerbach elaborated but in a ‘’reverse form’.

In other words, the Feuerbachian approach is based on the idea that
religion is not something instituted by God, but rather is man- made. It
is argued that the idea can be traced back to ancient Greece. But the
proponents of this historiography argue that it was not until the 18th
century, however, that it began to seem possible to finally prove what
had previous been mere speculation. Ludwig Feuerbach, drawing on
Hegelian philosophy, set out the idea that the process by which religion
was invented was wish-fulfillment.

God, according to Feuerbach, is projection of the strongest desires of
humanity. For Feuerbach, much of the appeal of Christianity lies in its
promise of immortality. Human beings have many fears, but most of all
they fear death. Christianity, in promising eternal life, offers to take
this fear away from humans.

If, the argument goes, human beings are willing to buy into religion
then they can escape from their fear, and live in blissful ignorance of
their mortality. This accounts for the attractiveness of religion, the
strength of its grip on human minds.

Of course, for this process to work human beings cannot consciously
decide to adopt a religion as a means of escaping from their fears. No,
the decision must be unconscious; it is the unconscious mind that drives
them to religion. To understand God, on this view, one must understand
human psychology; as Feuerbach put it, “theology is anthropology”.

This could be the case of modern reading of Christian religion but one
should not extend it to other revealed traditions as many Eurocentric
scholars on sociology and psychology of religion have mistakenly done.
In addition, fear and ignorance are not the only sources of movement in
life. In other words, how could Feuerbach explain the question of
‘conscious conversion’ among adults? There are many existential
questions which cannot be reduced to fear and ignorance alone. To put it
otherwise; then how could one explain ‘sacrifice’ (to give up one’s life
for the other or a cause) in the light of Feuerbach’s theory of fear of
mortality?

Lebenswelt and Kommunkationstechnik
-----------------------------------

Sociology is different from physics as both the universal and the
particular are of crucial significance in perceiving the complexity of
human person. If one in analyzing the human realm separates, for
instance, the dimension of art from conceptualizing human existence then
what could art mean alone? (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

In other words, the subject matter of human sciences is an ‘integrated
whole’ which should be taken into consideration in any sociological
analysis. Otherwise we may encounter insurmountable obstacles such as
one- dimensionality of modern subject in which spiritual growth,
aptitude and ability for critical thought and oppositional behavior
wither away.

This is deeply connected to the problem of depersonalization which has
resulted in the loss of self and destruction of conscience in the
contexts of disciplinary human sciences. Allama Jafari has reflected
upon these questions in a very systematic manner in his works on ‘The
Conscience’ (2002), ‘Intelligible Life’ (1998), ‘Message of Wisdom’
(1997) and ‘Man and Sociology’ (1976).

The main issues in these works could be summarized in five key points,
namely 1) loss of individuality, 2) loss of autonomy, 3) lack of
individual freedom and absence of free-will, 4) specialization and loss
of discernment, and 5) disintegration of value and virtue and separation
of both from human existence (leben versus system).

Of course, there is no doubt that the critical wing of social theory has
been occupied by similar concerns which could be of crucial importance
for the students of comparative sociological studies. For instance, we
can refer to works carried out by Barry Smart (1999), Max Weber (1991),
Cary Boucock (2000), David B. Grusky (2000), Michael Baurmann (2002),
and Samuel Slipp (1981).

Within sociological discourse, one should make an explicit distinction
between ‘relationship’ and ‘communication’ as in all kinds of
relationships there is an element of communication or relatedness but
the other way around is not always the case.

In other words, the concept of relation-ship is based on the idea of
‘communication’ which entails a sense of ‘communion’ and related to a
human community where ties of friendships, bonds of unions, and webs of
affections exist between human individuals while in the context of
communication there is a sense of systemness, formality and lack of
in-depth affiliation.

For instance, in the modern states of contemporary world system, there
are various ministries such as ministry of education, ministry of
transport and ministry of communication but there is not a single
reference to a governmental office of ministry of relationship. Why is
this so? Because the modern government is a machinery of bureaucratic
rules, while the textures of human relationship is part of *lebenswelt*
and follows different rules than those represented by *systemwelt* which
works in accordance to *kommunkationstechnik*.

In other words, in the context of relationship it is the ‘menschliche
faktor’ or *human element* which is of crucial significance while in the
context of communication, it is the ‘technical element’ which takes the
upper hand. It seems that Allama Jafari has been conscious of these
problems and therefore he has argued that when we speak about the
subject matter of sociology it should be clear from the outset that the
subject of sociological studies is ‘human social relations’.

To put otherwise, the crucial role of human element should not be
disregarded or treated as an epiphenomenon and wherever this factor is
under threat then we, as sociologists, should find out the underlying
causes of these detrimental modes in human societies. By reflecting upon
the relational nature of social life, he argues that

*… there are sociologists who argue that the subject matter of sociology
is ‘social relations’. This is fair enough but what does it mean in
concrete terms? Does it mean that sociology incline towards society over
against individual? Or does it mean that disciplinary sociology is based
on an equal approach to both individual and society? As far as I
understand, it seems that the disciplinary sociology, in despite of many
earnest attempts, has not been able to come to terms with the relation
between the individual and the social.*

*There could be many methodological and* *metaphysical reasons for such
a dash but the brief answer is that the disciplinary sociologists have
not taken the subject (equipped with body, psyche and soul) very
seriously. The question of human subject is deeply intertwined with the
problem of ‘I-ness’ which is of towering importance in any sociological
inquiry. (Jafari,1976. Ch. 1)*

Modern Disciplinary Rationality
-------------------------------

The relation or rather the lack of relation between science and
metaphysics is of crucial importance in the constitution of modern
disciplinary rationality. The concept of rationality is not an innocent
notion within the parameters of human sciences as we are faced with two
forms of rationality in the Weberian sense, i.e. the formal rationality
and the substantive rationality.

Before getting into the differences between these types and their
respective distinction with ‘essential intellection’ it would be more
constructive to define each of these concepts for the purpose of our
discussion on Allama Jafari. By rationality, Weber refers to an
orientation to reality which weighs up the means and ends of action in a
straightforward and pragmatic manner.

When Weber speaks of rationality, he distinguishes into the formal and
the substantive rationality. The primary type refers to a category of
decision making which is subject to calculation that goes into an action
to increase its chance of success. Its decisive feature is that it
eliminates an orientation to values because they are non- technical.

Rationality is formal when problems are solved by the application of
technical criteria. The second form of rationality refers to a type of
decision making which is subject to values and an appeal to ethical
norms.

Substantive rationality does not take into account the nature of
outcomes. In other words, Weber argues that formal rationality had
replaced substantive rationality, because bureaucracy stresses a
technical orientation to means and ends. (Nozick, 1993) To complicate
the matter even further, we should note that while substantive
rationality within the Weberian paradigm is of crucial importance in
terms of existential concerns but it is still operating within a
particular form where the diminishing role of values is lamented rather
than reflecting upon the *significance of virtue* in the constitution of
self and society.

In other words, while we agree that Weber had been a step further than
his contemporary positivist colleagues due to his incessant engagements
with Russian literary philosophy a la Dostoevsky but this does not mean
that he has been disloyal to modern metaphysical vision. By
distinguishing between form and substance of rationality, Weber may seem
to move towards ethical concerns which have been relegated to the
periphery of the spirit of capitalism but this is only on the surface as
both form and substance are part of the conceptual realm of cognition.

In other words, the question of essence which is deeply interconnected
to debates on ethics, morality, self, reality, religion, metaphysics,
and many other essential dimensions of human existence does not have any
crucial place in discursive form of rational engagement.

What I want to say is that the crisis of humanities and social sciences
is not divorced from these issues and those who are interested in the
reintroduction of humanism in the body of modern world system would fail
if they ignore these concerns which are of fundamental importance in
human existence.

To put it differently, to emphasize on the importance of value over
against instrumental outlook on life without realizing that the value is
a fruit of the tree of virtue which without it would lose its underlying
principle for people who have lost touch with the soil of reality.
Allama Jafari belongs to the camp of theorists who endorse the
reintroduction of metaphysical concerns in the body of humanities rather
than refraining from metaphysical contemplation in the context of
humanities. He argues that:

*… within modern science there is a tendency to avoid metaphysics by
arguing that the latter is synonymous to supernaturalism and science has
nothing to do with para- rational discourses. The question is not about
supernatural para-rationalism but the main issue is human subject that
is equipped with a psyche and this very psyche is consisted of thousands
of activities. When this multifaceted psyche takes a social shape then
this social modality gets multiplied by thousands of facets. This is of
crucial importance in delineating metaphysical aspects of the subject
matter of sociology, i.e. ‘relation’. In other words, when the term
‘relation’ is employed within our frame of reference we refer to the
‘multifaceted essence’*

*of relation which has appeared as a complex social modality. In other
words, ‘I-relatedness’ should be fundamentally clarified so we could be
able to comprehend which relation is of positive or negative nature.
This could not be understood empirically but metaphysically. (Jafari,
1976. Ch. 1)*

For Allama Jafari, human being was the focal point of any attempt to
change or transform the state of affairs. In his view, the art of
management could be distinguished into two types or kinds; in the first
type, the managerial paradigm was aimed to restore human dignity by
abstaining from reification of relationships while in the second type,
the governing philosophy was aimed to reduce the locus of human element
by focusing on instrumental factors in human societies. (Jafari, 1998)

In other words, social systems and personality characters could be
viewed in terms of necrophilia and biophilia which refer to destructive
as well as constructive tendencies in Frommesque style of doing
sociology. (Miri, 2010. p 77) This is to state that what Fromm refers to
as necrophilic mode is equivalent to Allama Jafari’s reified modality
and what Allama Jafari terms as realizing modality is what Fromm
considers as biophilic modality.

These kinds of similarities force us to think about the possibilities of
confluence of thought and comparative significance of eastern and
western paradigms in the works of thinkers such as Allama Jafari and
Eric Fromm. To put it differently, could one argue that the concern with
the crucial importance of human being in some worldviews is part of the
humanist tradition in the context of sociology?

If the answer is affirmative then what is the effect of such a tradition
on the body of humanities and human sciences in relation to human issues
as well as problematiques? To put it otherwise, how could we establish a
connection between the humanist tradition and Allama Jafari’s concern
with centrality of humanity (human being, human personality, human
character, human conscience and self-realization versus self-
alienation) without disregarding the atheistic tendencies in modern
humanism which is alien to Allama Jafari’s metaphysical position?

Human-ism or the Question of Self-Realization?
----------------------------------------------

To tackle these questions we need to elaborate the concept of humanism
and how it is defined within the sociological tradition. The question of
humanism and its relation to sociological imagination is as old as the
discipline of sociology.

However, the history of this relation seems to go back to Polish
philosopher-turned-sociologist, Florian Znaniecki. It is a methodology
which treats its objects of study and its students, that is, humans, as
composites of values and systems of values. In certain contexts, the
term is related to other sociological domains such as anti-positivism.

Humanistic sociology seeks to throw light on questions such as, ‘What is
the relationship between a man of principle and a man of opportunism?’
It can be seen that any answer to such a question must draw on
experience and facts from many disciplines. In the words of Tom Arcaro
(1995),

*… humanistic sociology is \<\>. It is a belief in human dignity and
worth. It is a personal yet rigorously professional effort to push the
\<\> just a little closer to the \<\>.*

To bridge between the realm of \<\> and \<\> is what Allama Jafari tried
to accomplish. Humanism has been defined differently by various thinkers
within a mixture of distinct intellectual paradigms and also shunned by
many religious thinkers in Iran and elsewhere, such as Seyyed Hossein
Nasr and Syed Naghib al- Attas.

These latter groups have shunned the position of humanism due to a
particular definition which seems to suggest a humano-centered world
rather than theo-centered world that is purported to be the true message
of revelations. However, Allama Jafari seems to present a more nuanced
version of humanism of Frommesque type which does not exclude religious
concerns while wholeheartedly includes existentialistic vision of
humanism. In other words, Allama Jafari seems to suggest what Fromm
argued on this issue, namely the belief that

*… man is indeed forced to choose between a renewal of humanism- of
taking seriously the spiritual foundations of* *our … culture, which is
a foundation of humanism or- having no future at all. (Fromm, 1994: 78)*

To put it differently, human-ism or centrality of self-realization is of
pivotal significance in the thought of Allama Jafari and it plays a very
important role in the constitution of his theories on self, society,
religion, politics and *lebensphilosophie*. By centrality of self-
realization in Allama Jafari’s outlook I refer to what Fromm elaborates
as

*… the supreme concern for the unfolding of those qualities by virtue of
which man is man … . (1994: 97)*

These qualities by virtue of which an individual is able to progress to
the heights of humanity are the essences of *constructive mysticism*.
(Jafari, 2012) In addition, Allama Jafari believes that modernism has
targeted these human qualities by virtue of which man could traverse the
thorny path of self-realization or humanization of self and society.
(Jafari, 1998)

In other words, in the heart of Allama Jafari’s sociological theory
there is a *reflective dread* over the well- being/felicity of human
self as well as human society both vertically and horizontally. This may
seem by some professional sociologists to be a sinful act as this looks
like we are crossing over the boundaries of *disciplinary sociology*.

This is correct as Allama Jafari is not a disciplinary thinker but a
scholar who works within the parameters of primordial school of social
theory. His sociological concerns are to be understood within a larger
context which is similar to continental tradition of *lebensphilosophie*
a la Henri Bergson and Erich Fromm.

To put it differently, this is to argue that every sociological theory
is based on some background assumptions and these assumptions as far as
disciplinary social sciences are concerned are *discursive rationality*,
*rationalism*, *empiricism*, *naturalism*, *negative metaphysics*,
*disjointing* of *reason* and *intellect*, *division* of *cogito* and
*leben*, and the philosophy of modernism.

However, these assumptions are not shared by primordial social thinkers
such as Allama Jafari who seems to have different background assumptions
which make his sociological concerns very deeply intertwined with
concerns embedded within the discourse of *lebensphilosophie*.

Lebensphilosophie and Human Predicament
---------------------------------------

There are at least two senses in which the term philosophy is used, a
disciplinary and an undisciplinary sense. In the disciplinary sense
philosophy is an academic study of the fields of metaphysics, ethics,
epistemology, logic, and social philosophy.

However when we employ the term *lebensphilosophie* in relation to
Allama Jafari we refer to philosophy in the informal sense, as a way of
life by focusing on resolving the existential questions about the human
condition. By human condition within the body of Allama Jafari’s work we
refer to a struggle between what *is* (existence) and what *ought*
(essence) to be.

The human condition encompasses the unique and inescapable features of
being human in a social, cultural, and personal context. It can be
described as the irreducible part of humanity that is inherent and not
connected to factors such as gender, race or class. It includes concerns
such as a search for purpose, sense of curiosity, the inevitability of
isolation, or the fear of death. The ‘’human condition’’ is especially
studied through the set of disciplines and sub-fields that make up the
humanities.

The study of history, philosophy, literature, and the arts all help
understand the nature of the human condition and the broader cultural
and social arrangements that make up human lives. The human condition is
the subject of such fields of study as philosophy, theology, sociology,
psychology, anthropology, demographics, evolutionary biology, cultural
studies, and sociobiology.

The philosophical school of existentialism deals with the ongoing search
for ultimate meaning in the human condition. Although the term itself
may have gained popular currency with André Malraux’s novel (1933) and
René Magritte’s paintings 1933 & 1935, both titled *La Condition
Humaine*, and with Hannah Arendt’s work and Masaki Kobayashi’s film
trilogy (1959-1961) which examined these and related concepts, the quest
to understand the human condition dates back to the first attempts by
humans to understand themselves and their place in the universe.

There are several theories as to what humans all have in common. A
popular example is that humans search for purpose, are curious and
thrive on new information. High-level thought processes, such as self-
awareness, rationality, and sapience, are considered to be defining
features of what constitutes a ‘’person’’.

The existentialist psychotherapist Irvin D. Yalom has identified what he
refers to as the four "givens" or ultimate concerns of human existence -
concerns with meaning, loneliness, freedom and mortality. Yalom argues
with Sartre that man is ‘’condemned to freedom’’, and must face his
ultimate aloneness, the lack of any unquestionable ground of meaning,
and ultimate mortality.

In other words, we are faced with normative situations (alternatives,
choice, freedom, values, standards, ideals, obligation, and
responsibility) and existential predicaments (finitude, alienation,
anxiety, guilt, ambivalence, and thrownness).

To put it otherwise; there are at least three prevailing theories on how
to respond to the *existential question*: 1) denial of essence; 2)
affirmation of both essence and existence; and 3) denial of existence.
In addition, it should be mentioned that religion has been functioning
as an attempt to overcome the *existential predicament*.

In this fashion, we could mention two broad orientations of *religious
existentialism* (religious existentialism holds that there are two
levels of reality, essence, which is the ground of Being and existence.
Religion is the ultimate concern, in this view) and *atheistic
existentialism* (atheistic existentialism holds that there is one level
of reality, existence. In this view, each person constructs his own
unique and temporary essence).

Now the question is how to locate Allama Jafari in terms of both the
existential question and existential predicament? He seems to answer the
existential questions based on the second paradigm where both essence
and existence are part and parcel of the same and one paradigm – and his
position as far as existential predicaments are concerned leans strongly
towards the religious existentialist position of thinkers such as
Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and Tillich.

One of the perils of modern perspective in a systematic fashion is the
question of ‘Atheism’ which has resulted in naturalism both as an
ontological modality and epistemological mode as well as an existential
praxis. Atheism has been defined by atheists themselves as the rejection
of belief in the existence of deities.

But this is not what atheism is all about and the belief in deities is
not tantamount to belief in God in accordance to *religio perennis* or
revealed religious traditions. On the contrary, the question at stake is
adherence to the principle of intelligibility of life or obedience to
the principle of unintelligibility of life which is the demarcating
factor between religionists and atheists.

By naturalism, we do not refer to the definition which has been designed
by atheists who have moved from the ‘’negating theology’’ towards other
domains of intellectual activities. Naturalism has been defined by
atheists as a philosophical viewpoint that the natural universe and its
natural laws and forces operate in the universe, and that nothing exists
beyond the natural universe or, if it does, it does not affect the
natural universe that we know.

Said differently, this definition is based on a latent contrast to the
principle of intelligibility of life which is endorsed by proponents of
transcendental wisdom philosophy. That is to argue that naturalism in
this fashion is contrasted with supernaturalism and this latter is
defined within the paradigm of atheism which is not related to the
concepts of ‘nature’ and ‘supra’ as they are understood within the
parameters of religio perennis.

In other words, the questions of humanities and the poetry of human
person should be sensitized to these fundamental differences which are
of perennial importance in the constitution of self and society. Having
problematized these questions one could now turn to the problem of
naturalism in human sciences.

To put it differently, how should one problematize the concept of ‘human
being’ within the context of human sciences? Could one think of humanity
in all its dimensions within the paradigm of naturalism? Is a naturalist
approach, to say differently, to human problems possible? The
publication in 1959 of the University of Cambridge Rede Lecture by C. P.
Snow, entitled *The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution*, is
justly remembered for posing this brilliant question before anyone who
is interested in humanities and the destiny of humanity at large.

Sir Charles’ account of the growing communication barrier between
practitioners of the natural sciences and technical fields, on the one
hand, and the arts and humanities, on the other, inspired a veritable
blizzard of urbane invective throughout the globe. Allama Jafari has
pondered upon this problem by arguing that the subject matter of
sociological inquiry should not be reduced to any other phenomenon than
being. In other words, if

*… a psychologist is working in the field of psychology and interested
in problems such as association of ideas, attention, memory and fantasy
then s/he should not neglect* *the fact that each of these are
organically interconnected and constitute a whole. In other words, the
human being should always be taken as a whole as the subject matter of
sociology (i.e. human person) is fundamentally different than the
subject matter of natural sciences and any negligence in this regard
would disrupt the very subject of sociological inquiry.*

*Now if the reader would ask me why am I insisting upon the
indissolubility of human being as an integrated whole? In that case the
brief answer would be that if this whole is neglected in the equation of
sociological analysis then what we consider as ‘society’ would not be a
possibility worthy of scientific inquiry. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)*

If we consider the questions regarding *meaning of life* in a serious
fashion and constitutive aspects of sociological background assumptions
which could color the very backbones of our theoretical engagements then
it would be inevitable to take issue with this problematique as the
meaning of life problematique occupies a pivotal position within Allama
Jafari’s overall sociological enterprise.

The meaning of life is the concept that provides an answer to the
philosophical question concerning the purpose and importance of life or
existence in general. This concept can be expressed through answering a
variety of related questions, such as ‘’Why are we here?’’, ‘’What is
life all about?’’, and ‘’What is the meaning of it all?’’ It has been
the subject of much philosophical, scientific, gnostic and theological
speculation throughout history. There have been a large number of
theories to these questions from many different cultural and ideological
backgrounds.

The meaning of life is fundamentally intertwined with the philosophical
and religious conceptions of existence, social ties, consciousness, and
happiness, and touches many other issues, such as symbolic meaning,
ontology, value, purpose, ethics, good and evil, free will, conceptions
of God, conceptions of humanity, the existence of God, the soul, and the
afterlife.

Scientific contributions focus more on describing related empirical
facts about the universe; they largely shift the question from ‘’why?’’
to ‘’how?’’ and provide context and parameters for meaningful
conversations on such problematiques. Of course, the value of the
question pertaining to the purpose of life may coincide with the
achievement of ultimate reality, or a feeling of oneness, or a feeling
of sacredness.

Allama Jafari seems to argue that religion as a model for inquiring
about the meaning of life and as one of the most significant dimensions
of man’s weltanschauung should be taken seriously in the study of social
problems. Because human beings build up features of their personality
based on the dialectics between nature and nurture in the soil of
society and one of the most pivotal dimensions in the constitution of
self and society is the religious impulse.

In other words, when working as a sociologist one should realize that
the nature of background assumptions could alter the path of
theory-building and concept-formation as the human condition is the
stage where a brokenness has occurred between the realm of ‘’is’ and
‘’ought-to’’. Within sociological enterprise one needs to take into
consideration the significance of meaning o life problematique or
weltanschauung as,

*… the existence appears before the eyes of a religious personality in a
different fashion than a person who lacks the religious impulse. It is
noteworthy that religion colors personality in a fundamental fashion.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch 1)*

How to conceptualize the relation between religion and personality in
the primordial sense, which is of significance in Allama Jafari’s
sociological perspective, is one of the most interesting comparative
questions for anyone who is interested in a non- Eurocentric sociology.
Allama Jafari argues that the nature of human life could be
conceptualized either in a naturalistic frame of reference or in an
intelligible fashion.

In each of these paradigms the very reality of life and the very life of
reality are interpreted differently which could affect the textures of
sociological theories at the level of *background assumptions*. In other
words, constructive religiosity would change the fabric of personality
by altering the frame of one’s reference both teleologically and
sociologically. In Allama Jafari’s parlance,

… *constructive religiosity … would awaken human being* *by altering the
textures of personality and transform the frame of reference from a
nature-oriented paradigm into an intelligible framework. (2012. p 25)*

[^1]: This question has been discussed by western thinkers such as Carl
Gustav Jung who spoke of the awakening of dark gods and modern horror.


