Chapter 4:  Sociology and Three Kinds of Relationships
======================================================

Allama Jafari speaks about three kinds of relationships in his
sociological inquiries. In other words, there are three general kinds of
relationships between individuals in any society: 1. Natural, 2.
Psychological, and 3. Contractual.

Natural Relationship
--------------------

The most common relation is the natural relationship which is divided
itself into two groups; 1) Deterministic-Intrinsic Type and 2)
Deterministic-Extrinsic Type. For instance, the question of instinctual
movement and its saturation are parts of the natural relationship and
also of deterministic nature.

Because the instinct exists as a need and a faculty within our body and
due to the fact that its presence is of an inherent nature then its
relational function is of deterministic character. In other words, the
instinctual relationships are of fundamental importance to the integrity
of human life. Any human individual is born with this innate ability
which makes the relationship between male and female a matter of impulse
and not choice.

In other words, when one speaks of free will in this level it should be
noted that the very question of impulse is not the issue but how it is
exemplified is the problem here. To put it differently; who to choose as
a spouse is dependent on the will of the subject but the very question
of compulsion to choose the opposite sex is not optional but
instinctual.

This is the simplest and also the most essential kind of relationship
between human beings. Now we can turn to the question of extrinsic
relationship among human beings which are not optional but compulsory
within the natural realm of relationship in accordance to Allama
Jafari’s approach.

For example, individuals in a society decide to cooperate with each
other against external enemy forces or dangers such as flood which would
assist them in defending themselves. This is an example of a compulsory
relationship but of an extrinsic nature as the external dangers either
natural or human have forced humanity along its historical course to
build coalitions with each other in various different forms of
relationships.

It seems both in the past and in the present time most of human
relationships have had the same origins, namely building various kinds
of relationships within societies against the stronger forces of nature
or otherwise as without these alliances the life of the human society
may have terminated *in toto*. Within sociological context one should be
able to distinguish between different types of relationships as to treat
these multifaceted relations all in the same fashion would be mistaken.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

Psychological Relationship
--------------------------

The psychological relationship is composed of three different but
interrelated types of relationships, namely a) Inherently deterministic
association of psychological nature, b) Extrinsically deterministic
affiliation of psychological nature, and c) Psychological relationship
based on freedom and will.

### a) Inherently deterministic association of psychological nature

These types of relationships are caused either by philanthropic emotions
or passions which are associated to philanthropic inclination rooted in
the soil of human self. For example, I, by nature, perceive that you are
a human being (part of human species) and similar to me in humanity. In
other words, this quality is not dependent upon any external factor.

When you are a human being and my fellowman then this, by itself, is an
indication that we have certain common characteristics such as
‘thought’, ‘joys’, ‘pains’ and so on and so forth. Thus these common
qualities create a sense of fellowship which is called inherently
deterministic association of psychological nature. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

### b) Extrinsically deterministic affiliation of psychological nature

When the common denominator is ‘belief’, ‘country’, ‘race’, ‘culture’ or
whatever else of this category then we are faced by extrinsic
affiliations which are of both psychological and deterministic origin.
Co-raciality, for instance, is not a matter of physical dimension but
rooted in the soil of psychological relationship. Because when two
people belong to the same race this sense of belongingness is not
authentically of physical but psychological origin.

On the other hand, all of us are born in the same land and belong to the
same historical era and by tracing back our genealogical roots we may
find the same forefathers or racial family tree. In other words, as
these types of relationships are deterministic by definition and they
are not either of inherent nature as well as dependent upon external
relationships then we can categorize them as extrinsically deterministic
affiliation of psychological nature. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

### c) Psychological relationship based on freedom and will

We could talk about this kind of relationship when associations are
based on shared belief or common ideology provided they are based on
self-awareness and freedom-cum-will. These types of relationships do
appear in people who have reached certain kinds of intellectual
advancements, i.e. those personalities who have achieved the state of
reflexivity.

In other words, these types of personalities do not feel content by
following the dominant social norms but are able to question the norms,
look for truths, go beyond the clichés and seek the paths of
self-actualization.[^1]

They, unlike the majority, do not settle for received wisdom but follow
their own profound concerns which may result in novel kinds of
associations. In other words, by following their own sublime concerns
they create affiliations which are of mental character and also based on
free-will. These affiliations are of great significance for the being of
human self as an emancipative personality. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

Contractual Relationship
------------------------

This kind of relationship itself is consisted of two other types, i.e.
the deterministic contract and the voluntarily contract.

### a) Deterministic Contract

When Allama Jafari talks about deterministic kind of contractual
relationships he refers to dominant legal, economic, and political
relationships in a certain society. Among individuals, groups and people
in a certain society one can discern these kinds of relationships which
are involuntarily in the strict sense of the term. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)

### b) Voluntarily Contract

This type of relationship is consisted of all commitments and voluntary
contracts including international/national commitments as well as
private and public agreements. To highlight these kinds of relationships
Allama Jafari refers to following examples: one may, for instance,
commit her/himself to study regularly from the coming week or sign a
contract with a factory to produce specific goods on an exact date. The
list could be longer but *… we settle for the aforementioned examples
which demonstrate clearly what it is meant by associations based on
voluntarily contract. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 1)*

The fundamental principles of human relationships belong to the field of
psychology but it should be noted that the aforementioned threefold
relationships are demonstrated with different quantities and qualities
in a societal context. Although these principles constitute the crucial
crux of primary relationships but one should not assume that the
boundaries between each of these affiliations are fixed.

On the contrary, the precincts are fluid and hard to territorialize in a
solid fashion. In Allama Jafari’s words, when analyzing a case in this
context it is not easy to determine to what extent the relationship is
of contractual or natural nature.

Thus a sociologist should not treat her/his subject-matters as physical
cases in isolated fashions but human relationships should be considered
in a constant connection with one another within the webs of societal
interactions.

For instance, when the relationship between the opposite sexes is a
matter of inquiry it should be remarked that this relationship is rooted
in the natural proclivity of human being which means the sexual instinct
falls under the category of natural relationship. But it should be
carefully noted that the subject-matter of our inquiry is human being
which by its very definition it gives birth to psychological problems.

In other words,

*… although the instinctual inclinations are of natural origin but these
natural proclivities when expressed at the human level could not be
confined solely to the natural plane. It is not hard to conceive that
when we choose a partner we may have different criteria for our choice
such as beauty, personality, and education. This entails psychological
issues apart from sexual considerations which may primarily come to
fore. When the couple is considered in their societal dimension then
legal issues may enter to the equation as one will be treated as a
husband and the other as the wife as well as the offspring which
together give rise to various possible contractual relationships.*

*Therefore if the relationships are inquired on instinctual basis then
the character of affiliations should be seen as purely natural. But due
to the fact that individuals in their collective associations and
societal life do not settle for this level of relationship and moreover
there are issues of procreations in society and adoption of social roles
which pave the way for establishment of contractual relationship … … …
and legal issues should be erected for the formation of social order and
solidification of family institution … . (Jafari, 1976. Ch.*

To put it differently, the tripartite relationships are not three
disparate issues without any fundamental connection to one another. On
the contrary,

*… these relationships should be considered in dynamic and
interdependent fashions and moreover each of these tripartite
associations, in despite of their systemic relationships, go through
transformations due to various different kinds of situations. For
instance, when the culture and civilization of any nation goes through
vital changes then the forms of relationships do get transformed too;
namely, some relationships increase and others decrease. In a nutshell,
the characteristics and qualities as* *well as features of relationships
follow the cycles of* *changes and transformations in a fundamental
fashion. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 2)*

By dividing the human relationships into three different but
interrelated kinds of associations Allama Jafari argues that we should
in the next step split up three tripartite forms of affiliations into
three movements in reference to what he terms as *transformational
trend*.

Primary Movement
----------------

By primary movement Allama Jafari refers to progressive and prosperous
movements such as reproduction in sexual relationships; defensive
movements for obtaining power; or progressive movements in domains of
civilization and culture and so on and so forth.

The curve of movement in natural relationship could go upward or
downward. For instance, in reference to sexual instinct as a form of
relationship, the reproductive instinct is per se desirable. The wisdom
of nature

*… has bestowed upon humanity such a wonderful design that a hefty
desire to function as a drive which would assure the cycle of human
reproduction ad infinitum. If there was no desire or passion between the
sexes the human population could not grow to this extent on the planet.
Needles to state that in regard to sexual relationships the main reason
could be primarily referred to the importance of ‘desire’ in this
context and secondarily one could think of reproduction and having
offspring. A cursory look at the social life and its various forms and
varieties demonstrate clearly that although not having children could
cause some* *sort of inconvenience nevertheless the more important
issue, i.e. ‘desire’ has been fulfilled. Thus the question of desire is
an issue on its own right in human context, which should not be
neglected as an epiphenomenon. In other words, beauty has its own locus
within the parameters of human life as human being is essentially
aesthete and delights over beauty. It should be vehemently emphasized
that this aesthetical yearning is part of being human. (Jafari, 1976.
Ch. 2)*

Psychological relationships in comparison to natural associations seem
to be clearer in terms of transformations

*… as in the natural relationship the source of affiliation is
principally constant (e.g. sexual pleasure and the invariable source of
sexual instinct) which makes the possibility of transformation very
meager. But as far as the psychological relationships are concerned the
transformations and alterations are both prominent and significant.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch. 2)*

Allama Jafari takes a very primitive society as an example. He argues
that in such a society the ‘relationship’

*… is solely confined to the exercise of power where the powerful rules
over the weak and powerless. But along the course of history and due to
social growth the geometry of relationships get more complicated and
multifaceted which make the very principle of dominance (in the form of
dominance of powerful over the powerless), in despite of its presence,
in its conventional sense meaningless. Because in more developed
societies the very exterior as well as interior dimensions of
relationship has evolved in a very unprecedented fashion which makes the
antique forms of power relationship unfeasible. The relationship between
master and disciple, colleague and coworker, teacher and student,
faithful and unfaithful, us and them and all kinds of associations which
touch the boundaries of dialogue or conflict and cooperation or enmity
are forms of psychological relationships. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 2)*

Allama Jafari goes even further by arguing that even the relationship
between master and slave is not a natural relationship but a
psychological association. In other words, the being of humanity is
based on the pre-epistemological notion of soul which plays a very vital
role in the constitution of metaphysical dimensions of *alethia* or
truth.

To deny this spiritual dimension of human self is tantamount to
reduction of psychological aspect into natural relationship. (Jafari,
1976. Ch. 2) To speak about ‘Human Being’ is tantamount to hold a
normative approach to the subject matter. Thus we need to clarify what
kinds of background assumptions we hold.

Do we assume that human self has a human nature? Or do we refer to the
socially constructed human person in our sociological analysis? If we
reduce the human relationships solely into the contractual and natural
affiliations then

*… rest assured that the vision of humanity would be a
materialistic/unidimensional imago of human self which, in turn, would
result finally in degrading relationship in human societies. Because if
we assume that the establishment of spiritual relationship is a
possibility of highest importance then we can reach to more sublime
shores of realization and transcendence which are not feasible within
the parameters of either natural or contractual* *relationships.
(Jafari, 1976. Ch. 2)*

Another important issue is the problem of conceptual *unclarity* in
sociological analyses. Allama Jafari raises a metasociological question
in terms of whatness of sociology. In other words, the unclarity of
sociological concepts seems to be a *disclarity* problem, i.e. *the
quality of being inconsistent*. To put it otherwise, why is there so
much confusion over the very state of social and human sciences? It
seems Allama Jafari is trying to find out what are the problems in the
contexts of naturalistic versus humanistic approaches to social and
human sciences by arguing that our

*… conception of mental and substantive concepts is indeterminate and
problematic. The concepts are sometimes so disorganized and muddled that
a comprehensible debate over human science issues may seem often an
unachievable task. If we approach the prime subject of human sciences,
i.e. human being from the vantage point of evolutionism then
reductionism is the only game in town as in this approach the being of
human self is practically no different than those in the animal kingdom.
In this context, the quality of ‘relationship’ is not substantially
different in the natural context over against psychological dimension.
In delineating the boundaries between various schools of sociology the
pivotal role of values is undeniable and this is the dominant reason why
sociologists are unable to agree upon fundamental questions of
sociology. (Jafari,* *1976. Ch. 2)*

Second Movement
---------------

While the primary movement is constructive the second movement is
downward and destructive. The movement towards

*… destruction/demolition/devastation/desolation/despondency is called
the second movement such as the fall of civilizations and collapse of
societies’ cultures. This kind of movement could occur within the
context of natural relationships. For instance, when the water resources
are dried out in a village and famine may break out then the village
could get transformed but this change is not of the first order. On the
contrary, the transformation in this case is of the second order, i.e.
the downward movement which ultimately leads to desolation and
destruction. Another example could be the fall of ancient nations and
civilizations where the beneficial factors are considered as harmful and
detrimental factors are viewed as favorable trends. By losing sight and
embarking upon a mistaken path they may have created the necessary
conditions for change in their respective societies but the curve of
movement, unlike the primary move, is downward and destructive. (Jafari,
1976. Ch. 2)*

Third Movement
--------------

This kind of motion applies to movements in a constant path within
society which

*… may lead neither to constructive nor destructive movement but to
minor transformations. For instance, when in the mind of an artist or a
scientist a new idea sparks this could lead towards some kind of changes
within the larger society without being destructive or constructive in
the aforementioned sense. However these changes are essentially
favorable in terms of transformation by generating a novel element in
the fabric of society which, in turn, could be instrumental in the
future transformations. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 2)*

The ‘Social’ as Demiurge
------------------------

The majority of debates within the context of social sciences are
related to the relation between the individual and the society. In other
words, to what extent does the society play a role in the constitution
of self and vice versa? In addition, what is the role of agency in the
constitution of social life?

An individual who has a purpose for her/his own self-realization and
consciously attempts to keep her/his integrity before the social forces
what will be left of the uniqueness in each person’s individuality in
the midst of social incursion to all corners of human self? Assuming
that the impact of society is constructive but still it does not make up
for the incursion which stifles the very existence of individuality by
pushing everyone towards collective conformitization.

Unlike the views expressed by extreme collectivists who argue that the
individual is a product of society (either a product of geographical
milieu or social environment), one should not be deluded that it is, in
fact, the individual who could make the society.

Because if we assume otherwise and concede to the view expressed by the
collectivists then morality (and all the ethical commands such as be
good, be humane, act responsible, follow your conscience and so on and
so forth) would sound futile. If we assume that all causalities and
effects are of social origin then what we have done in practice is to
demolish the individual from the equation of life. (Jafari, 1976. Ch.

In order to highlight his point on contingency versus permanence, Allama
Jafari gives an example. He argues,

*… let’s assume that a young man leaves his homeland and settles in the
West. After some time he adopts himself to the extent that he becomes
assimilated in the new culture. After a while he returns to his
homeland. When you ask him what did happen to your first identity before
leaving to the West he may answer that the identity that my society has
endowed upon me was robbed from me by the new society. In other words,
for this person issues such as personality, self and human nature seem
ridiculous as aspects such as authenticity, mores, culture and ethic are
all of social origin. When you change your social setting to a new one
then all these contingent aspects transform too so you need to adopt new
mores and manners as morality and ethic have no genuine significance.
But the question is how valid is this position? Is this a valid point of
departure? This is one of the most important issues*

*which constitute the backbone of human existence and without the human
life could not be considered as an examined life. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 3)*

In fact, to what extent could society impact upon individuals and vice
versa? To what extent to be under the impact of environment is related
to the authority of an individual and to what capacity is dependent on
the social factors? To be affected by society is a sign of individual
weakness or an indication of totalitarian social organization? (Jafari,
1976. Ch. 3) There are three fundamental questions which could be raised
when we think on social life of human beings:

1. How much transactions and interactions could occur between human
beings?

2. To what extent could the social life confine the individual life?

3. To what extent could the co-existence between individuals in a
society lead to suppression of ideas and change of what an individual
stand for?

In sum, one should know that the individual life is different than the
collective life where social interactions play a crucial role. (Allama
Jafari, 1976. Ch. 3) The concept of ‘social interaction’ has not been
fully conceptualized within the theoretical framework of Allama Jafari
and this may make the issue very complicated.

Because the very concept of ‘social interaction’ has been productively
conceptualized by proponents of American *social interactionism* who
have derived social processes (such as conflict, cooperation, identity
formation) from human interaction by focusing on the subjective aspects
of social life, rather than on objective, macro-structural aspects of
social systems.

[^1]: Self-actualization is a term that has been used in various
psychology theories, often in slightly different ways. Although the term
was used earlier by thinkers such as Kurt Goldstein but the concept was
brought most fully to prominence in Abraham Maslow's hierarchy of needs
theory as the final level of psychological development that can be
achieved when all basic and mental needs are fulfilled and the
‘’actualization’’ of the full personal potential takes place. (Maslow,
1968. p 204) In a work by Allama Jafari entitled Epistemology of Human
Being: The Ascendency Path of Growth (2006) one could discern profound
similarities between Maslow’s concept of self-actualization and Allama
Jafari’s notion of ‘’ascendency’’ (Jafari, 2006. p 171) which require us
to carry out systematic cross-cultural comparisons between these two
seemingly unrelated theoretical systems. Sayyid Mohsen Fatemi from
Harvard University has carried out such a research on psychology and
Allama Jafari which is due to be published by London Academy of Iranian
Press in United Kingdom in June 2012.


