Chapter 5:  Human Sciences, Values and Understanding
====================================================

Values and Understanding in Human Sciences
------------------------------------------

The subject matter of sociology is human behavior in society. All social
behavior is guided by values. Thus the study of social behavior can
never be value-free if value freedom is interpreted in the sense of
absence of values because values of the society under investigation form
a part of the social facts to be studied by sociology. Moreover social
research is in itself a type of social behavior and is guided by the
value of search for true knowledge. In other words, the values can
operate at three levels:

1. At the level of philological interpretation.

2. At the level of ethical interpretation in assigning value to an
object of enquiry.

3. At the level of rational interpretation in which the sociologists
seeks the meaningful relationship between phenomena in terms of causal
analysis. The point of value interpretation is to establish the value
towards which an activity is directed.

Sociologists should observe value neutrality while conducting social
research. It means that s/he should exclude ideological or non-
scientific assumption from research. S/he should not make evaluative
judgment about empirical evidence. Value judgment should be restricted
to sociologists' area of technical competence.

S/he should make her/his own values open and clear and refrain from
advocating particular values. Value neutrality enables the social
scientists to fulfill the basic value of scientific enquiry that is
search for true knowledge. Thus sociology being a science cherishes the
goal of value neutrality. According to Alvin Gouldner value-free
principle did

enhance the autonomy of sociology where it could steadily pursue basic
problems rather than journalistically react to passing events and
allowed it more freedom to pursue questions uninteresting either to the
respectable or to the rebellious. It made sociology freer as Comte had
wanted it to be -to pursue all its own theoretical implications.

Value free principle did contribute to the intellectual growth and
emancipation of the enterprise. Value-free doctrine enhanced freedom
from moral compulsiveness; it permitted a partial escape from the
parochial prescriptions of the sociologists' local or native culture.
Effective internalization of the value-free principle has always
encouraged at least a temporary suspension of the moralizing reflexes
built into the sociologist by her/his own society.

The value-free doctrine has a paradoxical potentiality; it might enable
researchers/scientists to make better value judgments rather than none.
It could encourage a habit of mind that might help sociologists in
discriminating between their punitive drives and their ethical
sentiments. However in practice it has been extremely difficult to
fulfill this goal of value neutrality. Values creep in various stages in
sociological research. According to Gunnar Myrdal total value neutrality
is impossible.

In other words, chaos does not organize itself into cosmos. To put it
otherwise, we need viewpoints. (Myrdal, 1958) Thus in order to carry out
social research viewpoints are needed which form the basis of hypothesis
which enables the social scientists to collect empirical data.

As a result a sociologist has to be value frank and should make the
values which have got incorporated in the choice of the topic of the
research of the formulation of hypothesis clear and explicit at the very
outset in the research.

The value-free doctrine is useful both to those who want to escape from
the world and to those who want to escape into it. They think of
sociology as a way of getting ahead in the world by providing them with
neutral techniques that may be sold on the open market to any buyer. The
belief that it is not the business of sociologist to make value
judgments is taken by some to mean that the market on which they can
vend their skills is unlimited.

Some sociologists have had no hesitation about doing market research
designed to sell more cigarettes although well aware of the implications
of recent cancer research. According to Gouldner the value-free doctrine
from Weber's standpoint is an effort to compromise two of the deepest
traditions of the western thought, reason and faith but that his
arbitration seeks to safeguard the romantic residue in modern man. Like
Freud, Weber never really believed in an enduring peace or in a final
resolution of this conflict. What he did was to seek a truce through the
segregation of the contenders by allowing each to dominate in different
spheres of life.

How all these debates are relevant to Allama Jafari? Of course, the
question of ‘’relevancy’’ itself is a very paradoxical concept within
sociological discourse as it is not unproblematic to demonstrate the
relation between things which may not look related to each other based
on the perspective of the beholder.

In other words, to those who consider the works of Allama Jafari as
irrelevant to sociological discourses then the debates on the
‘’relevance’’ of Allama Jafari within a sociological paradigm are futile
but we have, in the course of this work, showed that this view is
unfounded. Because the questions of ‘’value’’, ‘’observation’’ and
‘’episteme’ have occupied the minds of many *alternative* social
thinkers who have not operated within the paradigm of disciplinary
social sciences. Allama Jafari, to my view, is one of the paragonic
examples of this genre.

To put it otherwise, when Allama Jafari was debating these issues in
Iran during seventies very few scholars even realized the scope of his
critique which later on came to be known as *subaltern theories* versus
*mainstream theories*. This view was only recognized in Europe and
America by very few social scientists, such as Gunnar Myrdal from the
60s onwards. However, today these ideas have gained global momentum and
few dare to neglect the problematic state of eurocentricity and other
ills of disciplinary social sciences.

The claim of traditional science to analyze, describe and causally
explain independently of any particular observers' evaluation and
(value-neutrality) is unfounded, as already noted here. Value-neutrality
may be important in certain research phases of establishing facts or in
mediating conflicts, but if absolutised without it becomes entirely
self-defeating. However, the full consequences of this fact have by no
means been drawn in the practice of these sciences.

Types of Interventions in Human Sciences
----------------------------------------

In Allama Jafari’s view, the questions of positions and vectors are of
pivotal significance within human sciences and complex to tackle indeed.
Perhaps everybody approaches problems within society based on her/his
own contextual position and in accordance to this particular viewpoint
issues a verdict upon complex issues of human existence.

This perspectival approach to vital questions of human life is a *common
syndrome* which needs to be explored extensively as in issues related to
human being and also of primordial importance have metaphysical roots.
In all kinds of epistemic pursuits, in general, and in sociology which
deals with our destiny, in particular, we are faced with two kinds of
interventions, i.e. unstudied type of interference, and intentional type
of interference. (1976. Ch. 4)

The Unstudied Type of Interference
----------------------------------

The first kind of interference is related to what Allama Jafari
considers as the natural position of the researcher which is crucial in
the fabric of her/his conclusions. Of course the researcher is not
guilty of charge in this case, as the onus lies somewhere else which is
beyond her/his reach, i.e. the milieu. In Allama Jafari’s words, the
factors which were instrumental in the configuration of her/his
personality have caused such a makeup. For instance, an individual who
is squint-eyed would willy-nilly see one thing in a squinty fashion
without being guilty of charge as her/his natural condition has caused
such a vision. However, Allama Jafari argues that

*…we cannot rely upon his optical vision either as her/his visual
perception is not accurate. S/he may be a good person but her/his ocular
observations could be unreliable. When, for instance, the moon seems to
be two for a squint-eyed person while I can see only one moon in the sky
with my own eyes or a telescope then it is verified for me that there is
only one moon. Of course, I will not condemn her/him as this is due to
the positional interference, i.e. based on her/his conditions the moon
seems to be two instead of one. I, on the other hand, should be careful
not to follow the verdicts which are the*

*results of positional interference in a sociological research. There
are other characteristics such as* **specific ideology, race, class,**
*and other aspects which may have dominated vital* *dimensions of the
personality of a researcher in a fashion that one could link between
worldview and layers of personality. (1976. Ch. 4)*

In other words, our unintentional inclinations could color the fabric of
our vision in a very fundamental fashion which could turn our research
into a deeply biased narrative without any epistemological significance.
To put it differently, one should distinguish between evaluative
statements and actual value judgments.

All things considered, despite all the flipsides caused by the
*positional interferences*

*… it is undeniable that the interference of natural positions in
sociological studies is both necessary and normal. When a student of
social sciences reads the works carried by another social scientist who
may have her/his own ideological inclinations or background assumptions
which has driven her/him to conclude in certain fashion and explain the
facts in reference to her/his particular framework - s/he could study
problematiques and research conclusions without buying into her/his
ideological assumptions. Of course, this is not an easy task but it is
achievable for those who look at research data with armed sociological
eyes. (1976. Ch. 4)*

For instance, the primary and fundamental sociological rule in

Durkheim’s perspective is that one should make a distinction between

‘social facts’ and the sociologist who studies these facts. In other
words, Durkheim argues that the social events should be approached as a
*thing out there*. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 4) In Allama Jafari’s perspective,

*… these two statements should be taken either as a sign of wishful
thinking or unachievable ideals. (1976. Ch. 4)*

Allama Jafari levels a critique at Durkheim by arguing that the validity
of his statements are doubtful as well as one should not disregard the
philosophical problem in Durkheim’s remarks, as one cannot infer based
on the primary sociological rule as does Durkheim. It seems Allama
Jafari comes very close to the Weberian position when he states that

*… the sociologist should appraise the social fact apart and independent
from her/his own position … by considering the society as an independent
thing … in a fashion as though the sociologist is a mere spectator. This
is not an accurate depiction of the logic of sociological studies … as
this would lead us to consider society as a solidified entity … which
would not be factually influenced by people’s attitudes. (Jafari, 1976.
Ch. 4)*

The Intentional Type of Interference
------------------------------------

The second type of intervention is, in the paradigm of Allama Jafari’s
methodological approach, the ‘conscious interference’ in knowing the
subject-matter. Our knowledge about natural phenomena and facts are
generally outside the orbit of these kinds of interferences. In Allama
Jafari’s words, whether we like or dislike a glass is a glass and the
researcher’s intentions cannot affect the factual state of glass.
Because the objects have realities of their own and our intentions
cannot affect their objective positions and even our intentions would
for some time cloud the state of affairs these cloudy states cannot
endure the test of reality. However,

*… when I state that I am a sociologist this would have some serious
consequences in the future by those who may make assumptions based on my
sociological assessments. (1976. Ch.4)*

What does Allama Jafari mean by this? He explains his points by giving
an example from the history of ideas. He argues when

*… we look at the slavery in the history we see that grand thinkers such
as Plato and Aristotle by being influenced by the dominant norms in
their society assumed that the slavery is an inalienable fact of human
social life. In other words, they assumed erroneously that human beings
are essentially created as two different kinds of species, i.e. shepherd
and herd. Now the question is how could such grand thinkers express such
vulgar ideas? (1976. Ch. 4)*

This question seems to be directed at Durkheim who in Allama Jafari’s
view tended to neglect

*… the role of education in making of sociological theories. In other
words, when in the pantheon of knowledge we turn Plato and Aristotle as
two fundamental pillars of reason then what will happen to young
researchers who would like to approach the crucial questions of human
paradoxes? Wouldn’t they be influenced by these fads and fables?
Wouldn’t our socialization patterns or civilizational norms and cultural
horizons affect our judgments in construing sociological theories?
(1976. Ch.4)*

These are questions which, Allama Jafari thinks sociologists such as
Durkheim have neglected and need also urgent attention. Thus

*… I may express that the state of society is like this at the current
moment but in the course of future transformations our conceptions of
theories on the* ***social*** *could change. The nature of social
knowledge is very different than physical knowledge of material facts.
(1976. Ch. 4)*

Finally the natural interferences would,

*… soon or later, appear and the facts see the light of the day. As in
regard to elements and other issues in the history of human ideas many
conceptions were naïve and rudimentary but the course of human reasoning
changed* *many misconceptions about reality and the world which have
been unprecedented. (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 4)*

In other words, Allama Jafari seems to have a critical approach to the
principle of ‘scientific accumulation’ as far as human sciences are
concerned. To put it differently, he argues that

*… one can discern in the history of ideas that our conceptions about
natural issues have become more sophisticated but the same is not true
about issues in humanities. For instance, the quest for validity of
conscience in the constitution of human existence goes back as far as
Egyptian Pharaohs but the question is still unresolved and specialists
have not agreed upon the crucial authenticity of conscience yet. What is
the position of sociology in this regard? (Jafari, 1976. Ch. 4)*

In other words, how should we account for the arbitrary state of
concepts and conceptual frameworks in social sciences, in general, and
sociology, in particular? To put it differently, how far could one go
with relativism? What are the underlying problems in disciplinary
sociology in the sense that it is unable to equip modern self with a
conscientious ethos? Said differently, is the absence of religion in the
makeup of modern system interrelated to demise of conscience?

It seems Allama Jafari views the problematiques of conscience and
religion at the same inseparable plane. In the Old Persian language
there is one word for two concepts which we use today in English for
conscience and religion, namely *Daena*. (Clark, 1998. Pp 69-70) Daena
refers to religion and conscience in the Old Persian language. In other
words, it seems ancient magus or wisdom philosophers did not
differentiate between the realms of conscience and religion as
modernists do today.

To put it otherwise, the underlying streams which run through the works
of Allama Jafari are deeply intertwined with wisdom philosophy tradition
where to be religious is tantamount to be conscientious and both are not
devoid of insight in the realms of self and society.

Of course, it should be reemphasized that we do not employ the term
‘magus’ in the derogatory sense which was used by early Arab royalists
(such as the supporters of Umayyad Dynasty) who considered Iranian
people as ‘*Majus’*.[^1]

On the contrary, when we speak of magus the term is used in the paradigm
of Hafez [^2] who refers to *Pir-e Mugan* as the principal wayfarer in
the path of self- realization. In other words, the intellectual depth
which constitutes the background assumptions of Allama Jafari’s
theoretical universe has a long tradition that stretches back into
antiquity in a successive fashion.

To put it otherwise, the making of alternative discourses in an Iranian
context could come about through working on intellectuals such as Allama
Jafari whose discursive universe is connected organically to the streams
of their tradition [^3] in a meaningful fashion [^4] where reason is not
divorced from intellect and none is outside the realm of *Daena*.

[^1]: This term refers to the Iranian religion which has been mentioned
in Koran as one of the ‘People of the Book’ without any pejorative
connotations. But later on, it has been employed by Arab royalists in a
derogative fashion.

[^2]: Khawja Shams al-Din Muhammad Hafez-e Shirazi, known by his pen
name Hafez (1325/1326 – 1389/1390), was a Persian lyric poet. His
collected works composed of series of Persian poetry (Divan) are to be
found in the homes of most Iranians, who learn his poems by heart and
use them as proverbs and sayings to this day. His life and poems has
been the subject of much analysis, commentary and interpretation,
influencing post-Fourteenth Century Persian writing more than any other
author. He may be known as a poet to the world but he is more of a
poet-philosopher who has expressed his ideas through the medium of
poetry.

[^3]: By tradition, we do not refer to the modern meaning of tradition
which has evolved in the European discourse in the last two hundred
years, during the Enlightenment period, as philosophers and thinkers
counter- posed the concept of modernity with the concept of tradition,
in the context of progress. (Giddens, 2002. p 39) In other words, we
refer to the ability and nobility of thinkers such as Allama Jafari and
Allama Tabatabai who have not broken up with the intellectual tradition
of religio perennis due to hegemonic pressures of progressive ideology
of modernism. To put it otherwise, the ability refers to the concept of
intellect while the nobility originates from the concept of revelation
which in the frame of primordial school is different but interrelated
modalities of being present in the world of reality.

[^4]: In figures such as Allama Jafari, we can discern a solid chain of
knowledge which is absent in disciplinary epistemic mode. It may sound
bizarre but in the context of primordial school knowledge has a very
deep humane face while intellect has a rigorous modality beyond any
anthropomorphic aspect. In other words, when we trace the chain of
masters of Allama Jafari’s school of thought we shall soon or later come
face to face with the chain of Being. To put it differently, within the
context of disciplinary mode of knowledge this search would lead
ultimately to Void. How many of modern professors talk, for instance,
affectionately about their teachers? In a rationalized world there is no
place for affectionate souls. This is another story which I leave for
another treatise in the near future.


