Epilogue
========

Professor Dustin J. Byrd[^1]

Western Michigan University

United States of America

In an age where the social sciences find themselves intellectually
ghettoized, isolated not only from the broader society within which they
function and study, but also from other forms of science and
philosophical inquiry into the nature of reality, existence, and
existential meaning, there comes thinkers that are able to bridge the
gaps between not only the academic disciplines, but the sacred and
secular, spirit and matter, East and West, etc., illuminating the
elusive wholeness of existence that is so shattered in everyday
perception.

In the thirteenth century, it was the Persian scholar/mystic Shams-i
Tabrizi, who through his living wholeness, reconciliation of the
spiritual and temporal, his mastery of the knowledge of the totality of
the human condition – it's fragility, its temporality, its majesty, and
it's purposivity – led a young conventional scholar Mevlana Jalaludin
Rumi to transcend his *everydayness*, his compartmentalized mental and
spiritual existence, until he became the greatest living poet of
mystical union; a union not only of man and the divine, but man and
himself.

In the 20th century, it is another Tabrizi, Allama Muhammad Taqi Jafari,
that has demonstrated the possibility of a way of understanding reality,
the human condition, and the meaning of human existence through a
comprehensive and inter-connected orientation of sociological study; a
method of study that takes seriously the metaphysical and spiritual
dimensions of human life – a area of uneasiness for many Western
scholars.

Allama Jafari points to the integrated wholeness of 'human being' – the
*tawhid* of human existence with a form of communication-reason that
takes into account the repositories of human spirit, values,
metaphysical assumptions, and religious sensibilities, and humanistic
frailties.

For Allama Jafari, no sociological study that systematically neglects,
rejects, or fails to comprehend and consider the human being within his
totality can be adequate in penetrating into the human condition; in
effect, Jafari calls for a profoundly onto-humanistic approach to the
study of man that does not systematically distort or deny man's non-
physical dimension of being nor his spiritual-religious longings.

Science, Secularity, and Deficiency
-----------------------------------

Allama Jafari is very aware of the condition that modern man finds
himself when he is surrounded in a de-mythologized, technocratic,
sterile, and meaningless secular world. Ever since Nietzsche had the
courage to announce that which was already becoming obvious to those
whose eyes could see, that the rationalization, bureaucratization, and
secularization of the lifeworld had caused the “death of God”, that life
was becoming increasingly meaningless outside of the individual's
limited projection of relative meaning into his / her life, and that as
Dostoevsky said, “if God is dead, all things are possible,” man has been
faced with the realization that science and the capitalist market, those
tools that were originally meant to liberate him from his irrationality
and his oppressive chains to nature, had actually left in him an
existential void.

If God is dead, as Nietzsche's madman exclaimed to the men of the
market, then not only is everything permissible, it is permissible
precisely because it is meaningless. This meaninglessness is the true
specter that not only haunts Europe, but the secularized world as a
whole.

The pervasive detachment and disenchantment with the world that
secularity birthed into existence has not only become a problem for the
everyday man in his lifeworld, but has become a driving undercurrent in
the way we approach human existence through the social sciences. As
society has devalued the sacred, *Das Heilige*, the metaphysical
meaningfulness of life and existence, it left mankind with little left
but a thick description of what is the case.

The Vienna school, better known as “positivism,” is a scientific method
that is a symptom of this demystified, de- sacralized, and meaning
deprived way of approaching the world. It is rooted in the instrumental
rationality of efficiency, calculation, techno-reason, detachment, and
mathematization of all sphere's of life – its erasure is meaning,
spirit, eschatology, metaphysics, and all things unaccounted due to
their non-physicality.

Allama Jafari reads this diminished existence as if it were a horror
story written by a depraved author bent of updating Dante's religiously
inspired inferno for a modern secular audience who no longer find
themselves religiously literate. Like those unable to escape the burning
in Dante's hell, modern man finds himself somehow feeling trapped within
what the bourgeois sociologist Max Weber described as the “iron cage” -
it may not be burning on the outside, but the inner torture of perpetual
prison burns from within.

The “dungeon of necrophilia,” as Seyed Javad Miri describes it, is not
an imaginary nor metaphysical speculation, but a state-of-being within
the modern mode of existence; it is an all pervasive ethos of “death-
friendliness,” a seemingly inescapable system of hatred,
competitiveness, aggressiveness, and violence (both direct and
systemic), that modern man finds himself thrown into (*befindlichkeit*)
and made the victim of.

The worst aspect of this dungeon of death- friendliness it that it
deprives the imprisoned from the possibility of fathoming that another
existence based on Eros and Agape, *Taqwa* (Piety) and *Tawhid*
(Unicity), is even possible. He abandons his longing for an alternative
state of existence and reconciles himself to the reified daily
chaos-catastrophe. He accepts his fate – a negative *fana'* (passing
away, melding) into that which is the case.

This pervasive state-of-being redefines the meaning of human life by
aggressively dictating man's coordinates of life; his ultimate worth is
as a “consumer,” a “a producer of surplus value,” a “cog-in-the-
machine,” a “functionary” of a system that allows no true liberating
self-determination but regulates by way of law, custom, culture, and
duty – a lifeworld divorced from his own existential, ontological, and
eschatological concerns.

For Allama Jafari and others within the Primordial School of Social
Theory, the “dungeon of necrophilia,” the “iron cage,” the “Golgotha
history,” and the “history as slaughter bench,” cannot be the last word
within the poetic epic of human existence. It is the goal of Allama
Jafari, as Seyed Javad Miri discusses, to help build a framework or
roadmap from which humanity can find a way out of this twisted maze of
confusion and spiritual nothingness that we've weaved ourselves into.

If we are going to find another way-of-being within the world, we must
rethink our dominate mode of reason and how it is deployed with the
social sciences. It must take into account the spiritual and
metaphysical nature of human existence, and not define that which cannot
be calculated as absurd, mere speculation, obscurantism, or irrational
wish fulfillment.

We must begin to rethink and reevaluate what it means to be human; what
are the essential qualities of human existence, what metaphysical and
psychological dimension make us a “humane” and not just physically
human.

Allama Jafari is right, a social science that cannot account for the
“essence” of humanity – the non-physical yet existentially essential
aspects of human existence – is not a science that achieves its goal of
gnosis, but only one that describes that which is the case within very
limited parameters. It settles for the truthfulness of “protocol
sentences” - small statements of verifiable facts, that when all brought
together, describe a limited dimension of life, but not nearly human
existence in all its meaningful totality.

Jafari's thought calls for us to analyze and critique the catastrophic
results of instrumental rationality within how dominate forms of social
sciences and lifeworld. The positivist, scientistic, ideology of
materialism or the metaphysics of “what is the case,” has led us to
approach all of existence in such a bifurcating way; that the properties
of human life that are not somehow able to be calculated or are able to
be the subject of scientific experiments are unimportant, irrelevant, or
non-existent.

If Freud could not subject his *psyche* to rigorous lab experiments then
it most certainly does not exist, the positivists proclaimed – allowing
them to ignore the fact that is the psyche / mind that animates the
human, not the organ we call the brain. This scientific reduction of the
human existence to its material basis has become the dominant mode of
reason that has served as the basis for our (Western) social sciences
and has, by virtue of its latent values, skewed the way we understand
the human being.

Seyed Javad Miri is correct in his skepticism about a value free
sociology, as the dominant mode of sociological research operates under
the presupposed value system of material positivity – that what is
metaphysical, conceptual, or spiritual cannot be considered in a
scientific study of man.

However, man is simply not physicality, but spirituality and
metaphysically as well. In fact, it is the symbiotic relationship
between the physicality and mentality, spirituality and metaphysicality
of man that allows him to be what he is – a comprehensive cognitive
being that operates both within the world of material and the world of
metaphysical speculation and ideas.

Social sciences, especially Western forms of sociology operate under the
illusion that man can be studied without taking into account that which
animates his existence, provides meaning, directs his ultimate concerns,
and connects him / her to the mystical connection with world and people,
and leaves those “obscurantist” questions to the non-scientific
philosophers and theologians.

Yet, our dominate mode of instrumental rationality neglects precisely
that aspect of human being – leaving us a distorted and broken picture
of what it means to be human. Human existence is left in a fragmented
state in our daily life due to the all-encompassing nature of
instrumental-reason and profit driven motivations within politics,
economy, popular culture, and civil society.

This same distorting rationality has become the guide, from which the
social sciences have followed, leaving the humanities, the unscientific
studies of human existence, to be the academic voice of a humanity left
undisturbed in its wholeness.

The social sciences, especially sociology, or what has been describes as
“disciplinary sociology,” which distinguishes it from critical sociology
or primordial sociology, have suffered from a legitimation crisis from
the beginning, starting with its progenitor Auguste Comte.

Wanting to be “scientific” in method, but taking the subject matter of
mankind and his society, a subject of analysis that cannot even in the
most remoteness of thought be considered as purely physical being or
phenomenon, left sociology with an inherent problem; the problem of a
method of inquiry appropriate for natural sciences but ill equipped to
study phenomenon that have both materiality and metaphysics.

Sociologists wanted the authority that the natural sciences can provide
for their pronouncements and findings based on their empirical
experimentation and observations, but at the same time the subject of
sociological study remained at minimum partly metaphysical and
conceptual. In order to gauge, calculate, observe, and describe the
social phenomenon that was the subject of sociological study, they had
to systematically distort that phenomenon by isolating it from its
historical context, its contemporary associations, and its potentiality
and or becoming nature.

In essence, the positivist sociologist had to artificially construct the
phenomenon before he could measure it. The result of which is that the
phenomenon so constructed does not exist in the way that it is being
studied, i.e. divorced from the qualities that cannot be measured. What
then is the subject or object of the sociological study? At best, a
distorted “semblance” of the original object of study, at worst a
completely new phenomenon that has little to no true connection to the
original.

The scientific method for studying the social was to originally bring
the kind of legitimation and objective proof that the natural sciences
enjoy, only to find itself completely without legitimacy as the method
was ill equipped for the task.

The scientific method of the natural sciences proved to be very limited
in ascertaining truth about society when deployed within the social
sciences. What philosophers argued, accepted, and moved on from, only
decades later is positivist sociology attempting to “prove” beyond a
shadow-of-a-doubt, only to find that such purely objective proof is not
possible within the methods they employ.

What's worse, is that when the distorted “proof” they produce is
understood to be incontrovertible evidence, they are wittingly engaged
in ideology (in the best Marxian sense of the term); a false
construction of reality based on their ideological commitments that
hides and conceals certain social, political, and economic interests. In
the face of this distorted form of sociological analysis, Allama Jafari
calls for a non- disciplinary perspective that is not susceptible to the
pathology of instrumental reason that the positivist sciences have
fallen victim to.

Reason, if it is to be a tool from which humanity understands the world,
the physicality of its existence, the metaphysics of his / her being,
it's conceptual commitments, and it's process of becoming, must operate
with a form of reason that doesn't systematically distort that which it
wishes to comprehend and understand.

A form of reason that is capable of addressing human frailty, ecological
degradation, inter-subjectivity, metaphysics, and the longing for the
totally other, is desperately needed as the dominance of instrumental
reason leads us closer to nuclear catastrophe, ecological apocalypse,
and existential meaninglessness.

Sociological Gharbzadegi
------------------------

The dialectic of the enlightenment has directed the Western world since
the early years of the 18th century, both liberating it from its
infantile irrationalism rooted in a christological rejection of reason
(Think of Luther's statement that “reason is a whore”), the radical de-
hellenization of Christianity – which includes the exorcising of the Ibn
Rushd, Ibn Sina, al-Ghazali, and other Islamic theo-philosophers out of
Christian thought, and its racist and theological hatred of the “other.”

The Enlightenment project emancipated the Jews from their European
ghettos, gave birth to the natural sciences that looked to natural
causation for natural phenomenon, produced the industrial revolution,
and the modern nation-state.

However, as the West progressed through the enlightenment project, it
also liberated itself for existential meaning, made it crasser towards
human suffering, and learned how to perfect efficient weapons of killing
which allowed it to conquer greater territories with ease. As it began
to understand the how's of the human mind, social actors learned how to
manipulate the masses better – ultimately replacing the totalitarian
regimes with their explicit dictatorial powers with hidden persuaders.

Now the dictatorial powers operate tacitly, through popular culture, the
market, and the psychological neurosis of “keeping up with the Jones'.”
The dialectic of enlightenment emancipated humanity from its fetishistic
and fearful relationship with nature, which diminished it to inanimate
material objects and meaningless natural occurrences.

However, those objects in nature that once engendered respect due to
their mythological sacredness are now seen as bundles of meaningless
atomic material that are viewed as a resource to be exploited for profit
– to inflict damage on nature is not a sin or a crime against the spirit
of nature that dwells within the forest, but is now a admirable act as
it will create an enormous amount of wealth for the shareholders of the
corporation who have an invested interest in the destruction of that
once sacred space.

Enlightenment not only demythologizes, it desacralizes, and allows
wholesale atrocities on nature and mankind. That which was meant to
liberate now dominates and distorts human connectedness to the world
around us and to those who inhabit that world as well.

The Euro-centricity of the Enlightenment, as it was objectively
different from the enlightened age in classical Islamic civilization, is
apparent. As Europe and European civilization's faith in that which
isn't physically manifest diminished, so too did its new faith in
science increase.

It is clear that a sociological project such as Allama Jafari doesn't
fall victim to the distorting nature of Euro-centric instrumental
reason, but preserves and promotes a reason that understands its own
limitations, but refuses to reject that which it cannot *completely*
comprehend via its own method of analysis.

In classical Islamic thought, reason is understood to be a gift from the
divine, a tool that the ultimate sovereign bestowed upon his creation as
a way of understanding the natural world around them and by consequence
the author of that nature. It would be a grave mistake to fall prey to a
social-scientific “garbzadegi” (westoxification) within the Muslim world
when the negative consequences of such a method of research are so
blatantly visible in much of the world.

A form of reason that dehumanizes the human being to a conglomeration of
protoplasmic material – a reduction of “being” to the mere physical -
must be rejected by those who can still affirm metaphysics and their
inherent importance in human existence.

The “objectification” of Western social sciences bears the hallmarks of
the objectification of man within his own society – his “beingness,” his
spiritual life, his metaphysical commitments, are reduced to
irrelevancy, as his worth and value is not within his “being,” but in
his “having,” a mode of existence that only recognizes the individual
for what he possesses, not what he is (his commitments, his deeds, his
spiritual excellence, etc.).

When mankind is reduced to the level of an object, he/she is discarded
on the level of an object as well. In a consumer society, where the
“new” gleefully replaces that which was just “new” yesterday, it becomes
precarious to be in the position of being a human-object that was “new”
just a day before; as soon as one “is,” the storm cloud of replacement
is on the horizon to render him a “was.”

His very subjectivity, that sacredness of the individual that Immanuel
Kant respected in his ban on ever treating a human as a “means” as
opposed to an “ends,” is denied. It is that subjectivity of the man and
woman that differentiates them as something living from something
non-living. The de-subjectivizing nature of positivist sciences and
instrumental reason has ended in the destruction of millions of
individuals in the 20th century, and prepares the way for the same
possibility in the 21st.

To argue against a “gharbzegadi” orientation of sociology within the
Muslim world is not to say that all positivist accomplishments must be
rejected. That would be just as intellectually reactionary as the
rejection of all metaphysics by positivists themselves. It is clearly
the case that the positivist sciences have produced profoundly important
discoveries in the fields of medicine, physics, biology, cognitive
sciences, geology, etc.

However, skepticism concerning positivism is rooted in the recognition
of the socially destructive or distorted side of our scientific advances
as well as the perils of reductionistic social sciences that treat man
as an object.

To appreciate the accomplishments of the “hard sciences” is warranted,
but one must never neglect to recognize the dialectical nature of those
accomplishments, i.e. the more knowledgeable we become about ourselves
and our environment, the more destructive capacity we yield towards
them, and what's more, the more we operate within a world dominated by
instrumental rationality, the more it permeates our interpersonal
relationships, whether they be within the family, community, nation, or
international.

To abandon this skepticism is to abandon the future of humanity to a
method that cannot account for that which makes us human outside of our
physicality. In maintaining this skeptical appreciation, Allama Jafari
points us to a possible alternative.

Integrated Wholeness – Integrated Method
----------------------------------------

In the thinking of Allama Jafari, the integrated wholeness of human
existence warrants an integrated method of analysis that remains
sensitive to the question of human totality – the various realms of
human life and their inter-connectedness. A method of inquiry that
fractures the human being into compartments, that approaches each one of
these apartments as independent phenomenon within a individual, that
brackets out their relatedness of other realm of human life, cannot
adequately address the human condition.

Furthermore, as the structures of modern society are imposed on the
modern individual, his / her psyche and lifeworld finds itself already
compartmentalized, fractured, and deformed, as his or her moral,
ethical, and religious commitments are so often set in abeyance as they
conflict with the political-economy of the state and civil society in
which they procures their means of living.

Modern man too often lives in a schizophrenic bifurcated world of public
secularity and private religiosity / spirituality, which leaves him
without a firm ethical grounding; often times leading to existential and
ontological confusion – a perpetual state of personal inner-suffering.

This schizophrenic and in some ways sociopathic society emphasizes the
supreme value of competitiveness and aggressiveness rooted in the
*Aristocratic Law of Nature,* often thought to be our “first nature,”
while at the same time imparts religious and philosophical moral
imperatives of cooperation, solidarity, non-possessive love, charity,
and selflessness, often identified with our “second nature,” leaves many
in a wanderlust of moral vagary or an unquestioned acceptance of the
dominant ideology of the ruling class.

The spiritual, religious, and philosophical traditions that once gave
meaning to life and offered a moral vision via a theory and code of
ethics, are no longer able to resist and or conquer the current virtues
of vice, avarice, selfishness, greed, and violence.

To address humans from a methodologically compartmentalizing perspective
is to further enforce the already fragmented and confused state in which
much of humanity finds itself. Seeing the chaotic and catastrophic state
of modern human existence– the diminished and nearly defeated soul of
“human being,” in its despair over the accepted inevitability of what is
the case – Allama Jafari reemphasizes the “indivisible whole and
indissoluble totality” of human being, and therefore calls for a
re-humanizing of social sciences and the humanities; making them an
appropriate method of sociological study of mankind.

The “essence” of what is mankind, the “I”, “conscience,” and “self,”
must be considered in our understanding of what it means to be human, as
without that consideration, the human object of study ceases to be human
and can only truly be “human-like.” What is a human without the ‘‘I’’,
‘’conscious’’, and ‘’self’’? It is a corpse.

Although a corpse appears human, anyone who has ever been in close
contact with their deceased loved one knows that although their
physicality is present, that which is their “I”, consciousness,” and
“self,” is not. Why then should we study humans as if they were corpses?
Allama Jafari's serious challenge to the dominant way we do sociological
research, i.e. his insistence of reintroducing “wholeness” and
“integratedness” back into the study of man, should be taken seriously
by Western scholars, even if it means a radical rethinking of scientific
methodology within the social sciences.

The hyper-rationalization of society, that which is assumed to be
progress, has left man in a vulnerable position. For the first time he
can experience himself as having the capacity to destroy all of
humanity; a thought that was prior to modernity the sole power of the
divine.

It is scientific power divorced of moral sensibilities that have led to
such a state of being and is rooted in the dialectic of the
enlightenment's disconnect of man and his essences. In the face of this
possibility, we must ask: what kind of progress is the absolute negation
of human life?

Identity, Crisis, and Wholeness
-------------------------------

As globalization continues to weave itself into the fabric of every
society, the instrumental reason by which it operates continues to
fundamentally challenge, change, and overturn traditionally held
beliefs, values, religions, philosophies, and ways-of-being-in-the-
world that are rooted in a different form of reason; a form of reason
that emphasizes the communicative nature of human social relations.

The *biophilic* ethos of traditional societies, rooted in community and
non-possessive love, are being replaced by the logic of profit
accumulation, resource acquisition, labor exploitation, and a
necrophilic ethos of material gain as the supreme value in life.
Traditional societies, especially the Islamic world, have seen their
values, principles, and ways-of-being disintegrate within a couple
generations. Islam's insistence on the theologically mandated duties to
the poor is giving way to the virtues of being wealthy – a
*Calvinization* of the Islamic civilization.

For many scholars, who are sensitive to the social upheavals that are
occurring in the heart of the Islamic civilization, an identity crisis
at the heart of what it means to be both modern and Islamic is
identified. What does it mean to be Muslim in the 21st century? Will
Islam survive the modernization, secularization, and capitalization of
the world? Does fundamentalist reaction to globalization preserve the
Islamic identity, or further erode it – especially in light of the fact
that fundamentalism is a modern phenomenon itself?

A similar identity crisis has been brewing in Europe for decades, as
post-World War II insistence of “multi-culturalism,” which some view as
cultural suicide for the benefit of non-European immigrants, as well as
the comprehensive secularization of the life-world, has brought many
secular philosophers and theologians together to discuss the “awareness
of what's missing” in European identity.

In the past, to be European meant to be Catholic; then it meant to be
Christian (whether Catholic or Protestant), then it meant to be German,
Italian, a Frenchman, etc., but now, after the fall of religion and
nationalism, to be European means to be what? The identity of Europeans
is so fragmented as not to understand anymore who and what one is.

For many scholars who are sensitive to the suffering of the individual
in their “everydayness,” the mental confusion and existential emptiness
that comes from the failure to take seriously the “I”, “consciousness”,
and the “self”, as Allama Jafari has purposed, is seen in the faces of
the lost as they fade into the *das mann* of the secular-capitalist
life- world. European philosophers and theologians are unwittingly
beginning a precursory rethink of our social-scientific values, as the
civilizational price of losing the essence of humanity on the altar of
*rational progress* is becoming ever more apparent.

In this reevaluation of the dominance of instrumental reason, the
abandonment of metaphysics, and possible transvaluation of all
capitalist and market values, Western philosophers, theologians, and
sociologists may find themselves in agreement with the holistic and
organic sociological orientation of Allama Jafari. The grounds for
agreement are within the essence of mankind – the soul of what makes us
human, the recognition of these shared qualities and the inter-
subjectivity of cultures and civilizations – and can be the stage in
which our sciences re-humanize so that we may once again ground
ourselves in our individual and species wholeness.

[^1]: Dustin J. Byrd is a professor of humanities at Olivet College in
Michigan. He specializes in the critical theory of religion (Frankfurt
School) and Islam, and continues to work on a critical theory of Islamic
modernity and revolution.


