Publisher’s Foreword
====================

Dear reader, the book put forth before you needs not an introduction, as
its fame being greater than to be introduced. It is truly a languished
journey on a way of tearing asunder the covers that defamed – whether
deliberately or unknowingly – the character of our master Muhammad (may
Allah’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny). We will
never draw the long-bow when claiming that the book Adwa’ \`ala
al-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah (Lights on the Muhammadan Sunnah) is a bomb
among a bulky heap of falsified and fabricated traditions, which will
act to unveil the truth of the greatest man history has ever known of.

This book is, undoubtedly, a brave and intrepid dedication for defending
the Messenger of humankind, Muhammad (may God’s peace and benediction be
upon him and his Progeny). Its author’s position can never be more than
a sincere companion undertaking the task of defending his Prophet in the
Battle of Uhud or Hunayn.

Throughout course of history many traditions were, wrongfully and
against Allah’s Will, ascribed to the Messenger of Allah (S), which he
never uttered at all.

Had not that quantity of false and fabricated and even hazardous
traditions been there, no one among those having mean and debased
morality like Salman Rushdie, would have ever dared speaking ill of the
Messenger of Allah (God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny). And future, undoubtedly, will be brighter, with emergence of
new other realities and other pioneer studies, whereat clouds of
darkness shall verily disperse and

sun of truth shall rise, God-willing.

In this connection, Ansarian Foundation finds it necessary to present
its gratitude and veneration to brother Hasan M. Najafi, in recognition
of his good efforts and toilsome endeavour in translating, editing and
supervising the printing of this book. We implore the Beneficent Allah
to reward him for this work, in which he sought nothing but God’s
pleasure and favour.

We implore the Omnipotent the Almighty to help him to achieve more and
more munificent contributions to the Islamic cause. He is Hearer and He
is Responsive.

Ansariyan Foundation
