Position of Sunnah in Religion:
===============================

  
  
  

They (traditionists) made the spoken Sunnah in the third degree,
following the practised Sunnah, which comes after the Qur’an, that
reached us through successive chain (mutawatir), in a way no doubt can
be ascribed to it. For this reason it is quite established outright.
While the Sunnah reached

us through an unsuccessive chain, the fact entailing its being doubtful
as a whole. The second rank in religion is given to the practical Sunnah
(the Prophet’s acts).

In al-Muwafiqat,<span id="_anchor_19"></span>19 al-Shatibi is reported
to have said: The position of Sunnah comes in consideration after the
Book (Qur’an) for the following proofs:

First: The Book being decisive and asserted, while the Sunnah is
doubtful. And affirming it (Sunnah) is valid only in its generalities
not the details, on the contrary of the Book which is established in
general and in details. And that which is fixed is prior to that which
is suspicious, the fact necessitating to give the Book precedence over
the Sunnah.

Second: The Sunnah is either expository for the Book, or be excessive to
this. If it be an exposition its order of consideration would be after
the exposed thing (Book), as the decline of the exposed requires decline
of the exposition, while the opposite is not true. That whose status is
thus is more meritorious to be superior, and if it be not an exposition,
no consideration is given to it unless it be there in the Book. This
verily is an evidence to give priority to the Book in consideration.

Third: The akhbar (reports) and (old) traces, like the hadith of Mu’adh,
when the Prophet asked him: On what basis do you pronounce the hukm
(rule)? He replied: On the basis of the Book of Allah. He (S) inquired:
If you can’t find it there (with what you give the rules)? He said: With
the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah? He again asked: If you can’t find
it there (with what then)? He said: I exert my opinion.<span
id="_anchor_20"></span>20

Citing many proofs from Umar, Ibn Mas’ud and Ibn Abbas, confirming this
issue, al-Shatibi said: And that which is decisively established in this
regard being the fact that the Sunnah can never reach the degree of
consideration of the Book.He also said: The Sunnah has in fact the
position of interpretation and exposition of the denotations of the
rules in the Book. This is indicated in the Qur’an: “…that thou mayest
make clear unto mankind what hath been sent down unto them…” And the
Sunnah in meaning is referred to

the Book, as it is the elaboration of its generality, and exposition of
its ambiguity, and elucidation of its concised statements. It (the
Sunnah) is in short the exposition of the Book outright. This is
indicated in Almighty’s words: “…and We sent down unto thee the
Remembrance (i.e. the Qur’an) that thou mayest make clear unto mankind
what hath been sent down unto them.” No issue or point can be found in
the Sunnah,<span id="_anchor_21"></span>21 unless that meaning has been
indicated generally or elaborately. Further, whatever indicating the
Qur’an’s being the universality of the Shar’ah<span
id="_anchor_22"></span>22 (Islamic Law), and a fountain for it, is
verily an evidence indicating this fact. Also since Allah said: “And
most certainly thou standest on sublime morality,” which was interpreted
by A’ishah that his morality being the Qur’an itself no more no less.
This indicates that his utterances, acts and approval are altogether
taken from the Qur’an. And since morality is represented only by these
things and as Allah has made the Qur’an an explanation for everything,
<span id="_anchor_23"></span>23 the fact requiring that the Sunnah being
contained in it on the whole, as bidding and forbidding being the first
things revealed in the Book. And like His saying: “We have not neglected
in the Book anything,” <span id="_anchor_24"></span>24 and His saying:
This day have I perfected for you, your religion with which intending to
mean the revelation of the Qur’an.

As a conclusion, Sunnah then is an exposition of what the Book contains,
the fact giving the meaning of its (Sunnah) being referred to it (Book),
that was confirmed too through investigation. In the outset of the book
al-Adillah, it was proved that the Sunnah being dependent on the Book,
otherwise it should have never been approved, which is a sufficient
principle in this regard.” He added: The cause behind heeding to the
Sunnah lies in its being an exposition of the Qur’an, as to obey Allah
is to abide by the rules of His Book, and to obey the Messenger is to
act according to his expositions of the Book of Allah through saying, or
deed, or judgement. Had there been anything in the Sunnah having no root
in the Book, it would have never been expository for it, the fact
excepting not the Sunnah’s containing the explanation of the Qur’an’s
general rules, though seeming out of it, like the

prayer that is stated in general in the Qur’an and in details in the
Sunnah. But through this elaboration we got to know its being Allah’s
intention from the prayer He generally stated it in His Book.”

He also said:<span id="_anchor_25"></span>25 “The Sunnah elucidates the
generality, restricts the absolute, and specifies the common.” He said
<span id="_anchor_26"></span>26 too: “The objective of the Sunnah is to
expose the Book, and expound its meanings.”

When asked about the hadith saying: The Sunnah is baffling the Book,
al-Imam Ahmad replied: I never dare saying so, but I say that the Sunnah
interprets and demonstrates the Qur’an. <span id="_anchor_27"></span>27
 Al-Imam Malik used to say: “Take into account the continuous and
plentiful work, abandoning other than it though containing traditions.”
He further said: The dearest traditions to me are those which got
unanimous acceptance of people. <span id="_anchor_28"></span>28  In Ruh
al-bayan, al-Alusi reported that al-Imam al-Shafi\`i said: Whatever is
judged and decided by the Prophet is verily among that which he
conceived from the Qur’an.

He also said: The Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah can in no way
contradict the Book of Allah. <span id="_anchor_29"></span>29

The traditionist faqih al-Sayyid Rashid Rida (may God’s mercy be upon
him) said: The Prophet is a demonstrator of the Qur’an through his
utterance and acts. This demonstration implies elaboration,
specification and restriction, with the exclusion of annulment of any of
its rules or revoking any of its reports. Hence we have the verified
dictum: “The Sunnah can never abrogate the Qur’an.” The main pillar of
religion being the Book of Allah, occupying the first rank, after it
comes the concurred practical Sunnah with every act being successively
reported from the Prophet. In the third degree comes the unsuccessively
narrated evidential traditions (ahad). Whoever acting according to the
unanimously agreed ones will be verily among those delivered in the
Hereafter, and regarded near by Allah, the Exalted, the fact approved by
al-Ghazali. <span id="_anchor_30"></span>30

### Influence of Messenger’s Speech On Worldly Affairs:

The above-mentioned were excerptions of the utterances of the eminent
religious leaders, in respect of showing the status of the Messenger’s
speech regarding the religious affairs. Concerning his words regarding
the worldly affairs, it is said about them to be among mere opinions,
that were called by the scholars “guidance ordinance.” That means, his
ordinance in any of the world affairs is called guidance (irshad), that
stands versus the taklif (imposition) ordinance. According to the
jurisprudential laws, to apply the guidance ordinance is not considered
obligatory or mandub (recommended), since nearness (to Allah) is not
intended by it, nor denotation of devotion is implied in it. It is
commonly known that only a relevant special evidence can prove the case
of obligation or recommendation.

Whatever the ulama said in this regard is due to the fact that the
apostles being not infallible in other than propagation (tabligh). In
Sharh al-Aqidah, <span id="_anchor_31"></span>31  al-Safarini is
reported to have said:

In Nihayat al-mubtadi’in, Ibn Hamdan said: “They (apostles) being only
infallible in respect of Allah’s ordinances they be delegated to convey
to mankind, being non-infallible in other than these, including error,
oblivion and venial sins. Ibn Aqil in al-Irshad said: They (apostles) –
peace be upon them – were not impeccable in respect of the acts, but
rather in the fulfilment itself, with being impermissible for them to
tell lies while propagating and conveying Allah’s ordinances. The Shi’ah
scholars disapprove this belief, unanimously concurring on the prophets
being not liable to err, or subject to inadvertence or forgetfulness.
They concur that the apostles being infallible against (perpetrating)
major and minor sins, even in the worldly affairs.

It is widely known that the Prophet (S) was believing some of the
falsifications of the hypocrites, as in the case of the Battle of Tabuk,
and other battles. Besides, he used to believe some of his wives, with
hesitating in respect of falsehood hadith, feeling annoyed of it for a
long time till the revelation of the verses of Surat al-Bara’ah
(Immunity), which unveiled the

truth for him.

Al-Qadi ‘Iyad <span id="_anchor_32"></span>32 said: Concerning his
states in regard of the worldly affairs, he might surmise something to
be on a certain condition, but would prove to be the opposite. Or might
doubt or suspect some things in a way contradicting the Islamic Law.
Rafi’ ibn Khudayj <span id="_anchor_33"></span>33 is reported to have
said: As the Messenger of Allah (S) entered the Medina, he found some
people pollinating the date-palms, when he said: What are you doing?
They replied: We have been making them. He said: It may have been better
not doing so. So they left them (date-palms), after which they faded.
Thereat they told him about this matter, when he said: “I am just a
human being. When commanding you to (do) something relevant to your
religion you take and apply it. But when ordering you to do anything
according to my opinion, (know that) I am just a human being.” According
to narration of Anas: He [S] said: “You are better aware of your world.”
In another hadith, he (S) said: “I have only surmised something, so
excuse me for my surmise.” In the episode of conjecture, <span
id="_anchor_34"></span>34  Ibn Abbas is reported to have said: The
Messenger of Allah then said: “I am no more than a human being. Whatever
I tell you of that revealed by God is verily the truth, and that which I
tell you out of my own opinion, I am just a human being, that may err
and be right.”

These were our reports regarding the Prophet’s own opinions about the
world affairs and his surmise concerning its conditions. When he (S) got
down the Pond of Badr, al-Habbab ibn al-Mundhir said to him: Is this a
place in which you were commanded by Allah to get down, that we have no
right to leave and advance forward, or it is your opinion and war and
stratagem? He replied: No, it is verily the opinion and war and
stratagem. He said: Then it can never be an abode: Get up, to betake
ourselves nearer a pond belonging to some people, where we can settle
down, plunging into it, and drinking when others cannot drink. He said:
What an excellent idea! Then he applied his advice. In another event, he
intended to make compromise with some of his enemies through one third
of the Medina dates. When he consulted the Helpers (Ansar), and they
told him of their opinion, he retreated his intention.

In this way it was permissible for him what we mentioned before, in
respect of the worldly affairs we stated and their likes that have
nothing to do with knowledge or religion, or belief or teaching.

He also said: <span id="_anchor_35"></span>35 Concerning his believing
in the mankind affairs and rules run by him, with their issues, and
distinguishing between the truthful and falsifier, and recognizing the
one seeking reform from that seeking corruption, it was in this way,
when he said: “I am just a human being, you may seek my judgement
regarding your disputes, and one of you might be more eloquent in
presenting his proof than the other litigant, entailing that I give
judgement in his favour according to my hearing in the case. So I ask
that in whose favour I gave judgement with something, not to take
anything from the second one, as it will be verily like allocating him a
piece of fire.” (This hadith was reported from Umm Salamah). Al-Zuhri
reported from Urwah, that he (S) said: “Someone among you might be more
eloquent than the other (litigant), making me to consider him truthful
and consequently giving judgement in his favour.” And he (S) gives his
judgements according to superficialities and surmise, with the testimony
of the witness and oath of the swearer, beside observing analogy …etc.

He further said: <span id="_anchor_36"></span>36 In regard of the
Prophets’ capabilities of knowledge related to the world affairs, no
infallibility is stipulated to be possessed by the prophets regarding
unawareness of some of them or believing in their opposites, the fact
entailing no censure on their part.

The Prophet (S) also said: I know nothing except that what my Lord
taught me.” The Prophet Moses (A) said to al-Khidr (A): “…May I follow
thee on condition that thou shouldst teach me aright of what thou hast
been taught.” <span id="_anchor_37"></span>37

In al-Rawd al-basim, al-Wazir al-Yamani said: “It is quite evident for
those acquainted with the scholars’ rules that the Prophet’s acts can
never indicate by themselves any obligation or recommendation, but
rather pointing to permissibility. The extent concurred by all being his
abstaining from exercising prohibited acts (guilts), and if even one
slip done by him it be out

of inattention without persistence. Allah, the Exalted, has shown this
fact in His Book. The investigators say in this respect: When any deed
performed by him, we would scrutinize to see whether he did it for
seeking Allah’s pleasure or not. If circumstantial evidences indicating
the latter, following his example would be not recommendable, and his
act would be considered only permissible that every individual be free
to do or leave . An example for this act can be found in his confession
to Umar ibn al-Khattab of contradicting his opinion regarding the event
of the captives of Battle of Badr. <span id="_anchor_38"></span>38

Obligation Not Necessitated by Messenger’s Order Merely:

Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah (may God’s mercy be upon him), reported from
his father Amir al-Muminin (A), saying:

Much clamour was raised about Merry the Coptic (Umm Ibrahim), regarding
her Coptic cousin who used to visit and frequent to her. The Prophet
then said to me: Take this sword and go forth. If you find him near her
kill him. I said: O Messenger of Allah, shall I be at your orders on
dispatching me, executing your orders with no objection, or that the
attendant sighting what is unseen by the absent? The Prophet (S) said to
me: “Rather, the attendant can see what is unseen by the absent.” Then I
went forward girding myself with a sword, when I saw him with her. I
unsheathed the sword, and as approaching him, he realized my intention
(to kill him). So he fled toward a date-palm and climbed it. Then he
threw himself down falling on the back of his neck, with his legs being
dispersed, turning to be castrated and his male organ being mutilated,
losing whatever men usually have. He said: I then sheathed the sword,
returning to the Prophet (S) telling him of all these occurrences. He
(S) said: Praise belongs to Allah Who turns evil away from us, Ahl
al-Bayt.

In his comment on this report, al-Sharif al-Murtada said: The rules
contained in this report being to indicate that any act or practice can
never be obligatory merely it was commanded by the Messenger of Allah,
since had it

been so, there would have been no necessity to revise or inquire about
it. Further the rules’ advantage and occurrence in their due time
indicate their not requiring this obligation. <span
id="_anchor_39"></span>39

In Tabaqat al-Atibba’ wa al-Hukama’, Ibn Juljul reported from Sa’d ibn
Abi Waqqas that he said: I became sick and was visited by the Messenger
of Allah (S) who said to me: Call in al-Harith ibn Kildah, as he is the
man who can cure you. Then the Messenger of Allah gave his orders to
bring the physicians so as to inquire them about the remedies they had.
<span id="_anchor_40"></span>40

### Forbiddance from Writing the Hadith

As previously mentioned, the Messenger of Allah (S) was an expositor and
interpreter of the Qur’an, through his acts and sayings, but his
utterances in this exposition or other than it, was not preserved
through inscription as in the case of the Qur’an. All the reported
authentic evidences and correct established acts have altogether
indicated that the Messenger’s traditions were never written down during
his lifetime, as was done in respect of the Qur’an. Further there were
no scribes registering the traditions directly when hearing them with
the Messenger’s own words, as were scribes for the Qur’an inscribing its
verses as soon as being revealed. Correct traditions and established
reports are there all forbidding the inscription of the Prophet’s
traditions, of which I cite the following:

Ahmad, Muslim, al-Darimi, al-Tirmidhi and al-Nasa’i reported on the
authority of Abu Sa’id al-Khudri that he said: The Messenger of Allah
(S) said: “Write nothing from me except the Qur’an, and whoever has
written anything must efface it.” <span id="_anchor_41"></span>41 Again
al-Darimi has reported from Abu Sa’id al-Khudri that he said: I asked
the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny) to grant me permission to write down from him, but he refused
to give me permission.” Another narration is ascribed to al-Tirmidhi who
reported from ‘Ata’ ibn Yasar, on the authority of Abu Sa’id too, that
he said: “We asked the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be

upon him and his Progeny) to grant us permission to write (hadith), but
he never gave us permission.” <span id="_anchor_42"></span>42

It is also reported from Marasil ibn Abi Mulaykah, that Abu Bakr
gathered people, after the Prophet’s demise, addressing them: You relate
from the Messenger of Allah, upon whom be God’s peace and benediction,
traditions regarding which you disagree, and consequently severer
controversy shall occur among people. So relate nothing from the
Messenger of Allah, and when asked by anyone you can say: The Book of
Allah is the arbitrator between us. Deem lawful what it considers
lawful, and deem unlawful what is considered unlawful in it. <span
id="_anchor_43"></span>43

The Moroccan traditionist Ibn Abd al-Barr and al-Bayhaqi in al-Madkhal,
reported from Urwah that Umar ibn al-Khattab intended to write down the
sunan (traditions), so he sought the legal opinion (fatwa) – or
consulted, according to al-Bayhaqi’s narration – the Messenger’s
Companions in this regard, and they advised him to write them down. Then
Umar started seeking Allah’s guidance, keeping on this for one month,
after which one day entering upon the morning with God’s determining the
decision for him, he said: I have intended to write down the sunan, and
I remember that some people before you had written some books, devoting
themselves to them and discarding the Book of Allah. By God, I never
mingle anything to the Book of Allah. According to al-Bayhaqi’s
narration (he said): “I never obscure the Book of Allah with anything at
all.”

Yahya ibn Ju’dah reports that Umar ibn al-Khattab intended to write
ahadith and sunan. But having changed his mind he sent a circular to all
the cities declaring: “Whoever has with him anything of it should efface
it.”<span id="_anchor_44"></span>44

Ibn Sa’d reported from Abd Allah ibn al-Ala’, saying: I asked al-Qasim
ibn Muhammad to dictate for me some traditions, when he said: The
traditions have abundantly increased during the days of Umar ibn
al-Khattab, <span id="_anchor_45"></span>45 so he asked people to bring
them to him. When they brought them, he ordered to set them on fire,
declaring: No Mathnat is like that of the People of the Book (meaning he
didn’t want any other book to exist by the side of the

Book of Allah). Then he (Abd Allah) said: <span
id="_anchor_46"></span>46 So al-Qasim ibn Muhammad prevented me that day
from writing any hadith.

Zayd ibn Thabit entered upon Mu’awiyah, who inquired him about a hadith,
commanding someone to write it down, when Zayd said to him: “The
Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny) ordered us not to write anything of his traditions.” So he
effaced it. Abd Allah ibn Yasar is reported to have said: I heard Ali
addressing the people saying: I invite whoever having a book (of hadith)
to return and efface it. People before you perished due to their
following the traditions of their ulama, and discarding the Book of
their Lord.

Al-Aswad ibn Hilal is reported to have said: Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud
brought a codex on which a hadith was inscribed. He demanded water to be
brought and effaced and then washed them out. After that he ordered them
to be set on fire, declaring then: I ask whoever aware of it (sheet)
being kept by anyone to inform me about him. By God if I know it to be
in the house of Hind, I would get to it. Through this the People of the
Book before you perished, because of their loathing and ignoring the
Book of Allah as if they know not! Beside many other similar reports,
that can be referred to in the books Jami‘ bayan al-’ilm wa fadlih of
Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr, and Taqyid al-’ilm of al-Baghdali, and others, Despite
presence of some narrations reported about permission to write down the
(Prophet’s) traditions, but those prohibiting the writing of hadith
being more authentic and stronger, the act that was practised during the
era of Sahabah and their followers.

In his book: al-Ta‘adul wa al-tarjih, the faqih traditionist Sayyid
Rashid Rida dedicated an important chapter analyzing in it the
traditions prohibiting and those permitting the writing of hadith. I
quote here a part of it to be the clear-cut evidence in this issue. He
(may God’s mercy be upon him) said: <span id="_anchor_47"></span>47

It can be said that the most correct traditions prohibiting the writing
of hadith being those ones reported by Ahmad in his Musnad, Muslim in
his Sahih and Ibn Abd al-Barr in Jami‘ bayar al-’ilm and others, on the
authority

of Abu Sa’id al-Khudri: “Write nothing from me except the Qur’an, and
whoever has written anything of the kind must efface it.”

And the most authentic traditions permitting the writing of hadith,
being the one reported by Abu Hurayrah in the two Sahihs and others,
that the Messenger (S) said: “Write for Abu Shah”. There is no
contradiction between this hadith and that one reported by Abu Sa’id and
its likes having the identical denotation emphasizing the rule
indicating that his (S) prohibition from writing his traditions being
for the only reason that they never be adopted as a general religion
like the Qur’an. That is due to the fact that what he ordered to be
written for Abu Shah being a sermon he gave on the day of conquest of
Makkah, whose theme being inviolability of Makkah and forbidding of the
Sanctuary find. All this comes within his exposition for the Qur’an,
which he proclaimed on the day of conquest and during the Farewell
Pilgrimage (Hijjat al-Wada‘), commanding to propagate it, which being a
special case excepted from the general forbiddance. In his Sahih, bab
al-Luqtah (the Find), al-Bukhari is reported to have said that: Abu Shah
al-Yamani asked that the above-mentioned sermon be written for him, the
request that the Prophet (S) ordered to respond to.

If we assume that there is a conflict between traditions prohibiting the
writing of hadith and those permitting it, one may say that one of them
abrogates the other by proving that the traditions prohibiting supersede
the permitting ones for two reasons: Firstly, the Companions narrated
the traditions prohibiting writing even after the Prophet (S). Secondly,
the Companions did not write traditions; for had they done so, their
compilations would have reached us.

Hence, we can refer to Ali’s request of whoever having a book (of
hadith) to efface it, with Abu Sa’id al-Khudri’s saying: “Do you want to
make them into books (masahif)?,” <span id="_anchor_48"></span>48 and
Umar’s declaration when thinking about writing the traditions or not
doing so: “No book is to exist by the side of the Book of Allah,” in the
former narration, beside his saying in the latter narration, after
consulting (the Companions) regarding the writing: “By God,

I will never cover the Book of Allah with anything.”…beside Ibn Abbas’
saying: “We used to write down knowledge but never approve of writing
it”, i.e. we would never permit anyone to write it from us, with his
prohibiting to write it according to another report about the writing.
Also a reference can be made to Zayd’s effacing and burning the sahifah
brought to him, with calling to remember Allah by whoever having any
other book in any other place, even being far away, to let him know
about it so as to get to it and set on fire. Moreover we can cite Sa’id
ibn Jubayr’s statement about Ibn Umar, that: Had he known that he was
writing from him, it would have meant a separation between them, beside
Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud’s burning the sahifah brought by Abd al-Rahman ibn
al-Aswad and Alqamah, with declaring: “These hearts are receptacles, so
fill them with the Qur’an and never occupy them with anything other than
it.”

All the above-mentioned narrations cited by Ibn Abd al-Barr, beside
similar ones reported by others, like Abu Bakr’s burning of whatever he
has written down, <span id="_anchor_49"></span>49 with non-reaching of
any of the Companions’ books (suhuf) to the hands of the Followers
(Tabi’un), and the fact that the Followers have never written the hadith
for propagating it, but only in compliance to commands coming from the
rulers, support the fact that they resorted to writing the hadith with
the sole purpose of being an aid to memory, destroying it after that.
When adding to all this, the reports showing non-inclination of the
great Sahabah toward recording of hadith, or rather their loathing or
even forbidding such practice, <span id="_anchor_50"></span>50 we would
be more assured of the fact that their intention was unwanting for the
traditions (as a whole) to prevail like a public permanent reference
like the Qur’an. And had they got to conceive from the Prophet (S) his
desire for this, they would have written down the traditions with
commanding others to do the same, with the Rightly-guided Caliphs having
gathered what they wrote and recorded that which be approved by them,
sending it to their governors so as to propagate and apply it, beside
the Qur’an and the followed Sunnah that was commonly acted upon by Ahl
al-Sunnah.

This refutes the claim of those holding that: The Companions used to be
satisfied with riwayah (narration) for disseminating the hadith. When
adding to all this, Umar’s order to the magnates among the Companions to
do the contrary of all these traditions, with what the scholars during
the 1st and 2nd centuries used to do, such as the case of Abu Hanifah,
who would be satisfied with whatever reaching him of any traditions that
he approved of though being small in number, without exerting any effort
to gather any more ones so as to realize his religion and demonstrate
its rules, the former preponderance would become more strengthened.

Further, we may find out that the jurisprudents – after concurring on
making the traditions one of the sources of the legal rules, and
recording them by memorizers in the divans with distinguishing that
which can be used in disputation and that can’t be used – have never
unanimously agreed on writing the correct hadith and putting them into
practice. Nearly all the jurisprudential books adopted by the followed
schools of thought (madhahib), particularly the Hanafi, Maliki and
Shafi’i books, contain hundreds of issues and verdicts contradicting the
unanimously accepted veracious traditions, with no one of them being
considered incongruous with the principles of religion (usul al-Din).

Concerning the hadith ascribed to Abu Hurayrah that he said, “Abd Allah
ibn Umar used to write (hadith) while I was not writing”, can never be
regarded as a legal proof, or indicating that writing of Ibn Umar was
according to the Prophet’s command or tacit approval. Since, through
this, he would be considered contradicting the Prophet’s hadith
prohibiting to write nothing from him except the Qur’an – (but in fact
what Ibn Umar wrote had been no more than some supplications, as will be
referred to in its due time).

Ibn al-Qayyim, in A‘lam al-muqi‘in, has cited evidences about the
jurisprudents’ refuting the correct traditions out of applying analogy
(qiyas) or some other reasons. The strangest one among these evidences
being their taking only a portion of the hadith with discarding the rest
of it, the practice for which he cited more than sixty evidences. <span
id="_anchor_51"></span>51

It is reported that the Prophet (S) has forbidden the writing of hadith
for the only reason that to prevent the hadith of being intermingled
with the Qur’an…the reason that no intelligent sane man can be convinced
of, nor any learned investigator would accept, unless we hold the
traditions to be identical to the Qur’an in rhetoric and inimitable
style. No one can ever approve of such notion, even those holding such
opinion, as it indicates the abolition of the miracle of the Qur’an, and
uprooting its foundations.

It is to be known that the reason behind writing of traditions lies in
their being uttered by the Prophet (S), and certainly there are many
differences between hadith and the Qur’an which being quitely recognized
by everyone having perception in rhetoric and adroitness in elocution.
And even when the Companions – after the Prophet’s demise – committed
these traditions to writing, distributing them among the Islamic
townships as in the case of the Qur’an, this act was out of their being
ahadith received by Muslims as utterances disclosed by the Prophet (S),
that to be preserved and transmitted throughout consecutive generations
on this state without being afflicted with any blemish or alteration, or
spoiled by mean people. But this reason, to which they stick, has
vanished after the Qur’an was committed to writing during the days of
Abu Bakr, according to their reports, and after being recorded on
masahif during the caliphate of Uthman, with many copies being
distributed among the Islamic cities, the fact making it difficult or
even impossible for anyone increasing even one letter to the Qur’an.
Hence, they have no reason to invent causes and fabricate pleas while
the leading Companions themselves have demonstrated the true reason for
not writing the hadith, as was previously revealed.

True be the wisdom behind the Prophet’s forbiddance to write the hadith
lies in preventing the multiplication of commands of legislation and
expansion of evidences of rules. The occurrence of such things was so
avoided by the Prophet (S) that he was even averse to be insistently
questioned, or that his hadith being subject of private talks in a
specific time that it be impermissible to keep on applying it. <span
id="_anchor_52"></span>52

Before finishing with this chapter, we have to refer to a hadith related
by them (Sunnites) so as to make all the traditions seem as if revealed
by Allah, like the holy Qur’an. Following is the meant hadith: <span
id="_anchor_53"></span>53

“Verily I have been given the Book and its alike with it.” In another
narration (he said:) “Verily I have received the Quran and its alike
with it.” This hadith is actually the strangest one ever produced
through course of narration (riwayah)! Since if something “identical to
the Book,” or “to the Qur’an” was given to the Prophet, it would mean
that this thing was complementary to the Qur’an and for explaining his
religion and Shari’ah. Should it be so, one may inquire: Why hasn’t the
Prophet (S) cared for writing that mithl (identical thing) during his
lifetime, as soon as receiving it from his Lord, as he did for the
Qur’an? And why didn’t he appoint scribes for recording it when being
sent down, as in the case of the Qur’an? Also why has he restricted his
forbiddance from writing other than the Qur’an with neglecting this
mithl, when he said: “Write nothing from me except the Qur’an, without
adding: and whatever else I was given with it, which is “like it”?!

Here a question may arise: Is it possible that the Prophet would leave
half of what Allah revealed to him to be circulated among memories
without being recorded…with someone taking it, and the other forgetting
it, while the third one increasing to it! beside whatever inflicting
every material not inscribed in a preserved book? And would the
Messenger, by so doing, have managed in delivering the Message as
required, and rendered back the trust, complete to its owners?! Further,
what is the place of this hadith in respect of the one uttered by the
Prophet during his last sickness that entailed his demise, and after the
revelation of the verse: “This day have I perfected for you, your
religion, and have completed My favour on you, and chosen for you Islam
to be the Religion”, when he said: “By God, never hold me accountable
for anything…as I have never considered hadith (lawful) except that
which is deemed lawful by the Qur’an, and never considered haram
(unlawful) except that which is deemed unlawful by the Qur’an.”<span
id="_anchor_54"></span>54 And how can this hadith be

accepted when hearing the words addressed by Abu Bakr to people: “The
Book of Allah is the arbitrator between us and you, so deem lawful what
is counted lawful in it, and deem unlawful that which is regarded
unlawful in it.” And also when listening to Umar’s words, when the
Prophet (S) intended – on deathbed – to write a book for people after
which they would never go astray, exclaiming: “The Book of Allah is
sufficient for us”! So why didn’t Umar feel regretful for losing this
mithl (equal), while it being as alleged by them half of what Allah
revealed to the Prophet, sufficing with mentioning it to Abu Bakr on the
latter’s resorting to him to collect and write down the Qur’an after the
Battle of Yamamah?!

Further if there were an equal (mithl) to the Qur’an, A’ishah was
supposed to reply when asked about the Prophet’s morality (khuluq): His
morality was the Qur’an and its alike with it?! While she sufficed by
saying” “His morality was the Qur’an”. And why has the Companions’ care
or concern missed or ignored such “mithl”, never committing it to
writing as they did in the case of the Qur’an, during the caliphate of
Abu Bakr, and when it (Qur’an) was recorded in the form of masahif and
its copies were distributed through the Islamic regions? Taking this
fact into consideration, it can be said that the Companions, due to
ignoring such an extremely serious subject, have in fact abandoned half
the revelation without tadwin (inscription), turning thus to be among
the sinners.

  
  
  
  

19. See Vol. IV, p. 3 and afterwards.

20. This hadith was reported by Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhi and al-Darimi.

21. That is the established (thabit) Sunnah.

22. He means by this: The Qur'an contains in it all the rules and
principles of the Shari'ah.

23. Allah the Most High said in Surat al-Nahl: And We reveal the
Scripture unto thee as an exposition of all things, and a guidance and a
mercy and good tidings for those who have surrendered (to Allah)."

24. That means the affairs of the Din and other than the Din.

25. In vol. I, p. 21.

26. In vol. III, p. 43. I have abundantly quoted from this book since it
is, as expressed by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh: "One of the precious books
that no parallel to it was ever compiled."

27. Al-Shatibi's al-Muwafiqat, vol. IV, p. 26, and Tafsir al-Qurtubi,
vol. I, p. 23.

28. Al-Muwafiqat, vol. III, pp. 66 and 70.

29. In p. 576 of his Risalah, the edition prepred by Ahmad Muhammad
Shakir (may God's mercy be upon him).

30. Al-Manar, vol. XII, p. 694, and it was declared also by al-Ghazali
in his book al-Qistas al-mustaqim.

31. See Vol. II, p. 291.

32. Al-Shifa', vol. II, pp. 178, 179.

33. These traditions were reported by Muslim in his Sahih with various
wordings, the exterior of which being in the decisive precision between
what was uttered by the Messenger as an opinion or for preaching, and
what he said as legal rules.

34. The story of khars is thus: When they passed by some fruitful trees,
intending to conjecture it to put their surmise, to test, the Prophet
conjectured it, but it came to be contrary to his conjecture.

35. Al-Shifa', vol. II, p. 180.

36. Ibid., vol. II, p. 107.

37. Ibid., vol. II, p. 109.

38. Ibid., vol. I, p. 142.

39. Al-Murtada's al-Amali, vol. I, pp. 77, 78.

40. This book was published by the French Scientific Institute for
Eastern Monuments in Cairo.

41. For this hadith there are several versions (differing in words)
agreeing with each other in the meaning. Al-Darimi was the shaykh of
al-Bukhari.

42. Sunan al-Tirmidhi, vol. II, p. 91, published in India. The Prophet
(S) had dictated some epistles on legal rules and laws, handing them to
his emissaries and officers spread all over the countries, some of which
were conquered through charities and obligations. And all that which was
written from the Messenger during his lifetime would not exceed
tenpages, on matters, that should be learnt by heart with their original
texts, so as to keep them intact of being inflicted with alteration and
distortion.

43. Al-Dhahabi's Tadhkirat al-huffaz, vol. I, p. 3.

44. Jami' bayan al-'ilm wa fadlih, vol. I, pp. 64, 65; Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd,
Laidan, Edition, vol. I, p. 206. What Umar was afraid of has actually
occurred.

45. Narration of the hadith circulated abundantly during the caliphte of
Umar, so how it would be the case after his death?

46. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. V, p. 140; al-Baghdadi's Taqyid al-'ilm, p.
52. Umar might intend to resemble this practice with what the Jews did
when they disregarded the Torah and acted according to a number of
Jewish traditions which they called Mathnat. In Mukhtar al-Sihah it is
reported from Abu Ubaydah that the rabbis and monks have composed, after
demise of Moses (A), a book among themselves, filling it with rules
meeting their desires, other than the Book of Allah, and that was
al-Mathnat, with some narrating it with the unobserved (muhmal) sin. In
the book Maqalah fi al-Islam, it is reported with shin.

47. Al-Manar, vol. X, p. 766 and after it, and vol.  XIX, p. 511 and
after it.

48. Abu Nadrah said: I siad to Abu Sa'id al-Khudri: Won't we write down
whatever we hear from you? He said: Do you want to make it in masahif?
Your Prophet used to relate hadith to us and we would memorize his
hadith. (al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Taqyid al-'ilm, p. 27).

49. Al-Sayyid Rashid is referring by this to the khabar reported by
al-Hakim from A'ishah, and cited by al-Dhahabi in Tadhkirat al-huffaz,
vol. I, p. 5, in which she said: My father had collected the traditions
of the Messenger of Allah, which they numbered five hundred, and he
remained upset all the night. When he entered upon the morning, he came
to me and said: 'O daughter, bring the ahadith that are with you.' I
brought them to him. He burnt them and said: "I am afraid lest I should
die leaving these with you, and among them there might be ahadith which
I took from a man I had faith in and trusted, but the truth proved to be
not as he related, the fact showing me to be responsible for them!" When
al-Sayyid Rashid refers to such a khabar in this regard, or inferring
any hadith, we should be assured that it be undoubtedly sahih, since he
is one of magnates of hadith.

50. All this will be elaborated later on.

51. See later on the standpoint of jurisprudents toward hadith books. In
p. 288 of vol. VI of his Tafsir, he said: "We can determine that we have
forgotten and lost a large number of our Prophet's traditions, because
the Sahabah had not written whatever they heard (from the Prophet), but
this didn't include the ahadith manifesting and explaining the Qur'an or
religious affairs.

52. I give an example for this. It is said that one of the Sahabah
invited the Prophet and some of the Companions to a banquet, in which he
introduced meat of jazur. When they finished eating, one of them broke
wind, the stink of which was smelled by those invited to the banquet.
Soon an idea stroke the mind of the Prophet - to evade any disgrace on
the part of that who made that hadath - to say to them all: "Whoever ate
of the meat of the jazur, should perform the rite of ablution." The
strange point here being that many of the fuqaha' have adopted this rule
and made it a general basis, starting to command everyone eating the
camel meat to perform ablution, neglecting the fact that ablution should
be performed only for a thing (fart) that is emitted out of the abdomen
not for what enters the belly.

53. It was reported by Abu Dawud, al-Darimi and Ibn Majah, but not
al-Bukhari and Muslim. It is - as alleged by them (Sunnis) - equal to
the Qur'an or part of it, as narrated by them.

54. Sirat Ibn Hisham, vol. IV, p. 332.
