To Lie Against Messenger of Allah:
==================================

It is commonly agreed among all that lying is the worst of abominations,
and no trait can ever be possessed by man worse than calumny, beside no
group malady is there more problematic and incurable than slander.
Despite the fact that lying among individuals and groups can be
contained and eradicated, but its bad effects would be common and its
harm would be tremendous when being against the Messenger of Allah. That
is, falsily ascribing something to the Messenger (S) is quite different
from lying against other than him, due to his being an apostle delegated
with an all-inclusive religion, and owner of a Shari‘ah (Islamic Law)
for mankind as a whole, and in general.

Al-Tabarani reported on the authority of Rafi‘ ibn Khudayj as saying:
The Messenger of Allah said: “Do not lie against me, since it is verily
not the same as lying against any other man.” <span
id="_anchor_73"></span>73

The Muhammadan message brought to mankind doctrinal principles that no
man, whatever his extent of knowledge be, can ever change one of them,
and brought rules of rituals (‘ibadat) that no one is permitted to make
any addition or omission, or changing any of their forms or (determined)
time. This is due to the fact that the religious acts are based on two
foundations: The first being that not to worship other than Allah, and
the second is that He should be worshipped according to the legal rules
He revealed. Other than this, like population organizing and sociology
rules and other similar fields, we find certain general foundations
being laid down for them in religion, such as justice, mercy, goodness,
convenience, equality, freedom, truthfulness, trusteeship, benevolence
and non-transgression, beside other laudable virtues.

Due to the fact that the holy Qur’an was preserved through inscription
and memorization while the Messenger’s traditions were not written down,
so he (S) feared that some might falsify traditions ascribing them to
him, especially after leaving his hadith without committing it to
writing. He was so strict in this respect that he decreed death as a
worldly punishment for the falsifier, while in the Hereafter it be
torment in the Fire

(Hell).

Al-Bukhari73 reports on the authority of Rib’i ibn Kharrash as saying: I
heard Ali say: The Prophet said: Don’t lie against me, as who does so
will verily enter Fire. In his exposition for this hadith, al-Hafiz Ibn
Hajar says: This hadith is supported by narration of Muslim on the
authority of Ghandar from Shu‘bah by the words: “… he enters into Fire.”

Also al-Bukhari reported the same hadith from Anas and Abu Hurayrah,
with the word “deliberately” being added to it, beside some other
traditions with this addition reported by other than al-Bukhari. But
anyone deliberately meditating, and being in quest of truth into
researches, will verily come to know that the correct narrations
reported from the leading Companions among whom being three of the
Rightly-guided caliphs, indicate the hadith’s being devoid of this word
“deliberately.” Besides, to claim that the Prophet uttered such a word
should be regarded as improbable to its incongruity with reason and
morality that were fully possessed by the Messenger, as to lie is “to
announce of something in a way contrary to its true being, whether
deliberately or mistakenly.” This word may have crept into this hadith
through the means of idraj (gradual inclusion), that is common among the
scholars, as a pretext used by those fabricating hadith against the
Messenger of Allah to justify their practice as to be favouritism
without intention. This was followed too by righteous believers who used
to justify it by saying: “We lie for him not against him”! Or it was
adopted by the narrators in regard of that which they would report from
others either out of error, or delusion or misunderstanding, so as to
avoid falling in trouble, since that who is mistaken can never be
considered sinful. For all this, the narrators laid down their
widely-known principle: “That who deliberately lies has to be answerable
for his lie.”

### Decisive Correct Evidences On Reality of the Hadith Who Lied Against Me

Hereunder we produce some proofs confirming our claim:

Ahmad (ibn Hanbal) reported on the authority of Umar (ibn al-Khattab) as
saying: (The Messenger of Allah said:) Whoever lies against me, his fate
will verily be in Fire.

Ibn Sa’d in his Tabaqat, and Ibn Asakir from Mahmud ibn Labid, reported
on the authority of Ibn Sa’d as saying: I heard Uthman ibn Affan
addressing people from the minbar saying: It is imperssible for anyone
to report a hadith he never heard of during the reign of Abu Bakr or
that of Umar. <span id="_anchor_74"></span>74  The only reason that
forbade me from narrating the hadith of the Messenger of Allah was
fearing from being called the most conscious of his Companions, but I
heard him saying: “Whoever ascribes to me that which I never said,
verily his last abode shall be Fire.”

Ahmad, al-Darimi and Ibn Majah with others reported on the authority of
Abu Qatadah that the Prophet said: “I warn you against narrating from me
extensively. Whoever reports from me should never say but the truth, and
that who ascribes to me any saying I never uttered, his last abode shall
verily be Fire.”

The most decisive evidence in this regard being the hadith reported by
al-Bukhari on the authority of ‘Amir ibn Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, in
which he said: I said to al-Zubayr: You are not relating the Messenger’s
traditions as done by so and so and so and so! He said: (You know that)
I have never parted his (Prophet’s) company, but I verily heard him
saying: “Whoever lies against me, shall verily occupy his abode in
Fire.” <span id="_anchor_75"></span>75

In his comment on this hadith, Ibn Hajar said: This hadith was reported
by al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar in his Kitab al-Nasab, in another way, from
Hisham ibn Urwah, from his father that Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr said: “I
am meant by this,” i.e. paucity of narrations by al-Zubayr. I asked him
about that, when he said: O son, you know the consanguinity and blood
relation I have with the Prophet, upon whom be God’s peace and
benediction.

His paternal aunt is my mother, and his wife Khadijah is my paternal
aunt, while his mother Aminah bint Wahab and my grandmother Halah bint
Wahab are both daughters of Abd Munaf ibn Zuhrah, and your mother is the
sister of his wife ‘A’ishah. However, I heard him saying: “Whoever lies
against me (falsifies a hadith ascribing it to me), his last abode shall
be Fire.” The same hadith was reported by al-Darimi from Abd Allah ibn
al-Zubayr, with the words “Whoever related from me falsely”, without
mentioning the word “deliberately.”

It was further reported by Abu Dawud, <span id="_anchor_77"></span>77
 al-Nasa’i, Ibn Majah, al-Darimi and al-Daraqutni, <span
id="_anchor_78"></span>78  that he said: By God he never said the word
“deliberately”, while you claim that he said it. Further, Ibn Qutaybah
in his book Ta’wil mukhtalif al-hadith, <span id="_anchor_79"></span>79
 is reported to have said: “Whoever tells lies against me his last abode
shall be Fire,” adding: I see people adding the word “deliberately”,
while I swear by God that I never heard him uttering it. <span
id="_anchor_80"></span>80  In exposition of this hadith, Ibn Hajar says:
“In al-Zubayr’s tenacity to this hadith for its indicating his paucity
in narrating the hadith, is found the best evidence to show that falsity
means to tell of something in a way opposite to its truth, whether
deliberately or mistakenly. And though that who errs is not sinful as
unanimously agreed by Muslim scholars, but al-Zubayr feared that
prolification (in narration) might lead him to commit a mistake
unconsciously. Because though he has not sinned through erring, but he
may sin by prolification as it entails mistaking, and it will be
regarded an error on his part, – without his sensing it to be so – the
method adopted to be sure of his reporting, the fact rendering him to be
a cause for adopting rules that were never revealed by the Law-Giver.
Thus, whoever fearing from being at fault through extensively narrating,
is verily not immune against sinning.” <span id="_anchor_81"></span>81
 We are requested to reflect attentively on this hadith and its
exposition, making it an example for other than it.

In al-Madkhal al-Hakim is reported to have said: “The last abode of the
liar against him (the Prophet) is in Fire, and he insisted upon this
declaring that the Fire shall be the last abode of that who lies against
him (falsifies his

hadith) whether deliberately or not, <span id="_anchor_82"></span>82 by
this hadith which is reported by Ibn Umar: “Verily that who ascribes
false hadith to me, is building a house for himself in the Fire.” He
even intensified the severity through these words that were reported by
Uthman ibn Affan: “Whoever ascribes to me anything I never said…” So if
he even only conveys his (S) utterance without intending falsity on
purpose, shall be liable to this threat from the Prophet (S). <span
id="_anchor_83"></span>83

This tradition was reported in a different way, thus: “Whoever quotes
from me that which I never said, should occupy his abode in Fire.”

It is said: This being the hardest and most difficult word used by him,
due to its including every distorter, solecist and misinterpreter. We
can refer to al-Imam al-Shafi’i, who was ‘alim (religious scholar) of
Quraysh, and who was nearer to the pristine Sunnah fountain than
al-Bukhari and Muslim with all owners of sunan, and teacher of al-Imam
Ahmad, to review what he narrated in this regard, when we can observe
that many traditions with this meaning were narrated by him, all being
devoid of the word “deliberately.”

Following are some of his narrations in his famous treatise: <span
id="_anchor_84"></span>84

It is reported from Wathilah ibn al-Asqa‘, that the Prophet said: “The
worst calumny is that when one ascribing to me that which I never
uttered, and that who portrayed for himself that which his eyes never
saw, and who was adopted by other than his father.”

Ibn Umar reported that the Prophet said: “Verily that who ascribes false
hadith to me, is building a house for himself in Fire.”

Umm Asid is reported to have said: I said to Abu Qatadah: Why is that
you never relate anything from the Messenger of Allah as others are
doing? He said: I heard the Messenger of Allah declaring: Whoever
falsifies my hadith, has to seek for himself an abode (bed) in Fire.”

These were excerptions from the traditions reported by al-Shafi’i in his
treatise, in which the word “deliberately” is never seen at all, so let
those having reason give ear to this! Further this word can never be
found in all traditions we cite whatsoever.

Al-Nawawi, in expounding the hadith: “Whoever relates from me a

hadith believing it to be false, shall be regarded among the liars”
which was reported by Muslim, said: In prohibiting falsity against him
(upon whom be God’s peace and benediction) there is no difference
between that which is related to rules (ahkam) and that which is devoid
of rule like temptation, intimidation and counsels and other than these,
which all being unlawful (haram’) and among major sins and the most
abominable vices as unanimously agreed by the most authentic Muslim
scholars ... till he said: Men of resolution and determination have
unanimously concurred on prohibiting falsity against common people so
how would be the case with that whose saying is legislation, speech is
revelation (from God), and falsity against him is falsity against Allah
the Most High. <span id="_anchor_85"></span>85

Al-Suyuti is reported to have said: For evading this, the Rightly-guided
Caliphs and chosen Companions (may God be pleased with them), used to be
fearing (God) from extensively narrating hadith from the Messenger of
Allah (S), among whom be Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Ali, Talhah, al-Zubayr,
Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas, Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud,
al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, Thoban, the slave of the
Messenger of Allah, and Zayd ibn Arqam and others.

Abu Bakr and Umar used to demand from anyone relating to them a hadith
from the Messenger of Allah they never heard from him (S), to establish
it by evidence or otherwise he would deserve punishment, when failing to
do so. Further Ali ibn Abi Talib used to exact an oath from the
narrator, while Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud’s complexion would change when any
hadith of the Messenger of Allah would be mentioned before him, with his
jugular veins be swelling and his sweat flowing, and his eyes shedding
tears, declaring: Or something near to this, or like this, or similar to
this. All this was out of fearing from addition or omission, or
inadvertence, or forgetfulness, to take precautions for religion and for
preserving the Shari’ah. And to cut apart the greed of any avaricious or
deviation of any forger against venturing to relate from the Messenger
of Allah anything that he never uttered, or foisting into religion that
which is strange to it, the practice

entailing that they be examples followed by those addressed by them and
taking from them, in a way that their listeners follow their tracks and
do the same practice. <span id="_anchor_86"></span>86

Malik ibn Ubadah is reported to have said: The Prophet has, during the
Hijjat al-Wada‘ (Farewell Pilgrimage), committed to us declaring: Hold
on to the Qur’an’, as you will return to a people longing for relating
my hadith. So whoever comprehends anything, can narrate it, and whoever
fabricates a lie against me has to occupy his abode in Hell. <span
id="_anchor_87"></span>87

There were the evidences I intended to cite for proving that the word
“deliberately” never existed in Messenger’s hadith “Whoever fabricates a
lie against me…”. It is quite obvious from the traditions cited that the
narrations of the leading Companions among whom being three of
al-Khulafa al-Rashidun and al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, have all affirmed
that the word “deliberately” could never be there in the correct
narration of the hadith. <span id="_anchor_88"></span>88  Moreover,
sound reason and noble disposition are averse to accept the narration
with the word “deliberately”, since falsity is the mother of all
abominable vices, whether be deliberate or not.

### Fabricating a Lie against the Prophet during His Lifetime

It might be that the Prophet (S) has warned against falsity against him
after hearing that some people were fabricating lies against him though
he being alive. In his book al-Ihkam fi usul al-ahkam, <span
id="_anchor_89"></span>89  Ibn Hazm al-Zahiri reported from Abd Allah
ibn Buraydah, from Ibn al-Khatib al-Aslami, that he said: A suburb of
Banu Layth was situated two miles away from al-Madinah, to which some
man came putting on a cloak declaring: The Messenger of Allah garbed me
this vestment and commanded me to rule over you in regard of your
lifeblood and properties according to my own opinion! It happened that
this man asked a girl’s hand from among these people during the
pre-Islamic era, but they refused to marry him, so he set forth toward
her and fell

to her (fornicated with her). Thereat, the people (her family and
neighbours) informed the Messenger of Allah about the matter, when he
said (angrily): He lied, the enemy of Allah! Then he (S) sent someone
after him giving him this order: If you find him alive – which I never
believe him to be so – you should behead him, and when finding him dead
burn him by fire.

Ibn Sa’d in his Tabaqat and al-Tabarani reported on the authority of
al-Muqanna‘ al-Tamimi that he said: I brought the Prophet the sadaqah
(alms) out of our camels, when he ordered to receive it and take it to
the treasury. I said to him: Two she-camels among them are a present
offered to you. So he ordered to set apart the present from the sadaqah.
After elapse of some days, there prevailed a talk among people that the
Messenger of Allah made up his mind to delegate Khalid ibn al-Walid to
Muzar slaves for collecting alms from them. I said: By God our people
have no money! Then I came to the Prophet (S) saying to him: People are
plunging into so and so subject (what do you say)? In reply, the Prophet
raised his hands till whiteness of his armpit could be seen, declaring:
O Allah, I never sanction for them to fabricate a lie against me.
Al-Muqanna‘ says: Thereafter I never related from the Prophet any hadith
except that which agrees to the Book or be adopted and applied by a
(practical) sunnah. <span id="_anchor_90"></span>90  Thus was the case
regarding that who would lie against him during his lifetime! So how
would it be after his death? Many reports are there to demonstrate this.

  
  
  
  

73. This hadith was reported also by Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasa'i, Ibn
Majah, al-Daraqutni, and al-Hakim in al-Madkhal.

74. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'id, vol. II, p. 100.

75. The divergence of the forms of this hadith is resulted from the fact
that they used to narrate the traditions of the Messenger of Allah on
the basis of meaning, as will be stated later on in this book,
God-willing.

. Fath al-Bari, vol. I, p. 162.

77. In Mukhtasar Sunan Abi Dawud of al-Mundhiri, and Ma'alim al-Sunan of
Abu Sulayman al-Khitabi, and Tahdhib of al-Imam Ibn al-Qayyim (vol. V,
p. 148), who, after citing this hadith, said: "It is reported by
al-Bukhari, al-Nasa'i and Ibn Majah, but the word 'deliberately' could
not be found in the narrations of al-Bukhari and al-Nasa'i, nor in the
hadith reported by al-Zubayr, who said: By God the Prophet had never
said "deliberately" while you claim he said it. This book was verified
and edited by al-Shaykh Ahmad Shakir.

78. Al-Daraqutni is the great leader of hadith, about whom Ibn Hajar
said: "He was the hafiz of his time, and the most famous among the
critics of the two Sahihs, and deepest in investigation and scrutiny."
He died in 385 H.

79. Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, p. 49.

80. Though the narration with the word "muta'ammidan" (deliberately) was
weak and not confirmed by the eminent Sahabah, with being refused by
reason, and disapproved by the Prophet's morals, we see some of Sunnah
claimants and adorers of asanid in this age are still obstinately
insisting on confirming its presence, as if they are more knowledgeable
than al-Bukhari, or al-Nasa'i, or al-Daraqutni or others. They
exaggerate in obstinacy, when some of them claim that al-Zubayr ibn
al-'Awwam had never said: By God he (Prophet) has not said
'deliberately' while you say 'deliberately', ascribing this statement to
one of those who reported from him, whereas the narration being correct
and established by notable leaders of hadith, who no one among them
claimed it to be said by anyone other than Ibn al-Zubayr!!

81. Sharh al-Bukhari of Ibn Hajar, vol. I, p. 162.

82. This may be a sign of disgrace on the part of claimants of
knowledgeability who propagate among people that undeliberate falsity
can never be equal to the deliberate one.

83. Al-Suyuti, Tahdhir al-khawass, p. 26.

84. Ibid., p. 395 and upward.

85. Ibid., p. 23.

86. Ibid., pp. 28, 29.

87. Al-Tahawi, Mushkil al-athar, vol. I, p. 171.

88. Ibn Hajar said: The sublime characteristics of the narrators can
take he place of the number or exceed it, (Fath al-Bari, vol. I, p.
164).

89. In vol. II, p. 582.

90. That is a practical sunnah, as the Sunnah was not known then but
only by this, and many advantages are ther ein this saying that can only
be realized by men of reason.
