Fabricating Lies Against the Prophet After His Death:
=====================================================

  
  
  

While lies were fabricated against the Prophet during his lifetime, it
is to be observed that lies were multiplied and spread after his demise,
with numerous Companions being there, and religion rendered vulnerable,
and subject to people’s falsification. This falsity was even more
increased after the death of Umar-since he, as is known, used to
intimidate people (against relating hadith) – to the extent that the
abundance of traditions attributed to

the Messenger of Allah appalled the eminent Companions. Muslim, in the
introduction to his book, reported on the authority of Tawus that he
said: This man (i.e. Bushayr <span id="_anchor_91"></span>91  ibn Ka’b)
came near Ibn Abbas and started talking to him. Ibn Abbas said to him:
Go back to so and so hadith, when he returned. Then he again said to
him: Return to so and so hadith, and so did he, saying: I know not what
is the matter? Have you recognized all of my a hadith and denied this?
Or denied my hadith as a whole but recognized this one? Ibn Abbas said:
We used to relate hadith from the Messenger of Allah when no one could
dare fabricating lies against him. But when people plunged into
narrating extensively (with falsification) from the Messenger of Allah,
we gave up relating hadith from him. <span id="_anchor_92"></span>92

Bushayr ibn Ka’b al-Adwi came to Ibn Abbas starting narrating with
reiterating the clause: “Said the Messenger of Allah”, till Ibn Abbas
refused to give him permission to narrate beside being at odds with him.
So he said: O Ibn Abbas, what is the matter that you disdain from
listening to my hadith? Whenever I relate the Prophet’s hadith you turn
away?! Ibn Abbas said: For a long period, when hearing someone saying:
“Said the Messenger of Allah”, our eyes would forestall him, and our
ears would be heeding to him. But when people mounted the obstinate and
submissive (i.e. competed in narrating the hadith), we wouldn’t take
(accept) from people except that of which we are assured!

Ibn Abi Mulaykah is reported to have said: I sent a letter to Ibn Abbas
asking him to write me a book and keep it away from me. He said: What a
sincere son; he wants me to choose the affairs for him thoroughly and
conceal from him. He says: He asked to bring him the book Qada’ ‘Ali.
Then he embarked on writing down some excerpts from it, declaring
whenever passing by anything: By God, this issue was not judged by Ali
unless that he might have erred!

It is reported that Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash said: I heard al-Mughirah
saying: No one was regarding my relating from him (S) as true except
some among the companions of Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud.

We be content with these texts indicating fabrication of lies against
the Messenger of Allah during his lifetime and after his death. This
abominable practice was not only done by the heretics and capricious and
enemies of religion, but it was followed too by the upright, as will be
manifest in the chapter “The Righteous Fabricators” in this book.

### Sentence of That Who Lied Against the Prophet (S):

Al-Sam’ani is reported to have said: Whoever falsifies even one report
(khabar), attributing it to the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s
peace and benediction), all the hadiths narrated by him should be
rejected, <span id="_anchor_93"></span>93  and disregarded. It is
reported that Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Abu Bakr al-Hamidi and Abu Bakr
al-Sayrafi have said: The narration of that who falsified the traditions
of the Messenger of Allah should be rejected even if he repenting after
that. <span id="_anchor_94"></span>94  Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani is
reported to have said: The ulama concur on considering fabrication of a
lie against the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s peace and
benediction) as a rough thick act since it is among major sins.
Al-Shaykh Abu Muhammad al-Juwayni has even gone to extremes, and issued
a verdict considering as a disbeliever whoever practises such a
behaviour, the opinion which is shared by al-Qadi Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi.
Whereas ignorant be those among the Karamites (dignity-seekers) and some
of ascetics, who hold that: To fabricate a lie against the Prophet is
permissible when it is intended to consolidate the religion and conduct
(tariqah) of Ahl al-Sunnah, and temptation and intimidation, making
excuses by claiming that menacing was revealed in regard of that against
whom a lie was fabricated, not regarding that on whose behalf it was
lied. This argument is invalid outright, as threatening with torment
concerns that whose hadith was falsified whether on his behalf or
against him. And religion, thanks to God, is perfect needing not to be
strengthened by falsity. <span id="_anchor_95"></span>95

### To Lie Against the Prophet Is a Major Sin:

In his Ta’rikh, Ibn Asakir reports on the authority of Wathilah ibn
al-Asqa’ as saying: “I heard the Messenger of Allah saying: When someone
attributing to me something I never said, is counted among major sins.

Under chapter of “Forbidding Narration of the Composed hadith” in Sharh
Muslim, al-Nawawi says: “In prohibiting falsity against him (upon whom
be God’s peace and benediction) there is no difference between that
which is related to rules (ahkam) and that which is devoid of rule like
temptation, intimidation, and counsels and other than these, which all
being unlawful and among major sins and the most abominable vices as
unanimously agreed by the most authentic Muslim scholars”…till he said:
Men of resolution and determination have unanimously concurred on
prohibiting falsity against common people, so how would be the case with
that whose saying is legislation, speech is revelation (from God), and
falsity against him is falsity against Allah the Most High.

### Degrees of the Companions: <span id="_anchor_96"></span>96

The Companions were not at one level in fiqh and knowledge, nor of equal
degree in recognition and apprehension. But they were in diversified
classes and dissimilar ranks, like all ordinary people throughout ages:
“Such has been the way of Allah concerning His creation, and never shall
thou find in the way of Allah any change.”

In his Muqaddimah, <span id="_anchor_97"></span>97  Ibn Khaldun says:
“The Companions in tot were not able to issue verdicts, nor religion was
taken from them all. But this was specialty of the holders of the
Qur’an, aware of its abrogating and abrogated (nasikh wa mansukh), and
mutashabah and muhkam, with other indications, according to what they
received from the Prophet (upon whom be God’s peace and benediction), or
from whoever heard it (Qur’an) from them, the magnates among them. That
is why they were called al-qurra’ (the reciters), due to their reciting
of the Book, as the Arabs were illiterate, the fact

entailing that those known of reciting the Book were distinguished with
this epithet, due to its (Book’s) being estranged among people and this
state kept on to be as the prior matter in religion.”

Muhammad ibn Sahl reports on the authority of Ibn Abi Khaythamah, from
his father, <span id="_anchor_98"></span>98  as saying: Those who were
responsible for issuing fatwa (verdict) during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah, being three from among the Emigrants (Muhajiran):
Umar, Uthman and Ali, and three from among the Helpers (Ansar): Ubayy
ibn Ka’b, Mu’adh ibn Jabal and Zayd ibn Thabit.

Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Qasim reports from his father as saying: At any
time any issue happening to Abu Bakr al-Siddiq needing consultation with
sagacious people, he would summon some men from al-Muhajirun: Umar,
Uthman and Ali and some from among the Ansar as Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf,
Mu’adh ibn Jabal, Ubayy ibn Ka’b and Zayd ibn Thabit. All these men were
able to issue verdicts in religious issues during the caliphate of Abu
Bakr, who kept on this procedure for a time. And when Umar attained to
power, he used to call in these men for consultation.

In Sahih Muslim, Masruq is reported to have said: I followed up the news
about the Companions of the Messenger of Allah, upon whom be God’s peace
and benediction, and discovered that all their knowledge ended with six
people: Umar, Ali, Abd Allah, Mu’adh, <span id="_anchor_99"></span>99
 Abu al-Darda’ and Zayd ibn Thabit, and then nosed about the news of
these six, finding their knowledge be originated from Ali and Abd Allah.
<span id="_anchor_100"></span>100

In A‘lam al-muqi’in, Ibn al-Qayyim reports on the authority of Masruq
that he said: I kept company with the Companions of Muhammad (upon whom
be God’s peace and benediction), and they proved to be like ikhkhadhah
<span id="_anchor_101"></span>101  (pool, pond), that quenching the
(thirst of) equestrian and the passengers. And the pond at which if all
the earth (people) stop, it would satisfy them, and Abd Allah is among
that pond.

Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported that the Prophet (S) said: The parable of
guidance and knowledge cared by Allah is that of abundant rain

falling on a land, that may be pure <span id="_anchor_102"></span>102
 (fertile) receiving the water and growing much pasture and grass. Or it
might be barren so as to retain water inside it, with which Allah
benefiting people through drinking, watering and cultivating the land.
The same rain Allah might send to other folk, who be like a low land
that neither retaining water nor growing herbage.

‘Amir is reported to have said: The ‘ulama of this Ummah after its
Prophet being six: Umar, Abd Allah and Zayd ibn Thabit, who when Umar
uttering something and these two saying something, their words would be
conforming and pursuant to his. And (they are) Ali, Ubayy ibn Ka’b and
Abu Musa al-Ash’ari, who when Ali disclosing any utterance and they
uttering something, their saying would be conforming to his. He said
also: The judges of this Ummah are only four: Umar, Ali, Zayd and Abu
Musa al-Ash’ari. And the sages of this Ummah are four: ‘Amr ibn al-‘As,
Mu’awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan, al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah and Ziyad.

### Divergence among Companions in Narrating Truthfully:

Umar (ibn al-Khattab) believed in (truthfulness of) Abd al-Rahman ibn
Awf and said to him: You are the righteous and approved man to me. In
expounding this report, al-Dhahabi said: Though the Companions of the
Messenger of Allah be just, but the degree of this justice differs from
one to another. The evidence for this can be clearly observed when Umar
affirming his being content with Abd al-Rahman’s reporting, while
telling Abu Musa al-Ash’ari when asking permission to enter upon him and
narrate (hadith): Bring someone to testify and confirm your narration.
<span id="_anchor_103"></span>103

### Companions’ Reporting from Each Other and from the Followers:

It is to be noted that not all the traditions reported from the
Companions, which they narrated from the Messenger of Allah, and were

written down in books, have been heard by them from the Prophet orally,
or taken from him through dictation, but they (Companions) were
reporting from each other. It was common among them that when anyone
having not heard hadith from the Prophet directly, he would take from
that who heard it from him (S). When it comes to conveying it, he would
never report it on the authority of that Companion from which he
received it, but would attribute it directly to the Prophet without
referring to the Companion’s name. This practice was due to the
numerousness of the Messenger’s meetings, and their being held in
different times and places, making it infeasible for all the Companions
to attend each and every meeting by person, but some attending this
meeting and some others that one.

In his book al-Ihkam fi usul al-ahkam, <span id="_anchor_104"></span>104
 al-Amudi reports that Ibn Abbas – due to his youth – has never heard
from the Messenger of Allah but only four traditions. When reporting
from the Messenger of Allah the hadith “Usury only occurs when buying on
credit”, and that the Prophet kept on pronouncing talbiyah (during hajj)
till pelting the Aqabah stone, he said – when inquired about it –
regarding the first part: It is reported to me by Usamah ibn Zayd. And
about the second report he said: I have been informed of it by my
brother al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas. Further when Abu Hurayrah reported that
the Prophet (S) said: Whoever entered upon the morning in a state of
ritual impurity (junub) during Month of Ramadan, his fasting is
invalid”, he was questioned about its source. In reply he said: By the
Lord of Ka’bah, it was not me who said it but it is uttered by Muhammad!
Then he resumed by saying: It is reported to me by al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas.
<span id="_anchor_105"></span>105

Al-Bara’ ibn ‘Azib is reported to have said: “You have to know that the
traditions we are relating to you have not necessarily been heard from
the Messenger of Allah, upon whom be God’s peace and benediction, but
only some of them we have heard, and some others we are relating to our
companions.”

In regard of the Tabi’un, they used to transmit the reports <span
id="_anchor_106"></span>106  (khabar mursal), the fact whose evidence
can be seen in what is reported from al-

A’mash as saying: I said to Ibrahim al-Nakha’i: When relating anything
to me you should mention its sanad <span id="_anchor_107"></span>107
 (chain of narrators). He said to him: When informing you: So and so
reported to me from Abd Allah, it means he himself related to me. And
when saying: I was told by Abd Allah, it indicates that some narrators
reported to me from him. Thereafter al-Amudi is reported to have said:
This habit remained so common among the Sahabah and Tabi’un with no one
negating it, till rendering to a unanimity. <span
id="_anchor_108"></span>108

At the time when the Companions were narrating from each other, they
were also relating from the Tabi’un, the fact confirmed by hadith
scholars in their books, to which whoever desiring can refer.

Under the bab: “Riwayat al-Akabir ‘an al-Asaghir” (Narration of the
magnates from the juniors) Ibn al-Salah and others are reported to have
said: Ibn Abbas, the three Abds and Abu Hurayrah and others used to
report from Ka’b al-Ahbar – the Jew who deceptively embraced Islam –
during the caliphate of Umar, counting him among the leading Tabi\`un,
making him then a master over Muslims. In his Alfiyyah, <span
id="_anchor_109"></span>109  al-Suyuti says:

Seniors have been reporting from juniors,

In age or in knowledge and rank,

From him Companions take from Followers,

A follower receiving from follower of followers,

Like the erudite taking from Ka’b and al-Zuhri,

Reporting from Malik and Yahya al-Ansari

Al-Shaykh Ahmad Muhammad Shakir (may God’s mercy be upon him), in
expounding this Alfiyyah, says: Classified under this type is the
Companions’ narrating from the Followers, as in the case of reporting of
the erudite Abd Allah ibn Abbas and other Abds, Abu Hurayrah, Mu’awiyah
and Anas and others from Ka’b al-Ahbar!

But it is worth mentioning that the Companions – as we previously
exposed – when reporting from their brethren or followers, were never

indicating that their traditions being received through the means of
riwayah from others. Rather, they used to cite narrations during the
occasions requiring citation of hadith, however lengthy be the time,
without any reference to those from whom they heard these traditions,
attributing them to the Prophet (S) directly. They kept on this process
and practice till the occurrence of the sedition (fitnah), after which
they would start to exclaim: Inform us the names of your rijal! (i.e.
refer us to chain of narrators).

Ibn Sirin is reported to have said: They were not inquiring about the
isnad (chain of transmission), but as the fitnah <span
id="_anchor_110"></span>110  took place they began to say: Tell us the
names of your rijal.

From him Muslim reports: People experienced an age where no one asking
about the chain (isnad) of any hadith, but on the occurrence of the
sedition, people embarked on inquiring about chain of hadith. From him
too, in Sunan al-Tirmidhi it is reported: During the early time people
would never inquire about the isnad! But as the fitnah erupted, they
started to inquire. He added: A man would relate to me, and I would
never suspect or accuse him (of lying), but I would suspect that who
being superior to him, and higher in rank.

The Followers used to narrate from the followers of the followers, the
example for which can be found in the relation of al-Zuhri and Yahya ibn
Sa’id al-Ansari from Malik who was their disciple.

What is uncommon for the intelligent, as al-Suyuti said in his Alfiyyah
– to see a Companion reporting a hadith from a follower, from another
Companion. The example for this is the narration of al-Sa’ib ibn Yazid
the Companion, from Abd al-Rahman ibn Abd al-Qari, the follower
(Tabi’i), from Umar ibn al-Khattab, from the Prophet (S) that he said:
“That who sleeps with neglecting a section (of the Qur’an) or a part of
it, reading it in between dawn and noon prayers, it would be prescribed
for him as if he had recited it during night.” This hadith is reported
by Muslim in his book (Sahih), to which belongs the hadith “Not equal
are those who sit (holding back)”. Al-Hafiz al-Iraqi has collected
twenty traditions of

the same kind of this.

  
  
  
  

91. Bushayr is the diminutive of the name Bishr. He was reporting from
Abu Dharr and Abu al-Darda'' and authenticated by Ibn Sa'd' and
al-Nasa'i. Refer to the chapter "Fabrication in Hadith and Its Causes"
which will come later on.

92. If people rode out dangers and experienced difficulties during the
era of Ibn Abbas, so how would be the case with those who succeeded him?
And they, as I quoted before the utterance of Abu Bakr, used to relate
from the Messenger of Allah traditions regarding which there was
disagreement among them!

93. Al-Nawawi, al-Taqrib, p. 14.

94. Ikhtisar ulum al-hadith, p. 111.

95. Fath al-Bari, vol. VI, p. 389.

96. I have dedicated a separate chapter for reliability of the Sahabah.

97. Beirut Edition, p. 446.

98. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. IV, p. 168.

99. According to a narration of Ibn al-Qayyim in his book A'lam
al-muqi'in, Ubayy ibn Ka'b instead of Mu'adh.

100. He is Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud.

101. Ikhadhah is the pond.

102. In another narration: a good section. All these reports can be
found in Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd vol. II, pp. 109, 110.

103. Siyar a'lam al-nubala' of al-Dhahabi, vol. I, p. 48. Refer to p.
58.

104. In vol. II, pp. 178-180. In al-Wabil al-sayyib, Ibn al-Qayyim says:
The traditions collected by Ibn Abbas, to be uttered by the Prophet (S)
have not reached twenty in number. Ibn Mu'in, al-Qattan, and Abu Dawud
in his Sunan say that he has reported only nine traditions, due to his
youth … but despite this fact, Ahmad has ascribed to him 1696 traditions
in his Musnad.

105. There is an interesting story for this hadith, which can be seen in
the biography of Abu Hurayrah which I published twice under the title
Shaykh al-mudirah.

106. The mursal reporting of the hadith, is the riwayah in which no
reference is made to the name of the narrator who reported it from the
Prophet (S).

107. The musnad tradition is that one whose sanad (chain of
transmitters) continues successively till its last narrator. The
Followers used to adopt in this regard the method followed by the
Companions in reporting traditions which they didn't hear from the
Prophet directly, but took them from other Sahabah, whose names were not
mentioned by those who took the ahadith from them.

108. In vol. II, pp. 178-180.

109. In p. 237.

110. The fitnah (sedition) exacerbated after elapse of several years of
the caliphate of Uthman. In respect of the fitnah, I cite this report
from al-Zuhri, who said: When Uthman assumed caliphate, he remained for
twelve years as a ruler, during six of which no one could harbour malice
against him, beside his being dearer to Quraysh than Umar ibn
al-Khattab! Because Umar was so stern in treating people, but when
Uthman came to power he showed leniency to people and granted them
donations, disregarding them after that, preferring his relatives and
household during the second six years. He gave his orders to give Marwan
the land-tax of Egypt, donating as much money as he liked to his kins,
interpreting in this regard of his own, borrowing from the treasury a
lot of funds saying: Abu Bakr and Umar did not take their share of these
estates, but I took and distributed them among my relatives! So people
disapproved this of him (Tabaqat Ibn Sa'id, vol. II, p. 34). Refer also
to my book Shaykh al-mudirah, the chapter: "How was the Umayyad State
Founded."
