The Companions Criticizing Each Other:
======================================

  
  

It was not satisfactory for the Companions to be stringent in accepting
the reports from their brethren, as previously mentioned, but they
exceeded the limits to the extent of criticizing and reviling each
other.

It was that Umar, Ali, Uthman, A’ishah and Ibn Abbas with other
Companions used to scrutinize their brethren, raising doubt regarding
some of the traditions they were reporting from the Messenger, giving
back to them their narrations.

Mahmud ibn al-Rabi’ – who was among those realizing the Messenger’s
lifetime while being too young – reports that he heard Utban ibn Malik
al-Ansari, who was present at the time of Battle of Badr, declaring that
the Messenger of Allah said: Allah forbade Fire from afflicting whoever
saying, “No god is there but Allah” seeking with it God’s sake only. The
Messenger uttered this while being in the house of Utban who related it
to some people among whom being Abu Ayyub – the Companion of the
Messenger of Allah – but he (Abu Ayyub) denied my utterance, saying: By
God I never think the Messenger of Allah to have said what you uttered!
The Murji’ah <span id="_anchor_111"></span>111  (Postponers) have used
this hadith and its alike as an evidence for their madhhab (school of
thought). Further A’ishah refuted the hadith reported by Umar and his
son that (the Prophet said): “The dead person is afflicted with torment
out of his household’s lamentation over him,” and she said to them: You
relate from truthful people, but hearing may err. By God, the Messenger
of Allah has never said that Allah inflicts the believer with torment
due to his family’s lamentation over him! And she added: The Qur’an is
sufficient for you, when saying: “…and no bearer of burden shall bear
the burden of another.”

In another narration, when hearing Ibn Umar relating this hadith she
said: It is not so! But he (Prophet) said that the dead is tormented
because of

his guilt and sin, the reason for which his household are weeping over
him.” Again in another occasion she said that he has not lied, but he
has forgotten or erred, repeating his (Ibn Umar’s) words, that: Once
upon a time the Messenger of Allah stood by al-Qulayb, where those
killed in the Battle of Badr from among the polytheists were buried,
exclaiming: “Verily they can hear what I am saying.” Saying then: It is
not so, but what he actually said is that: Only now they realized that
what I was telling them was the truth, and she recited the verses. “Lo!
Thou canst not make the dead to hear (27:80)” and “Thou canst not reach
those who are in the graves (35:22)” when they occupied their abode in
Fire. Both the traditions are recorded in Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih
Muslim and other books.

A’ishah has also refuted the hadith in which it was claimed that the
Prophet saw his Lord on the Ascension Night, that was reported by the
two shaykhs (al-Bukhari and Muslim) from ‘Amir ibn Masruq who said to
A’ishah: O mother, has Muhammad actually seen his Lord? She said: I am
shocked at these words! Haven’t you heard these three traditions saying
that whoever related to you has lied. <span id="_anchor_112"></span>112
 Whoever relating to you that Muhammad has seen his Lord has verily
lied, reciting then: “…and knoweth not any soul what it shall earn
tomorrow.” Then she resumed: And whoever relating to you that he (the
Prophet) has concealed anything, has verily lied, reciting then: “O
Messenger! Make known that which hath been revealed unto thee from thy
Lord.”

In Sahih Muslim, he (Ibn Masruq) said: I was reclining, and sat
straightened then, saying (to A’ishah): Hasn’t Allah said: “And verily
he saw him yet another time”? She said: I was the first one to question
the Messenger of Allah about that saying: O Messenger of Allah, have you
actually seen your Lord? He said: Never, but I saw Gabriel descending.
In another narration, Abu Dharr inquired the Prophet about that (seeing
his Lord), when he (S) said: I saw a light (nur)…I believe I saw a
light. <span id="_anchor_113"></span>113

She has also disapproved the report of Ibn Umar and Abu Hurayrah that
(the Prophet said): Ominousness verily lies in three things, and she
said

for elucidating this: The Messenger of Allah was in fact <span
id="_anchor_114"></span>114 telling about the conditions of the
pre-Islamic (Jahiliyyah) era, due to its (hadith’s) contradiction to the
predetermined principle that: “Verily the authority resteth wholly with
God.” (3:154).

When coming to hear the hadith reported by Abu al-Darda’ that he (S)
said: “Whoever enters upon the morning, his night prayers (watr) is
invalid then,” she commented: Nay, Abu al-Darda’ did lie … the Prophet
was performing watr prayers even after entering upon the morning. And
when knowing that Ibn Umar said: The Messenger of Allah performed the
short pilgrimage (umrah) in the Month of Rajab, she judged that he
committed an inadvertence (sahw). In regard of Anas ibn Malik and Abu
Sa’id al-Khudri she said: Anas and Abu Sa’id were not aware of (or able
to comprehend) the hadith of the Messenger of Allah since they were two
young lads (boys)! She used to reject and refute any hadith incongruous
with the Qur’an, with conceiving the narration of any truthful Companion
to be mistakenly heard or based on misconception. <span
id="_anchor_115"></span>115  Also she denied the hadith reported by
Umran ibn Husayn ibn Samurah, that two pauses (saktah) were there for
the Prophet in his recital (of two surahs) during the (daily) prayers.
<span id="_anchor_116"></span>116  There are numerous examples in this
respect, and in the book Ta’rikh Abi Hurayrah, I have cited a number of
the traditions in which he was criticized, and which were rejected and
refuted, to which the dear reader is kindly requested to refer. <span
id="_anchor_117"></span>117

### Narration of Hadith after its Writing was Forbidden by Prophet:

Those having no expertise in knowledge and no awareness of expertise,
surmise that the Messenger’s traditions which they read in books or hear
from narrators, have all reached us correct in syntax and well-arranged
in wording, and that their original words reached to the narrators
intact and preserved exactly as were uttered by the Prophet, without any
corruption (tahrif) or alteration.

They further think that the Companions and those who succeeded them who
kept in memory the Prophet’s traditions till the time of tadwin (writing
down of hadith), have conveyed them with their original text and wording
exactly as they heard them, and duly related them in the form they
received them, keeping them safe against any change and alteration.

And the idea seizing people’s minds was that these narrators
constituting altogether a distinguished stratum among people in
calligraphy, perfect exactitude, and powerful memory. And that their
minds were created in a special shape with no parallel among all people,
in a way that whatever they were hearing would be engraved on their
(minds) tablets escaping not even one word and sparing not even one
letter.

Undoubtedly, this kind of conception had its extreme impact upon the
thinking of chiefs of religion, except those whom God kept immune. It
made them hold these traditions in the same position of the Qur’anic
verses, the fact entailing obligation to abide by them and surrender to
their rules, in a way that whoever contradicting them would be
considered as sinner, guilty and debauchee, and that denying or
suspecting them would be counted an apostate that should repent.

For this reason, I opined to elaborate discussion on this topic, so as
to expose to people the true aspect in it, making them recognize that
the traditions reported to them from the Messenger of Allah (S) were in
fact narrated according to their denotations and meanings, when (the
Companions) failing to convey them with their real syntax and wording,
either due to forgetting their origin or their being kept in memories
for a very long time since they narrated them for the first time.
Furthermore, it was that every narrator would report only that portion
of the hadith his mind could keep according to the meaning, after his
memory failing to recollect its original words. This was due to the fact
that they (companions), have not cared, in the outset, for writing down
the hadith, letting it be narrated through denotation, the state
attaining agreement of all gnostics and scholars. <span
id="_anchor_118"></span>118  Thereafter disagreement appeared among the
ulama regarding this matter, with some

forbidding it and some others permitting. The significance of
demonstrating this subject prompts us to refer here to some of the
evidences of these and those (people), finding no one making a
comprehensive investigation on this issue except al-Allamah al-Shaykh
Tahir al-Jaza’iri, in his valuable book Tawjih al-nazar. Following are
excerptions of his statements. <span id="_anchor_119"></span>119

  
  
  
  

111. The Murji'ah was one of great Islamic parties, which held that:
Guilt can never do harm beside faith, nor obedience can be of benefit
when accompanying disbelief.

112. In Sahih Muslim, the narration is thus: "… he has in fact done a
great slander against God. The ahadith on sighting God amounted to
thirty in number as stated by Ibn al-Qayyim in Hadi al-arwah, among them
more than twenty ones were marfu', not to refer to the mawquf ones and
the athar.

113. In Fath al-Bari, Ibn Hajar says: Al-Qurtubi, in al-Mufhim,
preponderated the idea of waqf in this issue attributing this to a group
of researchers. This notion was supported by the fact that there was no
clear-cut proof in this regard, and what he inferred for both the sects
were only contradictory external aspects liable to interpretation. That
is, the issue was not of the practical matters, when conjectual
evidences be sufficient to prove it, but it being one of doctrines
(mu'taqadat) the proving of which only definite proof is sufficient.

114. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah, in which all these akhbar and
others are stated elaborately.

115. Al-Imam al-Zarkashi has compiled a valuable book in which he cited
the restrictions (istidrakat) made by 'A'ishah against the Sahabah,
calling it al-Ijabah li-irad ma istadrakathu A'ishah 'ala al-Sahabah. He
died in 794 H.

116. Al-Isti'ab, vol. II, p. 154.

117. See Shaykh al-mudirah, the 3rd edition.

118. Ibn al-Salah, in his Muqaddimah, says: The narrators were most
often reporting the same meaning of one subject through different words,
and the only reason for this was their depending on the meaning not the
words (p. 90).

119. In p. 298 and the following pages in brief.
