Narrating Hadith By Meaning and Disagreement Among Scholars:
============================================================

  
  
  

The ulama’ disagreed regarding narration of hadith by meaning, with some
holding it to be absolutely impermissible, among whom being Ibn Sirin,
Tha’lab and Abu Bakr al-Razi, beside Ibn Umar <span
id="_anchor_120"></span>120  according to some narrations. But the
majority of ulama’ permit it, on condition that the narrator being aware
of the minutest words, able to discern the amount of difference between
them, experienced in their denotations. That is when exchanging any word
of the hadith reported to him with another one identical to it in
meaning, this would be permissible for him. <span
id="_anchor_121"></span>121

This issue was tackled by usul scholars, and due to its extreme
importance I would like to cite here excerpts of their statements for
readers’ satisfaction.

In al-Luma’, Abu Ishaq al-Shirazi is reported to have said: Ikhtiyar in
narration is to narrate the report by its original wording, in
accordance with the Prophet’s hadith: “May Allah bless whoever hears my
utterance and comprehends it, delivering it as he heard it. Holder of
fiqh may convey it to that who being more knowledgeable than him. <span
id="_anchor_122"></span>122  When he citing any riwayah, it should be
deliberated! If he being of those unaware of the meaning of the hadith,
his narration is impermissible, since he is not immune against changing
it. And if he be among those recognizing the meaning of the hadith, it
should be deliberated! If it be a probable report (khabar), he is not
permitted to narrate by meaning since he may relate it with words not
indicating the meaning intended by the Messenger, so he is not permitted
to

inflect with it. But if it be a conspicuous report, there would be two
views regarding it:

Some of our scholars hold that: It is impermissible, as worship may be
fulfilled through uttering some words like takbirah of prayers. Some
others believe in its permissibility, which is more preponderant as it
indicates its denotation, according to a hadith reported from the
Prophet (S): No harm will befall you if you hit the mark.

This hadith is reported by Ibn Mindah in Ma’rifat al-Sahabah, and
al-Tabarani in al-Mu’jam al-Kabir, on the authority of Abd Allah ibn
Sulayman ibn Akimah al-Laythi as saying: I said: O Messenger of Allah, I
hear hadith from you but be unable to convey it as I hear it as one
letter may be added or one omitted from it (what to do!) He (S) said:
“There is no harm in it if you do not legalize any unlawful act or
prohibit that which is lawful, and when you hit the mark.” <span
id="_anchor_123"></span>123

Those forbidding riwayah by meaning argued by emphasizing on the text
and rational aspect. In respect of the text, it can be referred to his
(S) hadith: “May God bless whoever hears my utterance and comprehends
it, delivering it as he heard it. The propagator might be more conscious
than the hearer. <span id="_anchor_124"></span>124  In exposing it they
said: Delivering it as he heard it is to deliver the same words heard.
And the faqih’s conveying the fiqh to that who is more knowledgeable
than him, means – God is aware – that the more sagacious one may
comprehend, thanks to his fiqh, some imports from the words to which the
narrator couldn’t take notice of, since he (rawi) might be lower than
him in degree of fiqh.

In regard of the rational, it has two views: First: When putting
(hadith) to test we found that the latter (hearer) might have inferred
some imports from a verse or a report to which some of the earlier ages
ulama’ and researchers could not reach. Had we permitted narration by
meaning a great difference might have appeared in the hadith, though the
narrator be of the opinion that no divergence is there.

Second: Had the narrator been permitted to exchange any of the

Messenger’s words with one of his own, it would have been permissible
for that reporting from him to change that very word with one of his
own. Rather this is more preponderant, as changing the narrator’s words
is nearer to be permitted than substituting any word uttered by the
legislator (Prophet), though this being in the third and fourth classes
(of narrators), as the result of all this shall be verily the
devaluation of the original words. It is quite certain that man, can
never secure himself against change and disagreement however sincerely
he strived to be trustworthy and honest in making his narration
identical to the origin. Consequently, when changes and divergences
continue from one to another, the last divergence would be so exorbitant
that no connection or relation would be left between the last narration
and original hadith.

In Sharh Tanqih al-fusul fi al-usul, al-Qarrafi says: On the contrary of
the view of Ibn Sirin and some other traditionsts, Abu al-Husayn, Abu
Hanifah and al-Shafi’i hold that it is permissible to report hadith by
meaning provided that no addition or omission be there in translation,
with its being neither more ambiguous nor more declarative, as the
purpose only be to make the meanings got by the hearer, regardless of
missing other than them. Whenever any addition or omission be made to
the narrator’s statement, that would mean something be added or
diminished from the Islamic Law, which is unanimously haram (unlawful).
And whenever the expression used in the hadith be manifest but the
narrator exchanges it with an obscure one, he would expose it to doubt,
entailing thus preference of another one over it due to its obscurity.
This being in accordance with the basis stating that should be
contradiction among the traditions regarding one rule (hukm), the more
manifest one would have preference over the obscure one. If the origin
of the hadith be plain, but be substituted by an obscure one by the
narrator, he would invalidate a good merit in it making it insustainable
in case of clash of views. Also when the hadith having an obscure
expression and he substitutes it with a more manifest one, he would thus
obligate for it the position of preference over other traditions, while
God’s hukm

(judgement) being to prefer other than it in case of clash of views. As
a consequence of this change, God’s judgement has been changed, which is
impermissible. This being the basis of these provisions, that when they
be fulfilled the controversy would be on permissibility, otherwise it is
unanimously impermissible. One of the pleas introduced by those
forbidding narration by meaning, being the hadith reported by al-Bara’
ibn \`Azib. <span id="_anchor_125"></span>125

The proof (hujjah) given by those permitting this practice, being that
the Companions used to give ears to the traditions without committing
them to writing or reiterating them, embarking after elapse of long
years on narrating them. In such case, man would decisively determine
that it is not possible to convey the very words uttered by the Prophet,
but only the meaning, since many traditions were reported with
miscellaneous expressions with oneness of denotation and episode. This
being the evidence given for permitting the reporting by meaning, and as
the term “Sunnh” cannot be taken as subject of worship like the term
Qur’an, so when the meaning attains exactitude, <span
id="_anchor_126"></span>126  no harm shall be there from missing that
which be not intended.

In his book Qawa’id al-tahdith, <span id="_anchor_127"></span>127
 al-Qasimi says:

To convey and relate hadith by meaning not by the very words (original
text), was permitted by some people among them being: Ali, Ibn Abbas,
Anas ibn Malik, Abu al-Darda’, Wathilah ibn al-Asqa and Abu Hurayrah,
with a large number of the Tabi’un, among whom we can refer to: Imam
Hasan al-Basri, al-Shi’bi, ‘Amr ibn Dinar, Ibrahim al-Nakha’i, Mujahid
and ‘Ikrimah.

There was much difference in the way and words used by the Sahabah in
narrating the hadith from the Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny). Some of them used to narrate
it completely, with some others narrating by meaning, and some citing it
abridged, beside some others making difference between every two words
with viewing it to be broad, if not being disagreeable with the original
meaning. All of them intend not to lie or falsify, but everyone seeking
the truth and to give the denotation of what he has heard, the fact
leading to the

hadith containing them. They used to say: “Falsity is to be counted
against that who exercised it internationally”. Umran ibn Muslim is
reported to have said: Some man said to al-Hasan: O Abu Sa’id, when you
relate any hadith, you deliver it with better context of sentences, more
eloquent expressions, more fluent language than any other one relating
it to us! He said: No harm in that if I hit the mark and give the
meaning intended. Al-Nadr ibn Shumayl said: “Hushaym was known of
committing grammatical mistakes, so I made his hadith look fine for you
– i.e. with the grammatical marks. Al-Nadr ibn Shumayl was a grammarian,
and Sufyan used to say: “When finding anyone intensifying in the hadith
words in a meeting, it should be realized that he intends to show off
himself so as to be distinguished among people. And a man kept on
inquiring Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan about the way of pronouncing a
letter in the hadith, when Yahya said to him: Nothing is there in the
world more dignified than the Book of Allah, the Exalted, the reciting
of which was permitted to be on seven readings (ahruf), so never
intensify.” <span id="_anchor_128 
 onmouseover="></span>128

Al-Bayhaqi reported on the authority of Makhul as saying: I and Abu
al-Azhar entered upon Wathilah ibn al-Asqa’ and said to him: Relate to
us a hadith you heard yourself from the Messenger of Allah, on condition
that it be devoid of falsity, addition and inadvertence! He said: Did
any of you read the Qur’an? We said: Yes, but we are not memorizing or
preserving it so accurately (word by word), and add to it or omit the
letters “waw” and “alif”. He said: This Qur’an amongst you, though being
written, but you fail to keep it safe from alteration, with alleging
that you add to and omit from it…so how would be the case with
traditions we heard from the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s
peace and benediction), only once in our life? You can suffice with the
hadith we relate to you by meaning.

Ibn Abi Layla used to narrate the hadith with different expressions
every time, without any isnad (chain of transmission), but only out of
what he memorized of traditions. All this was due to the fact that most
of the precedent learned men were never writing any hadith, and if any
had written it was only written for them after hearing it. Many of them
used to narrate

hadith by meaning, with expressing it through words of his own, that
would fall short of giving the full meaning. Most often the least change
(in the words) may alter the whole meaning and cause ambiguity in the
hadith, and it is known that al-Jumhur (Sunnites) have permitted
narration by meaning. <span id="_anchor_129"></span>129

In Sunan al-Tirmidhi, Makhul reported from Wathilah ibn al-Asqa’ as
saying: When we relate any hadith to you by meaning, it should be
sufficient for you. Al-Dhahabi, in Siyar A’lam al-nubala’, is reported
to have said: When I relate to you any hadith according to its meaning,
it is sufficient for you. <span id="_anchor_130"></span>130  Wukay’
<span id="_anchor_131"></span>131  reports also on the authority of
al-Rabi’ ibn Sabih, from al-Hasan, that he said: When you hit the mark
and reached the meaning, you must be satisfied with that. And he said:
Had the meaning not been so broad, people would have perished, and the
learned men used to compete each other by extent of memorization,
exactitude and verification during hearing (the hadith), though even
eminent leaders of schools could never be immune against error and
mistake. Sufyan al-Thawri <span id="_anchor_132"></span>132  is reported
to have said: Even when I myself tell you that I am narrating to you the
very ahadith as I heard (from the Prophet), never believe me, as it be
no more than the meaning. When it was said to him: O Abu Abd Allah,
relate to us (hadith) exactly as you heard. He would say: By Allah, this
by no means is possible, it is only the meaning, no more no less. He
also said: Had we intended to relate to you the hadith exactly as we
heard it, we would have never been able to relate even one hadith!

The trustworthy ulama hold that it is more proper to cite the hadith
with its (original) words, without making any change in them. But how
far is this when the course of events proved to be to the contrary!

Al-Qadi ‘Iyad says: “The door of narration by meaning should be closed
so as to prevent those unskillful (in this respect) but believing in his
skill, from imposing their control over hadith, as in the case of many
narrators, in the past and in the contemporary time…and Allah helps all
to succeed.

Researchers hold that riwayah by meaning should never include acts

of worship performed by pronouncing certain words, like takbirat
al-ihram (saying Allah is the Greater in the outset of prayers), and
tashahhudat (witnesses). But there being various words cited for
tashahhudat, the most widely-known of which are the following.

  
  
  

120. Among the Sahabah there were some permitting narration of hadith on
basis of meaning, like: Ibn Abbas and Anas. While among the Tabi'un
there were some who showed stiffness in regard of narration of hadith
with its very words, like Muhammad ibn Sirin, al-Qasim ibn Muhammad and
Raja' ibn Hayat. But some others showed leniency in this regard, such as
al-Hasan, al-Shi'bi and al-Nakha'i.

121. Knowing the minuteness of words and recognizing the degree of
difference among them, cannot be attained but only through being aware
and sure of the original words so as to be able to change them with
others. But the real reason behind narration of hadith on basis of
meaning, is forgetting some of the original words, the fact leading to
changing them. Since if the original words being preserved in their
places, changing them will be unjustifiable, as priority should be given
to narrating them, not other words.

122. What is strange here being that this hadith was reported in many
differing ways in wording and meaning, the citing of which I avoided for
sake of brevity, and the reader can see them in their due places. After
citing the Messenger's saying: "May God bless that who heard my
utterance and reported it as he heard it," Ibn al-Jawzi said: Reporting
the hadith in the way it was heard, can never be done but through
writing it, as committing to memory is mistrustful. Whenever Ahmad ibn
Hanbal was relating any hadith, it was said to him: Dictate it to us. He
would say: Never I do not dictate from other than the Book. Ali ibn
al-Midyani says: I was ordered by Ahmad ibn Hanbal not to relate
anything but from the Book (Talbis Iblis, p. 221).

123. Al-Iraqi, Fath al-maghib bi sharh Alfiyyat al-hadith, vol. III, p.
50, and this hadith undoubtedly contradicts the hadith: "May God have
mercy upon that who heard my saying …", but every group should support
its opinion by a certain hadith.

124. This is an excerpt from the Prophet's testament during Hijjat
al-Wada': "The attendant should inform the absent one, and the shahid
may inform that who is more conscious than him." In another narration:
"There may be an informed person who being more conscious than a
hearer". These ahadith were reported by al-Bukhari and others. On the
meaning of this hadith, I can refer to what al-Tirmidhi and al-Diya'
narrated of Zayd ibn Thabit's hadith, with a chain of transmitters
(marfu'): "May God bless that who on hearing any hadith from us, would
commit it to memory till informing it to another man. There may be a
bearer of fiqh to that who is more knowledgeable than him, and there may
be a bearer of fiqh, but not being a faqih. Also with the same meaning
the hadith: "May God bless a man who heard something from us and
reported it as he heard it … and there may be an informd man, who be
more conscious than a hearer". This hadith was reported by Ahmad and
al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Hibban.

125. The hadith of al-Bara' ibn 'Azib was recorded by al-Bukhari in his
Sahih, beside Muslim, al-Nasa'i and al-Tirmidhi.

126. If the meaning can be exact, but it is far-reaching!

127. Qawa'id al-tahdith, p. 207. I suffice with this number of
evidences. Anyone desiring to have more evidences can refer to
al-Jaza'iri's book.

128. It was a common practice among the Arabs to substitute some word
with another. It was reported that Dhu al-Rimmah said to Qays ibn Umar:
Write down my poetry, as I prefer committing to writing over
memorization … as an Arab man may forget a word which he spent a full
night on seeking it. then he replaces it with another word having its
meaning, transmitting it to people (Naqd al-shi'r al-Jahili, pp. 180,
181, of al-Shaykh al-Khidr Husayn).

129. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 76.

130. In vol. III, p. 259.

131. Wukay' ibn al-Jarrah, is an eminent leader and muhaddith of Iraq,
in regard of whom Ahmad ibn Hanbal said: I have never seen better
comprehender of knowledge, nor better memorizer than Wukay'. He was a
thiqah, precise and godly. He died in 197 H.

132. Sufyan al-Thawri was the master of huffaz. He was faqih of Kufah.
In his regard al-Qattan said: I have never met anyone better memorizing
(of hadith) than Wukay', and he was superior to Malik in everything. He
died in Basrah, in 161 H.
