Forms of Tashahhud:
===================

  
  

Ibn Mas’ud’s Tashahhud: In the two Sahihs, Abd Allah ibn Mas’ud is
reported to have said: The Messenger of Allah has taught me the witness
(tashahhud) from hand to hand as teaching me the Qur’anic verse in this
form (which is reported too by the authors of Sunan):

##### التحيات لله و الصلوات و الطيبات ، السلام عليک آيها النبي و رحمة الله و برکاته، السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين ، اشهد ان لا اله الا الله و ان محمدا عبده و رسوله. {dir="rtl"}

In another narration, he added: “And he dictated it to me word by word.”
Again in another one: If you say this thing or perform that, you have in
fact performed your prayers. This form was chosen by Abu Hanifah, Ahmad,
and most of the traditionists and ulama.

Ibn Abbas’s Tashahhud: Muslim and authors of Sunan have reported on the
authority of Ibn Abbas, beside al-Shafi’i in his book al-Umm, that he
(Ibn Abbas) said: The Messenger of Allah used to teach us the following
as if teaching us a surah of the Qur’an, saying: Say:

##### التحيات المبارکات الصلوات الطيبات لله . السلام عليک ايها النبي و رحمة الله و برکاته. السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين . اشهد ان لا اله الا الله و اشهد ان محمدا رسول الله. {dir="rtl"}

Tashahhud of Umar ibn al-Khattab: In al-Muwatta’, Malik reported from
Ibn Shahab, from Urwah ibn al-Zubayr, from Abd al-Rahman ibn Abd al-Qari
that he heard Umar ibn al-Khattab declaring from over the pulpit: Say:

##### التحيات الزاکيات لله. الطيبات الصلوات لله. {dir="rtl"}

Al-Sarakhsi in al-Mabsut reports:

##### التحيات الصلوات الطيبات. السلام عليک ايها النبي و رحمة الله و برکاته. السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين. اشهد ان لا اله الا الله و اشهد ان محمدا رسول الله. {dir="rtl"}

Malik says: The best tashahhud is that of Umar ibn al-Khattab, since he
uttered it on the minbar (pulpit) in the presence of the Companions, who
didn’t disapprove that of him unanimously. This tashahhud is reported
also by Abu Dawud and Ibn Mardawayh through a chain of narrators.

Tashahhud of Abu Sa’id al-Khudri:

Abu Sa’id then said: We used not to write but the Qur’an and tashahhud.
<span id="_anchor_133"></span>133

Tashahhud of Jabir: In Jabir’s hadith (confirmed by al-Hakim), that is
reported by al-Nasa’i, Ibn Majah and al-Tirmidhi in al-‘Ilal, he said:
The Messenger of Allah used to teach us tashahhud in the same manner as
teaching a surah of the Qur’an:

##### باسم الله و بالله ، التحيات ... الح . {dir="rtl"}

Tashahhud of A’ishah:

In al-Muwatta’, Malik reports from A’ishah, the Prophet’s wife, that she
used to say in tashahhud:

##### (التحيات الطيبات لله الزاکيات لله) {dir="rtl"}

dropping the word (Allah) after (التحيات و الصلوات) contrary to what is
cited in the hadith approved by Umar and Ibn Mas’ud, which is supported
by sanad. She even added to hadith of Umar the words (وحده لا شريک له)
which she confirmed too in the hadith of Abu Musa that was reported by
Muslim.

Tashahhud of Abu Musa al-Ash’ari: Muslim and Abu Dawud reported that Abu
Musa was citing tashahhud in this way: <span id="_anchor_134"></span>134

##### (التحيات الطيبات الصلوات لله وحده لا شريک له). {dir="rtl"}

Tashahhud of Samurah ibn Jundab:

##### (التحيات الطيبات و الصلوات و الملک لله ... الخ). {dir="rtl"}

Tashahhud of Ibn Umar: In al-Muwatta’, Malik reported on the authority
of Nafi’ that Ibn Umar used to say in tashahhud:

##### بسم الله التحيات لله الصلوات لله، السلام علي النبي ... الخ) . {dir="rtl"}

(with dropping the letter (kaf) of addressing and the word (ayyuha).
Then Nafi’ said: When finishing his tashahhud and intending to say
taslim, he would say:

##### السلام علي النبي و رحمة الله و برکاته، السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين. {dir="rtl"}

Which has reiteration of tashahhud, and was reported by al-Bukhari on
the authority of Ibn Mas’ud under “bab al-isti’dhan” (asking permission)
stating that he said at the end of it: “and I witness that Muhammad is
His servant and apostle.” When he (S) was alive, but after his demise we
used to say: “peace be upon the Prophet.”

In his comment on this, Ibn Hajar said: Through the chains of
transmission of Ibn Mas’ud’s hadith we can observe words indicating a
kind of separation between his (S) lifetime, that was expressed by terms
of addressing, and the post-obit period when it was referred to him by
expressions of third person singular (absent). Under “bab al-isti’dhan”
in Sahih al-Bukhari, it is reported on the authority of Abu Mu’ammar,
from Ibn Mas’ud who, after citing hadith of tashahhud, said: We used to
say this when he (S) was still alive, but after his demise we would say:
“peace be upon the Prophet.”

Al-Sabki in Sharh al-Minhaj is reported to have said: If what is
reported from the Sahabah be true, it would indicate that to address the
word salam (peace) after the word al-Nabi (the Prophet) is not
obligatory. So it

should be said ‘peace be upon the Prophet’. Al-Hafiz said: This is
undoubtedly correct.

Abd al-Raziq said: Ibn Jarih told us saying: ‘Ata’ informed us and said:
The Companions used to read, during the lifetime of the Prophet: Peace
be upon you O Prophet (al-salam alayka ayyuha al-Nabi). When he passed
away they started to say: peace be upon the Prophet, and this being a
veracious isnad.

##### (التحيات لله السلام عليک ايها النبي و رحمة الله. السلام علينا و علي عباد الله الصالحين. اشهد ان لا اله الا الله و اشهد ان محمدا عبده و رسوله ... (او) اشهد ان محمد رسول الله ). {dir="rtl"}

Regarding this diversity, al-Qadi <span id="_anchor_135"></span>135
 said: This indicates that when one drops a word that is already dropped
in some narrated tashahhudat, his tashahhud would be correct. Based on
this, it is permissible to say: The least satisfactory words to be
uttered in tashahhud being:

These were nine forms of tashahhud <span id="_anchor_136"></span>136
 reported from the Companions that having differed in the words. Had
they been among the verbal traditions reported by meaning, we would have
said, maybe! But they are among the mutawatir (successive) acts that
were performed several times everyday by all the Companions, who were
numbering tens of thousands. The noteworthy point here is that every
narrator of each tashahhud claims that the Messenger used to teach him
tashahhud as teaching the Qur’an, and that tashahhud of Umar was uttered
by him from over the Minbar of the Messenger of Allah, before all the
Sahabah without being disapproved by any of them, as reported by Malik
in al-Muwatta’.

What is noteworthy too being the fact that these tashahhudat, despite
divergence in their words, multiplicity of their forms and abundance of
their narrators, were all devoid of sending benediction upon the
Prophet. The Companions, as reported by Ibrahim al-Nakha’i, were
sufficed with saying tashahhud and: peace be upon you O Prophet and
mercy of Allah. There was

disagreement among the Sunnah leaders regarding the obligation of
sending benediction upon the Prophet in the obligatory (daily) prayers:
Abu Hanifah and his followers never consider it obligatory while
al-Shafi’i made it a provision (for accepting the prayers)!

In al-Bahr al-zakhir, Ibn Nujaym says: The obligation implied in the
holy verse: “Send blessings on him”, being prescribing it only once
throughout the whole life whether during the salat or in any other time,
as the ordinance never necessitates any repetition. This opinion got the
agreement and concurrence the of all ulama’. It is held by al-Sarakhsi
in al-Mabsut, Ibn Hammam in Sharh Fath al-Qadir, al-Qastallani in Irshad
al-sari, and al-Qadi ‘Iyad in al-Shifa’. The only exception from this,
being al-Shafi’i who reported that the Prophet said: Whoever sends not
blessing on me, his salat is verily invalid. But he has neither
authority for proving this saying, nor a sunnah to be followed. And he
was reviled by a group of ulama’ among whom being al-Tabari al-Qushayri,
with being disapproved by a follower of his same school of thought,
called al-Khitabi who said: It is not obligatory, and I have no
knowledge of any other example (qudwah) confirming this. Besides, the
tashahhudat reported from the Sahabah were devoid of this saying. And in
regard of the hadith: “Invalid is the salat of that who never sends
blessing on me”, it was considered weak by the traditionists. Also the
hadith narrated by Ibn Mas’ud: “Whoever performs any prayer without
sending benediction on me and my household, his salat shall not be
accepted.” Al-Daraqutni said: It is an excerpt from a saying of Abu
Ja’far Muhammad al-Baqir ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn, the full text of whose
statement being thus: If I perform any salat without sending benediction
on the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny) and on his household I am sure it shall never be completed.”
<span id="_anchor_137"></span>137

  
  

133. Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Taqyid al-'ilm, p. 93.

134. Hattan ibn Abd Allah al-Raqqashi is reported to have said: I have
performed prayers with (behind) Abu Musa al-Ash'ari. After completing
the salat he said: Don't you know what to say in your salat? The
Messenger of Allah has addressed us once, explaining for us our Sunnah,
and teaching us how to pray, stating the tashahhud thus: The good
greetings and benedictions be to Allah, and peace be upon you … etc
(al-tahiyyat al-tayyibat, al-salawat li Allah, al-salam alayk … etc.),
Sahih Muslim, vol. II, p. 13.

135 Al-Mughni, vol. I, p. 575, and al-Sharh al-kabir.

136. These were the tashahhuds I could enumerate. And the leaders of
fiqh have not concurred on one of them, but disagreed regarding them,
with Abu Hanifah and Ahmad choosing tashahhud of Ibn Mas'ud, while Malik
selecting tashahhud of Umar ibn al-Khattab, and al-Shafi'i
preponderating that of Ibn Abbas.

137. Al-Shifa', vol. II, p. 55.
