Word of Monotheism:
===================

  
  
  
  
  

The same belief held by these Imams regarding sending of benediction

on the Prophet, is also held in respect of word of tawhid (No god is
there but Allah). Al-Allamah Sa’id ibn Hajji in his treatise: al-Kalam
al-muntaqa fima yata’allaq bi kalimat al-taqwa la ilaha illa Allah”
says: Concerning its rule, in “Fakihat al-qulab wa al-afwah” (Fruit of
hearts and mouths), he said: “The believer, for his part, should mention
it once throughout his whole life with the obligation intention.” I do
not intend to elaborate further on this point, so as not to digress to
that which is out of our topic of discussion.

The faqih traditionist Rashid Rida (may God’s mercy be upon him), in his
discussion on traditions of the “ashrat al-sa’ah” (conditions of the
hour), said in his Tafsir: <span id="_anchor_138"></span>138

“Undoubtedly, most of the traditions were narrated by meaning as is
commonly known and agreed by the ulama’. Its evidence can be obviously
seen in the difference among narrators of the Sihah regarding the words
of the same hadith, even the abridged ones, and the words inserted and
foisted into some of these traditions in al-mudrajat, which meaning
whatever included in the traditions reported by the narrators. Based on
this, each one of them used to narrate according to his comprehension
(from the hadith), that which might be mistaken, beside some others
interpreting whatever they comprehended with adding some words of his
own. Till he said: Is it unusual then to see this amount of confusion
and contradiction befalling those traditions reported by meaning
according to extent of comprehension of narrators?

When his opinion was sought once about that who said: No more than 12 or
14 traditions were confirmed and proved to be uttered by the Prophet, he
replied: <span id="_anchor_139"></span>139  This claim is incorrect, and
no one has uttered such words. But this or lower than in being among the
traditions whose words have successively reached us.

There is no harm to state here an article published for me in al-Risalah
Journal, issue No. 957, issued on the fifth of November 1951, as a
correction for what is published by Professor Abd al-Salam Harun in
al-Jahiz’s book al-Bayan wa al-tabyin, as follows:

### Listening to Hadith Not to Songs:

Throughout reading of newspapers, man may come across
criticism-instigating things that need to be corrected. But he foregoes
them without any consideration, since if he undertakes criticizing or
correcting whatever he discovers of errors, in this case he would never
find enough time, nor the tranquillity required for doing this job’.
Sometimes he may be energetic, taking the initiative to expose every
mistake he may find, especially when coming across a matter regarding
which it is improper to keep silent or be inattentive.

As an example for this, when I was reading in the 2nd volume of al-Bayan
wa al-tabyin of al-Jahiz that was verified and expounded by Abd al-Salam
Harun, I came across in page 322 of it the following:

“Ibn Awn said: I came across three men showing strictness toward hearing
and three others showing leniency (in regard of maghani – i.e. songs).
Those showing leniency are: al-Hasan, al-Shi’bi and al-Nakha’i whereas
those showing strictness being: Muhammad ibn Sirin, al-Qasim ibn
Muhammad and Raja’ ibn Hayat. <span id="_anchor_140"></span>140

Al-Ustadh Harun has taken hearing in this report to mean hearing of
songs! Preferring to use the non-Arab word maghani he found in some
copies of usul books, than using it with its neglected pronunciation
that was cited in some other copies of usul books. He embarked then on
interpreting it according to his surmise in a way unknown to be pleasing
or angering the eminent linguists and grammarians!

In explaining the word he said: “Maghani is the plural of maghna – a
mimi root of the verb: ghanna – yughanni! (to sing). In the Taymuriyyah
version the word al-ma’ani (the meanings) with the obsolete letter
(‘ayn) is a misinterpretation, i.e. this word was stated in the version
of Koberly Library (maghani), while it was cited in the Taymuriyyah
version with the obsolete (muhmalah), which is a misinterpretation
(tahrif).

That which is regarded by this man (Harun) as tahrif is verily the
correct word, as veracity of the word al-ma’ani (meanings) with the
obsolete

‘ayn is confirmed in these two versions, and hearing here is hearing the
Prophetic hadith, not hearing the songs!

This statement is set forth by Ibn Awn, due to the fact that conveying
hadith of the Messenger of Allah with its genuine words or meaning was a
controversial topic among the Companions, which continued and reached
the Tabi’un and those succeeding them. Hence, the Companions were
divided into two groups: the first permitting narration of hadith by
meaning, among whom being Ali, Ibn Abbas and Anas and their followers.
And the second one who was represented by Ibn Umar, was forbidding this
practice. Concerning the Tabi’an, some of them were so strict in regard
of narrating the hadith with its original words, such as Muhammad ibn
Sirin, al-Qasim ibn Muhammad and Raja’ ibn Hayat. Whereas some others
were showing leniency in this respect, like al-Hasan, al-Shi’bi and
al-Nakha’i. <span id="_anchor_141"></span>141  Hence Ibn Awn uttered the
above-mentioned statement, that was reported by al-Jahiz, and
misunderstood by al-Ustadh Abd al-Salam Harun.

138. In vol. IX, p. 506.

139. Al-Manar journal, vol. XXXIV, p. 260.

140. See p. 77 of this book (Arabic version).

141. Jami' bayan al-'ilm wa fadlih, of Ibn Abd al-Barr, vol. I, p. 80;
Tawjih al-nazar, p. 308. Ibn Sirin was told that al-Hasan and al-Shi'bi
and al-Nakha'I used to narrate by meaning, when he said: If they narrate
in the way they heard (hadith) it would be much better; al-Kifayah of
al-Khatib, p. 206.
