Disadvantage of Narrating Hadith Through Meaning
================================================

While the Prophet’s traditions – as previously referred to – were
transmitted according to their denotations, and their narrators were
permitted to increase or decrease in them, with advancing and delaying
their words – accepting the solecist ones – all this caused a great loss
and disadvantage to hadith.

In his book Tawjih al-nazar, <span id="_anchor_149"></span>149
al-Allamah al-Jaza’iri says:

After researching and investigation, it was found out that many among
those narrating by meaning have fallen short of conveying the full
denotation of hadith. This fact led some of them (Companions) to
declare: It is necessary to close the door of narration through meaning
so as not to empower those incompetent from among those believing
themselves to be doing well, as occurred for a large number of narrators
in the past and recently.

The loss caused by narration through meaning was so tremendous that it
was considered one of factors of disunity among the Ummah. One of the
authors <span id="_anchor_150"></span>150 said in the introduction to
his book in this regard: Disagreement occurred to the Ummah in eight
aspects, from which all aspects of difference are produced and ramified.
First: Commonness of words and their liability to numerous
interpolations. Second: Real meaning and metaphor. Third: Singularity
and combination. Fourth: Specification and generality. Fifth: Riwayah
(narration) and naql (transmission). Sixth: Practicing ijtihad in regard
of any issue for which no text (nass) was revealed. Seventh: Nasikh

(abrogating) and mansukh (abrogated). Eighth: Permissibility and
extensiveness. And under bab “Momentary disagreement in respect of
narration and transmission,” he said: The benefit intended to be got
from this bab can never be attained but only through recognizing the
defects inflicting the hadith and altering its meaning. These defects
may delude people to think of presence of contradiction in hadith, or
may even create an ambiguity compelling the scholars to seeking the
remote interpretation. We are going to mention number of these defects,
and cite an example or examples for each one that can be inferred for
other ones, God-willing. <span id="_anchor_151"></span>151 Al-Batliyosi
is reported to have said: Know that the hadith transmitted from the
Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny) and from his Companions and their followers, is inflicted with
eight defects: First: Corruption in isnad (chain). Second: In respect of
narration of hadith according to its meaning with ignoring its wording.
Third: Ignorance of grammatical syntax. Fourth: In respect of tashif
(misconstruction). Fifth: Deleting something from the hadith without
which the meaning can never be perfect. Sixth: The narrator’s reporting
the hadith with neglecting to convey the reason necessitating it, or
explain the case entailing its citation. Seventh: The narrator hearing a
part of the hadith and missing some other part. Eighth: Reporting the
hadith from books without mentioning names of the shaykhs (authors).
<span id="_anchor_152"></span>152

### First Defect:

It is corruption in isnad (chain of narrators). This being the most
widely-known defect among people, to the extent that some of them may
imagine <span id="_anchor_153"></span>153 that when isnad be correct,
the hadith be veracious! But the truth is not so, since it may happen
that the hadith narrators be known of reliability and true faith and
honesty, without being liable to any defamation or suspicion in regard
of their transmission. Despite all this, their traditions may be
indeliberately inflicted with miscellaneous accidents. And the isnad may
be

afflicted with corruption in several aspects, of which are: Irsal and
absence of succession. Or that some of the hadith narrators being among
heretics, or accused of falsity and dishonesty, or known of being idiot
and negligent, or be fanatic to some of the Companions, averse to
others. So in case of being widely-known of being fanatic, reporting
then a hadith regarding preference of those whom he was siding, without
being reported through any other chain, he should be viewed with
suspicion and doubt. Because extravagance in one’s fanaticism toward
that of whom he is taking the part, and extremity in lovingness would
lead him to invent and fabricate the hadith, or if not fabricating he
may alter it and change some of its words. That which prompts one to
doubt the transmission of the narrator is being sure of his covetousness
to the world and rushing into attaining favoritism near the kings.
Anyone being on this condition, shall never be immune against changing,
alteration, fabrication of hadith and falsity covetting for gaining some
(worldly) profit. <span id="_anchor_154"></span>154 The Messenger of
Allah (S) has drawn the attention toward what we referred to by saying:
“You will be confronted with a multiplying number of traditions after
me. Therefore, when a hadith is narrated to you, compare it with the
Book of Allah; accept that which agrees with it and reject that which
contradicts it.

It is reported that a group of Persians and Jews <span
id="_anchor_155"></span>155 and others, when noticing emergence of Islam
and its spread everywhere, with vanquishing and subduing all nations,
realizing their inability to challenge or oppose it, resorted to
trickery and intrigue, showing off, unwillingly, Islam and faith,
engaging themselves in devotion and abstemiousness. When their conduct
and practices found way among people, being approved by them, they
embarked on fabricating traditions and reports, causing thus people to
be divided into several groups and parties.

When Umar ibn Al-Khattab be so strict in approving the hadith,
threatening to punish whoever abundantly narrating it during his time,
with presence of many Companions, before the appearance of the heresies,
at a time praised by the Messenger of Allah (S), so how would be the
case with

the times censured by him! with multiplication of heresies and scarcity
of trusteeship and honesty.

### Second Defect:

Which is reporting the hadith on the basis of its meaning without caring
for the very words uttered by the Prophet, in which a great number of
errors are found. Out of this practice horrible seditions were
originated, as most of the narrators used to disregard the words uttered
by the Prophet (S) with conveying to their successors the meaning
intended by him through other words and expressions. Hence we may notice
the same hadith, having the same meaning, reported with miscellaneous
words and different expressions, with some of them having additional
words.

But divergence of the hadith words may emerge due to the Prophet’s
reiterating it in several various occasions. Such kind of hadith is out
of scope of our discussion, but that which matters here is the
divergence among the words used in transmitting the hadith according to
its meaning. The faulty aspect in this regard lies in the fact that
people differ in their shapes and complexions and other aspects and
conditions. It may happen that the narrator hearing the hadith from the
Prophet (S) or from other than him, may portray its meaning in his mind
in a way contrary to that intended by the Prophet. And when expressing
that meaning imagined in his mind by other words (of his own), he would
be thus narrating the opposite of what he had heard without intending
this on purpose. Because the same utterance may bear two or three
meanings, and may contain a common word having one denotation and its
opposite, like his (S) saying: “Cut the moustache and let alone the
beard.” In such case, the Prophet may intend some specific meaning while
the narrator may conceive and express some other meaning. If he giving
the very meaning of what he heard without using the original wording,
this would mean his narrating form him (S) is the contrary of what he
intended indeliberately. But if he conveys it with the original words,
the latter hearer might comprehend

from him that which was not conceived by the former. The Prophet (S)
came to be aware of this to happen after him, so he warned against it by
saying: “May Allah bless whoever hearing my speech, and conveying it
then as he heard it. The propagator might be more conscious than the
hearer.”

### Third Defect:

Which is ignorance of syntax and principles and metaphors of Arab speech
as many of hadith narrators were unaware of the Arabic language, making
no difference between names in the nominative case and object (mansub)
and lowered case. Had the Arabs determined for every meaning a specific
word denoting it distinctively, they would have been excused in not
learning the rules of syntax, being needless to recognize the wrong from
the right. But the Arabs may differentiate between any two opposite
meanings by marks only, though the word be one, as the raf’ and nasb
distinguish between subject and object. The narrator might report a
hadith, making a word in nominative case as a subject, and the other as
an object. Then the hearer would convey the hadith from him with making
the opposite, exchanging the subject with the object, unknowingly, in a
way changing the meaning to the contrary of what was intended by the
first narrator.

### Fourth Defect:

It is tashif <span id="_anchor_156"></span>156 (mispronunciation), which
causes tremendous corruption and distortion to the hadith. It is
originated from the fact that numerous narrators can never observe
exactitude in the letters (huruf), but transmit them without any
constraint or revision, depending only on their memorization. When the
narrator neglects what he wrote for some time, being in need then for
reading what he committed to writing, or some other one reading it, it
may happen that he confusing the vowel points (harakat), reversing thus
the meanings into their opposites, or the letter might be misplaced by
another one due to absence of exactitude, giving the contrary

meaning of that one intended of it. All this is due to the fact that the
Arabic script being highly suspicious, as sometimes only the vowel point
or dot may distinguish between two opposite meanings, like their saying:
mukrim – with kasrah under ra’ – for the subject, and mukram – with
fathah on ra\` – for the object. And also using the word afra’ with fa’
for the thick-haired man, while using the word aqra’ (bald) with qaf for
that whose head being without hair. It is reported in a hadith that the
Messenger of Allah (S) was afra’. There are witty sayings in this regard
reported by traditionists, like what is reported by Yazid ibn Harun as
saying: “We were sitting around Bishr ibn Mu’awiyah”, while his name
being Bisr ibn Mu’awiyah. Also Abd al-Razzaq is reported to have said:
They fight Khor Kirman, while it is Khoz (with the dotted zay). There
are too many examples for such kind of tashif, on which al-Daraqutni
compiled a famous book, under the title. Tashif al-Hafiz.

A tender example for this can be found in Sahih Muslim, thus: On the
Doomsday we will be over so and so – see, which has no clear meaning. It
was reported in this way in many copies, while the correct form be: “On
the Doomsday we will be over heaps, which is the plural of a heap,
meaning a commanding place. It was perverted by some narrators, when
recording it thus: On the Doomsday we will be over so and so (kadha).
When being read by someone, who could not get its true meaning! he wrote
on the top of the book: Look! asking the reader to consider about its
meaning, drawing his attention to it. When this marginal note was read
by another narrator, he counted it to be of the book, annexing it then
to the text of the book.

### Fifth Defect:

Which is dropping something from the hadith without which it can never
give full meaning or be perfect. Numerous examples of such defect are
reported in the traditions, like the one reported about Ibn Mas’ud, that
when asked about the night of jinn, he said: No one of us attended it.
Through another chain (tariq), it is reported that he saw some people of
the Zitt, when

he exclaimed: These are the most resembling people to the jinn whom I
saw at the night of jinn. This second hadith indicates his attending it,
while the former one indicating his non-attending it.

As is obviously seen, the two traditions are contradictory to each
other. The reason behind this contradiction lies in the fact that the
narrator reporting the former hadith has dropped from it a word reported
by another one, while the original text of the hadith: (he said): “No
one of us attended it except me”.

### Sixth Defect:

It is caused by the narrator’s reporting the hadith with neglecting to
cite the reason necessitating it, creating thus an ambiguity in the
hadith or contradiction to another one.

It is reported by some narrators, that the Aranites who apostatized from
Islam and invaded (tribe of) Luqahah, were brought to him. He gave his
orders to mutilate their hands and feet, and scoop out their eyes, with
leaving them alone at the region of Hurrah, seeking a drink but never
given it till they died. This, while many traditions are reported
through various chains and ways confirming his forbidding the mayhem and
disfiguring of the body of human being. Such contradiction has befallen
the hadith because that who narrated the first hadith forgot or
neglected to convey the reason obligating its citation, and pushing the
Prophet to do so. The same hadith was reported by another narrator, who
revealed that he (the Prophet) has punished them in this way since they
disfigured his herdsmen, so he retaliated by punishing them with the
same thing done by them.

### Seventh Defect:

It occurs by the narrator’s hearing a part of the hadith but missing
some other part, like what is reported that ‘A’ishah told that Abu
Hurayrah narrated that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: “If evil omen is
really there it

should be in three (things): the house, woman and horse”. <span
id="_anchor_157"></span>157 This hadith contradicts his (S) saying:
“There are neither infection, nor vermin, nor yellow things nor ghoul”.
Further many traditions are reported from him forbidding from drawing
evil omen. Thereat ‘A’ishah became angry saying: By God the Messenger of
Allah never said this at all, but he said: “People of the pre-Islamic
era (jahiliyyah) say that if evil omen is really there, it should be in
three things: The house, woman and horse”...and when Abu Hurayrah
entered, he heard the second part of the hadith not hearing its first
part. No one can deny the occurrence of this, since the Prophet (S) used
to state, in his meeting, the reports in a relating way, telling about
that practice unwanted by him with a commanding form not a forbidding
one, never making it a principle in religion or a rule to be followed.
And such conduct was obviously observed through his acts and well-known
in his utterances.

### Eighth Defect:

Which is reporting the traditions from the hadith books, without meeting
the shaykhs (scholars of hadith) or hearing from the Imams (leaders of
schools). This kind of defect is verily a great misfortune afflicting
the Din and causing it severe detriment. Because so many people show
much indulgence toward it, with most of them depending mainly on the
shaykh’s permission without trying to meet him, and correcting the
traditions under his hands, referring then to drafted suhuf and books,
to take from them, without being aware of their veracity.

It may happen sometimes that the traditions he reports contradict those
narrated by his shaykh, by perverting the letters and changing the
words, and unjustly ascribing everything to his shaykh.

This characteristic became nowadays the main distinguishing feature of
the knowledge of most people, in a way rendering them devoid of nothing
except names of books. <span id="_anchor_158"></span>158

This point constitutes the end of the excerption we quoted from al-

Batliyosi’s book about the accidental disagreement among Muslims, in
respect of riwayah. We have to refer again to al-Allamah al-Jaza’iri,
who kept on awaiting us to tell us what is left of his talk concerning
the detriment of narrating the hadith on the basis of its meaning, by
saying:

Know that a large number of scholars, in various fields of knowledge,
realized and complained against the detriment of riwayah (narration) by
meaning, the severest of which being in hadith and fiqh (jurisprudence)
due to their high significance. Unsound utterances were ascribed to many
eminent scholars, and were used by their opponents as a pretext to
vilify and ridicule them with. But after long investigation and
verification, it was proved that these sayings were never uttered by
them but only attributed to them through traditions reported from them
on basis of meaning by a narrator who fell short of expressing exactly
what they said, entailing thus the emergence of such confusion.

Al-Allamah Najm al-Din Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Harrani al-Hanbali has also
suffered a great loss in his creed (madhhab) because of narration
through meaning.

So he said at the end of his book Sifat al-mufti under a chapter he
dedicated for exposing the defects of compilation and other than it, so
as the mufti (one who issues verdicts) would know how to deal with the
reported narrations, and conceive what the discloser intending to say,
so that his reporting of the madhhab rules and ascribing to the Imam or
others be correct.

“Know that the biggest perils in the traditional compilation being to
neglect the transmission of the very original words, and be content with
conveying the meanings with the narrator’s failure in duly conveying the
intention of the first speaker through its very words. The other reasons
may be ramified from this reason, since to determine fulfilment of what
the first speaker intended through very wording, or the writer by his
book with the narrators’ authenticity, depends negation of concealment,
dedication, abrogation, advancement and delaying (of words), commonness,
permission-

giving, estimation, transmission and rational contradiction. It is
unsafe for every transmission to be afflicted with some of the reasons,
that neither we nor the reporter can assert confidently their
non-existence, nor can we suspect their absence, nor there be any
evidence denying them, nor can we determine through it the speaker’s
intention, but we only suppose or imagine it. Whereas when his very
wording reported by itself with its reading, date and causes, <span
id="_anchor_159"></span>159 this peril or most of it would vanish in
general. Thereat suspicion in it would be only in the transmission of
the truth-secker, who may be excused once due to the claim of necessity
of inflection for apparent reasons, the practice that is sufficient in
the suppositive questions and most of the minor issues. <span
id="_anchor_160"></span>160

I introduce herewith some valuable words on narration of hadith, with
which I conclude this important chapter of my book:

Al-Khitabi said: It is impermissible to substitute any word with a more
expository one, since the lawmaker may intent to express his intention
through explicit words once, or through implicit ones another time, and
reversely too.

Ibn Hazm is reported to have said: The rule to be followed in reporting
any hadith from the Prophet (S) is to cite it with its original wording,
without any change or alteration, but only in one case – when the
narrator investigating and verifying the hadith, recognizing its
denotation with certainty. Only then when he be questioned he would give
verdict (fatwa) on the basis of its meaning and obligation saying: The
Messenger of Allah (S) judged to do so and so, permitted so and so
(act), forbade from (doing) so and so, and prohibited so and so... and
what is obligatory in this issue being that which is reported from the
Prophet (S), which is so and so. The same is true in respect of the
rules stated in the Qur’an with no difference. There is unanimity among
all Muslims that it is permissible for everyone to tell of something in
accordance with the Qur’anic verse, and cite it (verse) with other than
its wording. But for that narrating and ascribing the hadith to the
Prophet (S), intending to propagate what is reported to him from the
Prophet (S), it is unlawful for him but to investigate and use the very
words he heard,

without substituting even one letter with the other, though being of the
same meaning. Nor is he allowed to advance forward a letter, nor to
delay another, the fact that is true also in case of one intending to
recite or learn a Qur’anic verse, with no difference.

As a proof for this, it is reported that the Prophet (S) taught al-Bara’
ibn ‘Azib a supplication containing an expression: and You Prophet whom
You sent. When al-Bara’ wanted to read it before the Prophet, he said:
“and by Your messenger whom You sent. The Prophet said: “No (it is not
so), but: and your Prophet whom You sent,” <span
id="_anchor_161"></span>161 ordering him not to use the word messenger
(rasul) instead of ‘Prophet’ (nabi), so as not to change the meaning,
while he being a messenger of religion. So how it would be permissible
for some foolish ignorant people to claim that he (S) used to permit the
use of “Forgiving, Merciful” or Hearer, Knower” instead of “Mighty,
Wise” in the holy Qur’an, while forbidding from doing so in a
supplication other than the Qur’an, despite the fact that Allah says
informing for His Prophet: “Say (O Muhammad): It is not for me to change
it of my own accord.” (10:15) ... and no change is there greater than
inserting a word instead of another. <span id="_anchor_162"></span>162

### I am Delegated with the Universal Speech

In his exposition of the Messenger’s saying: “I delegated with universal
words”, Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani in Fath al-Bari <span
id="_anchor_163"></span>163 says: No prophet is there but only that who
was given beside the signs the like of them in which people can trust,
but what I am given was but a revelation Allah revealed to me. So I hope
to have more followers than they have on the Doomsday.

The restriction in his saying: “But what I am given was but...”
indicates that the Qur’an being the greatest, most beneficial and
everlasting of the miracles, due to its including the invitation
(da’wah) and hujjah (authority) and perpetual utilization for ever. So
since nothing is there to be resembling it, not to say be equal to it,
and every book other than it be nothing

when compared to it, it is said: From al-Bukhari’s citation of this
hadith in the wake of the precedent one – i.e. I am delegated with the
universal speech – it is conceived that in his view what is intended by
the ‘universal speech’ is the Qur’an, which is not necessary as there is
no doubt in the Qur’an being implied in his statement: “I am delegated
with the universal speech.” But the dispute is verily whether this
includes other than the Qur’an, from the Prophet’s utterance or not? The
examples cited for the universal speech (jawami’ al-kalim) can be found
in the holy Qur’anic verses: “And for you there is (security of) life in
(the law of) retaliation O. ye men of understanding, so that ye may
guard yourself (against evil)”, and “And whoever obeyeth God and His
apostle, and feareth God, and keepeth duty (unto) Him, these! they are
the victorious”... beside other verses. And from among the Prophetic
traditions, we can refer to hadith of ‘A’ishah: “Every act not related
to our affair is rejected”. And the hadith: “Every condition not stated
in the Book of Allah is verily void,” beside the hadith: “When I give
you any order, you should fulfill of it that which is in your capacity.”
Also we can refer to al-Miqdam’s hadith:” Son of Adam has never filled a
receptacle worse than his abdomen,” beside other traditions whose
mention is out of scope here. The only authentic traditions being those
with whose words the narrators can never dispose. The only method to
recognize this is when the chains of transmission of the hadith being
lessened and its words be in agreement, since when the former be
multiple, the latter will be rarely in agreement. Because most of the
narrators used to report hadith on the basis of its meaning in the way
seeming as duly fulfilled to any of them. This is resulted from the fact
that most of them never used to write down (hadith), and after elapse of
long time with the meaning being portrayed in mind without remembering
the very words (of the hadith). In that case the narrator would convey
the hadith on the basis of meaning for the sake of propagation after
which, and through the context of that better memorizing it, it would be
realized that he (the former) has never conveyed the full meaning
intended of the hadith.

For strengthening certainty in the extreme detriment caused by not
committing the hadith to writing during lifetime of the Prophet (S), and
that many words used in his traditions were changed with many of them
being lost, I cite, in the conclusion of this chapter, the strongest
evidence that can confirm veracity of my claim. This evidence is taken
from the distortion caused by narration in the farewell sermon, given by
the Prophet at the end of his life, after twenty-three years of his
mission in which he summed up his great recommendations and valuable
instructions. This sermon was addressed on a day in which all the
Companions gathered, numbering about a hundred and fifty thousand. So it
was more than logical and certain that this sermon (khutbah) be
all-inclusive, preserved intact with its original words and meanings
exactly as uttered by the Prophet (S), beside the Companions’ extreme
care to safeguard it and conveying it to their successors as they heard
it. But despite all this, they abandoned it without committing it to
writing or memorizing, to be like a play-thing toyed by the narrators.

When going through the scattered portions of the sermon published in the
famous hadith books and voluminous sirah books, with examining them in
an unprejudiced way, we will see so much dissimilarity among its words
and difference among its denotations, with its expressions being
incongruous, in a way exciting astonishment and causing wonder!

What is wonderful regarding those obstinately arguing that hadith used
to be narrated on the basis of meaning, the words resounding in their
ears uttered by all mosques orators on Fridays throughout long years
after finishing recitation of the sermon hadith “or as he said”, till
this clause turned to be as an original part of the hadith. So what for
is all that obligatory precaution?

149. See p. 337 and the following pages.

150. I kept on searching for this author till coming to know him to be
Abu Muhammad Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn al-Sayyid al-Batliyosi
al-Andalusi (d. 521 H.). And these words appeared in his book al-Insaf
fi al-tanbih ala al-asbab al-lati awjabat al-ikhtilaf bayna al-Muslimin
fi ara'ihim (exposing the reasons that caused disagreement in opinions
among Muslims) which was published in Egypt in 1319 H., revised by
al-Shaykh Umar al-Mahmasani al-Azhari.

151. I quote these ilal (causes) briefly from the original copy of the
book of al-Batliyosi.

152. It may be not right to count this among the causes of hadith, as
all the fuqaha' were of the opinion that to act according to the hadith
can never depend on hearing it. Abu Ishaq al-Isfara'ini says: Unanimity
is on permission of quoting from the dependable books (of hadith).
Al-Tabari says: Whoever finds a hadith in an authentic book, is
permitted to narrate it, and use it in dispute as a hujjah. The same
view is held by al-'Izz ibn Abd al-Salam.

153. Among them the contemporary Hashwiyyah, who disguise themselves
under the garb of ulama'.

154. As the case with some of the people in the present time.

155. Like Ka'b al-Ahbar, Wahb ibn Munabbih and Abd Allah ibn Salam.

156. In his Muqaddimah, Ibn al-Salah about perversion says: To recognize
the perverted among the asanid and texts of the traditions, is a
magnificent skill that can only be undertaken by acute huffaz, among
whom we can refer to al-Daraqutni, who has a valuable compilation in
this regard. Ahmad ibn Hanbal is reported to have said: Is there anyone
who can be immune against error and perversion? Ibn al-Salah cited an
example for tashif (misconstruction) in the sunan, by referring to what
Ibn Luhay'ah quoted from the book of Musa ibn Aqabah, on his authority,
from Zayd ibn Thabit, that the Messenger of Allah ihtajama (cupping) in
the mosque, while the original word is with ra', i.e. ihtajara in the
mosque with a booth or (straw) mat, making a chamber (hujrah) for
performing his prayers, but Ibn Luhay'ah mispronounced it (p. 114).

157. See the detailed discussion on hadith and alike things in my book
Shaykh al-mudirah.

158. See p. 100 and following pages.

159. I wish all that had come true!

160. For al-Harrani's speech there is a useful accurate elaboration, to
which the reader can refer in his book, or in al-Jaza'iri's Tawjih
al-nazar, p. 340 and following pages.

161. Refer to p. 77.

162. Abu Muhammad Ali al-Andalusi al-Zahiri, al-Ihkam fi usul al-ahkam,
vol. II, pp. 86, 87.

163. See vol. XIII, pp. 210, 211.
