Detriment of Narration Through Meaning Linguistically and Rhetorically
======================================================================

These were some of their sayings in regard of the detriment of reporting
hadith through meaning, concerning the religious affairs. Whereas the
linguistic and rhetoric detriment is elucidated through brief statement
by the eminent Islamic litterateur al-Sayyid Mustafa Sadiq al-Rafi’i
(may God’s mercy be upon him), when discussing the Prophetic rhetoric in
his precious book I’jaz al-Qur’an, <span id="_anchor_164"></span>164
saying: The words of Prophethood are inhabiting a heart connected to the
Glory of its Creator, and burnished by a tongue upon which the Qur’an
was revealed with the realities it contains. If they not being revealed
(by God), however they came to be through way of revelation, and if they
having no proof in it but they were verily among its evidences. That
which of affirmed chapters has no even one separated handle, and in
which meddling is absent has no even one preferred word. It is, in its
brevity and indication, like a speaking heart pulse, and in its
sublimation and efficiency is verily a manifestation of his (S)
recollections” ... etc. <span id="_anchor_165"></span>165

In his comment on the arrangement of the Prephetic rhetoric, he said:
“It is not necessary that whatever reported as a hadith, should be taken
as an utterance of the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be upon
him and his Progeny) with its very words and expressions. Because many
traditions have been reported on the basis of their meaning, the case in
which most or

some of their words be uttered by the one to whom they were ascribed in
transmission. Due to permission of narrating through meaning, Sibawayh
and other Imams of the two Cities (Basrah and Kufah) have never quoted
any hadith when compiling their books on grammar and linguistics, but
they depended mainly on the Qur’an and authentic traditions reported
from the Arabs. Had tadwin (writing down) been prevalent during the
early stage (of Islam), with the possibility of recording all the
traditions they (Companions) used to hear from the Prophet (S) with
their original words and expressions and eloquence, this language would
have been in an extremely different state”.

The procedure common among them was that the narrator’s being accurate
in realizing the meaning of the hadith, with using words some of which
being in agreement with the original texts, as in the case of his short
traditions and aphorisms and proverbs, and some others disagreeing
whereat the narrator inserting into them some of his own words. This
fact led Sufyan al-Thawri to exclaim: If I tell you that I am narrating
to you exactly as I heard (from the Prophet), never believe me, as it is
no more than the meaning of it. <span id="_anchor_166"></span>166

I have expatiated on discussing this section of the book due to its high
significance.

### Solecism and Mistake in Hadith:

The narrators were not satisfied with narrating the hadith according to
meaning, but allowed themselves to cite hadith in a perverted way,
finding no harm then in correcting its solecism and rectifying its
error.

The Moroccan scholar Ibn Abd al-Barr, n his book Jami’ bayan al-’ilm wa
fadlih, <span id="_anchor_167"></span>167 says:

Al-Walid ibn Muslim related to us saying: I heard al-Awza’i saying: No
harm is there in rectifying solecism and error in hadith. He also said:
I heard al-Awza’i saying: Arabicize the hadith as the people (addressed
by it) were Arabs.

It is reported that Jabir said: I asked ‘Amir i.e. al-Shi’bi, and Abu
Ja’far (i.e. Muhammad ibn Ali) and al-Qasim (i.e. Ibn Muhammad), and
‘Ata’ (i.e. Ibn Abi Rabah) about that relating hadith and perpetrating
solecism... shall I relate it as I heard or should I Arabicize it? They
replied: No, you have to Arabicize it!

Yahya ibn Mu’in said: No objection is there to anyone rectifying his
hadith according to the Arabic Language.

Al-Nadr ibn Shummayl is reported to have said: Hushaym was a solecist,
so I clothed for you his hadith with a nice garment – i.e.
Arabicization. Ali ibn al-Hasan related saying: I said to Ibn
al-Mubarak: When noticing any solecism in the hadith should I rectify
it? He replied: Yes, since the people (Arabs) were never committing
grammatical mistakes! But solecism is only on our part.

This matter was broached by al-Imam Ibn Faris in a treatise calling it
Ma’khadh al-’ilm, when he said: <span id="_anchor_168"></span>168 “Some
people claim that if any narrator committing a grammatical mistake when
relating any hadith, it would be impermissible for the hearer to report
from him but only in the same way he heard from him. Some others said:
Rather, the hearer should relate it, if being aware of the Arabic
Language grammar, in an Arabicized, correct, rectified manner, on the
basis of an evidence accepted by us. That is, the fact that the
Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny) was verily the most eloquent of all the Arabs with the best
Arabic tongue...besides being protected by Allah, the Exalted and
Glorious, against error.

Thus being the case, so it would be more proper to relate his hadith as
rectified and free from any solecism or grammatical mistake.

Our Shaykh Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Ibrahim al-Qattan used to record the
hadith with its mistakes exactly as he heard it, with writing a note on
the margin of his book: “he said so”, indicating that it is narrated in
this way, with saying: And the correct hadith is so and so. This is
verily the best of whatever I heard in this respect. Beside many other
examples.

### Advancing, Putting off, Addition and Omission in Hadith:

Furthermore, the narrators found no trouble in misplacing the hadith
words, bring some forwards and some backwards.

Abu Bakr ibn Abi Shaybah is reported to have said: Hafs related to us on
the authority of Ash’ath, as saying that al-Hasan and al-Shi’bi were
disdaining from bringing forwards and backwards the expressions of the
hadith. <span id="_anchor_169"></span>169

Jabir ibn Abd Allah quoted Abd Allah ibn Hudhayfah as saying: We are
Arab people,...we cite the hadith with bringing forwards and backwards
(its words). <span id="_anchor_170"></span>170

They exaggerated in doing a bad turn to the narration of hadith to the
extent that one of the narrators daring to add some words to the hadith
that can’t be found in another’s narration. They (narrators) even laid
down a rule for this calling it: “addition from the memorizer is
accepted.”

### To Narrate Part of Hadith and Shortening it:

Among other practices permitted by the narrators being to shorten the
hadith and relate a part of it.

In Sunan al-Tirmidhi, Mujahid is reported to have said: Delete whatever
you like from the hadith but never add to it. <span
id="_anchor_171"></span>171

Ibn Hajar, in Sharh al-Nukhbah, said: In regard of shortening the
hadith, the majority of traditionists permit it, provided that
epitomizing it should be a learned man (‘alim).

In Sharh Muslim, al-Nawawi says: The correct notion held by the
multitude and investigators among scholars of hadith, being permission
of narrating a portion of the hadith on the authority of a gnostic. He
adds: Concerning classification of hadith into sections by the
compilers, it is more proper for permission, or rather negating dispute
in it is excluded. This practice was continuously followed by most of
the memorizers among

‘ulama’ and traditionists (muhaddithun), and others among classes of
scholars.

Muslim was among those permitting abridgement of hadith, referring to
this fact in his introduction.

Abu Shamah, in his book Mukhtasar Kitab al-Mu’ammal, <span
id="_anchor_172"></span>172 is reported to have said:

‘That which is usually practised by pundits of fiqh in relation to the
Prophetic traditions and narrated reports, being their abundant
inferences from the weak (unauthentic) traditions to confirm their
claims, and support their sayings, deleting some of the hadith words
once, and adding to them another time. There are numerous examples for
this practice in the books of Abu al-Ma’ali and his companion Abu Hamid.
The most abominable act execised by some of them, being to argue with a
weak report (khabar) which in fact be the proof used by his opponent
against him. So they would introduce it, turning away from that which
they have weakened before.

Their Leniency toward Narrations on Virtues  
 and their Detriment:

Ibn Mahdi is reported to have said: “Whenever narrating any hadith about
halal (lawful) and haram (unlawful) rules, we would be very strict in
the asanid (chains of transmission) with scrutinizing the rijal. And
when relating anything on virtues, reward and punishment, we would show
leniency in the asanid and indulgence in respect of rijal”. (Reported by
al-Bayhaqi in al-Madkhal).

Among those permitting leniency in narrating the hadith when being
concerned with the good deeds, it can be referred to the names of Ahmad
ibn Hanbal and Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak. Al-Hakim said: I heard Abu
Zakariyya al-Anbari say: When the report (khabar) is neither forbidding
what is lawful nor legalizing what is unlawful, nor obligating a rule
related to temptation or intimidation, it should be overlooked with
being negligent

regarding its narration. And Ahmad has another opinion in this regard,
that will be exposed later on.

Ibn Abd al-Barr says: The traditions on virtues need not any argument or
proof... and the scholars in the past never showed that strictness in
respect of reporting them from whomsoever of the narrators, without
investigating deeply as they used to do with traditions on ahkam
(rules). <span id="_anchor_173"></span>173

In his commentary on the statement of the author of al-Adab
al-Shar’iyyah (Ibn Muflih <span id="_anchor_174"></span>174 ), that it
is reported on the authority of al-Imam Ahmad what is indicating that it
is unnecessary to adhere to the weak hadith on virtues and recommendable
acts (mustahabbat), al-Sayyid Rashid Rida says: “May God be pleased with
Ahmad, what vast knowledge and accurate comprehension has he!!... Verily
to believe in acting in accordance with the weak hadith in the cases he
referred to and calling to showing leniency in narrating it, opened for
the Ummah a door for ghuluww (extravagance) in religion and multiplying
the trouble-seeking rituals (‘ibadat), that are incongruous with the
easy teachings of Islam, beside even making some of them among the rites
of the Din. All this, beside incompetence of many people in establishing
the obligatory prayers and abiding by and fulfilling the duties, the
fact leading consequently to accept and believe in the Israeliyyat,
superstitions and dreams, as reported by a latter compiler on the
authority of Ibn Taymiyyah who said: The ‘ibadat (rituals) and virtues
decisively confirmed in the Book (Qur’an) and Sunnah are quite
sufficient for the Ummah. And I wish there were a large number of people
falling not short of fulfilling them.”

Really true is the utterance of these religious leaders and what they
manifested regarding the disadvantages caused by narration of the weak
and unauthentic traditions to the Ummah, due to the practice followed by
some of these leaders (imams) in respect of virtues.

Therefore, al-Qadi Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi al-Maliki said: “It is
absolutely impermissible to act according to the weak traditions.” <span
id="_anchor_175"></span>175

The notable fluent Islamic writer Mustafa Sadiq al-Rafi’i (may God’s

mercy be upon him) has dedicated a long interesting chapter for
narration (riwayah) in his valuable book Ta’rikh Adab al-Arab, of which
we quote the following:

  
  
  

164. I'jaz al-Qur'an, p. 364, refer to the complement of this eloquent
speech, in the following pages till p. 422.

165. Ibid., p. 364.

166. Ibid., p. 422.

167. See vol. I, pp. 78-81.

168 Tawjih al-nazar, pp. 308, 309.

169. Jami' bayan al-'ilm, vol. I, p. 80.

170. This khabar is recorded also in Uyun al-akhbar, vol. III, p. 136.

171. India Edition, p. 237.

172. See pp. 21, 22.

173. Jami' bayan al-'ilm, vol. I, p. 45.

174. Al-Adab al-Shar'iyyah, vol. II, pp. 313, 314. Another narration is
ascribed to Ahmad ibn Hanbal, in which he held that it can be acted
according to the weak hadith in virtuous deeds.

175. Al-Manar, vol. XXXI, p. 129.
