Narration in Islam
==================

  
  

The Companions used to learn under the Messenger of Allah (S) in a
scientific way so as to be acquainted with the religious teachings and
rules. Thus the meetings held by him (S) were the first knowledge
circles that were ever widely known throughout Arabian history, with his
being the first man to teach people.

When he (S) passed away, the science of riwayah emerged on the scene,
since no any way or option for inference (istidlal) and determination
was there but only through it. Abu Bakr was never accepting any hadith
from anyone unless be confirmed by a witness that it was heard from the
Messenger (S), <span id="_anchor_176"></span>176 the job that could be
easily done due to nearness of the Prophet’s lifetime to that period,
availability of the Companions and the material (of hadith) was still
not abrogated.

Also Umar used to verify and investigate the authenticity of
transmission, as hypocrisy prevailed among people, with the need
becoming more urgent to the riwayah. Besides, Umar, Uthman and ‘A’ishah
with majority of the Companions used to scrutinize the narrations cited
to them, refuting and returning them to their transmitters. Then Umar
feared that people expatiate upon narration abundantly, where blemish
would find way into it with imposture and falsification be made by the
hypocrite and libertine and the bedouin. So he kept on commanding them
to lessen the number of narrations, with being so strict toward those
narrating abundantly or reporting a hadith on (religious) rules without
introducing a witness confirming it. Because the prolific narrator,
though reporting some correct traditions, cannot be immune against
tahrif (misconstruction) or addition or omission in the narrations. It
is reported that the Prophet (S) said: Whoever falsily ascribes

any saying to me, his abode shall be Fire. <span
id="_anchor_177"></span>177 Due to this precaution and abstaining from
riwayah, many of the eminent Companions and the favourites near the
Messenger (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny),
like Abu Bakr, al-Zubayr, Abu Ubaydah, and al-Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib
used to narrate less traditions than others or rather some of them would
even narrate nothing, such as Sa’id ibn Zayd who was one among the ten
men promised with paradise.

The most prolific in narration among the Companions was Abu Hurayrah,
who kept company of the Prophet for three years, <span
id="_anchor_178"></span>178 surviving after him for about fifty years.
<span id="_anchor_179"></span>179 For this reason Umar, Uthman and
A’ishah were all the time disapproving his narrations with accusing him
(of falsification), rendering him to be the first narrator ever accused
throughout Islam. A’ishah was the severest in disapproving his
traditions, due to the too long period she and he lived
contemporaneously, as her death came to be one year before his.
Thereafter erupted the insurrection during the days of Uthman, after
which there was uproar and so much talk regarding the caliphate, with
people indulging in sorts of suspicion, perplexity and anxiety.
Consequently there were many narrators who would neither take precaution
nor verify or investigate (the traditions), the fact that became so
common and familiar among people, who never cared for inquiring the
veracity of traditions, or referring the riwayah to a decisive testimony
or an establishing proof. But all the errors that occurred in the hadith
previously were only due to inadvertence and ignorance on the part of
the narrator. The Companion <span id="_anchor_180"></span>180 (of the
Prophet) Imran ibn Husayn is reported to have said: By God, had I found
it necessary, I would have reported from the Messenger of Allah (upon
whom be God’s peace and benediction) as much as I willed, for two
consecutive days, but I abstained from so doing when noticing a number
of the Companions of the Messenger, though having heard what I heard and
witnessed what I witnessed, relating traditions whose original wording
and expressions be far from what

they were narrating. So I feared of falling into imagination and
misconception as happened to them. But the fact I want to disclose being
that their practice was only out of mistake on their part and was never
done by them on purpose. <span id="_anchor_181"></span>181

The fact to be observed here is that this procedure was followed at a
time when all the standards were still standing and branches were still
there (i.e. material of hadith was still extant and undestroyed), with
the situation reaching not the exacerbated degree yet. But after the
revolt of the Kharijites, and people’s tending to form sects and
communities (firaq), dividing the society into schisms, some of the
Companions embarked on making of the hadith as a trade (for earning
living), composing and fabricating false traditions. Then appeared on
the scene, the relators and Zanadiqah, and people of too ancient akhbar
(reports), <span id="_anchor_182"></span>182 that were similar to
superstitious traditions, causing so much distortion and corruption to
the hadith out of all these practices, throughout different ages and
times. Concerning the relators, they used to gain the hearts of the
dignitaries among people, extracting from what they owned (of wealth)
through disapproved, strange and falsified traditions. Common people
were of the habit of gathering around the relator whenever his hadith
being supersensible and irrationally amazing, or being a heart-saddening
touching one exciting the emotions and extracting tears from eyes, the
arts in which those people had good experience, big lies and extremely
abundant reports. In regard of the Zanadiqah, they tried their best, by
trickery means, to distort and blemish Islam, through foisting in it
some abominably ugly and unbelievable traditions resembling the
superstitions of the Greeks and Romans, and legends of the Indians and
Persians. Their only aim behind these practices was to vilify Ahl
al-Sunnah and pervert their narrations through inserting false
traditions that no reason could accept or sight could imagine. And
concerning the people of ancient akhbar, they intended out of this to
confirm and prove the superstitions that were prevalent in

the Pre-Islamic era (Jahiliyyah), with imparting veracity upon them so
as to use them in interpretation (tafsir) and alike purposes, the cases
for which ample examples are there.

### Stage of Committing Hadith to Writing:

After the class of traditionists, among whom were the minor Companions
and senior Tabi’un (Followers) – lie the class of Ibn Abbas – hadith
continued to be inflicted with symptoms of inadvertence, negligence and
foisted suspicions and interpolations. But there might have been some
trustworthy narrators who used to report hadith from unreliable ones,
till the caliphate time of Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz <span
id="_anchor_183"></span>183 Fearing the bad consequences of people’s
additions to hadith and spreading of falsity when correct hadith be
rare, as his time witnessed circulation of traditions, in which falsity
was made on purpose for no interpretative convenience, like the ones
falsified by Ikrimah the slave of Ibn Abbas, <span
id="_anchor_184"></span>184 and in which the slave (mawla) of Sa’id ibn
al-Musayyab was refuted <span id="_anchor_185"></span>185 and others,
Umar sent a letter to his deputy in administration and judgement on
al-Madinah, <span id="_anchor_186"></span>186 giving him the order:
Collect all the traditions of the Messenger of Allah and write them
down, as I am quite afraid about the extinction of knowledge and loss of
‘ulama’.

This was the outset of writing down and collecting of the hadith, as it
was never being written in the past <span id="_anchor_187"></span>187
... etc.

We conclude this discussion by referring to a critical defect of
riwayah.

### A Critical Defect of Narration How Were Their Narrations

Many defects were there for narrating hadith after being forbidden by
the Messenger of Allah (S), among which its being not narrated at the
time of hearing it, the fact necessitating the narrators to report
(hadith) according to

the meaning. The other defect is that they used to practise fraud in
narration, in a way that a Companion reporting the Messenger’s hadith
from another one without referring to the name of that from whom he
reported. This fact was stated by Ibn Qutaybah in his book, Ta’wil
mukhtalif al-hadith, <span id="_anchor_188"></span>188 when talking
about Hurayrah’s narration which he never heard from the Prophet (S),
that he used to say: “The Messenger of Allah said kadha (so and so)”,
but in fact he heard it (hadith) from a trustworthy (in his view)
narrator, relating it then. And the same was practised by Ibn Abbas and
other Companions. Such kind of riwayah was called by the scholars of
hadith by the term tadlis (fraudulence). In his reference to biography
of Abu Hurayrah, al-Dhahabi said: Abu Hurayrah used to practise tadlis,
and the tadlis of the Sahabah was so much and faultless. <span
id="_anchor_189"></span>189

I have exposed these defects and indicated their bad effects in a
previous chapter of this book, and in my book Shaykh al-mudirah which I
published seperately. But there is a quite dangerous defect I haven’t
referred to before, which was disclosed by the eminent Companion Imran
ibn Husayn, <span id="_anchor_190"></span>190 in his statement in which
he swore saying: “By God had I found it necessary, I would have reported
from the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s peace and benediction)
as much as I willed, for two consecutive days, but I abstained from so
doing when noticing a number of the Companions of the Messenger, though
having heard what I heard and witnessed what I witnessed, relating
traditions whose original wording and expressions be far from what they
were narrating. So I feared of falling into imagination and
misconception as happened to them. But the fact I want to disclose being
that their practice was only out of mistake on their part, and was never
done by them on purpose. <span id="_anchor_191"></span>191

In his book Shubhat al-tashbih, <span id="_anchor_192"></span>192 Ibn
al-Jawzi is reported to have said: Al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam heard a man
relating a hadith. He waited till the man finished his speech, when he
said to him: Did you hear this from the Messenger of Allah? The man
replied: Yes!! Al-Zubayr said then: This hadith and its likes are
preventing me from relating from the

Prophet! By my life, I heard this hadith from the Messenger of Allah,
and I was there when he (S) started to recite it. Then we talked to him
about a man from among the people of the Book (Ahl al-Kitab), when you
came after the fore part of the hadith was over. When he referred to the
man of Ahl al-Kitab, you thought that part to be included in the hadith
of the Messenger of Allah!!

Bisr ibn Sa’id is reported to have said: Observe your duty to Allah and
take precaution in the hadith. By God, we used to sit with Abu Hurayrah,
who would relate to us hadith of the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be
God’s peace and benediction) and report (hadith) from Ka’b. Then as soon
as he left us, I would hear someone from among us reporting the
Messenger’s hadith from Ka’b, with ascribing hadith of Ka’b to the
Messenger of Allah. <span id="_anchor_193"></span>193

This report was mentioned by Imran ibn Husayn, al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam
and Bisr ibn Sa’id, and every open-minded thoughtful Muslim is asked to
ponder upon and attentively contemplate over it.

As the Companion Imran ibn Husayn swears by God, that if he intended he
would report hadith from the Messenger of Allah for two consecutive
days, but he abstained since he saw some of the Messenger’s Companions
relating traditions whose original be different from what they narrate,
only out of error or misconception. So if such be the case of those
unintentional among the truthful Companions, how would it be the
condition of the intentional ones, and hypocrites and enemies of
religion? It is by God, in riwayah, one of the major sins! And whoever
trying to enlighten people to this fact would be charged with impiety.

Another defect was described by al-Zubayr, which is: some of the
Companions hearing a portion of the hadith from the Prophet, without its
fore part, going out then and narrating what he heard to be a complete
hadith.

After that comes the turn of Bisr ibn Sa’id, to appeal to people to
observe their duty to Allah in (narrating) the hadith, as some of them
used to

compose the Messenger’s hadith from Ka’b al-Ahbar and make Ka’b’s hadith
as if uttered by the Messenger of Allah. All that and others than it
were recorded in the books, and continued to be extant, reported by
successors from the ancestors till the Day of Resurrection. And there is
neither might nor power but in God.

There is much more discussion and elaboration on taking precaution in
narrating the hadith, recorded in our book Shaykh al-mudirah, to which
the dear reader can refer.

176. Al-Imam Ali (A) said: If I heard a hadith from the Messenger of
Allah (may God's peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny), God
verily makes me benefit from it as much as He wills, and if anyone
relating to me his hadith, I would exact an oath from him, when he
swearing I would believe him.

177. This is verily the correct narration.

178. To be exact, he accompanied the Prophet for one year and nine
months as I verified and stated in my book Shaykh al-mudirah, to which
the reader can refer.

179. Abu Hurayrah died in 59 H.

180. 'Imran ibn Husayn died in 52 H.

181. See the discussion of the speech of 'Imran ibn Husayn after this
statement.

182. Like the reports of the Jews and their likes.

183. He was acknowledged (as a caliph) in 99 H. and died in 101 H.

184. Ikrimah died in 105 H.

185. Sa'id died in 94 H.

186. Abu Bakr died in 120 H.

187. Ta'rikh adab al-Arab, published in 1329 H., 1911 AD., vol. I, pp.
276-281.

188. See p. 50.

189. Siyar a'lam al-nubala', vol. II, pp. 437, 438. Refer also to Shaykh
al-mudirah.

190. Imran ibn Husayn ibn Ubayd ibn Khalaf and his father embraced Islam
together with Abu Hurayrah in 7 H. He took part in some battles beside
the Prophet. He became governor of Basrah, when Umar delegted him to
make its people comprehend their religion, and al-Hasan took oath that
they were never visited by anyone better than 'Imran ibn Husayn. He died
in 52 H. His Musnad contained 180 traditions, four of which on
al-Bukhari, and nine of on Muslim - (Siyar a'lam al-nubala', vol. II,
pp. 363-366).

191. Ibn Qutaybah, Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, pp. 49, 50.

192. See p. 38.

193. Al-Dhahabi, Siyar a'lam al-nubala', vol. II, p. 436.
