Composition of Hadith and Its Causes
====================================

Postponement of writing down the hadith and recording its words till
after the 1st century A.H. and beginnings of the 2nd century, led to
expansion of categories of riwayah, and multiplication of composition
without any regulation or restriction. Consequently the number of
fabricated traditions reached tens of thousands, most of which are still
recorded in the books circulated among Muslims all over the world, East
and West.

### Beginning of Invention in Riwayah and Falsifying the Messenger’s Hadith

There is unanimity among all researchers and investigating scholars that
invention in riwayah and composition of hadith with ascribing it to the
Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s peace and benediction) started
during the days of the caliphate of Uthman, after the insurrection that
ended with his death. Invention became more intense and increased after
swearing allegiance to Ali. As soon as Muslims acknowledged him as the
competent ruler, the Umayyad devil began hatching the plot after another
to seize caliphate from its true owner and rendering it to an Umayyad
sovereignty! And that came true, Alas!

Al-Ustadh al-Imam Muhammad Abduh (may God’s mercy be upon him) in his
Muqaddimat on Risalat al-Tawhid, referred to the great sedition by
saying: “This sedition led to the decline of a significant cornerstone
of the temple of caliphate, causing to Islam and Muslims a shock that
dislodged

them from the straight path they have trodden steadily, and on whose
course the Qur’an remained established.” Then he wrote an accurate
sincere statement declaring: “After that the sequence of events
continued with breaching the covenant by some of those who swore
allegiance to the Fourth Caliph, <span id="_anchor_194"></span>194 and
eruption of several wars among the Muslims that led to the shifting of
power to the Umayyads! But the structure of the company was split, and
bonds of their unity were severed, with people being divided into
several schools of thought regarding caliphate, and parties embarking on
supporting the opinion of some school against that of its opponent,
verbally and practically. Then originated the invention in narration and
interpretation, with every sect going to the extremes, leading then to
disagreement and disunity among people <span id="_anchor_195"></span>195
...etc.

### The Fabricated Hadith:

The fabricated hadith is the forged invented one ascribed to the
Messenger of Allah (S), falsely and slandrously, whether it be
deliberately or mistakenly.

And as one of the Imams said, fabricating the hadith and ascribing it to
the Messenger of Allah (S) being more dangerous to religion and of
severer detriment to Muslims than bigotry of people of the east and of
the west. And separation of Muslims into schisms, communities, schools
of thought (madhahib) and cults is but only one of the effects and
consequences of fabrication and composition in the Din.

In his book Ithar al-haqq, al-Murtada al-Yamani said: Most of the
innovations of the heretics among the Muslims, originate from the
following two apparently invalid factors: addition to and omission from
religion (hadith). One form of addition to religion is verily falsifying
and fabricating it.

Al-Nawawi in Sharh Muslim, reports from al-Qadi \`Iyad as saying:

Liars are of two sorts: one of them a group known of forgery and

falsity in the hadith of the Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny), who are of several categories:
some known of composing traditions that were never uttered by the
Messenger of Allah (S) at all, such as the Zanadiqah and their likes who
were never observing any commitment to Allah, either out of favouritism
as they alleged, and religiosity like the ignorants among worshippers,
<span id="_anchor_196"></span>196 who fabricated traditions on virtues
and recommendable deeds, or out of doing something strange and seeking
fame like the debauchees among traditionists. Or out of bigotry and
argumentation like the propagators among the heretics and fanatics to
madhahib (schools of thought), or for satisfying the desires of
world-seeking people to attain to their goals, and asking for success
for their doing. <span id="_anchor_197"></span>197

 Among them also were those who would not fabricate text of hadith, but
would bring in a correct authentic chain of transmission for the weak
text. Some of them would reverse the chains (asanid) or add to them on
purpose either for the sake of saying what is stranger than others or to
take away ignorance from himself. Some would lie by claiming to have
heard what he did not really hear, and meet whom he did not really meet,
reporting correct traditions from them. Some others would take the
speech of the Companions or others, and maxims of the Arabs and sages,
ascribing them to the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be upon
him and his Progeny).

Besides the reasons mentioned by al-Nawawi for fabricating the hadith
and falsifying the Messenger’s traditions, many others are there that
were stated by the ulama’, the most important of which being the
following: <span id="_anchor_198"></span>198

First: Which is the most important of all. It includes the traditions
fabricated and falsified by the Zanadiqah disguising cheatingly and
hypocritically under the guise of Islam, with the purpose of corrupting
and ruining the religion with creating conflict and disunity among
Muslims.

Hammad ibn Zayd said: The Zanadiqah have fabricated four thousand
traditions. This being the number he could realize through his knowledge
and investigation in discovering their falsity, whereas the

traditionists reported that only one zindiq had composed this number of
traditions. They say that” When Ibn Ali al-Awja’ was taken to be
beheaded, he said: “I fabricated for you four thousand traditions,
forbidding in them the halal (lawful) and deeming lawful the haram
(unlawful)”.

Second: Fabrication of hadith for the sake of backing and supporting the
schools of thought in regard of principles (usul) and branches of
religion. Since when Muslims were separated into schisms and madhahib,
every group embarked on doing its utmost to prove the legality of its
madhhab, especially after the door of debate and disputation regarding
the madhahib was opened wide. The aim of this was only dumbfounding the
opponent and showing of superiority over him, to the extent they have
made dispute a science compiling on it many works, though their religion
was averse to nothing but to dispute and conflict. This cause seems to
be one of the consequences and effects of the previous one. This cause
was cited by some of the traditionists who had written about causes of
fabrication, saying: Someone among the heretics repented and embarked on
expressing: You should investigate the source from which you take the
hadith, as we used to render to a hadith whatever we desired or loved to
be attained.

Fabrication of hadith for supporting the madhahib was not restricted to
the heretics and owners of schools in usul. Rather many among Ahl
al-Sunnah, who having disagreement about the branches (furu’) of
religion, were known of composing traditions each for supporting one of
the schools of thought or glorifying any of the leaders (imams)...

I introduce here one hadith as an example: “There shall be a man in my
Ummah called Muhammad ibn Idris, who will be more detrimental to my
Ummah than Iblis. And there shall be among my Ummah a man called Abu
Hanifah, who is verily the beacon for my Ummah.” It is said that among
the chain of transmitters there are two fabricators: Ma’mun ibn Ahmad
al-Salami, and Ahmad ibn Abd Allah al-Khunbari. The hadith was reported
by al-Khatib on the authority of Abu Hurayrah with a chain of
transmitters, sufficing with the part related to Abu Hanifah, adding: It
is a fabricated

hadith, composed by Muhammad ibn Sa’id al-Maruzi al-Bawraqi. Then he
said: He narrated it in this way in Khurasan and then in Iraq, adding to
it: “There shall be among my Ummah a man called Muhammad ibn Idris, who
will cause a sedition that be more detrimental to my Ummah than that of
Iblis”.

It is said that no need is there to prove the baselessness of this
intentional violation of truth. Nevertheless, there are some
considerable jurisprudents who mention in their fiqhi books the part of
the hadith labelling Abu Hanifah as the beacon of the Ummah, <span
id="_anchor_199"></span>199 without any objection. Rather they even
infer it for giving superiority for their leader over other leaders
(imams). Despite all this, they are considered the example for the Ummah
whose sayings and judgements on religious affairs are so dependable,
that the Book and the Sunnah are put under their disposal since these
two – as they claim – are specifically handled by the religious high
authorities (mujtahidun).

In his Sharh Sahih Muslim, Abu al-Abbas al-Qurtubi says: Some of the
self-opinionated fuqaha’ permit to verbally ascribe to the Messenger of
Allah the ruling that is indicated by a clear-cut analogy (qiyas),
saying in this regard: “The Messenger of Allah said so and so”. Hence we
find their books replete with traditions whose texts testify on
themselves being fabricated since they seem to be identical with
verdicts (fatawa) of the fuqaha’, and never be fit to the eloquency of
the speech of the Master of Apostles, beside their being unsupported by
isnad.

Abu Shamah, in his book Mukhtasar Kitab al-Mu’ammal, is reported to have
said:

“The practice followed by chiefs of fiqh regarding the Prophetic
traditions and reported old speeches being abundant inference by weak
traditions to support their beliefs and their claims, with deleting some
words once and adding some others to the hadith. Many examples for these
cases can be found in the works of Abu al-Ma’ali and his companion Abu
Hamid. <span id="_anchor_200"></span>200

Third: Neglecting memorization due to be busy with asceticism and

devotion in worship. These ascetics and Sufis were thinking well of
people considering sarcasm as a forbidden backbiting. Therefore they
were deceived by the lies circulated here and there, reporting
traditions without any knowledge or verification. So no trust should be
put to the traditions filling the books of preaching, exorcization and
maysticism without indicating their sources and degree of authenticity.
This judgement is not related only to the books whose authors have
precedence in knowledge, like the book Nuzhat al-Majalis, which is
replete with falsities on hadith and other fields. Rather, even some
books of the leaders (imams) of ulama’, such as al-Ihya’ of al-Ghazzali,
can never be free from numerous fabricated traditions.

Fourth: The intention of seeking favoritism near the kings’ sovereigns
and emirs, as stated by several memorizers. And as the hireling ‘ulama’
fabricated many of the Messenger’s traditions for gaining the pleasure
of the monarchs and rulers, they also falsified many fiqhi rules and
branches of religion for this purpose. Among the traditions composed in
this regard are those containing flattery and extolling for the rulers,
through which the ignorant cajole the kings presently as they used to do
in the past.

Fifth: Error and inadvertence, that befell some of the narrators who,
despite recognizing the truth, abstained from forsaking their
viewpoints, out of disdain and to evade any error be ascribed to them.
Frailty in faith and dishonesty in the task of narrating the hadith
could not be realized until experiencing those events that are known for
all.

Sixth: Reporting the hadith by memorizing from those having reliable
books, with being inaccurate in memorization, entailing consequently the
loss of books and occurrence of mistakes and errors. <span
id="_anchor_201"></span>201

Seventh: Mental confusion inflicting people at the end of life, as in
the case of a group of trustworthy narrators, who were excused for this
reason, except those who were free from all the faults ascribed to them,
with no distinction between what is reported from them in the state of
maturity and sanity and that which is reported in the state of insanity
and decrepitude.

Eighth: Trying to overcome the opponent in debate and controversy

particularly when being in public, the condition differing from
fabrication of hadith for supporting the schools of thought. Ibn
al-Jawzi says: Among the causes of fabrication of hadith being the
inference exercised by an impious person during debates in public
meetings, to prove his claims in the way complying to his desires...for
putting his argument in order, edifying his statement, gaining
superiority over his opponent, desiring for achieving triumph,
satisfying his lust for power and escaping scandal when being defeated
by his opponent in debate.

Ninth: Pleasing people and seeking their approval with attracting them
to attend their preaching congregations, and expanding the sphere of
their allies and supporters. The narrators have attached this cause to
the talebearer. Maybe Ibn al-Jawzi was not to compile his book on
fabricated traditions until practising the job of preaching with
experiencing the corruption caused to religion at the hands of the
preachers. About himself he said that he used to disapprove the
traditions that were usually cited during the preaching meetings held by
him, the fact arousing the grudge of all talebearers against him. <span
id="_anchor_202"></span>202

  
  
  

194. Talhah and al-Zubayr were the first people who breached the swear
of allegiance (bay'ah), supported by A'ishah, because of the malice and
grudge they harboured against Ali (A). These two were - as is known -
among the ten men whom the Prophet (S) augured with paradise.

195. Risalat al-Tawhid, 1st edition, pp. 7, 8.

196. I will discuss the righteous fabricators at the end of this
chapter.

197. The Islamic encyclopedia says: After the demise of Muhammad (S),
the original religious opinions and treatments that prevailed among the
vanguard of Muslims could not remain intact without being inflicted with
changes. As a new era of development emerged on the scene, when the
ulama' started to make advancement on an orderly system of acts and
beliefs compatible with the new circumstances. As after the great
conquests, Islam prevailed and spread over spacious areas, borrowing
from downtrodden peoples new opinions and principles, with the life and
thinking of Muslims being affected then in many respects not only by
Christianity and Jewism, but also by Hellenism, Zoroastrianism and
Buddhism.
Anyhow, the Muslims have abided strictly by the principle: The Sunnah of
the Prophet and the foremost in Islam was the only basis fit to be the
moral ideal example to be followed by the believers. This led to
fabrication of ahadith, with the narrators allowing themselves to invent
traditions of their own, containing saying and act, ascribing them to
the Prophet so as to make them agree with the opinions of the coming
era. So that era witnessed circulation of falsified ahadith ascribed to
the Prophet, showing him to say or do something that was recommendable
in the following era. Besides, the narrators began to foist into the
hadith utterances taken from the innovated sayings of apostles and
gospels, and Jewish notions and Greek philosophical doctrines … etc.
which were approved by a certain group of Muslims, who found no harm in
making the Prophet elaborating by this story-telling style some issues
referred to in the Qur'an so briefly, calling to new opinions and
beliefs. Rather, a large number of these invented contained important
rules (ahkam), like halal and haram, purity (taharah), and rules of
food, law, etiquette, good morals, beliefs, Reckoning Day, heavens and
hell … etc.

With passage of time reporting the saying and acts of the Prophet
gradually multiplied, and during the first centuries coming in the wake
of the demise of the Messenger, the disagreement among Muslims
exacerbated regarding some opinions about divergent issues, and every
party embarked on supporting its opinion by a saying or an act cited, in
fabricated contradictory traditions ascribed to the Prophet's Sunnah.
And in the main disputes that were resulted from bigotry, every sect
resorted to the Messenger to prove its right, as some group ascribed to
him (S) a saying foretelling of the establishment of the Abbasid State.
As a whole, they made him prophesy in a way where vision intermingles
with prophethood, in respect of political events and religious
movements, or rather the new social phenomena that came into being out
of the great conquests, like elevation of honour, with the purpose of
justifying all these things in view of the new Islamic group. Certain
number of these traditions were composed in a form of utterances
ascribed to Muhammad (S), talking about various places and regions that
were not conquered by Muslims but only very lately.

Hence, we cannot - due to multiplicity of ahadith - give a correct
historical description for the Prophet's Sunnah, but on the contrary,
they - ahadith - stand for opinions adopted by some men of influence
during the first centuries that followed demise of Muhammad (S), and
were ascribed to him only then (vol. VII, pp. 330-335).

Some ignorant men may think that by quoting this speech we intend to
make it as one of our evidences to prove our claim, counting this among
matters for which we deserve censure, unaware that our only aim of this
being to manifest for them and their illiterate brethren that the
orientalists have knowledge of facts of our religion of which they
themselves (ignorant) being unaware. Glorified is He the Bestower of
intellects!

198. Refer to journal of al-Manar, vol. III.

199. For this reason the Shafi'is were forced to narrate (falsely) a
hadith in regard of their leader giving him by it superiority over all
other leaders, which reads: The Messenger of Allah (may God's peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny) said: "Dignify Quraysh, as its
'alim will verily fill the whole earth with knowledge"!
On their part, the followers of al-Imam Malik have also invented the
following hadith in regard of their leader: "People will migrate from
the East toward the West, where they will not find a man more
knowledgeable than the 'alim of people of al-Madinah." They reported
also another hadith with the same meaning from Abu Hurayrah. Refer to
Ibn Abd al-Barr's al-Intiqa'.

200. See p. 21.

201. These people, as said by Ibn Asakir in his Ta'rikh, used to: "make
of the mursal as marfu' once, give sanad for the mawquf another time,
and approve of the isnad once and insert a hadith into another one,
another time." (Vol. II, p. 10).

202. Among them a group of beggars who used to stand at the bazaars and
mosques, falsifying against the Messenger of Allah traditions with
correct asanid, which they have learned by heart, mentioning thus the
themes through those asanid (Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol. I, p. 69).
