Detriment of Tales and Talebearer:
==================================

  
  
  

Al-Salafi reports on the authority of al-Fadl ibn Ziyad that he said: I
heard Ahmad ibn Hanbal saying: The biggest liars among people being the
questioner and story-teller.

Abu Qullabah is reported to have said: Knowledge is never deadened but
by the story-teller.

Al-Uqayli reported on the authority of ‘Asim as saying: Abu Abd
al-Rahman used to say: Be cautious of the story-teller.

### Mu’awiyah was Fabricator of Tales:

In Akhbar al-Madinah, al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar reports from Nafi’ and other
men of knowledge as saying: Story-telling was neither exercised in the

lifetime of the Prophet (S), nor during the caliphate of Abu Bakr, nor
that of Umar, but it was only an innovation invented by Mu’awiyah when
fitnah (sedition) erupted.

Ibn Abi Shaybah has reported the same khabar from Ibn Umar, and it is
known that Umar (ibn al-Khattab) forbade from story-telling.

Tenth: Severity of intimidation and excess in temptation for the sake of
guiding people. This kind of falsified traditions was even accelerated
for their fabricators by the scholars’ stating that the weak traditions
could be applied and followed regarding the virtuous deeds, <span
id="_anchor_203"></span>203 and what is related to them in meaning which
be unrelevant to rules and rights, as if considering Din incomplete
needing something to complete and perfect it. This while Allah the
Glorified and Most High says: “This day have I perfected for you, your
religion, and have completed My favour on you, and chosen for you Islam
(to be) the religion.” Besides, all the heresies in religion that people
call good heresies (bida’), being no more than addition to
religion...would that it be excess in acts alone, but in fact it was
excess in beliefs and doctrines. An example for this is to believe in
intercession of some of the righteous men (dead ones) between Allah and
people in order to get their demands be accomplished, either by
themselves due to having supernormal invisible power, or by the Almighty
God for their sake. That means, Allah’s Will shall be subordinate to
their will in this regard, as this expression was widely known to be
uttered by them: “There are certain bondmen for Allah, that He wills
whatever they will”! Beside other similar claims. When it is said to
them that Allah has never permitted such a law, they cite examples and
similitudes from which Allah is quite free and far above, like
anthropomorphizing Him to the kings and emirs through whom favoritism is
sought near those they were loving, <span id="_anchor_204"></span>204 so
as to do the acts that they would have never done had those ones been
not present. They were unaware that the Will of Allah the Exalted never
changes for the sake of anyone whomsoever, since specifying and
preponderating it should be in accordance with the eternal knowledge
that is never liable to change or alteration.

Eleventh: Permission to fabricating chains of transmission (asanid) for
the euphonious speech, <span id="_anchor_205"></span>205 so as to make a
hadith out of it. This reason was mentioned independently, while it is
to be included within the previous one.

Twelfth: Dissembling of the knowledge-claimant to be superior to his
opponent in debate when controversy reaches topic of hadith, whereat the
hypocrite who having feeble faith and corrupt knowledge would say: This
hadith is reported by so and so and confirmed by so and so. Further he
would ascribe this hadith to very scarce books (as sources) so as to
delude people of his having preknowledge of things unknown or realized
by others, or would invent a new chain of transmission for the hadith.

Al-Suyuti reported that Ibn al-Jawzi was among those whose traditions
were fabricated, and that falsity and reversion are of several forms:
some of the narrators were overcome by asceticism so they forgot about
memorization. Or some whose books (of hadith) were lost so he used to
narrate out of what he memorized, committing thus numerous mistakes and
errors. Some others were trustworthy, but they were inflicted with
mental disorder at the last days of their lives. Some who used to report
the errors inadvertently, but when recognizing the truth and being
certain of it, disdained from returning or repenting fearing from that
blunder be attributed to them. Among them too were the Zanadiqah who
used to fabricate and falsify the traditions on purpose with the aim of
corrupting the Shari’ah (Islamic Law), and creating doubt and suspicion
into religion making it as a plaything. Some of the Zanadiqah used to
take advantage of the Shaykh’s inadvertence and to foisting something
strange to his hadith. Some used to fabricate hadith for seeking content
and temptation. Some others would compose chains of transmission through
flowery language, with some doing so for gaining pleasure of the ruler,
and the story-tellers who used to relate feeble unauthentic traditions.
<span id="_anchor_206"></span>206 In order not to expatiate on this
topic, I suffice with the examples already cited.

Concerning the hadith fabricators, they were innumerable, the most

outstanding of whom being the following four: Ibn Abi Yahya in
al-Madinah, al-Waqidi in Baghdad, Muqatil ibn Sulayman in Khurasan and
Muhammad ibn Sa’id in the Sham. <span id="_anchor_207"></span>207

Hereunder one example on fabrication of hadith for seeking favoritism
near the kings and emirs:

Al-Rashid was so fond of pigeons and amusing himself with them. One day
he received doves as a present at the presence of Abu al-Bukhtari
al-Qadi <span id="_anchor_208"></span>208 when he said: Abu Hurayrah
reported from the Prophet (S) that he said: “No race is there but in the
pad or hoof or wing”. The word ‘wing’ was added from his own for
pleasing al-Rashid, for which he was gifted a valuable reward. When he
went out, al-Rashid said: By God I got to know that he was a liar. Then
he issued his orders to slaughter the pigeons, when it was said to him:
What sin the pigeons perpetrated? He replied: Because of them a lie was
composed against the Messenger of Allah!

### Political Fabrication or for Sake of Politics

Before concluding this chapter I have to reveal a critical aspect in
regard of fabrication of hadith, that having a long-term effect on life
in Islam. This effect is still in force through the putrid thoughts,
retrogressive minds and bigoted souls. This aspect being the intrusion
of politics in this issue (fabrication of hadith), and its having an
extreme impact and influence upon it, employing it for backing the
rulers and statesmen, making it the strongest pillar for reinforcing the
basis of their power.

Such political situation reached its peak and exceeded all the bounds
during the reign of Mu’awiyah, who supported and encouraged it by
employing his influence and dedicating his money for pushing it forward.
So we witnessed the continuation of this situation, with the hadith
being lost and fully dedicated for the purpose of indicating Mu’awiyah’s
honour and extolling him. They have exaggerated in supporting and
showing strong fanaticism toward him, elevating the status of the Sham
ruled by him, giving

it a position that was neither attained by al-Madinah of the Messenger
of Allah nor by the Sacred Town (Makkah) in which he was born, going to
the extremes in this respect to the extent that certain compilations
were authored specifically for this purpose.

Though this subject needs in itself a separate book, I shall commit
myself – within this book – to be brief and concise, demonstrating only
a few indications and evidences.

Here are some examples on this fabrication:

We can refer to the hadith fabricated by al-Bakriyyah (supporters of Abu
Bakr), and reported by Ibn Asakir from Abu Hurayrah, that the angels on
the Day of Badr were exchanging announcement of good tidings saying:
Aren’t you witnessing al-Siddiq with the Messenger of Allah in the
canopy?! Al-Khatib reported on the authority of Ibn Abbas that the
Prophet (S) said: Gabriel, upon whom be God’s peace, descended upon me
putting on a rug and making friends (with angels)...I asked him: O
Gabriel! What is that? He replied: Allah the Exalted commanded the
angels in the heavens to make friends with each other as is done by Abu
Bakr on earth.

Abu Ya’la reported from Abu Hurayrah that he said: The Messenger of
Allah said: I ascended (by God) to the heaven, and by each heaven I
passed I found my name written on it: (Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah and Abu Bakr al-Siddiq is my successor).

Abu Ya’la reported again from Ibn Umar that the Prophet said: Verily the
angels are ashamed of Uthman as they are ashamed of Allah and His
Messenger.

In another hadith, it is reported that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
The excellence of ‘A’ishah over all women is like that of the sop over
all other foods. It is reported yet in another hadith that her portrait
was sent to the Prophet in a piece of silky cloth with Gabriel who said
to him” “This is you wife in the world and Hereafter”!!

Another hadith says: Take half of your religion from this Humayra’ (i.e.
A’ishah). In another narration he (S) said: Take part of your religion

from this Humayra’.

This chapter is so expansive that no room is there to enumerate all its
contents.

### Mu’awiyah and Sham:

Concerning Mu’awiyah and the Sham that he and his relatives ruled over
for a very long epoch, there are many traditions that were fabricated on
their merits.

Mu’awiyah, as is known, embraced Islam together with his father on the
day of Makkah conquest, being thus among the freed captives (tulaqa’).
He was also one of those whose hearts are to be reconciled, who were
receiving some fees for their (embrace of) Islam. It was him who
subverted the principle of the rightly-guided caliphate in Islam, for
which no trace is left and no edifice is established till the present
time. He made of Damascus as the capital of his sovereignty and rule.
Hereunder a recapitulation of the traditions composed on his excellence:

Al-Tirmidhi reported that the Prophet (S) said once to Mu’awiyah: O God!
Make him a guide.

In another hadith, the Prophet said: O God! teach him knowledge of the
Book and arithmetic, and Protect him against torment. There is an
addition made to this hadith as follows: “and let him enter paradise”.

However, despite the abundant traditions cited on the merit of Mu’awiyah
that were baseless and of no authentic origin, Ishaq ibn Rahawayh, the
eminent leader (imam) and shaykh of al-Bukhari, is reported to have
said: None of the traditions about merits of Mu’awiyah could be
confirmed or approved.

Under the chapter “Merits of the Prophet’s Companions”, “bab dhikr
Mu’awiyah”, <span id="_anchor_209"></span>209 al-Bukhari, without citing
traditions with chain of transmission going back to the Prophet, quoted
two statements ascribed to Ibn Abbas giving an account of Mu’awiyah. In
the first one he said, that he kept

company with the Messenger of Allah, and in the second statement he said
that Mu’awiyah was a faqih!

In regard of the Sham, they claimed that it was the land of assembly
(mahshar) and resurrection, and land of substitutes (abdal)... and that
the descent of Jesus Christ shall be in this land. Here you are with
some of the numerous traditions cited in its regard:

Ahmad, Abu Dawud, al-Baghawi and al-Tabarani and others reported that
the Prophet (S) said: Consider the importance of Sham, as it is Allah’s
choice of the best land, toward which He selects and guides the best of
His bondmen. Allah appointed Himself as the agent to take care of the
Sham and its people.

In another hadith, he said: The Sham is the best choice of Allah in His
land. Toward it He selects and leads the best among His bondmen. Whoever
departs the Sham betaking himself to other than it, will verily deserve
God’s wrath and anger... and whoever enters it coming from other than
it, shall verily be included in His mercy and grace.

Al-Bayhaqi , in al-Dala’il, reports from Abu Hurayrah, through a chain
of transmission, as saying: Caliphate is (confined) in al-Madinah while
the sovereign power is seclusively in the Sham. Ka’b al-Ahbar is
reported to have said: People of Sham are one of God’s swords, with whom
He will verily revenge Himself upon whoever disobeyed Him and rebelled
against His orders!

In another hadith, he (S) said: The Sham will verily be conquerred for
you. When you are asked to choose abodes in it, you have to select a
town that is called Dimashq (Damascus), which is the metropolis of the
Umayyads. It is verily the stronghold of the Muslims during fierce
battles and invasions, and its marquee is situated in a land called
al-Ghawtah.

They (narrators) made of Damascus <span id="_anchor_210"></span>210 the
rabwah (height) to which the holy Qur’an referred in the verse: “...and
We gave them a refuge on a height, a place of flocks and watersprings”.
In a transmitted hadith. Abu Hurayrah made of it one of the cities of
paradise in a hadith with a chain of

transmission reaching to the Prophet, with the following text: Four
cities are among the paradise cities, which being: Mecca, Medina, Quds
and Damascus, whereas the Fire cities are: Constantinople, Tabariyyah,
Antaqi and San’a!

At the time they consider Constantinople in this hadith one of Fire
(Hell) cities, they cite the following hadith on its excellence after
its becoming the aspiration of all sights Constantinople will verily be
conquerred ... what an excellent emir is its emir and what an excellent
army is that army! Probably this hadith was fabricated for the sake of
Yazid ibn Mu’awiyah, since it was him who commanded over the army during
the Constantinople Battle.

I am not intending to follow up whatever is cited on the merit of the
Sham, as it needs a number of separate compilations to cover, as said by
Ibn Taymiyyah in his book Iqtida’ al-Sirat al-mustaqim. <span
id="_anchor_211"></span>211

A group of people composed several works on the advantages of Quds (Bayt
al-Maqdis) and other localities in the Sham, citing in them some of the
transmitted traditions and statements from Ahl al-Kitab and those who
took from them, upon which it is unlawful for Muslims to base and found
their religion. The most outstanding man from whom these falsified
traditions (Israeliyyat) were reported, being Ka’b al-Ahbar, who was the
source of such traditions for the people of Sham.

### Origin of Substitutes Village:

The epithet with which the land of the Sham was distinguished – after
imparting upon it and its people multiple traits – was calling it the
land of abdal (substitutes). This belief was one of the factors that led
to destruction and subversion of Islam, as the Sufis adopted it as a
principle and source for their tariqah (creed; system of belief), on
which they based and constructed their fancies and superstitions.

Al-Waqidi <span id="_anchor_212"></span>212 reported that when Mu’awiyah
returned from Iraq to the Sham, after swearing allegiance to (al-Imam)
al-Hasan (in 41 H), he

addressed people saying: “O people! The Messenger of Allah said: You
will verily succeed me in assuming the post of caliphate! So choose the
socred land that verily contains the substitutes.” Here I have informed
you, so curse Abu Turab! (i.e. Ali ibn Abi Talib). The next day he wrote
a letter, gathering them then and reciting it for them, in which was the
following: This document is written by Amir al-Mu’minin Mu’awiyah, the
owner of the revelation (wahy) of Allah, who delegated Muhammad as a
Prophet, who was illiterate neither knowing to read nor to write. Then
He chose for him from among his family, a trustworthy vizier as a
scribe. When the revelation was sent down to Muhammad, I was writing it
down, without his being aware of what I was writing. No one was there as
an intermediary between me and Allah from among His creatures.” The
attendants there said: You said the truth!! <span
id="_anchor_213"></span>213

As soon as the Sham was described as the land of substitutes by
Mu’awiyah, a number of traditions about these abdal, ascribed to the
Prophet emerged on the scene, among which we can refer to the following:
<span id="_anchor_214"></span>214

1. “The abdal (substitutes) in this Ummah are thirty men, whose hearts
are sympathetic with that of Ibrahim the Friend of Allah. Whenever one
of them dies Allah will verily substitute him with another man (reported
from Ubadah ibn al-Samit).

2. “The substitutes in my Ummah are thirty. With them the earth is
established! And through their help you will be verily triumphant and
will be showered with raining” (reported from Ubadah).

3. “The substitutes are among people of the Sham, through them God will
verily help and provide them with means of living – (reported from Awf
ibn Malik).

4. “The substitutes are in the Sham, and they are forty men. Whenever
one of them deceases, Allah shall substitute him with another man.
Through them rain will be watering the earth and victory will be
obtained against the enemies. With them the torment will be verily
turned away from people of the Sham” – (reported from Ali).

5. “The substitutes are forty men and forty women! Whenever a man

dies Allah will verily substitute him with another man. And whenever a
woman dies Allah will substitute her with another woman” – (from Anas
ibn Malik).

6. “The substitutes are among the mawali (masters)” – (reported from
‘Ata’ ibn Abi Rabah).

A question about these traditions was raised to the traditionist
jurisprudent al-Sayyid Rashid Rida (upon whom be God’s mercy) in the
following way by an inquirer: What is the meaning behind distinguishing
people of the Sham with them? What denotation is indicated by removing
of torment, aiding to triumph and providing by substitutes to people of
the Sham? And are people of the Sham provided with livelihood, helped to
triumph, and delivered from torment seclusively and alone from among
inhabitants of the earth?!

Al-Sayyid gave him a scholastic, attentive and accurate reply, the
abstract of which I present hereunder: <span id="_anchor_215"></span>215

He initiated his speech by saying: “These traditions are altogether
false and invalid in respect of narration and dirayah
(knowledgeability), and also regarding their sanad and text. That which
made them so commonly circulated among the Ummah was the much care and
concern exerted toward it by the Sufis. To all of them a reference was
made by the traditionist Ibn al-Jawzi in his book al-Mawdu’at, who
proved their invalidity one by one. The substitutes traditions were
commonly fabricated by the Sufis, Shi’ah, <span
id="_anchor_216"></span>216 Batinites, and narrators of the foisted
traditions (Israeliyyat) like Ka’b al-Ahbar and others among circulators
of superstitious traditions, other than owners of the correct
traditions. <span id="_anchor_217"></span>217 Our sage the researcher
Ibn Khaldun through his discussion of the science of Sufism in the
introduction to his Ta’rikh, after stating origin of Sufism and
condition of Sufis in respect of knowledge and conduct, said the
following in the very words: <span id="_anchor_218"></span>218

“Then the latters among Sufis and Mutakallimun on revelation (kashf) and
supersensible matters, have penetrated deeply into this subject, in a
way that most of them were believing and calling to compromise solutions

and agreement of opinions, filling the newspapers with this call, like
al-Harawi and others, followed by Ibn al-Arabi, Ibn Sab’in and their
disciple Ibn al-Afif. Their ancestors were coexisting with the
Isma’ilites, the latters among the Rafidites believing too in the
compromises and divinity of the Imams, a doctrine that was never held by
their formers. Consequently each party was imbued with the doctrine of
the other, with their speech being confused and beliefs being
intermingled, and the Sufis starting to believe in the magnate, which
meaning the head of gnostics. They were claiming that no one could be
equal to him in respect of his status in knowledge till God takes his
life, when his position is to be inherited by another gnostic. Moreover
they started to talk about the order of substitutes to follow this
magnate, as held by the Shi’ah regarding the Nuqaba’ (headmen), to the
extent that when intending to find origin of the piece of cloth of
Sufism for making it a principle for their system of belief and
seclusion (takhliyah), they ascribed it to Ali, may God be pleased with
him, the fact included too in this meaning. Otherwise, Ali was not
distinguished from among the Companions with a certain way of seclusion
or manner of wearing or conduct, rather Abu Bakr and Umar were the most
ascetic and devoted in worship after the Messenger of Allah, may God’s
peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny... No one among them
was singled out with any certain act reported about him in particular,
but all the Sahabah were ideal in religiosity, asceticism and strife.
Many of the fuqaha’ and men of verdict (mujtahidun) were commissioned
with the task of refuting and dumbfounding the contemporary writers of
these articles and their likes, including in their disapproval campaign
whatever they faced within the system of belief”.

The scholars of hadith have expressed their views regarding the asanid
(chains of transmission) of these traditions. <span
id="_anchor_219"></span>219 Al-Hafiz Ibn al-Jawzi judged that they were
all fabricated. Followed him in this regard Shaykh al-Islam Ibn
Taymiyyah, al-Sakhawi and al-Suyuti who was one of the disciples of Ibn
Hajar. But the first of them was the most accurate and nearest to
scrutiny. He said: Report of the substitutes has certain methods with
various

words that all being feeble. This saying is closer to truth than that of
Ibn Hajar himself, who said: Some of them are correct and some are
incorrect!”

Al-Sayyid Rashid, after disproving these traditions one by one, said:
Mulla Ali al-Qari reported from Ibn al-Salah about the fabricated
traditions, that he said: The strongest hadith we narrated about the
substitutes being Ali’s utterance: The substitutes will be verily in the
Sham. This saying agrees with what Ibn Taymiyyah said in his treatise
<span id="_anchor_220"></span>220 about Ahl al-Siffah and the Sufis with
respect to the narrator. While the investigation held by Shaykh al-Islam
on this issue with regard to cognizance is truly the end of extremities.
Following are some excerptions of his statements in this regard:

(Section): Concerning the names that were circulated recurringly among a
large number of hermits and common people, such as the succour (ghawth)
that will be in Mecca, the four stakes, the seven magnates, forty
substitutes and three hundred pedigrees (nujaba’), they altogether have
neither existence in the Book of Allah, nor been reported from the
Prophet, may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny,
through a veracious isnad or probable weak one. Excepted from these is
the term Abdal (substitutes), in whose regard a decisively confirmed
Shami hadith is reported from Ali ibn Abi Talib, on the authority of the
Prophet (upon whom be God’s peace and benediction) as saying: “Among
them – i.e. people of the Sham – are the substitutes, who are forty
men...whenever anyone of them dies Allah will verily substitute him with
another man.” The ancestors have never referred throughout their
speeches and researches to these names in the order previously
mentioned…etc.

Then he stated that the term ghawth (help) and ghiyath (helper) can
never fit but to Allah the Exalted. After that, Shaykh al-Islam uttered
some rational sensible words about the issues of stakes (awtad) and
magnate, returning then to the substitutes when he said: “Regarding the
chain (marfu’) hadith, it is more likely not among the utterance of the
Prophet (S), as faith was found in Hijaz and Yemen before the conquests
of the Sham, when the Sham and Iraq were lands of kufr (infidelity).
Furthermore, during the

caliphate of Ali, an authentic hadith was reported from the Prophet (S)
that he said: “A group of renegades will verily rebel against the best
community (firqah) of Muslims, and will be killed by the cult that is
more entitled to truth”. Hence Ali and his companions were more entitled
to truth than those whom he fought from among people of the Sham.

Resuming his speech, al-Sayyid Rashid (may God’s mercy be upon him)
said: “The reason behind what is reported from Ali, may God be pleased
with him, being that some of his followers used to insult and revile
people of the Sham, but he forbade them from that absoluteness saying:
Among them are the Abdal. That is, Allah the Exalted will substitute
from among the supporters of Mu’awiyah with others, or what gives such
meaning. Then some narrators sychophant to the Umayyads, followed by the
Sufis, came and added abundantly to, making of it a chain authentic
hadith, composing other traditions on flattery and censure to be
circulated throughout the famous metropolises.

Ibn Asakir reported that Ka’b al-Ahbar <span id="_anchor_221"></span>221
said: The substitutes are thirty men. He also said: The substitutes are
in the Sham, and the Nujaba’ are in the Kufah. Then he stated a good
number of such sayings reported from that time people about the
substitutes, pedigrees (Nujaba’), heads (Nuqaba’) and the righteous. The
term ‘Abdal’ was the most widely known of these terms, while people
during the 2nd and 3rd centuries were unable to perceive from this word
yet what the Sufis were claiming about it. Rather, al-Imam Ahmad said:
“The substitutes are men of hadith”.

In regard of what these narrations claim that Allah the Most High will
succour people of the Sham and provide them with the substitutes, is
verily one of the defects of their texts and signs of their fabrication.
Since the Almighty Allah made certain means for victory that can be
recognized from His Book and sunan (methods, ways) in His creation. The
best people led by the best of apostles (peace be upon them), fell short
of some of these means during Battle of Uhud, the fact led to their
defeat and be overcome by the polytheists after they were victorious.
When finding that strange and

incredible, the following verse was revealed by Allah the Exalted to His
Messenger (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny)
for demonstrating this fact for them: “What! When a misfortune befell
you (at Uhud) while ye had already inflicted twice as much (on the
disbelievers), ye said: “Whence is this?” Say (unto them, O Muhammad):
“This is from your (own) selves...”

Among these social means and factors is the one manifested by God
through these words: “...if ye help (in the way of) God, He will (also)
help you”, and also through His saying: “...and quarrel ye not, for then
ye will be weakened in heart, and will depart your power...”

And among the spiritual and moral means of victory it can be referred to
the holy verse: (“O’ ye who believe!) when ye meet a party (the
contingent of the infidels) then be firm, and remember God much, (that
ye be successful).”

After throwing light upon the wretchedness and straitened conditions
experienced by people of the Sham in 1927, <span
id="_anchor_222"></span>222 with the French troops devastating their
homeland, and many of them starving to death, he (al-Sayyid Rashid)
said: So where are those substitutes and where are their secrets?!

Then he concluded his utterance by saying:

“These narrations have demolished the might of the Islamic Ummah, with
the Sufis and followers of this system turning to be a sedition for all
the Muslims, startling away those having intellectual independence and
modern sciences, from Islam, deeming it as a religion of superstitions
and fancies like other religions. They were also a shame to the Muslims
before the advanced peoples of the world. Their ignorance and corrupt
religion and morals reached an extent that they became collaborators for
France in Africa from frontiers of Tunisia up to the cultivated land of
Morocco. It is high time to comprehend and perceive our religion from
the Qur’an not from these abominable narrations which diverted us far
from the Book of Allah and Sunnah of His Messenger (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny), that are neither liable to
interpretation nor can be subjected to perversion. The

time has come to tread under foot all those misleading perverters with
all their supporters and those interpolating (the facts) for them from
among the sacristans of the worshipped tombs, due to the belief
prevailed among common people that sustenance and world felicity can be
acquired from those buried under earth. Because of such superstition our
Ummah became downtrodden under the feet of all nations, with its common
people keeping on to believe that the dead and invisible men are the
source of its sustenance and keeping it safe against misfortune.” <span
id="_anchor_223"></span>223

  
  
  

203. This saying and its holders have brought so much detriment to
people, in respect of their religion and life.

204. The following basis was laid down by them in this regard: "Unless
the intercession be there, the intercessor would be of no use."

205. Refer to the section: Fabrication of hadith for rhetoric speech, in
this book.

206. Kashf al-khafa', vol. II, p. 409.

207. Ibn Khallikan, vol. II, p. 113.

208. Abu al-Bukhtari was the judge of al-Madinah after Bakkar ibn Abd
Allah. After that he undertook adjudication of Baghdad after Abu Yusuf,
the companion of Abu Hanifah. He died in 200 H. during the caliphate of
al-Ma'mun. Tafsir al-Qurtubi, vol. I, p. 69.

209. In his exposition of this bab, Ibn Hajar said: "Notice: Al-Bukhari
used, in this statement, the word dhikr (remembrance) not the word
fadilah (virtue) nor manqabah (merit), since the virtue cannot be
understood from the hadith of this section, as out of Ibn Abbas'
acknowledging of his fiqh and companionship indicates much honour. In
al-mawdu'at, Ibn al-Jawzi reported that Ibn Rahawayh said: No hadith on
excellences of Mu'awiyah has been confirmed, so al-Bukhari's refraining
from using the word manqabah (for Mu'awiyah) came in fact in reliance
upon the utterance of his shaykh 'Ibn Rahawayh'. The same can be said in
regard of al-Nasa'i when he depended on words of his shaykh Ishaq, and
so also with al-Hakim. Ibn al-Jawzi reported again from Ibn Abd Allah
ibn Ahmad ibn Hanbal as saying: I asked my father: How do you view Ali
and Mu'awiyah? He paused for a while and then said: You should know that
Ali had so many enemies, who endeavoured to find any fault for him, but
on failing they resorted to a man who fought against him, flattering him
out of vengeance against Ali. Then this man embarked on citing many
merits for Mu'awiyah, which were invented by his followers, that having
no origin whatsoever. So many ahadith were reported showing excellences
of Mu'awiyah, but no one of them could prove to be correct through isnad
(chain of transmitters), the fact determined by Ishaq ibn Rahawayh and
al-Nasa'i and others. And God knows better. Thus ended the speech of Ibn
Hajar, in Fath al-Bari, vol. VII, p. 83. Concerning the story of
al-Nasa'i (to which Ibn Hajar referred), who is the author of one of
widely-known hadith books, it was reported by al-Dhahabi who said: When
being in Damascus, al-Nasa'i was inquired about merit's of Mu'awiyah,
when he said: Isn't he pleased to be compared head to head (i.e. to be
likened to Ali), so as to be preferred? Al-Dhahabi says: Then people
kept on pushing him till driving him out of the majlis (meeting), when
he was carried toward Kufah where he died.

210. Of what is narrated in regard of excellence of Damascus, I can
refer to what is reported by Abu Dawud, from Abu al-Darda', that he
said: The Messenger of Allah (S) said: The fustat (tent) of Muslims on
the day of epic in Ghautah, at the region near a city called Damascus,
which is the best of the cities of the Sham.

211. See p. 208, and refer too to my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

212. Sharh Nahj al-balaghah, p. 261.

213. Mu'awiyah was never one of scribes of revelation (wahy), and had
never inscribed even one word of the Qur'an.

214. These traditions are cited by al-Suyuti in his book al-Jami'
al-saghir.

215. Journal of al-Manar, vol. XXVII, pp. 747-754.

216. The Shi'ah categorically deny their participation in fabrication of
substitutes (abdal) traditions, since they had no abdal, so as to
compose traditions for them, nor they acknowledged them at all.

217. The eminent 'alim al-Izz ibn Abd al-Salam had a printed treatise
about the abdaI, ghawth qutub (magnate), and the nujaba' (the
dignified), stating in it that these names have no origin in Islam and
were not reported from the Prophet (S), neither in a sahih tradition nor
a weak one.

218. Refer to the Muqaddimah, Edition of Beirut, p. 473.

219. That is the traditions of substitutes (abdal).

220. It is the 3rd treatise in the book al-Rasa'i wa al-masa'il of Ibn
Taymiyyah.

221. In every place there is trace for Tha'labah.

222. The year in which this fatwa was written.

223. Let those who still look at the realities with obstinacy hear this.
