The Abbasid State:
==================

  
  

While many traditions were reported on merit of Mu’awiyah and the Sham,
the Abbasid State had also a good share of traditions in its support
after disintegration of the Umayyad State, and establishment of the
Abbasid State on its debris. The following are some of them:

Al-Bazzaz reported on the authority of Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger
of Allah said to al-Abbas: “Prophethood and kingdom will be verily among
you”. It is also reported by Abu Na’im in al-Dala’il, Ibn Adiyy in
al-Kamil, and Ibn Asakir who reported it thus: “Among you shall be the
Prophethood and among you shall be the kingdom.”

Al-Tirmidhi reported from Ibn Abbas, that the Messenger of Allah (S)
prayed for al-Abbas with the following supplication: (O God), make
caliphate perpetual in his descent.

Al-Tabarani reported that the Messenger of Allah (S) said: Successorship
will be verily among my cousins and full brother of my father, till they
hand it over to Christ. <span id="_anchor_224"></span>224

Fabrication of hadith extended to include al-Saffah. Ahmad reported from
Abu Sa’id al-Khudri that the Messenger of Allah said: At the end of the
Time and occurrence of seditions, a man from my household will verily
appear, that will be called al-Saffah!!

Since course of speech is about the Abbasid State, we quote here

what al-Suyuti reported, in his book Ta’rikh al-khulafa’, about
al-Mutawakkil, saying:

He has showed inclination toward the Sunni creed, supported its
followers, sending for the narrators to come to Samarra’, giving them
abundantly, and ordering them to narrate traditions related to traits
and vision. People embarked on praying to God for al-Mutawakkil,
exaggerating in extolling and glorifying him, that even some would say:
The (real) caliphs are only three: Abu Bakr al-Siddiq due to
exterminating the apostates (Ahl al-Riddah), Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz due to
his restoration of the seized trusts (mazalim), and al-Mutawakkil due to
his revival of the Sunnah and mortification of frowning.

As some of the eminent historians stated, some of the consequences and
traces left for us by the Abbasid State, were dispersion of word of
Islam, obliteration of the name of Arabs with the State being controlled
by the Daylamites and then the Turks who founded for themselves a great
sovereignty, after which the world kingdoms were divided into several
parts!

### Censuring the Turks:

On the occasion of making a reference to the Turks I intend to say:
Al-Mu’tasim <span id="_anchor_225"></span>225 brought a large number of
the Turks into the country till they occupied everywhere in Baghdad,
embarking on annoying and oppressing its people, who were averse to
their coming, since they constituted a bad omen for them wherever they
be. Then the traditionists started to narrate traditions on censuring
the turks, ascribing them to the Prophet (S), some of which are the
following:

“Verily the Turks are the first to plunder of my Ummah whatever be on
their way”.

Ibn Abbas also reported that the Prophet said:

“Kingdom – or caliphate – shall be verily among my sons (or
descendants), till they – at the peak of might – be conquerred by the
red-faced

people, whose faces are like hammered pots.

Abu Hurayrah reported that the Prophet said:

The Last Hour (Doomsday) will never come before the coming of
wide-faced, small-eyed, flat-nosed people, who will tie their horses at
the coast of Tigris. It was reported also by Ahmad in his Musnad from
Abu Hurayrah with different wording: The Messenger of Allah said: The
Doomsday will not come till you fight the Turks, who are small-eyed,
red-faced and flat-nosed, and whose faces resemble harmed pots.

Besides, the Constantinople hadith was previously referred to. Anyone
asking for more traditions can refer to al-Suyuti’s Ta’rikh al-khulafa’.

How Fabrication of Hadith was Permitted
---------------------------------------

It was not for fabricators of hadith to let alone their science without
supporting it with evidences permitting and justifying whatever they
used to compose. Al-Tahawi, in al-Mushkil, reported a hadith from Abu
Hurayrah, that the Prophet said: Whenever you are told a hadith from me,
that you know and never deny (by mind), you have to believe it, whether
I actually uttered it or not! Verily I utter that which can be known and
not denied. And when it is reported to you a hadith from me, that you
deny and never recognize, you have to disbelieve it, as I never utter
that which is to be disapproved and cannot be known.

A similar hadith was reported by Ahmad, that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said: When hearing any hadith ascribed to me, with which your hearts are
acquainted and toward which you incline, finding it near to you, I am
verily more entitled than you to it. But when you hear a hadith from me,
which your hearts disapprove and from which your senses are alienated,
finding it quite far from your conception, I will be verily farther than
you from it. Al-Sayyid Rashid Rida says that the isnad (chain of
transmission) of this hadith is good and authentic. <span
id="_anchor_226"></span>226

Khalid ibn Yazid is reported to have said: I heard Muhammad ibn Sa’id
al-Dimashqi saying: When the speech being fluent, I see no harm in
finding an isnad for it. <span id="_anchor_227"></span>227

In al-Hilyah, he reported from Ibn Mahdi, from Abu Luhay’ah that he
heard a shaykh from among the Kharijites saying (after repenting): These
traditions are verily a religion, so you should be careful from whom you
take your religion. We used to invent a hadith for anything we desired
much.

The traditionist Ibn Hajar says: By God these traditions are actually
backbreaking to those arguing with the mursal (hadith), as the heresy of
Khawarij was during the early period of Islam with the presence of so
many Companions, extending then to the age of the Tabi’un and those
succeeding them.

When these people admire and approve of anything, they make of it a
hadith with circulating it everywhere. Then it may happen that someone
would hear something, relating it then without referring to that who
firstly narrated it, out of good intention. From him it will be reported
by another one, after whom comes that arguing with the assertives and
takes it as a means for argumentation, despite its origin to which we
referred before!

  
  
  

224. The prophecy of the hadith came true, as sovereignty remainted in
the hands of Banu al-Abbas till the Jesus Christ received it from them!!

225. Mother of al-Mu'tasim was Turkish.

226. Tafsir al-Manar, Vol. IX, p. 228.

227. Sharh al-Nawawi ala Muslim, Vol. I, p.33.
