The Righteous Fabricators
=========================

  
  
  

Fabrication of hadith against the Messenger of Allah was not confined
only to enemies of Din and capricious people – as we stated before – but
some of the righteous among Muslims used to do so thinking it to be a
merit bringing them nearer to Allah, and yet they reckon that by this
they do good work. When questioning them: Why do you lie against the
Messenger of Allah? They would say: We lie for him not against him! And
the one to blame for falsity is that who did it on purpose!

Muslim reported in his book from Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan as saying: We
have never found the righteous falsifying in anything more than that in
hadith. In another narration: We have never seen the munificent people

telling lies in anything more than in hadith. That is as Muslim put it:
falsity comes out from their mouths incidentally or inadvertently not
deliberately. <span id="_anchor_228"></span>228 Muslim reported on the
authority of Abu al-Zinad that he said: I met a hundred men in Medina,
all of whom were trustworthy, and hadith was not taken from them. <span
id="_anchor_229"></span>229

Ibn Hajar writes: Some of the ignorants, after being self-conceited,
embarked on fabricating traditions of temptation and intimidation
saying: We haven’t told lies against him, but we did so for backing his
Shari’ah!! <span id="_anchor_230"></span>230

They were unaware that ascribing to him (S) that which he never said,
entails falsity against Allah, since it asserts a legal judgement or
decree, whether an obligatory or recommendable one. And so also
regarding their opposites: the haram (unlawful) and makruh
(reprehensible). No consideration is to be given to opposers to this
from among the Karamiyyah, who permitted composing of falsity in cases
of temptation and intimidation, for confirming the rules cited in the
Qur’an and the Sunnah, arguing that it be falsity for him not against
him, which is verily an ignorance of the Arabic language. <span
id="_anchor_231"></span>231

Abd Allah al-Nahawandi says: I said to the lad of Ahmad: Wherefrom you
brought these traditions which you relate through the parchments? He
replied: We fabricated them for making the hearts of people mild and
sympathetic. About this lad (servant), Ibn al-Jawzi said: He was an
ascetic who used to forsake the worldly pleasures and lusts, living on
eating the broad-beans merely... on the day of his death all the markets
of Baghdad were closed (as a sign of mourning).

And Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Faqih al-Maruzi was the most opinionated and
strongest defender of the Sunnah in his time, degrading whoever
contradicting it. Despite all that, he was among those known of
composing and perverting the hadith.

In al-Ta’rikh al-awsat, al-Bukhari reported from Umar ibn Sabih ibn
Imran al-Tamimi, that he said: I was the one who composed the Prophet’s
sermon.

In al-Madkhal, al-Hakim on the authority of Abu Ammar al-Maruzi, that it
was said to Abu ‘Ismah: Wherefrom you got these traditions from
‘Ikrimah, from Ibn Abbas on the merits of the Qur’an, surah by surah,
while they can never be found with the companions of ‘Ikrimah? He said:
When I found people turning away from the Qur’an, engaging themselves in
the fiqh of Abu Hanifah and incursions of Ibn Ishaq, I fabricated this
hadith for seeking favour.

### A Witty Saying:

Not satisfied with all this, they would even fabricate hadith for
trivial reasons. One of the traditions that al-Hakim reported on the
authority of Sayf ibn Umar al-Tamimi, <span id="_anchor_232"></span>232
that he said: I was in the company of Sa’d ibn Tarif, when his son
returned from the elementary school crying! His father inquired him:
What is the matter with you? The teacher has beaten me. He said: I will
verily disgrace them today!

‘Ikrimah reported from Ibn Abbas a hadith ascribed to the Prophet as
saying: “The teachers of your boys are the wicked among you ... the
least of them in pitiness toward the orphan, and the rudest toward the
indigent”.

There are innumerable reports in this regard.

### Fabrication Through Inclusion:

Sometimes the narrator may compose some addition to the hadith
indeliberately, which was to the hadith indeliberately, which was
considered by traditionists as inclusion (idraj). The mudraj tradition
was a term used for a hadith having an addition that was not originally
found in it. Scholars of hadith say that inclusion is of two kinds:
Inclusion (idraj) in the isnad (chain of transmission) and inclusion in
the text.

The text inclusion comes at the beginning of the hadith, like hadith of
Abu Hurayrah that was reported by al-Khatib saying: The Messenger of
Allah said: “Complete the ablution, woe be to those lagging behind from
the

Fire (hell)”. The words” complete (asbighu) the ablution” are included
by Abu Hurayrah.

Idraj may occur also in the midst of the hadith like hadith of Faddalah
reported by al-Nasa’i that the Prophet said: “I am a za’im (guarantor of
paradise) – and za’im is hamil (undertaker) – for that who believes in
me and struggles on the way of Allah, with a house in the gardens of
heavens”. His saying: ‘and the za’im (guarantor) is the undertaker’ is
included by him into the hadith.

In regard of the inclusion at the end of the hadith, it occurred in the
eclipse hadith which was recorded in the Sahih that (the Prophet said):
The sun and moon are verily two signs (marvels) among God’s signs
(ayat). They never eclipse because of the death or life of anyone. When
you see this, betake yourselves to remembrance of Allah and prayers
(salat). Al-Ghazzali says that the reporting of this addition was not
confirmed, so its utterer should be belied.

### Can the Fabricated Hadith be Recognized:

The investigators have stated generalities through which recognizing
which hadith being fabricated becomes feasible:

Its contradiction to the Qur’an and authentic successive Sunnah or
decisive unanimity or determined rules of the Shari’ah, or to the
rational proof, or to the senses and conspicuousness and all
certainties. Or the hadith’s including temerities in regard of promise
and threats, reward and punishment. Or its being contradictory to the
rules brought by the clear Sunnah, or the hadith’s being invalid by
itself, or its invalidity being established by correct evidences. Or the
hadith’s being unlike the speech of prophets, or its being nearer to the
speech of physicians, or its containing the chronicles of coming days,
or its being awkward or a laughing-stock or other than this. Among them
also are those traditions on whose baselessness several veracious
evidences, or established knowledge experiments, or those ones that

be poor in meaning.

Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani writes: From the word ‘poor’ the meaning is
intended, and whenever it is found it indicates presence of fabrication,
as this religion (Islam) comprises only good points, while poorness in
wording never indicates this, due to the possibility that the hadith
being reported according to meaning by the narrator who might exchange
its words with non-eloquent ones.

Ibn al-Jawzi said: The disapproved hadith makes knowledge-seeker
shudder, with causing his heart to have aversion to it, particularly
that one using the terms of the law-maker, having experience in them,
their splendour and resplendence.

He also said: When finding the hadith contrary to the reasonable or
incongruous to the manqul (transmitted), or opposite to the usul
(principles), only then you should know that it is fabricated.

Al-Rabi’ ibn Khaytham says: Hadith has a light identical to the daylight
that is manifest for all, and a darkness like that of night that is
ignored, (reported by al-Khatib).

Ibn Abi Hatam reported from Ibn Mas’ud as saying: Whenever I relate to
you any hadith I verily give you an evidence confirming it from the Book
of Allah.

Ibn Jubayr says: I never received any hadith with its shape, without
finding its confirmation in the Book of Allah. <span
id="_anchor_233"></span>233

Al-Bayhaqi reported on the authority of Ibn Abbas that he said: Whenever
I relate to you any hadith from the Messenger of Allah, the confirmation
of which you can never find in the Book, <span
id="_anchor_234"></span>234 or it may seem good in the eyes of people,
it will be verily false. <span id="_anchor_235"></span>235

It is out of scope here to enumerate all the composed traditions, of
which Ibn al-Jawzi and al-Suyuti and others compiled numerous volumes,
to which any knowledge-seeker can refer.

In his book Qawa’id al-tahdith, al-Qasimi has dedicated a section on the
fabricated hadith, concluding it with two chapters, the titles and
summary

of which are the following:

### Can We Recognize the Fabricated without Looking into its Sanad?

Al-Imam Shams al-Din ibn al-Qayyim was asked once: Is it possible to
recognize the fabricated hadith through a regulation without looking
into its sanad (chain of transmission)? He replied.

This is truly a very important question. This (fabricated) hadith can
only be recognized by that who is thoroughly acquainted with knowing the
correct sunan, in a way they be intermingled with his flesh and blood,
and he having an instinctive knowledge and good talent in recognizing
the sunan and old methods. Besides knowing the sirah (biography) of the
Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God’s peace and benediction), with his
guiding directions including to which he bids and from which he forbids,
of what he apprises and to what he invites, what he loves and what he
detests, and what he legislates for the Ummah, as if he enjoyed his (S)
company for a long time. Such a man can verily be acquainted with his
conditions, guidance, speech, acts and sayings, and what is permissible
to tell and what is impermissible, that which can never be realized by
others. This is verily the state of every followed (matbu’) with his
follower, as his favorite, who is serious in following up his words and
deeds, out of knowledge of them, and distinguishing between what is
proper to ascribe to him and what is improper to ascribe, ... such one
differs from that who is deprived of such traits...etc.

Ibn Daqiq al-‘Id is reported to have said: “Most often charging with
composition (of hadith) happens to be due to things related to what is
narrated and words of the hadith. The conclusion of this is due to the
fact that, because of the extensive use and transmission of the
Prophet’s words and expressions, these people came to possess a
psychological fashion and strong intuition through which they could
recognize which of the Prophet’s words are more proper to be used and
which are not”.

### Whole Heart Has Full Knowledge of the Fabricated Hadith:

In another chapter, Abu al-Hasan Ali ibn Urwah al-Hanbali is reported to
have said:

“If the heart be pure, clean and sanctified, it will be able to discern
between right and falsehood, truth and lie, and guidance and
misguidance, especially when being bestowed with illumination and
adroitness from the Prophetic light. Only then it shall have the power
to penetrate and find out the concealed facts and hidden aspects, with
discerning between the veracious and the falsified. And even if correct
isnad was combined to a text of composed words ascribed to the
Messenger, or feeble isnad to a sahih text, it would be able to
distinguish, recognize and taste this, discerning between the lean and
strong, correct and false among them, as the Messenger’s words can never
be hidden from a sane man who experienced them. For this reason the
Prophet (S) said: “Be cautious of the physiognomy of the believer as he
sees with the light of Allah.” <span id="_anchor_236"></span>236 This
hadith was reported by al-Tirmidhi from Abu Sa’id. Some of the ancestors
commented on the holy Qur’anic verse: “Verily in this are signs for
those who scan heedfully, taking the word ‘mutawassimin” to mean those
who practise physiognomy (firasah).

Mu’adh ibn Jabal said: “Verily for truth there is a beacon like the road
light-stand.”

Further, the sincere pure heart can sense and recognize any deviation
and perversion in deeds and conduct. Whenever hearing any hadith, it can
immediately recognize its real source, though no one of the memorizers
and critics had any say about it. Anyone whose acts be sincerely devoted
for Allah, in conformity with the Sunnah, would be able to discern
between things: their falsity and truth.

Every truthful smart person is inspired by Allah, the Glorified and
Exalted, the ability to discern between truth and falsity as the hadith
affirms: “Truth (sidq) is peacefulness and calmness and falsity is
suspicion”. He (S) said to Wasibah: “Consult your heart”. The Prophet
left his Ummah with clear signs, its night be like its day. And the
Messenger’s utterance has a

veneration and fluency that no other person can ever possess.

Ibn Taymiyyah says: When the pious heart recommences and seeks its own
opinion, this will verily be a legal preponderance. Whenever it appears
and that heart comes to think that this matter or that speech being
better pleasing to Allah and His Messenger, this would be a
preponderance with a legal proof. Mistaken are those who denied the
inspiration not being absolutely a means for attaining to realities. As
when man does his best and strives on the way of God’s obedience and
piety, his preference for what he preponderated would be stronger than
numerous feeble evidences. So inspiration of this would be an evidence
on its behalf, which is more forceful than many of the weak and fancied
analogies, phenomena and istishabat that are used as means of
argumentation by those concerned with schools of thought, controversy
and usul al-fiqh (principles of jurisprudence).

Umar said: “Truth (haqq) is apparent, and can’t be concealed from any
intelligent one”. Hudhayfah ibn al-Yeman is reported to have said:
“Inside the believer’s heart there is a lamp that is blooming”. And as
stronger as faith becoming inside the heart, all things would be
disclosed before it and it would be able to recognize and discern the
real from the false ones. The opposite is true, that is whenever faith
becoming faint, ability to discover realities would become weaker, in
the same way as the effect of the strong and weak lamp inside a dark
house.

In Sahih al-Bukhari it is reported that the Prophet said: “Among the
nations that preceded you there were inspired (muhaddath) people, and if
one of them is to be found among my Ummah, Umar shall be verily that
one.” The muhaddath is that who is inspired and addressed in secrecy.
Abu Sulayman al-Darani used to call Ahmad ibn ‘Asim al-Antaki with the
epithet “Heart Spy” (Jasus al-Qulb) due to the sharpness of his
physiognomy.

Thus we concluded the briefed quotation from these two chapters. <span
id="_anchor_237"></span>237

Among the criteria through which we can recognize sahih (veracious)
hadith, first its being not discarded by good taste and adroitness like
hadith of flies, and also its non-being contradictory to the sublime
objectives of Islam

that are aimed at bringing felicity to man in this world and hereafter.

### Liars and Their Slanders against the Prophet:

Hammad ibn Zayd is reported to have said:

The Zanadiqah (atheists) have fabricated twelve thousand traditions,
ascribing them to the Messenger of Allah (S).

Al-Mahdi said: One of the Zanadiqah has confessed before me that he
composed four hundred traditions, and they were being circulated and
conveyed among people.

Ibn Asakir reported that a zindiq was brought once to al-Rashid who gave
his orders to behead him, when he (zindiq) said: O Amir al-Mu’minin,
aren’t you aware of four thousand traditions I fabricated, in which I
forbid what is lawful (halal) and deem lawful what is forbidden (in the
Qur’an). It is reported too that when Abd al-Karim ibn Abi al-Awja’
intended to behead him, he said: I have composed for you four thousand
traditions forbidding through them what is lawful, and sanctioning what
is unlawful (haram).

Ishaq ibn Rahawayh, who was the teacher of al-Bukhari, said: I commit to
memory four thousand falsified traditions.

Sahl ibn al-Sirri al-Hafiz says: Ahmad ibn Abd Allah al-Jubyari,
Muhammad ibn Ukashah al-Kirmani and Muhammad ibn Tamim al-Farabi
falsified and fabricated more than ten thousand traditions against the
Messenger of Allah.

Al-Bukhari writes: I commit to memory one hundred correct traditions and
two hundred falsified traditions. Reports (akhbar) in this respect are
countless, and whoever wants to get acquainted with more of them can
refer to their sources, especially al-Suyuti’s book Tahdhir al-Khawass.

This is the last point I quote here, which I deem sufficient.

### Traditions Fabricated by the Jews

When the Muhammadan Da’wah (invitation) got so much valour and

prowess, becoming much strong, with smash of all the powers and forces
combating it, those opposing and restraining it found no choice but to
hatch plans and conspire against it through trickery and deceit, after
failing in weakening it through means of force and contest.

Since the most vehement of mankind in hostility to those who believe are
the Jews, as they allege to be God’s chosen people, recognizing no
favour for any other nation, admitting no scripture for any prophet
after Moses, their rabbis and monks found no other means – especially
after being overcome and driven forth from their homes <span
id="_anchor_238"></span>238 – but to resort to cunning and use finesse
to attain to their sought desire. Hence the Jewish artifice led them to
pretend and show Islam, concealing their religion inside their hearts,
so as to hide their resentment, and deceive the Muslims. The influential
and vehement in cunning among these priests were Ka’b al-Ahbar, Wahb ibn
Munabbih and Abd Allah ibn Sallam.

When observing that their tricks have found way and prevailed among
people, due to their false pretense of godliness and piety, and the
Muslims having confidence in and being beguiled by them, they resolved
first to direct a fatal blow to the Muslims, to the core of their
religion. This was achieved by foisting into the foundations on which
religion was established, the legends, superstitions, fancies and
trifles in order to enfeeble and undermine these foundations and
principles.

On failing to degrade the holy Qur’an due to its being preserved through
tadwin (writing), memorized by thousands of Muslims, and immune against
addition of one word or insertion of one letter, they resorted to
fabricating and foisting so many traditions that were never uttered by
the Prophet. <span id="_anchor_239"></span>239 What helped them to do so
was the fact that the Prophet’s traditions were not of determined signs,
nor of preserved roots and sources, since they were never inscribed
during his life-time as was the case with the Qur’an, nor committed to
writing by his Companions after his demise. This fact made it possible
for every capricious or evil-intentioned one to foist into them as much
as he liked, and assault them with falsity.

That which even facilitated and paved the way for their deception was
the fact that the Companions used to refer to them to get the solutions
for the questions regarding the affairs of the past world that were
unknown to them. And the Jews, due to the Scripture they possessed, and
the ulama’ they had, were considered teachers for the Arabs in respect
of all the issues related to ancient religions, if they be sincere and
honest. The sage Ibn Khaldun, <span id="_anchor_240"></span>240 when
discussing the traditional (naqli) interpretation and stating that it
included the meagre and the stout, the acceptable and disapproved, is
reported to have said:

“The reason behind this is that the Arabs were not people of a scripture
or knowledge, but most of them were bedouins and illiterate, who when
desiring to have information about origin of the universe, beginning of
creation and mysteries of existence, they would inquire people of the
Book (Ahl al-Kitab) and get all the solutions from them. <span
id="_anchor_241"></span>241 Among them were the Jews, followers of the
Torah and those who followed their religion from among the Christians,
like Ka’b al-Ahbar, Wahb ibn Munabbih and Abd Allah ibn Sallam and their
likes. Then books of exegesis were filled with the traditions they
reported, with the exegetes showing leniency toward such fabrications,
the source of all of which was the Torah, or whatever they used to
falsify and forge.”

In another place of his Maqaddimah <span id="_anchor_242"></span>242 he
said:

“Most often the historians and exegetes have committed so many errors in
the episodes and events they used to report with the leaders of
transmission, due to their dependence on mere transmission whether be
poor or authentic, without subjecting them to their sources, nor
comparing with their likes, nor fathoming them with the criterion of
wisdom, to comprehend the temperaments of the creatures, nor
investigating the veracity of the reports, going astray from path of
truth and wandering in the desert of deception and error.”

Dr. Ahmad Amin also said:

“Some of the Companions used to frequent to Wahb ibn Munabbih,

Ka’b al-Ahbar and Abd Allah ibn Sallam, while the Tabi’un (Followers)
used to refer to Ibn Jarih. All these men got information they used to
report from the Torah and Gospel, with their expositions and margins, so
the Muslims found no harm to relate them beside the Qur’anic verses, the
fact leading to their becoming another source of overproduction.” <span
id="_anchor_243"></span>243

For all this, the rabbis embarked on propagating within the Islamic
religion, so many falsities and trifles claiming them once to be taken
from their scripture or latent knowledge, and another time to be among
what they heard from the Prophet (S), while they being in fact foisted
and forged by them. How could the Companions discern between truth and
falsity in the rabbis’ utterances, while they were on one hand unaware
of the Hebrew <span id="_anchor_244"></span>244 language which was used
in their books, and on the other they were less than them (rabbis) in
sagacity and weaker in cunning. Therefore these falsities became so
current and circulated among the Companions and their followers who used
to take whatever those cunning men were relating without any
investigation or verification, considering it to be certainly correct
(sahih).

Before embarking on demonstrating some of the Jewish falsified
traditions with which books of tafsir (exegesis) and hadith and history
were replete, I would like to refer briefly to the biographies of the
chiefs of these rabbis: Ka’b al-Ahbar, Wahb and Abd Allah ibn Sallam.

  
  
  

228. This being in fact one of the misfortunes of that word
"muta'ammidan" (deliberately), to which cling those who claim to be
among the muhaddithun (Fath al-mulham, Vol. I, p. 132).

229. One of the rules in which they believe being:
Piety never necessitates veracity of narration.

230. Fath al-Bari, Vol. I, p. 161.

231. I wish the Hashwiyyah apprehend what is said by Ibn Hajar. But
wherefrom they can have understanding or apprehension!

232. This Sayf ibn Umar was a big liar and was the most famous among
those from  whom al-Tabari reported in his Ta'rikh and other books.

233. Al-Mirqat, p. 39.

234. That is the Book of Allah.

235. Al-Suyuti, Miftah al-Jannah fi al-ihtijaj bi al-Sunnah, p. 17.

236. Aws ibn Hajar said: The brilliant who suspects you, is like that
who has seen and heard.

237. See pp. 147 - 155.

238. Umar evacuated the Jews of Khaybar toward Adhra'at and other places
in the year 20H., and evacuated the Jews of Najran toward the Kufah,
dividing then al-Qura Valley and Najran among the Muslims (Ibn Kathir's
al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VIII, p. 108). He did so with those who
had no covenant from the Messenger of Allah (S).

239. Ibn al-Jawzi says: When no one managed to foist into the Qur'an
anything strange to it, some people started to add to the hadith and
fabricate things that were never uttered in origin (Ta'rikh Ibn Asakir,
vol. II, p. XIV).

240. Muqaddimat Ibn Khaldun, pp. 439,440.

241. Ibn Ishaq used to defend the Jews and Christians calling them in
his books 'people of first knowledge (Mu'jam al-udaba', Vol. XVIII,
p.8).

242. Al-Muqaddimah, p.9.

243. Duha al-Islam, Vol.II, p. 139.

244. Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Hurayrah as saying:
People of the Book (Ahl al-Kitab) used to read the Torah with the Hebrew
language, interpreting it with the Arabic for the Muslims (Vol. II,
p.285).


