Ka’b and Umar:
==============

  
  
  

On his arrival to al-Madinah and announcing his Islam, during the reign
of Umar, Ka’b embarked on employing his sagacity and cunning for

attaining to the goal for which he embraced Islam: that is corrupting
the religion and fabricating lies against the Prophet (S).

The fact that prompted him to narrate and fabricate hadith was that Umar
ibn al-Khattab, in the beginning of his rule, used to listen and heed to
him, taking into consideration his becoming a Muslim of true faith, the
fact pushing him to falsify as many as he could of traditions. Ibn
Kathir says: <span id="_anchor_264"></span>264 “When Ka’b embraced Islam
during government of Umar, he started to relate hadith to Umar, who used
to pay attention to him, the fact that paved the way before people to
listen to his narrations and convey his fabricated weak traditions.”

But so soon Umar took notice of his stratagem and discovered his evil
intention, when he forbade him from narrating the hadith, threatening
him with exile to the land of apes shouldn’t he leave reporting hadith
from the first. <span id="_anchor_265"></span>265

Despite Umar’s lying in wait for this crafty man with his decisiveness
and wisdom, penetrating into his wicked designs through his insight and
discernment, as seen in the rock story, but the extreme cunning and
artifice of this Jew (Ka’b) managed to overcome Umar’s perception and
good intention. So he continued to hatch plots, secretly and openly,
till they were concluded with murder of Umar. All evidences indicate
clearly that this murder was a plot engineered by an underground
society, among whose senior members being this cunning man, and headed
by Hormuzan, King of Khozustan, <span id="_anchor_266"></span>266 who
was brought as a captive to the Medina. The execution of this plot was
entrusted to the non-Arab Abu Lu’lu’ah.

### Murder of Umar and Ka’b’s Hand in It:

Al-Musawwar ibn Makhramah <span id="_anchor_267"></span>267 reported
that when Umar went home after being threatened by Abu Lu’lu’ah, he was
visited by Ka’b al-Ahbar <span id="_anchor_268"></span>268 who said to
him: O Amir al-Mu’minin, I am certain that you will die within three
nights. (According to al-Tabari’s narration: three days). He said:

How could you know this? He said: It is mentioned in the Torah. Umar
said: Do you find name of Umar ibn al-Khattab in the Torah? He replied:
It is not so, but I find in it your ornament and attribute, and that the
end of your life is approaching. When he uttered these words Umar was
never feeling any pain. The next day, Ka’b came to Umar saying: Only two
days are left. After passage of another day, Ka’b came to him and said:
Two days passed and only one day is left. In another narration by
al-Tabari: One day and one night are left, and it (night) is yours up to
its morning.

The next morning, Umar went out for (establishing) prayers, charging
some men with the task of arranging the rows, when he would utter the
takbirah (God is Greater). At that time Abu Lu’lu’ah entered among the
rows, holding a two-headed dagger with its haft being in its centre
part. He stabbed Umar six times, one of which being under his navel,
which led to his death. It is known that Abu Lu’lu’ah was one of
Nahavand captives.

In a narration reported by Abu Ishaq from Ibn Sa’d, it is said: Ka’b
came to Umar and said to him: “Haven’t I told you that you will never
die but only as a martyr while you say: “How would that happen while I
be in the Arab Peninsula?” <span id="_anchor_269"></span>269

I present here an unusual report conveyed by this priest, that can
eradicate any doubt you may have regarding his collaboration in this
conspiracy. Al-Khatib reported on the authority of Malik, that Umar
entered upon his wife Umm Kulthum one day, and saw her weeping, when he
said: What is the reason of your crying? She replied: This Jew, <span
id="_anchor_270"></span>270 i.e. Ka’b al-Ahbar ... he says that you will
stand (on Doomsday) at one of Fire gates. Umar said: Masha’Allah! Then
he went out and sent for Ka’b al-Ahbar, who came to him and said: O Amir
al-Mu’minin, do not speed things up. By Him in Whose hand is my soul,
(month of) Dhu al-Hijjah will never end till you enter paradise. Umar
said: What is that (you say)? Once you say I will be in paradise, and
another time in Fire?! Ka’b said: O Amir al-Mu’minin, by Him in Whose
hand is my soul, we find you in the Book of Allah <span
id="_anchor_271"></span>271 (standing) at one of the hell gates
preventing people from breaking into it. When you die,

they will continue breaking into it till the Day of Resurrection! After
his death, Ka’b came and started weeping at the door (of Umar’s house),
saying: by God, had Amir al-Mu’minin asked Allah to delay his death He
would have surely done this. <span id="_anchor_272"></span>272

His oath – may God curse him – came true, as Umar was killed on
Wednesday, only four nights left of Dhu al-Hijjah, in 23 Hijrah and was
buried on Sunday, 1st of Muharram 24 Hijrah.

All these evidences prove that assassination of Umar by Abu Lu’lu’ah,
was only a consequence of that conspiracy engineered by Hormuzan, due to
the grudge and hatred harboured in his heart toward the Arabs, after
their seizure of power and throne from the Persians and ruining their
State and sovereignty. The fact that can never be disputed or refuted
only by the ignorant, is that Ka’b al-Ahbar was among those who
participated in this plot, with playing a great role in planning and
executing it.

### Hadith of Istisqa’:

We learn from history (books) that a very extreme dearth and barrenness
occurred to the land during caliphate of Umar, in the Ramadah <span
id="_anchor_273"></span>273 Year, Ka’b didn’t miss this chance without
exploiting it as a means for directing to Islam one of his fierce stabs.
So he said to Umar: When the Children of Israel were afflicted with such
a calamity, they would seek water (from God) through the prophets’ ismah
(infallibility). Hence many narrations were reported stating that Umar
said: This is the uncle of the Messenger of Allah, and full brother of
his father, and doyen of Banu Hashim: al-Abbas. Then they betook
themselves to him and sought water. Anas <span
id="_anchor_274"></span>274 said that the words uttered by Umar in this
istisqa’: (O God) We used to implore You with our Prophet and You give
us water, and now we beseech You with the uncle of our Prophet, and You
will give us water.

Undoubtedly the purpose intended by this Jew through these words was
only to mislead Umar regarding the first foundation upon which Islam

was established, that is the sincere monotheism, so as to make him fall
into the abyss of solicitation (tawussul) which means polytheism in
itself. Then on falling of Umar into this abyss and his being an example
to follow, with his act turning to be a sunnah having an influential
impact on all Muslims in respect of the Islamic doctrine throughout ages
and generations, the fact entailing demolition of the firm basis of the
Din. But Umar, who had that insight and knowledge of religion, took
notice of the intrigue and did not fall in the trap set by this
impostor. So he never sought water through imploring anyone even the
Prophet (S), satisfying himself with istighfar (asking for forgiveness).

Abu Bakr Abu al-Dunya in his book al-Matar, and the book Mujabi
al-da’wah on the authority of Khuwat ibn Jubayr, said: Umar went out for
seeking water (from God). He performed two-rak’ah prayer and said (in
supplication): O God, we ask You to pardon and give us water. Before
departing his place it started to raining.

Al-Shi’bi said: Umar went out for istisqa’ with people, but he sufficed
only with asking forgiveness till coming back. People began to inquire:
O Amir al-Mu’minin, but you haven’t implored God to provide us with
water? He said: I asked for rain through the sky majadih <span
id="_anchor_275"></span>275 (extreme parts, roots) from which rain is
sought to come down. Then he cited the verse: “...Seek ye the
forgiveness of your Lord! Verily He is the Most-Forgiving. He will send
(down) upon you the cloud raining in torrents.” Then he cited: “And that
Seek ye the forgiveness of your Lord, then turn ye unto Him repentant.”
(11:3) <span id="_anchor_276"></span>276

Al-Shi’bi says: He (Umar) went out for asking God to send down
rainwater. Then he ascended the minbar (pulpit) and cited the following
verses: “Seek ye the forgiveness of your Lord! Verily He is the
Most-Forgiving,” and the verse: “And that Seek ye the forgiveness of
your Lord, then turn ye unto Him repentant.” As he descended (from
minbar), he was asked: O Amir al-Mu’minin, what prevented you from
seeking rainwater? He answered: I asked for rain through the sky majadih
from which water drops

are coming down.

Abd Allah ibn Dinar al-Aslami reported from his father as saying: When
Umar decided to ask for rainwater and go out with people, he wrote
letters to his deputies to go out on so and so day, and beg their Lord
asking Him to deliver them from this misfortune. Then he went out on
that determined day putting on the cloak of the Messenger of Allah (upon
whom be God’s peace and benediction), till reaching the mosque. Thereat
he addressed the people, and beseeched God, making people to insist in
invocation. The point on which he insisted more in his supplication was
asking for pardon and forgiveness. Then as he intended to return, he
raised his hands toward the sky, converting his cloak putting the right
side on the left, and vice versa. Thereat he extended his hand,
persisting in supplication and invocation, weeping bitterly and shedding
tears till his beard was moistened. <span id="_anchor_277"></span>277

Further it is reported in al-Mughni and al-Sharh al-kabir, that Umar
went out for seeking rainwater (from God), but his invocation was no
more than seeking forgiveness, exclaiming: I have asked for rainwater
from the sky majadih. <span id="_anchor_278"></span>278

Al-Jahiz said: When Umar ascended the minbar gripping al-Abbas’s hand on
the day of istisqa’, he sufficed with invocation and prayer. It was said
to him: You have never sought rainwater but only asking for forgiveness.
He said: I asked for rainwater through the sky majadih. Then he cited
the holy verse: “Seek ye the forgiveness of your Lord! Verily He is the
Most-Forgiving. He will send (down) upon you the cloud raining in
torrents.” <span id="_anchor_279"></span>279

If the case was truly in this way, no harm in it as long as all of them
were invoking Allah. It is almost certain that Umar has never pleaded
with anyone in his istisqa’ supplication, never taking any means or
medium to God except invocation and seeking forgiveness.

264. Tafsir, vol. IV, p. 17.

265. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VIII, p. 206. In another narration
reported by al-Dhahabi in his Siyar a'lam al-nubala': "You should give
up relating the hadith or otherwise I will exile you to the land of
apes" (vol. II, p. 433).

266. He was the governor of Tustar and the greatest among commanders of
the Persians. He undertook the right wing of the armies of Rustam, the
vizier of the king of Persia in the Battle of Qadisiyyah. When Rustam
was killed, al-Hurmuzan fled with those who survived among his soldiers.
The Muslims kept on chasing him till he sought refuge  in the Town of
Tustar, where he was fortefied by it, and the Muslims besieged him
severely till compelling him to surrender to the verdict of Umar,
bringing him to al-Madinah (in 17 H.). The Muslims used to slander the
Iranians and take them as slaves. Some of them who were in al-Madinah
used to frequent to al-Hurmuzan, among whom I can refer to Feirouz,
nicknamed 'Abu Lu'luah', who was a servant for Ibn Shu'bah, and it was
him who stabbled Umar.

267. Ta'rikh Ibn al-Athir, vol. III, p. 24, Ta'rikh al-Tabari, vol. V.

268. This man (Ka'b) had wonderful designs with which he could cojole
with minds of Muslims. As an example the following is one of his frauds
as reported by trustworthy historians: Ka'b said to Umar: In the Torah
it is stated that you will be killed as a martyr! Umar said: How can I
attain martyrdom while being in the Arab peninsula? Beside other designs
which can be seen in Ta'rikh al-Khulafa', pp. 90, 98, and Ibn al-Athir's
Ta'rikh al-Kamil, Vol. II, p. 357.

269. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. III, p. 236.

270. He is truly a cunning Jew. This report can be seen in Fath al-Bari,
vol. XIII, p. 41, and Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd vol. III, p. 253.

271. He used to attribute all of his malicious reports to the  Book of
Allah while it being totally free from that.

272. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, Vol. II, p. 262.

273. Ibn Sa'd and others stated that the year of Ramdah was the year 18
H. , and it lasted for nine months. Al-Ramdah is with fathah on ra' and
sukun on mim, and the year was called so due to severe barrenness that
inflicted the land because of lacking of rain, with death of the cattle,
and people starving to death, till were obliged to swallow the ash, and
drill the holes of jerbons and rats extracting what they contained
(Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, Vol. II, p. 223).

274. Undoubtedly this narration of Anas or other ones can never
withstand the strong narration contraditing them. Anas was one of those
whose narrations were not trusted, and Abu Hanifah was never trusting
him, or Abu Hurayrah or Samurah ibn Jundub.

275. In Asas al-balaghah of Jar Allah, under the bab "jim-dal-ha'" and
khafq al-mijdah means the posteriors (latter parts), whose rain is
abundant. It is said: The rain majadih have flowed. In a hadith by Umar:
"I have sought a drink by majadih of the heaven", meaning to ask
forgiveness.

276. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VII, p. 92.

277. Tabaqat Ibn Sa'd, vol. II, p. 231.

278. See vol. II, p. 290.

279. Al-Bayan wa al-tabyin, vol. IV, p. 279. This khabar was reported
also by Ibn Qutaybah in his book al-Shi'r wa al-shu'ara', under the
biography of Yazid ibn Ubayd, beside al-Tabari in his Tafsir.
