Some Companions Relating From Jewish Rabbis:
============================================

  
  

The Companions’ trust in the Ahl al-Kitab’s embrace of Islam and being
beguiled by them made them (Sahabah) to believe their utterances and
relate from them their fabricated traditions. Men of hadith state in
their books that the three ‘Abds, <span id="_anchor_298"></span>298 Abu
Hurayrah, <span id="_anchor_299"></span>299 Mu’awiyah and Anas beside
others, have reported from Ka’b al-Ahbar and his brothers (Jewish
rabbis). It is known that Abu Hurayrah was much more than all the
Companions in having trust in and relating from him and following him,
as can be seen clearly from his biography which I published in a
separate book under the title Shaykh al-mudirah to which everyone can
refer.

This Jew (Ka’b al-Ahbar) managed, through his devilish methods and
plans, to foist so many superstitions, fancies and falsities into
religion, that filled books of tafsir, hadith and history, in a way that
distorted them and created doubt among people in their regard, and still
causing us detriments and troubles that only God knows. I have
previously referred to some of these superstitions as covering all of
them requires independent full compilations.

### Companions Disproving Ka’b:

As is known, the Companions used to trust Ka’b in the beginnings, but
some of them did not wait to take notice of his truth after disclosure
of his

falsities and revelation of his reality, whereat they stripped him of
this trust and started to suspect his reports, or even belied him.
Whereas some of them, among whom be Abu Hurayrah and three Abds and
others, kept on believing and taking from him till his last hour.

Umar has forbidden Ka’b from relating the hadith, threatening to exile
him to his homeland in case of continuing this practice, saying to him:
You should give up narration of hadith or otherwise I shall make you
join the land of apes. <span id="_anchor_300"></span>300 Ali used to say
in his regard: He is verily a liar.

Al-Bukhari reported from al-Zuhri that Hamid ibn Abd al-Rahman heard
Mu’awiyah addressing a group of the Qurayshis, when he referred to Ka’b
saying: He was the most truthful <span id="_anchor_301"></span>301 of
all the narrators from among Ahl al-Kitab though we used to put falsity
to test through him.

Ibn Abi Khaythamah, through a good sanad (chain of narrators), reported
from Qatadah as saying: Hudhayfah was informed that Ka’b used to say:
The sky revolves round a pivot like a handmill. Thereat he said: Ka’b
told a lie, as Allah says: “Verily God holdeth the heavens and the earth
lest they come to naught.” <span id="_anchor_302"></span>302 Ibn Abbas
said to a man coming from the Sham: Whom did you meet? He replied: I met
Ka’b. He asked him: What did you hear him saying? He said: I heard him
say: The heavens revolves round a shoulder of an angel. Ibn Abbas said:
Ka’b uttered falsehood...hasn’t he abandoned his jewishness yet? Then he
recited: “Verily God holdeth the heavens and the earth lest they come to
naught.” <span id="_anchor_303"></span>303

There are numerous reports in this regard, but I suffice with the
examples cited above.

### Story of the Rock between Umar and Ka’b:

After conquest of Ilya and its land during the reign of Umar in Rabi’
al-Thani 16 H., and when Umar entered Bayt al-Maqdis, he summoned Ka’b
al-Ahbar and said to him: Where do you think better to build the oratory
(musalla)? Ka’b said: Beside the rock!! <span
id="_anchor_304"></span>304 Umar said: O Ka’b, by God you

have resembled the Jewish creed. <span id="_anchor_305"></span>305 In
another narration: O son of the Jewish woman, the Jewishness is mingled
with you (with your blood). I shall build it at the forefront of the
mosque, as to us belong the forefronts of the mosques, and I saw you and
the way you took off your shoes! He said: I liked to conduct it with my
foot! When he started to clean Bayt al-Maqdis from the sweeping which
the Romans buried into it, <span id="_anchor_306"></span>306 he heard
the takbir (God is Greater) from behind him, while he was averse to evil
of dissimulation <span id="_anchor_307"></span>307 in everything. He
said: What is this? They replied: Ka’b said God is Greater and people
repeated after him. He (Umar) said: Bring him here. Ka’b said: O Amir
al-Mu’minin, a prophet foretold of what you did today five hundred years
ago!! He asked: How is that? He replied: The Romans attacked Banu Israel
and buried it (Bayt al-Maqdis), till you were appointed a ruler, when
Allah delegated a prophet over the sweepings who said: O Jerusalem, I
have good tidings for you, al-Faruq has come to cleanse you of that
which inside you. <span id="_anchor_308"></span>308 In another
narration: Al-Faruq came to you with obedient soldiers, who will
retaliate and take vengeance of your people upon the Romans... etc.
Beside other similar superstitions that were fabricated by this impostor
and liar.

The rock remained uncovered during caliphate of Umar and Uthman when
ruling over the Sham, and also caliphate of Ali though he didn’t rule
over it (Sham), continuing till the government of Mu’awiyah, his son and
the son of his son. When Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan came to power, with
that known sedition that occurred between him and Ibn al-Zubayr, it was
him who built the dome over the rock, <span id="_anchor_309"></span>309
extolling the position of the rock through what he built and the garment
he covered it in winter and summer. All this was aimed at encouraging
larger number of people to make pilgrimage to Bayt al-Maqdis (Quds), and
abandon their visit to Ibn al-Zubayr, since people usually follow
religion of the kings. In this way, people started from that time to
venerate and sublimate this rock to an extent unanticipated by Muslims,
with some embarking on reporting Jewish fabricated traditions in its
praise and high status. To cite an example for this, some have reported
from Ka’b al-

Ahbar near Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, with the presence of Urwah ibn
al-Zubayr, that he said: “Allah said to the rock: You are My lowermost
Throne”.

Some others have even made compilations on the merits of Bayt al-Maqdis
and other regions of the Sham, transmitting many reports from Ahl
al-Kitab and those who followed them, upon which the Muslims are
unallowed to establish their religion. Ka’b al-Ahbar was the most vivid
example from whom those Jewish traditions were reported, as in the case
of the people of Sham.

In his Mir’at al-zaman, al-Sibt ibn al-Jawzi writes: People hesitated in
regard of the traditions reported by Ka’b al-Ahbar from the Messenger of
Allah, upon whom be God’s peace and benediction, since he embraced Islam
under the hands of al-Faruq (Umar), who used to hit him with the pearl
saying to him: Let us be far from your Jewishness. <span
id="_anchor_310"></span>310

### Jewish Traditions on Excellence of Bayt al-Maqdis:

Ka’b said: Allah looked at the earth and said: I am treading a portion
of you. Thereat the mountains contended in a race toward Him, and the
rock became dilapidated, when He appreciated that conduct on its part
and placed His foot on it!!

He also said: Presentation and reckoning (on Doomsday) will be verily
done in Bayt al-Maqdis, and anyone buried in this place no torment will
ever befall him.

He further said: It (Quds) is only eighteen miles nearer to the heaven,
and it is the land of mahshar (gathering) and manshar (resurrection).

He again said: The Hour (Doomsday) will never come till when Bayt
al-Haram (Ka’bah) visits Bayt al-Maqdis, and both of them including
their inhabitants will be led toward the paradise.

In another place he said: In the Torah it is written that Allah said to
the Rock of Bayt al-Maqdis: You are My lowermost Throne, and from you I

ascended to the heaven. From underneath you I stretched out the earth,
and whatever flowing down from the tops of mountains passes too from
under you. When one dies on you it is as if he has died in the heaven
... etc.

Also Abu Hurayrah – the disciple of Ka’b al-Ahbar – reported that the
Prophet (S) said: All the rivers, clouds, seas and winds are altogether
under the Rock of Bayt al-Maqdis.

Ka’b again said: Allah, the Glorified and Exalted, said to Bayt
al-Maqdis: You are my Garden, Holiness, and choice from among my land.
Whoever inhabits you, it verily be out of My mercy, and that who departs
you, it is only through a wrath on My part against him.

Ka’b said too: In Bayt al-Maqdis the day is like a thousand days, the
month is like a thousand months, and the year is like a thousand years.
Whoever dies in it, it is as if he has died in the heaven, and when
anyone dies around it, it is as if he has died inside it. <span
id="_anchor_311"></span>311

Wahb ibn Munabbih is reported to have said: People of Bayt al-Maqdis are
neighbours of Allah, and Allah’s right is not to torment His neighbours.
Whoever is buried in Bayt al-Maqdis will be verily delivered from the
trial and distress of the grave.

In a hadith, it is said that the party from among his Ummah, standing by
the truth, who are never harmed or affected by their opponents till
God’s command is revealed to them, are living in Bayt al-Maqdis and its
vicinities.

Al-Allamah al-Ustadh Ni’mat Allah al-Saljuqi, the head of Fakhr
al-Madaris (Herat) in Afghanistan, in his review of my book Adwa’ ‘ala
al-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah, in a valuable book he sent to me, says:

“Concerning the traditions reported on the merit of Sham, we admit that
most of them were only foisted by the Jews. Of them some are recorded in
books stating that whoever begins the new moon for hajj from al-Masjid
al-Aqsa, Allah shall verily forgive all his past and latter sins. This
narration – though indicating the excellence of al-Masjid al-Aqsa –
leads to atheism and negligence in regard of perpetrating guilts, paving
the way for debauchery.

Among the superstitions that were foisted by the Jews and recorded in

the biography and some exegesis books are the following: Some of the
heavens are of silver and some are of olivine; the planets are
transfixed in the heavens according to the order stated in the Greek
books; the moon is transfixed in the lower heaven, and the planet
Mercury is in the second heaven, and so forth till the seventh heaven.
And so on the heavens are placed on a vertex of a mountain surrounding
the earth called Qaf, and the earth is put on a horn of an ox standing
on a whale swimming in water.

All that was due to the scholars’ unawareness and negligence of the
untoward consequences of the traditions fabricated and foisted by
enemies of religion among the Muslims.”

### Traditions on al-Masjid al-Aqsa:

The reliable traditions were in the beginning concerned with the merit
of al-Masjid al-Haram (Ka’bah) and Masjid al-Rasul (Mosque of the
Messenger of Allah), but after building the Rock Dome (Qubbat
al-Sakhrah) several traditions began to be reported on the excellence of
al-Masjid al-Aqsa.

Abu Hurayrah reported (that the Prophet said): “No pilgrimage should be
made but only to three mosques: My mosque, and al-Masjid al-Haram and
al-Masjid al-Aqsa.” In another narration, he (S) said: Travel should be
made only to three mosques: the Ka’bah, my mosque and Mosque of Ilya
(al-Aqsa).

Malik reported in al-Muwatta’, and Muslim in his book (Sahih) reported
from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet said: One prayer (salat) in my mosque
is verily better than a thousand prayers in other mosques other than
al-Masjid al-Haram. In another narration: ... is like a thousand prayers
in any other mosque except al-Masjid al-Haram.

Abu Umar reported that the Prophet said: A prayer in my mosque is better
than a thousand prayers in any other mosque except al-Masjid al-Haram.

Ibn Abbas reported: A woman made a complaint saying: If Allah

recovers me I commit myself to perform prayers in Bayt al-Maqdis. On
regaining her health she got ready to go out, when Maymunah, the
Prophet’s wife, came to greet her, the time in which she told her about
her vow. Maymunah said to her: Sit down and eat what I prepared for you,
and pray in the Mosque of the Messenger of Allah, as I heard him saying:
One prayer performed in it (Masjid al-Rasul) is preferred to a thousand
prayers in any other mosque except the Ka’bah Mosque. Had these
traditions were truly reported on the excellence of al-Masjid al-Aqsa,
Maymunah would have never prevented that woman from carrying out her
vow.

### Jewish Role in Preferring the Sham:

We stated before that the extolling made by the Jewish rabbis that the
Prophet’s rule would be in the Sham was only for a purpose harboured
inside their hearts. It is to be stated here that the Sham would have
never deserved that extol and flattery, but only because of the
establishment of the Umayyad State in it. That State which reversed the
rule from a just and fair caliphate to a mordacious deviant government,
under whose wing and during whose days the Islamic sects were
established, the fact that led to disintegration and decline of the
Islamic State, beside prevalence and abundance of hadith fabrication.
This phenomenon was exploited by the Jewish priests who embarked on
blowing the fire of sedition, providing it with more and more lies and
deceit. Among these falsities we can refer to their exaggeration in
extolling the Sham and its people, claiming that all good being in it
and all evil being in other than it.

However, as previously manifested, the climax of the claims of these
priests was that the Prophet’s reign would be verily in the Sham, and
that Mu’awiyah alleged as the Messenger said that he was to succeed him
as a caliph and asked him to choose the sacred land where the
substitutes were living. Through this it is exposed for us another
aspect of the Jewish stratagem against Muslims and their religion and
rule. That is the claims

uttered by the Jews in the Sham, to some of which we referred before,
could never quench their grudge but they added to them the claim that
the right-supporting sect would be in the Sham too, and in it would be
the descension of Jesus, about whom they said he would be in his land.

In the two Sahihs it is reported (that the Prophet said): A group of my
Ummah is still backing the truth, and never be harmed by those who
disappointed or opposed them, till God’s decree coming to them on this
state. In another narration: …. While they be in the Sham. <span
id="_anchor_312"></span>312

In Sahih Muslim, Abu Hurayrah reported that the Prophet said: People of
the west keep on supporting the truth till the Doomsday. Ahmad and
others said: They (meant by the hadith) are verily the people of the
Sham.

When Andalusian land was conquered, they (Jews) considered it the west
that is intended in the hadith, making this hadith as if said in regard
of their homeland. In al-Mu’jib fi talkhis akhbar al-Maghrib, it is
reported from Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas that the Messenger of Allah (S) said:
People of the Maghrib continue to stand by the truth (haqq), unaffected
or harmed by whoever disappointed them, till when the (destined) Hour
comes. <span id="_anchor_313"></span>313

In Kashf al-khafa’, it is reported that Ka’b al-Ahbar said: People of
the Sham are one of God’s swords with whom Allah revenges upon the
rebels. Maybe the term rebels or insurgents here is used for those
refusing to submit and be under the command of Mu\`awiyah, following
other than him, the term used for Ali, may God be pleased with him!

Urwah ibn Ruwaym said: Some man met Ka’b al-Ahbar, saluted him and
prayed to God for him. Ka’b asked him: From where are you? He replied: I
am from people of the Sham. He (Ka’b) said: You may be one of the host
among whom seventy thousand will enter paradise without being called for
reckoning, or tormented? He said: who are they? He replied: People of
Damascus! He said: I am not among them. Ka'b again asked. You may be

from among the host to whom Allah looks twice a day? He said: Who are
they? He replied: People of Palestine. He said: I am of them! In another
narration. You might be from the troops whose martyr intercedes for
seventy persons? He said: Who are they? He replied: People of Hams.
<span id="_anchor_314"></span>314

Ka'b said: The first wall built on the surface of the earth after the
inundating flood, was the wall of Harran, then of Damascus, then of
Babylon. <span id="_anchor_315"></span>315

Nafi reported from Ibn Umar, that Ka'b said: A fire will verily appear
that takes off people. When you hear news about it you have to go out
toward the Sham. <span id="_anchor_316"></span>316  It is known that Ibn
Umar was a disciple of Ka'b.

Following are some traditions recorded in al-Jami‘ al-saghir of
al-Suyuti, that were confirmed by Ka'b:

Sham is God's choice from among the lands (He created). For it He
selects the best of His bondmen. Whoever departs the Sham toward another
place, he will face wrath (of God), and whoever enters it shall be
deserving God's mercy.

-Blessed be the Sham, the Beneficent is extending His mercy upon them.

-From a town in the Sham called Hams, Allah will verily forward seventy
thousand persons on the Day of Resurrection. They will neither be
subject to reckoning nor to torment. He shall despatch them in it
between the olive and the wall... etc.

This town of Hams must be in this high status — even in the Hereafter —
to the extent that no other town, even the Medina, can ever be compared
to it. That is due to the fact that the Jewish priest, who is considered
as a great follower by a large number of shaykhs (leaders) of Muslims,
has taken it a place of residence, beside its being his burial ground

after death. I do not intend to prolong the discussion by citing all the
available reports of the kind, sufficing with what I have already
stated.

### Investigators' Opinion about Israeliyyat and their Narrators:

Before ending discussion about Jewish fabricated traditions from which
Islam suffered a lot, I present here a number of statements uttered by
leaders (Imams) of Muslims about these priests, who pretended to be
Muslims, and about their fabricated foisted narration.

About the Jewish traditions cited in honour of Bayt al-Maqdis and other
regions of the Sham, Ibn Taymiyyah said the following.

Some have compiled several works on the merits of Bayt al-Maqdis and
other places in the Sham, stating in them the reports transmitted from
Ahl al-Kitab and from those who followed them, of the kind that no
Muslim can take them as a source for religious rules. Ka'b al-Ahbar was
the most famous one from whom these Jewish fabricated traditions were
reported, particularly by people of the Sham. In this regard Mu'awiyah
said: We haven't seen among these traditionists of Ahl al-Kitab anyone
more exemplary than Ka'b, though we sometimes would put falsity to test
through him. In Sahih al-Bukhari it is reported from the Prophet (upon
whom be God's peace and benediction) as saying: "When People of
Scripture relate to you any hadith, you should neither believe or belie
them. Since they either tell you lies which you may believe, or tell you
the truth which you may belie. <span id="_anchor_317"></span>317

It is surprising that this preserved <span id="_anchor_318"></span>318
 and guarded Shari'ah, with this protected Ummah that never comes
together on misguidance — when any hadith be related from the Prophet(s)
by some of eminent Followers, like \`Ata' ibn Abi Rabah, al-Hasan
al-Basri and Abu al-Aliyah and others, who were

the most notable scholars and religious authorities- can suspend men of
knowledge at their marasil. Then some of them would repulse the marasil
(traditions transmitted with no asanid), and some others would
conditionally accept them. Till he said. And between any of these people
and the Prophet (s), as a chain of transmission, none was there but only
one or two or three men, for instance.

In regard of those traditions recorded in the present books of Muslims,
that are reported in a mursal way, their veracity can never be confirmed
as unanimously agreed by the ulama’. So what about those which were
reported by Ka'b al-Ahbar and his likes from the prophets while about a
thousand years were separating between him and the prophet from whom he
used to report. Besides, he did not support these traditions with a
chain of trustworthy men, but his intention was only to convey hadith
from some books that were compiled by chiefs of the Jews. <span
id="_anchor_319"></span>319  When Allah informs about their alteration
and perversion, so how would it be permissible for any Muslim to believe
anything of that through this kind of transmission. Rather he should
neither believe nor belie it, but only through an evidence proving its
falsity. Truly in this way we have been ordered by the Prophet (S). Only
God knows how much falsity against the prophets and what is rejected in
our Shari'ah, contained in these Israeliyyat (Jewish falsified
traditions). <span id="_anchor_320"></span>320

Ibn Kathir, in his interpretation of Surat al-Naml, after stating the
Israeliyyat that went on in the episode of the Queen of Saba’ with
Sulayman, said the following:

“What is nearer to mind being that these contexts have been taken from
Ahl al Kitab, through what their books contained, such as narration of
Ka'b and Wahb may God pardon them both for what they reported to this
Ummah including the reports of Banu Israel, oddities, and strange things

about what occurred and that which never occurred, and what was
perverted, altered and abrogated. Allah has substituted us with that
which is more veracious, beneficial, obvious and eloquent, praise and
grace are God's.

Ibn Khaldun, in many places of his Muqaddimah, referred to Ka'b and Wahb
and whatever was reported from them, to which can refer whoever desiring
more details. I haven't come across, in the present age or even
throughout the recent ages, anyone taking notice of the cunning and
stratagem of Ka'b and Wahb, like the Faqih traditionist al-Sayyid
Muhammad Rashid Rida (may God's mercy be upon him). Herewith I quote a
portion of what he said in regard of Ka'b in particular, and about him
and his friend Wahb in general.

In regard of Ka'b in refuting those who described him as being a
receptacle of knowledge, he said the following: <span
id="_anchor_321"></span>321

“Establishment of abundant knowledge does not necessitate denial of
falsity. Most of his (Ka'bs) knowledge in their view was confined in
whatever he used to relate and quote from the Torah, or some other books
of his people with ascribing everything to it (Torah) so as to get
approval among people. Undoubtedly Ka'b was the most sagacious among the
Jewish \`ulama’ before embracing Islam, and most competent in cheating
the Muslims through his narration after adopting Islam.

He also said that he was among the atheists (Zanadiqah) of the Jews, who
used to display Islam and devotion so as to delude people to accept his
sayings in regard of religious affairs. His intrigue became so rife that
even some of the Companions were beguiled by him and embarked on
reporting from him, and communicating his utterances without ascribing
them to him (in the chain of transmission). Some of the Followers and
their followers have even thought them (his traditions) to be among what
they heard from the

Prophet, with some authors counting them among the mawqufat that having
the degree of marfu' traditions (whose sanad goes back to the Prophet),
as stated by Ibn Kathir in several places of his Tafsir. <span
id="_anchor_322"></span>322

About him he also said: He was a volcano of superstitions, I decisively
determine his being a liar, and rather I never trust his faith. <span
id="_anchor_323"></span>323

In regard of both Ka'b and Wahb, he said: <span
id="_anchor_324"></span>324  “The worst of the narrators of these
Israeliyyat or the most of them in deceiving and cheating the Muslims
were these two men. They were the source of every superstition foisted
into books of exegesis and Islamic history, concerning the issues of
creation, existence, prophets and their folks, seditions, the Hour and
Hereafter, as in every place there is a trace of Tha\`labah. Seeing some
of the Companions and Followers beguiled by reports that were spread by
these two men (Ka'b and Wahb) and their likes, can never be deemed
distressing by anyone, as every one may believe the liar, even the
infallible apostles. That is due to the fact that infallibility pertains
only to propagation of the Message and acting according to it, since the
apostles are impeccable against telling lies, committing error in
propagation, and acting in contrary to the Shari'ah they brought to
people, as this contradicts their being an example and disturbs the
establishments of proof. But if the Messenger believes the liar in a
matter related to him and his conduct, or convenience of the Ummah,
Allah the exalted will verily manifest this for him, an example for
which can be seen in the behaviour of one of his wives, about which the
first verses of Surat al-Tahrim, were revealed, and he realized through
God's words in her regard: "...she said: "Who informed thee of this?" He
said: "Informed me the All-Knowing, the All-Aware." That is he couldn't
discover the artifice through the faculty of infallibility (‘ismah), but
through God's revelation after its occurrence. Of this also God's words
regarding the hypocrites who lied to him

and asked him to excuse them from rising out with him(S) to Tabuk: "God
forgive thee (O Our Apostle!) Why didst thou give them leave (to stay
behind) until it was manifest unto thee those who spoke the truth, and
thou hadst known the liars.”

What al-Zarqani quoted of his opinion that whatever is reported from the
Companion which can't be counted among the entailed (mawquf) traditions,
has the position of a marfu' tradition (though having the option of
being taken from Ahl al-Kitab as a sign of thinking well of it, is a
false and rejected opinion, that can never be taken as a rule and
principle in our religion. And what he gave as a reason for it is
totally false as no room be here neither for good intention nor for the
opposite way. It is usually known in the tempers of human beings to
believe every report for whose utterer no evidence is there to charge
(as a liar) nor to prove its falsehood by itself. If some of the
Companions believe some of the fabrications which Ka'b al-Ahbar used to
delude them as learning from the Torah or other scriptures of Banu
Israel, as he being one of their rabbis, or in other than this, it will
never entail having evil intention regarding them. Had these Israeli
superstitions been among restrainers of Islam and of which people used
to speak ill, though being reported from those whose sayings and
opinions were neither regarded as religious texts nor legal proofs,
despite their being among \`ulama’ of ancestors — as is actually true —
so what would be our standpoint in regard of those defaming Islam, among
the atheists and callers to religions who harbour enmity against Islam
and Muslims, and also the Zanadiqah of Muslims beside Muslims among
Zanadiqah of Muslims too, when holding that these Israeli superstitions
and trifles were narrated by Companions in part, and counted among the
traditions whose chain of transmission goes back to the Prophet (S) in
which should all believe? But this being a vast bab on

defamation and restraining of Islam, had it been opened by other than
al-Zarqani from among the imitators of darksome medieval ages, we would
have closed it to his face saying to him the scholars of usul have
unanimously concurred that occurrence of potentiality in the marfu’
(hadith reported from the Prophet) in regard of existing states, will
clothe them with garment of generality whereat inference would lose its
validity.

This probability is more proper than that one, in preventing from
considering the mawquf as marfu’, and taking it as a legal evidence.

He further said: <span id="_anchor_325"></span>325  We, after
experiencing a third of a century in tackling and solving the
ambiguities and debating the atheists and their likes from among the
opponents of Islam, and refuting them orally and in writing, it was
already proved for us that the narration of Ka'b and Wahb, recorded in
books of exegesis, history and tales, constituted numerous suspicions
not only for the atheists and apostates, but also for the believers. The
free-thinking people reject their saying that; whoever believed to be
reliable by men of sarcasm and modification (jarh wa ta’dil) is verily
reliable, though known for their successors to be having means of
sarcasm that were unknown for them.

He also said: Through their <span id="_anchor_326"></span>326  narration
I found a lot whose falsity is definitely certain for us, due to its
contradiction to what they used to ascribe to the Torah and other
scriptures of the prophets. So we were sure of their being liars, the
fact that was undiscovered by the predecessors since they were never
acquainted with the books of Ahl al-Kitab. Besides, refuting their
narrations would drive so many suspicions away from the books of Islam,
particularly Tafsir Kitab Allah, which is replete with superstitions.

About their narrations he said: Most of them are Israeli superstitions
that spoiled books of tafsir and others, and constituted doubts into
Islam with which its enemies from among the atheists used to argue,
charging Islam to be

a religion of superstitions and fancies. While suspicion in any other
religion might be bigger than this, like what Ka'b stated about
attribute of the Prophet in the Torah. <span id="_anchor_327"></span>327

But though the investigating imams have confuted the narration of these
two priests, still there are — regrettably — some who trust them and
believe in their narrations as a whole, refusing any criticism against
them.

  
  
  

298. The three Abds are: Abd Allah ibn Abbas, Abd Allah ibn Umar, and
Abd Allah ibn 'Amr.

299. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah to see how has Abu Hurayrah
contacted Ka'b al-Ahbar and how has he fallen in his trap.

300. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, Vol. VIII, p. 106.

301. In another narration, the word used is amthal (the most
distinguished).

302. Ibn Hajar, al-Isabah, vol. I, p. 323.

303. Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani, al-Kafi al-shafi, p. 139.

304. In another narration: If you seek my advice, I prefer to pray
behind the rock, i.e. the rock would be the qiblah.

305. Mudahat the Jewism is to resemble and be like it in taking the rock
as qiblah, due to the resemblance it had in view of that believing it to
be still a qiblah.

306. The Roman Christians have thrown these sweepings out of pertinacity
against the Jews who were attaching much importance to it and pray
toward it (as qiblah).

307. The bad dissimulation and plety.

308. I have quoted this statement briefly from Tafsir al-Tabari, vol.
IV, p. 160 and following pages.

309. In regard of Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan who built the rock, I cite
here what Ibn al-Athir said in vol. IV, p. 190 of hid book: Abd al-Malik
ibn Marwan went on pilgrimage in 75 H., when he addressed people in
al-Madinah saying: After all I am neither the oppressed caliph (i.e.
Uthman), nor the sycophant caliph (meaning Mu'awiyah), nor the ma'fun
caliph (meaning Yazid). I will never treat this Ummah but with the sword
till make you submit to my will, and you learn by heart the acts of the
earlier immigrants, but never act like them. You bid us to God-fearing
but forget about yourselves. By God no one of you would bid to
God-fearing after this incident, but I will behead him!

310. See vol. I, p. 35.

311. Refer to al-Nuwayri's Nihayat al-arab , vol. I, p. 232 to see these
reports and more wonderful than them.

312. In the narration of Abu Umamah al-Bahili: When the Prophet was
questioned he said: Bayt al-Maqdis and its vicinities (Nihayat al-arab,
Vol. I, p. 333).

313. See p. 15.

314. Ta'rikh Ibn Asakir (the manuscript), Vol. I, p. 57; and Hams is the
place where his (Ka'b's) corpse was buried.

315. Ibid, p. 14.

316. Fath al-Bari, vol. XIII, p. 69.

317. This is the correct hadith through which the light of Prophethood
emanates. But one of the disciples of Ka'b, Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn
al-As, would come and report from the Prophet the following hadith:
"Relate from me even one verse, and relate from Banu Israel with no
harm," contradicting the Prophet's order then and enraging him by
relating from the Zamilatan (two Sahihs).

318. That is the Islamic Shari'ah.

319. That with supposing them to report from their shaykhs, but in fact
they used to invent and fabricate (traditions) from their own!

320. Iqtida' al-sirat al-mustaqim, pp. 208, 209.

321. Al-Manar Journal, p. 541 and following pages.

322. Ibid., vol. XXVII, p. 752.

323. Ibid., Vol. XXVII, p. 697.

324. Ibid., Vol. XXVII, p. 783.

325. Ibid., Vol. XXVII, p. 539.

326. I mean Ka'b and Wahb.

327. See Vol. XXVII, p. 618.
