Ka'b and Mu'awiyah:
===================

I have stated before <span id="_anchor_332"></span>332  that Umar ibn
al-Khattab forbade Ka'b al-Ahbar from narrating hadith, threatening him
with exile should he relate any of his Jewish traditions (Israeliyyat),
or what he used to claim as being reported from the Prophet (S) after
taking notice of his deceit and evil intention. As a consequence to this
threat, no alternative was left before Ka'b but to surrender unwillingly
and angrily. Then he started to work stealthily for attaining the
purposes for which he embraced Islam, finding no access to this but
through getting rid of this violent rock impeding his way, and
preventing him from reaching his goal. So soon it was opportune that
chance of the plot hatched by an underground society to murder Umar, in
which he collaborated, fanning its fire!

With murder of Umar, he felt free and safe, giving the reins to himself
to disseminate whatever the Jewish deception would let him, of the
superstitions and Jewish fabricated traditions that spoiled and defamed
religion, aided in this task by his senior disciples like: Abd Allah ibn
\`Amr, Abd Allah ibn Umar and Abu Hurayrah.

He was not sufficed with that, nor content with seeing no opponent to
his plans, or to find through Muslims' negligence and aid of rulers
someone to listen to or appreciate his fabricated traditions. Rather, he
kept on his cunning seizing every opportunity to direct to Islam one of
his malicious stabs.

We suffice here with citing only one example for this case: When fires
of riot erupted during the last days of Uthman's reign, and heated up
till causing murder of Uthman inside his house, this crafty priest never
missed this chance, rushing to fan its flames and contributing with his
Jewish stratagem as much as he could. Among the deceit he added to this
sedition, was his claim that caliphate after Uthman would go to
Mu\`awiyah!

Wukay' reported from al-A‘mash, from Abu Salih, <span
id="_anchor_333"></span>333  that a singer was chanting in regard of
Uthman saying:

The emir after him shall be Ali,

And al-Zubayr has a pleasant morality.

Threat Ka'b al-Ahbar said: Never, but he (the emir) will be verily the
owner of the gray she-mule! (meaning Mu'awiyah), as he used to see him
riding a she-mule. On hearing this, Mu'awiyah came to him saying: O Abu
Ishaq, what for do you utter this! while Ali and al-Zubayr and
Companions of Muhammad (S) are present here! He (Ka'b) said: You are
verily its (real) owner. He might have added by saying: I found this
(recorded) in the first book!!

In recognition of this favour, Mu'awiyah started to overwhelm Ka'b with
his kindness. From history of this priest, it is learnt that during the
era of Uthman he moved to the Sham, living under care of Mu'awiyah, who
brought him nearer, making him among his favourites, for narrating as
many falsities and Jewish traditions as he could in support of him
(Mu\`awiyah) and reinforcing pillars of his rule. In al-Isabah Ibn Hajar
al-Asqallani reported that it was Mu'awiyah who ordered Ka'b to relate
tales in the Sham. <span id="_anchor_334"></span>334  Sufficient be the
aforementioned traditions, and the narrations he falsified in respect of
preferring the Sham and its people. <span id="_anchor_335"></span>335

Our wonder is raised when knowing that these Israeliyyat are still
nowadays believed and rather sanctified by some people. When
enlightening and asking those people to give them less importance, some
of contemporary knowledge claimants, particularly the grandsons and
flatterers of the Umayyads, would rise and object us, giving reins to
themselves in slandering and abusing us, out of bigotry and idiocy.

This was only one example we cited, of Ka'b’s standpoints with
Mu\`awiyah in particular, and the misfortunes that befell Islam due to
his stratagem and cunning in general. All this was due to the fact that
Ali was the cousin of the Prophet (S) for whom these priests prepared
and amassed all their might and forces to combat and fight his Shari'ah.
Had I intended to cover all the stratagem and evil intended by this
priest against Islam and Muslims, this would have required me to
dedicate a separate full book, as I did in regard of his most eminent
disciple Abu Hurayrah. <span id="_anchor_336"></span>336

We should never forget that Ali used to say about Ka'b that he was
verily a liar. <span id="_anchor_337"></span>337

332. See section on this subject in this book.

333. Al-Maqrizi in Treatise: Al-Niza' wa al-takhasum fima bayna Bani
Umayyah wa Bani Hashim, p. 51.

334. See Vol. V, p. 323.

335. See p. 171 and following pages of this book (Arabic).

336. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

337. Refer to section: "Companions Belie Ka'b".
