Masihiyyat in Hadith
====================

(Hadith of Jassasah, of Satan's stabbing all mankind except Jesus and
his mother — Ibn Jarih)

If the Israeliyyat distorted the splendour of Islam through their
fabricated falsities, the Masihiyyat too had a share of the misfortune
that afflicted this religion. The first one undertaking the lead of
these Masihiyyat was Tamim ibn Aws al-Dari, who was a Yemeni Christian.
His abode with his tribe was in the Sham opposite to Palestine. He came
to the Prophet (S) and embraced Islam after the Battle of Tabuk in the
year 9H.

Abu Mu'aym says: He was the monk of his time people, and devout among
the Palestinians. He was the first to tack the saddle, and the first to
relate (tales). He kept the company of the Prophet (S) and took part in
his battles. He stayed long in al-Madinah till shifting to the Sham
after murder of Uthman. <span id="_anchor_338"></span>338  He died
during the caliphate of Ali in 40 H.

He used to relate narrations and tales of Jassasah, dajjal (impostor),
Iblis, death angel and heavens and fire, spreading these narrations
everywhere, as done by his likes: Ka'b al-Ahbar and Wahb ibn Munabbih.
No wonder to see Islam penetrated by the Masihiyyat after being invaded
by the Israeliyyat, as it was blemished with different things from every
religion and every creed. But it is out of scope here to elucidate all
the blemishes foisted into Islam from other cults and creeds, as a full
book is needed to cover them.

### Hadith of Jassasah:

Among the Masihiyyat stated by Tamim al-Dari to the Prophet (S), we can
refer to the story of Jassasah, and that of the impostor, with that of
descension of Jesus, and others.

In regard of the hadith of Jassasah, it is reported by Muslim <span
id="_anchor_339"></span>339  in his Sahib from contradictory ways and
chains. Hereunder its text as reported from Fatimah bint Qays, the
sister of al-Dahhak ibn Qays, who was among the first immigrants.

After gathering people, the Messenger of Allah (S) said: By God, I have
never gathered you out of desire,or dread, but because Tamim al-Dari
<span id="_anchor_340"></span>340 was a Christian man, who came, swore
allegiance and embraced Islam. He told me that he boarded a sea ship
with thirty men from Lakhm and Jadham. Then they became the sport of the
waves for one month, after which they landed at an island, staying there
until sunset. On entering the island, they encountered a hirsute hairy
mount, whose forepart could not be distinguished from the backside, when
they said: Woe to you, what are you? It said: I am al-Jassasah. Then it
advised them to look at a man inside the convent, pointing to him. On
going into the convent, they met the greatest man in nature, and firmest
in fetters, with his hands tied together to his neck, between his knees
up to the heels, with iron chains. When he recognized them to be among
the Arabs, he layed before them numerous questions, for which they gave
answers. Then he said to them: Tell me what has the Prophet of
illiterate done? They said: He departed Mecca and settled down in
Yathrib. He asked: Have the Arabs fought him? They replied: Yea. He
said: What has he done to them? They told him that he had overcome
whoever came close to him from among the Arabs, and they obeyed him. He
said: I apprise you about myself. I am Jesus (Messias) and I am about
<span id="_anchor_341"></span>341  to be permitted to rise out, when I
will

go out... I will proceed on earth for forty days, through which I shall
enter every and each village I pass by, other than Mecca and Tibah as
they are both forbidden for me. Whenever I intended to enter any of
them, I will be received by an angel holding in his hand an unsheathed
sword to restrain me from (entering) it.

After stating this, he thrusted the messenger with his wand, on the
pulpit saying: This is Tibah, this is Tibah, this is Tibah, meaning
al-Madinah.

Abu Hurayrah never missed this report without foisting it with a breath
of his oddities. So he narrated that between the two horns of
al-Jassasah there was a distance of one parasang for the rider!

I came across a comment on this hadith by al-Allamah al-Sayyid Rashid
Rida (may God's mercy be upon him), as follows:  
 About hadith of Jassasah which is related by Tamim al-Dari to the
Messenger of Allah and recorded by Muslim in his Sahih through chains
contradicting each other in respect of its text, it can be said that
this difference in the text was caused by some narrators mentioned in
the Sahih, and it can't be taken as caused by multiplicity of story.
<span id="_anchor_342"></span>342

Further, can the narration of Tamim al Dari to the Messenger — if its
chain be free from defects — make the hadith supplementary to what the
Prophet (S) uttered of his own accord, so as to determine the veracity
of its origin in accordance with his (S) permission or approval of an
act, as indicated by his warrant and permission? Apparently this qiyas
(analogy) is out of scope here, and the Prophet had no knowledge of the
unseen, as he — like common people — used to hold speech of people to be
true, when no suspicion being raised against it. Most often he believed
the traditions related by even the hypocrites and disbelievers, the fact
indicated by the hadith of Arinayn <span id="_anchor_343"></span>343
 and people of Ma'unah well. In fact he could recognize the falsity

of some liars through wahy (revelation), or some ways of test, or
reporting by trustworthy people, and the like ways of human knowledge.
It is known that the prophets could be distinguished from ordinary
people through revelation and ismah (infallibility) against telling
lies. And revelation was not to be sent down but with matters related to
religion, and da\`wah (invitation) to it, with safeguarding it and the
man who brought it, beside the fact that to believe the liar is not the
same as telling lie. It is sufficient to meditate in this section (bab)
admonition from Allah to His Messenger, due to his granting permission
to some of the hypocrites who asked him to exempt them from taking part
in the Battle of Tabuk, and the justification he gave for this, through
saying to him: God forgive thee (O Our Apostle!) Why didst thou give
them leave (to stay behind) until it was manifest unto thee who spake
the truth, and thou hadst known the liars. (9:43)

When the prophets and messengers are allowed to believe the liar in some
matters that neither breach the Din, nor entail a legal rule, or
anything inconsistent with the position of message, isn't it permissible
for others to believe the liar in every report that no evidence is there
to prove its containing any falsity? Whoever believes anything can
relate it to any other person without ascribing it to that from whom he
heard. <span id="_anchor_344"></span>344

About descension of Jesus from the heaven and reappearance of al-Dajjal
and al-Mahdi <span id="_anchor_345"></span>345  he said:

Many traditions about descension of Jesus are reported in the two Sahihs
and Sunan and other books, most of which are cited about the last hour
(end of time) and mixed with the traditions of al-Dajjal, in which and
in the traditions on al-Mahdi (A), there is much confusion, difference
and contradiction. Out of them altogether, it is apparent that among the
Jews a dajjal (impostor), and rather the biggest impostor ever known
throughout the

history of nations, will appear and claim to be Jesus that is awaited by
the Jews. At that time a large number of people will be tempted by him.
At the end of his epoch, Messias, Jesus the son of Mary, shall appear,
with his descension being at the white Minaret, east of Damascus. Then
he will meet the impostor Messias at the Lidd Gate in Palestine, where
the real Messias will kill the impostor Jesus <span
id="_anchor_346"></span>346  after a long war between the Muslims and
Jews. And most of the Christians had a strong belief in the descension
of Jesus, and they tried all the time, from advent of Islam till the
present time, to disseminate it among the Muslims. Wahb ibn Munabbih,
the second pillar after Ka'b al-Ahbar, was among those who tried this
through inserting it into exegesis, with the aim of distorting tafsir of
the Qur'an through the superstitions he spread.

### Hadith of Satan's Defaming All Sons of Adam Except Jesus and Mother.

Among the Masihiyyat traditions, it can be referred to the hadith
reported by al-Bukhari on the authority of Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet
said: "The Satan verily stabs every human being in the waist in time of
birth, except Jesus the son of Mary, whom he tried to stab but he
(Satan) stabbed the cover.” In another narration he said: I heard the
Messenger of Allah saying: No son of Adam shall be born unless that he
should be afflicted (touched) by the Satan at the hour of birth, when he
initiates his life crying out of the Satan's touch, except Maryam and
her son."

Yet in another narration: The Satan afflicts every son of Adam at the
time of birth, except Jesus, son of Mary and his mother. Allah made a
veil to prevent the stab, which hit the veil and missed them!

Muslim reported it thus: "...except the prick of the Satan", and...

"unless that he should initiate his life (crying) because of the prick
of the Satan." What we get of this hadith, which this honourable
Companion heard from the Messenger, being that, the Satan stabs or
pricks every son of Adam except Isa ibn Maryam and his mother. So none
of all sons of Adam shall escape stab of the Satan other than them, even
the apostles: Noah, Abraham and Moses and others, with their Seal
Muhammad, upon whom and all Prophets be God’s benedictions. How
wonderful is this hadith! <span id="_anchor_347"></span>347

Unsatisfied with all this, they narrated also that even the Prophet (S)
could never escape the Satan’s prick, only after the stab's penetrating
his heart. And that was through a surgical operation undertaken by the
angels, using surgical instruments made of gold! According to these
narrations, the chest of the Prophet (S) was rip open and the black
leech was taken out! But unfortunately, the first operation might have
failed, so his chest was rip again, and again for five times, four of
which were unanimously accepted — as is said at the age of three, and
ten, and at the time of his mission (mab’ath), and isra’, and for a
fifth time about which there is dispute. <span
id="_anchor_348"></span>348 It is said that the purpose behind
reiterating the act of ripping is only to show more veneration for the
Prophet!

This surgical operation resembles — in some aspects — the process of
crucifying Jesus Christ (upon whom be peace), who never perpetrated any
sin deserving such crucifixion. But they mentioned that so that God may
forgive the guilt of Adam which is shouldered by him and his offspring
till the Day of Resurrection, being a burden upon all of them. The
Christian creed stipulates that this forgiveness can never be attained
but only by that who has faith in the belief of crucifixion.

When the Muslims ask their brethren the Christians. Why doesn't Allah
forgive Adam's sin through other than this harsh means, in which an
innocent pure soul, of Jesus, was put to death, without any sin? It will
be said

to them. Why didn't Allah create the heart of His Messenger whom He
chose, like the hearts of other delegated prophets — while God knows
better where to give His message — pure from the black leech and devil's
luck without such an operation which tore his chest and heart
recurringly.

By God, I can't imagine where they to go from what the Almighty Allah
said in His holy Book, in Surat al-Hijr: "He said: "My Lord! because
Thou hast left me to stray, certainly will I adorn unto them the path of
error, and certainly will I cause them all to go astray. Save Thy
(devoted) servants, of them the freed ones." Said He. "This is a right
way unto Me. Verily, (as regards) My (devoted) servants, there is not
for thee over them any authority except the one who followeth thee, of
the deviators." (15-39-42). How can they repel the Book by the Sunnah,
or object the mutawatir (hadith) that indicating certainty with ahad
(unsuccessively narrated) traditions which never indicating but
surmise?! That is in case of these traditions being correct.

But this hadith of the Satan's goading was refuted by al-Zamakhshari in
his book al-Kashshaf, and also about it Fakhr al-Din al-Razi in his
Tafsir <span id="_anchor_349"></span>349  said: "Al-Qadi confuted this
report saying: it is khabar wahid that was cited opposite to the proof,
so its refutation became inevitable. We said that it was opposite to the
proof for several reasons. First: The Satan verily invites to evil that
who discerns the good and evil, while any lad never does so!

Second: Had such prick been in the capacity of the Satan, he would have
done worse than this. Such as destroying the upright people and
corrupting their conditions.

Third: Why the exception singled out Mary and Jesus other than the other
prophets (A)?

Fourth: Had this goading been reality there, its effect would have

remained obvious, and had it so the screaming and weeping would have
never stopped. On seeing non-existence of this we realized its futility.

Al-Ustadh Muhammad Abduh (May God be pleased with him) said: <span
id="_anchor_350"></span>350

"What is certain for us is that the Satan has no warrant over devoted
servants of Allah, the best of whom being the prophets and messengers.
Regarding the hadith on Mary and Jesus that they were never touched by
the Satan, hadith on Islam of the devil of the Prophet(S), and hadith of
removing the devilish luck out of his (S) heart, are all surmise-based
reports as they are akhbar al-ahad (singly narrated traditions). And
since their theme being the Knower of the Invisible, and due to the fact
that iman is among aqa’id (beliefs), in whose case surmise is not
adopted according to Allah’s words: "Assuredly conjecture can by no
means take the place of truth," we will never be obliged to believe in
the content of these traditions in respect of our beliefs.

### Ibn Jarih:

It is known that Ibn Jarih al-Rumi was one among those who used to
disclose what is hidden inside their hearts. He died in 150 H. and he
was regarded trustworthy in the perspective of al-Bukhari, who was right
in that thinking. In Tadhkirat al-huffaz al-Dhahabi said that he was of
a Roman origin (Rumi), so he was a Christian in descent. About him some
scholars said that he used to fabricate hadith, and he consummated
temporary marriage (mut’ah) with ninety women. Of the Masihiyyat that
were foisted into Islam is the hadith on making the Prophet(S) sit on
the Throne! And that was when witnessing the Christians believing that
Jesus used to sit beside God on the Throne, <span
id="_anchor_351"></span>351  it pained them not to make Muhammad (S) sit
on the Throne too, so they narrated this report which I am quoting
herewith from the

book Bada’i’ al-fawa’id of Ibn al-Qayyim (Vol. IV, pp.39-40).

Al-Qadi said: al-Maruzi compiled a book on the Prophet's virtues,
stating in it "his being seated on the Throne", adding that the same was
held by Abu Dawud, Abu Ja'far al-Dimashqi, Ishaq ibn Rahawayh, Ibrahim
al-Harbi, Abd Allah the son of al-Imam Ahmad, al-Maruzi and Bishr
al-Hafi, till stating more than fifteen scholars holding the same
belief.

Ibn al-Qayyim says: I said the same is also said by Ibn Jarir al-Tabari,
the leader of all these and imam of exegesis, and it is also said by Abu
al-Hasan al-Daraqutni. I quote here some of the poetic lines he said in
his regard.

Hadith of intercession is (reported) by Ahmad.

To Ahmad al-Mustafa its chain goes back,

And a hadith is cited in making him sit,

On the Throne too, so never renounce it,

Relate the hadith with its import,

And never insert in it what spoils it,

Nor deny that he is sitting,

Nor repudiate that he makes him sit. <span id="_anchor_352"></span>352

Following is a short statement I quote from the book al-Aqidah wa
al-Shari’ah by the great Orientalist Jold Tsihar, p.p.42-43.

There are sentences taken from the old epoch and modern epoch, sayings
of the divine ulama’, or derived from the fabricated gospels and
teachings of the Greek philosophy, and utterances said during the reign
of the Persians and Indians, all found way into Islam through way of
hadith, even the term abuna (our father). Thus they came to be directly

or indirectly purely owned by Islam! A great treasure of religious tales
crept into Islam, to the extent that when making a glance at the
material of hadith and the Jewish religious literature, we will verily
find an ample portion of Islamic religious literature was spoiled with
so many fabrications taken from these Jewish sources.

I don't intend to expose all the Masihiyyat that were foisted into
Islam. Whoever desires to have knowledge about the Israeliyyat and
Masihiyyat (Jewish and Christian fabricated traditions) and others in
the Islamic religion, can refer to books of tafsir (exegesis), hadith
and history. Beside the books of Orientalists like Jold Tsihar, and Fonn
Krimar beside others, in which so many of these Jewish and Christian
traditions were recorded.

Before concluding this bab (section) I introduce some of what Abu
Hurayrah related about descension of Jesus from the heaven.

### Jesus Christ and his Descension:

It is said that descension of Jesus (Messias) from the heaven being one
of the signs of the Hour (Doomsday). It is reported in the two Sahihs
and other books, that Abu Hurayrah said: The Messenger of Allah said:
"By Whom in Whose hand is my life, the son of Mary is about to descend
among you, as a just arbitrator. He will verily break the cross, kill
the pig, impose the jizyah (tribute), slaughter the ape and accept
nothing except Islam." They also said that he will not bring an
independent statute (shari‘ah), and will receive the reins of government
from al-Mahdi, with al-Mahdi being one of his companions and followers.
And all the acts done by him will resemble the acts they stated to be
done by al-Mahdi.

### Place of his Descension:

Jesus will descend at the White Minaret east of Damascus, placing his
palms on wings of two angels. When bowing his head, it will trickle, and
when raising it pearls will glide down from it. His descension will take
place after elapse of six hours of the day, and will sit on the pulpit,
when the Muslims, Christians and Jews will enter the mosque. Then he
will lead Muslims in (afternoon) prayers at Damascus Mosque. After that
he with his followers will rise out looking for the Dajjal, when the
earth be drawn together for him till he coming near the Bayt al-Maqdis,
which he will find closed, being besieged by the Dajjal.

### Length of His Term:

In a hadith related by Abu Hurayrah, that was recorded in the books of
al-Tabarrani and Ibn Asakir, the Prophet (S) said: "Jesus will dwell
among people for forty years." After that Muslims will bury him beside
our Prophet (may God's peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny). It is also reported by Ibn Umar through a chain going back to
the Prophet, as saying: He (Jesus) will get married and give birth to
two sons, one called Musa and the other Muhammad. He will live for
forty-five years, and will die and be buried with me in my grave. Then I
and Jesus will rise up from one grave (in the period) between Abu Bakr
and Umar! It is said that he will dwell for seven years, and after
murder of al-Dajjal he will betake himself to the Medina and visit the
tomb of the Prophet (S), making pilgrimage to the Holy Sanctuary
(Mecca), deceasing at the Medina! There are similar reports in this
regard, that I abandoned due to their vanity.

### The Suspicions Raised by Them:

They say There are authentic traditions asserting that descension of
Jesus will be at dawn on the eastern Damascus Minaret. <span
id="_anchor_353"></span>353  But how is it said that his descension will
be after elapse of six hours of the daytime (at 6 afternoon)! Besides,
it is commonly known among men of knowledge that Jesus will verily
perform morning prayers behind al-Mahdi not afternoon prayers!

### Abundance of Related Traditions:

It became manifest before, that behind such situation were many reasons,
various motives, with its doors being open for long centuries, producing
every day multifarious traditions which the fabricators diversify in
devising and ascribing to the Messenger of Allah (S).

Consequently the traditions ascribed (falsely) to the Prophet have
extremely multiplied, till reassing hundreds of thousands <span
id="_anchor_354"></span>354 , the fact that led al-Hafiz al-Daraqutni to
say: Verily the correct hadith among false ahadith is exactly like the
white single hair on the black ox skin. <span
id="_anchor_355"></span>355

Being terrified by this multiplicity of traditions, the \`ulama’ got
ready for unveiling and divulging the fabricated traditions, compiling
numerous works in this regard. The most outstanding ones who put their
best leg foremost were Ibn al-Jawzi, al-Suyuti, al-Saghani and Mulla Ali
al-Qari and others.

Further, Dr. Ahmad Amin (may God's mercy be upon him) has broached the
issue of abundance of traditions, saying: <span
id="_anchor_356"></span>356

"It is quite strange that when taking diagram for the hadith, it would
be like a pyramid, whose pointed edge being the era of the Messenger (S)
which becomes being gradually wider and wider with passage of time, till

when reaching the base we become so distant from the Prophet's time,
though the reverse being the reasonable fact. It is known that the
Companions of the Messenger of Allah should have been better aware of
his hadith than others, and with their death hadith should diminish with
absence of narrators from him(S), and so on. But we observe the
traditions that spread during the Abbasid epoch were more than those
spread during the Umayyad era.

It may be among the correct reasons that migration in request of hadith
and collecting it from all towns during the Abbasid epoch used to be
more perfect and active. But that was not the only reason, rather it
might be the greatest reason led to voluminosity of (fabricated) hadith,
as the Jews and Christians and others, <span id="_anchor_357"></span>357
 who follow other religions, have foisted many things from their
religions and reports into the traditions. Thus the traditions became
replete with things taken from the Torah and its margins, some of the
Christian reports, and teachings of the Shu'ubiyyah such as the
traditions indicating excellence of the Persians and Romans.

338. What is worth attention and pondering, the fact that all these Jew
and Christian priests had moved, after murder of Uthman, to the Sham.
This shift seems not to be for God's sake but with the aim of
collaboration together to sow discord and sparkle fire of grudge among
the Muslims, so as to make the Umayyad state flourish, and disperse the
Muslims, with gaining the booties from the Umayyads, after that.

339. See Vol. I, p. 520.

340. He and his brother Nu'aym came to al-Madinah in 59H. and embraced
Islam, as stated before.
"The geographers are requested to search for this island and recognize
its place in the sea! and inform us then so as to see the oddities
contained in it, about which we are told by - our master - Tamim
al-Dari, may God be pleased with him!

341. This imminence is about the year 9H., while we are now in the year
1386, without seeing the face of this Messias, or sensing any trace of
him!!

342. He is referring by this to the making of the men of hadith, who
when finding any difference in the text of any hadith would immediately
estimate the plurality of the event on which the hadith was said,
thinking that by this they managed to untie the knot of contradiction.

343. Hadith of 'Ariniyyin is thus: Some people from Akal and Arinah came
to al-Madinah, approaching to the Prophet, saying to him: O Prophet of
God, we were herders of sheep not villagers, so would you give us
shelter and food. And they found al-Madinah unhealthy for them, so the
Prophet ordered to provide them with cattle and a shepherd and commanded
them to go out and drink from their milk. Then they set out, till
reaching the district of al-Hirah, where they converted disbelievers
after embracing Islam, killing the shepherd sent with them by the
Prophet, driving the cattle with them. When the Prophet heard of their
practices, he sent after them some men, and when capturing them he gave
his orders to amputate their hands and legs and forsake them alone in
al-Hirah, where they died on this condition. In regard of the people of
the Well of Ma'unah it is said: Some magnates of Ra'l, Dhakwan, 'Usayyah
and Banu Lihyan came to the Prophet (S) and claimed that they embraced
Islam, seeking his support against their people. So he provided them
with seventy of the Ansar, when they went away with them till reaching
the well of Ma'unah, where they betrayed and killed them. When the
Prophet heard of their doing, he kept for one month invoking God against
people of Ra'l, Dhakwan and Banu Lihyan.

344. Al-Manar Journal, Vol. XIX, pp. 99, 100.

345. Ibid., Vol. XXIII, p. 756.

346. It is reported in the 2nd bab of the 2nd letter sent by Paul to the
people of Tsalouniqi, and the 19th bab of al-Mushahadat, that Jesus will
kill the Dajjal, (Izhar al-haqq, Vol. II, p. 191).

347. The Christians depended on this hadith to prove two of their
doctrines, the first of which: All the human beings have fallen into
trap of wrong and perpetrating of sins, except Jesus, the son of Mary,
who had a higher rank than ordinary people. The second belief:
Descension of Jesus the son of Mary from the heaven to the earth to
judge among people and chastise them.
The Saint Ibrahim Louqa, in his book al-Masihiyyah fi al-Islam, after
referring to superiority of Jesus over all other mankind and his being
competent to be infallible and immune against all sins, said: "In Surat
Maryam it is said: "And (there is) not one of you but shall go down unto
it (hell); This is of thy Lord a decided (unavoidable) decree". This
verse determines decisively that all human beings should enter the hell,
we seek God's protection from it, and it is known that punishment can
never afflich anyone but for a sin (he perpetrated), and otherwise it
will be injustice, and your Lord is not (in the least) unjust to (the)
servants…so this verse indicates that all human beings are liable to be
captivated by bestial passions and guilts. After this verse we can read
another verse from Surat Al Imran: "…and lo! I commend her to Thy
protection and also her offspring (i.e. the Messiah) from Satan the
castaway (accursed)". Hence we come to know that Allah has safeguarded
the Virgin Mary and the Christ against the seduction of the accursed
Satan.

After citing this hadith, which contained these two realities - i.e.
corruption of all human beings, and infallibility of Jesus alone - I
cite here another hadith reported by al-Bukhari: "Every son of Adam when
born is thrusted by Satan with his two fingers on the waist, except
Jesus son of Mary, who when he (Satan) intended to thrust he thrusted
the cover."

So acknowledgement of Islam that all the human beings have deviated and
corrupted, and been devoid of 'ismah, liable to committing the sins and
guilts, besides admitting 'ismah to be owned by Jesus Christ alone and
his being immune against touch of Satan, it also elevates him to a rank
superior to all people, admitting thus his glorified divinity. There are
other narrations for this hadith, which can be seen in Fath al-Bari,
vol. VI. In page 135 of this book he said that this hadith was reported
by Abu Hurayrah.

What is surprising even more, Abu Harayrah's declaring that he heard the
two hadiths of al-Bukhari on Satan's thrusting and descending of Jesus
from the Prophet, as he declared to have heard the hadith of God's
creating the ground on Saturday,  while the researchers proved that he
reported it from Ka'b al-Ahbar. Thus our prolific narrator disseminates
those traditions among people which constitute problems in our religion,
and proof for our opponents with which they support their beliefs!!

In regard of the hadith on thrusting of Satan reported by al-Bukahri,
Ibn Hajar said in his Sharh: "The author of al-Kashshaf suspected the
meaning of this hadith and refuted its veractity, beside al-Razi who
vilified it saying: "This hadith is khabar al-wahid and cited in
contravention to the established evidence.

348. See Sirat Ibn Hisham, Vol. I, pp. 154-156.

349. See Vol. II, p. 459.

350. Tafsir al-Qur'an al-Karim, vol. III, pp. 291, 292.

351. The Christians believe that the Messiah (peace be upon him) has
ascended to the heaven with his body after being crucified, and that he
is sitting there with his Father! The Roman Catholic followers have an
essential belief that his mother the Virgin Mary has also ascended
together with him by her body to the heaven, and she didn't die. Refer
to the Egyptian Wafd Newspaper, issues dated October 31 and November 1,
2 and 3, 1950. All the Egyptian Copts believe firmly in this doctrine,
and all of their cults celebrate every year the feast of ascension of
Lady Mary's body to the heaven, calling this as "Great Feast of the
Virgin". They never allow anyone to object or dispute this belief, held
by them that as long as Jesus (A) has ascended to the heaven and sat
beside his Father, so no objection to ascension of his mother after him
to reside with him and Allah in the heaven, so as to live together a
good life in happiness and bliss!!

352. I have reported this khabar from Ibn al-Qayyim in the 2nd edition
of my book. But it became clear then that this Ibn al-Qayyim, who was a
Hanbali, was not truthful in what he ascribed to Ibn Jarir al-Tabari,
who stated in his Ta'rikh, to which a reference made by the author of
Mu'jam al-udaba', that when he (Ibn al-Qayyim) came to Baghdad from
Tabaristan, some people stood against him, and the Hanbalis inquired him
about the hadith of sitting on the Throne, when he said: Concerning the
hadith of sitting on the Throne, it is impossible. The he chanted:
Glorified is that for Whom no sociable is there,

*Nor a companion sharing Him in His Throne.*

When the Hanbalis and men of hadith heard of this, they turned angry and
pelted at him their inkpots, when he returned home. Then they kept on
hurling stones at his house, till they piled up making a big hill-like
at the door. Then the chief of police headed tens of thousands of troops
toward his house, for keeping the people away from his house, staying
all the day till night, giving his orders to take away the stones.

353. Why did they make the descension of Jesus upon the Umayyad Minaret
of Damascus?

354. In his Musnad, al-Imam Ahmad said: I have compiled and selected
this book out of 750 thousand traditions. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar
al-Razi said: Abu Zar'ah learnt by heart 700 thousand traditions, with
memorizing 140 thousand traditions on tafsir, and Malik selected
al-Muwatta' out of 100 thousand traditions. Also al-Bukhari compiled his
book from 600 thousand traditions, Muslim from 600 thousand also, and
Abu Dawud from 500 thousand ones. Despite their reporting of tens of
thousands of traditions on tafsir, but Ibn Taymiyyah reported in his
book Fi usul al-tafsir (p. 14), that al-Imam Ahmad said: Three things
have no isnad: Exegesis (tafsir), epics (malahim) and inner meanings
(maghazi). So Shu'bah said: Nine-tenth of traditions are false.
What follows is a quotation from the book Wujhat al-Islam, which was
translated by Muhammad Abd al-Hadi Abu Ridah, taken from Ruh al-Islam of
Sayyid Amir Ali, in defence of Islam: "Reformation should be preceded by
education, and liberating the mind from restrictions. And we have to
take away superficial commitance to outside manifestations, since it has
become of no effect, and our decisions should be based on using the
reason and out of what giving the sense of being right and proper in a
certain situation.

Islam is able to fashion everything other than it with its form, and its
essence will verily be intact despite changing of its exterior. Had the
Imams been free in employing their opinion and discarding bravely 500
thousand traditions, sparing only eight thousand ones, we would have
dedicated such freedom for ourselves. And why does man think that Islam
has been casted in a mould that never changes after unanimity on the Six
Books? See p. 126.

355. Al-Islam al-Sahih, p. 215.

356. Duha al-Islam, vol. II, pp. 128-129.

357. The good fabricators (salihun) among Muslims and others are not
mentioned here, so the reader is requested to refer to the chapter:
"Fabrication of Hadith and Its Causes" in this book.
