Abu Hurayrah
============

If the traditions of the Messenger of Allah were altogether the
cornerstone of religion — like the Qur'an — upon which Din is set up,
and source of all rulings that every Muslim should know and follow, as
he follows the Qur'an and if the Prophet (S) commanded his Companions to
memorize these traditions so as to be followed after his demise, those
Companions exaggerating in narrating them would be of higher religious
position, firmer firm in faith, and sublimer in knowledge. Further,
those narrating less would be lower than them in religious status,
having degree of knowledge, honour and consideration beyond theirs. But
in fact the situation — as revealed in the well-known hadith books —
being on the contrary of this!! as the best of Companions in rank,
higher in status, broader in knowledge of Din and sincerest in
safe-guarding it, who were entrusted with shouldering the precepts of
religion which they learnt from their teacher, like the Rightly-guided
Caliphs and the Ten who claimed that he (S) died while being pleased
with them or augured them with paradise, beside magnates of the
Muhajirun and Ansar and others, were less than others in relating hadith
to the extent that some of them have not reported from the Messenger
even one hadith!!

Being unsatisfied with all this, the magnates among the Companions
shunned relating the hadith and forbade others from doing so. Their
extreme precaution in this regard led them to set to fire whatever was
written down, as was known before. This fact made us dedicate a separate
biography for the most prolific in relating hadith from the Messenger of
Allah among the Companions, and broader in narration, though being one
of the common

companions who was neither here nor there... that was. Abu Hurayrah.

Had not these abundant traditions — due to the commoners trust in them
filled the hadith books deserved respect and trust inside the Muslims'
hearts and seized their minds and thinking, to the extent they regarded
them of the general rules of religion, though having intricate problems
embarrassing the minds of the believers, with suspicions and
superstitions constituting weak points in religion and reliable asanid
to confirm the Israeliyyat and Masihiyyat (Jewish and Christian
fabricated traditions) and other creeds... had not all these things been
there, I would have never prepared this research, nor cared that much
for it.

### Disagreement about His Name:

During the pre-Islamic era and advent of Islam, there was no
disagreement regarding any name like the one that was in regard of the
name of Abu Hurayrah. No one had verified knowledge of the name his
family gave to him so as to be called with among people.

Al-Nawawi says: Abu Hurayrah's name is Abd al-Rahman ibn Sakhr,
according to authentic reports from thirty sources.

The Moroccan Hafiz Ibn Abd al-Barr, in al-Isti‘ab <span
id="_anchor_358"></span>358  writes:

There was much controversy and disagreement regarding the original names
of Abu Hurayrah and his father, in a way that no one could know it
exactly and accurately whether during the pre-Islamic period or after it
in the Islamic era.. With such disagreement and confusion, nothing can
be so reliable, and his nickname was more common than his name, as if he
had no name other than that, with which he was called everywhere .

The author of al-Mishkat said: People differed much concerning the name
of Abu Hurayrah and his descent, and he was only called with that

kunyah as if he having no other name. The kunyah became so widely known
to the extent that the original name was forgotten, since much
disagreement was there regarding it.

From what is exposed, giving him any definite special name would be no
more than conjecture. So we suffice with mentioning his kunyah, which he
himself manifested its real cause saying: I used to pasture the sheep of
my family, having a little pussy (hirrah) which I used to place inside a
tree at night. During daytime I would take it with me and play with it.
That is why people gave me the nickname of "Abu Hurayrah"!!

### His Growth and Origin:

Beside the disagreement regarding the name of Abu Hurayrah, nothing was
known about his growing up or his biography before embracing Islam,
except what he exposed about himself: that he used to play with a little
she-cat, and he was poor and destitute, serving people in return for
having food for living on. The only information available about his
origin and descent, being that he descended from Tribe of Sulaym ibn
Fahm that belonged to Tribe of Azd and of Dous then.

About this he said: I grew up as an orphan, and migrated as a destitute,
and was a servant in return for food as sustenance (as a payment).

In his book al-Ma'arif, after referring to the disagreement among people
regarding his name, and that he was from a tribe in Yemen called Dous,
stated what follows:

"Abu Hurayrah said: I grew up as an orphan, and migrated as a destitute,
and was a servant hired by Bisrah bint Ghazwan with my pay being only
some food to sustain on... I used to serve them when they got down, and
urge forward by singing when they mounted the horsebacks. And I was

nicknamed with Abu Hurayrah because of having a little pussy (hirrah) I
used to play with."

### His coming to Medina and Going to Khaybar:

After passing the thirty, Abu Hurayrah came to al-Medina, when the
Prophet (S) was out (participating) in the Battle of Khaybar which took
place in the seventh Hijrah year.

Ibn Sa'd in al-Tabaqat al-kubra, writes: The Dousis including Abu
Hurayrah arrived at al-Madinah while the Messenger of Allah was in
Khaybar. Thereat the Messenger asked his Companions to give Abu Hurayrah
a share from the booty, which they did. And due to being poor, he betook
himself to the Siffah <span id="_anchor_359"></span>359  after r
returning to al-Madina, living in it as long as he was residing in
al-Madinah, being the most famous among those frequenting to it.

### Reason of His Companionship to the Prophet:

Abu Hurayrah was frank and honest in revealing the reason behind his
companionship to the Prophet (S), as he was honest in uncovering the
truth about his growth. He didn't claim that he kept his company out of
affection and seeking guidance — as the case with other Muslims but he
said: "I kept his company for only filling my abdomen"

In a hadith reported by Ahmad and the two Shaykhs (al-Bukhari and
Muslim), from Sufyan, from al Zuhri, Abd al-Rahman al-A'raj <span
id="_anchor_360"></span>360  said: "I heard Abu Hurayrah saying: I was a
destitute man, who used to keep the company of the Messenger of Allah in
return for filling my belly." In another narration by Muslim, he said: I
used to serve the Messenger of Allah, and according to him also... for
satiating my abdomen."

In another narration by Muslim. He said: I was a destitute man, serving
the Messenger of Allah in return for satiating my belly. In another
narration by him too. I accompanied the Messenger of Allah (as a
servant) with satiating my abdomen in return.

In history books it is recorded that he was gluttonous and greedy, being
fed everyday in the Prophet's house, or the house of any of his
Companions to the extent that some of them were averse to him.

Al-Bukhari reported that he said: I used to ask someone to cite for me a
Qur'anic verse that was with me, so as to make him turn toward me and
give me food. And the most benevolent of people to the needy was Ja'far
ibn Abi Talib, who used to receive us and feed us of whatever he had in
his house (of food).

From him too al-Tirmidhi reported: Whenever asking Ja'far about a verse,
he would not give me any reply but only after going home (i.e. bringing
food). That is why this Ja'far was considered by Abu Hurayrah as the
best of all the Companions, giving him priority over Abu Bakr, Umar, Ali
and Uthman, beside other great Companions (may God be pleased with them
all).

Al-Tirmidhi and al-Hakim, through a reliable isnad (chain), reported
that Abu Hurayrah said: No man has ever put on a sandal, or got on
mounts, or trodden the earth, after the Messenger of Allah, better than
Ja'far ibn Abi Talib. <span id="_anchor_361"></span>361

  
  
  

358. See pp. 718, 719.

359. The Saffah is a shadowy place in the rear northern part of the
Mosque of Prophet. And Ahl al-Suffah are - as said by Abu al-Fida' in
his al-Ta'rikh al-mukhtasar - poor people having neither houses nor
tribes, sleeping during lifetime of the Prophet in the mosque and
staying there all night. So the ledge of the mosque was their abode,
hence they were called with this nickname. When the Messenger of Allah
was having supper, he would invite some of them to share him, dispersing
the others among the Sahabah to feed them.

360. Al-A'raj is his disciple and companion.

361. Fath al-Bari, vol. VII, p. 62.
