Shaykh Al-mudirah:
==================

  
  
  

The title given to Abu Hurayrah was Shaykh al-Mudirah. The care given by
the ulama’, writers and poets to this mudirah was never given to similar
sorts of sweets. These people kept on mocking it, calumniating Abu
Hurayrah because of it for several centuries. Following are some of
their

reports about the mudirah:

In his book Thimar al-qulub fi al-mudaf wa al-mansub al-Tha'alibi
writes: <span id="_anchor_362"></span>362

Shaykh al-Mudirah was Abu Hurayrah, for his excellence and nearness to
the Prophet (S), as a jester and glutton. Marwan ibn al-Hakam used to
depute him (as a governor) on al-Madinah, when he would mount a donkey
on which a saddle was tied. On meeting any man on his way he would say:
The road! the road! (i.e. make room), the emir is coming.

He further was claiming to be expert in medicine. Al Taha'alibi, after
referring to a part of his medicine, all of which being only food that
heals the intestine disease, and cures gluttony, stated: “He had strong
love for mudirah, and used to have it with Mu'awiyah, but in time of
prayers he used to pray behind Ali (may God be pleased with him). When
questioned about this, he would reply: mudirah of Mu'awiyah is verily
fattier and tastier, while performing prayer behind Ali is better. He
was widely known and called with the name of "Shaykh al-Mudirah."

Al-Tha'alibi concluded his statement with two poetic lines for some
poet, in which he satirized Abu Hurayrah, I preferred not to state here.

Badi' al-Zaman al-Hamadani has dedicated one of his maqamat for this
mudirah, in which he harshly satirized Abu Hurayrah saying: "Isa ibn
Hisham related to us saying: I was once in Basrah with Abu al-Fath
al-Exandari, the man of high eloquence and rhetoric. I attended with him
a banquet to which we were invited by some merchants. There a mudirah
was served for us, that was so tasty, luxuriant, auguring of
healthiness, and acknowledging imamate for Mu'awiyah.

Al-Imam Muhammad Abduh, in his exposition of this, said:

"Mu'awiyah claimed to be the caliph after swearing allegiance to Ali ibn
Abi Talib (A), but no one was there to acknowledge his caliphate during
lifetime of Ali except some of pleasure-seeking people, and runners
after lusts.

Had this mudirah been among the ordinary food of Mu'awiyah, it would
have enticed its eaters to acknowledge his caliphate, even though the
real owner of the legitimate allegiance was alive. Ascribing
acknowledgement to it (mudirah) is due to its being the only factor
causing it to exist, with the fact that Imamate and caliphate having the
same meaning."

In al-Asas, Jar Allah writes: Ali with the wretched condition is verily
better then Mu'awiyah with the mudirah.

Abu Nu'aym in Hilyat al-awliya’ says: Abu Hurayrah, while
circumambulating round the House (Ka'bah), used to say: Woe to my belly,
when satisfying it, it would seize me, and if I starve it, it would
defame me. In another narration by Ibn Kathir in al-Bidayah wa
al-nihayah, he said:...it would weaken me.

In Khass al-khass <span id="_anchor_363"></span>363  al-Tha'alibi
stated:

Abu Hurayrah used to say: I have never smelled a scent nicer than that
of hot bread, nor seen a knight better than butter on dates!

Besides, Abu Hurayrah was counting eating (part) of manliness. When
asked once: What is manliness? He replied: Fear of God (taqwa) and doing
favour, and having lunch and supper in the courtyards.

I abandoned many other reports, since some of them contain things that
hurt the feelings of some people.

### Hadith: Visit at Intervals You Increase in Love:

Once upon a day, the Messenger of Allah said to Abu Hurayrah: Visit at
long intervals, you verily increase in love. He (S) was the best

educator for his Companions, taking charge of them all the time with his
wisdom and sagacity, planting in them of his noble morals through his
conduct. It was not proper for him(S) to let one like Abu Hurayrah to
keep on his past practice of frequenting to houses whenever he liked,
that was either received by some and repelled by some, without educating
him with his sublime morality. As a consequence of this, the Messenger
said once to Abu Hurayrah: Where were you yesterday O Abu Hurayrah? He
replied: I visited some of my relatives. He said to him: Visit at long
intervals, you verily increase in love.

Abu Hayyan al-Tawhidi, in his book al-sadaqah wa al-sadiq, writes that
Abu Hurayrah said: The Arabs' dictum "Visit at long intervals you verily
increase in love" became widely circulated among people till I heard it
from the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God's peace and benediction),
and "he verily said it to me."

Al-Masjidi said: "This dictum is not to be taken in general, but there
are certain situations in which it should be said, since the visitor
deserving it! Don't you see that he never utters such words to Abu Bakr
or to Ali ibn Abi Talib or their likes, while Abu Hurayrah being
competent for that hadith! because of some slips that he should avoid
and shun." <span id="_anchor_364"></span>364

Abu Hurayrah's slips for which al-Masjidi slanders being his frequenting
to the Companions' houses every now and then, out of his gluttony, with
some of them shunning and averting him. So the Messenger decided to
teach him the etiquette of visiting and entering the houses, citing for
him the Arabic proverb. "Visit at long intervals you verily increase in
love." Besides, he (S) used to, through all occasions, teaching his
companions manners of conduct and the ways of attaining good morality.

His Jesting and Nonsense:

All the historians writing about biography of Abu Hurayrah concur that
he was joking and hallucinating all the time, showing love to people and
entertaining them with abundance of traditions, and strange sayings so
as to attract their attention, making them keen to meet him. Following
some of the narrations they cited in this regard:

A'ishah – who was the greatest among people for him due to their long
age both – in al-mihras tradition, said about him: he was a
hallucinating man.

### Scorning Him:

People used to scorn Abu Hurayrah making fun of his narrations, because
of the variety he followed in inventing them, and his exaggeration in
multiplying them.

Abu Rafi' is reported to have said: A man from Quraysh met Abu Hurayrah
while he was wearing a new garment, swaggering with it, when he said to
him: O Abu Hurayrah, you relate abundant traditions from the Messenger
of Allah, have you heard him say anything regarding this garment?!! He
said, I heard Abu al-Qasim saying: A man from those who were before you,
while swaggering in a vestment God caused the earth to sink with him,
and he will keep on rattling with it till the Doomsday. By God I don't
know, he may be of your folk or flock. <span id="_anchor_365"></span>365

Out of the question put forth by this man, we can conceive that he was
not inquiring (to know something) but sarcasting, as didn't say to him:
You commit to memory the traditions of the Messenger of Allah! but he
said: You relate abundant traditions from the Messenger of Allah.
Besides, the course of the tale indicates also that he was mocking and
ridiculing him.

### Multiplicity of His Traditions:

All men of hadith concur that Abu Hurayrah was the most prolific among
the Sahabah in relating traditions from the Messenger of Allah! Whilst
his company to the Prophet was only for a year and nine months. <span
id="_anchor_366"></span>366  Muhammad ibn Hazm states that Musnad Ibn
Mukhallad contained 5,374 traditions narrated by Abu Hurayrah of which
446 ones reported by al-Bukhari.

He himself said about himself – as reported by al Bukhari – None among
the Companions of the Prophet (S) exceeds me in relating traditions from
him except Abd Allah ibn \`Amr, <span id="_anchor_367"></span>367  as he
used to write down (the traditions) while I was not. <span
id="_anchor_368"></span>368  If we go through all the traditions related
by Ibn Amr we would find Seven hundred ones recorded by Ibn al-Jawzi,
722 ones recorded in Musnad Ahmad, with seven ones reported by
al-Bukhari and twenty by Muslim. The multiplicity of traditions narrated
by Abu Hurayrah stunned Umar ibn al-Khattab, who hit him with his pearl
saying to him: O Abu Hurayrah, you have exaggerated in narration
(riwayah) and I think you to be ascribing false traditions to the
Messenger of Allah. Then he threatened to exile him to his homeland if
he didn't give up relating hadith of the Messenger of Allah.

Ibn Asakir reported the hadith of al-Sa'ib ibn Yazid, that he said: You
should give up relating hadith of the Messenger of Allah, or otherwise I
shall exile you to the land of Dous.

Therefore, after death of Umar and going away of his pearl, he started
again relating so numerous traditions since no one was there to be
afraid from other than him (Umar). In this regard he said: I relate to
you traditions which had I related during the lifetime of Umar, he would
have hit me with the pearl — (in another narration: he would have
fractured my skull).

Al-Zuhri reported from Abu Salamah as saying: I heard Abu Hurayrah
saying: We were unable to say: "The Messenger of Allah said, but till
when Umar deceased! Then he said: Had I been relating to you such
traditions when Umar was alive, by God I would have been certain that
the beater (mikhfaqah) would be hitting my back, as Umar used to say:
Engage yourselves with the Qur'an as it is the speech of Allah.

The faqih traditionist al-Sayyid. Rashid Rida (may God's mercy be upon
him) said about this: Had Umar survived till after the death of Abu
Hurayrah, all these abundant traditions would have never reached us at
all. <span id="_anchor_369"></span>369  And about his fabricated
miscellaneous traditions he said: "None of them can be taken as a base
to establish any of the principles of religion. <span
id="_anchor_370"></span>370

### His Justification for Narrating Abundantly:

Abu Hurayrah was justifying his relating abundantly from the Prophet (S)
by saying that: as long as he neither deems lawful what is unlawful nor
forbidding what is lawful, so no harm in narrating, supporting his
practice with traditions he ascribed to the Prophet. Of these traditions
I can refer to some that were reported by al Tabarrani in his al-Tafsir
al-kabir, from Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah said: "If you neither deem lawful what is
unlawful nor prohibit what is lawful (halal), but convey the meaning,
there is no harm in it" (relating the hadith).

He also said that he heard the Prophet saying: "Whoever relates a hadith
pleasing Allah, the Glorious and Mighty, it is verily said by me, though
I haven't (really) uttered it." This hadith is reported by Ibn Asakir in
his Ta’rikh.

Al-Tahawi reported from Abu Hurayrah that the Messenger of Allah

said: "Whenever relating any hadith from me, that you hold to be
reasonable and never deny, you should believe it whether I said it or
not ... as I utter that which is known and not disapproved. And whenever
you relate from me a hadith that you disapprove (by reason) and can
never be acquainted with, you should belie it, as I never utter that
which is disapproved and can never be reasoned." <span
id="_anchor_371"></span>371

Beside some other similar traditions he reported, whereas what is
established for us that the Prophet said: "Whoever relates from me a
hadith that I never uttered, he should settle in hell as his abode."
Umar was obliged to remind Abu Hurayrah with this hadith when he drew
the long bow in narration.

  
  
  

362. See pp. 86, 87.

363. See p. 43.

364. See p. 51.

365. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VIII, p. 10.

366. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

367. He is one of the three Abds who reported from Ka'b al-Ahbar. He got
two Zamilahs of the books of Ahl al-Kitab, which he used to narrate to
people, the reason why most of leaders of Tabi'un refrained from
reporting from him, and used to say to him: Never relate to us
(anything) from the two Zamilahs. In regard of his sahifah which he
called al-Sadiqah (the truthful) and used to covet eagerly, it was only
comprised of supplications and prayers, as stated by al-Khatib
al-Baghdadi. In its regard al-Mughirah said: "What pleases me is that
its worth can never be in my view more than two fils" - (Ta'wil
mukhtalif al-hadith, p. 93).

368. Ibn Hajar, in Fath al-Bari, p. 167, says: It was established that
Abu Hurayrah was never writing down (hadith) and was never memorizing
the Qur'an.

369. Al-Manar Journal, vol. X, p. 851.

370. Ibid., vol. XIX, p. 100.

371. Al-Shatibi, al-Muwafiqat, vol. II, p. 23.
