The Author’s Response
=====================

This was the precious foreword which Dr. Taha Husayn published about the
book “Adwa’ ‘ala al-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah” after reading it. Had I be
obliged to present to him the most sincere and deepest gratitude, for
the extreme care he exerted for my book, making him to read it more than
once, but which delights me – for which I praise God – being that his
lordship, though being the honourable scholar and renowned critic, has
never put his hand on anything liable to be censured, from among the
book’s topics – that all being critical – which no book had ever
contained, except some points that seemed for him “mere slips for which
he is not to blame” as he expressed himself in his foreword. <span
id="_anchor_1"></span>1

On the margin of these slips I give the following brief comment, hoping
it win his pleasure and approval.

The first of these slips being his raising doubt about the plot to
assassinate Umar, and the collaboration of Ka‘b al-Ahbar in it. On
reading his words in this respect, I smiled and asked myself, how would
the truth of such a thing be unrealized by him while he being the
investigating and penetrating scholar. I eagerly awaited the publication
of his book al-Shaykhan, so as to see his opinion in regard of murder of
Umar. As soon as I read what he stated in this book on this issue, I
became rest assured regarding what I referred to in my book, thanking
Allah for finding the doubt raised in the mind of Dr. Taha Husayn
concerning the intrigue to kill Umar, be vanished, praise be to God.
<span id="_anchor_2"></span> 2

The second slip, claiming that I have gone too far in interpretation
when saying that Abu Hurayrah has embraced Islam only for filling his
abdomen (satiating his hunger). Whereas the fact being that the only
reason behind my reference to this matter lies in Abu Hurayrah’s
confession to this

fact throughout many hadith books. For instance, al-Bukhari has reported
from him his saying: I have kept the Prophet’s company only for filling
my belly. And again according to Muslim’s narration, he said: I have
been at the service of the Prophet in recompense for filling my belly.
And confession, as held by men of law and legislation, is the head of
evidences. Thus I have never interpreted or gone to the extreme in this
regard, beside the fact that Abu Hurayrah’s biography confirms his
confession. As Ibn Sa’d has narrated about him that before embracing
Islam he was hired for Ibn Affan and his son Ghazwan with his wage being
only food for sustenance. And after his converting to Islam, when he was
a lodger at the Siffah, he has done (indecent) things that were
demonstrated by al-Bukhari himself and other scholars, which it is out
of scope to refer to them here.

Whereas the third and last slip being the Doctor’s doubt regarding what
I narrated, that Abu Hurayrah used to eat mudirah with Mu’awiyah and
perform his prayers behind Ali, and that how it would be feasible for
Abu Hurayrah to behave in this way with being in safe from being accused
by any of the two sects with hypocrisy and espionage!

First of all, I would like to tell that references were made to this
report in numerous works for eminent historians and scholars like:
Shadharat al-dhahab of al-Imad al-Hanbali; al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah of
Burhan al-Din al-Halabi; al-Zamakhshari in Rabi’ al-Abrar and Asas
al-balaghah; Badi’ al-Zaman al-Hamadani who not only was among renowned
writers, but also – as known from his biography – a trustable (thiqah)
traditionist having full knowledge in rijal and texts; beside
al-Tha’alibi in al-Mudaf wa al-mansub. It is needless to mention all the
reference books containing this report, though he who so doing would not
fear any loss, since it was commonly known that he (Abu Hurayrah) was
neither here nor there (of no use), and was never among the warriors,
keeping throughout all his life to be a man of pacifistic nature.

Concerning the harshness in my style (of speech) observed by Dr. Taha,
my response is, had he got to know the abundance of slanders and

abuses I encountered since the day of publishing some chapters of this
book in al-Risalah journal before having the book printed, he would have
excused me for what I stated.

However, I have reviewed my writings and revised all the severe
statements I made in the book, deleting them from this edition,
preferring to repel evil with that which is better, heeding to God’s
commandment, passing then by whatever befalling me with dignity
(forbearance), with addressing whoever vexing me with the word of peace.

In regard of the severity against Abu Hurayrah, to which the Professor
referred, it was never on our part, but it was verily the strength and
decisiveness of the proofs encircling him from all sides.

These were brief lines about the slips referred to by Dr. Taha Husayn in
his book. I am so delighted that he has never found fault with any of
the book’s topics, which being numerous and critical, the likes of which
were never published in any all-inclusive book. And also for his calling
what he noticed only slips, with expressly saying: “He is not to blame
for the slips, to some of which I have referred, since those who are
exonerated of defect or deficiency or slips being rarely found
nowadays.”

May God preserve him. Mahmud Abu Riyyah

1. This foreword was published in al-Jumhuriyyah newspaper, in the issue
of Tuesday 25 November 1958.

2. The book al-Shaykhan, pp. 256, 257.
