His Imposture (tadlis)
======================

  
  
  

Ulama’ of hadith state that Abu Hurayrah used to defraud; and imposture,
as is known, is to relate from whoever meeting him that which he didn't
hear from him, or from that who lived contemporaneously with him without
meeting him, deluding people that he heard it from him. Imposture is of
several kinds, with all being absolutely abominable, <span
id="_anchor_372"></span>372  and a number of ulama’ were averse to
tadlis, with Shu'bah <span id="_anchor_373"></span>373 being the
severest in disapproving this practice, till saying: To practise
adultery is more desirable to me than practising imposture! He also
said: Imposture is the brother of falsity."

"Among the memorizers are some who vilified whoever known of practising
tadlis among the narrators, refuting totally his narration, though he
using the word of chain, even he was known of defrauding only once, as
was stated by al-Sahfi'i. "Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj reported from Busr ibn
Sa'id, as saying: Observe your duty to Allah and be cautious toward
relating hadith.

By God, we used to sit with Abu Hurayrah, and he was relating traditions
of the Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God's peace and benediction) and
those of Ka'b al Ahbar. On his departure, I would hear some of the
attendants making the hadith of the Messenger of Allah to be from Ka'b,
and hadith of Ka'b to be of the Messenger! In another narration: They
would make Ka'b's utterance as if said by the Messenger of Allah, and
what is said by the Messenger of Allah as if uttered by Ka'b! So guard
against Allah and beware in relating hadith.

Yazid ibn Harun is reported to have said: I heard Shu'bah saying: Abu
Hurayrah used to defraud – i.e. used to narrate whatever he heard from
Ka'b and from the Messenger of Allah, without any discernment between
the two. This hadith was reported by Ibn Asakir. It seems that Shu'bah
is referring through this to the hadith "Whoever enters upon the morning
with the state of ritual impurity (during Ramadan), his fasting is
invalid. And when this hadith was disapproved of him he said: I was told
by some narrator, and did not hear it from the Messenger of Allah."
<span id="_anchor_374"></span>374

In Ta’wil mukhtalif al-hadith <span id="_anchor_375"></span>375  Ibn
Qutaybah said: "Abu Hurayrah used to say: The Messenger of Allah (may
God's peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny) said so and so,
but in fact he heard it from some trustworthy (thiqah) and related it."

  
  
  

372. Al-Shaykh Ahmad Shakir, Sharh Alfiyyat al-Suyuti, p. 35.

373. He is Shu'bah ibn al-Hajjaj, the leader of men of hadith. He died
in Basrah in 160 H. He was so explicit in his utterances. An example for
his candidness is his saying: "By God I am more well-versed in poetry
than in hadith. If I intended (to please) God I would never come out to
you, and if you sought (pleasure of) God you would never come toward me.
But we love flattery and detest censure."

374. Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VIII, p. 109; And refer
also to my book on Abu Hurayrah, which has elaboration on this saying.

375. See p. 50.
