First Narrator Accused in Islam:
================================

  
  
  

Ibn Qutaybah, in Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, said: "When Abu Hurayrah
reported that abundance of traditions the similar of which none among
his Companions and the foremost in Islam could never relate, he was
accused and his narrations were disapproved by others, saying: How did
you hear this alone? who heard it other than you? A'ishah was the
severest in

disapproving his narrations, due to the prolongation of their lives."
<span id="_anchor_376"></span>376

"Among those charging Abu Hurayrah with falsification, were Umar, Uthman
and Ali and others. Thus he was truly — as stated by the great Islamic
writer Mustafa Sadiq al-Rafi'i <span id="_anchor_377"></span>377  – the
first narrator accused in Islam." "When A'ishah said to him: You relate
a hadith that I never heard from the Prophet (S), he gave her an
impolite answer (as reported by Ibn Sa'd, al-Bukhari and Ibn Kathir and
others) saying: Your attention was kept of him by the mirror and kohl
bottle! In another narration (he said): My attention was not kept of him
by the kohl bottle and dye, but that was your business"!!

"But he did not wait to witness that she being more knowledgeable than
him, and she was not busied with the mirror and kohl bottle. That was
when he related the hadith "Whoever enters upon the morning with the
state of ritual impurity his fasting is invalid," A'ishah disapproved it
of him saying: The Messenger of Allah has sometimes entered upon the
dawn with the state of ritual impurity, not because of having a venereal
dream, when he would take a ritual bath and keep on his fasting. I sent
him someone to ask him to stop relating such a hadith from the Messenger
of Allah, when he had no choice but to submit. Then he said: She is
verily more knowledgeable than me, and I never heard it from the
Prophet, but from al-Fadl ibn al-Abbas. Thus he quoted a dead man
deluding people that he heard the hadith from the Messenger of Allah
(S), as said by Ibn Qutaybah in Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith" <span
id="_anchor_378"></span>378

"Ali (may God be pleased with him) was evil-minded toward him, saying
about him: He is verily the biggest liar among people, or he said: The
biggest liar among the living creatures against the Messenger of Allah
is verily Abu Hurayrah. When he heard him (Abu Hurayrah) saying: "My
intimate friend (khalil) told me!", he said to him: When was the Prophet
your

intimate friend?

When he related the hadith, "Whenever anyone of you gets up of bed, he
should wash his hands before placing them in the pot, as none among you
knows where has his hand passed the night," A'ishah never approved it
saying: What to do with the mortar? <span id="_anchor_379"></span>379
 And when al-Zubayr heard his traditions he said: He said the truth, he
lied. <span id="_anchor_380"></span>380

Abu Hassan al-A'raj is reported to have said: Two men entered upon
A'ishah (may God be pleased with her) saying: Abu Hurayrah relates from
the Messenger of Allah (S) that he said: "Evil omen verily lies in the
woman, mount and house," she felt pity and said: By Him Who sent down
the Qur'an upon Abu al-Qasim, whoever relating such a hadith from the
Messenger of Allah (upon whom be God's peace and benediction) has verily
told a lie. What the Messenger of Allah said being: The pre-Islamic
people used to say: Evil omen is verily in the mount, woman and house.
Then she cited: "Naught of disaster befalleth in the earth or in
yourselves but it is in a Book before We bring it into being... <span
id="_anchor_381"></span>381

Ibn Mas'ud disapproved his saying: "Whoever washes or carries a dead
(corpus), he should perform the rite of ablution," using harsh words
against him, saying then: O people, do not be contaminated (najis) of
your dead. <span id="_anchor_382"></span>382

Muhammad ibn al-Hasan reported from Abu Hanifah to have said: "I imitate
the mufti judges among the Companions like Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Ali
and the three Abds, and I never allow to contradict them with my opinion
except three persons — in another narration" I imitate all the Sahabah
and never permit contradicting them with my opinion except only three
persons (Anas ibn Malik and Abu Hurayrah and Samurah ibn Jundab). When
being disputed in this regard he said: In regard of Anas, he became
disordered

in mind at the end of his life, and he used to issue verdicts from his
intellect, and I never imitate his intellect. Concerning Abu Hurayrah,
he used to narrate whatever reaching his ears without meditating the
meaning and without discerning between the abrogating (nasikh) and
abrogated (mansukh)." <span id="_anchor_383"></span>383

Abu Yusuf is reported to have said: I said to Abu Hanifah: Every report
reaching me from the Messenger of Allah contradicts our analogy (qiyas),
how should we deal with it? He replied: If it is reported by the
trustworthy narrators we verily act according to it and abandon opinion.

I said: What is your opinion about narration of Abu Bakr and Umar? He
said: How great are they. I said: What about Ali and Uthman? He said:
The same is true.

When I began to enumerate the Companions, he said: All the Companions
are just except some referring among them to Abu Hurayrah and Anas ibn
Malik. <span id="_anchor_384"></span>384

Ibrahim al-Nakha'i is reported to have said: Our companions used to
claim some of the traditions reported by Abu Hurayrah and reporting of
al-A'mash from him, but they were never approving of all traditions of
Abu Hurayrah!

Al-Thawri reported from Mansur ibn Ibrahim as saying: They (Companions)
were observing something in the traditions of the Messenger of Allah,
and were never approving of all the traditions of Abu Hurayrah except
those describing the paradise or fire, or urging toward a virtuous deed,
or forbidding from an evil mentioned in the Qur'an. <span
id="_anchor_385"></span>385

Abu Shamah reported from al-A'mash that he said: Ibrahim was known of
correct hadith, <span id="_anchor_386"></span>386 and whenever hearing
any hadith I would come toward him and put it before him. Once a day I
brought him some traditions of Abu Salih that he reported from Abu
Hurayrah, when he said: Forget about

Abu Hurayrah! they (Companions) used to rejecting many of his
traditions.

Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi is reported to have said: Our Shaykhs were of the
opinion that Abu Hurayrah was fraudulent and of disapproved narration...
he was beaten by Umar who said to him: You have been relating so many
traditions, and I see you to be falsifying traditions of the Messenger
of Allah. <span id="_anchor_387"></span>387  

Ibn al-Athir said: Concerning narration of Abu Hurayrah, there was much
suspicion regarding it due to its abundance. <span
id="_anchor_388"></span>388

In al-Ahkam, al-Amudi writes: The Companions disapproved multiplicity of
narrations of Abu Hurayrah since with multiplicity one can never be
immune against difference and inexactitude with which that whose
narration is less can never be inflicted.

One day, the issue of Misrat <span id="_anchor_389"></span>389  took
place in the meeting of al-Rashid regarding which a quarrel erupted
among the attendants, who started to produce loud voices, with some of
whom arguing with the hadith related by Abu Hurayrah. One of them
refuted the hadith saying: Abu Hurayrah is suspected in whatever he
narrates, the example of whom was followed by al-Rashid.

  
  
  

376. See p. 48.

377. Ta'rikh adab al-Arab, Vol. I, p. 278. Refer too to chapter
"Companions Criticizing Each Other" in this book. And in Ikhtisar 'ulum
al-hadith, p. 114, Ibn Hanbal, Abu Bakr al-Hamidi and Abu Bakr
al-Sayrafi are reported to have said: The narration of that who
falsified and lied in the traditions of the Messenger of Allah can never
be accepted, even when he repents and gives up falsity. Al-Sam'ani also
said: Whoever lied in one hadith, all his former traditions should be
refuted and rejected (al-Nawawi's al-Taqrib, p. 14). Ibn Hajar says: The
ulama' concurred on considering ascription of false hadith to the
Messenger of Allah to be a major sin. Moreover al-Shaykh Abu Muhammad
al-Juwayni has gone even farther to charge with impiety everyone doing
so, the idea to which Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi inclines.

378. See p. 28.

379. The mihras is a huge craved rock that cannot be lifted or moved by
men, but they used to fill it with water with which they would cleanse
themselves.

380. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VIII, p. 109.

381. Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, pp. 126, 127.

382. Jami' bayan al-'ilm, vol. II, p. 85.

383. Mukhtasar Kitab al-Mu'ammal of Abu Shamah, pp. 31, 32.

384. This is the opinion of Abu Hanifah about him, and we know the truth
about  him. He was born in the 1st century and came up with the era of
Sahabah, and due to his high status he was called al-Imam al-A'zam. He
was born in 80 H. and died in 150 H.

385. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah, vol. VIII, p. 109.

386. They used to call him 'Sayrafi al-Hadith'.

387. Sharh Nahj al-balaghah, vol. I, p. 360.

388. Al-Mathal al-sa'ir, p. 81.

389. The misrat is the she-camel or cow, from whose udder milk is
collected, and withheld for some days without milking for misleading the
purchaser of its being so milky. The reason for the Hanafis' refutation
to the hadith of Misrat was its being contrary to all their analogies,
as they viewed milking as an offence, which should be returned with its
like or with its price. And every measure of capacity of dates cannot be
returned with one of them.
