His Reporting From Ka'b Al-ahbar:
=================================

  
  
  

Ulama’ of hadith state, under the bab "The Companions reporting from the
Followers" or "Riwayat al-Akabir 'an al-Asaghir", that Abu Hurayrah, the
three Abds, Mu'awiyah and Anas and others used to report from Ka'b
al-Ahbar, the Jew who proclaimed Islam delusively, hiding his Jewish
belief inside his heart. It seems that Abu Hurayrah was more than other
Companions beguiled by him, having confidence in him, and in reporting
traditions from him and his (Jew) brothers, as he was more prolific

in relation of hadith. Out of investigation it can be discovered that
Ka'b al-Ahbar has imposed his faculty of sagacity upon naivety of Abu
Hurayrah so as to seize, and control him, growing him so as to dictate
upon him whatever he intended to propagate into Islam; the superstitions
and fancies, following in this regard strange means and wonderful
methods.

In Tabaqat al-huffaz, al-Dhahabi — under the bab “Tarjumat Abu Hurayrah”
— reported that Ka'b said in his regard: I have never met one who had
never read the Torah to be having more knowledge of its contents than
Abu Hurayrah!!

Thus we come to realize the extent of sagacity of this priest and his
artifice against Abu Hurayrah, which is manifest through his biography
that shows him to be a man of unawareness and inexperience! As how could
Abu Hurayrah be acquainted with what the Torah contained while he never
knew about it, and had he known he would have never been able to read it
<span id="_anchor_390"></span>390  since it was written with the Hebrew
language, and he was unable to read his own language — the Arabic as he
was illiterate knowing not how to read or write.

The fact that this sagacious pontiff managed to bring Abu Hurayrah under
his full control till making him to repeat the same words of this priest
rendering them a hadith reported from the Prophet, a portion of which I
cite herewith:

Al-Bazzar reported from Abu Hurayrah that the Prophet said: The sun and
moon are two bulls in the hell on the Day of Resurrection! Al-Hasan
said: What is their guilt? He said : While I relate to you a hadith from
the Messenger of Allah how do you daresay : What is their guilt?

The same and very words were uttered by Ka'b as reported by Abu Ya'la
al-Mousili that Ka'b said: The sun and moon will be brought on the Day
of Resurrection like two barren oxen, and they will be pelted into the
Hell in a

way that can be seen by those who worshipped them. <span
id="_anchor_391"></span>391

Al-Hakim in al-Mustadrak, and al-Tabarrani — and his rijal of al-Sahih —
reported that Abu Hurayrah said: The Prophet said: Allah permitted me to
relate a hadith about a rooster whose legs are on the earth and neck is
fixed under the Throne, saying: Glorified are you (O God), how
magnificent are You! He said: It will be given the reply, and that is
unknown by that who swore with me falsely.

This hadith is related by Ka'b al-Ahbar with its text being thus: Allah
has a rooster whose neck is under the Throne and claws at the bottom of
the earth ... when it crows the other roosters will crow, saying:
Glorified is the Holy One, the Sovereign Lord and the Beneficent, that
no god is there other than Him. <span id="_anchor_392"></span>392

Abu Hurayrah reported that the Messenger of Allah said: The Nile, Sihan,
Jihan and Euphratese are the rivers of paradise. The same hadith was
reported by Ka'b in this way: Heavens rivers are four that Allah, the
Glorified and Mighty, has made on earth: Nile is honey river in
paradise, Euphratese is wine river in paradise, Sihan is water river in
paradise and Jihan is milk river in paradise.

In his Tafsir, Ibn Kathir said that hadith of Abu Hurayrah on Yujuj and
Majuj, whose text as reported by Ahmad from Abu Hurayrah being thus:
“Yajuj and Majuj” used to excavate the dam everyday till when they were
about to see the sunray, those supervising them said to them: "Go back,
you will excavate it tomorrow," then they would return... etc. Ahmad
reported this hadith from Ka'b. Ibn Kathir said that Abu Hurayrah may
have taken it from Ka'b, as he used to accompany him and relate hadith
to him, citing in many places of his Tafsir the traditions that Abu
Hurayrah learnt from Ka'b. It is reported in the two Sahihs that Abu
Hurayrah narrated that: Allah has created

Adam according to His shape, the same words reported in the first Ishah
of the Torah (the Old Testament) as such: Allah created man according to
His shape, with His shape He created him. <span
id="_anchor_393"></span>393

When Ka'b mentioned the Prophet's attribute stated in the Torah, Abu
Hurayrah said about his attribute: He was neither obscene nor indecent
nor clamorous throughout markets. That was the full text of Ka'b's
saying as cited before.

Muslim reported from Abu Hurayrah as saying: The Messenger of Allah took
me with the hand! and said: Allah created the earth on Saturday,
creating on it the mountains on Sunday! the trees on Monday! the
misfortune on Tuesday, and light on Wednesday! spreading through it the
mounts on Thursday! creating Adam, upon whom be peace, in the afternoon
of Friday at the end of creation, at the last hour of Friday, the time
from afternoon upto night.

The same hadith was reported too by Ahmad and al-Nasa'i from Abu
Hurayrah!!

Al-Bukhari and Ibn Kathir and others said that Abu Hurayrah has received
this hadith from Ka'b al-Ahbar as it contradicts the text of the Qur'an
which indicates that Allah created the heavens and earth within six
days.

What is surprising here is that Abu Hurayrah has declared in this hadith
that he heard it from the Prophet (S) and he took him by the hand when
he related it to him. I challenge those claiming to have knowledge of
the science of hadith in our country, and all of their likes in other
countries, to be able to solve this problem.

Indisputably this hadith is of correct chain of transmission according
to their rules, and was reported by Muslim in his Sahih without
declaring his

hearing it only from the Prophet, but claimed that the Messenger of
Allah took him with the hand while he was relating hadith to him. Imams
of hadith determined that this hadith was taken from Ka'b al-Ahbar and
its being contradictory to the holy Book. Undoubtedly this narration is
considered a blatant falsity, and slander against the Messenger of
Allah, so what would be the position of that relating it? And shall it
be subject to the rule stated in the Messenger's hadith: (Whoever lies
against me should occupy his abode in Fire)? Or is there an outlet for
the narrator of this hadith by itself? I am really in need for
benefiting from their knowledge in this hadith alone which undoubtedly
lays bare the truth about Abu Hurayrah's narrations of which extreme
precaution should be taken in believing them."

Ka'b al-Ahbar's cunning and exploiting of Abu Hurayrah's naivety and
unawareness reached an extent that he was dictating on him the
superstitions and misconceptions he desired to spread into Islam. When
Abu Hurayrah embarked on relating them he would believe him, so as to
confirm these Israeliyyat creating credibility in them inside the minds
of Muslims, as if the ahadith being reported from Abu Hurayrah while it
was in fact reported by Ka'b al-Ahbar.

Herewith I cite an example with which I conclude my quoting of
traditions reported by Abu Hurayrah from the Prophet, which being in
fact among the Israeliyyat: Al-Imam Ahmad reported from Abu Hurayrah
that the Messenger of Allah said:

Abu Hurayrah could hardly narrate this hadith till Ka'b rushed saying:
He said the truth by Him Who sent down the Torah upon Moses and the
Qur'an upon Muhammad, if a man rides a jar or a trunk and revolving
round the top of that tree, he will never reach it but only when
becoming decrepit! The Almighty Allah has planted it by His hand and
breathed into it,

with its branches being for those behind the veils of heavens, and no
river is there in heavens but flowing from the root of this tree.

In this way these two collaborate to propagate such kind of
superstitions. What raises our wonder is the fact that this report being
related by Wahb ibn Munabbih in an odd work, to which can be referred by
anyone desiring to. <span id="_anchor_394"></span>394  Many examples of
this kind can be found in the chapter of Israeliyyat.

When he narrated that the Messenger of Allah said: "Verily if the belly
of any of you be filled with pus and blood is much better than to be
filled with poetry", A'ishah said: He did not learn by heart, rather he
(the Prophet) said: "...than to be filled with poetry with which you are
satired." <span id="_anchor_395"></span>395

### Memorizing the Two Receptacles:

Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Hurayrah as saying: "I learnt by heart from
the Messenger of Allah two receptacles, <span
id="_anchor_396"></span>396 one of which I have already disseminated,
while the other if I spread my pharynx would be cut."

This hadith is incongruous with another one reported by the Jama'ah
(Sunnis), <span id="_anchor_397"></span>397  with similar words, from
Ali, who when asked: Do you have a (separate) book? said: No, except the
Book of Allah or comprehension bestowed to a Muslim man, or what this
Sahifah contains.

It is also contradicted with a hadith reported by Abd al-Aziz ibn Rafi'
who said: I and Shaddad ibn Ma'qil entered upon Ibn Abbas, to whom
Shaddad said: Has the Prophet left (behind) anything? He replied: He
left nothing except what is contained between these two covers (Qur'an).

Had there been anything else with which the Prophet(S) would distinguish
any of his intimate favorites keeping it from all his other Companions,
Ali would verily have been the most entitled among people to

such a merit. That is due to the fact that Ali was his step-son, cousin,
the first to embrace Islam and son-in-law, never separating himself from
him whether in travel or presence, accompanying him in all the battles,
except Tabuk. When the Prophet made him his deputy over al-Madinah, Ali
said to him: Do you leave me behind among the women and boys? The
Prophet said to him? Aren't you pleased to have near me the position
Aron had near Moses?!! But there would be no prophet after me. (This
hadith was reported by al-Bukhari and al-Tirmidhi).

Truly, Ali was the best of all people entitled to such a merit, Hadn't
he been so, then it would be given to Abu Bakr or Umar or Abu Ubaydah —
the most beloved of his wives to him (the Prophet) after Khadijah, or
the wise sedate Umm Salamah, or Ibn Mas'ud to whom the Prophet said: I
permit you to raise the curtain and hear my private talk. He kept so
close to the Prophet (S) that people counted him to be one of his (S)
household, and he came to be known among all the Companions with the
epithet "Sahib al-Sawad wa al-Wisad", that was never given to any other
Companion.

Those were the most entitled people to be distinguished by the Prophet
with that which he didn't like to disclose to any other Companion, had
there been any secret he intended to confide to any of his intimate
favorites.

And who was that Abu Hurayrah to deserve to be confided by the Prophet
with a thing that he distinguished him with alone, keeping and hiding it
from his bosom friends and beloved and nearest people to him?!

In fact he neither had any merit to bring him near to the Prophet nor
counted, after the demise of the Messenger, among any of the classes of
Companions, <span id="_anchor_398"></span>398  nor he was among the
early foremost (in Islam) nor among the Immigrants (Muhajirun) or
Helpers (Ansar), nor among those who strove with their wealth or their
lives, <span id="_anchor_399"></span>399  nor among the poets who
defended the

Prophet (against his opponents), nor among the muftis (those giving
verdicts), nor among the reciters (qurra') who memorized the Qur'an, nor
of those regarding whose merit a hadith from the Messenger was reported.
<span id="_anchor_400"></span>400 And all that was known about him is
that he was one of Ahl al-Siffah, no more no less!

  
  
  

390. Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Hurayrah as saying: The people of the
Scripture used to read the Torah with the Hebrew, interpreting it with
the Arabic for followers of Islam. Had he been acquainted with the
Hebrew he would have said: I was among those who interpreted the Torah.

391. Hayat al-hayawan, p. 222.

392. Al-Nuwayri, Nihayat al-arab, vol. X, p. 220.

393. In another narration of this hadith: His (i.e. Adam) height is 60
cubits. In another one: He has the shape and complexion of the
Beneficent (al-Rahman). This hadith was criticized in one of its
respects by Ibn Hajar, in his Fath al-Bari, when he said: What raising
doubt against this being the old traces of the precedent nations, like
the houses of 'Ad and Thamud which indicate that their statures were not
that height, to which referred by Abu Hurayrah. Also this hadith was
disapproved and denied by Malik.

394. Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol. IV, pp. 513, 514.

395. Some ignorants have adopted this utterance of Abu Hurayrah as an
evidence proving that the Prophet was averse to poetry. This idea spread
among the Muslims and non-Muslims, while he (S) used to listen to the
poetry, praising it and rewarding for it. Ubayy ibn Ka'b reported that
the Messenger of Allah said: Some of the poetry is verily wisdom. Abu
Dawud reported from him (S) that he said: "From elocution there is got
enchantment, and some of ilm is ignorance, and some of poetry is
wisdom." In another rnarration by al-Bukhari in al-Adab al-mufrad, and
Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Majah: "In poetry wisdoms are found."
Then he (S) quoted some poetry of Umayyah ibn Abi al-Salt.

396. In another narration: jiraban (two wallets), and in another
version: three jirabs.

397. Al-Jama'ah means Ahmad and two Shaykhs, and authors of Sunan.

398. They divided the Companions, in respect of their merit and honour,
into twelve classes, in any of which we couldn't find him (Abu
Hurayrah)! Who are: (1) The first outstrippers who embraced Islam in
Makkah. (2) Those who attended Dar al-Nadwah. (3) Immigrants to
Abyssinia. (4) Those who attended the First Aqabah. (5) Those who
attended the Second Aqabah (swearing allegiance to the Prophet) (6)
First immigrants who joined the Prophet at Quba before he entered
al-Madinah (7) Those who participated in Battle of Badr. (8) Immigrants
in the period between (Battle of) Badr and (Treaty of) al-Hudaybiyyah.
(9) Those who attended the bay'ah of Ridwan. (10) Those who migrated
during the period between the Hudaybiyyah and conquest of Makkah. (11)
Those who embraced Islam at conquest of Makkah (12) Lads and children
who saw the Messenger of Allah on the day of conquest and in time of
Hijjat al-Wada', and we can count him among this class of lads (al-Rawd
al-basim, of al-Wazir al-Yamani, vol. I, pp. 69, 70.

399. It is established in history that he fled the Battle of Mu'tah, and
when he was reproached with this he couldn't find any answer.

400. Al-Bukhari and others have reported numerous traditions on honour
of a large group of notable Sahabah, among whom the name of Abu Hurayrah
is not seen.
