Fabrication of Traditions Against Ali
=====================================

  
  
  

Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi <span id="_anchor_412"></span>412  said that
Mu'awiyah forced some of the Companions and the Followers to narrate
obscene and indecent reports, with ascribing then to Ali, with the aim
of defaming and disowning him. He dedicated for this act a certain
stipend, that made them compose and falsify traditions which pleased
him, among whom being Abu Hurayrah, 'Amr ibn al-\`As and al-Mughirah ibn
Shu'bah, beside Urwah ibn al-Zubayr from among the Tabi'un.

Al-A'mash reported that: When Abu Hurayrah arrived, with Mu'awiyah, in
Iraq in the year called at-Jama'ah year <span
id="_anchor_413"></span>413  he betook himself to the Kufah Mosque. On
noticing the great multitude of people gathered for his reception, he
kneeled down on his knees, beating his bald head recurringly, saying: O
people of Iraq! do you allege that I am lying to Allah and His

Messenger, <span id="_anchor_414"></span>414  and burn myself in Fire?
By God, I heard the Messenger of Allah saying: For every prophet there
is a special shrine, and my shrine is at al-Madinah between "Ir to
Thawr. Whoever causing hadath (condition requiring wudu' or ghusl), will
be subject to damnation of Allah and the angels and all people... and I
give witness by Allah that Ali has caused a hadath in it. When Mu'awiyah
became aware of this hadith, he awarded and honoured Abu Hurayrah, with
appointing him a governor over al-Madinah.

But truth never loses supporters, and though the Companions having among
them a man like Abu Hurayrah, who can easily be beguiled and overcome by
Mu'awiyah, the overwhelming majority of them can neither be tempted by
any promise, nor be intimidated by any threat or menace. Sufyan
al-Thawri reported from Abd al-Rahman ibn al-Qasim, from Umar ibn Abd
al-Ghaffar, that when Abu Hurayrah entered al-Madinah with Mu'awiyah, he
used to sit in the nights at Kindah Gate where people would gather round
him. A youth from Kufah approached him saying: O Abu Hurayrah, I adjure
you by God, have you heard the Messenger of Allah say to Ali ibn Abi
Talib: O God! befriend whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever
be hostile to him? He replied: Yes, by God. He said: I give witness by
Allah that you have verily befriended His enemy and contracted the
enmity of His friend. Then after levelling at him such a painful blow,
he departed him.

Muslim reported that Mu'awiyah ibn Abi Sufyan said to Sa'd ibn Abi
Waqqas: What prohibits you from insulting Abu Turab? <span
id="_anchor_415"></span>415  He said: Don't you remember three virtues
disclosed by the Messenger to him? Had I possessed one of which, it
would have been dearer for me than the red camels, the fact for which I
abstain from slandering him! I heard the Messenger of Allah, as he left
him behind in one of his battles, <span id="_anchor_416"></span>416  and
when Ali inquired him: O Messenger of Allah, are you leaving me with the
women and lads? he

said to him. Are you not pleased to have the position (manzilah) in
relation to me as that Aron had in relation to Moses? But surely there
is no prophethood after me." Also I heard him on the day (of the victory
of) Khaybar: "Tomorrow I will give the standard to a man, who loves God
and His Messenger, and God and His Messenger love him." Everyone of us
was hopeful of getting it. (The next day) the Prophet declared: Summon
Ali. Then they brought him while suffering from eye pain (ramad). The
Prophet applied his saliva to his eyes and prayed for him. Ali recovered
as if he had no pain before. Then the Prophet gave the standard to him.
Also at the time of the revelation of the holy verse: "...say (unto
him): Come! We will summon our sons and your sons,...", the Messenger of
Allah summoned Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn saying: O God, these are
my household.

Further, among the merits of Ali, we can refer to what the Prophet said
to him. You are from me and I am from you. He also said to him: Of
whomever I am his master Ali also is his master.

Ahmad ibn Hanbal says: The reports that we got in regard of any of the
Companions can never amount to those ones regarding (the merits of) Ali.
In another place, he and al-Nasa'i and al-Nisaburi and others said: the
authentic and supported reports that reached us in honour of anyone of
the Sahabah can never exceed those reported in regard of the merits of
Ali.

About Ali too, Muslim is reported to have said: By Him Who split the
seed and created the soul, what I know about him is that (the Prophet
said to him): "Verily none loves you but only the believer, and that who
detests you should be a hypocrite." Also al-Nasa'i has compiled a book
under the title al-Khasa’is about the virtues and excellences of Ali.

### His Conduct during His Rule

Umar appointed Abu Hurayrah as a governor over Bahrayn in 21H., then
some reports reached him telling of his behaving in a way contradictory
to the trust undertaken by the just governor. For this reason, Umar
deposed him, appointing in his place Uthman ibn Abi al-'As al-Thaqafi.
Then he summoned him and said to him: Do you remember that when I made
you a wali over Bahrayn, you were barefooted! then I came to know that
you bought horses with a thousand and six hundred dinars?!! He said: We
had horses that bred and multiplied and donations that were given
successively! He said: I have allocated for you enough wages and
sustenance, and this is a favour that you should fulfil. He said: I am
not obliged to do this for you! Umar replied: By God you should do so,
and I have the right to hit your back for it. Then he stood up holding
the durrah (pearl), beating him with it till causing blood to come out
(from his back). After that he said to him: Bring it. He replied: I have
taken it into account. Umar said: That may be approved only in case you
have earned it through lawful means, and discharged it willingly! Have
you come from the farthest spot in the Bahrayn, to this region where
taxes are collected from people for you, neither for God nor for the
Muslims? Verily Umaymah (mother of Abu Hurayrah) has never produced you
but only for pasturing the red camels. <span id="_anchor_417"></span>417

In another narration reported by Abu Hurayrah himself: Umar said: O the
enemy of Allah and enemy of His Book! you have looted property of Allah,
wherefrom you collected all these ten thousand (dinars)?

I suffice with the reports cited here, as they can supply enough
information.

### His death:

Abu Hurayrah died in 59 H, at the age of eighty, in his palace in the
Aqiq. His coffin was carried to the Medina and he was buried in al-Baqi'
(graveyard). Salat al-mayyit (prayer upon the dead) was performed on him
by al-Walid ibn Utbah ibn Abi Sufyan, who was the then emir of
al-Madinah, as a sign of honour to him. When al-Walid sent a letter to
his uncle Mu'awiyah announcing to him the death of Abu Hurayrah,
Mu'awiyah wrote to him: "You have to seek and know whomever he left
behind (wife and children), and pay to his heirs ten thousand dirhams,
doing the honours of them and treating them amicably." Thus their
support and donations to him continued even after his death.

### A General Word in His Regard

Reaching this stage of the biography of Abu Hurayrah, I follow by
quoting some words uttered by the great scholar and muhaddith al-Sayyid
Rashid Rida, about him.

"He embraced Islam in the year 7H., keeping the company of the Messenger
of Allah for three-plus years, so most of the traditions he reported
were not got directly from the Prophet but he heard them from the
Companions and Followers. Had all the Companions been — as claimed by
most of the (Sunni) traditionists — just in whole, this epithet (adalah)
can never be applied to the Followers (Tabi'un). Further it is confirmed
that he used to hear and take traditions from Ka'b al-Ahbar who was
known of uttering weak and unauthentic traditions. But Abu Hurayrah used
to declare publicly of hearing <span id="_anchor_418"></span>418  in the
hadith "Allah created the soil (turbah) on Saturday," upon which there
was unanimity among ulama’ that he quoted this hadith from Ka'b
al-Ahbar." <span id="_anchor_419"></span>419

He added: "In his traditions, he depended on narration on the basis of
denotation (intended by the hadith) and irsal <span
id="_anchor_420"></span>420  (reporting hadith without referring to
chain of narrators), due to the fact that most of them he heard from the
Sahabah and some of the Tabi'un. Narrating hadith according to its
meaning used to be the cause and source of a large number of seditions
and disorders."

He also said: "Abu Hurayrah had been a unique narrator of many
traditions, some of which were disapproved or suspected (of being
falsified) because of their odd and eccentric theme, like those related
to seditions and the ones concerned with describing the conditions of
the Prophet (S) through some invisible and hidden events that were about
to take place after him. Added to this, some of these texts (of the
traditions) were odd and strange in themselves, in a way that had the
like of which been singly reported by anyone other than the Companions,
it would have been counted among the factors through which its narration
could be confirmed — as commonly known among hadith critics, Ahl al-Jarh
wa al-Ta\`dil (men of sarcasm and modification) <span
id="_anchor_421"></span>421 . For this reason we see some people keep on
murmuring about narrations of Abu Hurayrah. <span
id="_anchor_422"></span>422

Al-Bukhari recorded 446 traditions on the authority of Abu Hurayrah,
with recording only 217 ones for Ibn Abbas. They were not alone in
narrating this number of traditions on principles (usul) of religion,
but some others shared them in reporting many of them. Enumerating the
traditions concerned with legal rulings that were singly reported by Abu
Hurayrah, we would find them to be very few in number, realizing that
hadn’t he narrated them, not that many would have been missed of books
of ahkam, and whatever is missing can be learnt from the static Shari'ah
rules and definite principles, like: the law of relieving the
interdiction and distress,

establishing and preferring ease, beside the principle of freedom from
obligation, and that prohibition is applied originally to all evils and
adversities, and lawfulness being the basic rule for all the good things
(tayyibat), and that necessity knows no law, and other laws. <span
id="_anchor_423"></span>423

Also al-Bukhari, declaring that the two champions of Israeliyyat and
sources of superstitions being Ka'b al-Ahbar and Wahb ibn Munabbih,
said:

"How can we know that all the narrations – or the mawquf (suspended)
ones – are reported by them both, as the Companions were not citing what
they used to hear from each other and from the Followers out of
narration and transmission, but they were doing so in occasions and
often without referring to chain of transmitters. And so were many of
the Tabi'un, rather most of the marfu’ traditions reported by Abu
Hurayrah, he never heard from the Prophet (S), the reason why he
narrated them with weakness (‘an’anah) or by saying; The Messenger of
Allah said (S), or at least with the words: I heard the Messenger of
Allah say so and so. <span id="_anchor_424"></span>424  It is known that
he reported from some Companions and some Followers, and it is proved
that he reported hadith from Ka'b al-Ahbar. Hence we can say decisively
that the inalienable (mawquf) traditions of the Sahabah, that having no
room for ijtihad or exertion of opinion, have not the power of marfu’
(whose chain goes back to the Prophet) — as said by the traditionists —
unless they be not like the Israeliyyat. <span
id="_anchor_425"></span>425

That was a brief profile of Abu Hurayrah, in which I observed the
reportorial aspect, not adopting the analytical and objective method,
without which accurate profiles can never be perfect, nor study of rijal
and episodes can be done properly. That is because I have not realized
yet the possibility of its dominance, especially when it is concerned
with one of the Companions in whose regard it was said that all of them
being righteous and just to the extent

that no one is ever entitled, though presenting a scientific and
decisive proof and argument (hujjah), to criticize any of them or
suspect his narration, or witness, or conduct. Further it was said about
them that their rug had been rolled" as if adalah is singly confined in
them alone and that they exceeded the level of human being, where they
can never be afflicted, like other people, with oversight, or erring, or
fancy, or forgetfulness. I utter such words not out of falsity or
calumny!

But approving of their claim that every Companion was infallible against
whatever afflicting other people, and his being non-liable to
forgetfulness, or committing a mistake, or imagination, or
misunderstanding, and that no hypocrite was there among the Sahabah, or
that none of them perpetrated any major or minor sin, nor all those
disputes occurred among them, and that no one of them apostatized after
the demise of the Prophet (S), nor other alike things with which their
sahih history books were filled, it can be said that the case with Abu
Hurayrah differs from that of all the Companions, as he was criticized
and deplored by a number of high-ranking Sahabah, and those who
succeeded them, raising doubts and question marks about his narrations,
as it was previously manifested.

Among the statements uttered by the ulama of Kalam — owners of open and
free reasons I would prefer the following wise words about him: "What
raises our wonder about them — i.e. men of hadith — being their accusing
the (shaykh) <span id="_anchor_426"></span>426  with falsity, and
abstaining from recording from him those traditions that got the
approval of muhaddithun, through referring to sarcasm of Yahya ibn Mu'in
and Ali ibn al-Midyani and their likes, <span
id="_anchor_427"></span>427  arguing with the hadith of Abu Hurayrah in
respect of what was disapproved by all the Companions. And it is known
that Umar, Ali, Uthman and A'ishah belied him and denied the veracity of
his traditions. <span id="_anchor_428"></span>428

Throughout the exposition of biography of Abu Hurayrah only reality is
observed, and I demonstrated his true character as created by Allah,
without any addition on my part. But I cited the correct and authentic
traditions about that, referring only to confirmed and indisputable
doubtless sources. However I have deliberately neglected many things
confirmed and proved by correct history, due to the fact that some of
our present age people are still fearing power of truth, and never
tolerating decisiveness of proof and argument.

And — as said before — Abu Hurayrah had no considerable position whether
during the lifetime of the Prophet (S) or the reigns of the Four
Caliphs, with being unable to utter even one hadith except only after
the murder of Umar. Further he could not dare to issue one fatwa (legal
verdict) but only after the first fitnah (insurrection) <span
id="_anchor_429"></span>429  which was the killing of Uthman and the
Umayyads' attaining to sublime status and dominance. Further we never
forget to say that al-Bukhari has never mentioned his name among the
Companions in whose honour and excellence several traditions are
reported from the Messenger of Allah.

We never miss the chance to state that among the traditions he reported,
there appears a ray of the light of prophethood, that penetrates the
healthy hearts. These traditions might be among what he actually heard
(and did accurately). The correct hadith gives light like daylight.

### Samples of Abu Hurayrah's Narrations:

Al-Bukhari and Muslim reported that he said: Death Angel was sent to
Moses (A), and when he approached him, he (Moses) slapped him, <span
id="_anchor_430"></span>430  when he returned to his Lord! saying to
Him: You have delegated me to a bondman refusing to die. Then Allah
recovered his eyes! and said to him: Go back and

tell him (Moses) to put his hand on the back of an ox, as with each hair
comes under his hand one year will be added to his life! He said: O God,
then what? He replied: After that death comes. He (the angel) said: Now
I beg God to bring him near the Sacred Land a stone’s throw! The
Messenger of Allah said: Had I been there at that time I would have
shown you his grave on the road side near the red sandhill!!

In another narration Muslim said: Moses slapped the Death Angel on his
eye, which he gouged out.

In Tarikh al-Tabari, Abu Hurayrah is reported to have said: The Death
Angel used to come to people conspicuously till visiting Moses who
slapped him and gouged out one of his eyes, after which he started to
come to people stealthily! Verily this hadith smells of Israelism!

They also reported from him, that the Prophet (S) said: The Paradise and
Hell reasoned with each other! The Hell said: I have been distinguished
with (containing) the arrogant and tyrants. The Paradise said: What is
the matter with me that only the oppressed and low people enter me!
Allah, the most High, said to the Paradise: You are My mercy, with you I
compassionate whomever I will from among My bondmen. Whereas He said to
the Hell: You are just a torture, with you I torment whomever I will
from among My servants, and every one of you has its filling. Concerning
the Hell, it can never be filled till Allah the Glorious and Most High
places His leg in it when it says: Never, never. Only then it will be
filled and will gather its all ramifications.

Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Hurayrah as saying: "Between the two
shoulders of the disbeliever there is a three-day march for the hasty
rider."

Also al-Bukhari with Ibn Majjah reported from him, that the Prophet
said: If a fly falls in the cup of anyone of you, he has to immerse all
of it and

throw it away then, as verily in one of its wings there is malady and in
the other is remedy. <span id="_anchor_431"></span>431

In al-Awsat, al-Tabarrani reported from him that the Prophet said: an
angel brought me a letter from Allah, the Glorious and Exalted, and then
he raised his leg and placed it over the sky while keeping the other one
on earth, never lifting it.

Al-Tirmidhi reported from him that the Messenger of Allah said:
"Compressed dates come from Paradise and they contain remedy for poison.

Al-Hakim and Ibn Majjah, through a reliable and correct sanad, reported
from him that the Prophet said: "Anneal the pots, recline the
water-skins, putrefy the doors and prevent your boys from (approaching)
the women, as the jinn spread suddenly and snatch... turn out the lights
in time of sleeping, since the fuwaysaqah (i.e. rat) may pull the wick
and burn the inmates of the house.

Muslim also reported from him that the Messenger of Allah said: In the
Paradise there being a tree under whose shade the rider may move for a
hundred years.

Beside other narrations for Abu Hurayrah like that or even much more
exorbitant with which many books are replete, and we are unable to cite
them as a whole, since this task needs several complete volumes.

  
  
  

412. Sharh Nahj al-balaghah, vol. I, p. 358.

413. It is the year in which (al-Imam) al-Hasan renounced his right to
rule to Mu'awiyah for sparing Muslims' lives in 41 H. They used to call
it the Jama'ah year while it was in fact year of separation.

414. This saying indicates that Abu Hurayrah's lying against the Prophet
became so commonly known everywhere, since he said this when he was in
Iraq. And all people were talking about this falsity wherever they
settled and depared.

415. Abu Turab is Ali (A). And the practice which Mu'awiyah and the
Umayyad rulers who succeeded him followed was their asking or obliging
people to slandering and cursing Ali from over the pulpits. This bad
sunnah remained to be followed for many years till it was cancelled by
Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz (may God's mercy be upon him).

416. It is the Battle of Tabuk.

417. That is, your mother has not given birth to you but for taking care
of the asses. It is known that Umar has never addressed anyone other
than Abu Hurayrah with such a rude language which reveals only harsh
humiliation, by describing him to be unfit but to pasturing the asses.
In fact he kept company with the Prophet for only one year and nine
months (refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah).

418. That is, he heard it (hadith) from the Messenger of Allah (S).

419. Al-Sayyid (Rashid Rida), the great muhaddith or rather the head of
muhaddithun in present time, and others proved that he (Abu Hurayrah)
was untruthful in his claim that he heard this hadith from the Prophet
(S). The text and occasion of this hadith were stated before in al-Manar
Journal, vol. XXIX, p. 43.

420. The mursal tradition is that one in which no reference is made to
the Companion who heard it from the Prophet (S).

421. Was there anyone daring to suspect authenticity of Abu Hurayrah
while they closed the door of jarh and ta'dil in respect of all the
Sahabah, opening it wide for others? Had jarh and ta'dil been applied
and accepted in respect of the Sahabah, Islam would have benefitted much
from this.

422. Journal of al-Manar, vol. XIX, p. 97.

423. Ibid., p. 101. It is noted that al-Sayyid said these words in his
refutation to propagators of Christianism who criticized Abu Hurayrah,
so we find him defending Abu Hurayrah.

424. You have seen the value of veracity of his narration when he said,
that he heard it from the Prophet (S) previously in the hadith: God
created the turbah (ground) on Saturday!

425. Tafsir al-Manar, vol. IX, p. 476.

426. No definite shaykh is meant by this, but any of the shaykhs,
whomsoever.

427. That means the ulama' of jarh and ta'dil.

428. Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, pp. 10, 11.

429. In his exposition of Ibn Abbas, Ibn Sa'd said: It is reported from
Ziyad ibn Mina as saying: Ibn Abbas, Ibn Umar, Abu Sa'id al-Khudri, Abu
Hurayrah, Abd Allah ibn Amr ibn al-'As, Jabir ibn Abd Allah, Rafi' ibn
Khadij, Salamah ibn al-Akwa', Abu Waqid al-Laythi, and Abd Allah ibn
Buhaynah with their likes among the Companions of the Messenger of Allah
(may God's peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny) were
issuing verdicts in al-Madinah and relating hadith from the Messenger of
Allah from the time Uthman died till the end of their lives. If we
review those who used to give fatwas during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah and caliphate of Abu Bakr and Umar, we wil never find
Abu Hurayrah, among them, nor any Companion to whom people were
referring in any issue but only after the death of Uthman. Also 'A'ishah
used to give fatwa during the caliphates of Abu Bakr and of Umar and
Uthman and even Ali till the last days of her life, and some of the
magnates among the Companions used to question her about the sunan.

430. When al-Tha'alibi reported this khabar in his book Thimar al-qulub,
under the heading, 'Musa's slap' he said: And of the legends of the
ancestors, that Musa asked his Lord …(the story). What he said: The
Angel of Death is one-eyed, and it was said about him:
O Angel of Death, you faced an abomination,

Slap of Musa made you one-eyed!!

Al-Tha'alibi concluded his speech by the clause "I am free from this
tale", and he has right to discharge himself of this.

431. The full text of the hadith is thus: When a fly falls in the drink
of anyone of you, he should immerse it and take it away, as in one of
its wings there is malady while in the other is cureness. It is reported
by al-Bukhari and Ibn Majah from Abu Hurayrah. In another narration,
this clause is added to it: It wards off (evil) with its wing having
illness. In a third narration: If a fly falls in the utensil of any of
you he should take it out of it as in one of its wings there be poison
and in the other there is remedy, and it advances the poison and delays
the remedy. In a fourth narration: If a fly falls in the utensil of
anyone of you he should immerse it completely or take it away, as remedy
is in one of its wings and malady in the other. In a fifth narration: It
wards off (evil) with its wing having malady, so he should immerse it
fully.
