Narrations of Great Companions
==============================

  
  
  

Out of whatever was stated before, it became clear that Abu Hurayrah
related from the Messenger of Allah 5374 traditions (of which 466 ones
reported by al-Bukhari), though he did not keep company with the Prophet
(S) but only for a year and few months. What should be declared further
are the traditions reported by those who outstripped them in faith,

being closer to the Prophet,' more knowledgeable and of higher level in
honour and jihad, from among the Muhajirun and Ansar and others, who
spent long years in the company of the Messenger, so as to see how many
traditions were reported by them.

### Traditions Reported by Abu Bakr.

Do people know the number of traditions reported by Abu Bakr, who was
among the first men in embracing Islam after Ali, and shaykh of all the
Sahabah, keeping the company of the Prophet in Mecca and Medina, with
being expert in genealogy of Arabs?

Al-Nawawi, in his al-Tahdhib, writes that al-Siddiq reported from the
Prophet 142 traditions, of which 104 ones were recorded by al-Suyuti in
Ta’rikh al-khulafa’ and 22 others were cited in Sahih al-Bukhari.

### Traditions Reported by Umar:

He embraced Islam in the year 6H. and kept the Prophet's company till
the last days of his(S) life. Among the statements uttered by him, the
following one can be referred to: "I and some neighbor from among the
Helpers used to alternately descend to the Messenger of Allah, he one
day and I the other. When it was my turn to meet him I would apprise him
of what was revealed that day, and other things, and so did he on his
going down. Despite all this, the number of traditions he (Umar)
reported from the Prophet never reached more than fifty ones as
confirmed by Ibn Hazm.

### Traditions Reported by Ali:

Ali was the first man who embraced Islam and was brought up under
patronage of the Prophet, living in his lap before the Prophetic
mission,

keeping his company till he(S) passed away. He did not separate from
him, whether in travel or in presence, as he was his cousin and
son-in-law: husband of Fatimah al-Zahra’, attending all the battles
except Tabuk, in which he deputed him to administer al-Madinah, where he
said: O Messenger of Allah, do you leave me behind among the women and
boys? He replied: Are you not pleased to have the position in relation
to me as that Aron had in relation to Moses? But there will be no
prophet after me.

To this Imam, who outstripped all the Companions in knowledge, they
ascribed — as reported by al-Suyuti — only 58 traditions. Ibn Hazm said
that only fifty of these traditions were correct, of which only twenty
ones were related by al-Bukhari and Muslim.

In respect of Uthman, nine traditions were reported for him by
al-Bukhari and five ones by Muslim.

For al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, al-Bukhari reported nine traditions and
Muslim only one.

For Talhah ibn Ubayd Allah al-Bukhari reported only four traditions.

For Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf al-Bukhari reported nine traditions.

For Ubayy ibn Ka'b sixty-plus traditions are recorded in the Six Books
(al-Kutub al-Sittah).

For Zayd ibn Thabit al-Bukhari reported eight traditions, and the Two
Shaykhs concurred on five ones only.

For Salman al-Farsi al-Bukhari reported four traditions and Muslim three
ones...etc.

It is established that many Companions did not narrate from the Prophet
any hadith, among whom being Sa'id ibn Zayd ibn Nufayl, one of the Ten
promised with Paradise, and Abu Ammarah... etc.
