Ambiguous Traditions
====================

I previously stated that riwayah from the Messenger of Allah included
many ambiguous and odd traditions, of which I cite some herewith for
exemplary sake only as covering them all needs several volumes.

Ibn Abbas is reported to have said: Allah created a preserved label from
a white pearl with two leafs made of red ruby, and a pen and a book of
light. Its width extends between the skies and earth, in which he makes
a glance every day. He gives life and causes death, renders strong" and
subdues, doing whatever He likes, as He said in the holy Book: "Every
day He exerciseth (universal) power -" (55:29). This hadith is reported
by Abd al-Razzaq, Ibn al-Mundhir, al-Tabarrani and al-Hakim.

Al-Shaykhan (al-Bukhari and Muslim) with some Sunan, Musnads and Tafsir
reported that the Messenger of Allah said to Abu Dharr: Do you know
where does it go? He said: Allah and His Messenger know better! He(S)
said: It moves along till reaching a place where it will prostrate under
the Throne. Thereat it will ask for permission, which it will be
granted. In a short time, it may try to prostrate but it won't be
accepted of it, and seek permission which will not be granted to it. It
will be said to it: Go back to wherever you like. Thereat it will rise
from its point of maghrib (sunset), the fact to which Allah the Exalted
refers in the holy Qur'an: "and the sun runneth on unto a resting-place
for him.."(36-38).

In the introduction to his book, Muslim reported from Abd Allah ibn Amr
ibn al-'As, owner of the two fellowships, as saying: In the sea, there
are detained devils, tied by Sulayman ibn Dawud, and they are about to
go out and recite Qur'an for people.

Al-Bukhari, in his Sahih under "bab al-Dawa’ bi al-‘Ajwah li al-sahar"
(Remedy with compressed dates for daybreak meal), reported from

\`Amir ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas, from his father, as saying: The Prophet
said: "Whoever takes breakfast with compressed dates, will never be
harmed neither by poison nor by the daybreak meal of that day till
night." In another narration. "... with seven compressed dates...". The
same hadith was reported by Muslim from Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas.

Al-Nasa'i reported from Jabir as saying: The compressed dates (‘ajwah)
being from paradise and remedy for toxication.

The two Shaykhs reported from Abu Hurayrah that he said "when it is
called for prayers, the Satan retraces his steps with producing
(breaking) wind, so that not to hear call for prayers. When adhan is
over he comes in, till on starting prayers he retreats, after which he
would come back to sow dissension between man and his nafs (soul).

The investigating ulama, in exposing this hadith, say: He did this so as
not to hear (adhan) and will be obliged to give witness in favour of it
on the Day of Resurrection.

Muslim reported that Abu Sufyan said to the Prophet: O Messenger of
Allah, promise me to achieve three things: get married to my daughter
Umm Habibah, and make my son Mu'awiyah a scribe, and command me to fight
the disbelievers as I fought the Muslims (before).

And so it happened, as Umm Habibah was married by the Messenger of Allah
when he was in Abyssinia with al-Najashi naming a dowry for her. Also
Abu Sufyan embraced Islam (?) in the year of conquest (of Makkah), while
several years separated between migration (hijrah) and conquest (of
Makkah).

Muslim reported from \`Amr ibn al-Sharid that he said: I rode behind the
Prophet (S) who said to me: Do you remember any of Umayyah's poetry? I
said: Yes. Then I recited for him a hundred verses, when he said: He was

about to confess Islam in his poetry.

In his Musnad, Ahmad reported from Ikrimah, from Ibn Abbas that the
Prophet (S) said: Umayyah said the truth in some of his poetry. In
another narration, the Messenger of Allah said: Umayyah ibn Abi al-Salt
said the truth in part of his poetry when he said:

Saturn and Thawr being under His right leg,

And Vulture is under the left and Layth is prepared.

The Messenger of Allah said: He said the truth and he said:

And the sun rises every end of night,

Red with its colour becoming rosy,

It comes but never rises for us fluently, <span
id="_anchor_432"></span>432

But only when suffering pain and tolerating.

This hadith is of correct isnad (chain of transmission), and recorded in
Majma’ al-zawa’id, beside being reported by Abu Ya'la and al-Tabarrani
through trustworthy rijal.

When objection was raised against his saying "But only when suffering
pain and tolerating", Ibn Abbas said: <span id="_anchor_433"></span>433
 By Him Who owns my soul, the sun would never rise but only when being
pricked by seventy thousand angels who would say to her: Rise, rise! she
would say: Nay, I never rise for a people worshipping me other than
Allah! Thereat an angel would approach her, when she would blaze for
producing light for mankind. A devil would come to her intending to
restrain her from rising when she would rise from between his two horns,
under which Allah would burn her. To this the Messenger of Allah
referred by saying: The sun has neither risen nor set but only between
the devil's two horns, nor it has ever set but only when prostrating her
self. Then a devil would come to her intending to curb her from
prostration, when it would set between his two horns, under which Allah

would burn her.

Also al-Tabarrani reported from Abu Amamah as saying: Allah put the sun
into the charge of nine angels hurling snow at her every day, unless
which she would set to fire every thing subject to her rays.

In Sahih Muslim, the two Shaykhs reported from Anas ibn Malik that he
said: A man questioned the Prophet: When will the Hour come (Doomsday)?
Anas said, that the Messenger of Allah kept silent for a while, looking
at a lad near him from the tribe of Azd Shanu'ah, saying then: If this
lad lives long, he will never become decrepit till the coming of the
Hour (Resurrection Day)". Anas said: That lad was among my
contemporaries at that time.

It is known that Anas died in 93 H., after his life was contemporaneous
with that of the lad regarding whom the Prophet said that he would never
reach decrepitude till the coming of the Hour...thus, as is defined by
the hadith, the coming of the Hour would have been before the end of the
first Hijrah year!! <span id="_anchor_434"></span>434

So what would adorers of asanid say about this?? Some may daresay and
claim that: Who knows, this lad may have not reached decrepitude yet?!!

### Hadith on Dispute in Celestial City:

In his Musnad Ahmad reports that the Messenger of Allah (S), once upon a
morning, came out feeling happy with a shining face. When asked about
the reason he said: Why not! my Lord the glorious and Exalted, came
toward me with the best shape saying: O Muhammad! I said: Here I am my
Lord and be felicitous! He said: About what the Celestial City is
disputing? I said: I know not O my Lord! He (Messenger) said: He then
put His two palms (of His hand) between my shoulders, when I sensed
their coolness between my

two breasts till whatever the heavens and earth containing became clear
for me!

In another narration by al-Shahristani, (the Prophet said): My Lord met
me, shook hands with me and received me, placing His hand between my
shoulders till I felt the coolness of the tips of His fingers.

### The Paradise Bull:

In Bada’i’ al-fawa’id, <span id="_anchor_435"></span>435  Ibn al-Qayyim
reported that the Prophet used to say that for the believers, on the Day
of Resurrection, the Bull of Paradise of which it used to eat, will be
sacrificed and be their entertainment. Ibn al-Qayyim said: This animal
which used to eat from Paradise, will be sacrificed and presented as
entertainment for its inhabitants.

### Prophet's Seeing God Eleven Times, and Isra' was Reality:

Al-Qadi <span id="_anchor_436"></span>436  said: Ahmad confirmed that
Isra’ was reality. And when it was related to him that Musa ibn Aqabah
holds that traditions on Isra’ were all dreams, he said: This is the
claim of the scowling people. <span id="_anchor_437"></span>437

Abu Bakr al-Najjar said: He (the Prophet) saw God for eleven times! nine
of which were on the Mi’raj (ascension) night, when he was frequenting
to and fro between Moses and his Lord, the Glorious and Exalted, and two
other times in the Book.

### An Angel among Throne Bearers:

It is reported in Muntakhab Kanz al-ummal fi sunan al-aqwal wa al-af’al
that: Anas quoted the Prophet as saying: I was permitted to relate a
hadith on an angel from among the Throne bearers, whose two legs being
on

the lower earth, with the Throne being rested on his horn, and between
the lobe of his ear and his shoulder there being 700-year flutters of
the bird saying: You are the Sovereign Lord, be Glorified wherever You
be.

### The Thunder:

Ibn Abbas said: Thunder is one of Allah's angels charged with the
clouds, holding rags of fire with which he drives the clouds wherever
Allah, the most High, will. <span id="_anchor_438"></span>438

From him also it is reported: The snakes are the transformation of Jinn
as the apes and pigs were metamorphosed during the era of the Children
of Israel. From him further: The first thing Allah created was the
"qalam" (pen), then He created the nun (alphabet letter). Then He
compressed the earth on the back of the (Nun). <span
id="_anchor_439"></span>439

### The Black Stone:

Ibn Abbas is reported to have said: The Black Stone is Allah's right
hand in the earth, with which He shakes hand with whomever He wills from
among His creatures. <span id="_anchor_440"></span>440  In another
narration by him also, he said: The Black Stone is in origin from
Paradise, and it was much whiter than the snow, till it was blackened by
the guilts of polytheism, and it is said that it will come on the Day of
Resurrection, having a tongue and two lips to give witness in behalf of
that who touched (istalama) it as it should be.

It is obvious that this hadith is an Israeli (Jewish fabricated) one,
and it is reported from Wahb ibn Munabbih who said in it: "It (Black
Stone) was a white pearl but blackened by the polytheists. <span
id="_anchor_441"></span>441

Al-Jahiz scoffed at this hadith saying: The Muslims were supposed to
whiten it on embracing Islam...

### Favour of Basmalah:

Ala' ibn Abi Rabah reported from Jabir ibn Abd Allah that he said: When
'In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful' was revealed, the
clouds fled toward the east, the winds calmed, the sea agitated, the
beasts listened with their ears, the devils were stoned from the sky,
and Allah the Most High took an oath with His Power and Glory that when
His name be pronounced on anything, that thing would be verily blessed
with it. <span id="_anchor_442"></span>442

### One of Throne Bearers:

Jabir said: The Messenger of Allah said: "I was permitted to relate a
hadith on an angel from among the Throne bearers, between the lobe of
his ear and shoulder there being a distance of seven hundred years." It
is reported by Abu Dawud and al-Bayhaqi.

### Gabriel has 600 Wings:

Al-Imam Ahmad reported from Abd Allah as saying: "The Messenger of Allah
saw Gabriel in his shape, having six hundred wings, each of which can
fill up the horizon, with pearls and ruby falling down in succession
from his wing with quantity known only by Allah." (Its isnad is strong).

Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud said: The Messenger of Allah saw Gabriel, wearing a
green vestment, filling up the space between the sky and the earth. This
hadith was reported by Muslim.

### Our Lord Uncovering His leg:

The Two Shaykhs reported that the Prophet (S) said: Allah will verily
uncover His leg. In another narration recorded in Sahih al-Bukhari: Abu
Sa'id said: I heard the Prophet say: Our Lord will uncover His leg, when
every

believing man and believing woman will prostrate for it.

Ibn Mas'ud said: Allah will uncover His right leg, with the light of
which He will illuminate the earth.

### Sheep Being among Paradise Mounts:

In Sunan Ibn Majjah, Ibn Umar reported that the Prophet said: The sheep
is among the Paradise mounts (animals).

### Foot of the Almighty Allah:

In the two Sahihs, through a hadith reported by Anas, the Prophet said:
Still whenever people are flung into hell, it keeps on saying: Can there
be more to come? Till the Almighty Lord places His foot in it, when it
will shrink and gather its sides.

### A Tree in Paradise:

Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Sa'id, that the Prophet said: In the heaven
there is a tree, that the horse mounter or fast racer keeps on moving
for a hundred years without managing to cover its distance. In another
narration: In the heaven there being tree under whose shade the rider
moves for a hundred years but failing to cover it.

### The Most Credible Hadith:

Al-Tabarrani in al-Awsat, and al-Tirmidhi and others reported from Anas
that (the Prophet said): The most credible hadith is that which it is
sneezed when cited.

### Touba A Tree in Paradise:

Ahmad and Ibn Hibban reported in a hadith: Touba is a tree in Paradise.
In another narration: Touba is a tree in Paradise which Allah planted
with His hand, and breathed into it of His Spirit. It will produce
ornaments and vestments, with its branches being seen from behind the
fence of Paradise.

The problems are too many to be enumerated. It is sufficient to know
that al-Tahawi compiled the book Mushkil al-athar in four bulky volumes,
but failed to cover all the problems in it. this book was printed and
published in India.

### Traditions on al-Mahdi:

Out of the controversial narrations we can refer to the various
traditions cited in the books widely known among the Sunnis, dealing
with al-Mahdi the Awaited, stating that he will reappear at the end of
time to fill the world with justice as it was filled with oppression.

Ahl al-Sunnah take him to be Muhammad ibn Abd Allah, and in another
narration: Ahmad ibn Abd Allah. While the Shi'ah concur that he is
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Mahdi, one of the Infallible Imams, giving him
the title al-Hujjah and al-Qa'im al-Muntazar.

The Kaysanites hold that al-Mahdi is: Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah, and he
is alive and residing on a Ridawi mountain between two lions protecting
him, having two sprinkling eyes overflowing water and honey, with forty
(supporters) accompanying him.

Regarding his ancestral lineage he is known to be Alawi Fatimi, and
among the sons of al-Imam al-Hasan, with the Imami Shi'ah taking him to
be one of the sons of (al-Imam) al-Husayn.

In his Muqaddimah, Ibn Khaldun <span id="_anchor_443"></span>443
 writes:

It is commonly known among all Muslims throughout course of time, that
at the end of time a man from among Ahl al-Bayt should appear, to
support the Din and make justice prevail ... he will be followed by the
Muslims and will dominate all the Islamic kingdoms, and his name is
al-Mahdi. The appearance of al-Dajjal and consequent events will be
verily among the provisos of the appointed hour (of his reappearance),
which were established in the sahih works. It is also stated that Jesus
will come down after him, and help him in killing al-Dajjal, and he will
perform his prayers behind him (al-Mahdi). They argue in this bab with
traditions reported by the Imams, but doubted by the deniers to this
belief, or even objected by some reports (akhbar)... etc.

Ibn Khaldun confuted and doubted most of the traditions on al-Mahdi
cited in the Sunni books known among the Jumhur (Ahl al-Sunnah). Whereas
the Shi'ah — particularly the Imamiyyah — have certain evidences they
report from their Imams, upon which they depend to proving the
reappearance of al-Mahdi. Every people have their own sunnah and leader.

### The Abbasid al-Mahdi:

There are several traditions expressing that he will be one of the sons
of al-Abbas. Due to the abundance of these traditions, we suffice by
referring to them in a reviewing way, leaving the door open for those
desiring to be acquainted with their full texts and details to refer to
their sources.

### Al-Mahdi al-Sufyani:

When the Alavids have their Mahdi, and the Abbasids another one, why
don't the Umayyads have a third Mahdi! as long as the field of

fabrication has capacity for whatever coming into it. Especially after
the Umayyads got that much power and dominance, to the extent that
fabricators used to make advances to them to have share in their gifts
and donations. There are reports stating that they had their own Mahdi
called al-Sufyani, that it is out of scope here to prolong the
discussion by referring to the traditions and reports cited about him.

  
  
  

432. Rasl means rifq (leniency - slowness), see Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol.
IV, p. 7.

433. Ibn Abbas was one of great disciples of Ka'b al-Ahbar, and was
surnamed Habr al-Ummah. Al-Mu'arri, with his biting style, sarcasted
this hadith counting it among their falsities they used to fabricate
against the Prophet (S) saying:
They lied even against the sun that it,

Is contempted and beaten sunrise.

See al-Luzumiyyat, vol. I, p. 207.

434. There are other traditions on life-time of the world, that will be
stated later on.

435. Bada'i' al-fawa'id, vol. III, p. 177.

436. Ibid., vol. IV, p. 39. Al-Bukhari reported from Sharik as saying:
The isra' was (only) a dream.

437. Ibid., vol. II, p. 455.

438. Ibid., p. 459.

439. Ibid., p. 449, and nun is the wale.

440. Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, p. 271.

441. Ibid., p. 368.

442. Tafsir Ibn Kathir, vol. I, p. 17.

443. Edition of Beirut, p. 311.
