The Twelve Caliphs:
===================

  
  
  

Following are the traditions reported about the twelve caliphs
(successors), so as to be aware of one of the aspects of falsification
and fabrication of hadith, which is our concern in this research.
Whatever lies beyond this aspect is out of scope and far from our
intention, as we have no right to debate people regarding their beliefs
and tenets.

There are numerous traditions foretelling that the successors of the
Prophet (S) will be twelve in number. Herewith some of those traditions
we passed by, with their different wording without discussing or
presenting the meanings of their texts!

Al-Bukhari reported that the Two Shaykhs related from Jabir ibn Samurah
(that the Prophet said): "Verily there will be twelve emirs, all being
from Quraysh."

In Sahih Muslim it is recorded: "The affairs of people keep in process
as long as they be ruled by twelve men, all of whom are from Quraysh."

In another narration: "This affair (successorship) is not to terminate
till when being undertaken by twelve caliphs, from among people."

Yet elsewhere it is reported: "Islam is verily safeguarded and kept
powerful and inviolable as long as twelve successors are ruling." In
another hadith that was reported by al-Bazzaz and al-Tabarrani, Abu
Juhayfah

narrated it with the words: "The affair of my Ummah is still all
right..." Abu Dawud, from Jabir ibn Samurah, reported it with the same
wording with some addition. <span id="_anchor_444"></span>444

"On returning home people of Quraysh approached him saying: What would
happen then? He said: Then disorder and tumult would be there,".. i.e.
sedition and fighting (insurrection).

In another narration by Abu Dawud: "This religion is still established
as long as you are governed by twelve caliphs upon whom there is
unanimous agreement by the Ummah."

Ahmad recorded it thus: "This affair is still fit and in proper
condition..." In another narration by him too: "This affair remains
satisfactory and agreeable." While al-Tabarrani reported it with the
words: "... they are never harmed by the enmity harboured by those
contracting enmity of them."

Whereas it is recorded by Abu Dawud, and reported by Ahmad and
al-Bazzaz, in a hadith by Ibn Mas'ud, that he was questioned: How many
caliphs will reign over this Ummah? He replied: We have inquired the
Messenger of Allah about it and he said: There will be twelve ones
exactly the number of the nuqaba’ (chiefs) of the Children of Israel."

Al-Tabarrani reported a hadith transmitted by Abd Allah ibn Amr ibn
al-'As, tracing it back to the Prophet as saying: "When twelve men from
the descendants of Ka'b ibn Lu'ayy seize power, there will be flicking
and tattling till the Day of Resurrection.

Also Ka'b al-Ahbar — as there should be a hadith by him!! since
everywhere is a "trace of him!! — reported: "There will be twelve
Mahdis, and after them Spirit of Allah will come down (from the heaven)
and Kill al-Dajjal.

Though all these traditions indicate the caliphs to be twelve ones, but

they (narrators) have reported a hadith contradicting all of them, which
is called the Ark hadith that was reported by the authors of Sunan, and
confirmed by Ibn Hibban and other narrators, with these words: (the
Prophet said): "Verily successorship after me will last for thirty
years, after which it will be supreme power."

Further Abu Dawud reported from Ibn Mas'ud a hadith with a chain going
back to the Prophet that he said: "The era of caliphate in Islam will
last for thirty-five or thirty-six or thirty-seven years. If they
(caliphs) perish, so everyone with his course, and if their religion is
established, it will survive for seventy years." Al-Tabarrani and
al-Khitabi added to it: People then inquired the Prophet: Is it with the
exception of the passed years? He replied : Yes.

### Opinions of Some Scholars on These Traditions:

Al-Qadi Iyad said: There are two objections raised regarding this number
(i.e. twelve), one of which being: It is contradicted by the Ark hadith
uttered by the Prophet (S): "Verily successorship after me will last for
thirty years, after which it will be supreme power (mulk)." since
throughout these thirty years Muslims were ruled by the Four Caliphs
(al-Khulafa' al-Rashidun) and (al-Imam) al-Hasan ibn Ali for several
days. The second objection is: Caliphate was undertaken and conducted by
caliphs exceeding this number.

In Kashf al-mushkil, Ibn al-Jawzi is reported to have said: I have made
untiring and deep investigation concerning the meaning of this hadith,
and strived hard to find out its hidden denotation, doing much inquiry
about it, but I could not reach my sought aim. That was because of the
difference in its words and terms, and I am quite sure that all the

confusion and inconsonance afflicting this hadith being done by the
narrators.

Also, al-Suyuti, after citing the statements of the ulama’ in regard of
these ambiguous traditions, expressed an odd opinion I cite herewith for
the sake of jesting with readers.

"Hence among the twelve successors, we can mention the four caliphs
(Rightly-guided), with al-Hasan, Mu'awiyah, Ibn al-Zubayr and Umar ibn
Abd al-Aziz, who altogether constitute eight caliphs. Then it can be
added to them al-Mahdi from the Abbasids as his position among them is
the same as that of Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz among the Umayyads, beside
al-Zahir due to his being characterized with justice. After that remain
the two awaited (caliphs)!! one of whom being al-Mahdi! as he belongs to
the household of Muhammad (S)". But he missed to mention the second
awaited one…and may God’s mercy be upon that who said in regard of
al-Suyuti that: he was a night wood-cutter. <span
id="_anchor_445"></span>445

Before concluding our speech about al-Mahdi, I cite herewith a statement
about him uttered by al-Allamah Murtada al-Askari, one of the Iraqi
eminent great ulama’, that revealing the belief held by the Ithna Ashari
Imami Shi'ah toward al-Mahdi.

In a long reply (to a question) he sent to us, he said:

The Ithna-Ashari Shi'ah hold that the earth was never devoid of an
authority for Allah upon His creation, and will never be devoid too. And
he either be alive as a prophet to whom it is revealed, or anyone
appointed by him to take charge of his Shari\`ah after him, and clarify
it for his Ummah.

"They consider the traditions you cited in your book pp.210-211, <span
id="_anchor_446"></span>446  under the heading "al-Khulafa'
al-Ithna-Ashar" (the Twelve Caliphs), as an indication of the Twelve
Imams taking charge of the Din after the Prophet, as

this number applies neither to the Rashidun, nor the Umayyad caliphs,
nor others. Besides, they narrate hundreds of traditions, through their
special turuq (chains of transmission) from the Messenger of Allah, that
indisputably determine this fact. Also they believe that the Twelfth of
these Imams being al-Mahdi, the son of al-Hasan al-Askari, who was born
in Samarra' in 255 H., whom they believe to be still alive, as in the
case of Noah who lived among his folk for a thousand years save fifty
years, and that of Jesus whom they slew not nor crucified but it
appeared so unto them, but Allah took him up unto Himself.

"They (Shi’ah) believe that al-Mahdi is existent and alive with the
power of Allah that fashioned out of clay a bird and made the fire
coolness and peace for Abraham. and having faith in his being existent
all that long period is verily an evidence indicating faith in God's
power, believing also he is present among people, sighting them like
anyone of them without being distinguished by them. Among the advantages
they state of his existence, being that when Muslims needing a concealed
correct opinion, he would guide some of the ulama’ to the unerring
opinion in that matter.

"Concerning the appointed hour of his appearance, they concur that this
being a hidden fact unknown but only by Allah, and there be certain
signs for his appearance, some of which being inevitable and some others
potential, as indicated by traditions. Also they hold that his
appearance — as commonly known — will start in Mecca, and his first
campaign shall be by an army with the same number of that of the
Messenger of Allah during the Battle of Badr, and he will fill the earth
with justice, and judge among people according to actuality and facts,
though it being incongruous with the testimony of witnesses. In regard
of the crypt of occultation, about which it is said to be situated in
Hillah or Samarra', I have never heard any Shi'i claiming

occultation of al-Mahdi to be in it, or his existence in it, or his
emergence from it. The crypt known in Samarra' might have been an
oratory (musalla) that the two Imams Ali al-Hadi and al-Hasan al-Askari
made of it a place for worship and performing prayers, as it was a
common habit that people used to make a certain separate place for
performing prayers, a habit that continued to the present time.

444. It is noted that most of the traditions on al-Mahdi, cited in
Sunnah books were reported by Jabir ibn Samurah.

445. Fath al-Bari and Ta'rikh al-Khulafa', vol. XIII, pp. 179-183.

446. That is my book Adwa', 1st edition.
