Al-dajjal (impostor) 447
========================

About al-Dajjal, to whom Ibn Khaldun referred in his discussion on
al-Mahdi, many traditions have been reported, some of which indicating
that the Prophet (S) was believing in the emergence of al-Dajjal during
his lifetime, and his(S) saving the Muslims from his harm and evil.
Whereas some other traditions indicated his appearance to be after the
conquest of the Romans Land and Constantinople (Istanbul), with some
others stating that with him there will appear mountains of bread and
rivers of honey as reported by Ahmad and al-Bayhaqi, with Muslim adding
to them mountains of meat!

Nu'aym ibn Hammad reported from Ka'b as saying: "Al-Dajjal will verily
be given birth by his mother in Qous in Egypt, and there will be thirty
years separating between his birth and appearance...!

The reports regarding him state that he will descend at the Damascus
east gate... then he will appear in the East where he will be granted
caliphate. After that he will come to the river, and command it to flow
when it would flow, ordering it then to return when it would retreat,
and then to dry when it would become dry. Then he will command the
mountains to butt one another and they will do so, and then the winds to
stir up the clouds which will rain upon the earth. Thereat the sea will
ford three times a day, without reaching its two loins, with one of its
hands being longer than the other, which he will extend into the sea,
when it will reach its bottom, from where he will bring out as many as
whales he likes!

In another narration by Muslim, it is reported that he will rise out
from Isbahan. Also in the Jassasah Hadith it is reported that he is
confined in an abbey or a palace at an island in the Sham or the Sea of
Yemen. al-Hakim

and Ahmad reported that he will emerge from Khurasan. But through the
hadith reported by al-Nuwwas ibn Sam'an and recorded in Sahih Muslim, he
will appear in a place between the Sham and Iraq.

### Al-Dajjal in Farewell Sermon:

Al-Bukhari reported that Ibn Umar said: We were once upon a day talking
about Hijjat al-Wada' with the Prophet being present amongst us, without
knowing what is meant by Hijjat al-Wada'. At that moment he(S) praised
and glorified Allah, mentioning then the impostor Messias, making
extravagant statements about him, saying: Allah has never delegated any
prophet but only warning his community... so Noah and the prophets
succeeding him warned that he (al-Dajjal) will rise among you. Whatever
is unknown about his affair it will never be concealed for you! Three
traits of those hidden from you are never ascribed to your Lord! Your
Lord is not one-eyed while he (al-Dajjal) is right one-eyed. Allah has
verily tabooed for you your blood and properties as the inviolability of
this day in this country, in this month. Have I conveyed the message!
They said: Yes, He said: O God, I give witness thrice. Woe to you, be
careful: never return after me disbelievers, killing each other.

In expounding this hadith, Ibn Hajar said: This sermon (Khutbah) was
stated during the last hajj by a group of the Companions, with no one of
them implying the story of al-Dajjal in t except Ibn Umar.

Ibn Hajar may have forgotten that this Ibn Umar being one of the
disciples of Ka'b al-Ahbar.

Following is another strange hadith on al-Dajjal: In the two Sahihs, a
hadith reported by Anas ibn Malik from the Prophet that he referred to
al Dajjal saying: He is verily one-eyed and your Lord is not one-eyed.

In his commentary on this hadith, al-Fakhr al-Razi in his book Asas

al-taqdis said: "This hadith is indistinct, as its exterior shows that
the Prophet disclosed the difference between Allah, the Exalted, and
al-Dajjal, through indicating al-Dajjal being one-eyed and God not being
one-eyed! which is far from belief. And when khabar al-wahid reaching
this degree of feeble meaning, it should be believed that the speech was
preceded by an introduction which had been mentioned, this ambiguity
would have been removed.

There are other traditions about this al-Dajjal that are ascribed to the
Prophet, we abstained from citing for sake of brevity.

In order to instill this tenet and belief in the minds of Muslims, they
(narrators) cited a hadith ascribed to the Prophet that he said:
"Whoever denies al-Mahdi has denied God, and whoever denies al-Dajjal
has denied God (turned an infidel)." <span id="_anchor_448"></span>448

### Age of the World

In Tafsir al-Alusi, al-Suyuti reported several traditions stating that
the age of the world being seven thousand years. He indicated that the
life of this Ummah will exceed one thousand years, but the excess never
amounting to five hundred years. For proving this, he deduced reports
stated by al-Suyuti in his treatise which he named: "al-Kashf’an
mujawazat hadhihi al-ummah al-alf." <span id="_anchor_449"></span>449
 (Exposing of this Ummah exceeding thousand years). Al-Alusi said: If
al-Mahdi does not appear at the end of the current century whatever he
foretold of will be destroyed. And as is not hidden for you, everything
has already vanished.

But after the elapse of the century — the thirteenth Hijrah century — in
which al-Alusi lived, with eighty-six years of the fourteenth century,
al-Mahdi did not appear, leading then to demolishing whatever al-Suyuti
foretold

of and confused in.

In his Maqaddimah, Ibn Khaldun said: They said: the rise of al-Dajjal
will be in the year 743 H. <span id="_anchor_450"></span>450  Discussion
of this subject may be prolonged with no avail. Besides, I abandoned to
cite any reports about the seditions that occurred, and provisions of
the hour (of appearance), and descension of Jesus, that were filling the
Sunnah books which were reliable among Muslims, and sanctified by
shaykhs of religion. Also I neglected any reference to the traditions
reported about the emanation of (the rivers of) the Nile, Euphratese,
Sihoun and Jihoun out of the root of Sidrat al-Muntaha over the seventh
heaven, which are recorded in Sahih al-Bukhari and other books. Beside
those ones about God's creating everything out of the Prophet's light,
and rejoicing of the beasts at him, with alike odd and eccentric
traditions and reports.

Whoever desiring to be acquainted with the details of these reports can
refer to the Sunnah books, and the fifty-second chapter of Ibn Khaldun's
Muqaddimah, which he dedicated for "the affair of al-Fatimi and what
people think in his regard, and unveiling the truth about this matter."

### A General Word on Traditions of Provisions of the Hour and Alike

After refuting the traditions on provisions and ensigns of the last
Hour, like the seditions, al-Dajjal, al-Jassasah and reappearance of
al-Mahdi, and other marks, al-Allamah al-Sayyid Rashid Rida reached the
following valuable conclusions. <span id="_anchor_451"></span>451

1- That the Prophet was not aware of the Unseen: "Say: neither I own for
my self any benefit nor harm except, what willeth God; and had I known
the Unseen indeed I would have had much of good and evil had touched me

not, and I am not but a warner and the bearer of good news for a people
who believe," a fact that is necessarily known from religion. But Allah
gave him knowledge of some unseen matters through what He revealed to
him in His Book, which is of two parts: manifest and deduced.

2. Undoubtedly most of the traditions have been narrated according to
meaning, as is widely known and unanimously agreed by the ulama’. This
fact was indicated by the difference among the Sihah narrators in the
words of the same hadith, even the abbreviated ones, and the inclusions
inserted into some of the traditions, reported by narrators through a
chain going back to the Prophet. Thus every narrator was reporting
whatever he could comprehend (of the hadith), and an error might occur
in his comprehension, since these affairs being conducted by Unseen
hand. Also, some of the narrators may have interpreted whatever they
apprehended with words added and included from their own. <span
id="_anchor_452"></span>452

And if the Prophet was not informed by Allah the Exalted of these unseen
affairs in detail, exerting his opinion in some of them, adopting the
available contexts, as claimed by al-Nawawi and Ibn al-Jawzi who
ascribed to the Prophet(S) the saying that the contemporary Jew Ibn
Sayyad being the expected Dajjal, and his appearance would be during his
(S) lifetime, would it be strange then that confusion and incongruity
would appear in the traditions reported from him on the basis of meaning
to the extent perceived by the narrators.

Those sporting with Islam and seeking to corrupt the Muslims and uproot
their sovereign power, from among Zanadiqah of Jews and Persians and
other heretics, and partisans to the Alawid, Umayyad and Abbasid
dynasties, have all fabricated numerous slandered traditions, foisting
into some of the narrated reports insertions from their own. Many of
these falsified

traditions became prevalent by their narrators' pretending uprightness
and piety (taqwa). No one could recognize and distinguish some of the
fabricated traditions but only through the confession of their
fabricators who repented to Allah.

Ustadh Muhammad Abduh (may God's mercy be upon him) used to say: The
true Islam was that one followed by the first generation people before
occurrence of seditions. And some of the Companions and Followers used
to report from all Muslims, who were not necessarily altogether faithful
and truthful. In this practice they were not differentiating between
what they heard from the Prophet or from any other one, and between what
reached them through the expressions: "I heard' and \`he related to me'
or 'he informed' me, and ones like:" It is reported that the Prophet
said,' or \`the Messenger of Allah said', as used to be the practice of
the latter muhaddithun when fabricating the hadith. It is proved for all
that the Sahabah used to report from one another, <span
id="_anchor_453"></span>453  and from the Tabi'un, and even from Ka'b
al-Ahbar and his likes.

Ahl al-Sunnah, in principle, were viewing all the Sahabah to be
equitable and reliable <span id="_anchor_454"></span>454  as a whole, so
ignoring the name of any narrator would never disturb the veracity of
the sanad! which was the basis among the majority with some exceptions,
as there were hypocrites during the Prophet's lifetime. Allah, the
Exalted, says: "and of those who are around you of the (rustic) Arabs
(of the desert) there are hypocrites; and from the inhabitants of Medina
(also); stubborn are they in hypocrisy thou knowest them not, We know
them..." (9:101).

They were stubborn in hypocrisy, confirmed and burnished it or were
burnished in it to the extent that it was never recognized through their
features and through the purport of their speech, like those in regard
of whom Allah

said: "and if we willed We would certainly have shown them unto thee (O
Our Apostle Muhammad!) and thou wouldst certainly have known them by
their features; and (now) certainly thou (can) recognize them by the
tone of (their) speech,... "(47:30). But the misfortune afflicting the
Ummah results in fact from riwayah from Ka'b al-Ahbar and those who used
to report from him like Abu Hurayrah and Ibn abbas, <span
id="_anchor_455"></span>455  from whom most of the circulated
interpretation was taken, beside his disciples among whom fraudulents
were found, such as Qatadah and other great exegetes, and Ibn Jarih.
<span id="_anchor_456"></span>456

So every hadith characterized with ambiguous text, or confused chain of
narrators, or being contradictory to Allah's methods (sunan) in
creation, or to principles of religion or its definite texts, or to the
sensories and alike certain issues, would be a supposition for what we
have already stated. Whoever believing any narration of those mentioned
before, finding no ambiguity (ishkal) in it, then it should be true in
origin, and whoever doubting anything of it, or if any of the sceptics
or suspicious finding some ambiguity in the texts, he should hold it
within those unreliable not trusted traditions, as they might be among
the Jewish falsified traditions, or wrongly narrated ones by meaning or
any other previously mentioned kind. Had anything of them been
established through decisive tawatur, it would be improper to raise any
doubt against the Messenger’s truthful words known to be definite, or
any other definite statements.

I quoted this comprehensive speech so as people be led toward study of
hadith, not only the traditions on provisions of the Hour, but also
whatever narrated and ascribed to the Prophet (S).

I conclude this chapter with the following incongruous traditions.

### Incongruous Traditions (With Muslims Knowing not Which to Adopt)

Al-Bukhari reported from Imran ibn Husayn, that the Messenger of Allah
(S) said: The best of my Ummah being my offspring, and then their
descendants and after them the descendants of their descendants.

Imran said: I know not whether he has mentioned after his progeny two or
three descents... then after you there will come people who give witness
but won't be summoned to witness, betray and won't be trusted, and give
warning but never fulfil (their promise), with fatness afflicting them.

Abd Allah reported that the Prophet said: "The best of my Ummah are my
household, and after them their descendants, and they will be succeeded
by people whose testimony precedes their oath, and oath their testimony.

Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani is reported to have said : About the
characteristic of the Prophet (S) we can refer to his saying: I have
been delegated to the best descent of the children of Adam. In another
narration by Buraydah, as reported by Ahmad: The best of this Ummah
being the folk to whom I was delegated. It was known later on that there
was about a hundred and twenty years separating between the Bi'thah and
the last of Companions, with a little difference in regard of the
decease date of Abu al-Tufayl. And when counting it from the post-demise
of the prophet, it would be one hundred, or ninety or ninety-seven
years!

Concerning the generation of the Followers, if it be considered from the
year 100 H, it would be seventy or eighty years, till he said: It was
unanimously concurred that last among the followers of followers
approving his utterance, one who lived for two hundred and twenty years.
At that time heresies spread so extensively, with the Mu'tazilah finding
good chance to say

their word, and the philosophers pridely keeping their heads up! and men
of knowledge were tested so as to believe in the invention of the
Qur'an! with the conditions and circumstances being subject to so many
changes. <span id="_anchor_457"></span>457  This matter continued to be
deficient till the present time, with the circulation of the Prophet's
words: "Then falsity will prevail so manifestly and explicitly, <span
id="_anchor_458"></span>458  till including all the sayings and acts and
tenets, and Allah is the only One from Whom help is sought!

This hadith required that the Companions being superior to the Tabi'un
and the latters in turn being better than the followers of Tabi'un. Ibn
Abd al-Barr argued with the hadith : "The parable of my Ummah is like
that of rain, the good of which is not known to lie in its beginning or
end. <span id="_anchor_459"></span>459  It is a good (hasan) hadith,
with several chains, that may amount to degree of veracity.

Ibn Abi Shaybah reported from Abd al-Rahman ibn Jabr, that the Messenger
of Allah said: Jesus Christ will verily come up with folks who are like
you or better than you — repeating these words thrice. Abu Dawud and
al-Tirmidhi, reported a hadith related by Abu Tha'labah, as the Prophet
used to say: There are some days in which for that who strives on God's
way there will be a reward of fifty men. Then it was said to him: Are
these fifty from among them or among us O Messenger of Allah? He
replied: Rather, they are from among you. This is a confirmation for the
hadith "The parable of my Ummah is that of rain." Ahmad, al-Darimi and
al-Tabarrani reported hadith of Abu Jumu'ah as saying: Abu Ubaydah said:
O Messenger of Allah, is there anyone superior to us?! We have embraced
Islam with you, and contended in war with you! He said: "You will be
succeeded by a people who believe in me without sighting me. This hadith
was of good isnad (chain of transmitters), and confirmed by al-Hakim.

What we conceive from speech of Ibn Abd al-Barr, is that among those
coming after the Companions there will be people superior to some of the
Companions, as expressed by al-Qurtubi. But verily Ibn Abd al-Barr never
meant all the Sahabah in these words, as he excepted those who took part
in the Battle of Badr and (Treaty of) al-Hudaybiyyah. About this matter,
Ibn Hajar has a detailed comment, to which any one can refer.

It is known for all how many exorbitant misfortunes afflicted the
Prophet's Household, among which we can refer to the fitnah (sedition —
turmoil) that erupted after murder of Uthman, beside the calamities it
caused for Muslims, and the Umayyads' measures and intrigues to
undermine the principle of shura in Islam! Here is not the place to
state all the ordeals experienced by the Progeny of the Prophet, that
were recorded in history books.

Therefore, we prefer that the correct hadith which agrees with the
spirit of the Muhammadan Message being: "The parable of my Ummah is like
that of rain, the good of which is unknown to lie in its beginning or
end."

There are many other incongruous traditions of which books can be
compiled.

447. I have talked about al-Dajjal previously in the hadith of
al-Jassasah.

448. This hadith is reported by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami in his book
al-Fatawa al-hadithah, from Abu Ja'far al-Iskafi, from the Prophet with
the wording: "Whoever negates al-Dajjal has become an infidel. And
whoever negates al-Mahdi has become an infidel." See al-Imam al-muntazar
of al-Sayyid Muhammad al-Kazimi al-Qazwini, p.60.

449. In a hadith reported by the two Shaykhs, the last Hour will come
before the end of the 1st Hijrah Century.

450. Tafsir al-Alusi, Edition of Syria, p. 325. These traditions can be
seen in my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

451. Tafsir al-Qur'an al-hakim, vol. IX, pp. 504-507.

452. Refer to the chapter: "Narration of Hadith by Meaning" in this
book.

453. Refer to the chapter: "Companions Reporting from Each Other" in
this book.

454. Refer to the chapter: "Reliability of the Sahabah" in this book.

455. From him also many Abds and a large number of Companions used to
report.

456. Ibn Jarih was among the Christians.

457. Fath al-Bari, vol. VII, p. 7 and following pages.

458. It seems that falsity has not spread but only in the 3rd century.

459. This hadith is reported by al-Tirmidhi, Abu Ya'la and al-Daraqutni
from Anas with a chain of transmitters. It is also reported by al-Khatib
from Malik in al-Ruwat, beside al-Hasan al-Qattan in al-'Ilal. It has
also a witness from Ammar ibn Yasir and reported by Ibn Hayyan in his
Sahih. It is further reported by al-Tabarrani with other words: The
parable of my Ummah is that of rain, which Allah makes good in its
beginning and in its end. Al-Bazzaz also reported it with a good chain
from Imran ibn Husayn (who is the narrator of the first hadith).
