Tadwin Al-qur'an:
=================

Before embarking on the discussion of the issue of writing of hadith, it
is advisable to give a brief account on the history of collecting and
compiling the Qur'an, so as to show how the Prophet and the Companions
after him, cared for writing this great Book. Also they were so keen in
being accurate in collecting and preserving the Qur'an, till reaching
the extent of perfection and making it appear to people with the most
truthful form ever attained by any book throughout history. Thus it was
worth the epithet of correct tawatur, in which no man dares to doubt,
nor two men may differ, with all Muslims, East an West with their
different creeds, receiving it with trust and full certainty, with no
even one exception.

Had the Prophet (S) cared for writing of hadith as he cared for writing
of the Qur'an, and after him the Companions, all his traditions would
have been cited mutawatir in words and meaning, having nothing called
sahih or hasan, or da\`if (weak) or any other names invented by them
that were unknown during the days of the Prophet and his Companions.
Thus any disagreement regarding genuinity of hadith would be eliminated,
with relieving the ulama of the burden of investigating its veracity,
and compiling many works that were classified on hadith sciences and
discussion of conditions of the narrators, in respect of justice,
exactitude, sarcasm (jarh) and modification (ta’dil) and other than
this. The fuqaha’ of religion used to follow one course with no little
difference among them regarding its origin, except in apprehension and
realization, as all of their evidences would be consecutive (mutawatir),
like in the case of the holy Qur'an. So they would

never adopt what was called the overwhelming conjecture, that created
much disagreement and caused the Ummah to scatter into sects and
communities, the fact that is still observed nowadays and will continue
to be in future. Then the traditions used to be among the most important
references for the grammarians, linguists and rhetoricians.

### Writing of Qur'an during Lifetime of the Prophet (S):

As soon as any (Qur'anic) verse was revealed upon the Prophet, he would
give orders to his scribes to write it down at the moment of uttering
it. He was so keen to convey it to people exactly in the way it was
revealed to him, to the extent that he used to move his tongue repeating
the words he was receiving from the wahy, so as not to miss anything of
it. Al-Bukhari and others narrated from Ibn Abbas, in his interpretation
of the holy verse: "Stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it," that he
said: The Messenger of Allah used to tackle whatever was hard among
revelation, moving his tongue and lips with it lest he should miss it,
and for keeping it in memory, as a result of which God revealed the
verse (75:16)

"(O Our Apostle Muhammad!) Move not thy tongue with it (the Qur'an) in
haste! Verily, on Us is the collection of it and the recital of it!"
Then He (Allah) says to him (tacitly): on Us is the collection of it in
your chest, then We recite it, so when we have recited it, (revealed it
upon you)," then follow thou the recital!" i.e. listen and heed to it...
"Again it is on Us the explaining of it!" i.e. exposing it through your
tongue... etc.

The Prophet used to urge his Companions to memorize the Qur'an with its
exact words, with keeping on reciting it day and night, during salat
(prayer) and any other time. Thus there had been numerous reciters

(memorizers), some of whom used to write down whatever revealed "either
with initiative from their own selves or an order issued by the
Prophet." Among them too were some who memorized some portion of it, and
some most of it, beside some — who were few in number — who learnt by
heart all of it completely.

  
  
  

