Definition of the Book
======================

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful

“And those who shun the worship of the idols3and turn they unto God, for
them is the glad tidings, so bear thou the glad tidings unto My
servants. Those who hearken unto the word and follow the best of it;
those are they whom God hath guided; and those it is who are the men of
understanding.” (39: 17,18)

It is almost concurred among all, with no need for any proof, that the
Muhammadan hadith being so esteemed and sublime that requiring the best
care and accurate research, so as to study and learn the treasures it
contains, of religion, morals, wisdoms and precepts, beside other
worldly and hereafter advantages and interests. But, despite the
dignified position and noble status it had, the scholars and men of
letters have never given it the due attention, care and investigation,
leaving it to be handled and circulated by the so-called men of hadith,
studying it according to their way of thinking. The method adopted by
these people was based on inanimate unchangeable principles. So we see
the former ones among them, who laid down these rules, have confined
their attention on recognizing the hadith narrators, and searching – as
much as possible – into their biography, never caring then about
whatever uttered by them: whether being veracious or not, reasonable or
other than this. The reason behind this being their full dependence upon
the

sanad (chain of transmitters) alone, without any slight regard for the
meaning and denotation. Then it was the turn of their successors, who
blindly stuck at the limits and boundaries laid by those who preceded
them, without even thinking of trespassing or turning away from them.
Thus the science of riwayah (narration), since the earlier centuries,
became so rigid and lifeless without any vitality or change. Then we
noticed how these and those people clung only to the superficialities of
hadith as indicated by the narrations, fully believing in and following
without the slightest investigation or verification.

While doing their utmost in studying science of hadith, extremely caring
for its sanad to the extent it was said: The science of hadith has fully
developed and was burnt, <span id="_anchor_4"></span>4  but on the other
hand they have all neglected a highly serious point that had to be
realized and conceived before going into this science and studying its
books. This point being searching for the real context of the veracious
traditions uttered by the Prophet (S), and whether he has commanded to
write down this very text when disclosing it – as he did in the case of
the Qur’an – or ignored it, forbidding its inscription? Further, have
the Companions and their followers written it down, or forsaken that
job? What was the matter with them when embarking on narrating it? And
was whatever reported identical with the very utterances of the Prophet
– in wording and meaning – or contradictory to them? Also what be the
factors intrigued into the hadith from the propensities of his
(Prophet’s) enemies? Beside the effects befalling it from the purposes
of his friends till spoiling it and making strange words to creep into
it? Then at what time the parts narrated were registered? And was the
tadwin (writing down) done through only one method without any
modification with passage of ages and consecution of generations? Also
what was the form and manner in which it recently came out in his books
that people took for granted? And what was the stance of the Ummah ulama
toward it? And the extent of their trust in or disagreement with it,
after all that (distortion) which inflicted it and whatever affected it?
Beside alike significant matters that should be known by every Muslim or
researcher in Islam before considering the hadith and adopting

what its words and meanings denote.

But all this and whatever relevant to history of hadith, was altogether
discarded by scholars and researchers, leaving them only as akhbar
scattered in the books, and sayings concealed inside the asfar (history
books), with no book undertaking their promulgation, or influential
researcher undertaking the task of classifying them.<span
id="_anchor_5"></span>5

Before indulging into the science of hadith, they had to get acquainted
with its history, since the scholars made it compulsory for everyone to
recognize the history of every science before embarking on studying it,
exclaiming: The position of the history of every element and matter to
it being exactly as that of sight to the body.<span
id="_anchor_6"></span>6

Motives behind Compilation of this Book
---------------------------------------

On launching to study, with intellect and thought, my religion, after
learning it through dictation and imitation, emotionally, I opined that
I should trace back its prime sources and correct chains (asanid). When
reaching the hadith books adopted by the Sunnites I came across
traditions, whose words and denotations could never be found in any way
among his (S) wise utterances and rhetorical speech. That which
astonished me even more was to find in the denotations of many
traditions, things that neither reason would make sense of, nor proper
knowledge would confirm, nor could be supported by an external sense or
any authentic book. <span id="_anchor_7"></span>7

Such falsities I have found in a large number of the traditions that
were filling exegesis and history books, and others! That which excited
my wonder being: whenever reading a statement uttered by any of the Arab
arrogants, I would tremble because of its rhetoric, with manificent
feeling overwhelming me due to its strong wording. While reading most of
the utterances ascribed to the Prophet, I would never feel the same
joyance, nor that trembling. I was quite surprised how would such non
sensical feeble speech devoid of rhetoric – could be uttered by the
Prophet (S) while he being

the best of Arabic-speaking rhetoricians…or how would such feeble
language be produced from him while being the wisest man inviting to
guidance! The main reason behind my wonder was that I used to hear from
men of religion – may God forgive them – that the traditions contained
in the Sunnah books all being true and correct, with their words and
denotations, and that all Muslims should absolutely admit them with
whatever they contained!!

When reading the hadith: “Whoever said lies against me deliberately, he
should occupy his abode in fire”, I became so astonished of such
restriction that could’ “never be issued by a messenger who was
delegated with truth and commanded to do it, forbidding from lying
(kidhb) and warning against it. Since it is quite obvious for all that
to lie is to tell about something in a way contrary to its truth and
reality, whether being produced by Muhammad or other than him.

I kept on this belief till eagerness to realize the truth motivated me
to seek and search for the origin and narration of the hadith, with its
biography from the correct sources and authentic asanid, hoping to get
acquainted with that which relieves me of the straitness in my bossom,
eliminating my inside disturbance. This was due to the fact that this
sensitive matter has never enjoyed an all inclusive compilation that
could satisfy the researcher’s greed, and make the seeker’s quest to
come true I persisted for a long time on investigation and seeking for
truth, sparing no book that would be beneficial even with one word to
help me reaching my sought quest, trying my best without giving up my
efforts or submitting to the self calls to take rest and relieving it of
this toilful process. I countered these calls with calling my self to
patience, forbearance and persistence, till my trip was concluded with
reaching amazing realities and extremely critical results! As I came to
know that all hadith books were almost devoid of what they called sahih
(correct) or even hasan (good) tradition, which was cited and recorded
according to the very words and syntax of sentences uttered by the
Prophet (S). I found out also that those traditions which they termed as
sahih, had been no more than denotations as conceived by some narrators,
with only very few words that

might have remained with no change in several short traditions, and in
very rare cases. It became quite obvious for me that what they used to
call as a correct hadith, was in fact veracious only in the perspective
of its narrators, just indicating that al-Bukhari and Muslim concurred
on reporting it, no more no less. While in fact, the hadith being
decisively determined in regard of its theme was not among the
conditions for the correct traditions, because of the liability to
error, forgetfulness and inattention on the part of the thiqah
(trustable narrator). That is why these traditions appeared and reached
us with no any sign or hint of his (S) eloquence except for dim light
and scanty beam.

It is out of scope here to enumerate all the facts I discovered and came
across due to their multiplicity and abundance, as they being exposed in
details in this book.

The first of the facts that were revealed to me, being that the Prophet
(S) has never appointed certain scribes for writing down the traditions
that were disclosed by him, as he did for the Qur’an, letting them
(traditions) to be freely conveyed to people’s ears. And this task was
executed according to the power of memory, that could never be denied or
disputed by anyone through inattention or fancy, or error or oblivion,
leading thus to dissociation of the hadith’s words syntax and breaking
down its course of denotations. He (S) has not only left the matter in
this state but also has forbidden the inscription of traditions (uttered
by him), expressing: – as reported by Muslim and others – “Never write
anything from me other than the Qur’an. Whoever did write other than the
Qur’an should erase it.”

This forbiddance was obeyed and fulfilled by his Companions, who not
only did not inscribe from his utterances other than the Qur’an, but
also abstained from reporting the hadith, with forbidding people from
that act, showing severe preservation toward whatever narrated to them.
Abu Bakr and Umar used to reject every hadith from any Companion
whatever his rank be near them, except when bringing a witness giving
testimony that he had heard it from the Prophet, even that Ali (A) was
obliged to exact an oath from the

(Prophet’s) Companion to confirm what he used to narrate to him. This
practice was followed during the era of the Companions, so how would be
the case after them?!

3. Worshipping and obeying the taghut being always the cause leading to
tyranny and renegading from religion, on the part of a creature who is
worshipped a chief who is imitated and a desire (hawa) which is
followed. Ibn al-Qayyim said: The taghut is everything with which the
bondman trespasses his limits, as a worshipped or followed or obeyed
person. The taghut of every people is that whom they take as a judge to
settle their disputes, other than Allah and His Messenger, or worship
other than Allah, or follow him with no perception from Allah, and obey
him in matters which they know to be submitted to Allah.

4. It is said: The sciences are of three kinds: One which has ripened
but hasn't burnt, which is 'ilm al-nahw (grammar) and al-usul. The
second is a science that has neither ripened nor burnt, which is 'ilm
al-bayan (rhetoric), and exegesis. The third one is a science that has
ripened and burnt which is ilm al-hadith and fiqh (jurisprudence).

5. It is said a naqqab man, meaning an influential and potent man.

6. The book Manahij wa tajdid, by Amin al-Khuwalli, p. 88.

7. The only mutawatir book is verily the Qur'an, no book else.
