Revelation Scribes:
===================

  
  
  

The well-known of the wahy scribes — as stated — were the four caliphs,
and Sa’id ibn al-As and others. It is said also that the most famous
among them and most prolific in writing was Zayd ibn Thabit, though the
first one who wrote for the Prophet in Makkah, from Quraysh, was Abd
Allah bn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarah, who apostatized after conversion to Islam
and was reconverted on the day of the conquest of Makkah. And the first
who wrote in al-Madinah was Ubayy ibn Ka'b and Zayd ibn Thabit. <span
id="_anchor_460"></span>460

In al-Mawahib al-fathiyyah, <span id="_anchor_461"></span>461  it is
stated:

Al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam and Jaham ibn al-Salt were charged with writing
the estates collected through sadaqah (alms), while Hudayfah used to
write the produce of date-palms, with al-Mughirah ibn Shu'bah and
al-Husayn ibn Numayr being charged with writing the credit deals and
transactions.

### Collection of Qur'an and its Reason:

With the demise of the Messenger of Allah the Qur'an was not collected
or compiled yet, as it was kept memorized and learnt by hearts. When Abu
Bakr assumed caliphate, and on eruption of setback (riddah) wars that
took lives of a large number of Companions, Umar was afraid that much of
the Qur’an would be lost with the death of the Companions. Once upon a

day he entered upon Abu Bakr saying to him: The Battle of Yamamah is
taking the lives of the Companions of the Messenger of Allah as fire
devouring the butterflies, and I am afraid that such bloody encounters
should recur, many of the Qur'an memorizers <span
id="_anchor_462"></span>462  would be killed and the Qur'an would be
lost and buried in oblivion. Would it be better that you order the
Qur'an to be collected and written? But Abu Bakr abstained from this.
Thereafter, Abu Bakr summoned Zayd ibn Thabit and said to him: Umar
asked me to do something of which I abstained, and you are the scribe of
wahy if you can fulfil his order I would follow you both. But Zayd also
did not do so saying: How do we do a thing which the messenger of Allah
didn't? Umar said (to both of them): No blame would befall you when you
do this. Zayd says: He kept on pressing me, until God opened my heart to
do that to which He had opened those of Abu Bakr and Umar. Then I sought
for the Qur'an, and collected it from pieces of palm branches, <span
id="_anchor_463"></span>463 white stones (likhaf), scapulae, pieces of
leather and inside hearts of men. <span id="_anchor_464"></span>464

Abu Bakr distinguished Zayd with this task as he was one of the scribes
of the wahy and memorizers of the Qur'an. So he collected the scattered
pieces of the Qur'an, written in codices (suhuf) making it in one
mushaf.

### Seeking to Collect the Qur'an:

When it was unanimously agreed on collecting and writing of the Qur'an,
Umar addressed the people saying: Whosoever has acquired any part of the
Qur'an from the Prophet should bring it. Abu Bakr told Umar and Zayd:
Sit at the door of the mosque and write down the verses of the Qur'an
from anyone who brings two witnesses (to testify it). It is known that
Umar was never accepting from anyone any hadith reported from the
Messenger of

Allah, unless when bringing two witnesses testifying they have acquired
it from the Prophet (directly). Then Bilal was charged with announcing
all over Madinah that whosoever had acquired any part of the Qur'an
should bring it to the mosque and hand it to the scribes.

Abu Shamah says: It is likely that the witnesses were called to testify
that whatever was brought had been presented at the last presentation
before the Prophet (S) in the year of his demise and was written in
front of him (S). Hence Zayd ibn Thabit said at the last part of the
Surat al-Tawbah that he could not find it with anybody else (other than
Abu Khuzaymah), i.e. I did not find it written with other than him, as
he was never satisfied with what was memorized alone other than what was
written.

Ibn Wahb reported in his Muwatta’ from Malik, on the authority of Ibn
Shihab, from Salim ibn Abd Allah ibn Umar that he said: Abu Bakr has
collected and compiled the Qur'an in masahif. Thus he was the first to
collect the Qur'an in suhuf (codices), and this was the first
collecting.

The aforementioned was only an abstract of what is said briefly about
the subject of writing of the Qur'an. I haven't gone into details in
regard of this critical matter, on which multifarious narrations, were
cited, and the words of the narrators differed, since that being not of
our concern and out of the scope of this book.

Whoever desires to be acquainted with whatever said about this issue,
can refer to al-Suyuti's book al-Itqan, and al-Jaza’iri’s al-Tibyan, and
the first volume of al-Bayan fi tafsir al-Qur’an of al-Allamah the great
researcher al-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Musawi al-Khu'i.

This book is sufficient in manifesting this matter as its author has
exerted much effort in studying it, and elaborated in its discussion in
a way that the like of which can never be found in any other book. So it
can be said

that it is incumbent upon any Muslim to read it so as to gain more
knowledge and information.

### A Perplexing Oddity:

The strangest and embarrassing point is that they have never even
included the name of Ali within those encharged with collecting and
writing down the Qur'an, neither during the reign of Abu Bakr nor that
of Uthman! mentioning instead the names of those lower than him in
degree of knowledge and fiqh! Was Ali unable of undertaking such a task?
Or was he among those untrustworthy men? Or among those who were
incompetent to be consulted or committed to shoulder this
responsibility?

While in fact reason and logic necessitate that Ali should be the
foremost and most competent man entrusted with this job, due to
possessing attributes and merits of which all other Companions were
deprived. He was reared and grown up under the care of the Prophet (S),
living long under his protection, attending the wahy from the first days
of revelation up to the day of cessation, in a way that he did not miss
even one of his verses?!!

So if he was not to be called for such a critical task, what thing else
would he be called for?!!

And if they invented justifications for ignoring him (Imam Ali) in
regard of the caliphate of Abu Bakr, never consulting him or seeking his
opinion about it, what excuse they can give for not inviting him to the
task of writing the Qur'an? Is there any logical reason for this
behaviour? What judgement can be issued by any just judge? What a
surprising matter it is, and we have nothing to say but: May God help
you O Ali! They have never treated you with equity in anything!

### The Qur'an During Reign of Uthman:

Those codices (suhuf) written during the reign of Abu Bakr were kept
with him till when he expired, and after him were preserved by Umar
throughout the years of his caliphate. Before his death he handed them
to his daughter Hafsah, who kept them with her till the time when
required by Uthman in order to review with them the mushaf written
during his reign.

### Writing of the Qur'an During Reign of Uthman:

When Umar was on the point of dying and before assuming caliphate by
Uthman, the conditions of Muslims started to change utterly and they
differed even in the reading of the Qur'an.

In al-Masahif, Ibn Abi Dawud reported on the authority of Abu Qullabah
that he said:

During his caliphate, Uthman gathered some individuals instructing that
who had command over the Qur'an to teach others the correct way of
reading it. Then there were meetings among the youths in which they
differed in reciting the Qur'an, after which the teachers quarrelled
over them accusing each other with kufr. When Uthman become aware of
this situation, he gathered the memorizers and qurra’, addressing them
saying: I heard that you disagree and differ (regarding the reading of
the Quran)... whoever is farther from me his difference is stronger.

Al-Bukhari has narrated that Anas ibn Malik told him that Hudhayfah ibn
al-Yaman came to Uthman, when he was fighting along with the people of
Iraq against the Syrians for the conquest of Armenia and Azarbaijan.
Hudhayfah was frightened at the differences in the people's reciting of
the Qur'an. He said to Uthman: O Amir al-Muminin, rise to the rescue of
this Ummah before they fall into disagreement about the Scripture

like the Jews and Christians.

Among the words of Hudhayfah, were the following:

I found people of Hams claiming their reading to be better than that of
others, and that they learnt reading of the Qur'an from al-Miqdad. I
found also people of Damascus claiming theirs to be better and to be the
reading of Ubayy ibn Ka'b. Further, the people of Kufah alleged the same
saying that they learnt that reading at the hands of Abu Musa, calling
his mushaf "Lubab al-qulub".

In another narration by Ammarah ibn Ghazyah reported by Ibn Hajar in
al-Fath (vol. IX, p. 14), he said that when Hudhayfah returned from a
battle, he came to Uthman, directly, before going home, saying to him: O
Amir al-Mu\`minin, rise to the rescue of the people! He said: What is
the matter? He replied: I participated in the fighting in Armenia where
I saw the Syrians reading the Qur'an the way adopted by Ubayy ibn Ka'b,
citing words that were never heard by people of Iraq... while finding
people of Iraq adopting the reading of Abd Allah ibn Mas'ud, citing
words never heard by the Syrians. Then each party would charge the other
with disbelief.

When Uthman became aware of this, finding the situation reaching that
critical stage, he sent someone to Hafsah, <span
id="_anchor_465"></span>465  daughter of Umar, asking her to send the
suhuf that were with her, to be copied in the masahif and returned to
her later on. Hafsah sent them to Uthman who ordered Zayd ibn Thabit,
Abd Allah ibn al-Zubayr, Sa'id ibn al-\`As and Abd al-Rahman ibn
al-Harith ibn Hisham to make several codices. Uthman instructed the
three Qurashis that in case of any difference between Zayd ibn Thabit
and themselves they should write it in the dialect of the Quraysh, since
the Qur'an had come down in their dialect, and so they did. After
copying the suhuf in the masahif, Uthman returned the original suhuf to
Hafsah, sending to every

metropolis one copy of those copied before, giving his orders to burning
every other sahifah or mushaf. Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar says that all this
happened in the end of the year 24 H. and beginning of the year 25 H.

### Difference between Collecting of Abu Bakr and that of Uthman:

Ibn al-Tin and others said: The collecting of Abu Bakr differed from
that of Uthman in the reason for collecting, as Abu Bakr was afraid lest
some part of the Quran should be lost with the death of its memorizers,
since it was not collected in one book. So he collected and compiled it
in codices arranging the verses of every surah according to their order
of revelation as presented at the last presentation before the Prophet
(S). While Uthman gave his orders to collect the Qur'an when observing
the much difference in the ways of reading, that every group were
reading with their dialect, the practice causing much dispute among
several parties. So being frightened at the exacerbation of the
situation, Uthman copied these suhuf in one mushaf, with its surahs
being in order, choosing the dialect of Quraysh arguing that the Qur'an
had come down in their dialect. For making it easy and relieving people
of any trouble (haraj), he allowed reading the Qur'an with other
dialects in the first stages, but when coming to know that there was no
need any more for this, he determined to have it written with one
dialect.

### Number of Masahif Sent By Uthman to Metropolises:

There was disagreement regarding the number of the masahif written with
the order of Uthman, but they were widely-known to be five, four of
which were sent to the metropolises and the other one he kept for
himself.

That was a brief abstract of the information I gathered in this article,
which I found necessary to cite. May Allah help us to find opportune
time to publish the lengthy research which I prepared for a separate
full book, about this significant subject, so as to be benefited by
Muslims in particular, and all those concerned with Islamic themes in
general.

  
  
  

460. Between the revelation of first verses and last verses of the
Qur'an were 20, or 23, or 25 years, based on difference in period of his
(S) residence in Makhah after the bi'thah (mission), which is said to be
ten, or thirteen or fifteen years. But there was no disagreement in
regard of period of his settlement in al-Madinah to be ten years. The
Qur'an was revealed according to necessity, in five and ten verses, or
less or more. And the revelation of "other than those who have a
(disabling) hurt" was confirmed alone, which is a part of a verse
(al-Tibyan of al-Jaza'iri).

461. See vol. II, p. 85.

462. What is worth attention and good care, the fact that Umar when
stood in awe of rushing of the Sahabah like flying into the flame, and
resorted to Abu Bakr to make him accelerate in collecting and writing
the Qur'an, he never named them as bearers of hadith but called them
bearers of the Qur'an. He laso never asked them to collect and write the
hadith, but he mustered all his resolution to collecting and inscribing
the Qur'an alone. Not only this, but when doing this, we have never seen
any of them suggest collecting and writing the hadith but only the
Qur'an, the fact indicating the strongest evidences and most truthful
proofs, that they were not concerned in writing of the hadith, nor to
have a preserved book on it, staying for ever like the Qur'an.

463. Al-Usub, is plural of 'asib, meaning palm-leaf stalks, of which
they used to skim the fronds and write on the wide side. Al-Lakhaf is
plural of lakhfah, meaning plates of stones. These were the materials on
which they used to write the Qur'an on its revelation.

464. Refer to hadith of Zayd ibn Thabit, that was reported by al-Bukhari
in this regard.

465. Umar has appointed his daughter Hafsah as an executor over his
endowments and legacy, as he was not trusting his son Abd Allah.
Al-Suyuti, in his book Ta'rikh al-Khulafa' (p. 98) said: Al-Nakha'i
reported that some man said to Umar: Aren't you going to make Abd Allah
your successor? He (Umar) said: May God curse you! By God, you never
intended to please God by this. Do you want me to appoint as my
successor a man who knows not how to divorce his wife? It is reported
that he (Umar) said: Had Salim mawla of Hudhayfah been alive, I would
have made him my successor (Siyar a'alm al-nubala', vol. I, p. 123). In
regard of the divorce referred to by Umar, it is reported by al-Bukhari,
from Nafi', from Abd Allah ibn Umar that he divorced his wife when she
was menstruant, during the lifetime of the Messenger of Allah, when he
(S) said: Order him to revoke it and retain her till she is cleansed,
and menstruates again and purifies herself. After that he can retain her
if he wills, or he can divorce her before touching her. This be the
waiting period (iddah) to which Allah commanded us to follow when
divorcing the women (Fath al-Bari, vol. IX, p. 288).
Ibn Daqiq al-'Id reported that the Prophet (S) was enraged at this act
done by Ibn Umar.


