Tadwin Al-hadith: 468
=====================

In the beginning stage of putting hadith to writing, the Sahabah wrote
it down in the form they received it. Every one of them embarked on
collecting as many as he could of the traditions according to what the
narrators reported with their chains of transmitters (asanid).
Thereafter they kept on investing the conditions and position of these
narrators so as to recognize that whose narration was to be accepted and
the one whose reporting to be rejected.

It is to be known that though they have exerted much effort in this
regard, but they could not attain to the sought end, nor reached the
certainty of which the self feels confident and the heart rests assured
that what they had written was the same as uttered by the Prophet,
without any doubt or suspicion. How is it feasible for them to find way
into intentions so as to recognize the ins and outs as they be in truth?

Because of this, all their (Sunnis) books were devoid of any hadith
considered mutawatir among the traditions reported from the Messenger of
Allah, but they contained those regarded Sahih by the narrators and some
which were fabricated totally with no origin. This fact can be applied
to all of their books even those which they (Ahl al-Sunnah) used to call
al-Sihah, like Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim, as they were not
immune against campaign of criticism launched by Imams of hadith, men of
usul and theologians against hadith books.

From the previous chapter, we understand that the Companions,

during the reign of Abu Bakr, collected and compiled the Qur'an in one
book, out of whatever was written during the lifetime of the Prophet (S)
and from the breasts of men, exerting in this task much accurate effort.
Whereas this practice was not followed in the case of hadith, as the
Messenger’s traditions were neither written nor collected during the
days of the Prophet as was the case with the Qur'an, because the Prophet
forbade from putting them to writing, and they were preserved only in
the breasts of men. For this reason, the way they followed for
propagating them was the riwayah, either with the very words they heard
from the Prophet — if they remained in their memories, which was so rare
in some short traditions — or through expressions indicating their
meanings in case of their being forgotten. This practice was common and
prevalent among them, finding no harm in it since what is intended of
the hadith as held by them being mainly the meaning, with no rule
entailed — most often — out of syntax. This was contrary to the case of
the Qur'an as its words having miraculous entry, in a way that no room
being there for substituting any word with another, though being
identical in meaning, for fear of being forgotten with passage of time.
Hence it was extremely necessary to record and preserve it through the
means of writing, not to be satisfied with committing it to memory, and
its inimatability is undoubtedly established upon the composition of its
words and terms.

Al-Imam al-Khitabi in his book I'jaz al-Qur’an writes: The speech rests
upon three factors: a purporting word, and a standing meaning, and a
connector organizing them both.

Al-Shaykh Abu Bakr ibn \`Iqal al-Siqilli in his Fawa’id reported that
Ibn Bushkuwal said:

"The Companions should collect and compile the traditions (sunan) of the
Messenger of Allah (may God's peace and benediction be upon him and

his Progeny) in one mushaf as they did with the Qur'an, since the sunan
were spread abroad and the preserved ones became indiscernible from
those foisted ones. Hence those charged with preserving them were but to
commit them to memory, the practice was not followed in the case of the
Qur'an. Besides, the words used in the traditions were not guarded
against addition and omission as the Book of Allah was safeguarded by
Him through rhetorical syntax the like of which no man could be able to
produce. Thus they were unanimous regarding what they collected of the
Qur'an, while differing in regard of the words of the traditions and the
reporting of the texts of the metrical composition, the reason for which
it was impermissible for them to write down that which was a subject of
difference among them. <span id="_anchor_469"></span>469

Narrating the hadith remained to be under the mercy of memory, without
being written down or recorded throughout the reign of the Sahabah and
the main part of the era of the Tabi\`un up to the time of tadwin which
they believed to be at the end of the era of the Tabi'un. <span
id="_anchor_470"></span>470  Al-Hurawi says: <span
id="_anchor_471"></span>471  Neither the Sahabah nor the Tabi'un used to
write down the traditions, but they would convey them orally and take
them through learning by heart, except the chapter on charities and a
little of that which could not be comprehended by any researcher but
only after hard investigation. Therefore there was much fear of its
being obliterated with the death snatching the lives of the ulama' when
Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz ordered Abu Bakr al-Hazmi, <span
id="_anchor_472"></span>472  among what he wrote to him: Search for
every sunnah and hadith and write them down.

In al-Muwatta’ Malik, on the authority of Muhammad ibn al-hasan, said:
Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz wrote to Abu Bakr ibn Hazm: Look for every hadith
uttered by the Messenger of Allah or his sunan and write them for me, as
I fear obliteration of knowledge and passing away of the ulama’. He

recommended him to write down whatever was collected and kept with Umrah
bint Abd al-Rahman al-Ansariyyah — who was the disciple of A'ishah — and
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr.

In regard of Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz, he was approaching the end of the
first century. <span id="_anchor_473"></span>473  When he passed away,
Ibn Hazm abandoned writing of hadith, particularly when he was deposed
by Yazid ibn Abd al-Malik who took power after Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz in
the year 101 H. And so did all those who were charged with writing
during the reign of Abu Bakr, the fact leading to the sluggishness in
process of tadwin, till the time when Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik assumed
power in 105 H. Thereat this work was followed up seriously with Ibn
Shahab al-Zuhri, <span id="_anchor_474"></span>474  or rather it is said
that the emirs compelled him to write down the hadith, as they loathed
the writing of knowledge, as will be manifested later on. But in a short
time this loathing changed to satisfaction, and Ibn Shahab turned to be
a favourite of Hisham, performing pilgrimage (hajj) with him, becoming
the tutor of his sons, till he died one year before Hisham, who died in
125 H. With his death the sovereignty of the Umayyads became unsteady
and disturbed. Then tadwin became publicly known and circulated among
the first class (of narrators) that succeeded al-Zuhri, the act that was
encouraged by the Abbasids.

Ibn Shahab al-Zuhri was regarded the first one writing down the hadith,
the reason for which the Umayyads have taken from him.

In Tadhkirat al-huffaz it is reported that: Khalid ibn Mi'dan al-Hamsi
lived contemporaneously with seventy Companions, and he used to write
hadith, having several compilations to which no reference is made in
hadith books. He died in \`104H.

After stating that whatever the Prophet left of traditions and sayings
were neither written nor classified in the reference books during the
era of his

Companions and eminent Followers, since they forbade from this practice,
as recorded in Sahih Muslim, Ibn Hajar says in his introduction to Fath
al-Bari: "The writing of traditions and classification of reports
(akhbar) took place in the last days of the era of Tabi'un, when the
ulama’; spread abroad through the metropolises and innovation multiplied
by the Kharijites and Rafidites... etc."

Al-Bukhari and al-Tirmidhi reported from Abu Hurayrah that he said:
"None among the Prophet's Companions was more prolific in narrating the
hadith than me except Abd Allah ibn 'Amr, as he used to write (the
hadith) while I didn't." <span id="_anchor_475"></span>475  The
muhaddithun were never counting whatever recorded in a sahifah of any
narrator or scholar to be a correct narration but only when he relating
to have heard it from its original utterer, calling it al-wajadah.

Al-Allamah al-Shaykh Mustafa Abd al-Raziq is reported to have said:
"Tadwin of sunan was seriously necessitated because of circulation of
narrating of hadith and mistrust on account of some narrators, and
emergence of falsification in respect of the hadith reported from the
Messenger of Allah (may God's peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny) for political or creedal reasons. The first tadwin of the
sunan, in true meaning, appeared in the period between the years 120 H.
and 150 H. <span id="_anchor_476"></span>476

  
  
  

468 Tadwin is restricting (taqyid) what is scattered and established,
and compiling it in a diwan, i.e. a book in which the suhuf are recorded
so as to preserve their union and safeguard them against loss, which
being broader than restriction in its limited meaning.
Tasnif (classification - compilation) is more accurate than tadwin, as
it means assorting what was written down into specified chapters, and
separated sections. See Taj al-'Arus, and al-Zamakhshari.

469. Al-Hazimi, Sharh Shurat al-A'immah al-khamsah, pp. 48, 49.

470. The last era of Tabi'un was in the year 150 H. And the separating
boundary between the earliest and latest being the end of the year 300
H.

471. Irshad al-sari, exposition by al-Qastallani, vol. I, p. 7; Sharh
al-Zarqani ala al-Muwatta', vol. I, p. 10.

472. Abu Bakr ibn Muhammad al-Ansari, whose grandfather kept company to
the Prophet, was a faqih Follower, officiated by Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz 
as a governor and judge of al-Madinah. Malik says: No one (among judges)
in al-Madinah had that knowledge in adjudication as was owned by Abu
Bakr ibn Hazm. He died in 120 H.

473. Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz assumed caliphate in 99 H. and died in 101 H.
He was widely-known of justice. See Rasa'il al-Jahiz, compiled by
al-Sandubi, p. 91, and Tamhid li Ta'rikh al-falsafah al-Islamiyyah, of
al-Allamah Mustafa Abd al-Raziq.

474. He is Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Shahab al-Zuhri, one of imams of
hadith. He died in 124 H.

475. Al-Baghdadi states that what was written down by Abd Allah ibn 'Amr
in his sahifah which he named al-Sadiqah, and was so concerned, being no
more than supplications and prayers. Refer to Shaykh al-mudirah to be
acquainted with what this sahifah contained.

476. Tamhid li ta'rikh al-falsafah al-Islamiyyah, pp. 195, 198.
