Writing of Hadith Was Forcibly Done:
====================================

  
  
  

When the Companions were commanded to commit the hadith to writing, they
did not respond to that order but only when being under coercion, as
they were finding problem in writing it, after the sunnah (conduct) of
the earlier Companions was based upon not writing the hadith. Mu'ammar
reported on the authority of al-Zuhri as saying: "We loathed the

writing of knowledge, until the emirs compelled us to write it. <span
id="_anchor_477"></span>477  Later on we realized that no one from among
the Muslims should be prevented from it. <span
id="_anchor_478"></span>478

Al-Zuhri further says: The kings asked me to write down knowledge (ilm,
i.e. hadith) for them. After writing for them for some time, I felt
ashamed before God; (I asked myself): Why was it that I was prepared to
write for kings but not for others. <span id="_anchor_479"></span>479

That was due to the fact that concern of Muslims, in the first days of
Islam, was mainly concentrated on writing down of the Quran, while in
regard of hadith they used to propagate it through riwayah (narration)
relying upon their memory as a source for this.

### Tadwin of Umayyads was not Considered Symmetrical:

The Umayyad era was never regarded by the ulama’ as an age of
well-arranged compilation, as they couldn't come across comprehensive
classified books, But what they found that whatever produced by them was
made in non-sorted corpuses bearing no knowledge, but containing hadith,
fiqh (jurisprudence), grammar (nahw), linguistics and khabar, beside
other fields.

The professor Ahmad al-Iskandari, in his book Ta\`rikh adab al-Lughah
al-Arabiyyah, <span id="_anchor_480"></span>480  writes:

The era of Umayyads came to an end with no knowledge being written down
except rules of grammar, beside some traditions and speeches of the
fuqaha’ among the Sahabah on exegesis (tafsir). It is reported that
Khalid ibn Yazid <span id="_anchor_481"></span>481  compiled books on
astronomy and chemistry, and that Mu'awiyah summoned Ubayd ibn Sariyah
<span id="_anchor_482"></span>482  from San'a', who wrote for him the
book al-Muluk wa al-akhbar al-madiyah, beside other books written on the
same subjects by Wahb ibn Munabbih, al-Zuhri, and Musa ibn Uqbah.

However all these books could not convince the researchers in history
and classification of sciences to regard the era of the Umayyads to be
an era of compilation (tasnif), as no comprehensive, classified, or
detailed books were compiled during it, but there were only collections
written according to the way of reporting and concurrence in narrating
them. <span id="_anchor_483"></span>483

In al-Ihya’ al-Ghazzali says: Verily the books and compilations are
altogether produced recently as none of them was produced throughout the
era of the Sahabah and early stage of the Tabi'un, but that was after
the year 120 H. That was after the death of all the Companions and most
of the Followers, Sa'd ibn al-Musayyab (d.105 H.), al-Hasan (d.110 H.)
and the best of Tabi'un, rather the predecessors were averse to books of
hadith, and compilation of books, so as not to let attention of people
be diverted from the Qur'an, memorizing it, contemplation and
remembrance, saying: Memorize as we used to memorize... <span
id="_anchor_484"></span>484

Out of all this we conclude that the first tadwin of hadith was done
during the last days of the reign of Umayyads. This task was executed at
random from scattered suhuf (papers) that were folded up and circulated
without being divided into sections and chapters. This might have been
done in accordance with what was taught in the knowledge circles
(majalis al-’ilm) at that time, as they were not specified for a certain
science, but every majlis would include several sciences. 'Ata' <span
id="_anchor_485"></span>485  says: I have never seen a majlis nobler or
more in fiqh or greater in prestige than that of Ibn Abbas, where
Qur\`an-bearers, grammarians, and poets inquiring him, all proceeding
from a spacious valley. Umar ibn Dinar said: I have never seen a majlis
more inclusive of every good than his (Ibn Abbas), containing the halal
(lawful), haram (unlawful), Qur’an exegesis, Arabic grammar and poetry.
And that was the first stage of tadwin of which no book reached us.

### Tadwin during the Abbasid Era

Al-Iskandari says: During the Abbasid reign the ulama’ started to
revising and rectifying whatever was written in the suhuf, and writing
what was kept in the breasts, arranging, classifying and compiling it in
books. The strongest reason prompting the ulama’ to undertake the task
of compilation during this epoch was the urging on the part of Abu
Ja'far al-Mansur <span id="_anchor_486"></span>486  and his impelling
the leaders of fiqh to collect the hadith and fiqh. Further it is
reported that he — despite his parsimony — spent abundant fortunes to
fulfil this task. It is also said that the attention he paid for
knowledge was not confined only in supporting the Islamic sciences, but
he impelled the ulama’ and Syriac and Iranian translators to translate
into Arabic the Persian and Greek books on sciences of medicine,
politics, wisdom, astronomy, astrology, arts and logic and other fields.
<span id="_anchor_487"></span>487  Thus he was the first ruler for whom
the books were translated from other languages into Arabic. But the
attention he gave for the hadith, collecting and committing it to
writing was so extreme, to the extent that it was said to him: Is there
any of the worldly pleasures you haven't got? He replied: Only one trait
is left, that is to sit on a bench and be surrounded by men of hadith.
And it was him who asked Malik ibn Anas to compile the book al-Muwatta’,
according to some narrations.

Al-Sawli says: Al-Mansur was the most knowledgeable of his time in
hadith and genealogy.

No wonder then to see the number of men of hadith increasing during the
reign of al-Mansur, or to see the ulama’ having stronger desire to
seeking the Messenger's traditions and sayings or collecting and writing
them. Umar ibn Abd al-Aziz is reported to have said: The sultan (ruler)
is like the market to which brought what should be spent in it... if he
be righteous righteousness would be

brought to him, and if he be debauchee their immorality would be brought
to him. <span id="_anchor_488"></span>488  Ibn Tughri Barada, in
chronicles of the year 143, said the following: Al-Dhahabi said: In this
age (year 143 H.) the Muslim ulama’ embarked on writing down the hadith,
fiqh and tafsir (exegesis). Ibn Jarih <span id="_anchor_489"></span>489
 prepared several compilations in Makkah (he died in 150 H), while Sa'id
ibn Abi Urubah (d. 156 H.) and Hammad ibn Salamah (d.167H.) compiled
books in al-Basrah. Abu Hanifah (d. 150 H). compiled books on fiqh and
qiyas (analogy) in Kufah, al-Awza'i (d. 156 or 157) in the Sham, Malik
(d.179) compiled al-Muwatta’ in al-Madinah, Ibn Ishaq compiled
al-Maghazi (d.151) and Mu'ammar (d.153) compiled in Yemen and Sufyan
al-Thawri (d.161) compiled Kitab al-Jami’ in al-Kufah. After a short
time Hisham <span id="_anchor_490"></span>490 (d.188) compiled his books
beside al-Layth ibn Sa'd (d.175), Abd Allah ibn Luhay'ah (d.174), then
Ibn al-Mubarak (d.181), al-Qadi Abu Yusuf Ya'qub (d.182) and Ibn Wahb
(d.197). In that age, knowledge was increasingly classified and written,
with many books on Arabic grammar and language, history and public
episodes. Before this age, all the ulama’ — in another narration the
imams — used to speak of what they learnt by heart narrating knowledge
from disarranged suhuf (books)." Here ends al-Dhahabi's speech. <span
id="_anchor_491"></span>491

Due to the fact that they were altogether lived contemporaneously in one
age, it is unknown certainly which one of them superseded the others in
tadwin. Some said: The first to compile was Sa'id ibn Abi Urubah, while
some others said it was Ibn Jarih, and some mentioned the name of
al-Rabi' ibn Subayh, and some Hammad ibn Salamah. Ibn Hajar says: The
first to compile hadith were al-Rabi' ibn Subayh and Sa'id ibn Abi
Urubah... until the elderly among the scholars of the third tabaqah
compiled the ahkam. <span id="_anchor_492"></span>492  Then Malik
compiled al-Muwatta’, bringing in it the strong traditions of the people
of Hijaz, mixing them with sayings of the Sahabah and fatawa (verdicts)
of the Tabi'un and their followers. Ibn Hajar and al-Iraqi said: All
these

(compilers) lived in one era so it was not so easy to distinguish which
one was prior to others. Then many of their contemporaries followed
their example on the same fashion, until some of the leaders (imams)
among them found it necessary to dedicate a special book for the
Prophet's traditions, in the end of 200 Hijrah year. Of these
collections nothing reached us except Muwatta’ Malik, and description of
the other collections. So was the tadwin in this age, based on mingling
the hadith with sayings of the Sahabah and verdicts of the Tabi'un and
their followers as stated by Ibn Hajar. They kept on this practice till
the end of the year 200 H.

Following is the second stage of tadwin.

### Tadwin after 200 (Hijrah) Year:

After the year 200 the method of writing the hadith took another mode,
which lied in dedicating special place for writing the Prophet's
traditions, after being blemished with other sayings that could never be
uttered by him. Thus Abd Allah ibn Musa al-Absi al-Kufi (d.213),
Musaddad ibn Musarhad al-Basri (d.228) and al-Humaydi (d.219) and
others, each compiled a Musnad.

Then their traces were followed by the leaders (of hadith) like al-Imam
Ahmad (d. 241) and Ishaq ibn Rahawayh (d.237) and others. Though these
Masanid could set apart the hadith in respect of tadwin, without
mingling with it the utterances of the Companions or others, but they
contained the sahih and non-sahih traditions, of the flux of narration
at that time, as it was unknown yet how to classify the hadith into
sahih, hasan and da’if (weak). Hence those Masanid were lower in degree
than the Sunan books, so it was unjustifiable at all to argue with them.
Letter on more details shall be given about these Masanid and their
position among the well-known

hadith books.

Tadwin remained in this way until the emergence of the tabaqah (class)
of al-Bukhari, the time when it took another shape, entering a new stage
which was the stage of revision and selection.

In Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari Ibn Hajar says: "When al-Bukhari came across,
related, sniffed for and discovered the truth about these compilations,
he found them, according to their composition, including what can be
counted sahih and good (hasan), and many that to be regarded weak. <span
id="_anchor_493"></span>493  to which it can't be said eloquent
language. Therefore he put his best leg foremost to collect the correct
traditions in which no honest man can suspect. What encouraged him to do
this task was the statement he heard from his teacher, the chief of fiqh
and hadith Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Hanzali known with the name Ibn
Rahawayh... Abu Abd Allah ibn Isma'il al-Bukhari reports: We were with
Ishaq ibn Rahawayh who said: I recommend you to compile an abridged book
on the sahih traditions of the Messenger of Allah, upon whom be God's
peace and benediction? He (al-Bukhari) says: I was impressed by these
words, so I embarked on collecting and compiling the comprehensive
Sahih. <span id="_anchor_494"></span>494

  
  
  

477. Abu al-Mulayh said: It was Hisham who coerced al-Zuhri to write
down the hadith, after which writing of hadith became so common. Ibn
Sa'd in his Tabaqat says: "So we found it proper not to prevent anyone
of Muslims from writing" - (vol. II, p. 135).

478. Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Taqyid al-'ilm, p. 107.

479. Ibn Abd al-Barr, Jami' bayan al-'ilm wa fadlih, vol. I, p. 77.

480. See p. 72.

481. It is reported that Khalid ibn Yazid ibn Mu'awiyah has translated
books of philosophy, astronomy, chemistry, medicine and wars and others,
from the Greek into the Hebrew and from the Hebrew into the Syriac, and
also from the Syriac into the Arabic. He was the first man for whom the
books were collected, which he kept in a store-house. He died in 85 H.

482. Ubayd ibn Sariyah, and in another narration: Shryah al-Jarhumi, was
summoned by Mu'awiyah from Yemen to the Sham (Syria), to inquire him
about the conditions of the kings of Arabs and Non-Arabs (Ajam),
commanding him to write down what he said with ascribing it to him. And
that the beginning of tadwin throughout history (al-Fihrist of Ibn
al-Nadim, Leibziq Edition, p. 89). In al-Bukhala', al-Jahiz says: He was
not knowing but the outward of the words, i.e. he was only a narrator.

483. Al-Iskandari, Ta'rikh Adab al-Lughah al-Arabiyyah, p. 72.

484. Al-Ihya', Boulaq Edition 1296, vol. I, p. 79.

485. It is reported from Abd al-Rahman ibn Abi al-Zinad, from his father
that he said: We used to write down the halal (lawful) and haram
(unlawful) and Ibn Shahab used to write whatever he heard (Jami' bayan
al-'ilm, vol. I, p. 73).

486. Abu Ja'far al-Mansur was the first caliph for whom the Syriac,
Non-Arabic books were translated into Arabic, and the first who sowed
discord between the Abbasids and Alawids, after they were united. He
came to power in 136 H. and died in the year 158 H.

487. Al-Iskandari, op. cit., p. 72.

488. There is another narration saying that Abu Hazim al-A'raj said to
Sulayman ibn Abd al-Malik: The sultan (monarch) is no more than a
market, that whatever is spent in it is carried to it.

489. His full name is Abd al-Malik ibn Abd al-Aziz ibn Jarih al-Rumi.

490. He is Hasheem, and he was (living) in Wasit.

491. Al-Nujum al-Zahirah, vol. I, p. 351; Ta'rikh al-khulafa' of
al-Suyuti, p. 101.

492. The tabaqah (class) is a term used by the muhaddithun to mean a
community sharing similar age and meeting the mashayikh (chiefs).

493. Or rather the fabrication as will be manifested later on.

494. Ibn Hajar, Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, p. 4.
