Stages of Changeability of Tadwin:
==================================

  
  
  

From what has been said above, it can be concluded that the traditions
of the Messenger of Allah were not written down neither during his
lifetime nor in the era of Sahabah and their followers. And it is
concluded also that tadwin only commenced in the 2nd Hijrah century in
the last days of the reign of the Umayyads, adopting no one method but
diversifying in various stages.

In the first stage tadwin was done by collecting from riwayah of

narrators, according to what the memory kept of the traditions of the
Messenger of Allah. These were inscribed in suhuf not contained in one
comprehensive classified book, including beside the hadith something of
fiqh, grammar (nahw), lughah (linguistics) and poetry, and alike things
that were required for initial stage of tadwin. That was the first phase
of tadwin of which nothing reached us through a special all-inclusive
book. Then the second phase of tadwin started during the rule of the
Abbasids. The ulama’ rectified — by what they obtained from the city of
Fars — and arranged what these suhuf contained, adding to them the
narrations of that age, compiling out of them books dedicated for the
traditions and relevant sayings of the Sahabah and fatawa of the
Tabi'un, with no literature or poetry. Many among the elderly used to
consider the utterances of the Companions and Followers among the
hadith. Tadwin followed this course as a consequence of the elevation of
the level of compilation during the Abbasid era, with the sciences being
distinguished of each other, and the correlated issues- of every ilm
being collected separately. Thus compilation continued in this manner up
to the end of the 2nd century, but none of the classified books of that
stage reached us except Muwatta’ of Malik.

After the 2nd century tadwin followed another course leading it to the
third phase, in which the ulama’ embarked on committing to writing all
the traditions narrated orally during their time in independent books,
after being blemished with the sayings of the Sahabah and others, as
stated before. Many Masanid were compiled in this field, the most famous
of which being Musnad Ahmad which is still extant today, to which a
reference will be made when discussing the hadith books, with showing
its degree of veracity and position among those books.

To compile a musnad is to write whatever narrated orally from every

Companion, i.e. whatever is ascribed to him, in a bab (chapter)
privately, whatever be the subject of the hadith, or its degree of
veracity. That was due to the fact that up to that time it was
unrealized yet how to discern the sahih from other than the sahih in
time of compilation. And as said before, these masanid contained the
sahih and fabricated traditions together, the method that was followed
till the coming of al-Bukhari and his tabaqah (class), when tadwin
shifted to the fourth phase. It was — as mentioned before — the phase of
revision and selection. In this phase they compiled abridged books on
hadith selecting for them those traditions they believed to be sahih
according to their way of research, as done by al-Bukhari and Muslim and
those who followed them. About these books more elaboration will be
given when talking in respect of hadith books.

That was the last phase of compilation, as these books became reliable
and dependable among Ahl al-Sunnah, while the Shi'ah have their own
books of hadith upon which they depend and in which they trust alone,
since every people have their own sunnah and leader.

That which can be gleamed from the above-mentioned is that the tadwin
trusted by Ahl al-Sunnah was only made during about the middle of the
3rd century up to the 4th century.

  
  
  

