Effect of Delay in Tadwin:
==========================

  
  
  
  

When the Messenger's traditions were abandoned unwritten, and the
Sahabah had not undertaken the task of committing them to writing as
they did in case of the Qur'an, the horizons of narration from the
Messenger expanded and doors were open wide for evil-minded and
ill-hearted people for narrating what they willed with no fear of qualm
of conscience nor restraint of religion. <span
id="_anchor_495"></span>495

Had the elderly Muslims or those who embraced Islam later on, been one
class in regard of truthfulness and equal level of reliability and good
conduct, or had the riwayah been made dependent on those who were called
the true Suhbah (Companions), and the writing covered whatever narrated
during the era of the Rightly-guided Caliphs (al-Khulafa' al-Rashidun),
the reporting (naql) would have been limited only to whatever uttered by
the Prophet (S) without any addition or omission, and all the traditions
would have come correct with no little doubt. Also the Ummah would have
received these traditions with pleasure and admission as they did in
case of the Qur'anic verses, with the successors taking them from the
predecessors with their words and meanings, with none of the Muslims or
non-Muslims daring to oppose them, and the Ummah being guided through
their light and led aright, without bigotry to any madhhab (creed) or
sectarianism, as it is a principle to which religion calls as stated in
the Qur'an: "And hold fast, all of you together, to the cable of Allah,
and do not separate...", and the verse: "Verily those who divided their
religion and became schismatics, thou hast no concern with anything of
them." But people are the same every age, and human beings have
unchangeable dispositions, non-alterable instincts and unconverted
desires. Further the Companions and the Followers who succeeded them
were never exceptional among people nor infallibale. <span
id="_anchor_496"></span>496  "It is the law of Allah in His creation.
Thou wilt not find for the law of Allah aught of power to change."

It is sufficient to know that as the Messenger was at the threshold of
death, disagreement and conflict erupted among his Companions even
before performing rituals of his burial. Moreover many of those who
enjoyed the Prophet's company apostatized, and had not the resolution of
Abu Bakr and acuteness of Umar and those who supported them from among
the best of the

Sahabah been there, the edifice of Islam would have been subverted while
being still in the bud.

Because of this, the chiefs of Companions, like Abu Bakr, Umar and Ali
were never approving of any of the Sahabah — even their magnates — even
one hadith but only when introducing a witness confirming his hearing it
from the Prophet, or swearing that he learnt it from him. Had they all
been immune against error and falsity — as said about them — the
narration of every one of them would have been approved by these great
caliphs, when religion be in prime of life and signposts be evident —
with no need for any witness or oath, especially it was them who learnt
religion orally from their Prophet — with the light of Prophethood still
shining inside their hearts.

That who intends to study history of Islam as it is in truth, has to be
acquainted with the conditions of the Arabs in general in the
pre-Islamic era, particularly the disagreement that occurred between the
Hashimites and Umayyads in the Jahiliyyah period, <span
id="_anchor_497"></span>497  that extended till the time of Islam.
Further he has to have knowledge of the quarrels that took place between
the Companions since the time of Uthman, and the battles occurred
between Ali and Mu'awiyah, whose warriors both being mostly of the
Sahabah. Also of what happened between the Umayyads and Abbasids, and
between the Prophet (S) and the Jews, and the grudge and hatred
harboured in the hearts of the followers of other religions and other
communities against Islam.

It is truly a must for everyone intending to be aware of the right
history of Islam, to have full knowledge of all these matters, so that
to see new prospects before him from which emanates strong light showing
the right way to analyze the events honestly, and account for the
mishaps properly. All these facts had undoubtedly effective role in
forming the Islamic history and the superstitions foisted into tafsir of
the Qur'an, and the traditions ascribed

falsely to the Prophet.

We are informed by history that as the Messenger of Allah (S) was about
to depart this world, the rancour harboured inside the hearts of the
Umayyads against the Hashimites, that was disguised under the cover of
Islam at times, showed itself. That was when they endeavoured to tempt
the Hashimites to claim caliphate so as to create sedition and riot, but
caution and awareness of al-Imam Ali (A) thwarted their intrigue, when
they retreated lying in wait for the opportune time, That was during the
caliphate of Uthman, who as soon as assuming the power, the Umayyads
showed up what their breasts harboured, And as Uthman was an Umayyad,
they embarked on executing their plan so accurately and skillfully till
dominating and controlling all the affairs in his time. In the last
years of his rule the government system turned over from just caliphate
to a rule being the sport of desires and a plaything passed from design
to another.

When after the death of Uthman, dissension stirred up and insurrection
blazed hard, with people dividing into belligerent sects and parties,
every group of people started to support and back their party with every
available means of material, abstract and verbal backing, some taking
the side of the Hashimites and the others following the Umayyads, and so
on.

It was found that the strongest weapons for defeating others and
achieving victory, was that every community should have recourse to
evidences reported from the Prophet for backing up their sect and
reinforcing what it calls to. For all this, they all embarked on
narrating some traditions they ascribed to the Messenger (upon whom be
God's benedictions), particularly on virtues, as was previously
indicated when discussing the reasons of fabrication of hadith. That was
not to be done by them but only due to the fact that they realized the
Messenger's solemn and imposing

character, and his status being above every other status. But triumph
was for the Umayyads over the Hashimites, because of the power and
artifice they had, and what they possessed of wealth, influence and
subduing force.

There is another aspect having an effective role in sporting with
riwayah, which was represented by those who were disguising under the
religious garment, with the aim of corrupting the pristine religious
beliefs, through foisting into them estranged things, and inserting
falsified teachings that distorted their picture. These were the people
of the Scripture (Ahl al-Kitab) including the Jews and Christians, who
deceptively showed Islam, while slipping into the new religion of Arabs
(Islam) what their treachery and lust ordered them to insert of
Israiliyyat, Masihiyyat and lies, as stated before. Hence, and due to
many reasons to which I referred before, fabrication and falsification
circulated inside the society, with narration from the Messenger of
Allah becoming so profound that people — as said by Ibn Abbas — went too
far and exaggerated in this practice.

While the Qur'an, for which the Messenger appointed scribes to write it
down in the era of revelation, and which was inscribed again during the
reign of Abu Bakr, with being memorized by a large number of Companions,
and God's decree to preserving it in the verse: "Verily We have sent
down the Reminder (the Qur'an), and verily We (Ourself) unto it will
certainly be the Guardian," faced that much difference in reading to the
extent that each group was charging the other with impiety. This
difference and disagreement took place within less than ten years after
the demise of the Messenger (S), till Uthman found it obligatory in the
year 25H to commit to writing masahif with its correct form, and sending
them to the Islamic towns, ordering to burn other copies containing the
different reading of the Qur'an. If this be the case with the Qur'an, so
how would it be with the hadith that was not written

during the lifetime of the Prophet, or the era of Abu Bakr or Uthman,
letting it free from the restriction of tadwin beset with various
desires, and as a plaything in the hands of the incongruous caprices
current throughout centuries?!!

Therefore, it was hard to recognize the sahih traditions, with
investigation to realize the real minds of the narrators being harder.
Knowing all this it would — undoubtedly — seem that delay in writing had
extremely hazardous consequences, as it led to expansion in horizons of
riwayah and confusion between the sahih traditions and the fabricated
ones, in a way distinguishing between them became infeasible with
process of time.

  
  
  

495. Refer to chapter "Fabrication of hadith and Its Causes" in this
book.

496. Refer to chapter "Reliability of the Sahabah" in this book.

497. Refer to the book al-Niza' wa al-takhasum fima bayna Bani Ummayyah
wa Bani Hashim, of al-Maqrizi, and to my book Shaykh al-mudirah, to
realize how the state of Umayyads was established.
