The Shiah and Writing of Hadith
===============================

  
  
  

After discussing writing of hadith by Ahl al-Sunnah, I found it better
to complete our discussion about history of tadwin of hadith by the
Shi’ah so as to make commentary about this subject full-fledged on all
respects, thus:

The Shi'ah hold that: The first one who collected the traditions and
arranged them into chapters was Abu Rafi', mawla of the Messenger of
Allah, <span id="_anchor_498"></span>498  who compiled the book al-Sunan
wa al-ahkam wa al-qadaya. It is said that no one preceded him in
arranging the hadith and compiling it into chapters. <span
id="_anchor_499"></span>499

The eminent scholar Muhammad Husayn Al Kashif al-Ghita' al-Najafi, in
his book al-Mutala’at wa al muraja’at wa al rudud, <span
id="_anchor_500"></span>500 writes: The first one to write hadith was
Ibn Abi Rafi', a scribe of Amir al-Mu'minin Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be
upon him), and his treasurer or rather in fact the first who wrote down
the hadith was Amir al-Mu'minin himself, as indicated by the report
(khabar ) of al-Sahifah in the two Sahihs. <span
id="_anchor_501"></span>501

### Origination of Science of Hadith

I have stated before that had the Messenger's traditions been committed
to writing immediately when being uttered by him, and those written
throughout time been memorized, people would have received them as in
the case of the Qur'an — without questioning about their veracity, or
going in search of their truth. But not writing them in the era of the
Message -bearer and his Companions, and taking them from oral tradition
(riwayah) compelled the ulama’ to investigate about them to recognize
the sahih ones and the fabricated, beside other things in this regard.

### The First Who Compiled Ilm al-Hadith:

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar <span id="_anchor_502"></span>502  is reported to
have said: The first one who compiled (a book) on idioms was al-Qadi Abu
Muhammad al-Ramhurmuzi, <span id="_anchor_503"></span>503  who authored
the book al-Muhaddith al-fasil bayn al-rawi wa al-wa’i, but he could not
take up (everything). Beside him, was al-Hakim Abu Abd Allah al-Nisaburi
(d.405) but he neither rectified nor classified. He was followed by Abu
Nu'aym al-Isbahani (d.430 AD), who compiled a book drawing out in which
some terms with leaving things to be recognized by the researcher. After
him came al-Khatib al-Baghdadi (d.463) who compiled his famous book
rectifying its arts, the reason why people indulged in it, heeding to
it, abridged by some like al-Nawawi in his Taqrib, and versified by
others like al-Iraqi (d.806 H.).

### Purpose of ‘Ilm al-Hadith:

Ibn Khaldun, in his Muqaddimah, under chapter \`ulum al-hadith" p.417
writes:

One of the sciences of hadith being to examine the asanid and

recognizing which traditions having required conditions to be followed
and adopted. Because we should act according to the akhbar of the
Messenger of Allah that are thought to be true, exerting our effort on
the way through which we reached to that surmise, which lies in knowing
the narrators with reliability and exactitude... etc.

In his exposition of Muslim's sermon, al-Nawawi says:

The purpose of ‘ilm al-hadith <span id="_anchor_504"></span>504  is to
establish the meanings of the texts and science of isnad and
accountability. Cause (‘illah) is a meaning in the hadith that is
concealed and resulting in weakening the hadith though it on the surface
is free from it. And ‘illah may be some time in the text, and another
time in the isnad (ascription). The purpose of this science is neither
merely hearing nor making to hear nor writing, <span
id="_anchor_505"></span>505  but rather it is paying attention to it,
frequenting to men of knowledge and reading the books of investigators
and researchers on it. <span id="_anchor_506"></span>506

### Ascription and Text of Hadith:

Lexical meaning of sanad is that on which you rest or recline, like a
wall or alike, but among the men of hadith it means the way (tariq) of
the hadith text. It has been called sanad due to dependence of the
memorizers upon it for recognizing whether the hadith being correct or
fabricated. For tariq the word wajh may be used, when saying. This
hadith cannot be recognized but only through this wajh. And matn
lexically means the back and whatever is hardened and high of the land,
that then was commonly used to refer to the end of ascription (sanad).
The example for this is the statement of Yahya: Malik reported from
Nafi', from Abd Allah ibn Umar that the Messenger of Allah said: None of
you should sell or make a deal so as to make others lose it. The sanad
of the hadith being the narrators and matn

(text) of the hadith being "None of you should sell... etc."

### From Whom Hadith Should be Taken:

Ulama’ of hadith unanimously concur that hadith is not to be considered
authentic but only when its narrators having two traits; adalah
(reliability) and exactitude, with adalah being the greatest cornerstone
for narration.

But adalah alone is not enough, and regarding the description of which
there was much disagreement till saying: "It is difficult to be
acquainted with depicting of adalah not to say determining its limits."
There was extensive debate regarding this matter, which is out of scope
here. They defined the dabit (corrector) <span
id="_anchor_507"></span>507  in riwayah as that who commits less
mistakes in narration, and other than him as that who commits more
mistakes <span id="_anchor_508"></span>508  and fancy, whether this
being due to weakness in his ability, or failure in his strival and
diligence. For the corrector they gave numerous traits to which we
cannot refer now, <span id="_anchor_509"></span>509  as adalah and
exactitude each having high, middle and low ranks, the combination of
which constitutes degrees for hadith differing in respect of strength
and weakness. <span id="_anchor_510"></span>510

Thiqah (trustworthy) is that who possesses both adalah and exactitude,
and it is not necessarily that whatever reported by the precise
memorizer should be correct, due to possibility of his erring in some
places. Further, not whatever reported by other than the precise
memorizer is necessarily wrong as he be right in many places. The
intelligent wise man has to endeavour and do his best to realize the
correct aspects of every group so as to adopt them.

498. Abu Rafi' was bondman (mawla) of the Messenger of Allah, and his
name was Aslam. He was owned by al-Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib, who freed
and granted him to the Messenger of Allah. It was him who made the
pulpit (minbar) for the Prophet from the forest tamarisk. And Salma, the
bondwoman of the Messenger of Allah, was the wife of Abu Rafi', for whom
she gave birth to Ubayd Allah ibn Abi Rafi', the scribe of al-Imam Ali
(peace be upon him).

499. Al-Shi'ah wa funun al-Islam, by al-Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr (one of
ulama' of Iraq - Irfan Press, Seida, 1331.

500. See p. 56.

501. I have cited previously the hadith of Sahifah among the ahadith I
inferred to prove the narration on basis of meaning.

502. Tadrib al-rawi, p. 9.

503. He died in 360 H. Ramhurmuz was a Persian region, and
al-Ramhurmuzi's book is al-Muhaddith al-fasil bayn al-rawi wa al-wa'i,
of which a manuscript is found in Dar al-Kutub al-Misriyyah.

504. This knowledge was described by an honourable scholar thus: It is a
mere conventional knowledge, that can be comprehended through strenuous
exertion of memory, and deduced by power of remembrance. Thus it cannot
be found by fathoming thought as delightful over realities of
reasonables nor by fathoming imagination through atmospheres of
versificatoins, nor the twittering spirit, in meadows of literature or
hovering about in the of divinities. (see introduction to Qawa'id
al-tahdith, of al-Qasimi, Damascus Edition, p. 10).

505. Let this reach the ear of contemporary Hashwiyyah who have not
attained in ilm al-hadith that level to hear or make people hear, but
all they could know being only reading some hadith books or printing
them so as to gain profits out of that.

506. See p. 28.

507. The accurate narrator is in fact that who relates exactly whatever
he heard to others without any change or alteration, as stated in the
hadith: "…and related it exactly as he heart it in respect of wording
and meaning".

508. Ibn Taymiyyah says: Committing a mistake is something that most of
people can never escape, and rather among the Sahabah are some who would
err sometimes and even among their followers. As a consequence of this,
many traditions of those cited in the Sahihs were known to be wrong.

509. They have divided the narrators possessing reliability and
exactitude according to dissimilarity of their degrees, into nine kinds,
which they stated in their books.

510. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 407.
