Parts of Khabar:
================

Since hadith being the Prophet's utterances and acts, as defined by
them, and that who couldn't realize these utterances through senses no
way would be left for him to realize them but through khabar, the ulama’
cared for manifesting the parts of khabar in general, dedicating a
special research for hadith which is only a part of khabar.

Ulama’ of kalam and usul (principles) divided khabar into two parts:
Khabar mutawatir (successive) and khabar ahad. Khabar mutawatir is a
khabar reported from some authentic narrator who related it to a large
number of people to an extent that it is impossible to charge them with
collaboration on falsifying and foisting into it. This kind of khabar is
useful for knowledge itself, <span id="_anchor_511"></span>511  as it is
definitely correct and should be adopted without any hesitation in
respect of beliefs (aqa’id), for which it is a guide.

And khabar al-ahad, which is also called khabar al-wahid, is the khabar
whose reporters didn't reach that number as in the case of al-khabar
al-mutawatir, whether the reporter being one or two or... five, up to a
number with which it can never be sensed to be of al-khabar
al-mutawatir. <span id="_anchor_512"></span>512  This khabar indicates
surmise, according to which it is acted in respect of rituals (ibadat)
and transactions (mu‘amalat), not in aqa'id.

In his Sharh of Muslim, al-Nawawi says: Khabar is of two sorts:
mutawatir and ahad. The mutawatir is that khabar which being transmitted
by a number of narrators that usually cannot be charged with falsity,
and its two sides equal the central part, who altogether tell of an
unsuspected source, and knowledge is established through their
utterance. <span id="_anchor_513"></span>513  The fact upon which concur
most of the researchers is that this khabar cannot be determined by a
certain number, and neither Islam nor reliability being a condition for
the reporters. Whereas khabar al-wahid is devoid of the provision
required in the

mutawatir, whether the narrator being one or more, <span
id="_anchor_514"></span>514  and it includes the sahih and non- sahih.
All the books of hadith come under the bab of ahad.

### Rule of Mutawatir and Ahad:

When the khabar is mutawatir it would definitely denote knowledge (ilm),
while if it be khabar ahad it would not denote that. The akhbar al-ahad
may sometimes contain things in which the self has confidence.

The Jumhur (Ahl al-Sunnah) hold that: The akhbar al-ahad never indicate
cognizancer at all, even if they were recorded in Sahih al-Bukhari or
Sahih Muslim. Approving of them by the Ummah verily signify to act
according to whatever stated in them, on the basis that the Ummah is
commanded to adopt every khabar which is most likely nearer to truth,
<span id="_anchor_515"></span>515  and does not denote that what they
contain is in itself static absolutely. The express example for this is
the judge, who is obligated to issue his rule according to the testimony
of that who is apparently reliable. And his being duty-bound to do so
never indicates that the testimony of a just person should be
necessarily agreeable with reality and static in itself, due to the
possibility that he might have given witness contrary to truth either
due to having a wrong conception if his being just in respect of the
same matter, or a falsity not produced by him if he being apparently
equitable, according to what the Ahl al-Sunnah hold. A large number of
ulama’ of akhbar al-ahad hold that he should act according to them
without giving witness that they were uttered by the Prophet.

Ibn Abd al-Barr and his contemporaries hold that: This idea is held by
the Jumhur of men of knowledge and prudence.. with some of them
adding...reven if accompanied with a context (qarinah), i.e. it doesn't
indicate knowledge even if accompanied with a context. Al-Razi, in his
Tafsir, says:

narration of wahid (single) only indicates conjecture.

And in his Ma’alam usul al-Din, <span id="_anchor_516"></span>516 after
enumerating the spontaneous elements contained in the traditional proofs
based on oral narration, he writes: "If this is proved, we would come to
know that the traditional evidences being only conjectural, and the
rational ones being definite, and conjecture can never contradict (or
negate) decisiveness."

### Mutawatir is not Included in ‘Ilm al-Isnad:

Ibn al-Salah is reported to have said: About the mutawatir it should
never be researched in ‘ilm al-athar.

In Tawjih al-nazar al-Jaza'iri writes: What Ibn al-Salah disclosed that
it should never be researched about the mutawatir in ‘ilm al-athar, is
an indisputable fact.

Some of the ulama hold: The mutawatir does not belong to the school of
‘ilm al-isnad, <span id="_anchor_517"></span>517  as it is a science in
which the research is made about the veracity and weakness of hadith, in
respect of the characteristics of its narrators, and forms of their
statements, so as to act according to it or abandon it.

It is said too: It (mutawatir) signifies ‘ilm al-yaqin (certain
knowledge), even if produced by unrighteous persons and rather by the
infidels. In al-khabar al-mutawatir there should be equivalence between
the two parties — i.e. the first class and last class — and the medium,
which comes in between them. What is intended by equivalence is the
mentioned multiplicity not equivalence in the number that it be
equivalent in every class, which can never be harmed by disagreement, if
multiplicity is present in every and each number, as when the number of
the first class be a thousand and of the second one be nine hundred and
of the third one be one thousand and nine

hundred.

### Ibn al-Salah and his Opponents.

Al-Nawawi, in al-Taqrib, says: Whey they say, it is sahih and upon it or
its veracity there is agreement, they mean the agreement of the Shaykhan
(al-Bukhari and Muslim). Al-Shaykh <span id="_anchor_518"></span>518  is
reported to have said: What is narrated by both or one of them is
definitely veracious and regarding which definite knowledge is attained.
He was contradicted by the investigators and most of \`ulama of hadith,
who said: It would denote surmise unless it be mutawatir (reported
through chain of authentic narrators).

In his exposition of Sahih Muslim: He said: The words uttered by
al-Shaykh in these places never agree with those uttered by the
researchers and majority of ulama, who told:

The traditions cited in the two Sahihs that are not mutawatir, only
signify conjecture, hence they are ahad, which — as concurred by all —
denote only conjecture, with no difference between al-Bukhari and Muslim
and others in this regard. The Ummah's approval of these traditions
makes us obliged to act according to them... and unanimity of the Ummah
<span id="_anchor_519"></span>519  to adopt them in life never
necessarily indicates their concurrence that they being definitely
uttered by the Prophet (S). Ibn Burhan disapproved of that who agreed
with al-Shaykh, exaggerating in reproaching him.

Large was the number of both the opposers and supporters of Ibn
al-Salah. Those opposing him say that he contradicted the Jumhur, the
leaders of kalam and usul who were of the opinion that akhbar al-ahad
never signifying certain knowledge but indicating only conjecture, while
he believed that akhbar al-ahad cited in al-Sahihayn — with some
exceptions — indicated knowledge. If he sufficed with these words, it
would be able to say that with

knowledge he intended to mean strong conjecture, whereat disagreement
between him and them could be so intense, but he went farther by
describing the ilm to be yaqini (certain), leaving thus no room for
compromise with them. It is quite known that to contradict \`ulama of
kalam and usul was not an easy job. The point worth mentioning here is
that some of the researchers were of the opinion that akhbar al-ahad may
indicate knowledge — with the contexts — differing in regard of whether
the contexts signifying the report (khabar) being true or not. Al-Nazzam
and Imam al-Haramayn and al-Ghazzali believed in their denoting
knowledge while others denied this. <span id="_anchor_520"></span>520

### Hadith Including no Mutawatir:

Al-Hazimi, in Shurut al-A‘immah al-Khamsah, <span
id="_anchor_521"></span>521  writes: "Every hadith should be either
mutawatir or ahad, and to prove the tawatur in hadith is so hard,
especially for the school of those not considering the number of
narrators as a condition for defining it (hadith). In regard of akhbar
al-ahad, most of the fuqaha’ have made it obligatory to act according to
them without necessity of knowledge.

Al-Imam al-Shatibi, in the first part of al-I’tisam, <span
id="_anchor_522"></span>522  while discussing khabar al-wahid, says:

Charging with duties as a whole is based on it, as the command and
decree being sent to the mukallaf (duty-bound), from the Book of Allah
or Sunnah of His Messenger, or from their ramifications, should revert
to them. If it is revealed in the Sunnah (Prophet's traditions), it is
known that most of the traditions were reported through ahad, or rather
there was rarely one hadith reported as mutawatir from the Messenger of
Allah.

Ibn Hayyan al-Basti is reported to have said: The reports (akhbar) are
as a whole akhbar al-ahad, as no khabar is available to be reported

through two reliable men, each of whom reported it from two reliable
men, each of whom reported it from two reliable men, and so on till
reaching the Messenger of Allah (S). The impossibility and voidness of
this thing proved to us that all the reports being akhbar al-ahad. <span
id="_anchor_523"></span>523

In al-Taqrib al-Nawawi writes: Al-Mutawatir is known in the fiqh and its
usul, but to it no reference is made by the traditionists, and it is
very rarely mentioned in their narrations. <span
id="_anchor_524"></span>524  Besides, some of them negated the presence
of verbal mutawatir in the Prophet's traditions except in the case of
the hadith "whoever tells a lie against me..." and the Pond <span
id="_anchor_525"></span>525  (Hawd) hadith, and some other few
traditions.

### Ahadith al-Ahad:

I have stated previously that the khabar is of two kinds: mutawatir and
ahad, and presented to the reader the definition and ruling of each
kind. Herewith I conclude the discussion by referring to what the men of
hadith termed as a hadith al-ahad, and whatever is relevant to ilm
al-hadith, and all the issues related to the subject we are concerned
with.

Hadith, in fact and reality, can either be correct or incorrect. The
correct (sahih) one is that whose ascription to the Prophet is confirmed
and proved, and the incorrect is that whose veracity is unconfirmed. But
the traditionists classify the hadith into sahih, hasan and da'if <span
id="_anchor_526"></span>526  (weak), by which they mean the hadith
narrated through the way of ahad, whereas the mutawatir being out of the
scope of this classification, as stated before.

### The Correct Hadith:

The correct hadith, as was defined, is that which having a consecutive
chain of narrators from the beginning to the end, and transmitted

through an accurate reliable narrator from his like being devoid of any
oddity and defect.

In al-Taqrib al-Nawawi says: It (correct hadith) is the hadith whose
isnad (chain of transmitters) is incessant through exact reliable
narrators, without any oddity or defect. By saying it is sahih, it is
meant: It is not definitely decisive, and when saying it is incorrect we
mean that its isnad in not authentic, while the optional being that in
regard of whose isnad it cannot be determined to be the most veracious
of chains whatsoever. When saying: It is correct upon which or its
veracity there is concurrence, they mean the concurrence of the two
Shaykhs.

The most inclusive definition for it may be the following one: "It is
the hadith that is reported in a self-assuring way, with immunity
against oddity and defect."

Al-Jurjani, in his Ta’rifat, writes: The sahih tradition is that whose
wording being safe from poor ones, and meaning from any contradiction to
a verse or a successive khabar or unanimity, with its narrator being
reliable. Its opposite is the saqim (defective).

The degrees of a sahih tradition differ in respect of strength due to
the dissimilarity of the characteristics requiring rectification. When
they be meaningful out of the most likely supposition on which the
veracity depends, this would necessitate their having degrees differing
according to the strong points. If such be the case, whenever the hadith
narrators be of high level of reliability and accuracy and other
preference — obligating traits, this hadith would be more veracious than
that whose narrators be on lower degree of reliability. At the time they
made asanid differing from each other, they also classified the
narrators into high and low ranks, giving priority to the Madinah
narrators over the Basran ones, and making the Sham narrators

lower than the Basran ones, and so on. There are several parts for the
sahih traditions, that can be recognized through their books.

### The Good Hadith:

There was much disagreement among men of hadith in respect of defining
the hasan tradition. The following are some of their words in defining
it:

Al-Khitabi says: It is that hadith whose source was recognized, rijal
were famous, and upon which revolve most of the traditions, and approved
by most of the ulama’, and referred to by the fuqaha’ in general. Ibn
al-Salah says: It is of two kinds: One of them is that whose isnad
cannot be devoid of some unknown narrator whose credibility could never
be ascertained, not ignoring numerous mistakes, nor known to be a
deviant, with the hadith being known through an another identical
narration or any other way. The second kind is that whose narrator being
widely-known of truthfulness and honesty, but could not reach the level
of sahih due to failure in memorization and exactitude. It is higher in
level than that whose singleness is unacceptable. The hasan tradition,
can be used, like the sahih one, in disputation and debate, though it
being lower than it in strength.

### The Weak Hadith:

The weak (da’if) hadith is that which does not possess the
characteristics of the sahih or hasan ones, and its weakness differs in
the same way as the veracity of the sahih.

In Sharh Muslim al-Nawawi writes: Its kinds are: al-mawdu’ (composed),
al-maqlub (inverted), al-shadhdh (odd), al-munkar (disapproved),
al-mudtarib (confused) and other kinds referred to in ilm al-

hadith.

Some of the ulama’ hold that it can be acted according to it in respect
of virtuous deeds, but this was prohibited by great religious
authorities (imams).

In al-Adab al-Shar’iyyah <span id="_anchor_527"></span>527  Ibn Muflih
says:

It is reported from al-Imam Ahmad that it is impermissible to act
according to the weak hadith in regard of virtues and recommendable acts
(mustahabbat).

Al-Shaykh Taqi al-Din (Ibn Taymiyyah) commented on the notion held by
the ulama’ to act according to the weak hadith in virtuous deeds, by
saying: To act according to it means that the self wishes for that
reward (thawab) or fears from that chastisement. The example for this
can be found in the temptation and intimidation through the Israeliyyat,
dreams, words of the predecessors and ulama’ and events of the world
beside other things that can never be used to establish a legal
judgement, either a recommendable one or other than this. However, it
can be mentioned in cases of temptation and intimidation, regarding what
it considered good or abominable through legal evidences, the act that
can be of benefit not detriment, whether this be in itself true or
false.

One of the eminent ulama’ commented on al-Imam Ahmad's statement "It is
impermissible to act according to the weak hadith in respect of the
virtues and mustahabbat" by saying: "May God be pleased with Ahmad, what
an expansive knowledge and accurate understanding has he ... as his call
to act according to the weak hadith and be lenient toward narrating it
paved the way for ghuluww (excess) in religion and increasing the
constraining rituals (ibadat) that contradict and are incompatible with
the easiness of Islam, till making some of them to be among the rites of
this Din,

though most of people were negligent in establishing the ordinances
(fara’id) and abiding by the obligatory duties. As a consequence to
this, the succeeding compiler reported from Taqi al-Din his view of
approving the Israeliyyat, dreams and superstitions. The rituals and
virtues decisively determined in the Book and Sunnah are quite
sufficient for the Ummah, and would that many are there who be committed
and heedful to them."

Al-Qadi Abu Bakr ibn al-Arabi al-Maliki said: “It is impermissible to
act according to the weak traditions at all,” which is verily a right
notion. <span id="_anchor_528"></span>528

### Multiplicity of Hadith Ways Never Reinforces Them:

Al-Allamah al-Sayyid Rashid Rida is reported to have said: "The
traditionists claim in some ahadith, even those for which no correct
sanad was established: The multiplicity of the ways (turuq) of
transmitting the traditions strengthens them. It is a rule made by the
traditionists that neither a reference is made to it by God in His Book,
nor recorded in any sunnah from the Messenger of Allah, but it is merely
a non-successive theoretical issue. As multiplicity of the means
regarding an issue the voidness of which is legally determined, like the
issue of crowned-cranes, or rationally, is verily of no value whatsoever
due to the permissibility of unanimity of those turuq on falsehood.

### Being Self-Decisive is no Condition for Correct Hadith:

Al-Hafiz Ibn Salah says: <span id="_anchor_529"></span>529

"When they say: "This is a correct hadith' this means that its sanad
(chain of transmitters) being attached to the other afore-mentioned
attributes,

and for its veracity it is no condition to be decisive in itself... as
some of the traditions were reported singly by one reliable narrator,
and could not be among the akhbar which were approved unanimously by the
Ummah.

Also when they say about a hadith to be not sahih, this never means its
being false decisively in itself, as it may be true in fact, but the
fact intended is that its isnad could not be proved correct according to
the stated condition. In his Fatawa he (Ibn al-Salah) says: The Imams
say: Among the traditions there are some whose isnad being sahih but
text is not sahih, and some whose isnad is not sahih but text is sahih,
or those whose isnad is sahih and text (matn) is sahih, or those whose
isnad is unknown and text is unknown, or those whose isnad is weak and
text is weak. <span id="_anchor_530"></span>530

Al-Zayn al-Iraqi (d.806H) in his Alfiyyah, <span
id="_anchor_531"></span>531  writes:

When the traditionists say: "This hadith is sahih', they want to say —
as it seems through the appearance of isnad — that its veracity is not
decisive by itself, due to possibility of inadvertence and forgetfulness
on the part of the thiqah. <span id="_anchor_532"></span>532  This being
the sahih upon which concurred men of knowledge contrarily to those
holding that khabar al-wahid necessitating knowledge through the visible
exterior. And so also when they say: "This hadith is weak,' they mean:
The conditions of veracity were not seen in it, not due to its being
false in itself as the liar may tell truth and be free from many errors.
He also said: Anything whose origin is correct should not necessarily be
sahih. In al-Qawati’ al-Sam'ani writes: The correct hadith cannot be
recognized through the narration of trustworthy narrators alone, but
this can be done through perception, knowledge, perseverance on hearing
and study .

They also said: Veracity of the hadith never obligates its being
decisive in itself, because of possibility of inadvertence and
forgetfulness on the part of the thiqah. Al-Nawawi, in al-Taqrib,
attributed it to the majority

and investigators that they said: It signifies conjecture if not being
mutawatir. In his exposition of Muslim he said: This is the case with
the ahad, and no difference is there between the Two Shaykhs and others.

The traditionists do not care much for the mistakes in texts and say:
Whenever the sanad be correct the matn (text) should be correct.

### Best Care Was Given to Sanad:

Al-Dhahabi, in his book Siyar a’lam al-nubala’, when giving the
biography of Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Qattan, reported that Yahya said: "Never
look at the hadith but look at the isnad, when it be correct the hadith
is correct; otherwise never be beguiled by the hadith if the isnad be
incorrect."

He also said: The predecessors were averse to going deeply into matters
and call disputants as heretics.

  
  
  

511. Even the mutawatir was not free from suspicion in regard of its
relation - ilm al-yaqin - as it is possible to inform some people, who
can never be accused of falsification, of situation of so and so, while
telling some other people with some news contradicting their report.

512. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 33.

513. Many of the usulis declared that there should be contexts for the
mutawatir, as otherwise there would be no difference between it and
khabar al-ahad which if be sorrounded with contexts, they would obligate
knowledge of its being true. And the reason for their difference being
the obscurity and exactitude of this research.

514. Sharh al-Nawawi, vol. I, p. 169.

515. Can this rule which they determined be commanded by Allah and His
Messenger? And can it keep us away of being charged with following the
conjecture, to which reference is made in numerous verses of the Qur'an,
like: "Most of them follow not but conjecture. Assuredly conjecture can
by no means take the place of truth". And the verse: "And they have no
knowledge thereof. They follow but a guess, and lo! A guess can never
take the place of the truth". And also the saying of the Most High:
"…they have no knowledge thereof save pursuit of a conjecture"?

516. See p. 9.

517. That is 'ilm al-isnad.

518. He is Ibn al-Salah.

519. If they have not agreed on unanimity in itself, it is not admitted
here, as many of the Islamic madhahib, like Shi'ah, Zaydiyyah and
Ibadiyyah and others do not act according to whatever is cited in Sahih
al-Bukhari or other Sunni books, known among the Jumhur. Even leaders of
Sunni fiqhi schools (madhahib) held fast in their madhhab to what they
took from their leaders, and never deviated from the Sunnah books, but
they contradicted most of the traditions stated in them as will be
manifested later on.

520. Whoever desiring to get more information about this subject, is
asked to refer to Tawjih al-nazar of al-Jaza'iri, from which I quoted
this statement.

521. Al-Hazimi, Shurut al-A'immah al-Khamsah, p. 37.

522. Al-I'tisam, vol. I, p. 130.

523. Al-Hazimi, op. cit., p. 32.

524. Al-Taqrib, p. 31.

525. The full text of this hadith is thus: "My pond is (located) between
Aden and Oman the piehald. Its water is much whiter than the milk and
sweeter than the honey, and its cups numbering the same as the stars in
the sky!! Whoever having a drink from it will verily never feel thirst.
And the first people to drink of it will be the poor Immigrants, the
dishevelled and of polluted clothes who never marry the well-off women,
nor the dams will be opened for them!! This hadith was considered by
them as the mutawatir; and for it there are several narrations differing
in words, and in quantity of its water!!

526. There being other sorts of hadith to which I haven't referred as
they come wihtin the subjects of art of hadith. The first who divided
the hadith into three parts: sahih, hasan (good) and da'if (weak), is
Abu 'Isa al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H.), in his Sunan, and no one talked about
this division before him. He stated that the hasan is that hadith whose
ways of transmission were numerous, but none of them was accused of
falsity or has been abnormal. And it is lower in degree than the sahih
whose transmitters were known of reliability (adalah) and accuracy.
While the da'if is that hadith, the transmitter of which was known to be
a liar and of bad memory.

527. Al-Adab al-Shar'iyyah, vol. II, pp. 313, 314.

528. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXXI, p. 128.

529. Ulum al-hadith, which was known as Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah, who was
called by men of hadith with the title 'al-Shaykh'. He died in 643 H.

530. See p. 19.

531. Fath al-mughith bi-Sharh Alfiyyat al-hadith, p. 12.

532. Let's give an example for this: The hadith reported from the
Prophet on his returning to al-Madinah from the Battle of Uhud, after
commanding the Muslims to line up behind him, when he said: "Arrange
your rows so as to praise my Lord". Then he concluded it by saying: O
God, the killer of the infidels to whom the Scripture was sent, God of
truth. This hadith was reported by Ahmad and al-Bukhari in al-Adab
al-mufrad, with al-Nasa'i and others. In its regard al-Dhahabi said:
Despite cleanness of its isnad, it is disregarded, and I am afraid it
being fabricated. The books of hadith are replete with such narrations.
