Best Care Was Given To Sanad:
=============================

  
  
  

Al-Dhahabi, in his book Siyar a’lam al-nubala’, when giving the
biography of Yahya ibn Sa'id al-Qattan, reported that Yahya said: "Never
look at the hadith but look at the isnad, when it be correct the hadith
is correct; otherwise never be beguiled by the hadith if the isnad be
incorrect."

He also said: The predecessors were averse to going deeply into matters
and call disputants as heretics.

### A Necessary Meditation

It is proper here to make a short halt to meditate over what I stated
before, of the sayings of Ibn al-Salah and al-Iraqi and al-Hakim, beside
other leaders of hadith who considered it (hadith) to be sahih. However,
when going through whatever we manifested before in regard of hadith in
general, and that which we are going to state, we will verily come to
realize many things that permit or rather urge us to make such a
meditating pause.

The first thing we get out of this being that: the Prophet (S) did not
commit his traditions to writing during his lifetime as he did in the
case of the Qur'an, so as to come out as authentic as the Qur'an. Not
only this, but he also forbade from writing them, the order that was
obeyed by his Companions and their followers who abstained from writing
the hadith and were sufficed with transmitting it through oral tradition
(riwayah). But this was not done

according to the original words uttered by the Prophet, but they used to
narrate the hadith on the basis of meaning.

Such practice remained to be followed till they started to write it
(hadith) down, the act that was fulfilled about the middle of the 2nd
Hijrah Century. Religion and (Arabic) language were inflicted a severe
detriment due this delay in writing down of hadith, beside the falsities
foisted by the fabricators, and liars from among enemies of religion,
with the pleasure-seekers and even the righteous among Muslims.

When ulama’ of jarh and ta’dil began making investigations into
conditions of the narrators, so as to recognize the reliable one and the
unreliable, they couldn't — despite the toilful efforts they exerted in
this search — attain to the goal they were after, achieving not their
intention. That was due to the fact that their search was made in
accordance with their capacity and human ability, exceeding not the
apparent conditions of the narrators. And they are not to blame in this
respect, as endeavouring to realize the hidden realities and whereabouts
of men is verily an infeasible or rather impossible task.

In this regard al-Wazir al-Yamani, in al-Rawd al-basim, says: Many of
the chiefs of jarh and ta’dil are reluctant regarding the (reliability
of) narrator, deeming him reliable once and unreliable another. As
bringing his fancy within the pale of multiplicity can't be weighed by a
standard criterion but it is subject to conjecture and can be recognized
through investigation and strival (ijtihad), so such wahm (fancy) was
viewed in the same way the fuqaha’ were viewing the conjectural events.
Hence Ibn Mu'in <span id="_anchor_533"></span>533 holds two views
regarding the narrator: tawthiq (deeming reliable) and tad'if (deeming
weak), and alike things. Further, it is impossible to evade wahm
(misconception), and ismah (infallibility) can never be an attribute of
reliable

people, or rather it (Messenger's ismah) can never prevent against
suspicion but only in tabligh (i.e. tabligh of revelation). As the
Messenger of Allah doubted that he performed some obligatory prayers
completely, when Dhu al-Yadayn questioned him: Have you shortened the
prayers or forgotten this? <span id="_anchor_534"></span>534

For all this, we find all books of hadith containing the sahih and
non-sahih and even the fabricated and falsified ones, with none of the
books being devoid of this even those of al-Bukhari and Muslim which
were called al-Sahihayn, and were a target of violent attacks of
critics. Since the case was such with these books, which were devoid of
mutawatir authentic traditions but full of conjectural ahad traditions,
the Ummah ulama’ of fiqh, usul and kalam have not acted according to
them nor been committed to whatever cited in them.

So also the case with the grammarians who never quoted hadith to prove
rules of language and grammar (nahw), after being sure of their being
not sahih or mutawatir as were uttered by the Prophet, but were narrated
on the basis of meaning. The argument they adopted for this was the
hadith: "I married her to you with what you have", <span
id="_anchor_535"></span>535  which was cited in eight forms though being
composed of two words only!

Those were the views we intended to survey before quoting the utterances
of the ulama’ who prompted us to make such a meditative halt before
them.

Ibn al-Salah says: When they say: 'This hadith is sahih they mean by
this that its sanad goes back to all the aforementioned kinds, and it is
no provision for it to be decisive in itself.

This notion was confirmed by al-Iraqi in exposition of his Alfiyyah,
when saying: Whenever men of hadith say: This hadith is sahih, they
intend to say — as it appeared to us out of the externals of isnad —
that its veracity

is decisive in itself because of possibility of error and forgetfulness
on the part of the thiqah (trustworthy).

In al-Qawati; al- Sam'ani writes: The sahih tradition cannot be
recognized only through the narration of trustworthy men but also
through comprehension, knowledge, intensive hearing and study.

Al-Hakim says: So many a hadith are there whose isnad contains only one
reliable thiqah narrator, and so they be weak and defective.

Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi says: Recognizing the (correct) hadith is an
inspiration! and when asking that who is expert in defects of hadith:
Wherefrom is this? he will have no hujjah to argue with.

These were some of the statements of the ulama’ about the hadith which
they made sahih, so how would be the case with the traditions that were
reported in their books and were considered sahih by them?

And after all this what is to do by that who intends to recognize the
correct hadith in which the heart feels assured and the self is
confident? And which way has he to adopt so as to be guided to
distinguish it from among other traditions, while facing such and other
sayings that cause perplexity and raise doubt and suspicion? Which one
has he to adopt and which one has he to forsake? Especially after being
aware of what Ibn al-Salah quoted in his Fatawa from the Imams (leaders)
of hadith including their statements about forms of hadith, when saying:

The imams classified hadith into the following forms:

1- a hadith with incorrect isnad and matn (text).

2- or a hadith with incorrect isnad and sahih text.

3- or a hadith with unknown isnad and matn.

4- or a hadith with correct isnad and matn.

5- or a hadith with weak isnad and matn.

These were the five forms of hadith among whose ambiguous and
bewildering ravines the researcher may go astray, knowing no outlet
toward deliverance, because they (traditionists) have neither manifested
their boundaries nor singled out between their sorts, nor laid down
criteria for evaluating them so as people be acquainted with them.

If supposedly the knowledge-seeker be guided to the correct part of the
traditions, nevertheless he never feels rest assured to act according to
them after being aware of the statement of the ulama’ expressing that
veracity of hadith never necessitating its being decisive in itself due
to possibility of inadvertence and forgetfulness on the part of the
thiqah.

That was a short statement I presented in this meditating pause with no
need to go farther, and nothing more to say but to raise our hands to
Allah imploring Him: O God, shower Your mercy upon us and prepare for us
a guide of our affair.

### Some Kinds of Hadith

Hadith was divided into numerous kinds and many books were compiled in
this regard. And since we, as said before, never discuss the technical
aspect of this science but suffice with exposing history of hadith, we
found it proper to refer to those kinds that can serve our subject of
discussion. Because this would help us recognize the incongruity and
contradiction that afflicted the riwayah, and how it was affected by
alteration and changes, except what we have stated before.

### The Confused Hadith:

Ibn al-Salah says: The confused and disorderly hadith is that in whose
regard the narration differ from each other, with some reporting it in a

certain form and some others reporting it in another contradictory way.
Confusion may happen in the hadith text, or in the isnad, and it may be
caused by one narrator or a group of narrators... and it entails
weakness of the hadith since it reflects the fact that it was never put
right or corrected.

As an example for confusion in the text we can refer to a hadith
reported by Abu Bakr who said: O Messenger of Allah: I see that you
turned old! He (S) said: Surat Hud and its sisters made me old. This
hadith is confused, as it was not reported but only through Abu Ishaq
al-Subay'i, and there was disagreement concerning it. Some of the
narrators reported it in a mursal way. (with no reference to chain of
transmitters), and some reported it in a mawsul way (with a successive
chain of narrators), and some others ascribing it to Abu Bakr, and some
to Sa'd, and some others to A'ishah. The disagreement appeared in ten
aspects cited by al-Daraqutni, and reported by trustworthy narrators
some of whom can never be considered superior to the others, and putting
them together is infeasible.

### Traditionists Care Not for Errors & Criticism of Texts:

Al-Jaza'iri said: The traditionists rarely judge the hadith to be
confused, when disagreement regarding it occurring in the text itself,
as this being not of their business as they be muhaddithun, but it is
the business of the mujtahidun. But they judge the hadith to be
disordered when the disagreement be related to the isnad itself, as this
being their business.

Once a controversy took place regarding the salat (prayers) referred to
in the story of Dhu al-Yadayn. <span id="_anchor_537"></span>537  The
narrator doubted it to be either the noon (zuhr) or afternoon (asr)
prayers! Another time he thought it to be one of ashiyy two prayers:
either the zuhr or asr prayers. In another place he once

determined it to be the zuhr and once again to be the asr prayer.
Another time he said: It is most probably the asr prayer. At Nasa'i
reported once what testifies that the source of doubt was Abu Hurayrah
and his words, when he said: The Prophet, may God's peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny, performed one of ashiyy
prayers, but I (Abu Hurayrah) forgot <span id="_anchor_538"></span>538
 which one it was. Some of the narrators tried to bring them together,
claiming that the episode occurred twice. Much often some of them follow
this practice in bringing together in order to correct all the
narrations, for protecting the narrators from being charged with error
or inadvertence or forgetfulness. It seems as if these traditionists
care for the narrators much more than caring for the narrations, so they
brought them together, even when they (narrations) disagree with one’s
hearing. <span id="_anchor_539"></span>539

In relation to what al-Allamah al-Jaza’iri stated concerning the
ignorance of the traditionists to the texts (of hadith) I cite herewith
a statement al-Allamah al-Sayyid Rashid Rida said in this respect when
discussing the hadith of the going away of the sun after sunset, which
is one of the ambiguous traditions previously referred to: “The hadith
ulama’ so seldom care for errors in the texts in regard of their
meanings and rules, but their all attention is concentrated upon the
asanid with course and clauses of the texts, beside the differences in
them and what is marfu’ and mawquf of them. Also they cared for the
words foisted into them that were composed by the narrators and out of
the text ascribed to the Prophet (S). The researching ulama’ can
recognize the mistakes of texts through their expositions of principles
and branches of religion, and other things, even if they are not among
the muhaddithun. But they refer in this regard to the principles laid by
the traditionists like their saying: The veracity of the sanad never
necessitates veracity of the text in fact and the same matter.

And also their saying: One of the signs of fabrication of hadith – even
if its sanad be correct – being its contradiction to the decisive
Qur’anic text, and its meaning contradicts every legal decisive rule:
Such as some of the doctrinal principles, or the acts upon which there
is unanimity and which are necessarily known to be of religion in a way
that it is infeasible to bring them together.

That is why the traditionists determined to disapprove Abu Hurayrah’s
hadith which was reported by Muslim about the creation of the heavens
and earth in seven days.

If contradicting the decisive rule being a reason for judgement, either
after veracity of hadith due to not having trust in its narrators or to
their errors in its wording, the conceptions would necessarily differ
according to differences in cognizances and knowledge of their owners.
Those who know not that the sun never disappears from the earth and
never passes from view of people for one hour or even a minute, does not
see any trouble in the hadith of Abu Dharr about where it (sun) be after
its decline as they think that its decline is a decline from the world
as a whole. <span id="_anchor_540"></span>540

He (al-Jaza’iri) further says: If the narrations be criticized in
respect of the tenor of their text, and also in their sanad, the texts
will destroy and abrogate many of the asanid. <span
id="_anchor_541"></span>541

In his discussion of the ambiguities exposed in some of the traditions,
like the hadith on sorcery of the Prophet (S), and hadith of prostration
of the sun under the Throne, he stated the following: “No one can manage
to attain to truth in such ambiguities except that who gave reins to his
intellect to think freely respecting the sayings uttered by different
sorts of ulama’. He also says: the ulama’ of doctrinal and fiqhi
principles (usul) have much more knowledge than the traditionists
regarding criticism of texts and what is rational and sensible and
agrees with principles of aqa’id and what doesn’t agree with them.

Both the sects concur that: The text of marfu’ traditions of correct

sanad should not necessarily be correct, due to possibility of presence
of someone in chain of narrators who deliberately or inadvertently
committed a mistake in the riwayah … and it is not necessary that text
of any hadith of incorrect sanad should be untrue. Rather they said: Any
hadith with fabricated narration may be veracious actually, and the
hadith of correct sanad may be fabricated in actuality. We are requested
to judge according to the external dimension with observing the rules
and regulations. Hence that hadith whose sanad is correct we would
accept its narration and adopt rules of belief and evidences of
intellect to judge its text if it be ambiguous, and the one of incorrect
sanad we can never call it a prophetic hadith, though its meaning be
correct. <span id="_anchor_542"></span>542

Added to the words of al-Sayyid Rashid Rida we can say that the veracity
or goodness of isnad can never necessitate veracity or euphemism of the
hadith. Al-Hakim <span id="_anchor_543"></span>543 says: Many traditions
have in their isnad only one reliable trustworthy narrator, though they
being defective and weak. Hence the sahih tradition cannot be known
through its narrators alone but through comprehension, memorization and
recurring hearing.

Al-Daraqutni and other chief critics have never criticized the text as
they did in the case of isnad, as criticism related to text is so
precise and obscure that can never be realized but only by those hadith
leaders known of having expertise in recognizing its defects. That is
contrary to criticism related to text (matn), which can be fulfilled by
many of knowledgeable ulama’ engaged in legal (Shar’i) sciences, and
investigating about their original and minor issues, like exegetes,
fuqaha’, and men of usul al-fiqh and usul al-Din.

Many of the leaders of hadith were liable to criticism in respect of the
text, but that was so rare compared to criticism they faced in respect
of the isnad. As an example for this we can refer to al-Isma’ili’s
words, he uttered after citing the hadith reported by al-Bukhari on the
authority of Abu Hurayrah as saying: “Abraham will meet, on the Day of
Resurrection, his father Azar with darkness covering his (Azar’s) face”
(the hadith), he said:

There is doubt in veracity of this hadith as Abraham is aware that Allah
never breaks His promise, so how does He make what befalls his father a
disgrace for him after informing him that Allah promised him not to
disgrace him on the Day of Resurrection, assuring him that verily there
is no breach to His promise. Al-Daraqutni found defect in isnad of this
hadith saying: It is reported by Ibrahim ibn Tihman, from Ibn Abi Dhi’b,
from Sa’id al-Maqbari, from his father, from Abu Hurayrah, and he was
answered for this with that al-Bukhari suspended hadith of Ibrahim ibn
Tihman in tafsir neglecting not the controversy regarding it. Any reader
of the two Sahihs should search for the criticism levelled at them in
both respects (isnad and matn), so as to have full knowledge about
riwayah. <span id="_anchor_544"></span>544

### Defect-Finding in Hadith:

Defect-finding is the most accurate and obscure of sciences of hadith,
and can never be undertaken but only by that who owns acute mind, ample
memorization and comprehensive knowledge of asanid, texts, and
conditions of the narrators. The defective hadith, which is called by
men of hadith as al-ma’lul (diseased, ill), is that in which a defect is
found that refuting its veracity though safety from it appearing on the
face. This defect may befall the isnad of the hadith, which is more
common, and may also appear in its text, but when afflicting the isnad
it will vilify the veracity of both the isnad and text.

We suffice with citing one example for defect of text, which is a hadith
ascribed to Anas and reported by Muslim alone, in which he totally
denied recital of Basmalah (In the Name of Allah, the Beneficient the
Merciful) in the beginning of hadith. On seeing most of narrators
holding this view, initiating every report with the phrase ‘Praise be to
God, the Lord of Worlds’ with no mention of Basmalah, the practice
concurringly reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim in their Sahihs, some
traditionists accounted for narration of the said words holding that
whoever narrted it in that way has in

fact related it on basis of its meaning. Out of his statement, that they
used to initiate their reports with ‘praise’ it can be concluded that
they were not using Basmalah. Thus he narrated it according to the way
he understood it but made a mistake, as its meaning being that the surah
with which they used to initiate their speech was al-Fatihah, with no
mention of tasmiyah adding to this several things, of which it is
confirmed that Anas was once questioned about initiation with Basmalah,
when he replied that he never memorized from the Messenger of Allah (S)
any hadith in this regard.

The word defect (illah) may be used for other causes refuting the
hadith, that bringing it out of veracity into weakness state that
hindering from acting according to it, in conformity with the word illah
in origin. Therefore in many of books on defects of hadith we find much
sarcasm through falsity, inattention and bad memorization, and other
kinds of sarcasm. Defects of hadith appear more in traditions reporrted
by trustworthy narrators, when they reporting a hadith with being
unaware of a defect in it, rendering the hadith thus as defective, with
its proof (hujjah) being memorization and comprehension and knowledge,
no more.

Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi is reported to have said: To know the hadith is
an inspiration, and when inquiring any expert knowledgeable in defects
of hadith: Wherefrom you got this?, he will have nothing to argue with.

### Misconstructed Kinds of Traditions:

I previously quoted al-Allamah al-Batliyosi as saying that one of
reasons of disagreement that befell the Ummah being tashif
(misconstruction), which I didn’t discuss there, and herewith I give a
brief account about it:

The musahhaf tradition is that in which dissimilarity occurred through
changing places of dots of one word with keeping the same shape of
writing. The example for this can be the hadith. Whoever fasting month
of Ramadan following it consecutively with six days of (month of)
Shawwal, it

will be recorded for him. Tashif may befall the text as well as the
isnad, such as tashif of some muhaddithun in the name of Ibn Muzahim
when changing it to Ibn Murajim (with ra’ and jim). It can be refered to
the words uttered by al-Batliyosi there.

Ibn al-Salah said:

Recognizing the musahhaf among asanid and texts of traditions is verily
a weighty task that can only be shouldered by well-versed memorizers,
among whom being al-Daraqutni, who left for us a valuable compilation
about it. Also it is reported that Abu Abd Allah Ahmad ibn Hanbal said:
Who is that free from error and tashif!

An example for tashif in the text a reference can be mae to what is
reported by Ibn Luhay’ah from book of Musa ibn Aqabah, on the authority
of Zayd ibn Thabit as saying: The Messenger of Allah ihtajama (retired!)
in the mosque, while the correct word is ihtajara (with ra’) in the
mosque in a booth or hasir (mat) – a chamber in which he used to perform
prayers, but was misconstructed by Ibn Luhay’ah. <span
id="_anchor_545"></span>545

### Kinds of Muharraf Traditions:

Muharraf (perverted-corrupted) tradition is that in which dissimilarity
occurred through changing the shape of the word with keeping the image
of writing intact. The example for this being what happened for some
bedouin Arab, who found in a hadith in some book stating that the
Prophet (S), when performing prayers before him they used to erect
anuzah – meaning harbah (lance), <span id="_anchor_546"></span>546 which
he thought it with silent nun narrating it on the basis of the meaning
he imagined erroneously, saying: When the Prophet was performing prayers
a she-goat was put before him!!

### The Reversed Hadith

The reversed hadith (maqlub) is that in which replacement by taqdim
(bringing forward) and ta’khir (bringing backward) appearing, like the
hadith

of Abu Hurayrah reported by Muslim, about the seven men whom Allah will
overshadow under shadow of His Throne on the Day of Resurrection, which
says: “… and a man gave a charity secretly in a way his right hand knows
not what his left hand spends…” This hadith was reversed by one of the
narrators, as its correct wording was: “… in a way that his left hand
knows not what his right hand spends…” as was stated in Sahih al-Bukhari
and Sahih Muslim through certain ways of transmission. There are
numerous examples for this in their compilations.

533. Yahya ibn Mu'in was one of eminent ulama' of jarh and ta'dil.

534. Refer to vol. I, p. 81.

535. See the story of this hadith in this book.

536. Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi was one of notable ulama' of jarh and
ta'dil.

537. The story of Dhu al-Yadayn is reported in the two Sahihs, that Abu
Hurayrah said: The Prophet led us in prayers of the noon (zuhr) or the
afternoon (asr), when Dhu al-Yadayn said to him: The prayer O Messenge
of Allah, it is diminished!? The Prophet then said to his Companions:
Does he say the truth? They said: Yes. Then he (S) performed two other
rak'ahs, and made two sajdahs.

538. How can he forget? While claiming that the Prophet ordered him to
spread his garment, pouring out in it of his blessings so as to protect
him against forgetting anything. See my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

539. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 257.

540. Tafsir al-Manar, vol. XXIX, pp. 40, 41.

541. Ibid., vol. III, p. 141.

542. Ibid., pp. 101, 102; al-Azhar.

543. Al-Hakim stated this when elucidating the nineteenth kind of
sciences of hadith, in his book Ma'rifat ulum al-hadith. In this
elucidation he said: This sort of sciences is other than the jarh and
ta'dil.

544. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 334.

545. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah, p. 114.

546. One of its meanings is the stick.
