Narrating Hadith Through Denotation:
====================================

  
  

When the idea of narrating the Prophet’s traditions to people struck the
minds of some of the Companions, during the occasions necessitating this
reporting, though numerous years elapsed since hearing them, with
realizing their inability to convey the hadith in its original wording,
as uttered by the Prophet, they (Companions) deemed it lawful for
themselves to narrate according to the denotation. This method was
followed up by those narrators who succeeded them, in a way that the
latter taking from the former whatever he was reporting from the
Messenger implicitly (through its meaning), conveying it then to another
one in accordance with what he could conceive out of it. This being an
undisputable fact, common among all that Wukay‘ uttered his famous
dictum: “Had not the meaning been expansive, people would have
perished.” Sufyan al-Thawri said too: “If I tell you that I am reporting
to you (the hadith) as I heard, you should never believe me! As it is
verily the denotation (that I got).”

In this way the words remained liable to differences and denotations
used to change in accordance to the change of the narrators, among whom
– as said by al-Suyuti – were the non-Arabs and half-blooded and others
who were other than Arabs, having non-pristine impure Arabic accent!

Even further, al-Bukhari, though being the chief of traditionists, with
his book being widely known among the jumhur (Sunnites) who were
considering it to be the most authentic book after the Book of Allah,
used to narrate by way of meaning! And narrating the hadith through
meaning had – certainly – its extreme disadvantage on religion, language
and literature, as will be seen later on.

They have, moreover, allowed themselves to receive the hadith even

when being inflicted with intonation, or mispronunciation, or its syntax
of wording being disordered by bringing words forward and backward,
beside accepting a part of the hadith and discarding the other part. All
these points will be clarified in their due places of this book,
God-willing.

### Hadith of That Who Lied Against Me:

I have exerted much effort in seeking the truth of this hadith, till
after extreme toiling, I found that the word “deliberately” was never
mentioned in the narrations of eminent Companions. Seemingly this word
crept into this hadith through the means of idraj (inclusion), that was
common among men of hadith, so as it be taken by the narrators as a
reliable basis in whatever they report from others through mistake, or
misconception, or error, or misunderstanding. Through this they intended
to ward off the sin of lying and evade any interdiction in narrating, as
that who errs being not sinful. Or that this word (deliberately) was
inserted in the hadith in order that those who were unpurposely
composing and fabricating traditions, could justify their practice, to
support by it their utterances and gain the trust of people. <span
id="_anchor_8"></span>8

### The Compositions:

Throughout its whole history, Islam was never inflicted with a
misfortune more dangerous than those composed traditions, the
fabrication of which was done by both the enemies and lovers of Islam,
for numerous reasons we demonstrated in their places. Beside the
Israeliyyat which were disseminated by the Jews, like Ka’b al-Ahbar and
Wahb ibn Munabbih and others. Moreover we can refer to the Masihiyyat
and other similar fabrications that were foisted into our religion from
the un-Islamic religions and creeds, but believed and accepted by
Muslims without any investigation, or taking notice of them (their being
fabricated).

### Abu Hurayrah:

Abu Hurayrah was the most prolific Companion in reporting (traditions)
from the Messenger of Allah, though not keeping the Prophet’s company
more than a year and nine months, as I verified and recorded in my book
Shaykh al-Mudirah, <span id="_anchor_9"></span>9 with his narrations
containing that abundance of troubles which survived for a long epoch
and will be there for ever. Because of these facts I have dedicated for
him a separate special exposition in which I fulfilled my duty toward
knowledge, seeking only the truth, citing in it whatever be in his
benefit and whatever be against him, fearing no one in demonstrating the
truth, or hesitating in disclosing knowledge, as truth is verily
superior and greater than Abu Hurayrah.

### Collecting and Inscribing the Qur’an:

Before giving detailed information about inscription of hadith, I would
like to pave the way with a short recapitulation on writing down the
Qur’an, in which I stated a complete abridgement of this subject, so as
to make clear for people how our ancestors were seeking full accuracy
and extreme confirmation when collecting the Qur’an. Thus the Qur’an
reached us through a fully authentic chain of narrators (mutawatir),
deeming as an infidel whoever denying anything of it. Had the hadith
been written down in the same way followed for the Qur’an, through the
same means of investigation and accuracy, it would have reached us fully
mutawatir too, devoid of that much difference among Muslims that no one
could – throughout long ages – avoid.

### Inscribing the Hadith:

The other fact I reached through researching, was that the inscription
of hadith was only done in the 2nd century (H), i.e. more than a hundred
years after the Prophet’s demise. It was not the narrators who motivated
to this but the governors who were feeling interdicted of writing the
hadith, for fear of perpetrating that which was forbidden by the Prophet
(S). In the outset

this inscription was incomplete, going then into different and
changeable stages, till coming out in its recent shape, at about the
middle of the 3rd Century and beginning of the 4th Hijrah Century. This
delay in writing down the hadith had its bad effect and great
disadvantage to which we referred in its place of the book.

### Origin of Science of Hadith:

Since ‘ilm al-hadith is relevant to our research, we brought about a
good abstract of it, to be a guidance for anyone intending to recognize
it. We have also stated information about the famous hadith books to
demonstrate their reality, with what limitations attached to them and
the comments said about them. Then we have referred to the issue of jarh
(sarcasm) and ta’dil (modification), moving then to the reliability of
the Companions and the scholars’ controversy regarding it, beside their
positions in respect of knowledge and virtue. Out of all this we
concluded our research to the true school of thought (madhhab), which
discards both extravagance (ifrat) and intemperance (tafrit) concerning
this reliability.

### Scholars’ Stance Toward Hadith:

As previously mentioned, the inscription of hadith has originated only
in the 2nd Century, with its books widely-known among Ahl al-Sunnah – of
al-Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhi and al-Nasa’i having not come
out but only during the 3rd and 4th centuries, containing many
unsuccessively-narrated (ahad) ones entailing only surmise. Due to all
these facts the Ummah ulama have never accepted such traditions with
absolute submission and approval as they did in regard of the Qur’anic
verses, never considering them among successive authentic (mutawatir)
reports that should be indisputably agreed, but rather they have
contradicted most of them with making protracted controversies.

The Mutakallimun and scholars of usul – as they classify the khabar

into mutawatir and ahad, the mutawatir giving the certain knowledge
considered only in the doctrines (‘aqa’id), while the ahad giving only
the conjecture, that can by no means take the place of truth, – have
never found, in their searching, in the hadith books, any khabar to
which the rule of tawatur can be applied so as its indication be
certain. The scholars of hadith also have never offered to do any
research on it since it is beyond the limits of their knowledge, and due
to its means of reaching them being through single transmitters (ahad)
which being only of conjectural inference upon which it can never be
based in case of doctrines. So they have rejected every hadith that was
contradictory to the principles on which they concurred, and the
regulation they laid down, with the rule agreed by all experts: That the
single (ahad) traditions can never be considered reliable in case of
doctrines, however strong and authentic be their chains (asanid) and
multiple be their means of transmission.

While the imitators of schools of thought, who used to call themselves
scholars of fiqh (jurisprudence), were restricted by imitation, that
made them neglect hadith books that appeared after the decease of their
leaders (imams), never giving them their due of research and study to
the extent they did for the books of their shaykhs, or taking them as
proofs in their rules and judgements. When one of them coming across any
tradition – even that feeble one – that going in line with the school of
thought he follows, he would cling to it with rejecting every other one
even if being more authentic than the hadith he took for granted.
Further he might take and accept part of the hadith and discard the
other part! But as regards whatever contradicting his madhhab, he would
discard and never accept it even though being among those traditions
narrated by the company (jama‘ah). <span id="_anchor_10"></span>10 That
which prompted them to so doing was the fact that all the jurisprudents’
evidences were based on conjecture only, without the condition of
tawatur, and every one is free to accept, without any interdiction, all
the traditions of which his heart is quite confident.

When referring to the books of investigators, particularly A‘lam
al-muqi‘in of Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, we verily come across numerous

traditions numbering one hundred or more, that were disapproved by
magnates of fiqh, who never contradicting their creeds for their sake.
When asked about their full adherence to whatever their madhahib
contained with discarding everything other than them, they would say
that: their leaders have accepted only the traditions and verdicts
(fatawa) of the ancestors of which their hearts felt assured and
confident, and that which they considered correct, and was applied
during their lifetimes. Further (they say that) these leaders were, due
to their nearness to the Companions and great Followers (Tabi’un), more
knowledgeable and profound in fiqh than the authors of the Sunnah books
which became so widely known only after the elapse of the early
centuries, that were the best according to a hadith reported by them in
this respect.

Whereas the leading grammarians have never considered the hadith among
the texts they used to quote for confirming their grammatical rules, as
they fully realized the fact that the hadith’s correct text had lost its
earmarks, and whatever reported from the Prophet was not according to
its true wording, with no one certainly knowing the correct form of the
traditions uttered by the Prophet. Therefore it was improper to quote
the hadith (as an evidence), beside the fact that the traditions
disclosed by the Prophet were never accepted by them while they used to
quoting the sayings of the Arab rudes who did not know how to urinate!

8. Like the storyteller, and others.

9. This book has been published twice, and I am preparing it for the
third edition, God-willing.

10. By al-Jama'ah I mean: Ahmad (Ibn Hanbal), the two Shaykhs,
al-Bukhari and Muslim, Abu Dawud, al-Nasa'i and al-Tirmidhi.
