Malik and His Muwatta’:
=======================

He is Malik ibn Anas, belonging to tribe of Dhu Asbah from Himyar. He
was a venerable imam who lived contemporaneously with the best of
Tabi’un. There is no agreement regarding date of his birth between the
year 91 and 93 H. Date of his death was the year 179 H.

Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi says: Leaders of people in their times are four:
Sufyan al-Thawri in Kufah, Malik in Hijaz, al-Awza’i in Sham and Hammad
ibn Zayd in Basrah.

Of Malik’s sayings: This science is religion, so you should know from
whom you take your religion. I have realized (time of) seventy among

those who say: ‘The Messenger of Allah said in these pillars’, <span
id="_anchor_547"></span>547 but I never learnt anything from them. If
the treasury was committed to the charge of anyone of them he would be
trustworthy. He used to exert his opinion in cases of ijtihad and in
respect of men of knowledge attained in his town. <span
id="_anchor_548"></span>548

Al-Shafi’i is reported to have said: Verily the most authentic and
veracious book after the Book of Allah being Muwatta’ of Malik. <span
id="_anchor_549"></span>549 Al-Dihlawi, in Hujjat Allah al-balighah,
writes: The first class of hadith books can be realized through reading
three books: al-Muwatta’ and Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim. And the
second class were books that could not reach the position of al-Muwatta’
and two Sahihs, but they come after them in order, like Sunan of Abu
Dawud and al-Tirmidhi and al-Nasa’i. The third group included Musnads
and compilations written before those of al-Bukhari and Muslim, and
during their time and in the period following them, containing the
sahih, hasan, da’if, well-known, strange, odd, disapproved, wrong and
correct, and the established and reversed traditions. The traditionists
were depending mainly upon the second class books.

In Tanwir al-hawalik al-Suyuti quoted al-Qadi Abu Bark ibn al-Arabi as
saying: Al-Muwatta’ is the first source, and Sahih al-Bukhari is the
second source … and Malik narrated a hundred thousand traditions of
which he selected ten thousand in al-Muwatta’, keeping then on referring
them to the Book (Qur’an) and Sunnah (practical Sunnah) till sorting out
only five hundred traditions (i.e. the confirmed [musnad] hadith). <span
id="_anchor_550"></span>550 In another narration by Ibn al-Habbab: “…
and he kept on referring them to the Book and Sunnah and testing them
with old traditions and akhbar till they were sifted to only five
hundred traditions.

In al-Dibaj al-mudhahhab fi ma’rifat a’yan al-madhhab (i.e. al-Maliki),
Ibn Farhun writes: Atiq al-Zubaydi said: Malik compiled al-Muwatta’ with
about ten thousand traditions. He every year kept on reviewing it and
dropping from it till only the extant traditions remained of it, and had
very few of them remained he would have dropped it as a whole. <span
id="_anchor_551"></span>551

In Sharh al-Muwatta’ al-Zarqani writes: He (Malik) year to year kept

on extracting and refining them to the extent he found more convenient
for Muslims and more typical in religion. <span
id="_anchor_552"></span>552

Ibn al-Habbab states that Malik narrated a hundred thousand traditions
recording ten thousand from among them in al-Muwatta’, which he kept on
subjecting them to the Book and Sunnah, and testing them with old
traditions and akhbar till clearing them into five hundred traditions.

Al-Kia al-Harras says: Malik’s Muwatta’ contained first nine thousand
traditions, which he kept on clearing and selecting till they became
only five hundred ones, (p.11 of the introduction to Sharh al-Zarqani
ala Muwatta’ Malik).

Al-Abhari Abu Bakr says: The total number of traditions recorded in
Malik’s Muwatta’, reported from the Prophet (S) and the Companions and
Followers were 1720 traditions, of which 600 were musnad, 222 mursal,
613 mawquf and 285 utterances of the Followers. Al-Suyuti in his
al-Taqrib reporting Ibn Hazm as saying: When enumerating the traditions
stated in al-Muwatta’ and in the hadith of Sufyan ibn Uyaynah, in every
one of them 500 plus musnad, 300 mursal and seventy plus traditions, can
be found, acting according to which was forsaken by Malik himself.

Some ulama’ said: Malik was the first to compile and record sahih
traditions, but he did not confine himself to them alone, but inserted
also the mursal, munqati’ and balaghat (reports). Among his reports
there were uncommon traditions, as mentioned by al-Hafiz Ibn Abd
al-Barr.

### Divergence of His Narrations:

From Malik incongruous narrations were reported that differ in order of
chapters, and in number till reaching twenty different copies, and they
amounted to thirty according to other traditionists. <span
id="_anchor_553"></span>553

Al-Shaykh Abd al-Aziz al-Dihlawi (d. 1139 H), in his book Bustan
al-muhaddithin, writes: The copies of al-Muwatta’ that are extant
nowadays in the Arab countries are numerous, of which sixteen copies
were referred to,

each one reported from a certain narrator.

Abu al-Qasim ibn Muhammad ibn Husayn al-Shafi’i says: The copies of
Muwatta’ known to be compiled by Malik are eleven, with their denotation
being identical and only four of which are commonly referred to, being:
Muwatta’ Yahya ibn Yahya, Muwatta’ Ibn Bakr, Muwatta’ Abi Mus’ab and
Muwatta’ Ibn Wahb, with diminishing of reference to other copies.

Among the narrations there is great incongruity including bringing
forward and backward, addition and omission, the greatest and most ample
of which being the additions of the narration of Abu Mus’ab. <span
id="_anchor_554"></span>554 Ibn Hazm said: In Abu Mus’ab’s narration
there is addition exceeding all other Muwatta’s with about one hundred
traditions.

Al-Suyuti says: In the narration of Muhammad ibn al-Hasan there are
several traditions exceeding other narrations of Muwatta’.

Dr. Ahmad Amin has explained the reason of this divergence saying:
“Malik used to keep on compiling a copy of his book, but rather he was
perpetually changing and modifying in it, and he used to review and
revise the traditions, with eliminating whatever could not be confirmed.
Those who heard al-Muwatta’ had in fact heard it in different times,
with divergence in wording in every copy. Of these copies extant is the
copy narrated by Yahya ibn al-Laythi, which was exposed by al-Zarqani,
and the one narrated by Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani, companion of
Abu Hanifah, which contained many things that were not found in the copy
of Yahya, as he used to mix what he narrated from Malik with his
opinions, saying “Often: Muhammad said.” <span
id="_anchor_555"></span>555

### Cause and Time of Its Compilation: <span id="_anchor_556"></span>556

Al-Muwatta’ was compiled during the last days of the reign of al-Mansur,
in the year 148H. The reason for this — as reported by al-Shafi’i — was
that Abu Ja’far al-Mansur sent after Malik on his coming to al-Madinah,

saying to him: Disagreement found way among people of Iraq, so you are
asked to compile a book upon which you gather and unite them, hence he
compiled al-Muwatta’. In another narration, he said to him also: In it
(book) you should avoid oddities of Ibn Abbas, intensities of Ibn Umar
and permissions of Ibn Mas’ud. Malik said to him: O Amir al-Mu’minin it
is not for us to compel people to follow and adhere to utterance of one
man liable to err and be correct. And, as stated before, al-Mansur was
so much concerned with hadith and studying it. Ibn Abd al-Barr reported
that the first who compiled a book in al-Madinah on the basis of the
meaning of al-Muwatta’ — as unanimously concurred by men of al-Madinah —
was Abd al-Aziz ibn Abd Allah ibn Salamah al-Majshun (d. 164 H.), which
was reviewed by Malik before compiling his Muwatta’.

### Criticism of Ibn Mu’in to Malik:

Ibn Mu’in said: Malik was not a man of hadith but a man of opinion.
Al-Layth ibn Sa’d said: I have counted seventy issues for Malik, all of
which being contradictory to the Messenger'’ Sunnah.

Malik admitted this fact, and al-Daraqutni compiled a booklet containing
the traditions recorded by Malik in al-Muwatta’ and other books, that
were contradictory (to the Messenger’s Sunnah). This booklet is kept at
al-Zahiriyyah Library in Damascus.

  
  
  

547. Pillars of the mosque.

548. His town is al-Madinah (Yathrib).

549. There are other narrations for this hadith, like: 'No book is there
on earth, after the Book of Allah, more authentic than the book of
Malik'. And: 'I never know a book more veracious in knowledge than that
of Malik'. Also: 'No book is ever there nearer to the Qur'an than the
book of Malik'. And again: 'No book, other than the Qur'an, is there
more beneficial than al-Muwatta'. Some traditionists used to call
al-Muwatta' with the name al-Sahih (Sharh al-Zarqani 'ala al-Muwatta',
vol. I, p. 9).

550. The musnad (marfu') is a hadith reported by a connected chain of
Companions (going back to the Prophet). And the mursal is that hadith of
whose sanad (chain of transmitters) the name of a Companion is dropped,
and is reported by a Follower directly from the Messenger of Allah.
While the mawquf is that saying or act or alike which is ascribed to the
Companion, whether be connected or interrupted. And the marfu' is that
hadith in which the Companion relates from the Messenger of Allah.

551. See p. 25 of al-Dibaj.

552. Sharh al-Zarqani, vol. I, p. 11.

553. The like of this is cited by al-Zarqani in his Sharh, vol. I, p. 7.

554. Abu al-Mus'ab al-Zuhri was the last among those who reported
al-Muwatta' from Malik, due to his youth. He lived after Malik for 63
years, and his Muwatta' was the most perfect among its counterparts
since it contained 590 traditions (Tawjih al-nazar, p. 17).

555. Munji al-Islam, vol. II, p. 215.

556. Ibn Abd al-Barr, in his book al-Intiqa, (p. 41) reported that
Muhammad ibn Sa'd said: I heard Malik ibn Anas say: When Abu Ja'far
al-Mansur made pilgrimage (to Makkah), he summoned me and asked: I am
determined to order to have your book (al-Muwatta') copied into many
copies and sent to all towns of Muslims, and to command all people to
act according to them, and not to follow other than them! As I have seen
the origin of knowledge to be in narration of people of al-Madinah. In
another narration, al-Mansur asked him (Malik) to compile a book for the
people in which restraints of Ibn Umar, permissions of Ibn Abbas and
oddities of Ibn Mas'ud can be evaded.
