Al-bukhari and His Book
=======================

  
  
  

Full name of al-Bukhari is Abu Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Isma’il al-Bukhari
al-Farsi. He was born in Bukhara in 194H. He made trips to several
countries, seeking for hadith, starting to compile chapters of his book
in the Holy Sanctuary. It took him sixteen years to compile and classify
it in Basrah and other places till completing it in Bukhara. He died in
Khartang near Samarqand in 256 H.

In Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, <span id="_anchor_557"></span>557 Ibn Hajar
reported that Abu Ali al-

Ghassani quoted al-Bukhari as saying: I brought out al-Sahih from among
six hundred traditions.

Al-Isma’ili also quoted him as saying: I haven’t brought out in this
book but only the sahih <span id="_anchor_558"></span>558 traditions,
and the sahih ones that I haven’t cited being more. <span
id="_anchor_559"></span>559 He also said: I know by heart a hundred
thousand sahih traditions, and two hundred thousand non-sahih
traditions. <span id="_anchor_560"></span>560 It is not to be shocked at
the presence of these hundreds of thousands of traditions during the
time of al-Bukhari, as it is reported from al-Imam Ahmad that he said:
The number of correct traditions amounted to seven hundred thousand plus
ones ... referring by this to Abu Zar\`ah, who learnt by heart seven
hundred thousand traditions…

Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Razi says: Abu Zar'ah could learn by heart
seven hundred traditions, and one hundred and forty thousand ones
through their tafsir … (Tawjih al-nazar’, p. 4).

### Reason Behind Compilation of al-Bukhari’s Book:

Ibn Hajar in his Muqaddimah says: The motive that incited resolution of
al-Bukhari to collect the sahih traditions, and made him determined to
do so, was what he heard from his instructor chief of hadith and fiqh
Ishaq ibn Ibrahim al-Hanzali, known with the name of Ibn Rahawayh. Abu
Abd Allah Muhammad ibn Isma’il al-Bukhari says: We were with Ibn
Rahawayh who said: Would it be better if you compile an abridged book
containing the sahih traditions of the Messenger of Allah? Being
impressed by this statement, I embarked on compiling the comprehensive
Sahih in which including six hundred thousand traditions. <span
id="_anchor_561"></span>561

### Al-Bukhari Narrating Through Meaning:

In Ta’rikh Baghdad, al-Khatib al-Baghdadi reported from al-Bukhari as
saying: There might be a hadith I heard in Basrah writing it in the
Sham,

and there might be a hadith I heard in the Sham writing it in Egypt!
Thereat it was said to him: O Abu Abd Allah, (did you write it)
completely? when he kept silent. <span id="_anchor_562"></span>562

Uhaydar ibn Abi Ja’far, governor of Bukhara, is reported to have said:
Muhammad ibn Isma’il once upon a day said to me: There might be a hadith
I heard in Basrah writing it in the Sham, and there might be a hadith I
heard in the Sham writing it in Egypt! Thereat I said to him: O Abu Abd
Allah, (did you write it) completely? when he kept silent. <span
id="_anchor_563"></span>563

Muhammad ibn al-Azhar al-Sijistani said: One day I attended a meeting in
the house of Sulayman ibn Harb, with presence of al-Bukhari who was only
hearing but not writing anything. When one of the attendants was asked:
Why doesn’t he write? He said: When he (al-Bukhari) returns to Bukhara
he will write down out of his memory. <span id="_anchor_564"></span>564

Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani says: What is unusual about al-Bukhari being that
he used to report the hadith completely with one isnad and two
(different) wordings. <span id="_anchor_565"></span>565

### Death of al-Bukhari Before Revising His Book:

It is reported that al-Bukhari died before making a clean copy of his
book. Ibn Hajar, in Muqaddimat al-Fath reports that Abu Ishaq Ibrahim
ibn Ahmad al-Mustamli said: When copying al-Bukhari’s book from its
original manuscript that was with his companion Muhammad ibn Yusuf
al-Farbari, I found in it incomplete things and other things that were
not revised, among which explanations after which nothing was recorded,
and traditions that were not explained. So I added some of these to some
of those ones.

Abu al-Walid al-Baji says: What proving the veracity of this statement
the narrations of Abu Ishaq al-Mustamli, Abu Muhammad al-Sarakhsi, Abu
al-Haytham al-Kashmihi and Abu Zayd al-Maruzi, with some differences in
order and placing of words though they were copied from one

origin! That was due to the fact that every one of them used to copy as
much as he could from patchments and scapula, wherever it be, from which
he would add to what he collected before. From this it can be concluded
that two or more expositions are found connected to each other with no
traditions in between them. <span id="_anchor_566"></span>566

In Fath al-Bari (Vol. VII) <span id="_anchor_567"></span>567 he (Ibn
Hajar) writes: Throughout the copies of al-Bukhari I have never come
across any biography for Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf, or Sa’d ibn Zayd who
were among the ten (promised with paradise) – though dedicating a
special biography for Sa’id ibn Zayd in the beginning of al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah. I suppose this to be done freely by reporters of
al-Bukhari’s book, since he – as previously referred to – has left the
book in a draft-like form, so in the names cited by him here neither
preferability nor priority nor old age, the aspects of priority in
ranking are considered. When none of these considerations being observed
by him, it indicated that he had written each biography separately, the
fact resulting in the narrators annexing some of them to each other at
random.

Al-Bukhari was the first to discern between the sahih tradition – in his
view – and non-sahih one, so he selected for his book those traditions
which he thought to be sahih (correct). Because tadwin (writing down)
before his era was done – as stated earlier – through gathering the
correct and incorrect traditions without any discernment, as this can be
clearly seen in Musnad Ahmad and other Musnads, or by adding some things
to the Messenger’s traditions and the Companions’ utterances and
Followers’ verdicts, as this can be found in Malik’s Muwatta’. For all
this, al-Bukhari’s book (Sahih) was thought to be the first book
compiled that containing sahih traditions. The traditionsts criticized
him in a hundred and ten traditions, of which the reporting of
thirty-two ones was concurringly agreed by Muslim, and seventy-eight
ones were reported by him alone. <span id="_anchor_568"></span>568

Those for whom al-Bukhari not Muslim has reported alone were four
hundred thirty plus men, among whom eighty ones <span
id="_anchor_569"></span>569 charged him with weakness. Whereas the
number of traditionists for whom Muslim alone

reported amounted to 620 men, among whom 160 ones were telling of
presence of weakness. And the number of traditions for which they were
both criticized amounted to two hundred and ten ones, of which eighty
ones were independently related by al-Bukhari, with the rest being
related by Muslim. <span id="_anchor_570"></span>570

About the traditions criticized by al-Daraqutni, Ibn Hajar is reported
to have said: There is controversy regarding the veracity of these
traditions, and they were not approved or accepted as in the case of the
most of the book.

### Sahih al-Bukhari Containing Many Dubieties:

After reviewing the traditions narrated by al-Bukhari regarding which
doubts were raised, al-Sayyid Muhammad Rashid Rida said: When reading
what is said by al-Hafiz (Ibn Hajar) concerning them, you will come to
realize them to be all on skill of art… <span
id="_anchor_571"></span>571 but when reading the exposition itself (Fath
al-Bari) we will see many ambiguities in the meanings of many
traditions, or inconsistency between them, with an attempt to bring
together the contrarieties and solving the ambiguities, whichever
satisfying the tastes. <span id="_anchor_572"></span>572

Dr. Ahmad Amin — after stating number of traditions for which criticism
was levelled at al-Bukhari as mentioned before – reports the following:
<span id="_anchor_573"></span>573

“Some of the men for whom al-Bukhari reported were untrustworthy, and
those among rijal of al-Bukhari labelled with weakness numbered eighty
ones. In fact this being the biggest problem, as it is impossible to
recognize the hidden realities about the rijal. It is true that it is
easy to judge whoever committed a lapse, but what to do in respect of
what is concealed? Further the judgements of people regarding the rijal
differ greatly, as someone may deem some man to be trustworthy and
another one deeming him to be untrustworthy, the practice affected by
innumerable psychological impulses. Also there used to be disagreement
among the traditionists themselves in regard of rules of tajrih
(sarcasm) and ta’dil (commutation), as some of them would reject the
hadith of the innovator outright, whether being Kharijite or

Mu’tazili. And some of them would accept his narration of the traditions
that had no connection with his innovation. Some others would say: If he
be inviting to them (traditions), his narration would be disapproved,
but if he be not calling to them, it would be approved. Some of the
traditionists would be so strict that he would abstain from narrating
the traditions of those having connection with the governors and being
attached to the worldly lusts, whatever be the level of their
earnestness and exactitude, while some others would see no harm in this
as long as he (narrator) be reliable and truthful. Some others would be
stiff to the extent that he would reproach the narrator for a jest he
made, like that who reported as some of the Basran jokers used to spread
purses (of money) on the road and hide themselves… and when the
pedestrian stoops for picking them they would shout at him, when he
would be ashamed and leave it, and they would laugh at him. This led one
of the traditionists to issue a legal verdict (fatwa) to fill a purse
with pieces of glass, so that on their shouting at him he would pick the
money purse and leave the glass purse as a retaliation and chastisement
to them for their practice. For this fatwa, some of the traditionists
sarcasted him, while others approved of him as finding no objection to
it, beside other reasons the explanation of which is out of scope here.

Because of this fact, there appeared among them intense disagreement and
dispute in respect of judging the rijal, which entailed their differing
about veracity of their narration and taking hadith from them. The most
vivid example for this being Ikrimah, the mawla of Ibn Abbas, who spread
hadith and tafsir everywhere. He was charged by some (traditionists)
with falsity, and sharing the opinion of the Khawarij, and receiving the
gifts of emirs and rulers, with some of them reporting plenty of his
lies and fabrications. They reported that Sa’id ibn al-Musayyab said to
his master Burd: Don’t tell me lies as Ikrimah did to Ibn Abbas. <span
id="_anchor_574"></span>574 For him Sa’id ibn al-Musayyab reported a
large number of fabricated traditions. Al-Qasim said: Ikrimah is a liar,
who relates a hadith at noon, telling a contradictory one in the
evening. Ibn Sa’d says: “Ikrimah was a profoundly learned man, for whom
people were

speaking, with no one daring to dispute with his hadith.” However, there
are others who authenticate and deem him as reliable, for instance Ibn
Jarir al-Tabari has full confidence in him, filling his Tafsir and
Ta’rikh with his sayings and narrations. Also he was authenticated by
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Ishaq ibn Rahawayh and Yahya ibn Mu’in and other
notable traditionists.

For all this, compilers of al-Sahih adopted toward him (Ikrimah),
different attitudes, as al-Bukhari deemed him to be honest, citing many
of his narrations in his Sahih, while Muslim gave preponderance to his
untrustworthiness, reporting from him only one hadith on hajj, unrelying
on him alone in it but bringing his name for supporting the chain of the
hadith of Sa’id ibn Jubayr on the same subject.

Hence it seems difficult to judge those whose conditions being unknown,
and no compiler of any hadith book was immune against this due to
disagreement among people in judging the rijal (men of hadith).

### Al-Bukhari’s Traditions and Their Deniers:

Al-Sayyid Rashid Rida, in a reply to a question put forth to him about
al-Bukhari’s Sahih, said: Undoubtedly, in al-Bukhari’s Sahih there are
traditions that being in total the best source for producing the hadith
and pursuing the sahih through all the traditions recorded in hadith
books and after it in order comes Sahih Muslim. Also, there is no doubt
that in other than them among Sunnah references there can be found more
correct traditions, the fact confirmed by rejection of al-Bukhari and
others to hundreds of thousands of traditions that used to be reported,
for the sake of selecting the confirmed correct traditions. <span
id="_anchor_575"></span>575 It is not easy for anyone to prove the claim
about existence of fabricated traditions among those of al-Bukhari that
were reported on the basis of meaning, through which they could
recognize whatever foisted in ilm al-riwayah, but his book is not devoid
of few suspected traditions on which can be applied the sign of
fabrication. As an example for this we can refer to the hadith on the
Prophet’s being affected

by witchcraft of some men, which was disapproved by some ulama like
al-Imam al-Jassas, one of the earlier exegetes, and al-Imam Muhammad
Abduh among the latter ulama, as it (hadith) contradicts the Qur’anic
verse: “… when say the unjust (unto the believers): “Ye follow none but
a man bewitched. Behold thou (O Our Apostle Muhammad!) what similitudes
they coin for thee! for they have gone (so far) astray (that) they
cannot find the way (to truth). (17: 47, 48)

Further al-Bukhari’s book contained traditions on habits and instincts
that can never be among principles or branches of religion. When
pondering upon all these and those claims, it would be obvious for all
that it is neither of principles of faith nor of cornerstones of Islam
that the Muslim should believe in every hadith reported by al-Bukhari,
whatever its theme be. Rather, being aware of or accepting what Sahih
al-Bukhari contained was not stipulated as a contition to admit the
Islam or its detailed knowledge of anyone. It is known also that it is
not permissible for any Muslim to disapprove any of these traditions
after knowing of it but only through a proof establishing its
non-veracity in text or sanad. As the ulama’ who refuted the veracity of
some of these traditions were never to do so unless having strong
evidences, some of which might have been correct and some wrong;
nevertheless none of them was considered as a slanderer of Islam. <span
id="_anchor_576"></span>576 Further Allah has never imposed upon any
Muslim to read Sahih al-Bukhari and believe in whatever reported in it,
even if not considering it to be correct or believing in its being
contradictory to the principles of Islam.

Praise be to Allah!! Millions of Hanafi Muslims hold that raising the
hands in time of ruku’ (kneeling) and rising up after it is legally
reprehensible (makruh). This hadith was reported by al-Bukhari in his
Sahih and other places on the authority of tens of Companions through a
large number of asanid, with no one blaming or objecting them for their
leader’s not deeming it correct since he had not gone over al-Bukhari’s
asanid on it, the veracity of which was ascertained by anyone of his
school-mate ulama’ after reading them. Then some Muslim man <span
id="_anchor_577"></span>577 among the righteous Muslims, in knowledge,

acts, defending of Islam and inviting to it, may be charged with impiety
through a proof or suspicion against the veracity of a hadith reported
by al-Bukhari from some unknown man whose name indicating his not having
any relation to Islam, that was Abd ibn Hunayn, the theme of whose text
was neither of the doctrines, nor rituals nor rules of Islam, nor being
adopted by Muslims in practice. Rather, all the followers of the schools
(madhahib) of imitators were but to forsake acting according to what
al-Bukhari and Muslim deemed correct of the traditions on legislation
that were reported on the authority of eminent leaders of narrators,
either for ijtihadi causes or mere imitation. Al-Muhaqqiq Ibn al-Qayyim,
in his book A\`lam al-muqi\`in, has cited more than a hundred evidences
testifying this fact, and about this man charged with impiety. Despite
all these facts we hold that Sahih al-Bukhari being truly the most
authentic boof after Book of Allah, but it and its narrators can never
be considered immune against error … and not every doubtful in any of
its narrations is to be deemed disbeliever! How easy is charging with
impiety on the part of imitators of utterances of the latter
(traditionists), and Allah is sufficient for us and He is the best
Guarantor. <span id="_anchor_578"></span>578

Ibn al-Jawzi’s al-Intisar contained many traditions taken from the two
Sahihs, that were not adopted by the Shafi’ites when they preponderated
some contradictory ones, and so is the case with the rest of schools of
thought.

### Al-Bukhari and People of Sham:

Al-Dhahabi, on the authority of Abu Amr Hamdan, reported: I asked Ibn
Uqdah, from whom I should learn, al-Bukhari or Muslim? He replied:
Muhammad (i.e. al-Bukhari) was a knowledgeable man (‘alim), and Muslim
was an ‘alim. Hamdan says: I repeated this question several times, when
he said: Muhammad (al-Bukhari) may err in regard of people of Sham since
he took and looked into their books, so he might refer to some man with
his kunyah (nickname) in some place, while referring to him in another
place with

his name, thinking them to belong to two different men. Whereas Muslim
would so rarely commit any mistake in regard of causes (‘ilal), because
he used to write the masanid not the maqati’ or marasil. <span
id="_anchor_579"></span>579

### Al-Bukhari and Infliction of Invention of the Qur’an:

Al-Hakim Abu Abd Allah, in his Ta’rikh, writes: When al-Bukhari arrived
in Nisabur in 250 H., people entered on him to take and hear
(traditions) from him. Once upon a day a man inquired from him about the
“pronunciation in the Qur’an”, when he said: Our acts are invented
(makhluqah), and our words are (derived) from our acts. This statement
caused disagreement among people, and so soon Muhammad ibn Yahya
al-Dhahali embarked on instigating people against him saying: Whoever
claiming so is a heretic (mubtadi’), with whom no one should sit or talk
to! And whoever betakes himself to al-Bukhari after that, should be
accused with the same charge, as no one would attend his meeting
(majlis) but only that following his school! Thereat people desisted
from meeting and frequenting to al-Bukhari, with the exception of Muslim
ibn al-Hajjaj and Ahmad ibn Salamah. Then al-Dhuhali said: Whoever
believes in lafz, is not permitted to attend our meeting! On hearing
this, Muslim took his cloak over his turban and departed the place,
asking to collect whatever he has written about him. Thereat al-Bukhari
became fearful and felt the danger threatening him, so he departed
Nisabur to another city. <span id="_anchor_580"></span>580

### Al-Bukhari’s Narrations Differ in Number:

Number of al-Bukhari’s traditions according to narration of al-Firayri
exceeded those ones according to narration of Ibrahim ibn Ma’qil
al-Nasafi with two hundred while their number by al-Nasafi exceeded that
of Hammad ibn Shakir al-Nasafi with a hundred ones as reported by
al-Iraqi. <span id="_anchor_581"></span>581

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar, in Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, reported that the

number of the connected unrepeated texts cited in al-Bukhari (Sahih) was
2602, and one of the suspended marfu’ (successive) ones was 159 ones,
making together 2761 traditions. In Sharh al-Bukhari he said that the
number of the written ones reached to 2513. <span
id="_anchor_582"></span>582

  
  
  

557. Fath al-Bari, p. 4.

558. That is in his view, and as he thinks that he reported them in the
way intended by them.

559. Huda al-sari fi Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, p. 4.

560. Ibid., vol. II, p. 201.

561. Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, p. 4.

562. Ta'rikh Baghdad, vol. II, p. 11.

563. Huda al-sari, vol. II, p. 201.

564. Ibid., p. 194.

565. Fath al-Bari, vol. I, p. 186.

566. Ibid., vol. I, p. 5.

567. Ibid., vol. VII, p. 74.

568. Ibid., vol. II, p. 81.

569. That was the number of rijal against whom people spoke ill, and
from whom al-Bukhari, not Muslim, has reported. In regard of the rijal
of al-Bukhari in whose authenticity there was doubt, Ibn Hajar has
dedicated a separate chapter in his Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, in which
"he cited their names, and story of that vilification, with searching
for its causes and knowing its factors," as thought by him. These names
reached to about four hundred ones covering 65 pages from p. 113 up to
176, to some of which I will refer under bab of their disagreement about
jarh and ta'dil. (Muqaddimat Fath al-Bari, p. 7 and vol. II, p. 111;
Duha al-Islam, vol. II, p. 119.

570. Ibid., vol. I, pp. 7, 8.

571. That is the art of idiom of hadith, i.e. in view of the sanad. And
in regard of the texts of al-Bukhari's traditions, he has not vilified
them. But if a free-thinking faqih scholar devoted his time to these
traditions he would find many of them deserving criticism.

572. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXIX, p. 41.

573. Duha al-Islam, vol. II, pp. 117, 118.

574. It is also reported from Ibn Umar that he said to his mawla
(bondman) Nafi': Don't lie to me as Ikrimah lied to Ibn Abbas. Ibn
Taymiyyah, in Muqaddimat usul al-tafsir, said: A man inquired Sa'id ibn
al-Musayyab about some verses of the Qur'an, when he said to him: Never
question me about the Qur'an, but ask me about that who claims to know
everything! meaning by that Ikrimah (p. 39).

575. That is, in their view, not they be correct and confirmed to be
uttered by the Prophet (S).

576. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXIX, pp. 104, 105.

577. This Muslim man is Dr. Muhammad Tawfiq Sidqi, who doubted the
hadith on the flies, as a result of which he was charged with impiety by
shaykhs of al-Azhar as usual.

578. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXIX, p. 51.

579. Al-Maqdisi, Shurut al-A'immah al-sittah, p. 5.

580. Huda al-sari, vol. II, pp. 203, 204.

581. Shurut al-A'immah al-Khamsah, p. 58.

582. See vol. I, p. 70.
