Muslim and His Book
===================

  
  
  

His name is Abu al-Husayn Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Nisaburi.
He was born in Nisabur in the year 204 H, and dead in it in 268 H. He
has reviewed the Sihah but not interferred in istinbat (deriving of
rules) and alike matters. He excelled al-Bukhari in collecting the turuq
(means of transmission) and good arrangement. Besides, his book is
easily availed of, as he dedicated for every hadith a proper place in
which he stated the means he approved of, citing its numerous asanid and
various wordings. Also he – contrary to al-Bukhari – was not narrating
on the basis of meaning, nor commingling with the traditions any words
of the Companions or their followers. And – as Ibn Hajar said in
Muqaddimat al-Fath – was characterized with compiling his book in his
hometown with existence of its sources in the lifetime of many of chiefs
(mashayikh) of hadith, the reason why he was so careful in choosing the
words and accurate in the context of hadith. Further he has never
followed the same method of al-Bukhari in deducing the rules, on the
basis of which he was to classify the traditions, the fact entailing
dividing of the hadith according to its chapters (babs), but he brought
together all the turuq in one place, abstaining from reporting the
mawquf traditions, not referring to them but very rarely, out of
imitation not determination. <span id="_anchor_583"></span>583

It is reported that he compiled his Musnad out of three hundred thousand
commonly heard traditions, while the number of traditions constituting
his book was four thousand except the repeated ones.

In Sharh Muslim al-Nawawi writes: The Muslim’s statement: “Whatever I
stated here – in his book – is not necessarily correct, but I put

here whatever attained the unanimous agreement of all,” is quite
dubious, as he cited in it many traditions regarding the veracity of
which there was much disagreement since they were taken from unreliable
narrators whose traditions were not unanimously accepted. And so also
said Ibn al-Salah.

Ibn Taymiyyah, in his interpretation of Surat al-Tawhid, says: The
hadith reported by Muslim about creation of earth (turbah) on Saturday
<span id="_anchor_584"></span>584 is a defective hadith, traduced by
leaders of hadith like al-Bukhari and others holding that it was taken
from Ka’b al-Ahbar. Muslim has reported similar traditions that were
known to be incorrect, like the saying of Abu Sufyan when embracing
Islam (?): I want to marry you Umm Habibah (i.e. his daughter); while
all people know that the Prophet got married to her before Abu Sufyan’s
embracing Islam. Also like the hadith on salat al-kusuf (eclipse
prayers), in which he claimed that the Prophet performed it with three
kneelings (ruku’), while the right thing was that he had performed it
only once with two ruku’s. <span id="_anchor_585"></span>585

Muslim’s traditions that were suspected and criticized amounted to 132
ones, and number of his rijal (transmitters of his traditions) reached
to 110 ones.

Abu Zar’ah al-Razi <span id="_anchor_586"></span>586 – whose name is
cited in Sahih Muslim – says: These are people who intended to make
early progress, so they made something with which they wanted to trade,
inventing that which couldn’t occur to the mind so as to precede others
in attaining undue high rank.

One day some man brought him Sahih Muslim, into which he looked, seeing
a hadith reported from Asbat ibn Nasr. Then he found in it the name of
Qutn ibn Naseer, when he said: This one is worse than the former! Qutn
ibn Naseer has reported traditions with a chain going back to Anas while
they were ascribed to Thabit. Then he looked and said: It is reported
from Ahmad ibn ‘Isa al-Misri in the book of Sahih! saying then: Does he
(Muslim) report from such people and leave Muhammad ibn Ajlan and his
likes, allowing the heretics to daresay regarding any hadith with which
they were argued: This is not taken from the Sahih. Abu Zar’ah used to
censure the composition of this

book.

Muslim has reported from Abu al-Zubayr, from Jabir many traditions that
were known to be weak. In his regard the traditionists said: Abu
al-Zubayr Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Tadrus al-Makki used to defraud in
Jabir’s hadith, reporting from Jabir and Ibn Umar during the Farewell
Pilgrimage (Hijjat al-Wada’) a hadith with two different narrations,
about which Ibn Hazm said: One of them is undoubtedly false, and he
related then the hadith “Allah created the soil on Saturday.

The traditionists also said: When Muslim compiled his Sahih he laid it
before Abu Zar’ah al-Razi, who disapproved it and turned enraged saying:
And you have called it al-Sahih! making it a ladder for men of heresies
and others, in a way that when any opponent relating a hadith (to argue
with) they would say: This can never be in Sahih Muslim.

On his arrival to the Town of Ray, Muslim went to Abu Abd Allah Muhammad
ibn Muslim ibn Warah, who treated him rudely and reproached him for his
book, reiterating the same words of Abu Zar’ah about him. Thereat Muslim
apologized to him saying: I have brought out this book and said it is
Sahih, never claiming that all the traditions that I did not cite in
this book being weak! But I brought it out from the sahih traditions so
as to be kept altogether with whoever reporting them from me, doubting
not their veracity … and I never claimed other traditions to be weak. He
then accepted his excuse and related hadith to him briefly. <span
id="_anchor_587"></span>587

Muslim has reported traditions of people the hadith of whom al-Bukhari
abstained from reporting due to a suspicion he had regarding them, <span
id="_anchor_588"></span>588 since leaders of transmission differ in most
of them because of the divergence in their schools and conditions and
use of terms. There may be found a narrator who was considered
trustworthy by Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi, but unreliable by Yahya ibn
Sa’id al-Qattan and vice versa, who were both two imams constituting
axis of criticism in naql, and from whom most of narrators used to take
hadith. <span id="_anchor_589"></span>589

There was so much talk on criticism against al-Bukhari and Muslim,

but I suffice with citing the following.

Views Held about al-Bukhari and Muslim
--------------------------------------

Al-Hafiz Zayn al-Din al-Iraqi, in exposition of his Alfiyyah fi ulum
al-hadith, when stating degrees of correct hadith, reported that
Muhammad ibn Tahir said in his book of Shurut al-A’immah: al-Bukhari and
Muslim stipulate to report the hadith that unanimous agreement is there
regarding reliability of its narrators reaching to a well-known
companion. In exposition of his Alfiyyah, al-Iraqi writes: What is
uttered by Ibn Tahir is not good as al-Nasa’i has deemed weak some of
those from whom the two Shaykhs, or one of them, reported. Al-Badr
al-Ayni said: In the Sahih we can find the earlier reporters that were
defamed by some of the earlier traditionists.

In al-Ilm al-shamikh, al-Muqbili writes: Among rijal in the two Sahihs
some are deemed weak and criticized severely by many leaders of hadith,
though they needed not but to act according to their ijtihad.

Ibn al-Salah says: al-Bukhari used for argument some people who were
already defamed by others, like Ikrimah, the mawla of Ibn Abbas, Isma’il
ibn Abi Awis, Asim ibn Ali and Amr ibn Marzuq and others. While Muslim
used Suwayd ibn Sa’id and others who were known of being unreliable and
suspected position, and so did Abu Dawud. <span
id="_anchor_590"></span>590

Al-Shaykh Ahmad Muhammad Shakir (may God’s mercy be upon him), in his
Sharh Alfiyyat al-Suyuti, writes: In the two Sahihs many traditions are
found that were reported by some of the imposters. <span
id="_anchor_591"></span>591 And as is known, tadlis (fraud) <span
id="_anchor_592"></span>592 was considered one of reasons of jarh
(sarcasm). The same fact is referred to in the book Sharh Shurut
al-A‘ìmmah al-Khamsah of al-Shaykh Muhammad Zahid al-Kawthari, on the
authority of Ibn al-Hammam. <span id="_anchor_593"></span>593

Muslim reported from a large number of those who were not immune against
jarh and vilification, and so also found in Sahih al-Bukhari some
narrators of unreliable position. Therefore narration was done through
ijtihad

of the ulama’ regarding them, and also the provisions, even when what is
considered a condition by someone is negated by another, that what is
narrated by the latter in which that condition is not found would be
regarded by him equal to what is narrated by his opponent containing
that condition, and so also regarding that who deemed some narrator weak
while another one deemed him reliable.

Concerning the criticism levelled at them both in respect of the texts
and their inconsistency with the Book (Qur’an) and authentic sunnah and
the alike, they have never undertaken this task as it is among the
responsibilities of ulama’ of kalam and usul. <span
id="_anchor_594"></span>594

### Estrangement of Riwayah of Men of Opinion:

Al-Qasimi is reported to have said: Authors of al-Sihah shunned
narration from people of opinion, like al-Imam Abu Yusuf and al-Imam
Muhammad ibn al-Hasan, who were deemed as pliable by men of hadith as
can be seen in Mizan al-i’tidal. Their works indicate clearly ampleness
and profundity of their knowledge, and rather their priority over a
large number of huffaz. <span id="_anchor_595"></span>595 Al-Bukhari has
also shunned reporting from the Imams of the Prophet’s Household, and
the following is a statement in this regard.

Al-Allamah Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din, in his book al-Fusul al-muhimmah
fi ta’lif al-ummah, <span id="_anchor_596"></span>596 writes: What is
even worse than all this, being al-Bukhari’s not referring to Ahl
al-Bayt Imams in his Sahih in cases of argument, as he has never
reported any hadith from al-Sadiq, al-Kazim, al-Rida, al-Jawad, al-Hadi
and al-Zaki al-Askari, though he lived contemporaneously with them,
never relating from al-Hasan ibn (al-Imam) al-Hasan, nor from Zayd ibn
Ali ibn al-Husayn (al-Imam), nor Yahya ibn Zayd, nor al-Nafs al-Zakiyyah
Muhammad ibn Abd Allah al-Kamil ibn al-Hasan al-Rida ibn al-Hasan
al-Sibt or his brother Ibrahim ibn Abd Allah, nor al-Husayn al-Fakhkhi
ibn Ali ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan (al-Imam), nor Yahya ibn Abd Allah ibn
al-Hasan or his brother Idris ibn Abd Allah, nor

Muhammad ibn Ja’far al-Sadiq, nor Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Isma’il ibn
Ibrahim ibn al-Hasan ibn al-Hasan, known with name Ibn Tabataba or his
brother al-Qasim al-Sharsi, nor Muhammad ibn Zayd ibn Ali, nor Muhammad
ibn Muhammad ibn al-Qasim ibn Ali ibn Umar al-Ashraf ibn Zayn al-Abidin,
the author of al-Taliqan and contemporary of al-Bukhari nor from other
learned among the pure Itrah (Household) and bushes of the blossomy
tree, like Abd Allah ibn al-Hasan and Ali ibn Ja’far al-Aridi and
others. He has also never reported any hadith from the Prophet’s elder
Sibt and his Rayhanah (aromatic plant) in the world Abu Muhammad
al-Hasan al-Mujtaba the master of youth of paradise people, though he
used to refer to chief of Khawarij and the severest in antagonism
against Ahl al-Bayt, Imran ibn Hattan, who said in regard of Ibn Muljim
and his smite to Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him):

O strike from a pious not intending with it,

But to attain to pleasure of Lord of Throne,

I remember him one day and suppose him to be,

The most faithful of mankind in Allah’s view.

  
  
  

583. See p. 8.

584. This hadith was reported by Abu Hurayrah, declaring that he heard
it from the Prophet. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

585. See p. 16.

586. Al-Imam Ahmad said that he (Abu Zar'ah) memorized 700 thousand
traditions. Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Umar al-Razi said: Abu Zar'ah learnt
by heart 700 thousand traditions, with 140 thousand ones on tafsir
(Tawjih al-nazar, p. 4).

587. Al-Hazimi, Shurut al-A'immah al-Khamsah, pp. 60, 63.

588. Al-Maqdisi, op. cit., pp. 10, 11.

589. Al-Hazimi, op. cit., pp. 58, 59.

590. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah, p. 41.

591. See p. 36.

592. See my statement about tadlis (fraud) and cheaters in my book
Shaykh al-Mudirah.

593. Sharh Shurat al-A'immah al-Khamsah, p. 58.

594. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 131.

595. Al-Qasimi, al-Jarh wa al-ta'dil, p. 24.

596. See 2nd edition, pp. 159, 168.
