Are Sahihayn Containing Most Correct Traditions?
================================================

  
  
  

Al-Imam Kamal al-Din ibn al-Hammam, in Sharh al-Hidayah, said: The
utterance of that who said: ‘The most correct traditions are found in
the two Sahihs and what al-Bukhari unilaterally reported, and then
Muslim, and then what attained their stipulation, and then what attained
the stipulation of one of them’, is verily a ruling that it is
impermissible to follow, since the veracity can never be attained but
only when the traditions containing the conditions they stipulated. When
supposing these provisions to be possessed by narrators of a hadith not
found in the two books (Sahihayn), wouldn’t judging whatever recorded in
the two books to be the most correct be despotism? <span
id="_anchor_597"></span>597

### Amendment on al-Bukhari and Muslim:

In Sharh Muslim, al-Nawawi says: A group of people made up for
al-Bukhari and Muslim in respect of some traditions they both breached
the provisions they stipulated for them and so they (traditions)
becoming lower than what they abided by. In manifesting this matter,
al-Imam al-Daraqutni compiled a book under the title al-Istidrakat wa
al-tatabbu’, covering two hundred traditions included in the two Sahihs.

Abu Mas’ud al-Dimashqi, the author of al-Atraf, also made up for both of
them, and so did Abu Ali al-Ghassani in his book Taqyid al-muhmal. In
Sharh Muslim, he (al-Nawawi) says: What people hold that that for whom
the two Shaykhs have narrated, has in fact attained a lofty rank, is
just for seeking dignity and he is unable to claim so.

### An Odd Maxim Narrated by al-Bukhari and Muslim:

Al-Bukhari reported from Ibn Umar that the Prophet (S) on the Day of
Ahzab said: None of you should perform the asr (afternoon) prayer but
only with Banu Qurayzah. Ibn Hajar said: It was found in this way
throughout all the copies of al-Bukhari (Sahih), while it was zuhr
(noon) prayer in all copies of Sahih Muslim, though they both concurred
on reporting it from one Shaykh with one isnad from beginning up to the
end! He then said: Out of differing of the two words it appears that
when Abd Allah ibn Muhammad, the Shaykh of the two Shaykhs, related it
he related it with two words, or that al-Bukhari has written it out of
his memory without observing the wording, as his school was known of
permitting this, contrary to Muslim who used to observe the wording.

In the two Sahihs more than two hundred old traditions, and about this
al-Diya’ al-Muqaddasi has compiled a book calling it Ghara’ib
al-Sahihayn, citing in it more than two hundred strange and odd
traditions, from among those recorded in the Sahihayn. <span
id="_anchor_598"></span>598

### Who Considered al-Bukhari and Muslim More Authentic?

Ibn Amir al-Hajj, in Sharh al-Tahrir, stated what could mean: <span
id="_anchor_599"></span>599

The point to which good attention should be given is that their
authenticity more than others is only in respect of those succeeding
them not those who preceded them, as this fact, though being apparent
may be unknown by some, or some may swindle and cheat, and Allah the
Glorified knows better.

Someone explained this statement thus: That who stated these words
intends to say that the two Shaykhs and authors of Sunan constitute a
contemporary group of huffaz who emerged after the writing down of the
Islamic fiqh, taking care of certain segment of hadith. While the
mujtahid imams who preceded them were more plentiful in material and
prolific in traditions, having under their hands all kinds of hadith:
the marfu’, mawquf and mursal, and fatawa of the Sahabah and Tabi’un.
And as is known, the mujtahid’s view can never be restricted to a part
of hadith. This can be obviously seen in the comprehensive (jami’) books
and compilations (musannafat) which refer to these kinds in every bab
(chapter) that were indispensable by every mujtahid and authors of
comprehensive (jami’) books and musannafat, before the era of the
authors of al-Sihah al-Sittah (six sahih books), to whom they used to
refer, and who could easily look into asanid of these traditions because
of their high rank, especially the inference of any mujtahid with a
corrected hadith, and reference to al-Sihah al-Sittah and using them in
dispute can be achieved only through considering those who succeeded
them. That point drawing our attention here is that some of the latter
huffaz show leniency in ascribing the traditions they report to the six
origin books and other than them, with a great difference in wording and
meaning.

In his Sharh al-Alfiyyah, al-Iraqi writes: Al-Bayhaqi in his al-Sunan
and al-Ma’rifah, and al-Baghawi in Sharh al-Sunnah and others, used to
narrate the traditions with their own words and asanid, ascribing them
then to

al-Bukhari and Muslim with differences in wording and meaning, as what
they were after was relating the hadith in itself not ascribing its
words.

As an example for this I can refer to al-Nawawi’s words in the hadith
“the Imams are (all) from Quraysh,” as reported by the two Shaykhs,
while its wording in the Sahih was” This affair (caliphate) would be
kept in Quraysh till the day when only two of them are alive,” and the
great difference between the two wordings and the meaning is quite
obvious.

Al-Sayyid Rashid al-Attar has compiled a book on maqtu’ traditions
reported in Sahih Muslim, under the name: (al-Fawa’id al-majmu’ah fi
sha’n ma waqa’a fi Muslim min al-ahadith al-maqtu’ah), saying:
Concerning what the people claim that ‘Anyone for whom the two Shaykhs
have narrated, has in fact attained a lofty rank’ is untrue since Muslim
has reported in his book from Layth ibn Abi Sulaym and other unreliable
narrators. Also know that the words (inna and ‘an) necessitate inqita’
(i.e. disconnection from mudallas traditions) in view of men of hadith,
and these words were repeated many times in the books of Muslim
al-Bukhari, so they say for seeking dignity: Any hadith of this kind
reported in other books than the two Sahihs is munqati’, and that which
is cited in the Sahihs should be held to be muttasil (successive)!!

In his Sahih Muslim reported from Abu al-Zubayr, from Jabir so many
traditions known with ‘an’anah, and the huffaz said: Abu al-Zubayr
Muhammad ibn Muslim ibn Tadrus al-Makki used to defraud in Jabir’s
hadith and whatever was in the mode of ‘an’anah was rejected by him.
Also Muslim reported in his book from Jabir and Ibn Umar in the event of
Hijjat al-Wada’ that: the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be
upon him and his Progeny) betook himself toward Makkah on the sacrifice
day (yawm al-nahr), where he performed circumambulation of ifadah
(spreading) performing then the noon prayer at Makkah, returning then to
Mina. In another narration, he performed the ifadah circumambulation,
returning then to Mina where he performed the noon prayer. By these
words, they seek honour (tajawwuh) <span id="_anchor_600"></span>600 and
say: He performed it again to show permissibility!

and other such interpretations!! About these two narrations, Ibn Hazm
said: One of them is undoubtedly false.

Muslim has also reported the hadith on isra’, in which he said (that was
before sending down of revelation [wahy] to him). The huffaz have spoken
against and weakened this statement. Muslim has also reported the
hadith: “Allah created the earth on Saturday.” <span
id="_anchor_601"></span>601 Also in his book he reported from Abu Sufyan
that he said to the Prophet (S), after embracing Islam: “O Messenger of
Allah, would you kindly do me three favours: Get married to my daughter
Umm Habibah, appoint my son Mu’awiyah as a scribe, and command me to
fight the disbelievers”, and the Prophet responded to his demands … (the
hadith). It is known that much misconception is found clearly in this
hadith! As Umm Habibah was taken for wife by the Messenger of Allah in
the Abyssinia with the dowry given by al-Najashi, and Abu Sufyan
embraced Islam in the conquest (fath) year, and several years separated
between the migration (hijrah) and conquest year. In regard of
commandment of Abu Sufyan (to lead the army), the haffaz said that they
had no information about it, reporting from al-Zubayr through weak
asanid that the Prophet (S) gave him commandment of the army in few of
the battles. This was not reported or known by others, and the motive
pushed them to claim so was only bigotry.

The traditionists say that when Muslim compiled his book he showed it to
Abu Zar’ah al-Razi, who disapproved it and was enraged saying: And you
called it al-Sahih, making it a ladder for the heretics and others … and
when any opponent narrates any hadith for them, they would say: This can
never be in Sahih Muslim. <span id="_anchor_602"></span>602 I have
previously cited other statements uttered by Abu Zar’ah and others in
regard of Muslim and his book.

Al-Hazimi, in Shurut al-A’immah al-khamsah, writes the following:
(chapter on abolition of the saying of that who claimed that the
condition of al-Bukhari (for veracity of the hadith) was reporting the
hadith from two reliable men and so on and so forth, till the chain of
the khabar reaching to the Prophet, may God’s peace and benediction be
upon him and his Progeny):

“This being a decision of that who has never examined narrowly and got
to the bottom of the correct traditions, as if the book was attentively
studied, many of the traditions recorded in it would be found disproving
his (al-Bukhari’s) claim.”

Concerning the saying of al-Hakim that the option made by al-Bukhari and
Muslim in reporting the hadith from two reliable men from the Prophet
(S), <span id="_anchor_603"></span>603 is incorrect forward and
backward, rather had he reversed the issue and gave decision it would
have been much safer for him. The same notion was held by someone who
excelled him in the field of hadith, that is Abu Hatam Muhammad ibn
Hibban al-Basti, who said: “The reports are verily all akhbar al-ahad
since no report from the Prophet (S) is found to be narrated by two
reliable men who reported it in turn from two other reliable narrators
till the chain reaching the Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny). Impossibility and voidance of
this proved the akhbar to be akhbar al-ahad, and whoever stipulated that
condition has in fact abandoned all the sunan, as they were not to exist
but only through the akhbar al-ahad”. (End of Ibn Hibban’s statement).

Whoever fathoming and trying the depth of reports would realize that
whatever stated by Ibn Hibban is nearer to truth. (End of al-Hazimi’s
speech). <span id="_anchor_604"></span>604

These were the first class hadith books, and the following is a brief
discussion of the second class ones which are: Sunan Abi Dawud, Sunan
al-Tirmidhi and Sunan al-Nasa’i. <span id="_anchor_605"></span>605

  
  
  

597. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 120, Sharh al-Shurut, p. 25.

598. Al-Hazimi, op. cit., p. 31.

599. Hamish Shurut, pp. 58, 59.

600. Tajawwaha means ta'azzama (get proud), i.e. feigned magnanimity,
while being devoid of this.

601. See discussion of this hadith in my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

602. Al-Hazimi, op. cit., pp. 61, 62.

603. The first hadith in Sahih al-Bukhari is: The acts are verily
according to the intentions, and the last one i.e. the hadith: Two light
words, are two strange replies, when taking into consideration the way
of reporting, as stated by al-Burhan al-Biqa'i and others (Ibid., p.
31).

604. Ibid., p. 31.

605. Men of hadith stated that the books that come in order after those
of al-Bukhari and Muslim being: Sunan Abi Dawud (d. 275 H), Sunan
al-Nasa'i (d. 303 H), and Sunan al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H). They considered
these books to be the usul (reference books), with some of them adding
Sunan Ibn Majah (d. 375 H). Some of them said that it was proper to
regard Sunan al-Darimi (d. 255 H.) as the sixth source, as Ibn Majah has
reported traditions from men charged with falsification and plagiarizing
the traditions. While Sunan al-Darimi contains very few weak rijal, and
rarely contains disapproved or odd traditions, though having some mursal
and mawquf ones. Nevertheless, he is more rightful than him (Ibn Majah),
and what they said is the truth.
