Abu Dawud
=========

  
  
  

He is al-Imam al-Faqih Abu Dawud Sulayman ibn al-Ash’ath al-Azdi
al-Sijistani. He was born in 202H. He has visited Baghdad several times,
and was dead in Basrah in 275 H. Al-Khitabi is reported to have said: No
book was compiled on ilm al-hadith to the level of Sunan Abi Dawud,
which was of better position and more doctrinal than the two Sahihs.
From him al-

Tirmidhi and al-Nasa’i reported a number of traditions. Ibn Kathir, in
Mukhtasar ’ulum al-hadith, said: The narrations for Sunan Abi Dawud are
so many, in some of which things are there that can’t be seen in the
others. The most notable among narrators of the Sunan, being Abu Sa’id
ibn al-A’rabi, Abu Ali al-Lu’lu’i and Abu Bakr ibn Dasah.

All the resolution of Abu Dawud focussed on collecting the traditions
that were inferred by fuqaha’ of all towns and upon which they based
their judgements. So he sorted out his Sunan, including in it the sahih,
hasan (good), layyin (flexible) and that which is fit to adopt in
practice. Among the words uttered by him: I have never stated in my book
a hadith upon the abandonment of which people unanimously agreed, and if
there found any hadith of very feeble nature in it, I have indicated it
clearly.

Abu Bakr ibn Dasah says: I heard Abu Dawud saying: I have written down
from the Messenger of Allah 500 thousand traditions, some of which I
have selected and implied in this book, in which I brought together four
thousand and eight hundred traditions, including the sahih and similar
and near ones.

It is said: Sunan Abi Dawud is sufficient for every mujtahid, and for
his religion he can be sufficed with only four traditions: (1) The acts
are verily (accepted) with only four traditions. (2) That which
indicating betterment of one’s Islam being forsaking what is not of his
concern. (3) Any believer can never be (true) believer (mu’min) till he
wishes for his brother what he wishes for himself. (4) The halal
(lawful) is manifest and haram (unlawful) is manifest, and between the
two some dubious (mushtabah) things. Some of the traditionists have
preferred it (Sunan) to Sahih al-Bukhari.

Abu Dawud and al-Bukhari have both learnt fiqh under fuqaha’ of Iraq.

  
  
  

