Al-tirmidhi
===========

  
  
  
  

His name is Abu ‘Isa Muhammad ibn ‘Isa al-Tirmidhi al-Darir. He

was born in Tirmidh in 209 H. and died in it in 279 H. Ibn al-Athir is
reported to have said: In Sunan al-Tirmidhi, not in other books, there
is a reference to madhahib (schods, of thought), manners of inference,
and manifestation of kinds of hadith, namely the sahih, hasan and gharib
(odd).

When compiling his book, he epitomized in it so elegantly the ways of
hadith, elucidating its sorts, whether being sahih or weak or
disapproved. But his book al-Jami’ al-sahih contained so many
disapproved traditions. <span id="_anchor_606"></span>606

Al-Hafiz Ibn Rajab, in Sharh ‘Ilal al-Tirmidhi, stated that al-Tirmidhi
reported in his book the correct (sahih) hadith and good (hasan) one,
(which is lower in degree than the sahih having some weakness, beside
the gharib (odd) one. In the strange traditions he cited there are found
some disapproved ones, particularly in the chapter (kitab) on al-fada’il
(merits), but he often demonstrates this never letting it go unseen. I
have no knowledge that he has reported from some narrator upon whose
falsity there was consensus, any hadith through a single isnad, but he
might report a hadith narrated through different turuq (ways) or in its
isnad there being a narrator known of falsification. Thus he reported
hadith of Muhammad ibn Sa’id al-Maslub and Muhammad ibn al-Sa’ib
al-Kalbi. Yes, he might report from narrators known of bad memory or
whose narrations being misconceived, but he used to manifest this fact,
never keeping silent about it. Abu Dawud shared him in reporting from
many narrators of this class with keeping silent regarding their
traditions, like Ishaq ibn Abi Farwah. Al-Tirmidhi used to report hadith
from the accurate thiqah (trustworthy), and from that of little dubiety
and that of much dubiety, and that commonly known of misconception, with
demonstrating this.

It is also known that al-Tirmidhi was the first among traditionists in
classifying the hadith into sahih, hasan (good), da’if (weak), while
before his time such classification was not known.

606. Ikhtisar ulum al-hadith, p. 18.
