Al-nasa’i
=========

He is Abu Abd al-Rahman Ahmad ibn Shu’ayb al-Nasa’i. He was born in Nasa
which belonged to Nisabur in 215 H. Al-Daraqutni said: He travelled for
performing the hajj pilgrimage, and was put to the test in Damascus
realizing the shahadah then, when he said: Carry me to Mecca. So he was
carried to it, dying there, and was buried in a place between the Safa
and Marwah. The date of his death was 303 H.

Al-Dhahabi says: In Damascus he was questioned about merits of
Mu’awiyah, when he said: Never he be pleased with being neck and neck
(with Ali) so as to be preferred! He (al-Dhahabi) said: Then people kept
on pushing him till bringing him out of the mosque, after which he was
carried to Mecca where he died, while the correct narration, it was
Ramlah (not Mecca), and he said: I entered Damascus, finding those
turning away from Ali large in number, when I compiled the book
al-Khasa’is, imploring Allah to guide them to the right path.

The narrations of al-Nasa’i differed much from others, and his book
al-Mujtana, which was counted among the five principles, and was known
with Sunan al-Nasa’i al-saghir, was narrated by Ibn al-Sunni. While the
narration of Ibn Hayat and Ibn al-Ahmar and Ibn Qasim, was called Sunan
al-Nasa’i al-kabir. Ibn Kathir said: In Sunan al-Nasa’i, we find rijal
unknown either considerably or in respect of position, among whom we
find some of defamed reputation (majruh), and in it weak and defective
and disapproved traditions are found. <span id="_anchor_607"></span>607

There are other books, the reference to which is out of scope here,
since they (Sunnis) have said: These five books: al-Bukhari, Muslim, Abu
Dawud, al-Tirmidhi and al-Nasa’i have never missed any of the
Messenger’s traditions but so rarely.

In al-Taqrib (p. 3) al-Nawawi writes: “It is correct to say that only
very few traditions were missed by the five books. Al-Suyuti, in his
Alfiyyah, also referred to this. Ibn Khaldun, after discussing
al-Muwatta’ and these five books, <span id="_anchor_608"></span>608
said: These are the well-known masanid in faith (millah), and major

reference of books of hadith among the Sunnah, which even when numbering
many, but most often should be referred to these (five) books. <span
id="_anchor_609"></span>609

Following is a statement uttered by Monsieur Amil Darmengihim in his
book “Hayat Muhammad” (Life of Muhammad):

The first sources for sirah (biography) of Muhammad being the Qur’an and
Sunnah, of which the Qur’an being the most authentic in sanad, but it
being not so comprehensive to the extent needed in this regard. In
regard of the hadith, despite all the efforts exerted by the
traditionists, particularly al-Bukhari, in collecting all the utterances
of the Messenger and having knowledge of the least of his indications,
with the biography of the rijal from whom the traditions – the musalsal
and mu’an’an – were reported, it contained so many doubted and
fabricated ones … etc.

Commenting on Darmengihim’s statement, Emir Shakib Arsalan expressed:
“He was not believing in veracity of so many of the traditions even
those cited in the two Sahihs. This being one of the thought tastes for
which we cannot blame him, when taking into consideration the fact that
many Muslims and those having Islamic ardour and strong faith and
conviction share Monsieur Darmengihim in this opinion, finding it not a
religious obligation to believe in all the traditions cited in the two
Sahihs or others, since changing or alteration or addition or omission,
might have crept into them, as it is known that they used to narrate
hadith on basis of meaning. And narrating hadith on basis of meaning,
usually opens the door for many additions through which the meaning may
differ or be alienated from its origin, till he said:

The evidences the help from which is obtained by this elite for
obligatoriness of not considering most of the traditions as definitely
right, and necessity of contemplation before accepting what people
hastily approve, being the following:

First: Non-possibility of narrating any hadith but only very rarely
without any addition or omission, out of what one learnt before, as when
one intending to reiterate any words he heard, it would be verily
infeasible for him

to cite the same and very words even after elapse of only one hour after
hearing them.

Second: The belief held by them that innumerable traditions being
narrated on basis of meaning, the fact leading to many changes in words.

Third: Liability to inadvertence and forgetfulness on the part of every
man regarding which no one can dispute at all.

Fourth: The Prophet (S) himself referring to fabrication of ahadith
during his lifetime, and the most authentic hadith known to be uttered
by him being: “Falsifiers to me have been multiplying, whoever falsifies
my hadith should dwell in his abode in Fire.”

Then he (Arsalan) said: Suspicion still hanging about so many traditions
cited in the Sihah, not in respect of honesty in naql (reporting) but in
respect of non-ability of human beings – except in very rare cases – to
narrating whatever coming to their ears literally, or citing the events
exactly with no any addition or deletion. There may be two persons
witnessing one and the same event, but each one of them may narrate it
slightly or much different from the other. <span
id="_anchor_610"></span>610

### Al-Mustakhrajat

Al-Istikhraj (extraction) is a practice in which a memorizer embarks on
citing al-Bukhari’s traditions one by one through asanid he approved of
without observing the trustworthiness of the narrators from other than
the turuq of al-Bukhari, till meeting with him in his Shaykh or that of
a higher rank. But it is impermissible for the extractor to deviate from
the way through which he meets with the compiler of the origin to the
remote way but only for an urgent purpose, like a significant addition
or alike. The extractor might abandon traditions for which he couldn’t
find an authentic isnad, or rather might have reported them from some
narrators, or citing them through the original source. Many of the
huffaz cared much for istikhraj due to the significant advantages it
had, restricting this most often to Sahih al-Bukhari

and Sahih Muslim as they being the main references in this science (in
view of those adopting it). From al-Bukhari extraction was done by Abu
Bakr Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Isma’ili and Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Muhammad
al-Barqani, and those extracting from Sahih Muslim were Abu Ja’far Ahmad
al-Nisaburi and Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Raja al-Nisaburi, who
shared Muslim in most of his shaykhs, and many others.

Among those who extracted from both of them we can refer to Abu Nu’aym
al-Isfahani with some other narrator, who extracted also from Abu Dawud
and al-Tirmidhi. Many benefits are there for mustakhrajat, some of which
being the additions to the traditions cited by them that were not found
in the original ones from which extraction was done. These additions
only emerged because the narrators could not observe citing the very
words of the traditions they extracted from, but only the words with
which the narration reached them from their shaykhs, that most often be
contradictory to them. Contravention may occur in meaning also. Another
benefit is the probability that the Sahih compiler may have reported
from that accused of confusion, without manifesting whether he heard
that hadith before confusion or after it, the case in which the
mustakhrij would demonstrate this either through declaration or by
narrating it from him through the tariq of that from whom he hadn’t
heard but only before confusion. Also of them, his reporting in the
Sahih from one known of tadlis with unauthentic chain, but the
mustakhrij narrating it with declaration by hearing. Of them too the
hadith containing some expression contradicting an Arabic grammar rule,
the case in which he exerts much effort for justifying and drawing it
out, so it would be produced according to the rules through the
narration of the mustakhrij, when it would be introduced as sahih, while
claiming that what inflicted the sahih ones was only misconception on
the part of the narrators. <span id="_anchor_611"></span>611

Ibn al-Salah says: The compiler of the books extracted from al-Bukhari
and Muslim have never observed agreement of hadith words with those
books exactly without any addition or omission, since they reported
these traditions from other than al-Bukhari and Muslim, seeking higher
isnad,

the act resulting in some inconsistency in wording. So was the case with
the traditions reported by authors of independent compilations like
al-Sunan al-kubra of al-Bayhaqi, and Sharh al-Sunnah of Abu Muhammad
al-Baghawi and others, in which they said: ‘It is reported by al-Bukhari
or Muslim,’ the case in which it would be got that none other than
al-Bukhari or Muslim has reported the origin of that hadith, with
probability of presence of difference in meaning between them, <span
id="_anchor_612"></span>612 in which I actually found some inconsistency
in denotation. <span id="_anchor_613"></span>613 I will not discuss what
these extracted traditions contained of alterations in terms or meanings
or additions, but they can be sought in their books. Al-Hamidi has
distinguished these additions to the terms of al-Sahih, by saying, after
citing the hadith, al-Bukhari was sufficed of it with so and so words,
while al-Barqani, for instance, increased so and so words in it! and so
forth. And non-distinguishing only occurred in few cases, as he may
quote the hadith from what al-Barqani or another one extracted, saying
then: Al-Bukhari abridged it and reported only part of it, without
indicating the portion he was satisfied with, rendering it obscure for
the reader, the obscurity that can’t be removed but only through
referring to the origin of the hadith when he would be mostly relieved
of blame. <span id="_anchor_614"></span>614 And as stated before, they
have found fault with many of the traditions reported by al-Bukhari and
Muslim, beside many suspicions raised in Sharh Ibn Hajar against
al-Bukhari and by al-Nawawi against Muslim, which were used by them for
producing several mustakhrajat. So when al-Bukhari and Muslim – though
being al-Sahihan as called by them – containing all these defects and
objections, with all that criticism levelled at them, left alone
creeping of some Jewish traditions (Isra’iliyyat) into them and wrongly
reporting on basis of meaning, beside ascribing them to some of hadith
books that can’t be called masanid since they being unauthentic and not
dependable at all, as whatever they contained was so poor. About them
the leaders (imams) of hadith deemed them to be unfit for disputation,
nor can be relied upon, as will be later seen.

O God, we implore You to provide this straightforward religion with that
who safeguards its principles and protects its foundations, so as not to
be

invaded by any alien, nor be scaled by any ill-intentioned impostor.

  
  
  
  

607. Ibid., p. 18.

608. The most famous books compiled in the 4th century were: Al-Ma'ajim
al-thalathah of al-Tabarrani (d. 360), Sunan al-Daraqutni (d. 385 H.),
Sahih Ibn Hibban al-Basti (d. 345 H.), Sahih Ibn Khuzaymah (d. 311 H.)
and Musannaf al-Tahawi (d. 321)…etc.

609. Muqaddimat Ibn Khaldun, p. 418.

610. Hadir al-'alam al-Islami, vol. I, pp. 44-51.

611. Tawjih al-nazar, pp. 141, 142.

612. Till when is this difference in the words and meanings of the
hadith?

613. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah, pp. 9, 10.

614. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 144.
