Musnad Ahmad
============

  
  

A question may be raised that for what reason we made no reference to
Musnad Ahmad among books of hadith that were discussed elaborately,
despite its being more extensive in narration and all-inclusive than
them, to the extent that it was said to contain forty thousand
traditions! with its author being a great leader having one of followed
school of thought adopted by numerous communities of Muslims? My reply
to this being that, I made no detailed mention of this book or other
Masanid books – which number so many – only due to the fact that the
ulama’ have discussed them judging them to be unfit for argumentation
and debate, and not dependable. But I found it proper to shed light upon
Musnad Ahmad, which being the most famous of them, so as to reveal for
the Muslims its real state and lay bare its position among books of
hadith, to be a criterion by which all other Musnads should be measured.
With this we can be satisfied and in no need of talking about other
books.

I will initiate with a foreword manifesting the status of Musnad books
in general among hadith books, and level of narrations contained in
them, discussing then Musnad Ahmad.

### Musnad Books Other Than al-Sihah al-Sittah:

The Musnad books are those books in which every Companion would
privately report a hadith, with no regard to categorization. Their
compilers used to bring together in the Musnad of every Sahabi all of
his traditions whether correct or defective, hence it is absolutely
improper to use whatever recorded in them for argumentation.

Ibn al-Salah, in his Muqaddimah says: The Musnad books can never reach
the level of the five books: Sahih al-Bukhari, Sahih Muslim, Sunan Abi
Dawud, Sunan al-Nasa’i and Jami‘ al-Tirmidhi. Also they are neither fit
for

argumentation as in the case of those books, nor dependence can be there
upon all the traditions cited in them, like Musnad Abi Dawud
al-Tayalisi, Musnad Ubayd Allah ibn Musa and Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
and their likes. The authors of these books used to report in the sanad
of every Companion all the traditions heard from him without any
commitment to their being fit for argument, the fact leading them to be
lower in rank than those five books – though being high due to highness
of their authors – beside their like of categorized books. <span
id="_anchor_615"></span>615

Wali Allah al-Dihlawi says: “The Musnad books brought together the
sahih, hasan (good), da’if (weak), well-known, odd, eccentric,
disapproved, mistaken and right, thabit and maqlub (reversed)
traditions. Besides, they could never gain that fame among the ulama’,
though they be no more deemed fully disapproved, nor their veracity or
weakness be fully investigated by the traditionists. And among them are
some that no grammarian could use because of their oddity, no faqih
could comply with the madhahib of the salaf (predecessors), no
traditionist could manifest their dubiety, and no historian could refer
to names of their rijal.” <span id="_anchor_616"></span>616

Al-Nawawi, in his Taqrib, when discussing the hadith books and their
ranks, said: Concerning Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal and Musnad Abi Dawud
al-Tayalisi and other Musnads, they can never be counted to occupy the
same position of the five books and their likes, in respect of
argumentation and reliance on whatever cited in them. <span
id="_anchor_617"></span>617

### Comments on Musnad Ahmad:

The statements mentioned before were comments on ranks of Musnad books
in general among hadith books, that could be considered as unanimously
agreed among traditionists. In regard of Musnad Ahmad in particular, I
quote herewith some comments of leaders of hadith on it, initiating with
utterance of Imam of Hanbalis after Ahmad: Ibn Taymiyyah. After quoting
these sayings, we are not to blame if this would enrage any of

those claiming to be rijal of hadith nowadays, as truth should be
followed. And I have never brought out this book but only for the
purpose of pleasing the truth (haqq) alone, and if any one be enraged,
his anger should be with truth not with us.

About Abu Nu’aym, Ibn Taymiyyah said: He had reported many traditions
that were deemed weak or rather fabricated, according to concurrence of
ulama’. And though he was a trustworthy memorizer, known of being
prolific in narrating the hadith, and of extensive riwayah, but he used
to — like other similar narrators – narrate whatever contained in the
chapter (bab) for being acquainted with that, although he could not use
all of it, except some portion, in argumentation . This while the
authors of Musannafs were not reporting from those known to be
falsifiers, like Malik and Shu’bah and Ahmad ibn Hanbal, who were never
reporting from any narrator they could never trust, nor relating any
hadith from that known to be one of those who were deliberately
falsifying the hadith. But it may happen that the narrators of some
traditions might have committed mistakes in them, and al-Imam Ahmad and
Ishaq and others may report traditions known to be weak in their view
due to charging their reporters with had memory or the like, so as to be
considered and inferred by others. It may happen that some evidences
indicating that this hadith being preserved (against error), and may be
there other signs proving its being wrong, with its original narrator
being a liar in reality but not known for all to be falsifier, rather
known to be relating many correct traditions, consequently his
traditions would be reported. A large number of compilers may find
difficulty in discerning this fact as it is, failing to find the truth,
as a result of which he may narrate whatever reaching his ear as it is,
leaving others to blame not him. <span id="_anchor_618"></span>618 Ibn
Taymiyyah also said: It is not necessary that whatever reported by Ahmad
in his Musnad is to be regarded hujjah by him, but rather he may report
the traditions narrated by men of knowledge, as his condition for the
musnad lies in not reporting from those known of falsification in his
view, though containing some weak traditions. In regard of books of
fada’il (merits), he (Ahmad) used to narrate

whatever he heard from his shaykhs, whether being correct or weak, as
never intended to not reporting but only those traditions proved to be
true for him, increasing then some additions, with some other additions
made then by Abu Bakr al-Qati’i, in which numerous fabricated traditions
can be seen. <span id="_anchor_619"></span>619

He further said: Ahmad ibn Hanbal used to narrate every hadith related
by people even if its veracity was not established. Every
knowledge-seeker is aware that not every hadith on merits reported by
Ahmad, should necessarily be correct, nor every hadith he reported in
his Musnad should be deemed sahih, as these being the same traditions
related by people from that who is known among people of transmission
(naql) but his falsity was not manifest for all, with some of them
probably having a defect indicating their being weak or even invalid.
<span id="_anchor_620"></span>620

In a reply to that inferring a hadith reported by Ahmad which was false,
he said: Even if we suppose the hadith be reported by Ahmad, this can
never necessitate its being sahih and should be adopted in practice.
Rather, al-Imam Ahmad is known to have reported many traditions so as to
make people aquainted with them, disclosing for people their weakness,
the fact that can be better apparent in his speech and answers, needing
no more elucidation, especially in such a great source. In this book –
Musnad Ahmad – many additions were increased by his son Abd Allah, from
whom al-Qati’i reported with adding from his shaykhs several traditions
that were known to be fabricated with concurrence of notable
traditionists. <span id="_anchor_621"></span>621

In his book Qa’idah jalilah fi al-tawassul wa al-wasilah, he writes:
There was heated dispute between Abu al-Ala’ al-Hamadani and al-Shaykh
Abu al-Faraj ibn al-Jawzi, regarding presence of any fabricated hadith
in Musnad Ahmad. Al-Hamadani denied its existence and Abu al-Faraj
proved its being there, stating that it contained traditions known to be
false. And no incompatibility is there between the two opinions, as what
is deemed fabricated by Abu al-Faraj being that hadith on the falsity of
which a proof was established though the narrator not intending falsity
but committing an error in it. While al-Hafiz Abu al-Sa’ud and his likes
meant by the falsified

fabricated hadith, that one whose narrator intended falsity on purpose,
<span id="_anchor_622"></span>622 following the rule of “That to blame
for falsity being one who intended it”. Whereas the narration of
unintentional liar cannot be counted as falsity! And how much
detrimental was this rule for religion.

In the same rule he said too that Ahmad ibn Hanbal and other ulama’
permitted reporting of traditions on virtuous deeds, that were not known
to be established. <span id="_anchor_623"></span>623

Among the traditions reported by Ahmad ibn Hanbal and agreed by Abd
al-Rahman ibn Mahdi and Abd Allah ibn al-Mubarak, we can refer to the
traditions: “When we narrate (a hadith) on halal (lawful) and haram
(unlawful) we be severe, whereas when narrating on virtues (fada’il) we
show tolerance.”

In Ikhtisar ulum al-hadith, <span id="_anchor_624"></span>624 Ibn Kathir
says: The comment of Abu Musa Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al-Midyani on Musnad
Ahmad that it is sahih, is verily a weak saying as it (Musnad) contained
feeble or even fabricated traditions, like those on excellences of Marv,
Asqalan and the Red Berth belonging to Hams and others, as indicated by
a group of huffaz. Besides, al-Imam Ahmad missed so many traditions in
his book, and rather it was said that he has not reported from the
Sahabah whose traditions are recorded in the two Sahihs, numbering about
two hundred.

Al-Iraqi says: In refutation to those claiming that Ahmad ibn Hanbal
took upon himself to reporting sahih traditions in his Musnad, we say:
We never admit this, and regarding existence of weak hadith in his
Musnad it is something verified, and rather it contains fabricated
traditions which I collected in a booklet. Further his son Abd Allah
made many additions containing weak and fabricated traditions with
hadith of Anas: Asqalan is one of the two brides, from which Allah will
resurrect on the Doomsday seventy thousand persons that will never be
subject to reckoning. Also it contained several disapproved traditions
of which hadith of Buraydah: “Be present at Khurasan then settle down at
the City of Marv, as it is built by Dhu al-Qarnayn…etc. But the hadith
of Berth being: “From it Allah will resurrect

seventy thousand men not subject to reckoning or chastisement, in a
place between the Red Berth and so and so, also hadith of A’ishah on the
story of Umm Zar’ which is found in the Sahih but not cited in Musnad
Ahmad.

Al-Allamah Abd al-Rahman ibn Isma’il , known with the nickname Abu
Shamah, in his book al-Ba’ith ala inkar al-bida’ wa al-hawadith, says:
Abu al-Khattab said: Companions of al-Imam Ahmad infer the traditions
reported by Ahmad in his Musnad in argumentation, while most of them
being unfit for argumentation, as they were cited by him only for
knowing the source of the hadith, and determining whether its narrator
being reliable or defamed! And it is impermissible for any well-informed
Muslim to cite but only what is correct so as not to be miserable in the
world and hereafter, as there is a correct hadith reported from Sayyid
al-Thaqalayn (S) that he said: “Whoever relates from me any hadith,
knowing it to be false, he will verily be counted as a liar.” <span
id="_anchor_625"></span>625

Some of the examiners of Musnad Ahmad said about it: Truly the Musnad
contained many traditions that were so weak to the extent that they were
counted among the fabricated ones. <span id="_anchor_626"></span>626

When al-Imam Ahmad’s saying: ‘I made this book an imam, so as to be a
reference for people when differing in any sunnah of the Messenger of
Allah, <span id="_anchor_627"></span>627 was objected, my reply would be
that al-Imam Ahmad started to write the Musnad on separate papers,
making it then in separate parts like a draft copy. But his last hour
approached before completing his work, when he embarked on reciting it
to his sons and family members, passing away before revising and
rectifying it, leaving it as it is. Then his son Abd Allah added to it
traditions resembling what it contained, including in it alike and
identical ones from his memory (what he heard). After that al-Qati’i
selected from this copy whatever he could of traditions, causing
confusion in Musnads and repetition. Consequently numerous traditions
were left intact on papers and booklets since they were out of reach, as
a result of which the Musnad was lacking many sahih traditions. <span
id="_anchor_628"></span>628

When al-Imam Ahmad said: I have compiled and selected this book

out of more than 750 thousand traditions; whenever Muslims differ
regarding any hadith of the Messenger of Allah they can refer to it, if
it be there (it should be adopted) and otherwise it is not a hujjah (fit
for argumentation), Abu Abd Allah al-Dhahabi said: This utterance by him
(Ahmad) applies to general probability, since there being strong
traditions in the two Sahihs and Sunan and parts that are not found in
the Musnad. And Allah predestined for al-Imam (Ahmad) to stop the
narration before revising the Musnad, thirteen years before his death,
as a result of which we find in the book repeated things, and
interlacing of a Musnad into a Musnad and of a sanad (chain) into a
sanad, which being a very rare case. <span id="_anchor_629"></span>629

Ibn al-Jawzi, in his book Sayd al-Khatir, has a commentary on the
Musnad, I quote herewith its very words from the introduction to volume
one of the Musnad (published by Dar al-Ma’arif):

A section (fasl): A question put forth to me by some men of hadith: Does
Musnad Ahmad contain any incorrect hadith? I said: Yes. But this was
regarded as exaggeration by some claiming to be among the followers of
the madhhab (school of thought), whom I held to be among common people,
paying no attention to them. But all of a sudden, they issued some
fatawa (verdicts), in which some of people of Khurasan including Abu
al-Ala’ al-Hamadani aggrandized and refuted this saying censuring anyone
uttering it! This made me so amazed and astonished, speaking to myself:
How wonderful! Knowledge claimants turned to be among common people too!
And the only reason for this was that they heard the hadith without
investigating to recognize the correct and defective ones, supposing
that whoever holding what I held was subject to vilification in respect
of what Ahmad reported, while the truth was never so. Because Ahmad has
reported the good and weak traditions altogether, with disapproving and
not adopting many of these traditions he himself reported. Hasn’t he
said about the hadith on “performing ablution with wine” that it is
“unknown”! and whoever looking into the book al-Ilal, compiled by Abu
Bakr al-Khallal, will verily come across a large number

of traditions that were cited in the Musnad, and vilified by Ahmad.

Al-Qadi Abu Ya\`la Muhammad ibn al-Husayn al-Farra’, in a comment on the
issue of wine, said: Ahmad reported in his Musnad whatever was
widely-known of hadith without intending to bring either the sahih or
the defective ones. The evidence for this can be seen in Abd Allah’s
words, saying: I said to my father: What is your opinion about the
hadith of Rib’i ibn Kharash which he reported from Hudhayfah? He said:
You mean the one reported by Abd al-Aziz ibn Abi Dawud? I said: Yes. He
said: There are traditions contradicting it. I said: But you have cited
it in your Musnad!? He said: You mean the widely-known Musnad…if I
intended to cite only what I think to be right, I wouldn’t report in
this Musnad but only very little number of traditions, but you know my
way of citing the hadith…as I never oppose the weak hadith when there be
nothing refuting it in the chapter.

Al-Farra’ said: He himself has explained his method of citing the hadith
in the Musnad, as whoever was taken by him as a reference for correct
hadith, he would contradict and leave him.

Ibn al-Jawzi said: What grieved me in this time, <span
id="_anchor_630"></span>630 being the fact that the ulama’, because of
their incompetency in knowledge, turned to be like common people…when
coming across any fabricated hadith, they would say: It was reported!
<span id="_anchor_631"></span>631 and that which should be lamented
being the vile resolution. And neither might nor power but only is with
Allah the Most High, the Great. <span id="_anchor_632"></span>632

Ibn Qutaybah, in his book al-Ikhtilaf fi al-lafz, writes: Ahmad ibn
Hanbal stopped narration of hadith many years before his death, since
the year 228H., as stated by Abu Talib al-Makki and others. Therefore
the traditions that were reported from him were filled with expletives
and words having no relation to knowledge, either out of bad accuracy or
misconception or purposeful falsity. <span id="_anchor_633"></span>633

615. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah, p. 15.

616. Hujjat Allah al-balighah, vol. Pp. 134, 135.

617. Al-Taqrib, p. 5.

618. Minhaj al-Sunnah, vol. IV, p. 15.

619. Ibid., vol. IV, p. 27.

620. Ibid., vol. IV, p. 27.

621. Ibid., vol. IV. P. 106.

622. See pp. 75, 76.

623. Al-Qa'idah, p. 77.

624. See pp. 18, 19.

625. See p. 55.

626. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 155.

627. In Muqaddimat Ibn Khaldun it is reported that Musnad Ahmad
contained 50 thousand traditions. See also the book al-Islam al-sahih of
Muhammad Is'af al-Nashashibi.

628. Muqaddimat Musnad Ahmad, of al-Shaykh Ahmad Muhammad Shakir, vol.
I, pp. 30, 31.

629. Ibid., p. 31.

630. Ibn al-Jawzi was born in 510 H. and died in 597 H.

631. All the misfortune is in the phrase: "it is reported".

632 Musnad Ahmad, Dar al-Ma'arif, introduction to vol. I, pp. 56, 57,
revised by Shaykh Ahmad Shakir.

633. See p. 53.
