Jarh and Ta’dil
===============

After finishing discussion on hadith books, I an going to talk about
jarh (sarcasm) and ta’dil, saying: When riwayah was inflicted with that
corruption, and sahih traditions were mixed with incorrect ones, with
capricious and irreligious people allowing themselves to falsify and
fabricate traditions, ascribing them to the Messenger of Allah, for
satisfying their desires and due to differences in conditions of
narrators, among whom there being those lacking accuracy and reliability
– the two provisions necessary for veracity of narration—some notable
ulama’ undertook the task of criticizing the narrators so as to make
people – through studying their biography – acquainted with the level of
the narrations reported by them. This criticism was called ‘jarh and
ta’dil’.

Muslim reported from Muhammad ibn Sirin as saying: This knowledge is
verily a religion, so you should know well from whom you take your Din.
He said too: They were not inquiring about isnad (chain of
transmitters), but when fitnah (sedition) occurred they started to say:
Bring in the names of your rijal.

Al-Nawawi said: Criticizing (jarh) the narrators is permissible, and
rather is obligatory as agreed by ulama’ in cases of necessitating
exigency, for the purpose of safeguarding the holy Shari’ah, and it
can’t be considered of forbidden backbiting, but rather it is a counsel
sincerely for sake of God and His Messenger (S) and the Muslims.

Scrutiny is something prescribed and called to by the Qur’an, when the
Most High said: “O ye who believe! If an evil-liver bring you tidings,
verify it, …” (49:6), and said: “… and call to witness two just men
among

you…”, and also said:”… of such as ye approve as witnesses…”. In another
place He praised saying: How excellent a slave! Lo! He was ever turning
in repentance (toward Allah)”.And He censured saying: “Detracter,
spreader abroad of slander. Hinderer of the good, transgressor,
malefactor. Greedy therewithal, intrusive”.

It is known that criticizing the rijal was an ordinary practice from the
lifetime of the Messenger (S). Ibn Adiyy (d.365H.), in the introduction
to the book al-Kamil, has cited number of rijal belonging to his time,
among whom we can refer to the Companions: Ibn Abbas (68) and Ubadah ibn
al-Samit (34). And among the Tabi’un, we can refer to al-Shi’bi whose
age exceeded one hundred years, and Ibn Sirin (110) and Sa’id ibn
al-Musayyab (190).

It is said that Shu’bah, who used to call al-Shi’bi with the title Amir
al-Mu’minin in hadith, was the first to comment on rijal, and he was
born in 82 H. and dead in 160H.

He mentioned many critics of the 2nd century. What he said about this
century: In its beginnings there were some unreliable narrators among
the Tabi’un, the weakness of most of whom often originated before their
being able to control the exactitude and correctness of hadith, as they
used to narrate many mursal traditions and make the mawquf as marfu’,
with committing several mistakes.

The most eminent critics in the end of the 2nd century were the
authority Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan (198) and Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi
(198). Since they were both trusted by people, whoever was deemed
trustworthy by them would attain approval among people, and that deemed
untrustworthy by them would be of no worth among people. And in regard
of one concerning whom difference of opinion was there, people would
refer to what they preponderated. The first one undertaking the task of
collecting his utterance on jarh and ta’dil was Yahya ibn Sa’id
al-Qattan. After him, another one of his disciples, Yahya ibn Mu’in
(d.233), had a commentary too, in which his opinions and expressions
differed regarding some of the rijal. Among the disciples of Yahya ibn
Mu’in we can refer to Ahmad ibn Hanbal

(d.241) and Ali ibn al-Midyani (d.224) and others.

About this subject a commend is ascribed to Muhammad ibn Sa’d (d.230),
the scribe of al-Waqidi in his Tabaqat, whose statement was good and
reasonable.

I am not to cite the names of all those who discussed the subject of
jarh and ta’dil as this being out of scope here.

### Reasons of Jarh:

Ibn Hajar says: Reasons of jarh are different, that can be restricted in
five main things: Bid’ah (heresy), or contradiction, error, or ignorance
of conditions, or claim of interruption in the sanad, as when claiming
that the narrator was defrauding or giving mursal hadith. <span
id="_anchor_635"></span>635

### Disagreement Regarding Jarh and Ta’dil:

There was disagreement among ulama’ of jarh in regard of jarh and ta’dil
proportionate to difference of their schools (madhahib) and conditions.

Al-Hazimi, in Shurut al-A’immah al-Khamsah, says: The leaders (imams) of
naql (reporting), with their multifarious madhahib and inconsistent
states in usage of items, differ in most of them. There may be a
narrator regarded trustworthy by Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi but deemed
defamed by Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan, and vice verse. And it is known
that these two were notable imams, being axis of criticism in naql, and
from whom most of traditions were taken.

Abu ‘Isa al-Tirmidhi said: Some of men of hadith have commented against
a group of venerable ulama’, charging them with weakness, before their
being memorizers, while others deemed them reliable due to their
venerated status and truthfulness, though they might have misconceived
in some narrations. Then Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan spoke against
Muhammad ibn ‘Amr, reporting from him afterwards. Further, Ibn Abi Layla
used to narrate something in one way, narrating it in another way
another time

without any isnad, as this was done out of his memory, due to the fact
that most of the earlier men of knowledge were never writing down the
traditions, and those who wrote down had done this only after hearing.
<span id="_anchor_637"></span>637

Following are some samples of their disagreement, <span
id="_anchor_638"></span>638 I cite just as examples not for the sake of
restriction, since this task requires a separate full book.

1- Ahmad ibn Salih al-Misri, Abu Ja’far ibn al-Tabari, one of the
learned pious leaders of hadith, having both knowledge of fiqh and of
hadith. From him many traditions were reported by al-Bukhari and Abu
Dawud, and he was deemed reliable by Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Yahya ibn Mu’in
and Ali ibn al-Midyani and others. But al-Nasa’i had a had opinion of
him, as once he mentioned him saying: He is neither a thiqah
(trustworthy) nor reliable!

2- Ahmad ibn al-Miqdam ibn Sulayman al-‘Ijli, who was deemed trustworthy
by Abu Hatam and al-Nasa’i. About him Abu Dawud said: I never report
hadith from him since he used to teach the impudent how to jest.

3- Khalid ibn Mukhallad al-Qutwani al-Kufi, who was one of the eminent
shaykhs of al-Bukhari, from whom he reported and from another narrator
from him. Al-Ijli says: He is a thiqah in whom there is tashayyu’. About
him Ahmad ibn Hanbal said: He had (reported) some munkar (disapproved)
traditions.

From him al-Bukhari singly reported the hadith: “Whoever contracts the
enmity of a friend of mine…etc.”, <span id="_anchor_639"></span>639
which was considered by the traditionists as one of the odd traditions
reported by al-Bukhari. Some of the leaders of hadith deemed some of his
rijal to be unreliable, with being charged with reporting from those
known of narrating weak and disapproved traditions, by Ibn Abi al-Dunya
and al-Tabarrani through asanid about each of which there is lengthy
discussion.

4- Ikrimah, mawla of Ibn Abbas, who was counted as authority (in
argument) by al-Bukhari and authors of Sunan, but ignored by Muslim.
Also Ibn Sirin said to his mawla Burd: Don’t tell me lies as done by
Ikrimah

against Ibn Abbas.

5- Al-Waqidi: He was deemed as a liar by al-Shafi’i and trustworthy by
others. In Tahdhib al-Tahdhib it is said about him: There is concurrence
that he being the most knowledgeable among ulama’ of the cult (millah)!
Al-Thawri had a commentary on Abu Hanifah, Ibn Mu’in on al-Shafi’i, and
al-Dhuhali on al-Bukhari.

The author of al-‘Ilm al-shamikh said: Opinions and judgements of people
regarding jarh and ta’dil differed, as we find views differing in regard
of one narrator , in a way once he would be labelled as Amir
al-Mu’minin, and another time as the biggest liar, or something similar
to these expressions.

Herewith is an all-inclusive statement about this subject, uttered by
al-Sayyid Rashid Rida (may God’s mercy be upon him):

“Authenticating everyone deemed trustworthy by the earliers, though the
opposite is proved , opens the door for defamation against ourselves, by
discarding the proof (dalil), adopting its preliminaries in respect of
taqlid (imitation), and contradicting the guidance of the holy Qur’an”.
<span id="_anchor_640"></span>640

Al-Allamah never adopted their rule of jarh and ta’dil of rijal in its
absoluteness, saying:

“Everyone deemed as reliable unanimously by all earlier men of jarh and
ta’dil, is verily reliable though proving to have for the latters some
causes of jarh that were never found by the earliers. Those
free-thinking men never approve of such utterance”. In the end of this
book the reader will come across the complement to this discussion.

This saying and others, which were disclosed by this Allamah, had no
alike by other Sunni ulama’, and no one could be found to have deeply
studied the hadith, reaching the depth of its kernel and real knowledge,
in the present time, or rather in many ages. No wonder for this since he
being the most eminent among the disciples of al-Ustadh Muhammad Abduh,
and his companion who undertook the task of propagating his knowledge
and interpreting his madhhab, with complementing, preserving and writing
it

down. His position to him was like that of the companions of Abu Hanifah
and al-Shafi’i to both of them, as stated before. <span
id="_anchor_641"></span>641

Al-Wazir al-Yamani, in al-Rawd al-basim, writes: Many of leaders of jarh
and ta’dil hesitate in regard of the narrator, authenticating him once
and raising doubt about his reliability, another time, since taking his
misconception into fold of multiplicity can never be measured with known
balance, but it depends on surmise only and it necessitates
investigation and strival (ijtihad) to be sure. His judging him turned
to be like judgement of fuqaha’ regarding the surmise events,
consequently Ibn Mu’in would have two views about the narrator:
authentication and deeming with weakness, and alike.

To guard against wahm (misconception) is something infeasible, and
infallibility (‘ismah) can never be trait of reliable narrators, but
rather ismah never protects against wahm but only in propagation
(tabligh). <span id="_anchor_642"></span>642 The Messenger of Allah (S)
has imagined that he performed some obligatory prayers in complete
forms, when Dhu al-Yadayn said to him: O Messenger of Allah, have you
broken the prayer or forgotten that? In the Sahih the hadith was thus:
And he (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny)
said: May God’s mercy be on so and so, he reminded me of a verse I have
forgotten. (This hadith was reported by Muslim).

Also in the two Sahihs, it is reported from ‘A’ishah as saying about Ibn
Umar: he has never lied but misconceived. <span
id="_anchor_643"></span>643

Here is an example on this: Abu Ja’far al-Razi ‘Isa ibn Mahan, and it is
said: Abd Allah ibn Mahan, about whom al-Dhahabi said: ‘He was of good
hadith’, narrating about him difference of opinion afterwards. Al-Hafiz
Abd al-Azim said: There was disagreement in the views of Ibn al-Midyani
and Ibn Mu’in and Ahmad ibn Hanbal. Al-Midyani once said: He is thiqah,
and another time said about him: He was commingling and confusing! Ahmad
said once: He was not so strong (authentic), and another time he said:
He is thiqah…he writes his hadith

but commits mistakes. Abu Zar’ah al-Razi said: He is accused most of the
time Al-Fallas said: He was of bad memory.

So there was uncertainty regarding his reliability, as knowing the limit
of misconception with which the truthful should be forsaken, is
something minute and assiduous about which there being two views for the
memorizer, as there being two views by the faqih regarding the minute
fiqhi issues. <span id="_anchor_644"></span>644 Al-Imam al-Shafi’i has
abundantly narrated from Ibrahim ibn Abi Yahya al-Aslami, and
authenticated him while being opposed by most of the traditionists in
this regard. Ibn Abd al-Barr, in his Tamhid, said: All the traditionists
unanimously concurred – except al-Shafi’i – concerning vilification
(tajrih) of Ibn Yahya. <span id="_anchor_645"></span>645

I give here another example: Muhammad ibn Ishaq, the greatest historian
in the field of first episodes of Islam. Qatadah said: People are still
in knowledge as long as Muhammad ibn Ishaq is living among them. About
him al-Nasa’i said: He was not so strong. Sufyan said: I have never
heard anyone accusing Muhammad ibn Ishaq (with weakness). But
al-Daraqutni said: Neither him nor his father can be taken as (reliable)
authority. Malik said about him: I give witness that he is a liar. <span
id="_anchor_646"></span>646

### Jarh Precedes Ta’dil:

Ibn al-Salah said: When jarh and ta’dil come together in one person, the
jarh would be given priority over ta’dil, as the moderated (mu‘addal)
narrator tells of his apparent condition, while the jarih tells of a
hidden reality about the mu‘addal. So if the number of the moderated
being more than others, then priority would be given to ta’dil, while
the correct notion held by all the jumhur (Ahl al-Sunnah) being: the
jarh should be given priority. <span id="_anchor_647"></span>647

The philosopher Ibn Khaldun, when discussing the reason compelling some
of the narrators to reduce number of their narrations, said:

The only reason that made every narrator decrease number of his
narrations lies in the slanders facing him regarding them, and the
defects

intercepting his way, particularly the majority giving priority to jarh.
Hence ijtihad would lead him to abandon adopting such interceptors
befalling the traditions and ways of asanid. On multiplicity of this,
his riwayah would become less due to the weakness in the turuq. <span
id="_anchor_648"></span>648

### A General Word

It is inevitable to state here that ulama’ of jarh and ta’dil have
exerted great effort on purifying all the traditions reported from the
Messenger of Allah, the act deserving much applause and appreciation.

But, despite their favour and precision, they could not achieve the
purpose of their striving as the hadith books are still containing
numerous dubious traditions, or those which seemed to be fabricated. And
this was not of their fault, as they have done their full utmost in
their work, but that was beyond their human capability, as their
judgement on rijal was only regarding their apparent conditions and what
they came to know of their news, inward facts, intentions and hidden
consciences, which all being beyond their reach and can never be
recognized but only by Knower of Hidden things. There may be some man of
good looking and appearance, but when divulging his inner intention we
would be aware of his bad true state, the fact regarding which no one
can doubt. About it several investigating ulama’, like mujtahid of Yemen
al-Wazir al-Yamani who said in al-Rawd al-basim: <span
id="_anchor_649"></span>649

There is unanimity among ulama’ on considering the exterior not the
interior, and anyone whose hypocrisy appeared and infidelity was proved,
his traditions would be abandoned. And that whose Islam and honesty
could be manifested for all and uttered the truth, he would have good
status though his inner truth being the opposite of what is outwardly
known about him. Thus we would have undertaken our obligation and
exerted the required effort to seeking the truth. The Messenger of Allah
used to act according to the outward and repudiate knowledge of inward,
the fact to which the Qur’an referred: “…whom thou (O Muhammad) knowest
not. We, We know

them…”, i.e. he (S) had no knowledge of the hypocrites as stated in the
verse 101 of Surat al-Tawbah, the text of which is thus: “And among
those around you of the wandering Arabs there are hypocrites, and among
the townspeople of al-Madinah (there are some who) persist in hypocrisy
whom thou (O Muhammad) knowest not. We, We know them, and We shall
chastise them twice; then they will be relegated to a painful doom.”

Dr. Taha Husayn, in a valuable word <span id="_anchor_650"></span>650
with which he reviewed my book Adwa’, indicating the efforts exerted by
men of jarh and ta’dil, said:

The earlier muhaddithun took notice of all this and did their best in
seeking and finding the sahih traditions, purifying them of falsities of
falsifiers and affectation of feigners. The method they adopted in this
endeavour was studying the biographies of the rijal who transmitted the
traditions throughout ages till the time they were written down. They
used to follow up each and every one of these men, verifying whether he
had an honest conduct and true faith in Allah and His Messenger, caring
much to be truthful in all the traditions in general and those reported
from the Prophet in particular. That was a commendable and fruitful
effort exerted by the precise among ulama’ of hadith, who did their
utmost to bring out hadith in a sahih form. But all this exertion,
despite its intensity and fertility, was not enough, as it is too
difficult to follow up biographies of people, with searching,
investigation and trying to find their minute details and what their
hearts harbour inside, with what they hide of weak points in their souls
and conduct.

It was inevitable to add to this effort another one, which being
investigating the text itself, since the narrator might be honest and
trustworthy ostensibly to the extent the judges admitting his testimony
when giving witness, but Allah alone has the knowledge of minds and what
the hearts hide, or inner consciences. Or the rijal from whom he
narrated might be truthful and honest like him, of acceptable testimony
by judges, but their innermost hearts conceal truth from people, the
fact making it necessary to deeply studying the text of hadith reported
by him from his counterpart reliable

narrators, so as to explore the extent of its compatibility with the
Qur’an to which doubt can never reach nor suspicion can afflict from any
side. That is due to the fact that the Qur’an has never reached us
through narrators – individuals or groups – but generations of the
Islamic Ummah have unanimously exchanged and conveyed it in the form we
know it today.

There generations have not conveyed it out of memory but in written
form, as it was written during the lifetime of the Prophet himself,
collected during the caliphate of Abu Bakr, and was inscribed in masahif
and sent to all towns during caliphate of Uthman, the fact making it
gather the written riwayah and memorized one, with compatibility of the
two with each other. Thus it becomes meaning less to doubt even little
any of the Qur’anic texts since they reached us through a firm way
having no room for suspicion or doubt.

While citing all these realities as they are, and manifesting these
historical events after verifying and rectifying them, my aim is not
harming anyone but what I am after is to display, without any
reluctance, the real character of the Companions, their being ordinary
people like others, containing the righteous and sinner, truthful and
liar, living and enjoying life like others. All this can never be
detrimental to Islam in a way or another, and its light will verily
continue to shine out of its great Book, covering all people till the
Day of Resurrection.

635 Huda al-sari, vol. II, p. 111.

636. Al-Hazimi, op. cit., pp. 58, 59.

637. Tawjih al-nazar, pp. 75, 76.

638. Ibid., p. 101 and following pages.

639. When al-Dhahabi cited this hadith in biography of Khalid ibn
Mukhallad al-Qatwani in al-Mizan he said: This is a very odd hadith, and
if not be for the status of the Sahih I would have considered it one of
Ibn Mukhallad's oddities. See the full text of the hadith in my book
Shaykh al-mudirah, and it was reported by Abu Hurayrah.

640. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXVII, p. 615.

641. See p. 34.

642. That is the Prophet's propagation from Allah.

643. Al-Rawd al-basim, vol. I, pp. 80, 81.

644. Ibid., pp. 135, 136.

645. Ibid., p. 163.

646. Fajr al-Islam, p. 366.

647. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah, p. 42.

648. Muqaddiamt Ibn Khaldun, p. 444.

649. Al-Rawd al-basim, vol. I, p. 151.

650. This speech was published in the Egyptian Newspaper al-Jumhuriyyah,
issue dated November 25, 1958, and with it I initiated this edition of
my book.
