A General Word:
===============

As soon as becoming aware of all these facts and other than them stated
in my book, and uncovering the truth of the Muhammadan hadith in a
clear-cut pure shape like a polished mirror, I became well-acquainted
with all the traditions ascribed to the Messenger, taking whatever I
take with consent and discarding that which I discard with confidence,
fearing no blame or guilt in this or that.

It is not to be fancied that I be a heretic in this respect, as the
Ummah scholars<span id="_anchor_11"></span>11 have never approved of
every hadith reported in the Sunnah books, so let them have capacity for
whatever I encompassed, after it was demonstrated to them. This verily
being a common fact known for men of discernment with no disagreement
between even two scholars, except for the Hashwiyyah who believe in all
the traditions narrated to them whether being correct or incorrect, as
long as their chain (sanad) be established in their viewpoint. Ibn Abi
Layla said: “Any man can never comprehend the hadith till he takes some
and rejects some”. Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi said too: “No one can be a
leader (imam) in hadith, when following up the eccentric and odd
traditions, or telling of whatever he hearing, or reporting from
whosoever (with no verification)”. Many examples proving this can be
found in their proper places of this book.

No one has paid due attention to this subject – as previously stated –
in the past, while studying it was extremely necessary before going into
the books of hadith, tafsir (exegesis), fiqh, usul, history and grammar
(nahw), with alike topics relevant to religion of Islam. It was supposed
that a separate book be authored about it a thousand years ago, when the
well-known hadith

books came to scene after spread of fiqhi schools of thought among
Muslims, so as these books occupy their proper places of religion, and
truth of the traditions reported in them be revealed for people so as to
be well-acquainted with them. Had I come across, throughout the
expansive Arabic Library, only one book covering this weighty and
sensitive subject – of which every Muslim should be aware – I would have
been relieved of this heavy burden,<span id="_anchor_12"></span>12 which
I shouldered for the sake of research and exploration into hundreds of
books and asanid to which I referred, and from which I quoted and
reported. After spending protracted years in rushing into and treading
this tedious road that was never paved before, nor had a beacon to guide
the misled, I at last managed to find those abundant materials that
enabled me to prepare and compile this all-inclusive book. Also I could
publish this book – which is verily considered the first and unique in
type – making it available for all people so as to be well-acquainted
with the Muhammadan hadith, and be able to study it scientifically and
comprehend it with logic and reason, far from bigotry.

And due to the fact that this research – as said before – being delicate
and novel, with the probability of being opposed and disputed by some of
the Hashwiyyah (Marginalists) and short-sighted people, so I have cited
in it a large number of decisive indisputable proofs, and invulnerable
evidences.

Through the book’s chapters, some of these proofs and evidences might
have been repeated here and there due to a necessitating exigency or a
compelling reason, or an unresolved interrelation with the course of
speech in a way that meaning be incomplete unless they be there, and
antecedent and following statements be badly lacking them. Besides, my
intention being to evade and abstain from criticism and analysis in this
book, though they being the principles upon which every proper
scientific authorship is based and established in the contemporary time.

I found myself obliged to so doing, since our people have just recently
been acquainted with such kind of research. Nevertheless my only hope is
to see the end of the epoch in which only hypocrisy in knowledge and
riya’

(dissimulation) in religion be prevalent, with the absence of good
morals that deserve the pleasure of those who allege to be among the
traditionists or scholars. I hope too to see people living in a time
where only uttering and disclosing the truth is established, and nothing
is set up but only the good deeds, with only the useful and beneficial
knowledge be remaining on earth.

After managing in tearing down the veils and disclosing the truth
regarding the Muhammadan traditions, which they (Sunnites) considered to
be the second source for the legal proofs after the practical Sunnah
(Prophet’s acts), taking them as asanid (documents) for supporting the
Islamic sects and communities (firaq), and evidences for their
superstitions and fancies, which they claimed to be relevant to
religion. Also after succeeding in divulging to people the hidden facts
about hadith, demonstrating a pristine and truthful profile of its
history, I sincerely hope that I have succeeded in hitting the mark and
attaining the prime purpose for which I exerted a great deal of effort
and toiling, and spent that much of my life: being to defend the wordily
Sunnah (of the Prophet) and protect it against any blemish, so as the
Messenger’s speech be immune and invulnerable against any foisted words
composed by the liars, or be spoiled by the intrigues of the hypocrites
and enemies of religion. My aim was also to keep noble essence far from
being described with epithets unfitting and improper for its sublime
status and glorious worth, as he (S) – having the highest peak of
knowledge, wisdom and rhetoric – was more honourable than to produce
anything out of ignorance, or utter anything of his own desire.

If it is for this book to change – undoubtedly – the opinions of many
Muslims in regard of the beliefs they inherited (from ancestors), and
the rules they learned, it will, God-willing, make them acquainted with
numerous realities increasing in their perception and knowledge in
religion. It will further give solutions for the miscellaneous problems
of which their bossoms are annoyed, with repelling and eliminating
suspicions misused by the Muslims’ opponents and religion restrainers.
In this way the consideration will be concentrated upon recognizing the
principles of religion (usul al-Din),

and all viewpoints of Muslims and non-Muslims shall be straightened
apprehending its purposes.

This book will, God-willing, remain a lofty light stand guiding toward
the earmarks of the Muhammadan hadith biography throughout all stages of
history, as long as this hadith be read or taught to people on earth.

I introduce my work – after Allah the Glorified and Exalted – to the
learned among Muslims in particular, and to those concerned with Islamic
studies in general, as it is these and those who are well-aware of its
value and realize its worth. I implore Allah to help them all to find in
it that which can satisfy their eagerness, and please knowledge and
truth altogether.

I beseech Him the Glorified, to render my work sincerely devoted for His
pleasure, prescribing for it a success and succour from His Own, so as
to attain the aim I intended from it, that is to serve religion and
demonstrate the truth, for the benefit of all people. He is the One Who
responds to supplication.

From Jizat al-Fustat, Saturday 5 Jumada al-Ula, 1377 H. December 7, 1957
Mahmud Abu Riyyah

11. Abu Umar and other eminent ulama' said: There is unanimous
concurrence among people that the imitator can never be counted among
men of knwoledge, and that knowledge can only be realized through an
evidence (dalil). Commenting on this saying, Ibn al-Qayyim said: "These
two unanimities included dropping the bigot to desire and blind
imitators from among the elite of ulama', as those who being superior to
them acquired the qualifications to be inheritors of the prophets. The
ancestors used to use the word jahil (illiterate, ignorant) for the
imitator, since they believed that the 'alim should be indepenent in
comprehending the knolwedge, and inferring evidences for his
comprehension. They used to say: The parable of man who imitates
(others) is like an animal that is guided by others.

12. This being the way with which Dr. Taha Husayn described my work, in
his valuable foreward, with which I initiated this edition of the book.
