Reliability of the Companions
=============================

The issue of reliability of the Companions is quite critical, about
which much talk was there, beside lengthy dispute throughout all ages.
Hence this subject deserves good attention and much care so as to have
moderate opinion about it, and any dispute be eliminated.

There was much dispute and controversy among Muslims regarding this
reliability (adalah), while it being in itself an issue in which favour
of the Qur’an and the Messenger can be clearly sensed. Thus it neither
calls to disagreement, nor needs controversy. So is it right to enter
into debate about an issue in which the merit of the Qur’an and the
Messenger is established? A group of people have gone too far in this
matter to the extent they deemed them (Sahabah) to be reliable in all,
even those indulged in sedition (fitnah), or in whose hypocrisy a
Qur’anic verse was revealed, making it impermissible to criticize anyone
of them, or raise doubt about his riwayah, accusing anyone doing so with
debauchery. <span id="_anchor_651"></span>651 And this verily is an
exaggeration in trust and extravagance in appreciation. Besides, it
contravenes the principles stated in the Qur’an and Prophetic Sunnah
regarding the firm evidences, and can never agree with the human tempers
and nature.

It can be said that claiming the reliability of all the Sahabah, and
consecrating books of hadith constitute the two main factors that
facilitated for the enemies of Islam to attack it, and led to
close-mindedness of its friends among thinkers! That is because adalah
of all the Sahabah undoubtedly necessitates trusting whatever they
narrate as cited in books of hadith, while it is known they contained
many weak and poor traditions, that constituted source of harm and
detriment.

If we intend to enumerate all the detriments that afflicted the Muslims
as a result of that belief, it would be so lengthy, but we suffice here
with stating only two detriments:

First: That intense dispute which inflicted the Ummah so seriously
causing disunity among Muslims, from the days of Uthman till the present
day and even to the days to come! This dispute scattered the Muslims,
renderring them inconsistent parties, wrangling cults, and differing
schools, either in rituals (ibadat) or transactions. And despite the
efforts exerted by many ulama’ who endeavoured to reuniting the Muslims
throughout hundreds of years, so as to make them hold fast together to
the cable of Allah and not to separate, but the moth of disagreement was
and is still eating into the bones of the Islamic Ummah, the fact that
no one can deny.

Second: The fatal attacks and stabs that inflicted Islam everyday,
because of what hadith books contained of traditions including
superstitions and confusions, and other things that no free mind can
approve of or right knowledge can support, till our religion came to be
called Din of superstitions and misconceptions and that it being unfit
and incompetent for ages of science and civilization. There is no
dispute that those who reported those dubious traditions were the
Sahabah themselves, and from them the narrators took and men of hadith
inscribed in their books.

So if we exclaim that: The tribulation inflicting Islam is actually
caused by two things: Absolute reliability of the Sahabah, and blind
trust in books of hadith which contain together the poor and strong
traditions, we would never alienate or neglect the truth.

If we go along the straightforward path, and obligate the express
hujjah, following logic of reason (aql), adopting the programme adopted
by contemporary ulama’ in studying the issues, unaffected by any
conventional or passional impact whether in respect of analyzing the
characters of the Sahabah or what they narrated, the truth will be
manifested explicitly and light of Islam will brightly shine, and
Muslims all over the world will hold fast to the cable of Allah, united
and not separated.

And since the reliability of the Sahabah – as said before – is quite a
perilous issue, I find it proper here to write this chapter so as to
reinstate the matter aright and show – through strong indisputable
evidences from the Book of Allah and His Messenger’s traditions – the
correct aspect that safeguards us from committing a mistake and protects
against nonsense.

### Who is the Companion?

Before broaching the subject of reliability of the Sahabah, I have to
define who the Sahabi is as identified by them (Sunnis), and the most
adequate definition in view of the Jumhur (Sunnis) being that one
mentioned by al-Bukhari:

In his book, <span id="_anchor_652"></span>652 he said: Whoever from
among Muslims kept company with the Prophet (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny) or saw him, he would be verily
a Sahabi. <span id="_anchor_653"></span>653

In his exposition for the definition of al-Bukhari, Ibn Hajar
al-Asqallani declared: What he wants to say is that the epithet Suhbat
al-Nabi (Companionship of the Prophet) fits that who kept company with
the Prophet (S), a degree less than what the word suhbah means
lexically, though the prevalent norm stipulated for it some association
(mulazamah). It is also used for anyone who saw him (S) even from a
remote distance.

What al-Bukhari stated is the preponderant notion, but is it stipulated
that the seer should discern what he has seen! Or mere seeing being
enough? Still there is controversy regarding this point but the practice
of those who were counted among the Sahabah indicates the second option.
As they mentioned Muhammad ibn Ali Bakr al-Siddiq, who was born only
three months and few days before the demise of the Prophet, as recorded
in the Sahih, stating that his mother Asma’ bint Umays gave birth to him
during the Farewell Pilgrimage (Hijjat al-Wada’), before enterring
Mecca, in the last days of Dhu al-Qa’dah in the year 20H.

Ali ibn al-Midyani says: Whoever accompanied or saw the Prophet

even for only one hour, should be counted among the companions of the
Prophet. It seems that they supported this definition with a hadith
reported from the Prophet as saying: Some people will launch invasion,
when it will be said to them: Is there among you anyone saw the
Messenger of Allah? (When an affirmative answer is given) Then they will
verily conquer.

In his introduction to the book al-Isabah fi tamyiz al-Sahabah, he (Ibn
Hajar), in defining who the Sahabi is, said: The best definition I
managed to get being: The Sahabi is that who met the Prophet (may God’s
peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny), having faith in him,
dying as a Muslim, he will be counted among those who met him, an fought
beside him or those who did not participate in a battle. Also is that
who saw him by his own eyes, even if he did not sit beside him, and that
who could not see him due to a casualty like blindness. <span
id="_anchor_654"></span>654

The ulama’ have – a manifested in the previous chapter — obligated
investigation about narrators of hadith, sarcasting some and moderating
some others. And they have right in this as it is improper to admit the
claim of any man whatever he may be, without investigation or
verification or scrutiny. While making jarh and ta’dil of the narrators
an obligation incumbent upon every narrator whatever his status be, they
could not transgress the boundaries of the Sahabah, as they held them
all to be reliable not liable to criticism, nor sarcasm can be levelled
at them. What they said in this regard: “Their carpet had been
folded”(i.e. there is no room for attacking them).

The wonderful point here being that they adopt such a stance while the
Companions themselves used to criticize each other and even charging
each other with impiety, as stated before and will be manifested later
on in this book.

In his al-Taqrib, al-Nawawi writes: The Sahabah are altogether reliable,
those who were involved in the fitnah and others. Al-Dhahabi, in his
Risalah, said about the trustworthy narrators: <span
id="_anchor_655"></span>655

If we open the door of jarh and ta’dil, a good number of Companions,
Followers and leaders (imams) would enter it, as some of the

Sahabah charged each other with impiety, according to some
interpretation!! And Allah is pleased with all and forgives them, as
they are not infallible, and their disagreement or contending them can
never make them mild in our eyes.

Then he said: But the Sahabah, are not liable to sarcasm, despite
whatever happened, and even if they erred as other trustworthy men
erred!! No one can be immune against mistake, but it being a very rare
error causing no harm at all! As their reliability should be accepted
and whatever they reported should be approved of, and acted according
to, with which we charge Allah the Exalted.

While the Tabi’un are nearly free from anyone deliberately telling lies,
but they may err and have misconceptions, and whoever committing very
rare errors would be admitted, but that making multiple mistakes, though
being among men of knowledge, his error would be forgiven too, with
reporting his hadith and acting according to it. But determined ulama’
would hesitate in referring to narrators, with such description and
acting alone in argumentation, as whoever making numerous mistakes, his
hadith can never be used in dispute and debate. Concerning the
companions of the Tabi’un – like Malik and al-Awza’i and their likes –
they are also classified in the same categories, and it was found in
their time some who would deliberately lie or perpetrate so many errors,
as a result of which his hadith would be ignored. For instance, Malik
who was known as the guiding star among the Ummah, could never be immune
against sarcasm!! And if anyone talked against Malik while using him in
argumentation, his talk would be for an excuse! And so also is
al-Awza’i, who was thiqah (trustworthy) and hujjah (authority), and he
probably reported hadith alone and misconceived, with his reporting from
al-Zuhri being doubted! In his regard Ahmad ibn Hanbal said that he was
of weak opinion and weak hadith. So also spoke that who could not yet
acquainted with al-Zuhri since he dyed with black colour, was wearing
like soldiers, and served Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik. This is a vast
section. Also a reference should be made to Muhammad ibn Idris
al-Shafi’i, who was widely known as a virtuous, trustworthy and honest
man, and a verifying memorizer

that rarely erring. But Abu Umar ibn Abd al-Birr said: I heard Muhammad
ibn Waddah saying: I inquired Yahya ibn Mu’in about al-Shafi’i, when he
said: He is not a thiqah. The clause of Ibn Mu’in <span
id="_anchor_656"></span>656 about al-Shafi’i was only a slip of the
tongue (lapsus lingue) out of desire and bigotry, <span
id="_anchor_657"></span>657 as Ibn Mu’in was a Hanafi, though being an
upstart.

Beside Ja’far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, who was deemed trustworthy by Abu
Hatam and al-Nasa’i, whereas al-Bukhari did not consider him an
authority (hujjah)! <span id="_anchor_658"></span>658 Also Sa’id ibn Abi
Urubah, in whose regard Ahmad ibn Hanbal said: He is thiqah, an imam of
bad memory, and his traditions were recorded in the books, but he was a
fatalist (qadari).

And al-Walid ibn Muslim: He was the learned man of Damascus, thiqah, and
a memorizer but he used to defraud from weak narrators, with his
traditions being cited in all books. That was what we quoted of this
treatise in brief.

In al-Ahkam <span id="_anchor_659"></span>659 al-‘Amudi says:

The Sunnah Imams concurred in believing in the reliability of the
Sahabah, with some of them holding: Their judgement in adalah is like
that of those who followed them necessitating investigation and
verification about their reliability in riwayah. Some of them said: They
(Sahabah) continued to be reliable till the time when conflict and
seditions erupted among them. After that we should look into the
reliability of the narrator or the witness among them, when he being not
widely-known to be reliable. Some others said: Whoever fought against
Ali, being aware, is verily a debauchee of refuted narration and witness
against the true Imam. Some others believed in rejecting the narration
and testimony of all of them, as one of the two parties should be fasiq,
and he is unknown and unidentified. <span id="_anchor_660"></span>660

Al-Gazzali, in al-Mustasfi, says: Some people held them to be like
others in respect of necessity of investigation. Some others said: They
used to be characterized with reliability from the beginning till the
eruption of battles and enmities, when the situation changed and blood
was shed, the fact entailing investigation and scrutiny.

The basis upon which those believing in reliability of all the Sahabah
depended was the hadith they used to report from the Messenger of Allah:
Verily, my Companions are like the stars (nujum), whichever of them you
follow, you shall be guided rightly. But this hadith is false and
baseless.

A Research on Disagreement

Al-Imam al-Muqbili, <span id="_anchor_661"></span>661 in his book
al-‘Ilm al-shamikh fi tafdil al-haqq ala al-aba’ wa al-mashayikh,
dedicated a separate chapter in which he discussed the issue of
disagreement in religious affairs, including the reliability of Sahabah.
Due to the numerous advantages and valuable rules it contained, I cite
herewith a brief abstract of it:

Allah, Subhanahu, has hinted to difference in religion, reiterating this
several times in His holy Book, as He is fully aware of its detriment in
the world, repeating it in regard of the Children of Isra’il, saying:
“And they were not divided until after the knowledge came unto them,
through rivalry among themselves.” Allah said the truth, as we could not
find disagreement but only where truth could be ascertained. Then came
the Messenger of Allah (S) and forbade from suspicions entailing
conflict, warning against them, like controvery about fate (qadar),
regarding which the Almighty said: “O ye who believe! Ask not of things
which, if they were made known unto you, would trouble you…” And the
Messenger of Allah said: “Depart me as long as I leave you”. Allah, the
Glorified, has perfected the Din on His Prophet’s tongue, so nothing
drawing us near paradise but he would show it to us, and so also with
the Fire, nothing was ignored by Allah or His Messenger. Because Allah
never likes us to search for everything with our powerless minds, as all
the world was created in a limited measure within His Knowledge, after
which the apostles were sent to perfect that what completing the favour,
and establishing the hujjah. Whatever other than this being only
officiousness the detriment of which is feared and no benefit is
expected. This mission was undertaken by the best of men, who used to
evade disagreement,

making up for every slip made by them, not insisting on the wrong they
did knowingly, as did by Talhah and al-Zubayr and ‘A’ishah. Those
Companions who survived till after the demise of the Prophet, bore
patiently despotic rulers till the emergence of heresies due to
searching for whatever left by Allah and His Messenger, of which if
there was any good for them, Allah would certainly make them acquainted
with all these things through His Messenger never leaving them groping
about awkwardly. Then some novel things appeared among Muslims, like
talking about qadar and issue of creation of the Qur’an, and interfering
in what occurred among the Companions, followed by debate before kings
and emirs which turned to partisanship. Each party was claiming this to
be religiosity, while in fact it is not so. But when they overleapt the
bounds, not observing their limit at which Allah and His Messenger
ordered them to stop, Allah forsook them alone bewildering them with
dissension and making them taste the tyranny one of another.
Consequently, one caliph would agree with those people, launching severe
attack against their opponents, while another one would invalidate what
the first one did, speaking ill of these and belittling those, till evil
prevailed and people divided into schisms.

Sometimes we see someone convert from a madhhab to another for the sake
of some shaykh, or a ruler or any other worldly cause and natural
bigotry. It is also reported that Ibn Abd al-Hakam inquired for majlis
(meeting) of al-Shafi’i after his death, when it was said to him:
Al-Shafi’i said: Al-Rabi’ is more rightful to my majlis. Al that time he
was enraged, converting to the Maliki school, compiling a book calling
it: Al-Radd ala Muhammad ibn Idris fima khalafa fih al-Kitab wa
al-Sunnah. Thus was mentioned by Ibn al-Sabki, and only Allah and those
who are of sound instruction know well that truth (haqq) could never be
wholly beside a certain party, and falsehood with the rest, but the
truth – thanks to God – can never come out from among them altogether.
In fact truth was quite on the side of those who committed themselves to
what the Prophet (S) brought with him, and it is inevitable for him to
err in his exertions too in respect of minor issues

not in major issues. And who can keep on his state and accept the
teaching taught from Allah and His Messenger, never adopting any
madhhab, preferring the ancestors to the Book and the Sunnah and
abandoning this irremediable blight, committing himself to equity in
reporting ? By God I know not anyone in all these extinct books but he
would grope about and confuse, being bigoted to his madhhab without any
fairness, referring the Book of Allah to his belief and perverting!

After exposing the biography of the mutakallimun, he embarked on talking
about the narrators, saying:

These muhaddithun, who claim the Sunnah to be firm, forbidding from
kalam (theology), <span id="_anchor_662"></span>662 were afflicted with
corruption and deviation more than others, as they being on the centre
of way of the Shari’ah, and demorality, war, assault, serpents,
scorpions, poisons and lions when being on the road are verily more
detrimental than when they be on the sideways. However, their calamity
being caused by indulgence in kalam, becoming more fanatic than the
mutakallimun since the latters based their work on examination, without
blaming the knowledge-seeker for discussion and putting questions and
inventing explanations, rather counting this as a kind of elegancy and
perfection. With succession of views, the latters, might discover the
rapprochement in kalam of the two parties and alike, as falshood of
determinism (jabr) was uncovered for the followers of al-Ash’ari, who
clung then to acquisition and after finding it defective they converted
to the Mu’tazilah school on the basis of meaning as stated before. Also
establishment of option never appertains to the Mu’tazilah alone so as
to be averse to it, but it being verily the Din and hujjah of Allah, and
when being verified by any of the latters he would take easy what was
aggrandized by the ancestors and be calm. While the muhaddithun have
adopted something through the first sight, never criticizing, as if this
being an innovation which they believed in, while it being an innovation
from first to last, so why did they engaged themselves in it?! It seems
that their indulgence was unintentionally, but they were enticed by the
Satan saying to them: You are

Ahl al-Sunnah (followers of the Prophetic Sunnah), so who would defend
it if you forsake these people? Thus they neither were satisfied with
what they had, nor realized the intention of those people so as to be
able to refute their claim!

Al-Imam Ahmad, with his full knowledge of the Sunnah and dedication to
God the Glorious, was not ignorant of this, but when discussing the
issue of creation of the Qur’an and was afflicted because of it, he
considered it equal to Tawhid (monotheism) or even more! Once he was
told that Muhammad ibn Harun said to Isma’il ibn Ulayyah: O the son of
prostitutor! Do you claim the Qur’an to be invented? – or a similar
expression! Ahmad said: May God forgive him (i.e. Muhammad ibn Harun).
While Isma’il ibn Ulayyah was more entitled to imploring of Ahmad, since
he was his equal in being an imam of knowledge and piety. And if
supposedly he has erred in regard of what Ahmad alleged, then God’s
forgiveness is certainly more expansive. And his error in its regard is
only like that who assumes caliphate while being devoid of its
provisions and traits, plunged (ya’uth) <span
id="_anchor_663"></span>663 in blood and properties of Muslims!

May God forgive Ahmad, he has gone too far in bigotry in this issue, to
the extent that whoever opposing him would be rebuffed with rejecting
his riwayah, which being a treachery to the sanad. Because that who
obligated approval of the report of the reliable, would obligate
accepting such khabar, as he used to say: ‘We report from the
Qadariyyah’, and when checking al-Basrah we will find two thirds of
their people to be Qadariyyah, as reported in Tahdhib al-‘Izzi and other
books.

This issue cannot exceed the limit if there being steadiness in the
disagreement regarding the two issues, but he exaggerated and began to
reject the waqif saying: So and so is an ill-omened waqifi. <span
id="_anchor_664"></span>664 He even overstated and said: I never like
reporting from that who responded in the ordeal like Yahya ibn Mu’in,
though Ahmad was not among the obstinate nor among the hardliners. His
shaykhs (in hadith) included ‘Amir ibn Salih ibn Abd Allah ibn Urwah ibn
al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwan, in whose regard al-Nasa’i said: He is

not thiqah, and al-Daraqutni recommended to reject his hadith. Ibn Mu’in
said about him: He is a liar, villain, enemy of Allah, and of no value,
and also said: Ahmad turned mad, is he reporting from ‘Amir ibn Salih?
Al-Dhahabi said: He is very weak…Ahmad has never reported from anyone
weaker than him. Despite guluww of al-Dhahabi <span
id="_anchor_665"></span>665 in regard of Ahmad and approving of him, but
he would not doubt that he was not covetous toward his narrators, but
only when the issue be related to the Qur’an. We want to ask him: What
do you know about the Qur’an and the Sunnah, is the Qur’an not invented?
Or is it invented? And your research and that of others are both
innovations! And Allah described the Qur’an as an Arabic Qur’an
containing no crookedness, saying: “We made it,” and ‘We have revealed
it’, and ‘We have expounded it’, never saying, We have invented
(created) it, nor saying it is not invented. So wherefrom you have
brought this sunnah. When Ali ibn al-Midyani, in whose regard al-Bukhari
<span id="_anchor_666"></span>666 said: ‘I never despised myself but
only near him’, responded during the tribulation, being subject to
sarcasm, though he might be excused when responding in the abandonment,
in regard of the issue of invention of the Qur’an, till was defended by
Muslim <span id="_anchor_667"></span>667 though being known of leniency
toward his rijal. Even more amazing than this being the fact that those
supporting Ali ibn al-Midyani couldn’t find any fault except their
saying: From him many narrators reported that he said: “Whoever claims
the Qur’an to be invented (makhluq) has denied God! And whoever said,
Allah does not see has denied God!” This exemption, if being right, has
in fact incited vindictive feelings against him, since it is charging a
Muslim with impiety without a proof shouldered by one of them, the
charge that was levelled against ‘A’ishah and some of the Sahabah and
Tabi’un in negation of vision (ru’yah of God). But the muhaddithun could
not recognize the extent of error in kalam as this being out of their
capacity, and every owner of anything should have knowledge of that
thing alone. So we should search for this meaning and learn every art
from its leaders, and beware of aliens in it. They used to reiterate
this rule, and when intending to exempt anyone from error or extol him
they would say: Whoever claims the Qur’an to

be makhluq(invented) he is a disbeliever. That was said in regard of
some people, among whom being Ibn Luhay'ah and others, and rather they
said: Al-Muhasibi left the heritage of his father adding: the followers
of two cults can never inherit each other, since his father was a
waqifi.

Yahya ibn Mu’in, leader of jarh and ta’dil, said: ‘Amr ibn Ubayd was a
dahri (atheist, sceptic)! When asked, who is the dahri? He replied: He
who says: nothing…while ‘Amr was not so. Had we referred to the greatest
of mutakallimun, or rather the venturous story-tellers, we would have
never found anyone daring to that extent against a man known widely of
knowledge, asceticism and gnosticism, followed by about half the Ummah.
In regard of Unbasah ibn Sa’id ibn al’As ibn Umayyah, Yahya ibn Mu’in
said: He is thiqah, and used to keep company with al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf;
and so also said al-Nasa’i and Abu Dawud and al-Daraqutni, with
al-Bukhari and Muslim reporting from him. Further al-Bukhari has
reported from Marwan ibn al-Hakam, who accused Talhah while being among
his army, and the one who prompted him to revolt against Ali, doing
every sort of calamity. Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani, a leader of the recent
narrators (al-Kamil), in his exposition on Marwan, said: If his
companionship is proved, no vilification would affect him!! As if suhbah
being like prophethood, or the Companion being in fallible, <span
id="_anchor_668"></span>668 the fact being an imitation in investigation
after reliability of the Sahabah became intuitive among the Jumhur.
Truly what is intended by this being only the majority, as the praise
from Allah and His Messenger – the evidence for their reliability – has
not identified individuals by names but it came in general, though the
evidence for the Companionship including every seer (one who only saw
the Prophet) and alike, is a very meagre evidence, and would that be
known who is the addressed recommended? Is he the same recommended in
the Prophet’s hadith: Do not insult my Companions…if anyone of you
spends the weight of each of them in gold, he can never attain to the
measure or half of anyone of them. Here it is obvious what kind of
factors lying behind those traditions, <span id="_anchor_669"></span>669
when the latters in Islam talking in regard of the formers, as when he
said to Ammar (may God be pleased with

him): Does this slave insult me?! If we intend to generalize the epithet
of companionship from upward going downward, i.e. starting from the
ancestors (sabiqun) up to that who could only see the Prophet, so from
looking at the positions of extolling cited in the Qur’an and the
Sunnah, we can distinguish between one telling of a lofty status the
least of which being reliability, and one telling of some kind of
honour, though the Prophetic distinguishing probably came very explicit
as his (S) saying in regard of one poor Companion: “He is verily better
than the earthful of this”, i.e. some of the heads among the latters in
Islam.

Generally-speaking, whoever following up these and other cases among the
Sahabah, he is either blind or feigning blindness. As reliability of
some of them should be recognized out of necessity, who constitute the
majority as stated before, in a way making it unnecessary to investigate
their biographies. Among the Sahabah there being very few who were
devoid of reliability, like wine-imbibers, so we should drive them out
of reliability not out of companionship. Some of them have embraced
Islam for fear from the sword (killing) like the freed prisoners of war
(tulaqa’), <span id="_anchor_670"></span>670 and others, of whom if his
good state couldn’t be confirmed, he would be quite unknown for all, who
being very rare in number. Nevertheless, reliability verily is not like
infallibility (‘ismah), but people have exaggerated in regard of those
whose companionship was confirmed in insisting on proving their adalah.
Had we admitted the inclusion of subhah (companionship) and after it
adalah to all, the case would not have reached that level portrayed by
ghulat among the narrators.

If suhbah benefitted one like Bishr ibn Marwan, if supposedly it was
proved, or al-Walid, it would become clear for us that no act would be
detrimental along with companionship except infidelity, when suhbah
would be greater than faith, and this belief would be more special than
madhhab of Muqatil and his followers, the Murji’ah. And what is the
position and consideration of the ahadith: “You don’t know what they
have done after you”, which were successive (mutawatir) in meaning.
Rather, if tawatur in

words was claimed in some of them that belief would be justifiable, and
Sunnah-claimants have claimed companionship or its confirmation for
those no evidence was established in their regard, deriving from it as
many as they liked of ramifications, founding then the Din on this.
Hasn’t God said: “If an evil-liver bring you tidings verify it...” in
regard of a man of an ascertained suhbah, <span
id="_anchor_671"></span>671 though his state was uncovered together with
the suhbah. Among the Sahabah there were some addicted to drinking wine,
<span id="_anchor_672"></span>672 beside innumerable (bad) practices
that were not divulged as an observation for the right of the Prophet
(S), unless there being a religious necessity when it should be
mentioned. The worst infliction is verily inference of a religious
ruling out of narrations of Marwan and al-Walid ibn Uqbah <span
id="_anchor_673"></span>673 and others. This being verily the greatest
betrayal to the Din of Allah and contradiction to the express text of
the holy verse, the consequence of which would not bring the Sahabah as
a whole any defect, but rather it being a vindication for them, so
beware of self-conceit.

No doubt al-Bukhari was one of the leaders of lofty muhaddithun, so how
would be the case with those having lower position despite the fact that
al-Bukhari evaded reporting from so many devout huffaz, <span
id="_anchor_674"></span>674 as stated in books of jarh and ta’dil. Also
Ali al-Midyani was ignored by Muslim. In regard of Umar ibn Sa’d ibn Abi
Waqqas, al-Ijli said: He is a Tabi’i and thiqah, from whom people
reported hadith, and it was him who embarked on murdering al-Imam
al-Husayn.

So is there jarh (defamation) in religion worse than this! And this
being a warning only, as it is a vast section when opened for
researchers to compile in it, this would take a full book. So also said
the other muhaddithun in regard of their opponents in doctrines
(aqa’id), that can be put to test. The evidence for this claim can be
found in the books of jarh, from which we can meditate statements about
the supporter and opponent, considering them as witness from the foes,
and would that they made this inward and outward, but they say that they
report from the innovators while treating them in such a

way. Yahya ibn Mu’in - when authenticating Sa’id ibn Khalid al-Bajali
and being told that he was a Shi’i - said: a Shi’i and thiqah, and a
qadari, thiqah.

Al-Ijli, described Imran ibn Hattan as a thiqah, while he flattered Ibn
Muljam <span id="_anchor_675"></span>675 (may God’s curse be upon him),
saying:

O smite by a pious desiring nothing from it,

But to attain to pleasure of throne Owner!

Here we can identify who was pleased with killing of Ali, and who killed
Talhah, and who killed al-Husayn, and how they were deemed trustworthy
by others. While the faithful and true ulama and huffaz of the Ummah,
like Hammad ibn Salamah - the known leader - and the ascetic scholar
Makhul, were avoided and ignored by al-Bukhari and Muslim too. The
beliefs and opinions held by the muhaddithun, differed much regarding
the narrators, as we see the same man may be described once with the
epithet Amir al-Mu’minim by some, and the biggest liar by others, or
something alike. We can have a look into the two Sahihs, and see how
their authors shunned the great imams, against whom malice should be
harboured, and if avoiding the best of them was considered, it (malice)
would vanish, and it would never affect the supposition of their
truthfulness but only like a drop in the sea. And among the rijal they
cited in their books there were some who were vilified by many leaders
of hadith, and harshly attacked by some others, though they both - i.e.
authors of the two Sahihs - would not be obliged but to act according to
their ijtihad. More wonderful than this is the fact that their rijal
included some whose ta’dil could never be established, but rather their
position was like that of unknown or ignored ones.

In his exposition of Hafs ibn Bughayl, al-Dhahabi said: Ibn al-Qattan
said: He is of unknown condition and unrecognized, meaning he was not
known to be unreliable and he himself was unknown, gathering both the
ignorances.

Al-Dhahabi said: I haven’t mentioned such kind (of people) in my book
al-Mizan. Ibn al-Qattan said: He has discussed those subjects that were
not broached by any leader (imam) or one lived contemporaneously with
that man, indicating his reliability, which being something great. In
the two Sahihs there can be found so many of these concealed pe4ople who
were neither deemed weak by anyone nor considered unknown. In his
tarjumah of Malik al-Khayr al-Zabbadi he said: Among narrators of the
two Sahihs, there being a large number (of narrators) whose
authentication was not confirmed by anyone. How marvellous is that! The
reporting is done from the unknown while eminent leaders and compilers
are abandoned because they believed in invention of the Qur’an or were
among the Waqifah or something of the sort. What causes wonder here is
the courtesy of al-Dhahabi when he said: “...and they are not unknown,”
as that whose reliability was not proved would not be included with the
evidences of khabar al-ahad relevant particularly to the reliable.
Besides the term mastur (hidden, concealed) can never bring its owner
into the fold of the reliable who being meant by proofs of approving the
single (ahad) narrators. To ignore men like Abu Hanifah, Muhammad ibn
al-Hasan, Ibn Ishaq and Dawud al-Zahiri, among whom some were admitted
by people in the maghazi (moral lessons), and some others were imitated
by half the Ummah, and reporting from an unidentified man that no one
knows who is he and what is he.

My intention is not defaming or belittling the two Sahihs, but to make
known that the corruption of disagreement has prevailed everywhere, and
this is exactly what I intend to manifest out of inviting to disdaining
from disagreement and conflict, the fact to be known for all. <span
id="_anchor_676"></span>676

In a footnote to this book, which is called al-Arwah al-nawafikh,
al-Muqbili explained the statement “they claimed suhbah (companionship)
and proved it for that no evidence was established for it in his regard,
“saying” The outside aspect of this speech is the fact we reiterated
before that they term something emerged in recent times, embarking then
on interpreting the Book and the Sunnah with their renewed term... and
suhbah has no legal

identity, but it and other words about merits of the Sahabah were used
on the basis of lexical meaning. But the traditionists termed and
decided, without any evidence, that the term suhbah was used for
everyone saw the Prophet, or seen by the Prophet even when he was a
child, provided that he be a Muslim, keeping this until death and not
apostatizing. No equitable or sane man can doubt that these restrictions
being only in terminology not necessitated by the language, as the
derivation being from sahaba (accompanied) not from ra’a (saw) or
sighted certainly or hypothetically, so as to include even the blind
one. It was better for them to say close hypothetically or a similar
expression, so as to include even the contemporary people who did not
see the Prophet or even every and each one, as hypothesis has capacity
to cover everything. This is verily the origin of misconception of the
issue, as we cautioned previously against this mistake that was
perpetrated by so many people.

After identifying the word suhbah (companionship), they added to it an
appendix by cancelling what was practised by the Sahabah. Some of them
disguised under claim of ijtihad, that could be proved false by exigency
in numerous cases, and some others would declare openly! How wonderful
is this impudence in claiming ijtihad on the part of Bisr ibn Arta’ah,
<span id="_anchor_678"></span>678 who was known of doing all kinds of
evil, as he was envoy of the mujtahid Mu’awiyah, advisor of Islam in
slandering Ali ibn Abi Talib and his party (Shi’ah). Beside Marwan and
the debauchee al-Walid, and the ijtihad in swearing allegiance to Yazid
and that who suggested it and endeavoured to achieve it or advocated it,
beside innumerable cases. They claim that all these practices aimed only
at gaining God’s pleasure, except some ignorant ones unaware of what
they are saying, giving premises, nourishing on desire and blind
imitation, that became their diet. After that on this basis they dared
to construct identical things from which no one could be free, though
they differed in religious status, with the purpose that the pious
disdaining from approving such calamities. That who was absent in time
of committing a sin but showed his consent then, would be viewed like
that who attended and participated in it, and vice versa, as stated in
the Prophetic hadith. <span id="_anchor_679"></span>679

651. Refer to my reply to al-Ajjaj and others in my book Shaykh
al-mudirah.

652. Fath al-Bari, vol. III, p.2.

653. Al-Allamah al-Muqbili, in his reply to those proving the
companionship for that who saw the Prophet: They term something very
late, coming then and interpret the Book and Sunnah with their abstract
term. And suhbah (companionship) has no legal origin but only used
lexically, and so also are the rest of words used for indicating the
merits of the Sahabah. But the muhaddithun termed and decided, with no
any proof, that suhbah is used for everyone the Prophet saw, or he saw
the Prophet even if he be a child! on condition that he be a true
Muslim, and dying on this without apostatizing.

654. Al-Isabah, p. 4.

655. Al-Taqrib, pp. 3 - 21.

656. Yahya ibn Mu'in was one of great leaders of jarh and ta'dil whose
opinions about the rijal were deemed a decisive authority (hujjah).

657. The result of bigotry can be realized here.

658. If al-Bukhari does not depend on such lofty magnate as hujjah so on
whom does he depend? You can see what al-Bukhari did to Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt, from whom he disdained to report, as stated before.

659. Al-Ahkam, vol. II, p. 128.

660. Ibn Qutaybah, in Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, writes: What is
wonderful about them being their charging the Shaykh with falsity,
without reporting from him what the traditionists agreeing with him, of
censuring Yahya ibn Mu'in and Ali ibn al-Midyani and their likes, while
they argue with the hadith of Abu Hurayrah (as hujjah) in cases not
agreed by anyone of the Sahabah, though he was belied by Umar and Uthman
and A'ishah (pp. 10, 11).

661. He is al-Shaykh Salih Mahdi al-Muqbili, one of Yemen mujtahidun. He
died in 1108 H. In origin he was a follower of Zaydiyyah school
(madhhab), seeking truth then by not imitating, which led him to abandon
embracing any religion, and admitting the truth that is established on
evidence. Al-Imam al-Shawkani certified his absolute ijtihad.

662. That is 'ilm al-kalam.

663. It is said: 'atha - ya'thi - and 'atha - ya'ith which is the
severest kind of corruption. See al-Qirtayn, p. 43.

664. The waqif is that who never talked about the issue of creation of
the Qur'an.

665. Al-Muqbili described al-Dhahabi as that who used to feign
calumniating Ahl al-Bayt, being blind to their virtues and merits,
taking the side of the Umayyads, particularly the Marwanis.

666. One of those discussing the issue of creation of the Qur'an was
al-Bukhari who said: Our acts are created and our words are taken from
our acts.

667. Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj, is the author of the famous book.

668. See their definition of the Sahabi, stated before in this book.

669. This hadith was said when Abd al-Rahman ibn Awf stickled with
Khalid ibn al-Walid in one of the battles, and Khalid used harsh words
against Abd al-Rahman. When this news reached the Messenger of Allah, he
said: Never insult my Companions … (the hadith). Hence it is said in a
certain occasion, and it was reported by Muslim.

670. Like Abu Sufyan and Mu'awiyah and their supporters.

671. That is, his being one of the Sahabah, who was al-Walid ibn Uqbah.

672. Like Qudamah ibn Maz'un.

673. It is him in whose regard the verse "…If an evil-liver bring you
tidings, verify it…" was revealed.

674. Refer to what I stated earlier about this issue.

675. Ibn Muljam was the one who perpetrated the guilt of murdering Ali
(A).

676. Al-'Ilm ol-shamikh, pp. 297-312.

677. Al-Arwah al-nawafikh, pp. 678-688.

678. Ibn Hajar, in al-Isabah reported that Mu'awiyah has delegated Bisr
ibn Arta'ah to Yemen and Hijaz, commanding him to find those who
followed Ali and kill them altogether. It was him who killed two kids
for Ubayd Allah ibn Abbas.

679. Those who were considered among the Sahabah, some who carped the
Prophet (S) in regard of the alms (sadaqat), and some who vexed him
saying: He is only a hearer, and some who chose a place for worship out
of opposition and disbelief, and separation among the believers, with
those in whose hearts there was disease, and the disabled, and those
asked to stay behind in the Battle of Tabuk, who were eighty-plus men,
and swore to the Prophet who accepted their declaration. In their regard
the verses: "They will swear unto you by God, when ye return unto them,
that ye may turn aside from them; so turn ye aside from them; verily
they are unclean and their abode is hell; a recompense for what they did
earn. They will swear unto you that ye may be pleased with them, but
(even) if ye be pleased with them, verily God is not pleased with people
who are wicked," were revealed.
Al-Bukhari reported from Zayd ibn Thabit as saying: When the Prophet
went out toward (Battle of) Uhud, some of his Companions retreated
backwards, when a group said: We should kill them. Another group said:
We should not kill them. At that time this verse: was revealed "What
hath happened to you (that) ye are two parties about the hypocrites?
Verily God hath reversed them for what they have earned…". Al-Raghib, in
his Mufradat, said: "reversed them, meaning: he returned them to the
disbelief." There is so much talk about this bad.


