Adopting Reliability of All the Sahabah
=======================================

While the Jumhur believe in reliability of all the Companions, refusing
any jarh and ta’dil regarding them with accepting that for other
narrators, considering them (Sahabah) all infallible against error,
inadvertence and forgetfulness, there being many researchers not
believing in this (absolute) reliability for all the Sahabah. But they
hold the same view held by al-Allamah al-Muqbili that it includes the
majority not all, and that they are liable to error, forgetfulness,
inadvertence and even caprice, as they are human beings doing what
others do, that which belongs to the human nature. Besides, their master
(S) who was chosen by Allah, Who knows better where to place His
Message, said: “I am only a human being, that may be right or mistaken,”
supporting their judgement with those (companions) who were during the
lifetime of the Prophet (S) among the hypocrites and liars, and many of
whom apostatized after his demise. Truly they have instigated wars and
seditions that consumed everything, with their bad consequences still
sensed nowadays and will continue in future. It seems that the Messenger
(S) could discern with his penetrating insight what will his Companions
do after his passing away, as a result of which he said in the Farewell
Pilgrimage (Hijjat al-Wada’): “Do not return after me disbelievers
beheading and killing each other.” <span id="_anchor_680"></span>680

Al-Bukhari reported from Ibn Abbas, that the Prophet (S) said: “Verily
you will be resurrected bare-footed and naked, and a group of my
Companions will be driven to the left (Fire). I would say, (God!) Aren’t
they) my Companions !He (God) would say: They were still apostatizing
and renegading since the time you departed them. I would say as the
righteous bondman (al-Abd al-Salih) said: “I was a witness of them while
I dwelt among them”. Muslim reported the same hadith thus: “A group of
my Companions will be brought to me at the Pond (of al-Kawthar), and as
soon as I recognize them they shall be dragged away. I would say, (God!
Aren’t they) my Companions! He (God) would say: ‘You don’t know what
they did after you.’”

Al-Bukhari reported from Abu Hurayrah as the Prophet saying: “When I was
standing, a group of people came toward me. As soon as I recognized them
a man emerged between me and them saying: Come on! I said: Where to? He
said: Toward the Fire, by God. I said: ‘What did they do?’ He said:
‘They retraced their steps backwards after you.’ Then another group
appeared, and as soon as I recognized them, a man came out in between me
and them, saying: Let’s go, I said: whereto? He said: Toward the Fire,
by God. I said: What did they do? He said: They retreated backwards. And
I never think any of them will be delivered but as few as the ignored
cattle. <span id="_anchor_681"></span>681

In another version of the hadith, the Prophet (S) said: “On the Day of
Resurrection, a group of my Companions will come toward me, and will be
dragged away from the Pond (Hawd). I would say: O God, (aren’t they) my
Companions. He (God) would say: You have no knowledge of what they did
after you... they have retreated backwards”.

Sahl ibn Sa’d reported that the Prophet said: A group of people will be
brought to me (on the Doomsday), whom I know and they know me. Then
something will intervene between me and them. Abu Hazim said: Al-Nu’man
ibn Abi Ayyash heard me and said: Did you hear it in this way from Sahl?
I said: Yes. He said: I give evidence against Abu Sa’id al-Khudri that I
heard him — adding to it — and I (the Prophet) would say: But they are
from me. It would be said to him: You don’t know what they did after
you. I would say: Remote be everyone who changed after me.

Al-Bukhari, under “bab Ghazwat al-Hudaybiyyah”, reported from al-Ala’ibn
al-Musayyab, from his father, as saying: I met with al-Bara’ ibn Azib
when I said to him: Blessed be you, you kept company with the Prophet
(S) and swore allegiance to him under the tree. He said: O my nephew,
you don’t know what we did after him!

He also reported from Abd Allah, that the Prophet (S) said: I will
precede you on the Pond, and some men from among you will be brought to
me, and will be dragged away from me. I would say: O God, (aren’t they)
my Companions! It would be said: You don’t know what they did after you.
Al-

Bukhari said: He was followed by Asim who reported from \`Wa’il. Husayn
said: It is reported from Abu Wa’il, from Hudhayfah, from the Prophet
(may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny).

And he reported from Asma’ bint Abi Bakr as saying: The Prophet said: I
will be at the Pond waiting to see who from among you will come toward
me. And a group of people will be dragged away from me, when I would
say: O my Lord (aren’t they) from me and from among my Ummah? It would
be said: Did you realize what they did after you? By God, they kept on
retreating and falling backwards.

Al-Bukhari said: Ibn Abi Mulaykah used to say: O God, we seek Your
protection against retreating backwards and being seduced away from our
Din.

Those were some traditions I quoted from al-Bukhari and Muslim, which
contained so many (odd) things I disdained from citing for sake of
brevity.

  
  
  

680. See al-'Ilm al-shamikh, of al-Muqbili, p. 92.

681. Hummal al-na'am means the cattle which have no shepherd, which
means that only very few of them will be delivered from the hell.
