Hypocrites Among Sahabah and Surat Al-tawbah:
=============================================

  
  
  
  

Al-Baghawi and others reported from Ibn Abbas as saying: The Messenger
of Allah was not aware of the hypocrites till the revelation of Surat
Bara’ah (al-Tawbah). Before it he could recognize some of their
distinguishing qualities, sayings and deeds, out of what is revealed in
their regard in several surahs before Surat al-Tawbah, like
al-Munafiqun, al-Ahzab, al Nisa, al-Anfal, al-Qital and al-Hashr.

Surat Bara’ah has in fact disgraced them and divulged all sorts of their
outward and inward hypocrisy, the reason for which it was called also
al-Fadihah, al-Muba’thirah, al-Musharridah, al-Mukhziyah, al-Muthirah,
al-Hafirah, al-Munakkilah, al-Mudamdimah and Surat al-Adhab!

Herewith exposition of some facts about them in the Battle of Tabuk and
its limit, with their acts and signs of their hypocrisy, and scandals,
and

their punishment, arranged according to the course of the verses of
Surat al-Tawbah not according to the letters. <span
id="_anchor_682"></span>682

1. Their asking permission to remain behind, which can never be done by
a believer, as none asks permission to abandon jihad but only that who
believes neither in Allah nor in the Hereafter (467).

2. Had they intended really to go out they would have made ready for it
(174)

3. Allah was averse to their resurgence, so He hindered them (471)

4. Had they risen out among the believes, they would have only increased
in their perplexity, with wishing for their disgrace (473).

5. They have adopted the course of sedition before Battle of Tabuk,
during Battle of Uhud, when they instigated discord among Muslims,
discouraging some of them (474).

6. They reversed the facts for the Prophet in the outset till truth was
revealed to make him victorious and manifesting of Allah’s decree, while
they being averse to this (475).

7. Some of them took leave from the Prophet to stay behind (in battles),
with the excuse of fearing from being infatuated by prettiness of the
Roman women but they were afflicted with the fascination of disobeying
Allah and His Messenger by practice (477).

8. Every good befalls the Prophet would bother them, and every disaster
strikes him would delight them, thinking themselves to be decisive in
remaining behind (478).

9.The believers await for the hypocrites to be afflicted with a doom
from Allah directly or at their hands (479).

10. Their almsgiving would not be accepted due to their debauchery,
impiety, performing prayers while being idlers, and paying their
contribution only unwillingly (481).

11. Punishing them with their wealth and children in this world, and
passing away of their souls while being disbelievers (485-574).

12. Their swearing for the believers that they be in truth of them, with
describing their failure and being afraid of them (485).

13. Pointing of some of them at the Messenger in the alms, and if they
be given from them they would be pleased, otherwise they would be
enraged (487).

14. Their vexing the Prophet (S) by saying: He is only a hearer (516).

15. Their swearing for the believers to please them without pleasing
Allah and His Messenger (522).

16. Their fearing from revelation of a surah proclaiming what be in
their hearts, and threatening them (by God) for their scoffing with
disclosing what they fear (525).

17. Their apologizing for their scoffing by saying that they were only
prating and jesting, which being the same as infidelity, with
threatening to punish a party of them because of their insistence on
their guilt, and possibility of forgiving another party (528-532).

18. Manifesting the conditions of the hypocrites and their general
qualities, males and females, and throwing them together with the
disbelievers into Hellfire and cursing them (533).

19. Resembling them to the hypocrites of the ancient peoples in having
nothing to do but to enjoy what they stated when prating in falsehood
and perishing of their works in the world and the Hereafter like them
(527), with reminding them with the fate of the hypocrites folks who
were before them (539).

20. The hypocrites are verily the transgressors (the verse 67).

21. Connecting them (hypocrites) to the disbelievers in respect of
obligation of striving against them, with being harsh in treating them
and threatening them (549).

22. Their swearing (by Allah) on denying what they said of the word of
disbelief, and God’s proving what they denied, (and He inspired them
that which they could not attain), which being the attempt to
assassinate the Prophet (551-555).

23. Making some of them a covenant with Allah to give alms when being
straitened, but breaching their covenant and lying after attaining
richness and affluence, with (Allah’s) making the consequence of this to
be hypocrisy accompanying them until the day of meeting God. And their
unawareness that Allah knows both their secret and what they announce
(558).

24. Their pointing at and carping the believers in giving the alms, and
deriding them (563).

25. Depriving them from asking forgiveness by the Messenger due to their
disbelief in Allah and His Messenger, with no hope to be guided (by
Allah) through abandoning their rudeness. (666).

26. Rejoicing of those who were left behind at sitting still behind the
Messenger of Allah, and their recommendation not to go forth in the heat
with reminding them with the fire of hell (569).

27. Its being more proper for them to be sad, laugh a little and weep
much (572).

28. The Prophet’s forbidding from praying for the dead of them, giving
the reason to be their disbelief and dying while being
disbelievers.(573).

29. Asking leave by men of wealth among them to stay behind of jihad
whenever a surah is revealed commanding to gather between faith and
jihad (581).

30. The state of the wandering Arabs and asking permission by some of
them to sit and be exempted from jihad, and sitting of the liars without
an excuse, with threatening that a painful doom will fall on those who
disbelieve (583).

I suffice with citing these qualities of the hypocrites in the Battle of
Tabuk, as stated in Surat al-Tawbah, Whoever seeking more information or
desiring to recognize all the acts done by the hypocrites, he can refer
to the Surahs of al-Munafiqun, al-Ahzab, al-Nisa’, al-Anfal, al-Qital
and al-Hashr.

In the two Sahihs, in hadith al-Ifk, it is reported that Asid ibn
al-Khudayr said to Sa’d ibn Ubadah: You are a hypocrite, and you dispute
on behalf of the hypocrites. Then there was a heated wrangling between
them till the Prophet reconciled between them. These were the Badrites
among whom someone said to the other: you are a hypocrites, but the
Prophet never charged with impiety anyone of them.

There are so many reports in this regard, and anyone desiring to know
the names of the hypocrites among the Khazraj and Aws (Tribes), he can
refer to the first volume of Ansab al-Ashraf, in which their names
filled ten pages from p.274 upto p.283.

### Preferring Trade and Pastime to Prayers:

It seems proper to state here what was done by the Sahabah toward the
Messenger of Allah, and how they broke away from him toward merchandise
and pastime, preferring this to prayers, leaving him standing performing
the Jumu’ah (congregation) prayer, alone. That was after the commandment
of Allah the Glorified to them to haste unto remembrance of Allah and
leave the trading, as that is better for them, if they but knew.
Nevertheless, they disobeyed Allah’s order and dispersed toward their
merchandise and pastime, leaving the Messenger of Allah!

The following verse can divulge the truth about them:

“And when they see merchandise or pastime, they break away unto it, and
leave thee standing. Say thou (O Our Apostle Muhammad!) What is with God
is better than pastime and (better) than merchandise, and God is the
Best of sustainers” (61:11).

### Hypocrisy of Companions during and after Prophet’s Lifetime:

The following is a hadith reported by al-Bukhari and others <span
id="_anchor_683"></span>683 from Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, in which he
manifests clear the hypocrisy of the Sahabah during the Prophet’s
lifetime and after him.

Hudhayfah said: The contemporary hypocrites are worse than those who
lived during the Prophet’s lifetime and used to conceal their truth but
today they declare publicly! In another narration by al-Bukhari from him
(Hudhayfah) too; who said: Verily hypocrisy was found in the time of the
Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his Progeny),
but today it is no more than disbelief after faith. In another narration
(he said): It is in fact disbelief and faith.

Al-Bazzar reported from Abu Wa’il as saying: I said to Hudhayfah: Which
is worse, the hypocrisy of today or that which was found during the time
of the Messenger of Allah? He — banging his forehead by hand — said: Oh!
It is today manifest, while in the time of the Messenger of Allah they
used to hide it.

I support this chapter with a statement written by Dr. Taha Husayn in
his book Uthman, in which he referred to the issue of fitnah (disorder)
that happened during the time of Uthman, and some comments of the
historians about it.

The stances of people toward the events during the days of Uthman and
his role in them differed much. Some of them relieved themselves of the
job saying: Most of these events were falsified and innovated, and their
occurrence was not established. But they were claimed to exist by
claimants, some of whom intended to hatch plots against Islam, with some
others being compelled to do so, because of the severe animosity that
was found among the parties. Therefore they would reject and deny most
of the events, viewing those ones accepted by them to be not so
perilous, but were subjected to exertion of opinion (ijtihad) by the
madhhab leader (imam) that if he would be correct, two rewards will be
his share but if mistaken one reward.

However, his intention of that was only good, as he could not intend but
good, the opinion that was held by them (the latters) in regard of the
narrations approved by them, which were exposing the antagonism that was
going on between Uthman and the Prophet’s Companions. So most of these
events were viewed by them to be composed and very few of them could be
accepted according to the above-mentioned interpretation, i.e. they were
produced as a result of ijtihad.

Most of those holding this notion, are in fact compelled to it, due to
their consecration to that era of Islam, and being averse to accuse the
Prophet’s Companions with charges that were usually ascribed to those
caring only for the worldly lusts, out of what they harbour of readiness
to rivalry and struggling on transient wishes that never suit people
accompanied the Messenger of Allah, striving hard in the way of Allah
and founding the State, through what they expended of money , wealth and
efforts. Despite the possibility of being wrong or correct but they used
to strive all the time, rushing to do good, so it was not possible for
them to be involved in major sins, nor to perpetrate such minor sins
that Allah forgive for His benevolent bondmen! Few of those holding this
belief are impelled to hold it due to the mental inactivity that curbs
them from researching, investigation and inquiry.

There being others who make it easy for themselves by denying the
possibility of occurrence of such events and seditions at the hands of
the Prophet’s Companions, viewing them to be conspiracies hatched by
enemies of Islam, like Abd Allah ibn Saba’ and his likes from among
People of the Book and other than them. It is quite obvious that we can
never believe in this or that notion, as we neither like laziness nor
incline towards comfort, nor exaggerate in consecrating people to that
far extent, nor ascribing to the Prophet’s Companions traits which they
don’t attribute to themselves. They used to consider themselves to be
human beings, liable to what others are subject to, of sins and guilts,
exchanging serious charges, with some of them accusing each other with
infidelity and liberatinism. As an example, it is reported that Ammar
ibn Yasir used to charge Uthman with impiety, deeming

it lawful to kill him, calling him with the name of Na’thal. It is
reported too that Ibn Mas’ud used to deem shedding the blood of Uthman
to be lawful when he was in Kufah, where he used to address the people
saying: The worst of things are verily their invented ones, and every
invented thing is a heresy (bid’ah), and every bid’ah is dalalah
(deviation), and every deviation is in fire, meaning with this Uthman
and his deputy al-Walid. Further it is reported that Abd al-Rahman ibn
Awf said to some of his companions, when he was in deathbed: Precipitate
him (i.e. Ali), before his sovereignty exceeds the bounds.

Those who supported Uthman from among the Prophet’s Companions, were of
the opinion that their opponents had renegaded religion and violated his
commandment, the reason for which they deemed fighting each other as
lawful. And actually so they did, as in the Battles of al-Jamal and
Siffin, except in the case of Sa’d and his few companions. While the
Prophet’s companions have obliged themselves toward such disagreement,
reciprocating charges with major sins and fighting each other to please
God! So how can our opinion of them be better than the way they viewed
themselves, and we can’t hold the belief held by those denying most of
the akhbar (reports) that conveyed to us the sedition and conflict
occurred among them. Doing so, we would only negate the Islamic history
as a whole since the mission of the Prophet, since those who narrated
the reports of these seditions were the same narrators relating the news
of conquest and reports of maghazi, beside conduct (sirah) of the
Prophet and caliphs. Hence it is not for us to believe them when
narrating that which pleases us, and belie them when reporting that
which we dislike. And we should not approve of a part of history and
negate its other part, for the only cause that some of it pleases us
while some other part of it bothers or harms us. Also it is improper to
believe whatever is narrated or belie it as a whole, as the narrators
being ordinary people liable to err and be correct, and may tell the
truth or falsehood. The earlier traditionists themselves realized this
fact, and made ready for it, laying down certain rules and regulations
for ta’dil and tajrih, and believing and refuting, beside ways of
preponderation and disapproval, and suspecting that

which is doubtful. So we are not to blame when adopting the same method
they followed, and to add to the rules known for them the new rules
recognized by recent traditionists, which they employed to verify,
investigate and analyze the texts so as to comprehend their denotations.

The point that has no room for any doubt being that, the Muslims have
differed in opinions regarding Uthman, and this disagreement resulted in
a disorder and insurrection that created disunion and discord after
which they haven’t attained unity or agreement till the present time.
<span id="_anchor_684"></span>684

Taha Husayn concluded this chapter with some elaboration about the rules
that everyone studying the Islamic history should follow and base his
research on their principles, so as to employ them to verify,
investigate and analyze the texts and comprehend their denotations.

He also obligated upon anyone intending to study these reports properly,
to adopt a stand toward narrators of reports as that of a psychologist,
viewing them as ‘ordinary people liable to err and be right, and may
tell the truth or falsehood.” Further, he should seek truth and equity
when investigating their narrations, believing nothing out of
malignance, or denying nothing out of self desire.

If these healthy rules cited by Dr. Taha Husayn enrage some people, they
undoubtedly deserve approval and confidence of ilm (knowledge), truth
and religion altogether.

I conclude this chapter with a word recorded by Dr. Ahmad Amin (may
God’s mercy be upon him) in his book Duha al-Islam, <span
id="_anchor_685"></span>685 through a letter by some Zaydis, saying.

“We noticed how the Sahabah used to criticize each other, or rather
curse each other, and if the Companions were at a position where no
criticism or cursing be permitted, we would be able to recognize this
fact through them themselves, as they are better aware of their status
than common people of our present time. <span
id="_anchor_686"></span>686 For example Talhah, al-Zubayr and A’ishah
and their supporters have forsaken Ali, with Mu’awiyah and Amr ibn al-As
having not fallen short of smiting him and his followers with the sword.
It is also

reported that Umar used to vilify and refute the narrations of Abu
Hurayrah, <span id="_anchor_687"></span>687 standering Khalid ibn
al-Walid and charging him with debauchery, accusing Amr ibn al-’As and
Mu’awiyah with dishonesty and looting the spoils of war and deducting
them. In fact we can rarely find among the Sahabah anyone whose tongue
and hand be free from fault, beside many similar instances found in
history books.

The Tabi’un used to follow this way in regard of the Sahabah, holding
such belief about the rebels among them, while common people considered
them as masters after that. It can be said that the Companions were only
ordinary people, and should be judged and viewed in the same way of
other people. Whoever of them doing any offence is to be censured, and
that who does good should be extolled, having no merit over others but
in sighting and accompanying the Messenger. Rather, the sins they
perpetrated might be more obscene than those of others, since they have
witnessed all the landmarks and miracles, therefore our guilts should be
considered lighter as we are far from that time and more excused.”

After finishing talk on reliability of the Sahabah, I am going to
manifest how the Ummah ulama’ were viewing the akhbar al-ahad.

Attitude of Ulama’ toward Akhbar al-Ahad
----------------------------------------

In a comment on utterance of Ibn al-Salah, <span
id="_anchor_688"></span>688 “The Ummah received al-Bukhari and Muslim
with approval” al-Jaza’iri said: “He didn’t manifest what he meant by
Ummah! Or what he intended by receiving them both with approval! And he
had to elucidate that clearly so as not to let doubts and questions
raised in the minds of people. If he meant by Ummah all the Ummah
throughout all ages, he would prove his dishonesty, as these two books
were only approved in the 3rd century after the time of al-Bukhari and
leaders of known schools of Islamic Law (mudhahib). And if he meant some
of it — who came on the scene after the two Sahihs and they truly
constituted part of the Ummah — his proof cannot be established. But if
he meant by it

its ulama’ — which is apparently sensed — the ulama’ here are on three
divisions: Mutakallimun, Fuqaha’ and Grammarians.

But the ulama’ to whom this description can be applied, being in fact
those who emerged after coming out of these two books in the 3rd Hijrah
century. Whereas those who came before them from among people of ancient
centuries, in regard of whom a hadith ascribed to the Prophet was cited,
that ‘they were the best of peoples of all centuries’! had never seen
these two books so as to seek their opinion regarding them, nor the way
they received them!

Let’s go back to the ulama’ who came after the appearance of these two
books, to inquire about the way they viewed them and how they received
them.

### The Mutakallimun:

Out of what is known about them, they used to refute and reject every
hadith contradicting their beliefs, even if it was among the conjectural
issues. When any such hadith was cited before them, they would interpret
it if finding its interpretation accessible. Or they would reject it
contenting with saying: This is of akhbar al-ahad indicating only
conjecture, and it is impermissible to take decision based on conjecture
in the case of kalami issues, since the basic principle in ilm al-kalam
being always: The naqli evidences can never indicate certainty” <span
id="_anchor_689"></span>689 As an example for this, we can refer to the
hadith: A dispute was heated between the Paradise and Fire. The Fire
said: I have been distinguished with the supercilious and despots. While
the Paradise said: What is the matter with me that no one enters me but
only the weak and mean among people! Allah, the Glorious and Exalted,
said to the Paradise: You are My mercy, with you I bestow My mercy upon
whoever I choose from among My bondmen. And to the Fire He said: You are
only a torment, with you I punish whoever I wish from among My bondmen.
For every one of them is her filling! As the Fire is never filled till
He (We seek

God’s forgiveness) puts His leg, when it would say: Never, never, never.
Only then it would be filled and would seclude itself altogether, and
Allah the Glorious and Exalted never oppresses anyone. Concerning the
Paradise, Allah will verily prepare for it certain creatures. This
hadith is unanimously concurred, and was reported by al-Bukhari and
Muslim from Abu Hurayrah, from the Prophet (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his progeny). In another narration by
al-Bukhari, from Abu Hurayrah, it reads thus: the Paradise and Fire
quarrelled before their Lord — the hadith — saying in it: Allah will
originate creatures for the Fire. In another narration by Muslim: “Till
Allah puts His leg.” The researchers believed that the narrator intended
to mention the Paradise, but he was distracted and his tongue slipped
and said the Fire.

No mutakallim can believe in veracity of this hadith and its likes –
which being so many – and rather he can never be determined in their
regard! And if he be obliged to believe in their veracity he would spare
no effort to interpret them, even if when the words cannot conduce it,
in a way the hearer gets to know that the speaker never holds it
permissible inwardly. This fact has created strong antagonism between
the mutakallimun and muhaddithun, that is known for anyone looking into
history books, to the extent that the mutakallimun called the
muhaddithun with the name al-mushabbihah (anthropomorphists), while the
muhaddithun used to give them the title al-mu‘attilah (prorogators).
<span id="_anchor_690"></span>690

### The Fuqaha’:

In relation to the fuqaha’, it is commonly known about them that they
used to interpret every hadith contradicting the notions held by the
ulama’ of their madhhab, even if being among the latters. Or they used
to refute the hadith by another hadith, though being unfamiliar among
leaders of hadith, and that one they refuted being recorded in the two
Sahihs or reported in al-Sihah al-Sittah. Whoever looking into the
expositions of the two Sahihs,

everything will be explicitly manifested. Some have avoided courtesy to
the muhaddithun, expressing that preponderating two Sahihs over other
books being a preponderation without a preponderated, and those who
showed courtesy were content with the apparent indications. To this fact
a reference was made by al-Izz ibn Abd al-Salam in Kitab al-qawa’id by
saying:

What raises wonder here is the fact that even when any of the imitating
fuqaha’ be acquainted with the weakness of doubt aroused by his imam, he
would keep on following him in it, though failing to find an escape for
him. Moreover he would leave alone those who witnessed and attended the
revelation of the Book and the (Prophetic) Sunnah, and the correct
criteria for his madhhab, clinging strictly to imitating his imam, and
rather he may follow some trickery so as to divert and repel the
phenomena of the Book and Sunnah, interpreting them with false illogical
interpretations for defending his imitated imam. They used to meet and
gather in one place, and when anyone of them hearing some hadith
contradicting what he used to have in mind, he would be so astonished,
not bothering himself to seek the evidence, rather being stiffly
adherent to what he was familiar to, that is imitating his imam. But had
he pondered over it, his amazement of the madhhab of his imam would have
been much more and prior to that of any other madhhab! Hence, debating
with such people is verily futile and useless, leading only to
antagonism and discord of which no benefit is hoped. I have never known
of anyone converted from madhhab of his imam after coming to know that
truth and right be in the side of another madhhab! Rather such person
would insist on it despite his awareness of its weakness and remoteness
from truth. It is better then to refrain from debating such people who
when one of them failing to keep pace with madhhab of his imam, he would
say: There may be an Imami who comprehended a proof that I couldn’t
understand, or be guided to it. This poor man is unaware of the fact
that this is encountered by its equal, and he is distinguishing his
rival with the manifest evidence and clear proof mentioned by him.
Glorified is Allah, many are those whose sight was covered by imitation,
till impelling him to hold the belief I referred to. May

Allah help us to follow the truth wherever it be and no matter by whom
it is disclosed. (End of statement of al-Izz).

Al-Jaza’iri (may God’s mercy be upon him) concluded this discussion with
an important notice, in a commentary on their criticism for the hadith
of disputation between Paradise and Fire), that the Fire is never filled
till Allah originates another creation, saying:

What is strange in this respect being the attempt of some unknown man,
who has no experience in this profession, whether in respect of riwayah
or dirayah to ascribe error to it, believing that criticism has closed
its door for all, or thinking that criticizing the text is unjustifiable
since he fearing that pleasure-seekers may enter from it, unknowing that
when criticism being practised according to the normal course it would
not be deplored. Many of leaders of hadith have experienced this case,
like al-Isma’ili, who after citing the hadith “Abraham will meet his
father Azar on the Day of Resurrection with darkness covering Azar’s
face”, said: This is a report in whose veracity there being doubt, with
respect to the fact that since Abraham is well aware that Allah never
fails to keep is well aware that Allah never fails to keep the tryst, so
he may consider what befell his father as a disgrace for him, with
telling him that Allah promised not to disgrace him on the Doomsday,
though being aware that He never breaks His covenant. We can see here
how he found defect in the text he stated.

Some of the usulis said that the traditions contained things that can’t
be ascribed to the Prophet (S), as they can’t be held in accordance with
their apparent aspect due to their being contradictory to the proof, and
other than their appearance being far from his(S) eloquence. <span
id="_anchor_691"></span>691

### Sayings of Madhahib Imitators:

After completing the speech of those who refuted Ibn al-Salah, I am
going to cite a number of sayings about imitators of madhahib and their

standpoint in respect of hadith, so as to perfect what al-Izz ibn Abd
al-Salam previously said.

The indisputable fact being that a certain hadith may be adopted by some
Hanafi due to its good fame, but some Shafi’i may come then and reject
it due to weakness (he claimed) in its sanad! While some Maliki follower
may neglect the same hadith since the practices and acts proceeded in
its contrariety, with a Shafi’i acting according to it due to strength
of its sanad in his view, and so on and so forth.

In Mir’at al-usul and its exposition Mirqat al-wusul, there can be found
principles laid by the Hanafis on investigating the position of the
narrator. They hold that if he was a faqih, all of his narrations will
be approved, whether he agreeing with the analogy (qiyas) or
contradicting it. But if he was not a faqih, like Abu Hurayrah and Anas,
his narration would be rejected when disagreeing with the hadith he
reported.

Some ulama’ hold: Riwayah of akhbar from the Messenger of Allah (S) is
not accepted but only when being khabar by common people from common
people, or the ulama’ of all regions concurring on acting according to
them. This method was followed by the fuqaha’ of Iraq: Abu Hanifah and
his companions.

This matter was elucidated by al-Imam Abu Yusuf, the companion of Abu
Hanifah, in his book which he compiled from al-Awza’i. And in the book
al-Umm of al-Imam al-Shafi’i <span id="_anchor_692"></span>692 the
following statement was quoted from Abu Yusuf the disciple of
al-Shafi’I: “You have to take the hadith which is widely-known by common
people (‘ammah) <span id="_anchor_693"></span>693 and beware of the odd
one, as Ibn Abi Karimah related to us from Ja’far that the Messenger of
Allah has one day summoned the Jews and put to them some questions, when
they related to him some traditions in which they told lies about Jesus
Christ. Thereafter he assumed the pulpit and addressed the people
saying:

Verily the traditions ascribed to me will spread among you. When what is
reported to you from me agrees with the Qur’an, it is certainly from me,
but when it contradicts the Qur’an it is verily not from me. And as we

were told, Umar was not approving of any hadith reported from the
Messenger of Allah (S) but only with two witnesses (confirming it). Ali
ibn Abi Talib also used to reject every hadith reported from the
Messenger of Allah. The narrations are multiplied, producing strange
things unknown by the fuqaha’, and inconsistent with the Book and
Sunnah, so avoid the odd traditions, and take only the traditions
approved unanimously by men of hadith and fiqh, and which agree with the
Book and the (Prophetic) Sunnah. <span id="_anchor_694"></span>694 So
you have to measure everything according to this rule, whatever
contradicting the Qur’an is verily not uttered by the Messenger of
Allah, even if cited through narrations. And even if related by
trustworthy narrators from the Messenger of Allah (S), that he said when
was on death-bed: I forbid — in another narration: I never forbid but
only — what is forbidden by the Qur’an and Allah, and they never retain
anything against me. <span id="_anchor_695"></span>695 Make the Qur’an
and the Sunnah your Imam and leader, and keep on this, and take it as a
criterion for measuring whatever is cited to you, of that which was
never clarified in the Book and the Sunnah!

Al-Imam Alam al-Din al-Maliki, in his book Iqaz al-himam, <span
id="_anchor_696"></span>696 writes:

We may see someone that when coming across some hadith agreeing with his
madhhab, he would be delighted and would admit and yield to it. But if
coming across a correct hadith free from abrogation and contradiction,
supporting the madhhab of other than his imam, he would open wide the
door for remote probabilities, turning away from it, seeking for his
leader’s madhhab aspects of preponderation, despite its contradiction
with the Suhabah, Followers and express text; when failing in all this
he would claim abrogation <span id="_anchor_697"></span>697 , without
any evidence, or specification, or non-acting according to it, or any
other plea presented by ill-minded people. When being unable to do all
this, he would allege that his imam had knowledge of all the narrations
or most of them, and he (imam) had left this noble hadith only when
coming across a refutation against it in his view. Hence he would take
of the ulama of his madhhab as lords, opening for their excellences and
noble acts many

doors, thinking that whoever opposing this to be mistaken and misled.
And if he being counselled by anyone of the Sunni ulama, he would take
him as an enemy, even if he was an intimate friend before!

Opinion of Malik and His Companions:

The opinion held by Malik and his companions being thus: The Sunnah can
be established through two manners: One of them lies in finding some
leaders among the Prophet’s Companions holding an opinion agreeing with
it. The second way being: Not to find people disagreeing in its regard.
And he (Malik) used to toil and exert efforts all the time, abandoning
every other thing though several traditions were cited in its regard,
saying: The most beloved traditions to me are those upon which there
being unanimous agreement among people.

We have to return to the original topic. Al-Shatibi, in al-Muwafiqat,
<span id="_anchor_698"></span>698 said. About the hadith “washing the
pot from the licking of the dog seven times”, the imam (of madhhab)
said: This hadith is cited, and I don’t know the truth about it! He
deemed it weak saying: When its (dog’s) game trophy is eaten so how its
saliva being abhorred? Malik also disregarded the hadith: “Whoever dies
while owing some days fasting, his wali (custodian) should fast on his
behalf, <span id="_anchor_699"></span>699 in accordance with the
Qur’anic principle: “No laden soul can bear another’s load.”

Ibn al-Arabi says: If khabar al-wahid comes contradictory to any of the
legal rules, is it permissible to act according to it or not? Abu
Hanifah said: No, it is impermissible to act according to it. Whereas
al-Shafi’i holds: It is permissible. Malik said: When the hadith be
supported by a rule, it can be adopted, but if it be alone it should be
neglected, as in the case of the dog’s licking. That is because this
hadith contradicted two great principles: One of them being the
Almighty’s saying: “... so eat of that which they catch for you...”. The
second one is that: The cause of purity (taharah), which is animation
(hayat), is incarnated in the dog. He also forbade from fasting six

days of the Month of Shawwal – despite the establishment of the hadith
that is reported by al-Tirmidhi and Abu Dawud and al-Nasa‘i, saying:
Whoever fasts Month of Ramadan, following it with six days of Shawwal it
will counted as he has fasted all the life – which he refuted, relying
on the principle of sadd al-dhara’i.

Abu Hanifah holds: When khabar al-wahid is cited contradictory to the
qiyas (analogy) it will never be accepted, that is why they have never
approved of the hadith of al-misrat.

Al-Tahawi, <span id="_anchor_700"></span>700 the Imam of the Hanafis,
who was mujtahid in the madhhab, used to disagree with his father when
the evidence being established, criticizing the hadith in respect of its
meaning despite the veracity of the sanad in the view of the
traditionists.

### Al-Awza’i and Abu Hanifah:

Ibn al-Hammam reported that al-Awza’i said: Why don’t you raise your
hands (to the chest) during ruku’ and standing up? He (Abu Hanifah)
said: Because there is no confirmed hadith about it from the Messenger
of Allah. Al-Awza’i said: “How is that, while al-Zuhri related to me
from Salim, from his father Ibn Umar, that the Messenger of Allah used
to raise his hands when starting the prayers and during ruku’ and when
standing up after it. Abu Hanifah said: It was related to us by Hammad,
from Ibrahim (i.e. al-Nakha’i), from Alqamah and al-Aswad, from Abd
Allah ibn Mas’ud that the Prophet was not raising his hands but only
when starting the prayers, not returning to it again. Al-Awza’i said: I
relate to you from al-Zuhri, from Salim, from his father, and you say:
It was related to me by Hammad, from Ibrahim! Abu Hanifah said: Hammad
was afqah (more knowledgeable) than Salim, and Alqamah was not lower
than Ibn Umar in fiqh ... and if Ibn Umar was merited with his company
(to the Prophet), al-Aswad also was of great virtue.

The Moroccan Hafiz, in al-Intiqa’, <span id="_anchor_701"></span>701
said:

Many of men of hadith used to permit sarcasm against Abu Hanifah because
of his refuting a large number of reliable akhbar al-ahad, as he used to
compare them to what got unanimous agreement of traditions and meanings
of the Qur’an, rejecting whatever deviated of them and calling it odd.

Al-Nawawi says: Abu Hanifah was keen in taking the knowledge, defending
God’s sanctuaries against violation, taking only those traditions he
considered to be correct that were reported by trustworthy narrators,
beside the acts of the Messenger and Kufah ulama’ he could see.

Al-Awza’i used to say: We never harbour malice against Abu Hanifah
because of exerting his opinion, <span id="_anchor_702"></span>702 as we
all do that also, but the reason for our malice against him lies in the
fact that when relating to him any hadith from the Messenger of Allah he
would disagree with it by approving of another hadith. <span
id="_anchor_703"></span>703

Despite all these facts, Abu Hanifah is and will be counted as the
greatest Imam, and his followers are spreading all over the world, east
and west, with no one being allowed to doubt their faith or suspect
their devotion. In A’lam al-muq’in Ibn al-Qayyim enumerated about one
hundred traditions that were not adopted by imitators of the fuqaha’,
taking them from the books regarded authentic by Ahl al-Sunnah.

Sibt ibn al-Jawzi has also cited a number of traditions taken from the
two Sahihs, that were disregarded by the Shafi’is, when they approved
other contradictory ones. And so also was the case with other madhahib.

Al-Khatib reported from Abu Salih al-Farra’ as he said: I heard Yusuf
ibn Asbat saying: Abu Hanifah refuted four hundred or more traditions
reported from the Messenger of Allah. He also reported from Wukay’ as
saying: We know about Abu Hanifah that he disapproved of two hundred
traditions. Further he reported from Hammad ibn Salamah through two
ways, as saying: Abu Hanifah received the athar (old traditions) and
sunan and refuted them by his opinion. <span id="_anchor_704"></span>704

We conclude this chapter with a statement uttered by Abu Shamah:

### Madhhab being Altered Religion:

He (Abu Shamah), in his Mukhtasar Kitab al-Mu‘ammal li al-radd ila
al-amr al-awwal, writes: One of gnostics was inquired about the meaning
of the madhhab, when he replied: It gives the meaning of an altered Din,
as Allah the Exalted said: “... and be not of those who ascribe partners
(unto Him). Of those who split up their religion and became
schismatics.” <span id="_anchor_705"></span>705

### Points of Disagreement among Fuqaha’:

The opinions of fuqaha’ differed due to the fact that everyone of them
adopted a single hadith, adhering to it alone with ignoring others, the
example for which can be seen in the hadith related by Abd al-Warith
<span id="_anchor_706"></span>706 ibn Sa’id who said: I came to Makkah
where I found Abu Hanifah. I said to him: What is your opinion regarding
a man who sold something with stipulating a certain provision? He
replied: The selling transaction is invalid and the provision is
invalid! I came then to Ibn Abi Layla and inquired him about the same
issue, when he said: The selling is valid and the condition is invalid.
Then I (Abd al-Warith) put the question to Ibn Shubrimah, who said: The
selling is valid and the condition is valid. I said to myself: Glorified
is Allah, three of the fuqaha’ of Iraq do not concur in opinion on one
issue! After that I returned to Abu Hanifah and apprised him with what
his two companions said, when he said: I don’t know what they said to
you. It was related to me by ‘Amr ibn Shu’ayb, from his father, from his
grandfather saying: The Messenger of Allah has forbidden from selling
with condition, so the selling transaction is invalid then and the
condition. Then I betook myself again to Ibn Abi Layla and informed him
of what his friends said, when he said: I have nothing to do with what
they said to you, I was told by Hisham, reporting from his father, that
A’ishah said: The Messenger of Allah ordered me to buy a slave girl and
set her free ... the selling is valid and the condition is invalid.
<span id="_anchor_707"></span>707

Then I went to Shubrimah and made him aware of the opinions of his two
companions, when he said: It is not my business to know what are the

opinions of them. It was reported to me by Mis’ar ibn Kudam, from
Muharib ibn Dithar, from Jabir who said: I sold to the Prophet (S) a
camel, and he stipulated to me to carry it to al-Madinah, so the selling
is valid and the condition is valid. <span id="_anchor_708"></span>708

I suffice with these evidences, as citing all of them will need a full
volume.

### Grammarians and Linguists:

As was stated before, the Ummah ulama’ were divided, in respect of
manners of receiving the hadith, into three parts: Mutakallimun, Usulis
– fuqaha’ – and Muhaddithun. For perfecting this discussion, I have to
refer to the viewpoint of the grammarians and linguists, who have not
depended on hadith as an evidence for proving rules of language and
grammar. Al-Suyuti, in his book al-Iqtirah fi usul al-nahw, stated: From
his (Prophet’s) speech, it can be inferred as was confirmed, that he
said it with the narrated wording, which is very rare, but it can be
found in the short traditions, so rarely too. Because most of the
traditions were reported on the basis of meaning, and were transmitted
by the non-Arabs who were born before committing them to writing. So
they narrated them in accordance with the meaning indicated by the
expressions they used, increasing and omitting, changing the places of
the words, and substituting words with other ones. That is why we see
different narrations with unsimilar expressions for the same hadith
related to one subject. Then he disapproved for Ibn Malik his
confirmation of grammatical rules with the words used in the hadith.

Then he reported from Abu al-Hasan ibn al-Da’i’ (d. 86 H.) as saying in
Sharh al-jumal:

Permitting narration through the meaning is the reason – as I believe –
behind relinquishing inference of hadith to establish rules of language,
by imams (of linguistics) like Sibawayh and others. They relied in this
regard upon the Qur’an and correct traditions reported by the Arabs
(from the

Messenger), and had not been there the declaration of ulama’ in
permitting the reporting of hadith on basis of meaning, the Prophet’s
speech would have more deserving to be used in confirming the rules of
language, as he being the most eloquent of all the Arabs.

The author of Thimar al-sina’ah says: “Grammar (nahw) is a science
deduced through qiyas and istiqra‘ (investigation) into the Book of
Allah and speech of the eloquent among the Arabs.” So he confined it
(grammar) to these two ways without citing the hadith.

In Sharh al-Tashil, responding to Ibn Malik (d. 672) who permitted
inference of hadith and compiled al-Alfiyyah, Abu Hayyan (d. 740) said:

“The compiler has abundantly inferred what came in the traditions for
establishing the universal rules in the language of Arabs. I have never
come across anyone among the formers and latters to adopt this method
other than him. But the first founders of ilm al-nahw (grammar), the
investigators of ahkam from language of Arabs, like \`Amr ibn al-Ala’
(d.154), Isa ibn Umar (d.149), al-Khalil (d.175), Sibawayh (d.188) among
the Basran notable ulama’, al-Kisa’i (d.189), al-Farra’ (d.207), Ali Ibn
Mubarak al-Ahmar (d.194) and Hisham ibn al-Darir, the Kufah leaders,
have never done so. They were followed by the latters among the two
sects and others among the grammarians of all regions, like those of
Baghdad and al-Andalus. On this topic there was some discussion with one
of the smart latters who said: The ulama’ have in fact abandoned this
(inference by hadith) due to not trusting the words to be uttered
actually by the Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace and benediction be
upon him and his Progeny), as if they trusted that it would be counted
identical to the Qur’an in establishing the general rules. But that was
for two factors:

First: The narrators permitted reporting on basis of meaning, as a
result of which we may see a certain event occurred in his (S) time, but
never reported with the same words uttered by the Prophet, like: his
saying: “I married her to you (zawwajtukaha) with what you know (by
heart) of the Qur’an” and “I made her your property (mallaktukaha) with
what you

have...” and other alike words mentioned in this story. Thus we can
realize for sure that he (S) has not disclosed all these words, or
rather we can never determine that he said some of them, since it is
probable he said some words identical to these ones, and the narrators
have used the identical words not the original ones. Because what is
intended being the meaning, particularly with passage of long time on
hearing without precising the hadith by writing, and depending upon
memorization with precision of meaning, <span
id="_anchor_709"></span>709 as precising of words being far-reaching
especially in the long traditions. Sufyan al-Thawri said: If I tell you
that I relate to you the hadith exactly in the way I heard it, never
believe me, as it is verily the denotation. And whoever making the least
glance at the hadith he would recognize certainly that they (narrators)
used to relate hadith on basis of meaning.

Second: So much solecism occurred in the narrated traditions, because a
large number of narrators were non-Arabs and unaware of the language of
Arabs in the art of nahw, the fact leading to occurrence of solecism in
their speech unknowingly. Hence their words and narrations included so
many non-eloquent words, of and it is certainly known for all that the
Messenger of Allah (S) was the most eloquent among people, not using but
the chaste language with the best, most famous and clearest expressions.
And the compiler (i.e. Ibn Malik) has abundantly inferred what is cited
in the athar pursuing - as he alleged - the grammarians, without
meditating much in this nor accompanying that who was of acute
discernment, as Badr al-Din ibn Jama’ah — who was among those taking
from Ibn Malik — said to me. I said to him: Sir, this hadith is narrated
by the non-Arabs, and their narrations are known to contain within them
words and expressions which were never uttered by the Messenger (S)! But
he couldn’t give any answer. Abu Hayyan says: I have insisted on
discussing this issue so that no beginner would say: What is the matter
with the grammarians, they infer the utterances of the Arabs, among whom
Muslims, and disbelievers are there, and do not infer what is narrated
in the hadith reported by reliable narrators like al-Bukhari and Muslim
and their equals. Whoever going through what I have mentioned,

he would verily realize the reason why hadn’t the grammarians inferred
the hadith.

Ibn al-Anbari, in al-Insaf, discussed the prevention of (inna) in the
khabar (predicate) of kada (almost be), saying: Concerning the hadith
“Poverty has almost been infidelity (kufr)” was changed and altered by
the narrators, since he (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and
his Progeny) was the most eloquent among the Arabs, and this hadith is
da’if (weak). Also in the book al-Nahw of Ibrahim Mustafa, a hadith is
recorded, that reads: Verily the severest torment on the Day of
Resurrection will befall the photographers,” so its narrator has
solecized. <span id="_anchor_710"></span>710 This hadith was reported by
Muslim.

Among those who refuted Ibn Malik, we can mention also Abu Ishaq Ibrahim
al-Andalusi al-Shatibi al-Ghirnati, in his exposition (sharh) of
Alfiyyat Ibn Malik, who said. <span id="_anchor_711"></span>711

Ibn Malik, by inferring the Prophetic hadith, has in fact disagreed with
all the earliers (grammarians), as in none of their grammar books we can
see inference of a hadith reported from the Prophet (S), but only in a
way which I later on will indicate, God-willing. This while they quote
the speech of the insolent and uncivil men among the Arabs, and their
poems which include obscene words and abomination. Abu Hatam reported
from al-Jarmi that Abu Ubaydah Mu’ammar ibn al-Muthanna brought him some
portion of his book Tafsir Gharib al-Qur’an al-Karim, when he said to
him: From whom you have taken this, O Abu Ubaydah? As it contradicts the
tafsir of fuqaha’! He replied: This is the tafsir of the backward
bedouins (who urinate on their heels)!! If you like you can take, or
otherwise you can leave!! Thus they depend on such people and forsake
the correct traditions, for such people and forsake the correct
traditions, for the only reason that they infer in grammar and language
those ones proved to be, in their view, reported on basis of meaning,
and permitted by imams, as what is intended for understanding the legal
rules being the meaning not the words. Therefore we see so many
differences in the traditions as for the same hadith on one event

we find the expressions differ greatly between what is agreeing with
what was commonly known of speech of Arabs and what was unknown. Hadn’t
the case been another way, it was unjustifiable for the narrators to
report hadith on basis of meaning, in contravention to the case with
transmitting poetry and utterances of Arabs, as the intention in quoting
them being the words not the meaning, as indicated by tongue rules.
Hence the grammarians cared much for inference from the speech of Arabs
reported from trustworthy men, leaving the traditions reported due to
possibility of the narrator’s perverting the wording of the hadith from
the Arabic criterion (standard), the fact leading to base it on other
than the origin, and that was one of the things they prohibited for
safeguarding the tongue rules. If we make a glance at their ijtihad in
taking from the Arabs we would be astonished, as it was not abominable
in their view to refrain from inferring the Prophetic traditions and
deducing from them. How is that while they used to depend upon the
narrations reported by men of readings, from the Qur’anic words, since
they paid much attention to reporting of words.

Then he (al-Shatibi) said: I have never known any other one among the
earlier grammarians be equal to him (Ibn Malik) but only Ibn Kharuf. It
is probable that Ibn Malik has Allah knows better — adopted the opinion
of forbidding from narration of hadith through meaning outright, which
is a weak notion refuted by the determined reporting of the same issues
through different words, the fact that was not specified to the time of
the Sahabah alone, not to the Arabs other than them. Whoever pondering
over books of hadith will verily find a lot of such instances, with a
large number of words that are perverted from their Arabic origin, to
the extent leading to charge with error the narrators among the
scrutinizing imams and ulama’ knowledgeable of speech of Arabs, without
distinguishing them from others. Al-Shaykh Abu Ishaq al-Shatibi says:
Ibn Malik is surely not right in respect of this rule... etc.

The dear reader may have noticed in this book abundance of quotations of
utterances of leaders of grammar about this theme. That was

due to the fact that in each utterance of everyone of them there can be
found benefits that cannot be seen in that of the other, and their
evidences altogether can convince men of thought and opinion (with
truth), so that no dispute can be there but only by the ignorant and
bigoted.

There were several other cults and groups who took various positions
toward hadith, like the Shi’ah, Zaydis, Kharijites (Khawarij) and
others, as every people have their own sunnah and their own leader
(imam).

In regard of the Shi’ah, in particular the Imamiyyah, they never approve
but only the traditions that proved to be correct in their view, through
the way of Ahl al-Bayt from their grandfather (S). That means, they
accept only those traditions reported by al-Sadiq (Ja’far), from his
father al-Baqir, from his father Zayn al-Abidin, from al-Husayn al-Sibt,
from his father Amir al-Mu’minin, from the Messenger of Allah, (God’s
peace be upon them all. Whereas the traditions reported by people like
Abu Hurayrah, Samurah ibn Jundub, Marwan ibn al-Hakam, Imran ibn Hittan,
and Amr ibn al-As and their likes, have no consideration even an atom in
their view. <span id="_anchor_712"></span>712

Concerning the Khawarij, <span id="_anchor_713"></span>713 they used to
take and adopt only those traditions reported by the Sahabah followed by
them. So the traditions accepted and deemed authentic by them being only
those which were propagated to people before the fitnah (disorder,
sedition), <span id="_anchor_714"></span>714 white after it they have
disregarded all the Jumhur due to their following of the imams of
tyranny — as they claimed — as a result of which they could not attain
their trust.

### Opinion of al-Imam Muhammad Abduh:

Hadith al-ahad, whatever degree of veracity it attained with the
traditionists, was rejected and disapproved alright by al-Imam Muhammad
Abduh, when it be contradictory to and disagreeing with reason, Qur’an
and knowledge. The following are some excerpts of his sayings in this
regard.

Talking about the sorcery ascribed to the Prophet, he said: Many of
(blind) imitators who never recognize what the Prophethood is and the
rights to be considered for it, were of the opinion that effect of
sorcery on the noble soul of the Prophet was correct, <span
id="_anchor_715"></span>715 so it should be believed, with disapproving
and rejecting all the innovations of the heretics since they denied
sorcery while some Qur’anic verses were revealed on confirming it.!! We
can clearly notice here how the correct Din and manifest truth being
rendered to heresy by the imitators!! We seek God’s protection!! That
the Qur’an is used as a hujjah to prove and establish presence of
sorcery (sihr)! While it is ignored and disregarded when negating
sorcery to be a trait of the Prophet (S), with, considering that only a
lie fabricated by the polytheists. How is it possible that
interpretation is applied to this fact while it is unallowed in that
case? Though what is intended by the polytheists being so manifest.
Because they say that the Satan used to transfigurate the Prophet (S),
and this transfiguration was counted by them to be sorcery and one of
its modes. This being the very sorcery ascribed to Labid, <span
id="_anchor_716"></span>716 in regard of whom they claimed that sorcery
had intermixed with his mind and perception!

The fact in which all should strongly believe is that the Qur’an being
confidently affirmed, and the Book of Allah through successive
transmission (tawatur) from the Infallible (may God’s peace and
benediction be upon him and his Progeny). So we should be believe in
whatever it establishes, and disbelieve in   whatever it denies. And in
it there being verses refuting the charge of sorcery from his (S), when
ascribing assertion of this charge to the polytheists, his enemies,
censuring them for this allegation. So he is definitely not afflicted
with sorcery.

  
  
  

682. This chapter is taken from the tenth volume of Tafsir al-Qur'an
al-hakim, of al-Imaman Muhammad Abduh and Muhammad Rashid Rida, and the
numbers placed before the words are the numbers of the pages of this
volume.

683. Fath al-Bari, vol. XIII, pp. 62, 63.

684. Al-Fitnah al-kubra, p. 17 and following pages.

685. Duha al-Islam, vol. III, pp. 75, 76.

686. Similar to them are the commoners of our time, though disguising
among people under cloak of ulama'.

687. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

688. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 125.

689. Al-Mawaqif by al-Ibji and al-Jurjani, p. 79, Istanbul edition.

690. Also al-mutakallimun used to call the muhaddithun with the term
al-Hashwiyyah, describing them as the most ignorant of what they have of
knowledge, and the miserest among people in what they seek. They
contented of knowledge with its outward only, and were pleased to say:
So and so is expert in ways and narration of hadith, but was indifferent
to be said: He is aware of what is written and applying what he has
knowledge of!!
Refer to Ibn Abd al-Barr's Jami' bayan al-ilm wa fadlih, vol. II. And I
will give more elaboration on this in the chapter: "Seeking Hadith
without Fiqh."

691. Tawjih al-nazar, pp. 130, 131, 136, 137 and following pages.

692. Al-Umm, vol. II, pp. 307, 308.

693. With the word ammah (common people) the jumhur (Sunnis) not the
opposite of khassah (the upper class).

694. The Sunnah is the practical one (acts), which was commonly known
among them in this way.

695. See Sirat Ibn Hisham, vol. IV, p. 332.

696. Qawa'id al-tahdith, p. 72.

697. Al-Zuhri says: The weariest and most incompetent among fuqaha' is
that who failed to recognize the abrogating hadith and abrogated one of
the Messenger of Allah.

698. Al-Muwafiqat, vol. III, p. 21.

699. It is reported by the two Shaykhs and Abu Dawud.

700. He is Abu Ja'far al-Tahawi, who learnt fiqh under his uncle
al-Muzni the companion of al-Shafi'i. He compiled Ma'ani al-Qur'an and
Mushkil al-athar and other books. He was born in 229 H. and died in 321.
H.

701. Al-Intiqa', p. 149.

702. Abu Hanifah was leader of men of opinion (who used to exert their
opinion).

703. Ta'wil mukhtalif al-hadith, p. 63.

704. See vol. XIII, p. 390.

705. See p. 10.

706. In another narration: al-Layth ibn Sa'd.

707. This hadith was reported by al-Bukhari under bab "al-Shurut fi
al-wala".

708. Al-Batliyosi, al-Insaf, pp. 70, 71.

709. It is too difficult for him to convey the meaning exactly and
accurately.

710. Al-Insaf, p. 65.

711. I have quoted this statement from the book al-Mawahib al-fathiyyah,
of al-Shaykh Hamzah Fath Allah, vol. I, pp. 39-41, in which he briefed
what was reported by al-Allamah Abu Ubayd Allah Muhammad al-Andalusi
al-Maliki, who was widely-known with al-Ra'i, from chief of his shaykhs
Abu Ishaq Ibrahim al-Andalusi.
Among those who talked about the standpoint of the grammarians toward
the hadith, claiming that they were never inferring it, was Abd al-Qadir
al-Baghdadi, the author of Khazanat al-adab, so refer to pages 5 and 6
of vol. I of his book.

712. Al-Allamah Muhammad Husayn Al Kashif al-Ghita', Asl al-Shi'ah wa
usuluha, p. 149, 10th edition.

713. They are those who renounced allegiance and revolted against Ali
(A).

714. How is it possible to distinguish between what was produced before
the fitnah and what was produced after it.

715. The hadith of sorcery was reported by Ahmad and the two Shaykhs and
al-Nasa'i.

716. Labid ibn al-A'sam, who was said to have bewitched the Prophet (S).
