Sorcery Hadith Is of Ahad:
==========================

  
  
  

The hadith on sorcery - supposing it to be correct, is a singly narrated
one (hadith ahad), and the ahad traditions are not approved in the bab
of doctrines (aqa’id). And the Prophet’s infallibility against impact of

sorcery being one of the aqa’id, that cannot be refuted and discarded
off him but only by certainty (yaqin), nor it can be adopted through
suspicion and suspected! While in regard of the hadith reaching us
through the way of ahad, suspicion occurs only for that who deemed it
veracious, but that for whom it was proved to be incorrect, he has no
hujjah to establish against us. Anyhow, we have to give full authority
in the matter of hadith, not making it arbitrator in regard of our
creed, and take hold of the text of the Book and evidence of reason
(’aql). Since if the Prophet became disordered in mind — as alleged by
them — he would be warranted to suppose that he propagated something
while he did not do so actually, or that something was revealed to him
while it was not so, and this fact is so manifest needing no
elucidation. Till he (Muhammad Abduh) said: How detrimental is the
ignorant lover, and how severe being his danger against that whom he
thinks to love. We seek protection by God against disappointment.

It is to be noted that the denier of sorcery outright can never be
regarded a heretic, since Allah the Exalted has clarified what is that
the believer should believe in the verse”. The Messenger believed...”
(2:285), and in other verses. Also there were commandments showing the
things in which the Muslim should believe so as to be counted a (true)
Muslim, with no any reference to sorcery.

He also said: Had these people given the Book its rightful value, and
knowing of the language that much enough for a wiseman to speak, they
would have neither prated all that nonsense, nor disgraced Islam with
that blemish. But with that who got accustomed to believe in the
impossible, it is not possible to debate with him whatsoever. We seek
refuge by God against insanity. <span id="_anchor_717"></span>717

Charging the Prophet with sorcery was negated and refuted by the earlier
ulama’ among whom I can refer, beside al-Imam (Abduh), to al-Jassas in
his Tafsir.

Al-Imam (Abduh) has also refuted many traditions on doctrinal and
non-doctrinal matters like hadith al-gharaniq (crowned-cranes), and
hadith

on Zaynab bint Jahash and others, regarding which his comments we cannot
cite here.

### Opinion of Sayyid Rashid Rida:

I conclude this topic with a valuable comment for al-Allamah al-Sayyid
Rashid Rida (upon whom be God’s mercy):

Some of the ahadith al-ahad may constitute a hujjah against that for
whom they were established and attained his trust, not being a hujjah
against other than him according to which he should act. For this reason
the Companions were not writing all the traditions reaching them nor
inviting to follow them, but used to call to follow and act according to
the Qur’an and the followed practical Sunnah (Prophet’s acts)
manifesting it (Qur’an), except few cases where they would refer to the
Sahifah of Ali that included some rules such as blood-money (diyah),
emancipation of the captive, tabooing a city like Makkah. Al-Imam Malik
disapproved of the caliphs al-Mansur and al-Rashid their compelling
people to act according to his books, even al-Muwatta’, but obligated
following the ahadith al-ahad upon that who believed in them, in respect
of narration and indication, necessitating on that trusting the riwayah
of anyone and comprehending part of it to learn from him, but not to
make of this as a law for all.

Whoever hearing a hadith that proved to be authentic in his view, should
act according to it, and whoever contradicting some traditions due to
not-being confirmed for him or due to being unaware of them, is not to
blame. And ahadith al-ahad should not be followed in case of doctrines
(aqa’id), but to be applied in the legal rules, since the proofs of the
aqa’id being the mutawatir reports (akhbar).

It is not to blame also that who found a defect in narration of any
hadith, disbelieving its chain of transmission due to that defect, and
it is not fair to describe him as a denier of so and so hadith. They
(ahadith al-ahad) indicate surmise, and the Ummah have based their
worship on a khabar

whose truth prevails over surmise, till considering among their rules
that judgement is established through overwhelming surmise, of which its
veracity is not binding in reality. And among the important foundations
agreed among ulama’ of usul being: Occurrence (unexpectedly) of
probability in the marfu’ actual conditions and events, can cover them
with garb of wholeness, as a result of which its inferring will be
invalid. <span id="_anchor_718"></span>718

717. The tafsir of part of 'amma, pp. 183-186. Some ulama' refuted and
disapproved narration of hadith of sorcery, among whom being the faqih
exegete Abu Bakr al-Jassas in his book Ahkam al-Qur'an.

718. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXVII, p. 784.
