Asking For Hadith Without Fiqh (and What the Traditionists Nicknamed With)
==========================================================================

  
  
  

There remained one point worth mentioning, which is asking for the
hadith in the recent eras, since it being relevant to the topic of my
book.

Abu Umar ibn Abd al-Barr said: In regard of seeking the hadith, as done
by a large number of present time <span id="_anchor_719"></span>719
people without comprehending it or deliberating its meanings, is
something reprehensible among a group of men of knowledge <span
id="_anchor_720"></span>720 .

Al-Dhahabi (d.748) in his book Bayan zaghal al-ilm wa al-talab an ilm
al-hadith, writes:

Most of the muhaddithun, have no knowledge (of hadith), and are not
resolved to comprehend the hadith, or following it. And it is not to
blame Sufyan al-Thawri for saying: Had the hadith been good, it would
have gone away as the good goes away! (The full text of statement of
Sufyan is thus: Had this hadith been good (khayr) it would have
decreased as the good decreases, but it is evil, so it increases as the
evil increases). By God he said the truth! As what good is there in a
hadith whose sahih and weak words being intermixed, and not verified,
nor its transmitters be investigated, nor being fit for recognizing
teachings of the Din. He continued by saying: By God, it is better to
forget about these things, as we have become a subject of teasing and
mockery for men of intellect, who started to look at us differently,
saying: These are the people of hadith!!

After reviewing the course of riwayah and notable narrators in the
earlier ages, he said: This intense situation retreated in the 4th
Century as compared to the 3rd century, and it is continuing to come
down up to the present time. Now the best of today traditionists —
though numbering so few — are equal to those who were of low position in
the past, despite their large number. Also there can be someone renowned
with fiqh and opinion in the past who excels many among the latters in
hadith, besides, some of ancient time mutakallimun being more
knowledgeable in ilm al-athar than the chiefs (mashayikh) of present
time... etc. <span id="_anchor_721"></span>721

These were the statements of leaders of hadith in regard of the
condition of muhaddithun during the 5th and 8th Hijrah centuries... so
how would be the case with those claiming nowadays to be among the
muhaddithun, with their level of knowledge being only reading some of
hadith books, and learning by heart a few of the traditions contained in
them? This alone can never be enough to make of anyone a knowledgeable
man, of whose knowledge people can benefit, or trust his sayings or
verdicts.

In regard of a man said to be striving much till reaching a degree that
could not be attained by any other one, learning by heart all of Sahih
al-Bukhari, al-Imam Muhammad Abduh said: “One copy increased in the
country…“By God al-Imam said the truth: what he meant that the worth of
this man, who was admired by all people due to his memorizing of
al-Bukhari, was not more than the value of a copy of al-Bukhari’s book,
that can’t move or comprehend !!

Al-Dhahabi, from whom we quoted these words, being in fact the great
traditionist and historian of Islam, in regard of whom al-Safadi in his
book Nukat al-himyan has said: I have met him and learned from him so
many of his compilations, never seeing in him the inaction of
traditionists, or non-originality of transmitters. <span
id="_anchor_722"></span>722

That was not to be said by al-Safadi but only due to the inertia widely
known to afflict the men of hadith. Al-Imam described them also with

putrefication and narrow-mindedness, in his book Risalat al-Islam wa
al-Nasraniyyah. <span id="_anchor_723"></span>723

If all that was said by al-Safadi about his shaykh for the sake of
exempting him from the defect of stiffness (jumud) known to be common
among men of hadith, his shaykh al-Dhahabi himself has uttered the
following words in their regard in his valuable book Siyar a’lam
al-nubala’, in the biography of al-Faqih al-Muhaddith Shaykh al-Islam
Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash:

I reported from the book Fawa’id of Abu \`Amr Ahmad ibn Muhammad
al-Nisaburi, from Abu Turab Muhammad ibn al-Faraj who said: I heard
Khalid ibn Abd Allah al-Kufi saying: On the way of Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash
there was a dog, that on seeing any inkpot owner (i.e. one of scribes of
hadith) it would attack him. One day men of hadith have fed it something
which caused its death. Abu Bakr then went out, and on seeing it dead
said: We all belong to God, that who used to bid to good and forbid from
evil has gone away. Nu’aym ibn Hammad says: Abu Bakr ibn Ayyash used to
spit at men of hadith.

In Ta’wil mukhtalif al-hadith (p.96) Ibn Qutaybah writes:

We cannot exempt most of men of hadith from censure and blame in our
books, due to neglect acquiring knowledge of what they wrote, and
comprehend what they compiled, with rushing into seeking to obtain the
hadith from ten or twenty ways! And in every correct way and the two
ways sufficient evidences are there for that intending to recognize God
through his knowledge till going away of their lives, getting nothing of
all that but a number of asfar, <span id="_anchor_724"></span>724 that
fatigued the knowledge-seeker and never benefitted the successor!
Whoever be of this class we will view him as a loser of his right,
demanding other than which can benefit him.

Such people were called Hashwiyyah and Nabitah <span
id="_anchor_725"></span>725 and Mujbirah, or it is said Jabriyyah. Also
they were given the names of: Ghutha’ <span id="_anchor_726"></span>726
Ghuthr, <span id="_anchor_727"></span>727 which all being nicknames.
<span id="_anchor_728"></span>728

Al-Wazir al-Yamani, in al-Rawd al-basim, says: They were called
Hashwiyyah because they used to yahshun (insert) baseless traditions
into those ones reported from the Messenger of Allah. That is they used
to foist these fabricated traditions into the original ones while they
had never been among them.

In his book Diya’ al-ulum, Muhammad ibn Nashwan writes: The reason for
calling the Hashwiyyah with this name lies in their approval of so many
akhbar without negation. <span id="_anchor_729"></span>729

Al-Shi’bi says: The earlier righteous men were averse to relating the
hadith abundantly, and if I was able to be moderate and fair in
accepting and rejecting, I would not relate any hadith but that which
got unanimity of men of hadith.

Al-A’mash said: By God to give in charity a piece of bread is much
better for me than relating sixty traditions.

Shu’bah inquired Ayyub al-Sakhtiyani about some hadith, when he replied:
I suspect it. He (Shu’bah) said: Your suspicion is to me more lovable
than certainty of seven ones.

It is reported too that Shu’bah ibn al-Hajjaj said: O people, the more
you progress in hadith, the more you retrograde in the Qur’an.

He also said: I never fear anything to cause me to enter the Fire but
only the hadith.

Further he said: I wish I was a bathhouse igniter, and never being
engaged in hadith.

Ubayd Allah ibn \`Amr said: I was in the meeting in al-A’mash’s house,
when some man came and asked him about an issue, for which he couldn’t
give him any answer. But he looked at Abu Hanifah saying: O Nu’man,
declare your opinion in its regard. And he said: The opinion about it is
so and so.

He (Ubayd Allah) said: From where (is that)? He (Abu Hanifah) said: From
the point you related it to us. Al-A’mash said: We are the pharmacists,

and you are the physicians. That is: men of hadith are like the
pharmacists while the fuqaha’ being like the physicians.

Shu’bah says: I used to (in the past) be delighted whenever sighting
anyone of men of hadith! While nowadays nothing is more detestable in my
eyes than to see one of them. He also used to say: Verily, this hadith
curbs you from remembering Allah, and from prayers (salat). So would you
give up (relating the hadith)?

Al-Shi’bi was of the opinion that to be engaged in poetry is safer than
relating the hadith. Once upon a day he said to his companions: If I
sought (to serve) Allah, I wouldn’t go out for you, and if you sought
Allah (His pleasure), you wouldn’t come to me... but we all like
flattery and dislike censure.

‘Amr ibn al-Harith says: I have never seen a knowledge more honourable,
nor people more foolish than people of hadith!!

Sufyan looked at the men of hadith saying: You are going too far. Had we
and you altogether been present in the time of Umar ibn al-Khattab, he
would have severely beaten us. <span id="_anchor_730"></span>730

Mughirah al-Dabbi said: By God I am much more frightened from the
debauchees than them (men of hadith).

Sufyan al-Thawri said: We have been indulged in the hadith for sixty
years, and I wish I had come out from it self-sufficient, neither
against me nor for me. <span id="_anchor_731"></span>731

Muhammad ibn Salam says: Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan related to me saying:
Reciters of poetry are more mindful than narrators of hadith, since the
latters narrate a lot of fabricated traditions. While reciters of poetry
recite the falsified (masnu’), criticize it and say that this being
falsified. <span id="_anchor_732"></span>732

Al-Mazini (the eminent grammarian) was asked about characteristics of
men of knowledge, when he said: Men of the Qur’an are charged with
confusion and weakness, while men of hadith are charged with hashw
(insertion) and raqa’ah (impertinence). And the poets are known with
hawaj

(i.e. recklessness and rashness), and the grammarians are known with
sluggishness, and in narration of akhbar are quite elegant. <span
id="_anchor_733"></span>733

If we intend to cite all the sayings uttered in regard of inanimation of
men of hadith, it would be so protracted, so we suffice with what we
have already stated.

I conclude this chapter with a regrettable issue, as it indicates how
Islam was inflicted with the malady of discord, and partition into
several groups. Among the Muslims communities and sects, I can refer to
the Mu’tazilah group which was called also al-Adliyyah and its rival
group which was called Ashab al-Sunnah, between which there was heated
conflict that led them to defame and attack each other.

719. Ibn Abd al-Barr died in 463 H.

720. Jami' bayan al-ilm, vol. II, p. 127.

721. See pp. 6, 9, 11.

722. See p. 242. In Lisan al-Arab: Kawdan is the cross-bred (hajin), and
it is said to be the mule.

723. See 4th edition, p. 107.

724. Asfar means books, and plural of sifr.

725. See Asas al-balaghah of al-Zamakhshari, and this is the notion held
by al-Nabitah and al-Nawabit, who are the Hashwiyyah.

726. Al-Ghutha' is whatever comes on the surface of flood, including
scum and filth, and the alike. This name was used for them
metaphorically.

727. Ghuthr is plural of aghthar, meaning in origin the despicable and
mean among people.

728. It means nicknames.

729. See vol. I, p. 120.

730. Umar used to hit whoever narrating the hadith. Those whom he beat
were Abu Hurayrah and Ka'b al-Ahbar. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah.

731. All these news and others can be found in the 2nd volume of the
book Jami' bayan al-ilm wa fadlih, of the Moroccan Hafiz Ibn Abd
al-Barr.

732. Abu Ali al-Qali, al-Amali, p. 105.

733. Mu'jam al-udaba', vol. VII, p. 123.
