The Greatest Calamity Inflicted Islam:
======================================

  
  
  

Al-Ustadh Muhammad Abduh said: Islam was never inflicted with a calamity
greater than the bida’ (heresies) ascribed to it by those pretending to
be Muslims, and the fabrications invented by the Ghulat, which corrupted
the minds of Muslims and made others mistrust the foundations of
religion. Consequently falsification spread tremendously against the
Muhammadan religion in its early centuries, continuing till the era of
the Companions, and rather falsity was practised against the Prophet (S)
during his lifetime. But the misfortune of falsification exacerbated and
prevailed everywhere during the rule of the Umayyads, where the
narrators increased in number and the truthful decreased, with many of
the honourable Sahabah refraining from reporting the hadith, except from
those whom they trusted to be truthful, for fear from the perversion
that inflicted the narrations. In the introduction to his Sahih, Muslim
said: “I have never seen the righteous people telling lies in anything
more then in the hadith <span id="_anchor_742"></span>742 and then evil
of slandering spread, with fabrication and invention exacerbating and
extending with passage of time.” Whoever going through the introduction
of al-Imam Muslim, would verily realize how intense toil and fatigue he
experienced in compiling his Sahih, and how much falsified traditions
were foisted by fabricators into religion with

which it had nothing to do. And men of insight in history were fully
aware of the fact that Islam has overshadowed sights of the world with
brightness of might, rising above heads of nations with power of
authority, inundating among people like rushing streams, with some of
them covetting certain desires in it, and some imagining in it dreads,
with manifest signs established for men of insight. Hence, those
embracing this Din were of several divisions: Some people believed in it
submissively to the need for it and for obtaining its light, and those
were the truthful. Some others were of different cults who arrogated its
title and began to be branded with its mark, either out of desire in its
spoils, or out of fear from assaults of its followers, or priding
themselves in belonging to it. So they covered themselves with it but
couldn’t be conscious of its real slogan, covering their superficial
conditions under the disguise of Islam, without sensing it by their
hearts, following their religions inwardly while resembling the Muslims
with their apparent aspects. Allah the Exalted said in regard of their
equals: “The wandering Arabs say: We believe. Say (unto them, O
Muhammad): Ye believe not, but rather say: “We submit,” for the faith
hath not yet entered into your hearts.” Among these people there was
someone exaggerating in riya’ (dissimulation) to the extent that people
would start to count him among the pious. On seeing some people trusting
and believing in his utterances, he would begin to relate them
traditions from his old creed, ascribing them to the Prophet (S) or some
of his Companions, as a result of which all the Jewish traditions
(Israeliyyat) and whatever was contained in the expositions of the Torah
were recorded in the Islamic books as being Prophetic traditions. <span
id="_anchor_743"></span>743 And some of them have deliberately
fabricated traditions which if their meanings be firmly rooted in the
minds, they would deteriorate the morals and impel to neglect and think
little of legal and religious duties, slackening people’s resolutes from
supporting the truth. Of them those traditions indicating the end of
life of Islam — we seek protection by God — or enticing greediness to
God’s forgiveness with deviating from His shar’ (legislation), or those
impelling full submission to the fate (qadar) through letting alone the
reason indulged in what improving

the Din and the world. All these traditions were fabricated by the
fabricators on purpose with the aim of corrupting the Muslims and
diverting them from the original rules of their religion, so as to
disturb the order of their life and weaken their might.

Among the liars there were some believing that increasing in the akhbar
and narrating abundant sayings would elevate the position of religion,
so they babbled whatever they willed, seeking by this reward and thawab,
while they would not gain but heavy burden and punishment. It is them in
regard of whom Muslim in his Sahih said: I have not seen the righteous
telling lies more than in the hadith. <span id="_anchor_744"></span>744
He means by ‘the righteous’ those who used to prolong their sibal
(beard), widen their trousers, bow down their heads, keep low their
voices, frequent regularly to the mosques with their ghosts, while being
the farthest among people from them with their spirits, move with
remembrance their lips and follow them with moving their rosaries. But
in fact they were as described by Amir al-Mu’minin Ali ibn Abi Talib who
said in their regard: They made the Din one of the locks of insight and
blockages of intellect. They are self-deceited and deluded, doing evil
but thinking to do good. They imagine oppression to be justice, and
treachery to be a virtue, so they believe that ascribing what they
surmise to the Prophet’s Companions will increase in their honour and
make others hold them in higher esteem, so as to be fit for what is said
in their regard: “A wise enemy is much better than an ignorant lover,
<span id="_anchor_745"></span>745 (with some abbreviation).

When broaching to \`ilm al-hadith in the bill he laid down for reforming
the education, and what method should be followed, he (Muhammad Abduh)
said: “Art of hadith is considered acceptable when it is viewed as
interpreting the Qur’an and exposer for it, with deleting from it
whatever contradicting the Quranic text, like the unauthentic traditions
and exertion of opinion (ijtihad), so as to restore the correct
traditions to it, if their outward appearance deludes of being
contradictory (to the Qur’an). <span id="_anchor_746"></span>746

In an address to one of brothers (in Din), counselling him to keep on
reading the Qur’an and the Prophetic sirah (conduct), he said: “Keep on

reading the Qur’an and learn its imperatives, the forbidden things,
counsels and lessons, as it used to be recited for the believers and
disbelievers in the time of (coming of) revelation. Beware of going over
the books of tafsir but only for understanding the meaning of some word
that you could not realize what the Arabs intended by it, or connection
between a word and another the conjunction of which was unknown for you.
Then betake yourself to what the Qur’an designated for you, bear down
upon what it assaults, and attach to this study of the Prophetic
conduct, admitting the reasonable correct matters, keeping your eyes
away from the weak and rejected things. <span
id="_anchor_747"></span>747

In interpreting the Qur’an and comprehending the religion, he said: In
this regard that which should be followed is only the decisive proof,
since this issue comes under bab al-aqa’id (doctrines), and it is
dependable upon certainty that can’t be taken through conjecture and
imagination. <span id="_anchor_748"></span>748

### Believing in Message of Muhammad (S): <span id="_anchor_749"></span>749

Al-Ustadh Muhammad Abduh says:

It should be believed in what he (S) reported and had faith in whatever
he brought, with which I mean what is expressed clearly in the holy
Book, and what was successively narrated (mutawatir) through an
authentic chain of transmitters that having all the necessary
conditions. That is the khabar that is reported by a group of people
against whom charge of collaboration on falsity can never be levelled by
anyone, as is usual in the case of sensible matters, such as the
conditions after death like resurrection (ba’th) and bliss in the
paradise, or torment in the hell, reckoning for the merits (hasanat) and
guilts, beside other known alike issues. But when it is related to
belief and faith, we should depend only upon what is plain in the
khabar, and it is impermissible to annex the conjectural to the
decisive. The provision for soundness of belief lies in its devoidness
of anything spoiling the probity and highness of the Deity above being
resembled to the creatures.

But in case of akhbar al-ahad, believing in whatever is cited in them is
obligatory upon whoever heard them and trusted the veracity of their
narration. Whereas that who has not received the khabar, or it reached
him with a suspicion seeming to him in its veracity, while it being not
mutawatir, entailing that non-believing it would not slander his faith.
The basis to be followed in all that being: Whoever denies anything
<span id="_anchor_750"></span>750 while knowing that it was disclosed or
acknowledged by the Prophet (S), he has in fact confuted the
truthfulness of the message and negated it. The same is true in regard
of that who neglected the successively narrated (mutawatir) knowledge,
though being aware of its being necessarily of the religion and found in
the Book, and little of the Sunnah is got from the acts. <span
id="_anchor_751"></span>751

### Can Anyone Authenticated by Earliers be Deemed Thiqah?

One of al-Azhar shaykhs was displeased with the behaviour of al-Sayyid
Rashid Rida, when he criticized Ka’b al-Ahbar and Wahb ibn Munabbih, and
declared distrust in their narrations. This was responded with a long,
interesting and dumbfounding reply, of which I quote the following:

“If we admit that whoever is authenticated by the antecedent Jumhur to
be thiqah — even if the opposite proved true by evidence — we will open
the door wide for defamation against ourselves due to abandoning the
proof, adopting its preludes through imitation, and contradicting the
guidance of the holy Qur’an.”

And after stating the fact that criticizing the narrators of hadith was
a subject of debate among men of jarh and ta’dil, he said: In regard of
verification of the texts of narrations and their consistency or
inconsistency with truth, matter of fact, the decisive or preponderant
usul (foundations) or furu’ (branches) of the Din or other than this,
being not of their (men of hadith) profession, and it was rarely
practised by the researchers among them. And if any of them — like
al-Imam Ahmad or al-Bukhari —practised it, he would not fulfill it as is
due, as was stated by al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar when

talking about the contradiction among the correct narrations for him and
others. Besides, it was inaccessible for men of hadith to recognize
congruity or contradiction of some traditions to the truth, like the
outward of hadith of Abu Dharr in view of al-Bukhari and Muslim and
others: <span id="_anchor_752"></span>752 Where will be the sun after it
sets? As what was thought by the predecessors being that the sun sets
away from the earth as a whole, with its light being stopped from
shining over it during the night! resting under the Throne waiting for
permission to rise again!! But it has become decisively known for
hundreds of millions of people that the sun never sets from the earth
during the night, but it sets from some countries and rises over others.
So when it be day here, it will be night in the other hemisphere and
vice versa, as is understood from the holy verse: “He maketh night to
succeed day, and He maketh day to succeed night”. And also the verse: He
covereth the night with the day, which is in haste to follow it.

So we — after coming to know for certain this established fact and
decision in its regard — will have to choose one of the two alternatives
left before us: Either impeaching the chain of transmission (sanad) of
the hadith, even if it be rectified, as narrating what contradicting the
decisively confirmed (hadith) was one of indications of fabrication in
the eyes of the narrators themselves. And the least cause impelling to
doubt veracity of the hadith whose narrators were known of truthfulness
and precision, lies in the fact that the Companion or Follower heard it
from Ka’b al-Ahbar or his likes. And it is known for all that Abu
Hurayrah used to report from Ka’b al-Ahbar abundantly and trust him, the
reason why we see many of his traditions appearing mu’an’anah, that he
couldn’t declare to have heard them from the Prophet (may God’s peace
and benediction be upon him and his Progeny). The indisputable fact
being that he hasn’t heard so many of them directly from the mouth of
the Prophet (S) due to embracing Islam so lately, and he most likely
heard them from Ka’b al-Ahbar. And the Companion’s mursal tradition (one
reported with no chain of transmitters) would be hujjah when

being heard from another Compaion, <span id="_anchor_753"></span>753 the
fact that can be said in regard of Ibn Abbas and others who used to
report from Ka’b al-Ahbar and trust him.

Interpreting the hadith narrated on basis of meaning and which some of
its narrators couldn’t comprehend what is intended by it, led them to
express what they could conceive of it, as in the case of not
comprehending of the narrator of this hadith – which I referred to as an
example – what is denoted by the Prophet’s saying: “The sun will be
prostrating under the Throne ... etc.”, about which he said what
indicated that it sets of the earth as a whole. Till he said: The hadith
was interpreted by the exposers of the two Sahihs in a way agreeing with
the opinion of the precedent astronomers, whose ta’wil came to be
feigned, that would be refuted by the outward aspect of the hadith,
especially the prolonged narration by Muslim.

Like that is the relation of some of the narrators for Ka’b and Wahb
from the books of the Children of Israel. Yahya ibn Mu’in, Ahmad, Abu
Hatam and his son and their likes, <span id="_anchor_754"></span>754
were unable to discern which ones were correct and which ones were
incorrect among these traditions due to their not being acquainted with
those books, and non-availability of an evidence proving the falsity of
the narrators well-versed in fabricating narrations which they ascribed
to these books. If it appeared for those succeeding them during that age
or before it or after it, what was not discovered by them in regard of
non-truthfulness of two or more of these narrators, can he then argue
pertinaciously or deny the truth and believe them falsely and
hypocritically? Or can he hide the truth from the Muslims so as not to
be disagreeing with those who were before him, in respect of whatever
became known for him but not for them! Hence the critic, <span
id="_anchor_755"></span>755 altruist over the Sunnah, couldn’t realize
that the atheists, whose impeachment in the Sunnah with the ta’dil of
Ka’b and Wahb, used to mistrust the Muslims in respect of the usul and
definite issues, and even the Qur’anic texts! I reiterate and emphasize
that exposure of falsity of Ka’b and Wahb for us would never entail
loosing any of the usul or furu’ of our religion, as what is dependable
in the Din being the Qur’an and the Prophet’s successive (mutawatir)
sunan, the practical ones (his acts), like

way of performing prayers and other rituals, beside the oral traditions
which were adopted by the antecedent Jumhur. All other than these sunan
and traditions, such as ahadith al-ahad which being not decisively
proved and confirmed, are liable to exertion of opinion (ijtihad). And
it is known that some of the leading mujtahids have not approved of many
sahih traditions, even those reported by the two Shaykhs (al-Bukhari and
Muslim), the practice that is still followed by millions of people, for
which other Muslims can never consider them as perverts. Al-Muhaqqiq Ibn
al-Qayyim has cited more than a hundred excerpts of these sahih
traditions that were opposed by the Hanafis and others, who constitute
the majority of Muslims of present time.

So what value would be for the narrations of this Israeli man (Ka’b
al-Ahbar) and this Persian (Wahb ibn Munabbih), the most of which are
only Jewish superstitions, that distorted the books of exegesis (tafsir)
of the Book of Allah and other books, and raised doubts against Islam
that were misused by its atheist enemies to charge it with being
religion of superstitions and suspicions. And other than the
superstitions may contain bigger doubts, like the one stated by Ka’b
about the description of the Prophet in the Torah, <span
id="_anchor_756"></span>756 which was confirmed to be reported from him
by the critic.

He continued by saying: The sarcasm we raise against them both (Ka’b and
Wahb) was only for some defect that was unknown for earlier men of jarh
and ta’dil, which being a reasonable and acceptable cause. And the
narrations that were known to be authentic and correct are sufficient to
prove their falsity.

After all that I would say: If through what I stated I could prove the
falsity of these two men, out of what they mentioned, there will be no
room for doubting that they used to cheat the Muslims, foisting into
their religious books and narrations things entailing slander against
their Din. Consequently no one would wonder to see them affiliating
themselves with Jewish and Magian societies, which used to conspire
against Islam and Arabs. <span id="_anchor_757"></span>757

### Criticism by Ulama’ of Fiqh al-Hadith:

He (Muhammad Abduh) said also: Beside the criticism of the ulama’ of
fiqh al-hadith against the asanid (chains of transmission) of reports
and works, there was another criticism to the texts in respect of their
meanings and expressions, and how viewed by reason and Islamic law
(Shar’) and their contradiction with others. In this kind of criticism
they were shared by men of philosophy, literature and history, and it is
called in the present age the analytical criticism (al-naqd al-tahlili).
Afterwards, they began to doubt and impeach many traditions, even the
ones of the authentic asanid, speaking against their expositions, with
some of them compiling books dedicated for this purpose, the most famous
of which being: Mushkil al-athar of al-Tahawi. <span
id="_anchor_758"></span>758

On the whole, the concern of men of jarh and ta’dil was concentrated on
verifying the narrators of the traditions, in respect of goodness of
memorization and precision, and non-oddity as far as possible. They were
rarely charging the hadith to be confused, if the disagreement occurring
in the text, but verifying the texts of narrations or their
contradiction to the truth, and to the preponderant decisive religious
usul and furu’ was not their profession, and practised by very few of
the researchers among them. There were so many traditions, in the chain
of transmitters of which only one trustworthy narrator can be found,
while they be defective and weak, as the sahih one cannot be known only
through its narrators but through comprehension and committing to
memory.

### Most of Ahadith al-Ahad Weren’t Abundant in First Age:

In the introduction to the book al-Mughni wa al-Sharh al-kabir, the
following statement is cited:

“Out of proofs of the madhahib it can be deduced that most of the
traditions that are used by men of hadith to argue men of opinion <span
id="_anchor_759"></span>759 and analogy from among ulama’ of riwayah,
being ahadith al-ahad that were not

so abundant in the first stage of Islam, or nothing was reported from
the Sahabah and Tabi’un contravening to their theme. Thus it became
known for all that they couldn’t be counted of the universal
legislation, according to which the Prophet and his Companions used to
act, not among the precepts recommended by the Prophet, but were among
the judicial questions the solutions of which people used to ask and get
answers (verdicts). If he did not ask, he would be free to exert his
opinion in its regard, and it would be better for him and people, as had
it been among necessities of the Din that Allah wanted to impose upon
His bondmen as duties, He would have manifested them without
questioning, since Allah the Exalted knows better what benefits people
more. <span id="_anchor_760"></span>760

The Prophet (S) was averse to asking abundant questions, forbidding from
this habit so as not to be a cause to multiplying the obligations, the
undertaking of which the Ummah will fail to do. Therefore the Messenger
of Allah (S) said: “Let me alone as long as I leave you. Surely it was
this asking abundantly and difference concerning the prophets which
caused those who have gone before you to perish. When I forbid you from
anything, you should refrain from (doing) it. And when I command you to
do a thing you have to perform as much as you can of it.” This hadith
was reported by al-Bukhari, and Muslim, but narrated by al-Daraqutin in
another version. Thereat the following verse was revealed: “O ye who
believe! Ask not of things which, if they were made known unto you,
would trouble you...”

He (S) said also: “Allah has imposed upon you obligations, which you
should not transgress, and laid down limits that you should not
approach. He has prohibited things that you should not violate, and kept
silent of (left) things out of mercy for you, not out of forgetfulness,
so you should never inquire about them.” It is reported by al-Daraqutni
and al-Nawawi in the book al-Arba’in.

On top of all this, comes the Almighty’s saying: “This day have I
perfected your religion for you and completed My favour unto you, and
have chosen for you as religion, al-Islam.” It would be verily glaring
ignorance and

an offence against the Din to demolish these great foundations and
principles with comparisons taken from conjectures of opinion and
analogy (qiyas).

It is proven that the Prophet used to answer every questioner about any
judicial issue in a way appropriate to his condition and level, and some
of his fatawa were general or special permissions. For example he
granted license to Aqabah ibn ‘Amir and Abu Burdah to sacrifice the
jidh’ (trunk) or atud of the goat, which meant that one which used to
pasture (of grass) and became strong, with completing one full year.
Al-Jawhari said: The best of it is that which reached the age of one
year. This hadith is unanimously concurred, while Ahl al-Sunnah,
including the four imams (of the schools) prohibited sacrifice of the
trunk and goats. <span id="_anchor_761"></span>761

### Can Traditions be Counted a General Law?

Al-Sayyid Rashid Rida says: Can the traditions – which they call oral
sunan – be considered a general Din and Shari’ah, though they weren’t
followed sunan in practice (acts) with no dispute or controversy,
particularly during the first era of Islam?

If we say yes, we will be faced with the biggest suspicion, as the
Prophet (S) forbade from writing anything other than the Qur’an, and the
Sahabah’s not committing the hadith to writing! Beside ignorance of
their ulama’ and leaders, like the caliphs to reporting of traditions!
It is reported rather, that they were disdaining from the hadith.

### What is Refuting Khabar al-Wahid:

In his book al-Luma’, under the bab: “Bayan ma yuradd bihi khabar
al-wahid”, al-Shirazi writes: If the khabar be related by a thiqah, it
can be refuted by several things:

First: If it be contradictory to the necessities of minds, when its
falsehood would be known since the shar’ can be approved by
permissibilities of minds, <span id="_anchor_762"></span>762 not the
contrary way.

Second: If it be contradictory to a text of the Book or successive
(mutawatir) Sunnah, when it will be recognized to be of no origin or
abrogated.

Third: If it disagrees with the unanimity (ijma’), the fact indicating
its being abrogated, or baseless, as it can’t be correct and not
abrogated while the Ummah is unanimously concurring on its contrary.

Fourth: If a single (wahid) narrates alone that which should be known by
all people, the fact indicating its being of no root, as it is
unreasonable that it has an origin but he alone be aware of it from
among all people.

Fifth: If a single narrator narrates individually the tradition that is
usually known to be reported by men of tawatur, as a result of which it
can’t be accepted since he is unallowed to singly narrate such a
tradition. If it came to be contradictory to qiyas, or the single
narrator reports alone a tradition with which the calamity prevails
everywhere, it would not be refuted. I have discussed the controversy
regarding this elaborately in another book (Tawjih al-nazar, p. 82), so
no need is there for reiteration.

In al-Mustasfa, al-Ghazali says: The second division of akhbar, the
falsity of which is known, are confined in four kinds as follows:

First: That which can be known to be contrary to truth either by reason
necessity, or view, or sense, or sighting, or akhbar al-tawatur. On the
whole, whatever contradicted the commonly known rules through the six
faculties (madarik).

Second: That which disagrees with the decisive confirmed text of the
Book (Qur’an) and the mutawatir Prophetic Tradition (Sunnah), and
unanimity of the Ummah, since it came to be contradicting Allah the
Exalted and His Messenger and the Ummah.

Third: That khabar, the falsity of which is declared by a large number
of traditionists who can never be generally collaborating on telling
lies when saying: We were present with him at that time (at the meeting)
and we haven’t found any root for the event he related.

Fourth: That which the majority of narrators refrained from reporting
and relating, though attending and witnessing the happenings of the
episode, and despite the impossibility of refraining from citing it due
to availability of motives encouraging to report it.

Al-Qarrafi is reported to have said: Five things indicate the falsity of
any khabar: Its contradiction to what is necessarily known by all, or to
consideration, or decisive evidence, or what was fit to be mutawatir but
hasn’t come so, and the legal rules, or its contradiction to all of
these things in a whole, like the miracles or that which was sought to
obtain from the memories or books of the narrators after searching into
the traditions, but could not be found. <span
id="_anchor_763"></span>763

### State of People during First Era and After It:

Al-Imam Abu Zayd al-Dabbusi, in his book Taqwim al-adillah, says: People
of the first era (of Islam), i.e. the Sahabah and Tabi’un and Righteous
(Salihun), used to base their affairs on the hujjah (proof). So they
used to act according to the Book, then to the Sunnah of the Messenger,
<span id="_anchor_764"></span>764 and after him to the utterances of
those who succeeded him, particularly those which can be proved right
through proof. Thus someone may act according to utterance of Umar in a
certain issue, but then he may contradict it with a saying of Ali in
another question. It is known about the companions of Abu Hanifah that
they once agreed with him and disagreed another, in accordance with what
be made clear to them through the hujjah. The legal madhhab was neither
Umari nor Alawi but the ascription was in origin to the Messenger of
Allah, as he was the source of ahadith, so he (S) extolled those people
who used to depend on the proof not their ulama’ or own selves. But when
people kept far from God-fearing during the 4th century, and lazied
themselves from seeking the proofs, they turned to acknowledge their
ulama’ as hujjah (authority), following and imitating them. As a result
of this, some of hem became Hanafis, some Malikis, and some others
Shafi’is, reinforcing the hujjah with

the rijal, believing the veracity to lie in being born on that madhhab.
Then, every community coming after them embarked on following the guide
of their leader, whomsoever, without any consideration to
qualifications, the fact led to substituting the sunan with the bida’
(innovations) and making the truth lost among desires.<span
id="_anchor_765"></span>765

### Fiqh during the Prophet’s Lifetime:

Wali Allah al-Dihlawi, in his treatise ‘al-Insaf fi bayan sabab
al-ikhtilaf, wrote:

During his (S) lifetime fiqh was not written down, and searching for the
rules then was not like the searching made nowadays by the fuqaha’, who
do their utmost to manifest the arkan (cornerstones), provisions and
norms, portray the images from their own invention, embarking then on
talking about these imposed images, laying down limits for what is fit
for being limited, confining what can be confined, and so on.

During his lifetime, the Messenger of Allah (S) used to perform ablution
and the Companions would learn from him and imitate him, without his
embarking on clarifying which part being rukn and which are being
recommended. Also when he was performing prayers, they would observe his
way of praying and follow his example in prayers, <span
id="_anchor_766"></span>766 and the same is said in the case of doing
the rites of hajj ((pilgrimage to God’s House).<span
id="_anchor_767"></span>767 That was his way of teaching the legal rules
to the Muslims, without manifesting for instance, the obligations of
wudu’ to be six or four, or supposing that some one might take ablution
without muwalat (consecutive order), so as to judge his wudu’ to be
valid or invalid, and they were rarely inquiring him about such matters.

Ibn Abbas is reported to have said: I have never encountered people
better than the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (may God’s peace
and benediction be upon him and his Progeny) ... they have not asked
about anything except thirteen issues till he passed away, all of which
being stated

in the Qur’an. Among them the following: “They question thee (O
Muhammad) with regard to warfare in the sacred month,” and the verse:
“They question thee (O Muhammad) concerning menstruation).” Then he (Ibn
Abbas) said: They were not questioning but about things that avail them.
Al-Qasim said: You are questioning with regard to things about which we
never used to inquire, and searching for things that we were not seeking
for ... I have never met people of easier conduct (sirah), or less
strictness than the Sahabah. <span id="_anchor_768"></span>768

On the whole, such was his (S) noble habit, so each one of the Sahabah
would take whatever he found easy to apply of his worship, verdicts
(fatawa) and rules, which he learned by heart and comprehended,
realizing for every one of them a certain aspect according to the
evidences indicating it. Their main dependable criterion in this regard
was only the inner consciousness and confidence, <span
id="_anchor_769"></span>769 without paying attention to ways of
inference, as the Arabs used to conceive the denotation of words among
themselves. <span id="_anchor_770"></span>770

  
  
  

746. Ibid., p. 516.

747. Ibid., p. 559.

748. Ibid., p. 643.

749. Risalat al-Tawhid, pp. 200 - 202.

750. That is of the rules of religion which being the subject of the
message and propagation from God the Most High.

751. Most of the successive (mutawatir) sunan being the practical ones
like the description of the salat and hajj. While the oral mutawatir
traditions, it is said that they didn't amount to the maximum plural of
paucity (commentary of al-Sayyid Rashid Rida).

752. This hadith was reported by al-Bukhari, Muslim, authors of Sunan
and Musnads, beside exegetes and al-Bayhaqi with similar words.

753. This when the riwayah was cited so, but it came to be otherwise, as
the Companion would never refer to the name of the narrator from whom he
heard the hadith, the case in which the argumenting authority vanishes.

754. He was one among leaders of hadith and ulama' of jarh and ta'dil.

755. The name of that critic who used to doubt the authenticity of Ka'b
and others was al-Shaykh Abd al-Rahman al-Jamjamuni.

756. See p. 151 and the following pages.

757. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXVII, pp. 614 - 619.

758. Al-Manar Journal, vol. XXXIV, p. 620. Mushkil al-athar was
published in India in four big volumes. We can also find many problems
in exposition of Ibn Hajar for al-Bukhari which is called Fath al-Bari.

759. Fiqh among Ahl al-Sunnah was on two systems of belief: the system
of men of opinion and analogy (qiyas), who were from Iraq. And system
(tariqah) of men of hadith who were from Hijaz. It is known that people
of Iraq practised qiyas abundantly and skillfully, the reason for which
they were called Ahl al-Ra'y. Their leader was Abu Hanifah, while the
leader (imam) of people of Hijaz was Malik and after him al-Shafi'i.
There was another fiqh for other madhahib like Zaydi Shi'ah, and Imami
Shi'ah and other Muslim communities, and every community has its leader
and sunnah.

760. No one knows the reasons or times or accasions of these issues,
which are verily necessary factors for apprehending them.

761. See vol. I, pp. 18, 19.

762. This issue is unanimously agreed by all farsighted men. Ibn
Taymiyyah said: It is impossible for two definite evidences to
contravene each other, whether they be both rational, or one of them be
rational and the other be traditional (sam'i).

763. Tawjih al-nazar, p. 82.

764. What is intended here by sunnah is the practical one (Prophet's
acts).

765. Qawa'id al-tahdith, p. 334.

766. The Messenger of Allah said: Perform prayers in the way you saw me
pray. It is unanimously concurred.

767. Muslim and Abu Dawud and al-Nasa'i reported from Jabir that the
Messenger of Allah said: Take (learn) your rituals (manasik) from me.

768. This statement of Ibn Abbas was reported by Ibn Abd al-Barr in his
Jami' bayan al-'ilm wa fadlih (vol. II, p. 141). It is also stated by
al-Suyuti in al-Itqan, by saying: They are twelve questions. But al-Razi
cited them with the expression: 14 letters, eight of them in Surat
al-Baqarah, in the following way (1) And when My servants question thee
concerning Me; (2) They ask thee (O Muhammad) of new moons; (3) They ask
thee what they shall spend; (4) They question thee with regard to
warfare in the sacred month; (5) They question thee about strong drink
and games of chance; (6) And they question thee concerning orphans; (7)
They question thee concerning menstruation, (8) And they question thee
what they aught to spend. Say: That which is superfluous. And six others
in other surahs: (9) They ask thee what is made lawful for them; (10)
They ask thee of the (destined) Hour; (11) They ask thee of the spoils
of war; (12) They are asking thee concerning the Spirit; (13) They will
ask thee of Dhu al-Qarnayn; (14) They will ask thee of the mountains…
and those who ask concerning the Spirit and Dhu al-Qarnayn are the
polytheists of Makkah and the Jews, as mentioned in Asbab al-nuzul, not
the Sahabah. Hence the cleared ones will be 12 questions, as stated by
al-Suyuti.

769. The Messenger of Allah said to Wabisah, when he asked him about the
birr (godliness): Consult your heart…the godliness is that in which the
soul and heart have confidence, and then what is woven in the soul and
what falters inside the bosom, even if people consult you and give
verdict to you. This hadith is reported by Ahmad and al-Darimi.

770. Al-Risalah, pp. 2, 3, Hujjat Allah of the author of al-Risalah,
vol. I, pp. 140, 141.
