Original Rules of Rituals and Transactions:
===========================================

Rule of rituals (ibadat) is invalidity, till an evidence be established
to confirm their veracity. And rule of mu’amalat and contracts is
veracity, till a proof be presented showing their invalidity, and
prohibition (tahrim).

The difference between these two, being that Allah, the Glorified,
cannot be worshipped but only through what He decreed and legislated by
means of His apostles (with their tongues), as worship is only His
obligation upon His bondmen, and His right that He Himself has
warranted, legislated and been pleased with.

Concerning the contracts, provisions (shurut) and transactions, they are
valid till introducing an evidence proving their invalidity. So Allah –
Subhanahu – has forbidden the polytheists (mushrikun) from contradicting
these two principles, which is prohibiting what He hasn’t prohibited,
and seeking His pleasure through what He has not decreed. Because the
halal being verily that which Allah regarded lawful, and the haram
(unlawful) being that which He has prohibited, and whatever He left
(with no express hukm) being ‘afw.

There may be a narrator deemed thiqah by Abd al-Rahman ibn Mahdi, and
suspected (majruh) in view of Yahya ibn Sa’id al-Qattan, or vice versa.
And these two were leaders (imams) and pivot of criticism in naql
(transmission), and upon them depend most of the traditions.

Whatever was of decisive indication in the texts, is the general shar’,
that should be followed and adopted in acts and adjudication. Whereas
that which was conjectural denotation, is in fact entrusted to the
exertion of opinion (ijtihad) by some individuals in regard of acts of
worship and prohibited acts (muharramat), and to the ulu al-amr
(authorities) in the adjudication rules.

The rule whose indication on tahrim (prohibition) being conjectural
(zanni) not definite, can never be considered a universal law for which
all the Ummah being answerable and asked to follow. But each one can
apply it according to his ijtihad, and whoever conceiving of its
indication to

prohibiting anything, would abstain from it, while that who couldn’t
comprehend that, he would follow the rule of ibahah (permission).

In Ma’alam usul al-Din, al-Fakhr al-Razi writes: The naqli (traditional)
evidences can never indicate certainty (yaqin).

A’ishah used to refute and disapprove every hadith contrary to the
Qur’an, holding the narration of the truthful with mistakenly hearing or
misunderstanding.

Al-Sayyid Rashid Rida says: I never believe in veracity of the sanad of
any hadith or utterance of any Companion contradicting the exterior of
the Qur’an, even if his rijal be authenticated. As there may be a
narrator that is deemed thiqah out of being deceived by his outward
complexion, while he being of bad inward. He added: Had the narrations
been criticized in respect of import of their texts, as they are
criticized with regard to their sanad, the texts would have judged many
of the asanid with incongruity. We can say for certain that we have
forgotten and lost a large number of the Prophet’s traditions, due to
the fact that the Sahabah ulama’ have not committed to writing whatever
they heard (of traditions). But these (lost) traditions do not include
those ones exposing and explaining the Qur’an, or any of the issues
related to the Din as they are recognized from the Qur’an, and
manifested in the practical Sunnah. Whatever is other than the
traditions can only increase in the guidance and manifestation. <span
id="_anchor_783"></span>783

1. The people were not charged with what is correct near God, as that
cannot be done on His part and He never tasks or imposes what cannot be
endured, but they were tasked with what they thought to be right. The
Usulis defined ijtihad as the faqih’s doing his best and exerting what
he possesses of power on a conjectural acquisition with a legal hukm.
Their expression: conjectural acquisition with a legal hukm, “since the
definite ahkam of religion can never be subject to ijtihad whatsoever.”

2. Among the rules widely known among them is that their supposing the
veracity of the khabar does not necessitate its veracity in reality.

Following are some of the established Shari’ah rules, and their definite
principles:

– The rules of relieving of the haraj (interdiction) and distress and
confirming and preponderating of easiness.

– The rule that the origin being innocence of guilt.

– The rule that primarily all the evils and adversities are prohibited,
and for all dainties the rule is permission.

– The rule that necessity knows no law.

– The rule that neither detriment nor adversity <span
id="_anchor_784"></span>784 (la darar wa la dirar).

Al-Imam Abu Hanifah says: “My opposition to every man relating from the
Prophet anything disagreeing with the Qur’an, is not to be taken as a
refutation or negation to the Prophet’s speech, but it is a refutation
to that who falsely reporting from him, and he will be charged with the
offence not the Prophet. And we respect the Prophet, and believe in
whatever he said and uttered, witnessing that it is actually as said by
him. We also witness and admit that he has never commanded to do
anything contrary to God’s commands, nor innovated or claimed other than
what Allah said, nor has he been among the feigning forgers
(mutakallifun).” (P. 99, of Manaqib Abi Hanifah).

Al-Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal is reported to have said: Be careful in taking
the rules of your Din, as imitating other than the ma’sum (infallible)
is an abominable act, causing blindness for insight and perception.
<span id="_anchor_785"></span>785

\* \* \*
--------

At this point I will put aside my pen and stop writing, after presenting
an effort and research which Allah succoured and helped me to do, having
recourse to Allah to bringing it out for all people, in a sincere way
supported by the most established proofs and strongest asanid. Pleasing
God was my aim from the work on which I spent long years going through
hundreds of

references, and exerting that effort in selecting from them that which
fits my book. The hardship I faced in preparing its material, and
arranging its chapters, specially because this compilation which had
neither example in the past to follow, nor a way, paved for us by
someone of those who went before us, so that to tread and proceed on.
And as is said, classifying and arranging any book is the most important
step on the way of compiling it.

If my this work can gain the pleasure and approval of the enlightened
and educated intellectuals, this being in fact what I look forward, and
it is sufficient for me. But if some people be annoyed and wearied of it
(the book), this would be of no concern on my part and of no importance,
as such people can never be of any peril against us, or taken into
consideration on our part.

Through the work I produced, I wish I had managed – as I said before –
to reflect and manifest honestly all the traditions reported from the
Messenger of Allah, showing them (to readers) as they are in reality.
Also I hope that I could give those who seeking to be guided to the
roots of these narrations, a luminous light, divulging what is true and
what is false among them.

And as long as my work is dedicated purely for the sake of God, so I
seek no recompense for it, nor expecting any praise or flattery from
anyone. As He, Subhanahu, is alone sufficient for us, and Most Excellent
is He in Whom we trust, in Whose hand being the good... He guides to the
straight path whoever He wishes, recompensing him of His county abundant
reward. And all praise belongs to Allah, in the beginning and the end.
And we seek from Him permanence of success...He is Hearer and He is
Responsive.

783. Tafsir al-Qur'an al-hakim, of al-Imam Muhammad Abduh and al-Sayyid
Rashid Rida, vol. VI, p. 288.

784. In his exposition of this hadith al-Imam al-Tukhi said: In the
transactions the convenience is given priority over nass (text) and
ijma' (unanimity).

785. Al-Islam al-sahih, p. 297.
