Introduction of the Second Edition 13
=====================================

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

“This is God’s guidance guideth He with it, whomsoever of His servants
He pleaseth; and if they were to associate others (with Him) certainly
would be vain for them what they were doing. These are they whom gave We
the Book and the authority and the apostleship; so if these (people)
disbelieve in it, indeed have We (already) entrusted it unto a people
who are not disbelievers in it. These are they whom God hath guideth,
therefore follow their guidance.” (6: 89-91)

While introducing the second edition of my book Adwa’ ‘ala al-Sunnah
al-Muhammadiyyah, or Difa‘ ‘an al-hadith, I find myself obliged to
present an express comment on its first edition, and how was the
reaction and response toward it on the part of people with their
different strata and inclinations.

Concerning the eminent scholars and leading thinkers in our homeland and
other countries, this book – thanks to God for His favour and help – has
gained their pleasure and appreciation with much applause, may Allah
reward them the best, on my behalf and that of knowledge. In regard of
those who dislike investigation in research, strival (ijtihad) in
comprehension, and free thinking, seeing knowledge to lie only in
whatever they have learned

through dictation from their chiefs and shaykhs … these people reacted
to it – as was expected – with severe protest, making widespread
campaign against it here and there, and even authoring books to this
end. My reaction or stance toward such people was turning away from
them, never facing them with the same stance and practices.

But, through any of these books – despite their voluminousness and
abundance – I have never come across even one study of worth or a
subjective criticism based on a modern scientific style that showing a
truth or rectifying an error, or modifying a viewpoint, with their value
being only disclosing the actual morals and nature of their authors with
the level of their knowledge. And if such type of criticism was
justifiable for some people in the past, it has verily become nowadays
so detested, with no one resorting to it but only the ignorant who know
nothing of the principles of criticism.

This is due to the fact that the proper criticism in the present time
verily rests upon established principles of full perfect knowledge,
sagacious intellect and sound logic, beside the critic’s being of chaste
tongue and polite style as a prime condition. Through these conditions
alone, criticism can undertake its mission best so as to be approved and
accepted by people, with having the required effect and impression upon
hearts and minds altogether.

The fact of which man may never perish out of wonder, being that all
those who blasted and opposed my book have in fact neither managed to
recognize its real purpose and objective, nor been able to be aware of
its aims. The reason behind this might be traced back to its being
beyond their cognizance and perception, and its theme being strange and
unknown to them. Beside its research being based on modern scientific
methodology which they fail and be short of attaining and recognizing,
as when they were faced with it were frightened entailing to their
denial and opposition to it for fearing from its implications for them.

I wish that they, on failing to comprehend and realize my words, would
have chosen to keep silent, causing no bother to people (out of their
opposition), heeding to the counsel of the wise poet who said:

I wish that who having no knowledge,

Had kept us immune from evil of his knowledge!

After all this, I announce with full confidence and self-assurance that
verily no harm is there to inflict my book because of such a feeble
baseless criticism, which only added to its value, and sublimated its
position.

13. I have deleted from this introduction more than seventeen pages, in
which I stated the standpoint of those who attacked me and my book.
Because I preferred to deal mildly and respond to evil with good and
kindness, the fact led me to neglect whatever they said and spoke
against me. I invoke Allah to forgive all those who vexed and slammed
me, and to guide them toward the straightforward path.
