Bibliography
============

1. The Holy Qur’an.

2. Tafsir Books: Al-Tabari – al-Nisaburi – Ibn Kathir — al-Qurtubi —
al-Qadi – al-Arabi – al-Razi – al-Zamakhshair – al-Alusi — al-Qur’an
al-hakim by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh and al-Sayyid Rashid Rida — part of
‘Amma and al-Fatihah by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh – Muqaddimat al-tafsir
and tafsir of Surat al-Ikhlas by Ibn Taymiyyah.

3. Hujaj al-Qur’an by al-Razi and al-Itqan of al-Suyuti.

4. Al-Mufradat by al-Raghib al-Isfahani.

5. Ta’rikh al-Qur’an by al-Zanjani.

6. Fada’il al-Qur’an by Ibn Kathir.

7. Al-Tibyan by al-Shaykh Tahir al-Jaza’iri.

8. I’jaz al-Qur’an by al-Baqillani and Mustafa al-Rafi’i.

9. Al-Bayan fi tafsir al-Qur’an, by al-Allamah al-Khu’i, vol. I.

10. Muwatta’ Malik and its exposition by al-Zarqani.

11. Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra by Muhammad ibn Sa’d, edition of Laidan, 1330 H.

12. Sahih al-Bukhari and its Sharh by Ibn Hajar and al-Qastallani.

13. Al-Adab al-mufrad by al-Bukhari.

14. Huda al-sari by Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani.

15. Sahih Muslim and its Sharh by al-Nawawi.

16. Al-Mulham fi sharh Muslim.

17. Sunan Abi Dawud, Sunan al-Tirmidhi, Sunan al-Darimi and Sunan Ibn
Majah.

18. Ma’alim al-Sunan by Abu Sulayman al-Khitabi.

19. Risalat miftah al-jannah fi al-ihtijaj bi al-sunnah, by al-Suyuti.

20. Tahdhir al-khawass and al-Jami’ al-saghir.

21. Mukhtasar Sunan Abi Dawud by al-Mundhiri.

22. Tahdhib Ibn al-Qayyaim.

23. Al-Umm wa al-risalah, by al-Imam al-Shafi’i.

24. Musnad Ahmad.

25. Taysir al-wusul by al-Zubaydi.

26. Al-Tamhid fi tajrid al-Asanid by Ibn Abd al-Barr.

27. Al-Arba’in by al-Nawawi, and its Sharh by Ibn Daqiq al-‘Id.

28. Risalah fi al-ruwat al-thiqat by al-Dhahabi.

29. Tadhkirat al-huffaz by al-Dhahabi.

30. Shurut al-A’immah al-sittah, by al-Maqdisi, and al-khamsah of
al-Hazimi.

31. Sharh al-qari ala nukhbat al-fikr by Ibn Hajar.

32. Muqaddimat Ibn al-Salah.

33. Tawjih al-nazar by al-Jaza’iri.

34. Qawa’id al-tahdith by al-Qasimi.

35. Miftah al-Sunnah by al-Shaykh Abd al-Aziz al-Khuwalli.

36. Fath al-mughith.

37. Sharh Alfiyyat al-hadith by al-Iraqi.

38. Alfiyyat al-Suyuti and its Sharh by Ahmad Shakir.

39. Ikhtisar ulum al-hadith by Ibn Kathir.

40. Talbis Iblis by Ibn al-Jawzi.

41. Taqyid al-ilm by al-Khatib al-Baghdadi.

42. Al-Ijabah li-irad ma istadrakathu A’ishah ‘ala al-Sahabah by
al-Zarkashi.

43. Kashf al-khafa’ by al-‘Aljuni.

44. Risalat al-Dhabb an al-Arab by Abd al-Aziz al-Khalidi (of Indian
ulama’).

45. Al-Muwafiqat by al-Shatibi.

46. Al-I’tisam by al-Shatibi.

47. Al-Ahkam by al-Amudi.

48. Al-Ahkam by Ibn Hazm.

49. Al-Mabsut by al-Sarakhsi.

50. Al-Bahr al-ra’iq, by Ibn Nujaym.

51. Fath al-Qadir by Ibn Hammam.

52. Al-Isabah by Ibn Hajar al-Asqallani.

53. Usd al-ghabah by Ibn al-Athir.

54. Dala’il al-Nubuwwah by Abu Nu’aym.

55. Sirat Ibn Hisham.

56. Ta’rikh al-Tabari.

57. Ta’rikh Baghdad.

58. Ta’rikh Ibn al-Athir.

59. Ta’rikh Ibn Asakir.

60. Al-Bidayah wa al-nihayah by Ibn Kathir.

61. Ta’rikh Abi al-Fid’ by Ibn Kathir.

62. Rihlat Ibn Jubayr by al-Andalusi.

63. Al-Khutat by al-Maqrizi.

64. Ta’rikh al-khulafa’ by al-Suyuti.

65. Al-Nujum al-Zahirah by Ibn Taghri Barada.

66. Al-Fakhri fi al-adab al-sultaniyyah.

67. Wafayat al-a’yan by Ibn Khallikan.

68. Mu’jam al-udaba’ by Yaqut al-Hamawi.

69. Mu’jam al-buldan by Yaqut al-Hamawi.

70. Muqaddimat Ibn Khaldun.

71. Al-Ma’arif by Ibn Qutaybah.

72. Ta’wil mukhtalif al-hadith by Ibn Qutaybah.

73. Nihayat al-arab by al-Nuwayri.

74. Al-Fasl fi al-milal wa al-ahwa’ wa al-nihal by Ibn Hazm.

75. Tarjumat al-Imam Ahmad by al-Dhahabi.

76. Minhaj al-Sunnah by Ibn Taymiyyah.

77. Al-Muntaqa min Minhaj al-Sunnah by al-Dhahabi.

78. Fatawa Ibn Taymiyyah.

79. Iqtida’ al-sirat al-mustaqim.

80. Raf’ al-malam.

81. Al-Furqan bayna awliya’ al-Rahman wa awliya ‘al-Shaytan.

82. Al-Rasa’il wa al-masa’il by Ibn Taymiyyah.

83. Fatawa Ibn al-Salah.

84. Al-Aqidah al-Tahawiyyah.

85. Jami’ bayan al-‘ilm wa fadlih by Ibn Abd al-Barr.

86. Al-Intiqa’ by Ibn Abd al-Barr.

87. Al-Dibaj al-mudhahhab fi ma’rifat a’yan ulama’ al-madhab by Ibn
Farhun al-Ya’muri.

88. Daf’ shubah al-tashbih by Ibn al-Jawzi.

89. Al-Shifa’ by al-Qadi ‘Iyad.

90. Al-Awasim min al-qawasim by al-Qadi Ibn al-Arabi.

91. Izhar al-haqq by Rahmat Allah al-Hindi.

92. Al-Ta’rifat by al-Jurjani.

93. Bayan zaghal al-‘ilm by al-Dhahabi.

94. Al-Ahd al-qadim.

95. Lisan al-Arab by Ibn Manzur.

96. Siyanat al-insan by al-Sahsiwani.

97. Abu Hurayrah by Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din.

98. Ta’rikh al-Shu’ub al-Islamiyyah by Carl Brokelman.

99. Hashiyah ala Sharh al-Dawwani by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh.

100. Risalat al-Tawhid by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh.

101. Al-Islam wa al-Nasraniyyah by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh.

102. Ta’rikh adab al-Arab by Mustafa Sadiq al-Rafi’i.

103. Ta’rikh al-Lughah al-Arabiyyah by al-Shaykh al-Iskandari.

104. Ashhar mashahir al-Islam by Rafiq al-‘Adum.

105. Al-Islam al-Sahih by al-Nashashibi.

106. Ta’rikh al-Imam Muhammad Abduh, vols. I and II.

107. Faylasuf al-Arab by al-Shaykh Mustafa Abd al-Raziq.

108. Tamhid li ta’rikh al-falsafah al-Islamiyyah by al-Shaykh Mustafa
Abd al-Raziq.

109. Uthman by Dr. Taha Husayn.

110. Ali wa banuh by Dr. Taha Husayn.

111. Mir’at al-Islam by Dr. Taha Husayn.

112. Al-Shaykhan by Dr. Taha Husayn.

113. Fajr al-Islam, Duha al-Islam and Zuhr al-Islam by Dr. Ahmad Amin.

114. Mu’awiyah fi al-mizan by Ustadh Abbas Mahmud al-Aqqad.

115. Al-Faruq by Diyab Uthman.

116. Al-Wahy al-Muhammadi by al-Sayyid Rashid Rida.

117. Risalat Yusr al-Islam by al-Sayyid Rashid Rida.

118. Risalat al-riba by al-Sayyid Rashid Rida.

119. Al-Manar and al-Azhar al-Sayyid Rashid Rida.

120. Al-Tadhkirah al-Taymuriyyah by Ahmad Taymur.

121. Asl al-Shi’ah wa usuluha by Muhammad Husayn Kashif al-Ghita’.

122. Al-Abqariyyah wa al-dhakha’ir by al-Shaykh Abd al-Rahman
al-Barquqi.

123. Al-Mu’jib fi talkhis akhbar al-Maghrib by al-Marakishi.

124. Al-Mawahib al-fathiyyah by al-Shaykh Hamzah Fath Allah.

125. Nash’at ‘ilm al-nahw by al-Shaykh Muhammad al-Tantawi.

126. Al-Masihiyyah fi al-Islam by Saint Ibrahim Louqa.

127. Wujhat al-Islam li-jumlah min al-mustashriqin, translated by
Muhammad Abd al-Hadi Abu Ridah.

128. Al-Aqidah wa al-Shari’ah fi al-Islam by Jould Zihar.

129. Ra’id al-fikr al-Misri by Dr. Uthman Amin.

130. Al-Qirtayn by Ibn Mutrif al-Kinani.

131. Manahij wa tajdid by Ustadh Amin al-Khuwalli.

132. Al-Mu’ammirin by al-Sijistani.

133. Nakt al-himyan fi nukat al-‘imyan by al-Safadi.

134. Ihya’ al-nahw by Ustadh Ibrahim Mustafa.

135. Al-Mughni by Ibn Hisham.

136. Al-Mu’rab by al-Jawaliqi.

137. Al-Sahibi by Ibn Fars.

138. Hujjat Allah al-balighah and Rasilat al-insaf by al-Dihlawi.

139. Al-Rawd al-basim by al-Wazir al-Yamani.

140. Mukhtasar al-Mu’ammal by Abu Shamah.

141. Al-Ba’ith ala inkar al-bida’ wa al-hawadith by Abu Shamah.

142. A’lam al-muqi’in by Ibn al-Qayyim.

143. Husul al-ma’mul by Siddiq Khan.

144. Al-Mughni and al-Sharh al-Kabir by Ibn Qudamah.

145. Lawa’ih al-anwar by al-Safarini.

146. Al-Niza’ wa al-takhasum bayna Bani Umayyah wa Bani Hashim, by
al-Maqrizi.

147. Al-‘Ilm al-shamikh by al-Muqbili.

148. Mushkil al-athar by al-Tahawi.

149. Hayat al-hayawan by al-Damiri.

150. Mu’jam al-hayawan by Ma’luf Basha.

151. Al-Bayan wa al-tabyin and al-Hayawan by al-Jahiz.

152. Uyun al-akhbar by Ibn Qutaybah.

153. Al-Umdah by Ibn Rashiq.

154. Al-Mathal al-sa’ir by Ibn al-Athir.

155. Khazanat al-adab by al-Baghdadi.

156. Khass al-khass by al-Tha’alibi.

157. Thimar al-qulab fi al-mudaf wa al-mansub by al-Tha’alibi.

158. Sharh Nahj al-balaghah by Ibn Abi al-Hadid.

159. Sharh Maqamat Badi’ al-Zaman by al-Imam Muhammad Abduh.

160. Al-Kamil by al-Mubarrad, and its Sharh by al-Shaykh Ali al-Mursifi.

161. Al-Wasilah al-adabiyyah by Husayn al-Mursifi, vol. II.

162. Asas al-balaghah by al-Zamakhshari.

163. Sharh Lamiyyat al-Ajam by al-Alwani.

164. Ta’rikh al-Tashri’ al-Islami by al-Khidri.

165. Al-Jarh wa al-ta’dil.

166. Taubih al-talib by al-Qasimi.

167. Ta’rikh al-tamaddun al-Islami by Jurji Zaydan.

168. Al-Arab qabl al-Islam by Jurji Zaydan.

169. Islamic Encyclopedia.

170. The Islamic Civilization by Kriemar.

171. The Arab Dynasty by Foultin.

172. Al-Hadarah al-Islamiyyah by Ahmad Zaki.

173. Al-Islam wa al-hadarah al-Arabiyyah by Kurd Ali.

174. Hadarat al-Islam fi Dar al-Salam by al-Yaziji.

175. Intiqad al-Tamaddun al-Islami by al-Shibli.

176. Al-Nu’mani.

177. Rihlat Ibn Jubayr.

178. Ta’rikh al-Arab al-Mutawwal by Dr. Philip Hatti, Edward Jorjis and
Gabriel Jbour.

179. Al-Mizan by al-Shi’rani.

180. Anba’ Nujaba’ al-abna’ by al-Siqalli.

181. Al-Amali by al-Murtada.

182. Maqatil al-Talibiyyin by Abu al-Faraj al-Isbahani.

183. Qabul al-akhbar wa ma’rifat al-rijal by Abu al-Qasim al-Balkhi
(manuscript).

184. Al-Muhaddith al-fasil bayna al-Rawi wa al-wa’i by al-Hasan ibn Abd
al-Rahman al-Ramhurmuzi (manuscript).

185. Al-Ba’th al-hathith by Ibn Kathir.

186. Al-Wabil al-Sayyib by Ibn al-Qayyim.

187. Risalah fi al-abdal by al-Izz ibn Abd al-Salam.

188. Al-Mawaqif by al-Iji.

189. Al-Luzumiyyat by al-Mu’arri, vol. I.

190. Al-Tibyan by al-Jaza’iri.

191. Al-Hamasah al-Sunniyyah by al-Tarkiz ibn al-Shanqiti.

192. Al-Fatawa al-hadithah by Ibn Hajar al-Haythami.

193. Al-Shi’ah wa funun al-Islam by al-Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr.

194. Nathr al-durar fi al-muhadarat by al-Wazir Abu Sa’id ibn Mansur ibn
al-Husayn al-‘Abi.

195. Al-Kafi al-Shaf wa takhrij ahadith al-Kashshaf by Ibn Hajar
al-Asqallani.

196. Ahadith ‘A’ishah by al-Allamah Murtada al-Askari.

197. Ibn Saba’ by al-Allamah Murtada al-Askari.

### Journals and Newspapers:

Journals: al-Muqtataf — al-Hilal — al-Manar — al-Fath — al-Risalah —
al-Thaqafah — al-Kitab — Nur al-Islam

— Al-Ahram Newspaper.

There are other sources to which I referred but I haven’t stated their
titles here, as they can be identified out of the pages of the book.
Besides, there being other sources if I cite here I would need many more
pages.
