For Truth and History
=====================

Following is the story of my book with the investigating and
non-investigating scholars, recorded here, in a brief statement for sake
of serving the truth and history, so as to remain for ever as a sincere
ensign and evidence to be read by all generations throughout ages.
Through this, people get to know how some shaykhs of religion – in our
age, of enlightenment, knowledge and atom – would react toward knowledge
books produced through serious investigation in research, and strival in
conceptualization, and freedom in thought!!

I have no choice here but to refer to a point I found so clear in the
criticism launched by the critics, that is their campaigns were
intensified in regard of Abu Hurayrah in particular, and reliability of
the Companions (Sahabah) in general, to an extent reaching an
unreasonable stage. Therefore, for fulfilling my duty toward truth and
history and respecting knowledge sanctity, I found myself obliged to
review and revise my book as a whole. Out of this I intended to
reinforce its sections and support its chapters, with authentic sources
and asanid having consideration among Ahl al-Sunnah of which I abstained
publishing in the first edition and which may be found after the coming
out of this edition. They cover these two subjects (Abu Hurayrah and
Sahabah) with all other topics of the book that actually need
reconsideration, revision, rectification, omission, addition and
elucidation, especially those points being stated for the first time,
till the book turned to be defectless and perfect.

Concerning Abu Hurayrah, due to his own special situation, in which none
of the Companions shares, and no parallel to him is there among them,

whether in regard of his sirah (conduct) or biography, or abundance of
the traditions he narrated, I have dedicated a separate book for him
under the title: Shaykh al-mudirah, having it printed and published
twice.<span id="_anchor_14"></span>14

With regard to the Sahabah, I opined to support my writings in the first
edition with quoting whatever revealed about them from the most truthful
book, referred to by Muslims in East and West of earth, that is the holy
Qur’an. Whoever intends and be able to dispute or argue regarding any of
its verses, or debates any of its words, he is free to do, being thus so
bold and valiant. Some people (of Sunnites) may claim that the verses
revealed in regard of the Sahabah and their conditions were abrogated!
Further, they say that if they were on this state during the lifetime of
the Prophet (may God’s peace and benediction be upon him and his
Progeny), they afterwards have been quite innocent and immaculate, <span
id="_anchor_15"></span>15  and anyone claiming the opposite is verily a
zindiq (blasphemous) whose faith is corrupt. <span
id="_anchor_16"></span>16

In conclusion of speech I say: I am ready to accept, with delight and
pleasure, all the criticism launched against me. May Allah’s mercy be
upon Ibn Hazm, who said:

“Whoever ponders and meditates, training his self to be pacified at
realities, though they be painful for it at first shock, his rejoicing
at being censured by people shall be much more than that rejoice caused
by praising him.

May Allah guide us all toward the straightforward path and bestow upon
us His grace and pleasure. He is surely the Benevolent the Merciful.

### An Indispensable Explanation

Before finishing with preparing the second edition of this book, I find
myself obliged to publish this explanatory statement to give replies for
two accurate comments. One given by the honourable scholar Dr. Taha
Husayn after reading the first edition of this book twice, as he
expressed – may God preserve him – in the interesting chapter he wrote
about my book, in which he

applauded it and its author, for which I present my gratitude and
sincere praise. I have sought God’s guidance to make of this chapter the
introduction to this edition.

Following is the first comment that was given by the Doctor and some
scholars:

While citing to people the story of hadith, exposing what happened to it
at the hands of the narrators, and that which befell it out of the
fabrication of fabricators and others, beside alike things I stated in
my book, I quote again some traditions as proofs for whatever I intend
to confirm or negate, or other than this! which seems to be only
paradox.

This comment is worthy of regard, should I believe in the veracity of
the traditions I am quoting, assuring their being uttered, with their
words and denotations, by the Prophet (S)! For warding off this
suspicion I say: The traditions I am citing through my discussion as
evidences supporting my views in the book, are only mentioned for
convincing those who can never be persuaded but only by such traditions,
since they consider them as intuitions in which they firmly believe.

Through this I have not transgressed the principles of logic and methods
of argumentation and debate. Since we have the term al-dalil al-iqna’i
(the convincing evidence), where one can argue with his opponent with
something the latter considers intuitive. The example for this being the
Muslim’s arguing the Christian with something stated in the Gospel,
while he himself disbelieving in that with which he is arguing. Or on
the contrary of this, or what is called by them dalil al-ilzam (the
binding evidence), in which they say: “Bind them with the laws with
which they have bound themselves.” This issue is quite common among
scholars needing no proofs or evidences to prove it.

But this fact never includes all the traditions cited in my book, as
signs of veracity seem apparently on some of them, like an exposition of
the holy Qur’an, or being in harmony with the sound reason, or “be in
accordance with the principles upon which religion was established,
toward which the

da\`wah (call) was launched, and for which Prophethood was bestowed,” or
through whose denotations I be enlightened by a ray of Nubuwwah light,
though being dim and scanty. Feeling this fact through my inner
consciousness, I would take and narrate those traditions in which
confidence is felt and reason can believe and admit, considering them to
be among the Messenger’s explanation of the noble Book. This, while
being certain of their being among ahad traditions, and of conjectural
evidence that never amounting to the degree of peremptoriness indicating
certainty (yaqin), with their narration being through denotation and not
with the original words uttered by the Prophet (S).

Intuitionism necessitates us to believe in authenticity of some
traditions like the one: “Never write from me other than the Qur’an,”
the hadith on which I based my book. Because all the contexts and
evidences indicate its veracity, with being supported by the acts of the
Sahabah, who have all followed it absolutely, abstaining from writing
down the Messenger’s traditions, beside forbidding people from
inscribing them. In this way, all these traditions have reached us
through narration (riwayah), not through inscription as in the case of
the Qur’an.

The second comment given by the honourable Doctor, was through his own
words when saying: You have abundantly reported from al-Sayyid Rashid
Rida (may God’s mercy be upon him). I heard this note too from other
eminent ulama, which I admit to be an undeniable truth!

My reply to this comment being that, my doing so was never out of
unawareness or lacking to evidences, but was verily on purpose on my
part for significant reasons.

Of them, that this Sayyid is regarded nowadays one of the reputable
leaders of fiqh, whom Ahl al-Sunnah were considering reliable and
trustworthy mujtahids, of whom they were taking (traditions and ahkam).
And also his being the unrivalled chief of Ahl al-Sunnah traditionists
in our time, to the extent being aware of whatever related to the
traditions contained in the famous Sunnah books, recognizing what
afflicted them at the hands of

narrators, beside whatever relevant to subject of my book, unless any
other scholar be aware of such things. Sufficient be is that al-Azhar –
that great institute – has never introduced or educated, throughout many
ages or in our time, anyone that can be his equal in knowledge and
research. I am fully responsible for these words.

Moreover, he has inherited knowledge of Professor al-Imam Muhammad
Abduh, whose knowledge and virtue needing no mention, beside being
widely known among the leading religious authorities and leaders. So
whatever is uttered by al-Sayyid Rashid I consider as if issued by his
teacher al-Imam, due to identicalness between their methodology and way
of viewing the religion. <span id="_anchor_17"></span>17

Due to his enjoying all these attributes, his sayings and opinions shall
be – undoubtedly – be considered by Ahl al-Sunnah as decisive arguments
(hujaj) and convincing proofs, with no one daring to dispute or deny.
That is why I have extensively quoted his sayings and views in my book,
taking them as strong evidences supporting my statements.

The same can be true in regard of any other scholar whose utterances I
usually quote like Ibn Taymiyyah, of whom I have abundantly quoted. Ahl
al-Sunnah call him Shaykh al-Islam, imparting upon him high esteem and
status. At the same time we recognize worth of these two eminent
scholars, we are aware too of the points for which they be reproached.
And the utterances of everyone can be quoted and refuted, except for the
owner of the message (S).

I have deliberately done so, since I was aware of the protest to be
launched against my book, on the part of those calling themselves Ahl
al-Sunnah, exactly as was seen in their reaction toward some chapters of
this book that were published in al-Risalah journal several years before
coming out of my book. This fact is explicitly demonstrated through the
hardships and misfortune I experienced after the coming out of the book
from press.

This being my reply to the observations of Dr. Taha Husayn and others,
hoping this reply be sufficient and satisfactory for him and all learned

‘ulama. I will content myself with this answer.

Here I avail myself of this opportunity to add some lines to this
statement in which I disclose a firm reality of whose comprehension some
people are misled.

This point being their claim that from my book I intend to achieve a
latent purpose, being to impede the Prophetic Sunnah (traditions) from
spread and be content with the holy Qur’an in taking all precepts and
rules of religion! I know not wherefrom they got this mistaken
conception, nor in which chapter of my book I mentioned it, or referred
to it in a way or another.

Whereas what I have expressed through clear-cut statements with no
ambiguity or obscurity, was that calling people to be precautious and
reservative in taking and accepting the traditions, trying their best to
seek and find only the sahih (veracious) and authentic ones. Beside
discarding and not heeding to the unauthentic and composed ones, after
that much distortion to them at the hands of narrators, the fact I
elaborated in details in my book. I haven’t introduced in this respect
anything as a novelty, rather it was the conduct (sunnah) of the
precedent leaders of Islam, and the usual practice of the knowledgeable
‘ulama.

Reiterating and emphasizing this more than once, I am certain that the
Qur’an being verily the origin of the straightforward religion, and the
Sunnah being only its exposer. So the exposition and demonstration
should be correct and obvious, and devoid of any suspicion.

Though my words being so obvious and clear, much criticism and sarcasm
reached me. But all this has no effect on me whatsoever, and can never
be in a way or another detrimental to my book.

Jizah of Fustat,  
 Friday 8th of Muharram 1383 H.  
 May 31, 1963, A.D.

14. This book was printed twice, one edition in the city of Sour in
Lebanon, and the second one in Cairo.

15. The principle upon which some depend is that the Sahabah as a whole
being reliable, inferring the hadith: "My Companions are like stars …"
which is baseless. See the book al-Muntaqa of Ibn Taymiyyah, p. 551, and
other books.

16. Refer to my book Shaykh al-mudirah, so as to find the name of that
who issued such a judgement, who is - regrettably - a professor teaching
the Islamic Shari'ah in one of the Egyptian universities.

17. The great Allamah al-Shaykh Mustafa Abd al-Raziq, the former
lecturer in al-Azhar University (may God's mercy be upon him) says: If
al-Shaykh Muhammad Abduh be a religious authority (imam), so al-Sayyid
Rashid Rida would be undoubtedly his companion, interpreter of his
madhhab and his complement. The founder of al-Manar (may God's mercy be
upon him) has exerted in this respect a tremendous effort, replete with
religious researches and fiqhi debates, which had an effective impact on
knowledge-seekers and their curricula, and on methods of the Islamic
studies throughout all the Islamic countries. (See the book Ra'id
al-Fikr al-Misri, p. 15).
