Introduction
============

**In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

1. The history of Islamic contemplation and culture has witnessed
diverse conjunctions with different human knowledge especially the
exotic reflections.

As we know, the spread of the geographical domain of Islam was
accompanied with the attachment of various tribes and nations.
Consequently, different thoughts and reflections entered the domain of
Islam. Amongst them were the thinking of Indian, Iranian and Greek
philosophers and gnostics and the beliefs of Zorastrians, Jews and
Christians. The transfer of Greek philosophical books into Arabic gave
momentum to the above matter.

In the meanwhile, the Muslims who saw themselves alien to the numerous
thoughts and beliefs showed various reactions against these types of
beliefs. These reactions can be summarized into three important pivots
and inclinations:

A. Some of the Islamic scholars did not pay attention to these exotic
elements since most of them did not consider as permissible, any kind of
research and investigation in *Ma’arif* (gnostic knowledge) and beliefs;
not even with regard to the divine works. They use to remain silent in
front of the questions related to beliefs and believed in the literal
meanings of Qur’an without any examination and analysis. They suggested
this as the only way of solution.

The above tendency has been in vogue mostly among the Ahlul Sunnat[^1]
and one can count the Hanbalities and Ahlul hadith as those following
this view. The slogan of this group was “Asso’aal Bed’ah” i.e. asking
questions about religious belief is heresy and forbidden. From among
those who belonged to this group, one can name persons like Malik-bin
Anas, Muhammad bin Idris, Shafa’ee, Sufyan Sun and in particular Ahmad
bin Hanbal.

B. Some others showed a passive reaction before the alien thoughts. They
form a wider spectrum. Some reacted through submission and acceptance,
and others who enjoyed relative freedom and had the ability to do
“*Ijtihad*” by taking possession over the alien elements and adorning
them over the foundations of religion gave entry to them in the head
stock of Islamic culture.

Transfer and translation of the alien philosophical thoughts into Arabic
language has passed three stages: Translation, interpretation and their
appropriation and arrangement with the Islamic *Ma’arif* (gnostic
knowledge) and establishment of new philosophical orders.

The second and third centuries *Hijri* was a sparkling period for the
translation of philosophical books. Among the renowned translators, we
can mention the names of Husayn bin Ishaq and his son Ishaq bin Husayn.

The third and fourth centuries can be reckoned as the period of
acquisition and interpretation of the works of Greek and Alexandria
laws, an endeavour started by individuals like Qavarri, Yuhanabin
Hailan, Abu Yahya Maruzi, Abu Bashar Mata bin Yunus and Abu Zakaria
Yahya bin Adi.

The third period started from the third and fourth century and reached
its perfection in the fifth century. One can name “Qandi” and “Faarabi”
as the commencers of this period. The climax of this stage can be seen
in the works of “Ibn Sina” and “Sahrvardi”.

The recent stage has been a dominant one amongst Muslim thinkers. The
result has been a mixing of the religious *Ma’arif* (gnostic Knowledge)
with non-religious elements in such manner that the system of beliefs
has enjoyed much less purity than required. In reality, these thinkers,
directly and before coming in contact with the alien culture (through
referring to the inspiration and relation about them), had not acquired
a faithful and religious system. By having one of the religious
*Ma’arif* in hand (a confused one, at that) they would encounter the
non-religious belief, strive in comprehending it, and occasionally would
write their descriptions.

Thereafter, by taking and accepting them, they strived hard to
coordinate these types of beliefs with the religion’s *Ma’arif* and
fashion them together within one rational system. It can be said that
these thinkers, in the threshold of Islamic thoughts and by reaping the
benefits of religious *Ma’arif*, have given dept and profundity to the
human *Ma’arif*, Greek beliefs and other ancient schools of thoughts and
have given new shape to them and presented them in the form of
philosophical systems. In this way, that which reaped the maximum
benefit was the human philosophies. By getting nourishment from the
Divine *Ma’arif*, their weaknesses and feebleness decreased and they
were strengthened and prepared for stepping into the field of sciences
and knowledge.

On the other hand, the Divine *Ma’arif* sustained a real loss because
gradually and systematically it lost its purity and its basic elements
were forgotten. In any case, the above course can be named as “the
manner of composition and adaptation of divine and human *Ma’arif*”
(gnostic knowledge) or “the manner of systems-making on the basis of
combination.”

C. Another tendency to which we shall now refer is the course that has
been referred to by most of the theologians, (especially the holy
theologians) jurisprudence and thinkers among the Shias and some parts
of the *Ma’arif* too has been acted upon. But on the whole and in the
form of one united system, it has been less exposed to public view.

This path is an analytical encounter with the religious authorities and
the human view. In this course, the religious *Ma’arif* and the human
belief will be examined and discussed in three stages: Acquisition and
explanation of religious world-view in the form of one united system,
well- reasoned, and on the basis of becoming learned in religious
sources. The second stage is recognizing and interpreting the human
world-views. The third stage is comparing the religious theologies with
each of the human world-views and separating them from each other.

The above course can be named as “the greatest Fiqh” and “the way of
segregation in Islamic beliefs” or “the related discourse.” On the one
hand it engages in obtaining knowledge in the most basic religious
matters, and on the other hand it resorts to separating the religious
*Ma’arif* from the non-religious one. In this method, talk is not about
contravention and confutation, problems and answers, and correctness and
incorrectness. Rather the discourse is in perceiving the *Ma’arif* and
separating them from each other.

The author, by confessing to the paucity of means in this research,
applied the above method to the most fundamental and the highest form of
religious *Ma’arif* i.e. recognizing the fundamentals of knowing God.
This is a small step on a great path. Of course, in this research,
benefit has been derived from the views and confirmations of great
Jurisprudents and exegetists too. On the whole, it is expected from
concerned thinkers and Islamic scholars that they do not withhold their
useful guidance, and help the author in reaping the benefits of their
instructions.

2. There is no doubt that until today various methods have been born of
culture and civilization. These methods, from the viewpoints of policy,
principle and consequences, possess common and contrasting points.
Therefore, judging about a particular reflection does not necessarily
embrace the other reflective systems. Rather, it involves only their
common points. However, without the least doubt, the Greek philosophy
due to the influence which it had on other schools of thought possesses
significance and importance such that makes it distinct and superior
from the others. Although other reflections before the Greek culture
found its existence in other places like Iran, India and China, none of
them had exerted influence on other civilizations and sects to the
extent Greece had, such that Greece has come to be known as the
fountainhead of human views.

It is by favour of the above point that the importance of recognition
and separation of “Greece and religion” will become clear. By “Greece”
is meant the reflections of Greek philosophers, in particular Socrates,
Plato and especially Aristotle.[^2]

By “religion” is meant the divine religions i.e. the collective
teachings which the Divine Prophets presented on behalf of Almighty God
to the people for their guidance, like the religion of Islam, and of the
Jews and Christians. In as much as the religion of Islam is the final
and most perfect of all the religions and the Holy Qur’an has remained
immune from the calamities of deviation, our emphasis is more so on
Islam and our testimonies too are from the Qur’an.

3. Undoubtedly, the “*Fitrah*” (innate nature) or the natural
“*Ma’rifat*” (knowledge about God) is one of the fundamental structures
of religious *Ma’arif*. Regretfully, not enough attention was given to
this in past philosophical and theological discussions.[^3]

In recent years too, while some have embarked upon that, often we see
insufficient and weak reasons have been set forth in proof of God. The
claim to this is that “*Fitrah*” (innate nature) is a part of religious
theological logic that, along with the other parts, collectively shows
the true path of “knowing God” in the logic of divine religions. What
this book has intended to prove is this that the Compassionate God has
not abandoned the most basic matters related to belief and has not left
its affairs to the various *Ma’arif*s (gnostic knowledge) and to the
human contradictions. Rather, right from the first step of search of
religion, He has helped and shown the path.

4. It is necessary here to have a general outlook and a brief review
over the discussions of this book.

In the first section, while comparing briefly the “Usul” (principles)
prevailing over the Greek reflection on the one side and the basic
foundation of divine religions on the other side, we shall reach the
conclusion that the real differences of these two inclinations should be
linked in their roots and essence. A deeper investigation will take us
towards this concept, that the real foundation and the corner-stone of
differences of these two schools of thought (with regard to the
*Ma’rifat* of God) will return back to one basic and foremost principle
of ‘collateral proof’ (not acceptable proof).[^4]

In the Greek reflection, the prevailing inclination is this: that every
knowledgeable matter has been manifested as a mental complication and
naturally the mind should undergo an autopsy with the knife of logic and
philosophy so that henceforth it is either approved or rejected. The
concept of God and proof of His existence too, like other mental
concepts, is an unknown and irresolute affair which one has to achieve
with mental labouring, and after passing through various stages of
examination and discussion. It is clear that except for some specific
group of people and thinkers for all the others, this rational behaviour
is forbidden and restricted. (Plato has emphasized this matter).

The principle of collateral proof in its turn relies on two other
foundations. One is imagining God in the mechanism of abstraction and
separation, and the other is its confirmation with a definite method,
which Aristotle succeeded in explaining for the first time. By making
use of the matter of abstraction of collective concepts and the way of
combining concepts and jurisdictions he was able to explain the method
of rational collateral proof. In the first section this logical method
will be evaluated and analyzed and in the second section the kind of its
functioning in theologies and ‘knowing God’ will be revealed.

In the second section the Greek philosophy and its theologies will be
discussed in five stages. These stages are the period of fantasies, the
beginning of philosophy, the philosophy of Socrates, Plato and
Aristotle. The real emphasis is on Plato and especially Aristotle and
thus while examining the fundamental of their theologies we shall, in
contrast, briefly refer to the religious fundamentals.

On the other hand, the inclination towards the divine Prophets and the
*Ma’rifat* of God is rooted not as one rational affair and that too
unknown and uncertain, but as one clear mysticism and *Ma’rifat* in the
heart and innate disposition of all the human beings. Thus, if at times,
this *Ma’rifat* (knowledge about God) lacks the required divulgence and
manifestation, it is due to inattentiveness or human negligence and
external hindrances and factors where the tarnished dust settles over
the mirror of *Fitrah* (innate nature) and deprives man from
remembrance. Therefore, the cornerstone of the upright religion consists
of the norm of “innate definition”.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَتَ اللَّـهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

On this basis, the divine Prophets put the innate *Ma’rifat* into
operation through elegant methods. These methods were ‘reminding’ and
notifying the very same *Ma’rifat*. Therefore ‘reminding’ was the real
path of the divine evangelists, and is the second stage from the stages
of divine theology (knowing God). However, in as much as man is the
bearer of free-will and power and is in the position to express
gratitude and submission before God or turn away and express obstinacy
in front of these “reminders,” so in the third stage of divine
theologies the matter of “submission” is set forth.

In this way, the first stage from the stages of guidance and belief is
given to man and he finds readiness and honour in entering in the next
stage of the journey to God and the path of bondage.

These three stages (definition, reminding, and submission) form the
logic and the real fundamentals of religious theology (knowing God)
which will be discussed in order in the third Chapter of this book.

[^1]: We say this because the matter of deviation of the Akhbarit never
manifested in the form of beliefs of the Hanbalites. Basically in the
history of culture of Shias you will never come across a religious
scholar who will reckon discussion of beliefs and its defence to be as
heresy and or will adopt silence before the questions and doubts related
to beliefs. The Akhbaris who in deducing the commandments (Ahkams) and
the independent reasoning (Ijtihad) and its logic were denying Ilm
al-Usul (Methodology), have themselves narrated traditions from Imams
(‘a) that consists of the deepest form of Islamic Ma’arif (gnostic
knowledge and beliefs). Nevertheless, while coming across such
traditions they never resorted to deriving independent reasoning,
comparing or analyzing and for this reason they were close to the above
tendency. (The matter of differences between Hanbalites and Akhbarit and
the defects of these two schools of thoughts are out of the scope of our
discussion).

[^2]: From among the inclinations which we often come across in the
study of Greek culture is the inclination towards “mysticism and
intuition” and its necessities, among them being the belief in “unity
and Existence.” This aspect of Greek culture which reached its climax
through ‘Platonism’ is out of scope of our discussion. But in
continuation of this discussion we do intend to earmark a section
regarding the comparison of the ‘Greek mysticism’ with the “religious
Ma’arif.” If the opportunity is provided, this Section too will be
presented to the respected readers in the future.

[^3]: Some of the exegetists, scholars of hadith, theologians and
jurisprudents long ago presented useful discussions about innate
Ma’rifat (knowledge about God) under the concerned verses and
traditions. However in the conventional philosophical and theological
discussions of the past, this has either not been discussed at all or
has not been seriously mooted.

[^4]: We do not use the term ‘acceptable proof’ from this account: that
in the logic of religion too it occupies a place and that position is
argumentation and disputation. In the second stage of the third section
of the book while setting forth the discussion, appropriate
rationalization and notification has come in the discussion of
argumentation and disputation and we shall discuss about the place,
condition and form of argumentation and reasoning in religion.
Basically, most of the religious Ma’arif are not built upon the
philosophical, sensory or experimental satisfaction and it is due to
this that the Philosophical and experimental sciences are not having the
ability to reject and deny them. This is because some types of of
Ma’arif have a deeper outlook than the human sciences. On the whole, the
human sciences have the ability to prove and approve the religious
Ma’arif through different ways. In particular, one can make use of them
as a matter of support to the religious Ma’arif in the position of
“argumentation and disputation” at the proportionate circumstances.


