Section Two: Philosophical Theology (Knowing God)
=================================================

Introduction
------------

In this section the main emphasis is on the Eminent Greek Philosophers
Plato and Aristotle. However, it is appropriate to first briefly look
into the theology during “The Period Of Fantasies” and “The Cosmologists
Before Socrates” and then during the time of Socrates.

Period of Fantasy
-----------------

The period before Philosophy is usually propounded as the period of
fantasy in Greece and the most fundamental matter pertaining to the
fantasy of this period is the matter of gods. It seems that choosing the
name ‘fantasy’ for this period has a close connection with the matter of
gods and divine myths such that the Greeks without any rational and
philosophical analysis were directly considering a supernatural agent
for every natural, social and ethical manifestations. Indeed, for
everything which they encountered in this world they expounded the
happenings with those agents (living) out of this world. These
super-natural agents were the same numerous gods of the Greeks who had a
close connection with the various matters of this world.

Thus, as a means for expounding the happenings of this world, the matter
of gods was propounded in the Greek culture with extensive and simple
fantasies and without rational and philosophical examination. These
gods, who attracted the whims and fancies of the Greeks, were
accompanied with analogy, simile and syllogism for justifying the
natural and human affairs. Therefore the Greek gods had mostly human
figures while some possessed beastly forms, and they took shape from the
syllogism and simile of gods with the natural agents.

The journey of fantasy did not end here by way of simile. Rather in the
same way, they contemplated biography, ethics, manner of living,
ancestors and sons for the gods and these were explained in the mould of
myths.

Of course, as it was mentioned in the first section, the Greek fantasies
were in the form of images placed upon the previous matter. This prior
matter was the divine ‘*Fitrah*’ and the reminding of the previous
religions. That the Greeks turned towards fantasies of gods and not to
any other thing for analyzing the events of this world shows their
special condition and state of affairs.

From the time when human beings began to expropriate the divine
‘*Fitrah*’ (innate disposition) through fantasies, the human Greek
culture was born. In the subsequent periods, this kind of expropriation
underwent a change and took the form of philosophical expropriation and
finally mystical expropriation.

It appears that the above explanation explains the most fundamental
factor in the multiplicity of gods. However, this does not mean that
other factors like political and tribal considerations were not having
any effect in aggravating the multiplicity of gods. Similarly other
justifications for the origin of fantasy of gods have been explained,
which are not inconsistent with the above explanation and it is needless
to mention them.

With regard to the above matter, we mention here a testimony:

“Political and tribal separations added fuel to so many gods and made
impossible the worship of One God…When the religious fantasies of the
Greeks came out from the local limits it became the cause of myths and
common gods of the Greeks. For every social and natural manifestation,
for each of powers of the land and the heavens, for every joy, good
fortunes, evils and works the Greeks considered one source or one god
for them. The Greek gods were having human figures. This too is another
specialty of Greece and no other nation has ever imagined there gods
resemble so closely the human beings… With regard to each of the gods,
there existed a myth, which would clarify their race, their human
connection and similarly the customs related to them. These myths which
would arise either out of the local exigencies or was the product of the
poets brought into existence the beliefs, philosophy, etiquette and
history of ancient Greece… In the Greek myths, the world is not the
creation of gods. The world was existing prior to the gods.”[^1]

The theology at the time prior to philosophy can be summarized and said
as such: During this period, the gods were propounded in a polytheistic
manner through fantasies, imaginations, simile and syllogism. This
theology in general is categorically opposite to the divine theology and
this disagreement will be discussed in the section of religions. However
the point which is worthy of attention is the influence which the
theology of this period had on the later periods of philosophy
especially during the time of Plato and Aristotle. This influence was to
such extent that the later philosophers were speaking of gods and the
matter of imagination and analogy too has always been propounded in
Greece.

When Aristotle proves the multiplicity of gods by means of multiplicity
of movement he coincides his ancestors gods with immutable essences
(original movers). He says: “On account of the former ones and ancient
forefathers you have like a heritance remained in your place in the form
of a myth… He imagined that the original essences are the gods.”[^2]

Period of Commencement of Philosophy
------------------------------------

The birthplace of Greek philosophy and the foremost Greek philosophers
were among the people of ‘Ayooniya’ Miltus was the cradle of ‘Ayooniyus’
philosophy because it was in Miltus that Thales the first famous
‘Ayooniyus’ philosopher sparkled. The philosophers of ‘Ayooniya’ were
deeply under the influence of variable affairs, nativity and
development, disintegration and death.

However, as much as these philosophers have employed their mind and
intellect in explaining the Universe they have paid attention to this
point that in spite of every change and transition a thing should have a
firm and steadfast existence since change is from one thing to another.
Thus a thing which is prior, fundamental and remaining and takes
different forms should be existing. The philosophy and cosmology of
‘Ayooni’ is basically an endeavour in making clear the point that what
is the first agent or the matter of (all) the matters and the source of
each and every thing.

The thinkers of ‘Ayooniya’ were having differences in the nature of
“matter of (all) the matters” but all of them were unanimous in its
being material. Thales was of the opinion that it was water, Anaximans
believed it was air, Heraclites reckoned it to be fire and so on…[^3]

In the philosophy and reflection of this period, the matter of God and
theology is not propounded, the witness being that some words and
references about gods have been narrated by some of these thinkers[^4].

In other words, the belief in God, which was propounded in all the
periods, was still not given a place in the mould of philosophical
system.

Basically, during this period science and philosophy were not yet
distinguished from one another and scientific and philosophical research
too were mostly concentrated in finding the original agent in the
material world and this situation continued up to the time of Socrates
and sophists. Rational theology had still not a solemn place in the
reflection of the Greeks and whatever has been related with regard to
God in the rational forms and figures and in philosophical orderly
reflection are very insignificant and imperfect which the best specimen
of that can be found in the philosophy of ‘Anaxagoras’.

About him, Aristotle says as such:

“In this manner whenever a person would say that intellect is the cause
of regularity and order in the entire nature just as it is in the
animals, then as against the aimless sayings of the past people, he is
considered to be a wise man. We certainly know that Anaxagoras was
having this opinion. In spite of this, it is believed that ‘Hermutimus’
the native of Klazumanai has spoken about that more than him.”[^5]

Anaxagoras uses intellect as a mechanical tool in the making of Universe
and whenever he became helpless in the explanation of the cause of
existence then, out of necessity he would bring intellect in the
forefront. But in other instances he reckoned (other) things and not
intellect to be the cause of events. [^6]

‘Parmenides’ who was one of the philosophers prior to Anaxagoras
disbelieved the presence of any kind of movement in life and in this way
he created problems for the future thinkers. As such, every thinker
after him who reflected in the affairs of life and nature, instead of
conceiving movement to be a certain and undeniable reality had to strive
hard in its explanation and justification.

Anaxagoras who had imagined the picture of life in the beginning
(intermixed in numerous forms) to be from innumerable and static matter,
when faced with the matter of power or the power which is entrusted with
giving movement to the original mass and creating the things of the
world, introduced the principle of ‘Nus’.

‘Nus’ in distinct moments, gives the initial shake to that unlimited
mass and becomes the cause of spinning and rotation, which accomplishes
in various break-up of the original matter and then continues its motion
till it results in the formation of happenings of nature. Thereafter
‘Nus’ in between becomes alien and idle and perhaps becomes only a
spectator to the factory of existence. [^7]

With regard to ‘Nus’ there are a few points, which are worthy of
attention.

1) According to Aristotle, whenever Anaxagoras would get stuck up in
explaining something, he would bring intellect in the forefront.

2) On the one hand ‘Nus’ (intellect) is possessing divine attributes
like ‘infiniteness’ ‘free-will’, ‘independent subsistent’ and ‘regulator
of the Universe’ but on the other hand Anaxagoras ascribes attributes
like ‘the most delicate things’ and ‘place being incumbent’ to ‘Nus’. It
is for this reason that it is said Anaxagoras has not gone further than
imagining a bodily principle. Aristotle too likens ‘Nus’ to a mechanical
tool.

3) Even if we accept ‘Nus’ as one philosophical god, this god is not
entrusted with sufficient role in this world and secondly it passes
through the channel of simile and imagination and thus Nus like the
other things of the world possesses a place.[^8]

Such kind of defective philosophical theology had been propounded in a
more defective form at the time of Anaximanas, Kasnufanas and Heraclites
(much before Anaxagoras).

Over here we mention in brief the philosophical theology of these three
philosophers.

Anaximanas: In his philosophical reflection, he imagined the source of
the Universe to be the ‘air’. On the other hand ‘Anaximanas’ determined
air to be the God which is in existence and is great, unlimited and
always in motion. He says ‘that the air is God’ and even the gods too
‘have come into existence from air’.[^9]

In this way, Anaximanas takes God in his philosophical mould and
considers it (i.e. God) as equal with the original source of the
Universe (i.e. air).

Kasnufanas: He says: “One God, the greatest god among all the gods and
the humans which neither in figure nor in thinking is similar to the
mortal creatures.” “A god which is static and firm in its place and
which never moves.”[^10]

About him, Aristotle says as such: “By only paying attention to the
entire cosmos, he says that one (To hen) is God (To Theon).”[^11]

According to Aristotle’s report, Kasnufanas believed in some kind of
Unity of Existence and Oneness. It seems that he replaces ‘Aarkhe’ or
the original source of the previous philosophers with Oneness and names
it as God and considers God too as equal to the Universe. In this regard
Plato says that according to Kasnufanas “Whatever we can name the entire
things they are the creation of One.”

In none of his sayings Kasnufanas shows what he means by God is
something outside this world and his idea is a continuation and logical
expansion of philosophical course of the ‘Ayooniyus’ thinkers who
searched the source of existence in every place and everything.[^12]

Heraclites: He gives a more philosophical meaning to god after
Kasnufanas.

The basic principles of his world-view (Ontology) and theology comprises
of:

1) Existence in spite of its numerousness is one.

2) Oneness, born of contention is constantly in paradoxes.

3) Contrast and contradiction in existence is the very ‘logos’ or “the
Universal everlasting laws.”

4) The world is constantly in the state of change and perfection.

5) The original source of the world is fire.[^13]

6) According to Heraclites, fire the everlasting rotator is god. He
says: “The One, who only He is the wise, wishes to and also does not
wish to be named by the name of Zayus.” “God is day, night, winter,
summer, war, peace, statiety and hunger and changes in the form of fire
such that whenever it is mixed with fumigation’s then it is named
according to the (particular) smell of each one of them.”

“This saying of Heraclites has become the source of numerous research,
debate and differences of opinion in its interpretation. The thing which
can be clearly inferred is that the world and its various occurrences
are countless manifestations of God.”

Heraclites himself says: “All things are One.”[^14]

In this manner, theology in rational and philosophical form, is one
temporal matter in human civilization and culture. By philosophical
theology is meant imagining God and proof of his existence in the mould
of one rational system and giving shape to it based on the principle of
this system. We shall witness the complete specimen of this kind of
rational theology in the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle.

Basically, such kinds of reflections are generated at the time when
philosophical reflections have sufficiently developed in the field of
‘beings’ and the philosophical systems are on the verge of growth and
expansion.

Considering that the world of existence without God cannot be explained
and justified, the matter of God finds its place in the philosophical
systems. This matter can clearly be observed in the beginning of Greek
philosophy.

In the initial stages of this period when philosophy had not yet
adequately developed and the philosophical systems had not entered the
scene, rational and philosophical theology and the matter of God was not
at all propounded in its philosophical mould. Right from the time when
philosophical system began to lay foot in the field of human culture and
civilization, God too like other things, took a mental shape and
philosophical color and it is precisely for this reason that the
visualization of God, by gradual development of philosophical
reflection, took birth from the mother of human mind and in the custody
of human thoughts, it grew bigger and bigger.

The commencement of philosophy was conceiving of a birth which, for the
first time flaunted in the form of ‘Nus’ (intellect) in the philosophy
of Anaxagoras. It is for this reason that the philosophical portrait of
God was born and in philosophies like the philosophy of Plato and
Aristotle it requires ample of years for this powerless child to settle
down and appear in the form of one rational and philosophical powerful
God.

Theology of Socrates
--------------------

Speaking about the views of Socrates is indeed difficult. The
description of one of his students by the name of ‘Guznafun’ is not
compatible with the description of another of his student by the name of
‘Plato’ in all the instances. Similarly the depiction of Socrates which
is presented in the first conversation of Plato is not the same as the
Socrates propounded in the later depictions.

Nevertheless, if this certification of Aristotle that Socrates did not
teach exemplary ideas is accepted, then the true Socrates is the same,
which has been propounded in the primary works of Plato. As such, it
would also have less contradiction with the descriptions of Guznafun.
Previously, we had mentioned something about the aim and method of
Socrates and it was explained that with the great attachment which
Socrates had in the manner of ethics he intended to find a reliable base
for ethics and finally reckoned this base to be the Universal and
ethical definitions. According to him the manner of reaching these
Universals is dialectics and discussion in the definitions so that one
can move from a partial definition to a more general definition.

Aristotle explicitly asserts that Socrates was preoccupied with ethical
matters and did not engage in the whole of nature. Rather he was in
search of the whole in ethical fields and he was the first person who
focussed contemplation of definition.[^15]

The aim of Socrates was achieving a virtuous and ethical life and
recognition and knowledge of the Universal definition, which is attained
through dialectic and debates. On the other side, the specification of
Socrates ethics is a relation, which is set forth between knowledge and
virtue, meaning that a wise person, who knows what is the truth, also
acts upon it. In other words, no person intentionally and by knowledge
involves in evil actions. Thus, knowledge of the Universal definition is
the necessary and adequate condition for a virtuous living.

Just as Aristotle used to state, there does not exists any weakness in
the views of Socrates about ethics, obligation and responsibility
because, there does not exists a possibility that after (achieving)
knowledge of the definition, man does not act, due to moral vices, upon
the necessities of ‘*Ma’rifat*’ (gnostic knowledge). In other words,
ethical qualities and habits are having no place in the philosophy of
Socrates.

Now regardless of this that the necessary consideration between
knowledge and action, self-love and essentials of man is towards
perfection or other things, this result can be understood from the
philosophy of Socrates that perfection and guidance of man lies in the
knowledge (*Ma’rifat*) of the Universal definition and the mechanism of
guidance is dialectics.

### The General Principles of Socrate’s Theology

By paying attention to what was said earlier, the theology of Socrates
is capable of being projected in few sentences:

1) In view of the fact that Socrates has not presented a philosophical
system with regard to the world, rational philosophy too are not
propounded in his philosophy.

2) More than any other thing, Socrates focussed his attention towards
man and presented one ethical system for man.

3) Socrates reckoned the guidance and perfection of man to be in ethical
and virtuous life and for the reason that virtue is necessary after
acquiring knowledge of Universal definition and the fact that virtue is
the same as knowledge, the perfection of man lies in recognizing the
Universals.

4) According to Socrates, the mechanism of guidance is inductive
dialectic with this meaning that dialectic and dialogue begins from
partial definition and along with the contravention and confirmations
which is mooted in relation to the definition, a Universal definition
with regard to ethical actions is finally achieved.

5) In the view of Socrates, ‘*Ma’rifat*’ (gnostic knowledge) is the same
as virtue and ‘*Ma’rifat*’ accompanies the virtue. Therefore, there
remains no place for moral purification or striving for keeping aloof
from mental vices or becoming endowed with spiritual habits. Ethical
weakness, obligation and responsibility too are devoid of any meaning
and is seen as a kind of practical compulsion in Socrates philosophy.

6) In the philosophy of Socrates God has not been given any place and
for a prosperous living, man 15 needless of God, divine Prophets and
religions and he should only bear the trouble of dialectics.

7) It is narrated that Socrates has spoken about the traditional Greek
gods and similarly it has been narrated that Socrates had reckoned the
human intellect to be a part of ‘Universal intellect’. [^16]

If these talks have been said on the part of Socrates, perhaps one can
consider a role for gods or Universal intellect in the philosophy of
ethics of Socrates, in such manner that the gods in the form of genetic
and without sending the Prophets guide the intellect of man. Moreover,
by paying attention to the other sayings of Socrates, the help of gods
is either through presentation of intellect and or by means of placing
the Universal definition, in the human soul and or in reminding the
Universals.

Describing the differences of Socrates ethical system with the divine
religions is outside the scope of this discussion. However, inasmuch as
this system does not consider any place for sending of Messengers and
the matter of divine rules and legislation’s, its encounter with the
divine religions becomes manifest. With regards to the origin of God’s
existence and His role in the Universe, Socrates has not narrated
self-sufficient discussion and only some scattered words from him are at
hand which indicate the multiplicity of gods. Hence its difference with
the monotheism of religions. About ‘Universal intellect’ too, there is
no explanation at hand.

On the whole, it can be said that Socrates is not the master of
cosmology and theology. Rather, just as it has been said by Aristotle he
was engaged more in ethics and his ethics too leave no place for the
divine religions.

Theology of Plato
-----------------

The matter of God and Theology are among the complicated and vague
matters in Plato’s philosophy regarding which, many discussions and
interpretations have taken place and these interpretations too have
mostly been propounded on the basis of probability.

Regarding this, Plato himself in the treatise of ‘Taima’oos’ says: “It
is difficult finding the creator and father of the Universe and in case
of discovering Him, it is impossible to talk about Him with every
one.”[^17]

Moreover, in the treatise of ‘Jamhur’ he says: “The source of goodness
lies in the farthest end of the world of rational ideas and one can see
that with hardship.”[^18]

Before the matter of God in Plato’s philosophy is discussed, it is
appropriate to cast a short glance over his philosophy. Just as it was
said before, Plato believed that perceptible things are in the state of
‘becoming’ whereas rational recognition is with regard to those things
which are in the state of ‘are’ and the constant Universals which
intellect can recognize them, are existing in a world different from the
perceptible and variable world.

These Universals or parables are placed with special arrangement and in
an orderly manner in the world of exemplary ideas such that the more we
go up in the chain of exemplary ideas the more encompassing and
Universal parables we do achieve. On top of this is placed the ‘absolute
goodness’ which according to the statement of Aristotle is the same as
‘Oneness’.

On the other hand, Plato propounds the matter of ‘Creator’ or ‘Demurage’
for explaining the relation between the perceptible world and the
rational world and the manner of formation of the perceptible world. “In
the treatise of Tima’oos, Plato explicitly mentions that God or the
Creator makes the things of this world according to the pattern of
images (exemplary ideas).”[^19]

“It cannot be denied that Plato speaks in ‘Tima’oos’ in such manner that
as though the Creator (Demurage) i.e. the efficient cause of regularity
in the Universe makes the things of this world out of images as an
exemplary cause. Thus the image or exemplary ideas are completely
separated from the Creator such that if we name the Creator as God we
should then conclude that the images are not only far away from the
things of this world but are also away from god.”[^20]

Till here it appears that the god of Plato is the very Creator or
Demurage which is separate from the exemplary ideas and absolute
goodness and its work is making the perceptible world from the pattern
of exemplary ideas.

On the other hand, Aristotle states that in the view of Plato, ‘Oneness’
is the cause of (essence) of images”[^21]

Plato himself says in the book of Jamhur that: “I suppose that the
source of goodness is having a place in the farthest end of the world of
rational ideas and it can be seen with great hardship. However if a
person witnesses that, then he will inevitably admit that the source of
every good and beauty is the same and the creator of illumination and
center of light in the perceptible world is none other than that and the
source of reality and intellect in the world of rational ideas too is
the same.”[^22]

“In the same way one should acknowledge that those things too which are
recognizable, not only acquire the quality of recognition from the
source of goodness but their existence and essence too are from
goodness. This is not withstanding the fact that goodness is not exactly
as existence but with respect to power and greatness, it is by many
degrees higher than existence.”[^23]

As such, in the philosophy of Plato we are faced with two gods:
‘Creator’ and ‘absolute goodness’. Plato too in his sixth letter to his
friends endorses this matter. In that letter he asks his friends “to
swear faithfulness in the name of god who is the Leader of all present
and future things and in the name of father of that Leader and
Cause.”[^24]

This god and its father have been adapted to Demurage (Creator) and
Absolute goodness (oneness).

Now let us see how in the view of Plato, people can recognize God.
According to him, the real recognition is the very recognition of the
Universals and image and the most Universal images too is Absolute
goodness and Oneness which was the god of Plato and is placed on top of
the image. It is to be seen as to how the recognition of image and
Universals is to be acquired.

Plato narrates in detail the way of achieving the recognition of the
image in the seventh book of Jamhuri: In the beginning of this book, he
sets forth the famous example of the cave in the words of Socrates and
then mentions that it is only the philosophers who have liberated
themselves from the darkness of the cave and obtained the brightness of
the sun and Absolute goodness.

Thereafter he continues and says: “A philosopher who has met Absolute
goodness should come down to the territory of the captives and take over
the reign of their affairs until a virtuous city is established and the
people reach prosperity. However if someone wishes to become a
philosopher and engage in witnessing the ideas, absolute goodness and
god he should from before, pass through some stages.

The first knowledge, which Socrates[^25] recommends is the knowledge of
numbers and arithmatics. By means of this knowledge, the soul elevates
from the environments of the transient world to the position of real
perception. Concerning this, man can lead his soul to an upper world and
incite it to reflect about the reality of numbers and not allow the soul
to consider the numbers to be the agent of visible and perceptible
things.

The second knowledge, which is recommended, is Geometry. Since the
matter of geometry is an existing everlasting and subsistent knowledge
it drives the soul towards the realities. Thereafter the geometry of
space and stars are discussed. In this course the research moves from
plane geometry to space geometry until it helps one philosopher in
getting closer to the abstractional ideas through advancement from the
next perusal of difficulty number two to the next perusal of difficulty
number three.

The last stage in the premises of dialectic is the knowledge of voices
and music. Of course, the emphasis is not on studying the voices itself
but studying their relation between them. After successfully passing the
above premises, a person is now worthy enough to participate in
Dialectic (rational argumentation, debate and dispute) so that he is
able to release himself completely from the shadows of the cave and is
able to remember the rational ideas.

However, the debater should possess other qualities too which consist
of: Will, courage, beauty, natural disposition, sharp-mind, memory,
untiring aspirations, love towards every kind of work and physical and
spiritual powers.

Of course the aged cannot pass this path because it is easier for the
old to avoid rather than acquire knowledge and the difficult and heavy
works should be entrusted to the young.

As such, the philosophers should learn the above teachings from
childhood and till the age of eighteen they should have the primary
knowledge of literature, music and mathematics. Thereafter till the age
of twenty they should be given physical and military training. Then, for
a period of ten years they should engage in mathematics and should by
now put together those knowledge which they had learnt in a diversified
manner in their childhood. At that time, the best are chosen and for
five years, i.e. till the age of thirty-five, they should strive in
acquiring the knowledge of debate. After that, he should spend fifteen
years in acquiring methodical experiences until at the age of fifty,
this selected person finally succeeds in meeting Absolute goodness.[^26]

### Universal principles of Plato’s Theology

The theology of Plato can be summarized in a few sentences:

1) For Plato, searching God is difficult and speaking to people about
God is impossible.

2) In Plato’s theology we come across two existences which in all
probabilities both are god and or one is the real god and the other a
secondary one just as Plato remembers them as father and son.

3) ‘*Ma’rifat*’(gnosis) is only reminiscence and rational intuition[^27]
of images and intellectual ideas. This intellectual ideas or concepts
become feasible through rational disputation and debate.

4) One of the two god’s of Plato is placed on top of the rational ideas
which is ‘Oneness’ and ‘Absolute goodness’

5) When the other god of Plato i.e. Creator (Demurage) appears in
Plato’s philosophy and the relation between the two perceptible and
rational worlds are propounded in an interrogatory manner and Plato sets
forth the other god for solving this problem. This god i.e. Creator
occupies no more a place in the chain of exemplary ideas and gets
separated from Oneness and Absolute goodness.

6) The theology of Plato is in reality a philosophical theology. That is
to say, Plato is capable of being imagined and perceived only within the
framework of philosophical system.

7) The more abstract and universal the images the more difficult become
their recognition. Therefore recognizing the Absolute goodness, which is
placed on top of the rational idea and is one of the two gods of Plato,
is the most difficult recognition and from the viewpoint of time too, it
is reckoned to be the last recognition.

8) Both the gods of Plato, especially the Absolute goodness are capable
of being recognized only by the philosophers and the philosophers are
restricted people who possess physical, external, spiritual, mental and…
abilities who, after passing through many stages become capable at the
age of fifty of perceiving the Absolute goodness. The rest of the people
i.e. the majority are deprived from perceiving god and their prosperity
lies only in being obedient to the philosophers and rulers of Plato’s
virtuous city.

The above discussion is the result of Plato’s theology. All these
outcomes are against the construing of divine religions from Almighty
God and the way of His recognition.

In the next section divine theology will be evaluated in detail and then
its glaring difference with the above results will be revealed. We shall
index-wise present here the views of divine religions especially with
regard to the above discussion. Its explanation will be given later on.

1) The *Ma’rifat* (gnosis) of God is Universal and is not exclusive for
some particular people.

2) There is no knowledge, which is preliminary step towards recognition
of God, and the recognition of God is not propounded in the mould of
philosophical systems.

3) Recognition of God does not need philosophical and rational
deliberation. Rather making the people to recognize God is the
responsibility of God and so it does not involve any intellectual
problem for man.

4) The fundamental pillar of divine theology is ‘Tauheed’ (monotheism).

5) God cannot be described and depicted in any rational and mental form.
His holy presence is pure and free from any rational imagination. All
the human conception about Him is an imagination, which is the outcome
of the system of human mind and is not capable of being accepted in the
presence of Holy God.

6) The real *Ma’rifat* (gnosis) of God is not possible by means of
Dialectic and disputation but the heart of man is the focal point of
*Ma’rifat* (gnosis) and he is the address of God’s definition. Of
course, one should not utilize this talk in the sense that we reject
every kind of reflection and debate in the domain of religious belief.
Good argumentation and disputation enjoys a special position in all the
religious sciences, which shall be clarified in the future, discussion.

Theology of Aristotle
---------------------

In the first section it was mentioned that Aristotle’s logic seeked to
discover the unknown by making use of the capital of Universals and by
employing his own special method. Now the same matter will be discussed
from another dimension until we reach the theology of Aristotle.
Basically the logic of Greek philosophers is composed of two important
parts:

1) Discovering the Universals.

2) Transition from one Universal to another Universal or from one
incident to another incident through the method of deduction.

Taking into consideration the interpretation of a philosopher, the
discovery of the Universals is accomplished from the Universal. In this
way, Socrates who reckons the place of the Universals to be in human
conscience strives by means of dialectic and conservation, to take out
the Universals and description of the Universals from the soul of man.

Since Plato considers the world of exemplary ideas to the place of
Universals he strives to meet the Universal idea by transition from this
world of ideas and since Aristotle reckons the perceptible world and the
particulars to be the place of Universals, he propound the matter of
separation of the Universals from the particulars.

Therefor the matter of separation is having a deep relation with the
interpretation of Aristotle of the Universals and the important means of
difference of Aristotle with Plato and Socrates should be searched in
this region, not in the second part of logic where the matter of
deduction and the passing of one Universal to another is discussed.[^28]

The matter as to how this separation takes place and by which means it
is fulfilled is a complicated and important part of the world-view of
Aristotle. He i.e. Aristotle himself was aware of the problems of
separation. “By being aware of this that we are not by any means able to
always acquire innate or real description (which is fulfilled through
separation and composition of genus and differentia) Aristotle reckoned
nominal or descriptive definition although he was not so much optimistic
about them.”[^29]

Surely the discussion about separation requires a separate time.
However, it should be said in brief that by being heedful of the common
and contrast points ‘Universal’ becomes separated. The common points
among the parts get separated to one category in the form of ‘species’
and the common points among the various species get separated in the
form of ‘genus’. Acquiring the separation from the contrast points among
the species forms the ‘differentia’ These Universals from lower to
higher ones, are classified in such manner that on top of the various
classes is placed the ‘categories’.

Till here, the capital of logic has been brought together. From here
onwards we enter the second stage of logic namely, movement from known
imaginative principles to an unknown aim and in other words, the act of
deduction. For example, from composition of two known imaginations
(genus and differentia) we reach to one unknown imagination (quality of
species) and finally we describe the specie by means of genus and
differentia.

This part of logic, which is usually regarded as the entire logic of
Aristotle and is labeled as formal logic, is having a perfect relation
with the first part. That is to say, this logic has been designed for a
journey from special elements (abstractional elements) to special
unknowns (Abstractional Universal Unknowns) and for this reason there
exists a relation between contents and forms which one can call the
logic of Aristotle as the logic of contents also.[^30]

However in the section of confirmations, we should first of all achieve
the known confirmations. A known confirmation is a confirmation which
has been formed from two known imaginations called subject and predicate
which the relation between these two also are known and self-evident.

Therefore, the foundation of every confirmation is imagination. On the
other hand, if the relations of all the unknowns to the subjects are
unknown and not evident then, no knowledge can be acquired and a
philosopher in his journey will never reach his destination.

In this way, the principles and confirmations are fixed which can be
recognized through intuition and without the establishment of proofs and
the foundation of a rational movement is towards the direction of the
unknowns. Thus the primary perceptions enjoy a special place in the
philosophy of Aristotle.

With regard to the law of non-contradiction and the law of three
exclusion, Aristotle says: “Therefore it -is evident that such a
principle is the most perseverant of all the principle. Now we shall
mention this principle:

The being and non-being of one thing - both of these is not possible at
one time and in the same thing and for the same cause… This is the
strongest of all the principles.”[^31]

“However, in reality the existence of no central thing in between two
contradictions is possible. Rather with regard to one thing, (only) one
thing (whatever it may be) should be either confirmed or rejected.”[^32]

Of course more than their direct usage in reasoning as minor and major
ones, these evident principles are a guarantee to the authenticity of
the reasoning. This is because as soon as we accept the preliminaries in
deductive reasoning we cannot reject anymore its result; otherwise we
will have believed that there is and (also) there is not Oneness in a
thing.[^33]

However, Aristotle describes the manner of passing from known
confirmations to unknown confirmations by means of syllogism, induction
and analogy. Now, by paying attention to the above points let us see how
Aristotle acts with regard to recognition of God.

Rational recognition is the same recognition of the Universals and
Universals too consists of two parts:

1) Known imaginations.

2) Unknown imaginations.

First of all, Aristotle must gather together one known Universal
imagination of God since his ultimate aim is proving existence for God.
Thus a known imagination should be brought about from existence.
Thereafter the relation between these two imaginations should be proved
through syllogism and through two known propositions, which the subject
and predicate as well as the relation in them are known. Therefore, for
proving God three stages should be passed:

1) A known imagination of God.

2) A known imagination of being existent.

3) Proving and making clear the relationship between the above two
imaginations by means of two known proposition which are placed next to
each other in the form of syllogism and giving effect to the third
proposition (acknowledging the relationship between God and existence)

Now it should be seen as to how these three stages are passed.

### A) Imagination or Notion of God

Basically, every philosopher who in the beginning builds a mental system
for himself and in the end of the affair engages in proving God, pays
attention and proves God by considering his philosophical and mental
principles. This matter was explained before and was also seen in
Plato’s philosophy. In the same manner, Aristotle too creates an
imagination of God in his mind.

Now we refer to the important elements of Aristotle’s philosophy, which
have had a role in giving shape to the imagination of God:

1-the world was existing from eternity without having been created from
eternity. This matter is the characteristic of Greek culture wherein the
matter of creation of world by the hands of God is not discussed.

2-There exists motion in the world and this motion is necessarily
eternal.

3-As against existence, Motion actually requires a source. Therefore the
world in general requires one ‘original mover’ which itself is
motionless. Otherwise it would require another mover and this would
result in an endless chain.

4-The original mover cannot, by will and intention or as an efficient
cause run the Universe as according to Aristotle, in the mode of motion,
a reaction is shown from the motion upon the mover and so the mover too
undergoes change and motion. Nevertheless since the original mover is
the beloved and the goal of existents, for this reason, the existents
are having love and attraction towards the original mover and this
becomes a cause for movement towards the original mover. Therefore the
original mover is the source of motion in the form of un-voluntary final
cause.

5-The original mover should be a pure act and non-material and there
should not be any potentiality in it; otherwise reaction, change and
movement will occur (in that).

6-since an act is having a general resemblance with the doer, the
original mover, by decree of its being non-material, cannot perform any
bodily action. Rather his activities should be purely spiritual and
intellectual. Therefore the only work of the original mover is
contemplating.

7-The *Ma’rifat* (knowledge) which the original mover possesses is not a
knowledge which requires change, sensation and newness. Therefore the
original mover only understands it and so Aristotle introduces the
original mover as intellect and thought of thought and according to his
owns interpretation “Contemplating about him is contemplating the
contemplation” and “contemplating with the contemplation is one and the
same.”[^34]

8-It was mentioned before that Aristotle usually places the Universals
in ten stages and on top of each is placed one category which all
together we will be having ten categories. One of these categories is
essence while the other nine are accidents. Aristotle places the
original mover under the category of essence and remembers it as a
motionless essence.[^35]

9- Aristotle has probably reckoned multiplicity for the motionless
movers. Inasmuch as Aristotle reaches to the imagination of God through
motion and from the other side various kinds of motions are existing in
the world, therefore as a rule, Aristotle is bound to believe in the
multiplicity of gods. Regarding this he says: “As far as we see, apart
from the absolute motion of the entire world (which we say the original
essence causes movement for their motionless ones), there exists other
spatial motions like, the everlasting wandering stars (i.e. the
planets); so each of these spatial motions too should be brought into
motion by means of one essence.

Therefore it is obvious that the essences will necessarily be having the
same number as the spatial motion of stars… the total number of spheres…
would amount to fifty-five. However if we do not add to the moon and sun
those motions which we talked about then the number of spheres would
amount to fourty-seven. So let us consider the number of spheres to be
of this amount just as the essences and motionless bases can probably be
imagined to be of the same number. This is because we should leave the
talk to a more capable thinker.”[^36]

It seems that Aristotle was not having a clear notion in mind of the
number of gods and so with humbleness he entrusted with humbleness, the
actual and integral opinion to much more capable thinkers than him and
he sets forth his own views on the basis of probability only.

10-The god of Aristotle can neither be worshipped nor loved nor one can
expect help from him. In the Great Ethics, Aristotle explicitly says:
“Those who imagine that they can love god are in error because god
cannot answer our love and (so) we cannot, in any condition say that we
are loving god.”[^37]

From the above points we come to this conclusion that the god (or gods)
which Aristotle has imagined on the basis of his philosophy is the
original mover and the beloved of the Universe who is having no Will and
Capability and is only occupied in thinking about himself.

In other words the god of Aristotle is a perfect example of one
philosopher (like Aristotle himself).

### B) Imagination of Existence

According to Aristotle, existence is the most Universal[^38] and it can
be carried over all the categories. He says: “The word existence is used
in many ways but regarding one nature it is (used) in a prescribed form
and is (also) not used in homonymous manner (by commonness in name).
Rather (it is used) in the same manner which every healthy thing is
attributed to good health…Thus the term existence is used in many
meanings but all those meanings return back to one derivation (or
source)… because they too are a demonstration of one and the same
concept in some manner.”[^39]

Therefore inasmuch as existence is used in different meanings it is not
ideal homonymy and since the various meanings of existence find
connection with one fixed nature it is also not expressional homonymy,
rather existence is a kind of equivocal category i.e. existence is not
having one meaning but its different meanings finds connection with one
meaning by some means or the other.[^40]

### C) Proof of God

In the previous two stages, Aristotle attained a clear imagination of
god and existence. Now he should clarify and reveal the relation between
these two notions and should prove the proposition that “God (original
mover) is existing.” In proving too, the fundamental reasoning of
Aristotle is the reasoning of motion. His proof can be discussed in this
manner:

1) The world is in motion.

2) Every motion is having a mover.

Conclusion: The world is having a mover

1) If that mover is having another mover too till no end, then an
infinite regress comes into picture.

2) Whereas infinite regress is false and impossible.

Conclusion: The mover of the world is itself not having a mover i.e. he
is propounded as the original mover.

With these two exceptive and categoric syllogism Aristotle succeeds in
proving the original mover. The minor and major above syllogism should
be known from before. It seems that Aristotle has deduced the motion of
the world from change and decadence of the existents of the world which
he reckoned to be self-evident and has understood the dependence of
motion on a mover from the obvious principle of ‘Sufficient mode’.[^41]

### Universal Principles of Aristotle’s Theology

Now it’s appropriate to summarize the Universal principles of
Aristotle’s theology in few sentences:

1) The matter of God is resolved in a broad sense at the conclusion of
Aristotle’s philosophy and after natural sciences and theology. It means
that before the discussion of natural sciences and general principles of
philosophy one cannot talk of God and God too can be proved after
passing the various sciences like physics and general philosophy.
Therefore imagination of God in the position of affirmation and also its
confirmation in the position of proof is fulfilled in preliminary
sciences and philosophical systems on the basis of proven matters.

2) Since Universal is a matter of recognition and notion of the
intellect, God too is set forth as one Universal. Aristotle places God
under the Universal category of essence.

3) The notion of God takes shape by paying attention to the rational
systems, which has been planned from before. This matter is absolutely
clear in the diverse interpretation of Plato and Aristotle about God.

4) On the basis of Aristotle’s philosophical system, God is one mover
who being an extreme limit, sets the world into motion and he neither
possesses any Wills nor does he perform any act. Rather God is an
intellect, which puts himself in the state of thinking i.e. a perfect
deceitful Greek philosopher.

5) God is having no work with this Universe and so he neither introduces
himself to the people nor he is capable of sending a Prophet or religion
for the guidance of the people. On the other hand, the people too cannot
love and hence worship god.

6) God and his existence are imagined as the two Universals (category of
essence and equivocal category of existence).

7) Existence of god is dependent on rational proof (and there is no
other way for recognizing god).

8) The rational system of Aristotle is unable to reject the matter of
polytheism. Rather with the special move, which Aristotle makes, not
only he proves the existence of the highest mover as a motionless
essence but through multiplicity of kinds of motion, he also proves the
multiplicity of motionless essence and the multiplicity of gods.

9) For Aristotle, the matter of monotheism and polytheism is propounded
as one difficult and vague matter. Therefore he leaves its decisive view
to the more capable thinkers than himself and what he does is only he
confirms the matter of polytheism on the basis of probability.

The above point is the conclusion of Aristotle’s theology. Some of these
points have already been discussed in the previous section and the rest
of the points too will be compared with the viewpoint of religions in
the next section.

Over here, we mention briefly the divine principles, which are set forth
against Aristotle’s principles:

1) Recognition of God is needless of any philosophical system. Rather
definition (of God) is fulfilled through God and man is needless of
knowledge in remembering the *Ma’rifat* (gnosis) of God.

2) Definition and Gnosis of God is prior to this world and all the human
sciences (from the viewpoint of time).

3) Rank-wise too, ‘*Ma’rifat*’ (gnosis) of God is placed in the
beginning of religion.

4) Since definition (of God) is the action of God, therefore it is far
from any kind of ambiguity and God has uniquely introduced Himself to
man. So in divine theology, there is no place for polytheism.

5) In place of the matter of ‘proof’ the matter of ‘reminding’ is set
forth in religion.

6) The notion of God is not discussed in religion by any meaning.

7) The God of religion is a God to be loved who looks at His creatures
with Grace and Mercy. The humanity of the people too is on the basis of
the degree of their relationship with God and this relationship in the
form of worship, is counted as the ultimate aim of creation.

8) The God of religion is a personal God. Therefore at times of
remembering the ‘*Fitrah*’ (innate disposition), man pays attention to
his external Creator with His Divine Beauty and Majesty and calls Him
with all his strength.

[^1]: Will Durrant - History of Civilization; New edition; chapter 8;
pg. 197-203.

[^2]: Aristotle – Metaphysics.

[^3]: History of Kapilstan’s philosophy; vol. 1; first part from pg. 25
onwards.

[^4]: For example. Aristotle attributes this saying: “All the things are
filled with God” to Thales. History of Kapilstans philosophy; vol. 1;
pg. 38.

[^5]: Aristotle - Metaphysics; pg. 14-15.

[^6]: Aristotle - Metaphysics; pg. 17.

[^7]: “The first Greek philosophers”- Dr. Sharaf; pg. 409-412.

[^8]: History of Kapilstan’s philosophy; vol. 1; first part; pg. K
95-101.

[^9]: The First Greek Philosophers; pg. 147.

[^10]: History of Kapilstan’s philosophy; vol. 1; first parts; pg. 69.

[^11]: Aristotle-Metaphysics; pg. 22.

[^12]: Aristotle-Metaphysics; pg. 167.

[^13]: Regarding this matter, researchers are having difference of
opinion as to whether fire is meant to be discussed as the original
source for the beings or that Heraculitis finds fire as the best example
to show the idea of constant change of things through their forms and
perceptibility. Aristotle while emphasizing the first view says:
“Hipasus a native of Metapuntus and Heraculitis a native of Afsus
reckoned (this principle) [matter of all matters to be the fire”
(Metaphysics; pg. 13)

[^14]: Aristotle-Metaphysics; pg. 239, 258 & 259.

[^15]: Aristotle - Metaphysics; pg. 25 and 428.

[^16]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 1; pg. 160.

[^17]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; pg. 247.

[^18]: Plato – Jamhur.

[^19]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 1; pg. 234.

[^20]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 1; pg. 238.

[^21]: Aristotle - Metaphysics; pg. 26.

[^22]: Book of Jamhur 7th section; pg. 400, 401.

[^23]: Book of Jamhur 6th section; pg. 384.

[^24]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 1; Part 1; pg. 247.

[^25]: The book of Jamhur is arranged in the form of narrative sayings
of Socrates and it is presumed that in the year 411 BC Socrates entered
into a debate one night with some people in the house of an old man by
the name of Safalus and the next day he narrated the points of his
discussion to his friends.

[^26]: Jamhur 7th section; pg. 392-446.

[^27]: With regard to intuition of Plato, the matter of discussion is
whether this intuition is of mystical or rational type. The intuition of
Plato is one mental and rational intuition because his method for the
intuition of rational ideas is the method of dialectic and debate and
the preliminaries of Dialectic too like mathematics, strengthen more the
mind of a person until it gives a spiritual and seizing condition to
him. The commentators of Plato too like ‘Estees’ and ‘Ritar’ believe
that exemplary ideas are rational and are perceived by means of
intellect and only ‘Tilur’ in the treatise of ‘Mehmani’ has interpreted
the words of Plato as one spiritual journey. (History of Kapilstan’s
Philosophy; vol. 1; First part; pg. 271 onwards.)

[^28]: Here two points are worthy of attention: a) Logic takes shape by
being attentive to the philosophy of logic and the basis of gnosiology
of a philosopher. For example Aristotle, by being heedful of his
philosophical viewpoint with regard to the universals, attains the
matter of abstraction and by paying attention to the matter of
abstraction, he sets forth the logic of deduction of the unknown from
the abstractional affairs. b) Some people by mistake compare the
dialectic logic of Socrates or Plato with the deductive logic of
Aristotle whereas dialectic is placed in front of abstraction because
dialectic and abstraction are both used for discovering the Universals.
If we wish to compare the deductive logic of Aristotle with the logic of
Plato, the portion of division and composition of Plato should be
correspondingly placed in front of Aristotle’s logic and then compared.

[^29]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 1; Part II; pg. 385-386.

[^30]: In modern times especially in Europe great attempt has been made
to wipe as far as possible the tint of content from this logic and make
it more formal. However in this logic or rather in any other logic, one
cannot empty its mould from the contents under the condition that a
special mould is placed upon every kind of contents and gives a positive
result. This affair will be ascertained at the time when more
encompassing and absorptive moulds than the existing mould are
assembled.

[^31]: Metaphysics of Aristotle; pg. 97.

[^32]: Metaphysics of Aristotle; pg. 119.

[^33]: Metaphysics-Paul Fulkia

[^34]: Metaphysics of Aristotle; pg. 409; Similarly History of
Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 1; Part II; pg. 428-434.

[^35]: For example, Metaphysics of Aristotle; pg. 395-404, 405 & 406.

[^36]: Metaphysics of Aristotle; pg. 403-407.

[^37]: History of Kapilstan’s Philosophy; vol. 2; pg. 432.

[^38]: Ref. Metaphysics of Aristotle; pg. 76- last line.

[^39]: Aristotle - Metaphysics; pg. 89-90.

[^40]: In transcendental wisdom, existence is ideal homonymy but its
predication upon its meanings takes place in various manner and this
difference is due to differences in applicability and not in meaning and
concept. Therefore existence, while possessing ideal homonymy is also
one equivocal category. The reason as to why this category is considered
as equivocal is that on that on the one hand, it is having one singular
meaning but on the other hand its predication upon its meanings takes
place in various forms (first principle, precedence, ancientness and
severity and so it creates a doubt for man whether it possesses one or
many meanings. If we observe Aristotle’s views from the view-point of
transcendental wisdom, (we have to then say that) Aristotle or such
wisdom believe in ideal homonymy of existence and its doubtful
predication upon its meanings and or the equivocalness of existence has
also caused Aristotle to commit mistake and so has traversed a path
between ideal homonymy and expressional homonymy.

[^41]: This principle is counted to be the source of many other rational
principles like the principle of causality, principle of essence and
principle of effect and as the real pivot, the principality of intellect
is discussed. However till the time of ‘Laibnits’, much attention was
not given to this principle. As per this principle, every existence is
having a fixed cause and there is nothing, which is void of rational
mood. This principle is also remembered as the principle of general and
inclusive intellectual concepts. (For details refer to Metaphysics of
Paul Fulkia; pg. 92-96).


