Imam Ali's Admonition and Description of the Negligent
======================================================

Do not be like him who hopes for (bliss in) the next life without
action and delays repentance by lengthening desires, who utters words
like ascetics in this world but acts like those who are eager for it. If
he is allowed something from it he does not feel satisfied. If he is
denied he is not content. He is not grateful for what begets and covets
for increase in whatever remains with him. He refrains others but not
himself. He commands others for what he himself does not do. He loves
the virtuous but does not behave like them. He hates the vicious but he
himself is one of them. He dislikes death because of the excess of his
sins but adheres to that for which he is afraid of death. He says: why
do I work and get tired? I should repose and wish. He wishes for
forgiveness, but preserves in disobedience. He attained an age quite
enough for remembrance. He says about what he missed: had I worked
painstakingly, it would have been better for me. But he wastes time
bravely and inadvertently. If he falls ill he feels sorry for his past
negligence. When he recovers from illness he feels vain about himself;
when he is afflicted he loses hope.

His whims overcome him in the suspected questions, but he does not
overcome his whims in the certain questions. He is not satisfied with
his provisions and does not trust what is guaranteed for him. He does
not perform the imposed acts -of worship-. He doubts himself. If he
becomes wealthy he becomes self-conscious and falls into vice. If he
becomes poor he despairs and becomes weak. He has many sins and graces.
He seeks more but does not show gratitude. He regards the sins of others
as big but considers the same things for himself as small. When passion
overtakes him he is quick in committing sin but delays repentance, and
he does not how that will fall. His desire does not satisfy him, and his
caution does not stop him. He goes too far when he is begging and he is
too negligent in actions. He is tall in speaking but short in action. He
hopes for winning the prizes of deeds that he did not do and is
disregards the punishment of the ill deeds that he did. He aspires
for -worldly- things that will perish and ignores things that will last
for good. He fears death but does nothing in its anticipation. He deems
excessive people's acts of obedience but he deems insignificant his acts
of disobedience that are greater than people's. If he does something in
obedience to Allah he considers it much but if others do the same he
considers it small.

For others he is afraid of small sins, but for himself he expects more
reward than his performance. He therefore rebukes others but flatters
himself. He fulfills the obligations only when he is healthy and
pleased, but he betrays when he is displeased and inflicted by
misfortunes. If he is cured, he thinks that his repentance was accepted,
but when a misfortune befalls him, he thinks he is punished. He delays
fasting and hurries to sleep. He does not spend the night with worship
and does not spend the day with fast. In morning, he cares only for the
breakfast while he did not stay up last night. In evening, he cares only
for the dinner while he was fasting. He seeks God's protection against
them who are less powerful than him, but does not seek God's protection
against the more powerful. He wants others to obey him but he himself
disobeys God. Entertainment in the company of the wealthy is dearer to
him than remembrance of God with the poor. He is angry when he is given
little sustenance, but he commits many sins. He prefers himself to
others but never prefers others to himself. He wants others to obey him
and never disobey. He seeks fulfillment of obligations towards himself
but does not fulfill his obligations towards others. He guides others
and misguides himself. He fears the people and acts for other than his
Lord and does not fear his Lord in his dealings with the people. He
deems his wrongdoing and good and deems his good deeds as wrong. He
neither praises his Lord for His graces nor thanks Him for the increase.
He neither enjoins good nor forbids evil. He lives in confusion. If he
is ill, he acts sincerely and shows repentance. If he is cured, he
behaves severely and returns to his acts of disobedience. He always
against himself and is never with it. He does not know where will his
ill deeds take him. How long and until when will he be in such manners?
O Allah, make us rear You.

**Imam Ali's Description of the God-Fearing**

All praise and gratitude are due to God. The God-fearing in this world
are the people of distinction. Their speech is to the point, their dress
is moderate and their gait is humble. They submit to God with obedience.
They keep their eyes closed to what Allah has made unlawful for them,
and they put their ears to knowledge. They remain in the time of trials
as though they remain in comfort due to their satisfaction with the act
of God. If there had not been fixed periods of life ordained for each,
their spirits would not have remained in their bodies even for the
twinkling of an eye because of their eagerness for the reward and fear
of chastisement. The greatness of the Creator is seated in their heart,
and so, everything else appears small in their eyes. Thus, to them,
Paradise is as though they see it and are enjoying its favors. To them,
Hell is also as if they see it and are suffering punishment in it. Their
hearts are grieved, they are protected against evils, their bodies are
thin, their needs are scanty, their souls are chaste, and their
supporting Islam is great. They endured hardship for a short while, and
in consequence they secured comfort for a long time. It is a beneficial
transaction that the Generous Lord made easy for them. The world aimed
at them, but they did not aim at it. It captured them, but they freed
themselves from it by a ransom.

During a night they are upstanding on their feet reading portions of
the Quran and reciting it in a well-measured way, creating through it
grief for themselves and seeking by it the cure for their ailments.
Their griefs are stirred as they weep for their sins and the pains of
their wounds and injuries. If they come across a verse creating
eagerness for Paradise they pursue it avidly, and their spirits turn
towards it eagerly, and they feel as if it is in front of them. And when
they come across a verse, which contains fear of Hell they bend the ears
of their hearts towards it, and feel as though the sound of Hell and its
cries are reaching their ears. They bend themselves from their backs,
prostrate themselves on their foreheads, their palms, and their toes,
and beseech Allah the Sublime for their deliverance. During the day they
are wise, learned, virtuous and God-fearing. Fear of Allah has made them
thin like arrows. If any one looks at them he believes they are sick,
although they are not sick, and he says that they have gone mad. In
fact, great concern (i.e., fear) has made them mad. If they remember the
sublimity of God the Exalted and the stability of His omnipotence, in
addition to the mention of death and the horrors of the Day of
Resurrection, their hearts are dreaded, their views are agitated, and
their minds are bewildered. If they feel fearful, they hurry to God
through good acts.

They are not satisfied with their meager good acts, and do not regard
their major acts as great. They always blame themselves and are afraid
of their deeds. When anyone of them is spoken of highly, he says: "I
know myself better than others, and my Lord knows me better than I know.
O Allah do not deal with me according to what they say, and make me
better than they think of me and forgive me those shortcomings which
they do not know. You are the All-Knowing of the unknown."

The peculiarity of anyone of them is that you will see that he has
strength in religion, determination along with leniency, faith with
conviction, eagerness in seeking knowledge, courtesy in lenience,
clemency in almsgiving, understanding in awareness, knowledge in
forbearance, moderation in riches, devotion in worship, gracefulness in
starvation, endurance in hardship, mercy for the exhausted, fulfillment
of the right, leniency in earning, desire for the lawful, pleasure in
guidance, hatred from greed, piety in straightforwardness, and
abstinence in appetites. The approval of him who ignores him does not
deceive him. He does not stop judging his deeds. He performs virtuous
deeds but still feels afraid. In the evening he is anxious to offer
thanks to Allah. In the morning his anxiety is to remember Allah. He
passes the night in fear and rises in the morning in joy-fear lest night
is passed in forgetfulness, and joy over the favor and mercy received by
him. If his self refuses to endure a thing, which it does not like, he
does not grant its request towards what it likes. The coolness of his
eye lies in what is to last forever, while from the things of this world
that will not last he keeps aloof. He transfuses knowledge with
forbearance, and speech with action.

You will see his laziness aloof, his activity uninterrupted, his hopes
simple, his shortcomings few, heart fearing, his spirit contented, his
ignorance absent, his affairs simple, his religion safe, his desires
dead, his anger suppressed, his mannerism pure. He does not brief about
what is kept secret with him. He does not conceal the testimony against
he enemies. He does not do any practice ostentatiously. He does not
leave anything shyly. Good alone is expected from him. Evil from him is
not to be feared. Even if he is found among those who forget Allah he is
counted among those who remember Him. He forgives him who is unjust to
him, and he gives to him who deprives him. He behaves well with him who
behaves ill with him.

His forbearance is not absent. He does not neglect what adorns him.
Indecent speech is far from him, his utterance is lenient, his evils are
non-existent, his virtues are ever present, his good is ahead, and
mischief has turned its face from him. He is dignified during
calamities, patient in distresses, and thankful during ease. He does not
commit excess over him whom he hates, and does not commit sin for the
sake of him whom he loves. He does not claim the possession of things
that are not his. He does not deny others' rights that are obligatory
upon him. He admits truth before evidence is brought against him. He
does not misappropriate what is placed in his custody. He does not call
others bad names. He does not oppress or threaten others. He does not
cause harm to his neighbor, he does not feel happy at others
misfortunes. He hurries to the right. He fulfills the trusts. He is slow
in ill deeds. He enjoins good and forbids evil. He does not enter into
the worldly pleasures wrongly and does not go out of right.

If he is silent his silence does not grieve him, if he laughs he does
not raise his voice. He satisfies with what is his. Malice does not
agitate him. Whims do not overcome him. Stinginess does not prevail him.
He does not desire for what is not his. He associates with people so as
to learn. He keeps silent so as to be safe. He asks so as to understand.
He does not listen to the good wording so that others will not find
themselves neglectful in comparison with him. He does not speak of his
good actions so as to avoid taking pride in it before others. If he is
wronged he endures till Allah takes revenge on his behalf. His own self
is in distress because of him, while the people are in ease from him. He
puts himself in hardship for the sake of his next life, and makes people
feel safe from himself. His keeping away from others is by way of
asceticism and purification, and his nearness to those to whom he is
near is by way of leniency and mercifulness. His keeping away is not by
way of vanity or feeling of greatness, nor his nearness by way of deceit
and cheating. He follows the example of the past men of virtue and he is
the example of the coming people of virtue.

**Imam Ali's sermon of faith**

In this sermon, Imam Ali (peace be upon him) refers to faith and its
supports and aspects, and atheism and its supports and aspects. When God
began the matters, He chose for Himself what he willed and extracted
what He liked. Within the matters that He liked was faith. He accepted
it; therefore, he derived the name of faith from His Name and gifted it
with whomever He loved among His creatures. He then showed it. Hence, He
made its springs within reach for whoever wants to have it and made its
supports difficult for the opposites to penetrate. He also made faith
the fort of him whoever is loyal to it, the security of him whoever
wants to enter into it, the guidance of him whoever betakes himself to
it, the adornment of him whoever wants to have its beauty, the religion
of him whoever braces it, the refuge of him whoever seeks its refuge,
the bond of him whoever clings to it, the evidence of him whoever speaks
of it, the honor of him who knows it, the wisdom of him whoever utters
it, the light of him whoever seeks light from it, the proof of him
whoever discusses about it, the claim of him whoever advances it as
plea, the knowledge of him who understands, the narration of him who
relates, the rule of him who judges, the forbearance of him who
recounts, the reason of him who ponder over things, the understanding of
him who meditates, the conviction of him who recognizes, the insight of
him who determines, the sign of him who scrutinizes, the lesson of him
who learns lessons, the salvation of him who believes in it, the Lord's
love for him who is virtuous, the nearness of him who seeks nearness,
the confidence of him who depends (upon God), the rest of him who
entrusts (with God), the color of him who does charitably, the welfare
of him who takes haste steps (toward God), the shelter of him who
endures, the dress of him who fears (God), the purification of him who
seeks right guidance, the safety of him who submits (to God), and the
spirit of the honest.

Faith is the principal of right. Right guidance is the way of the
principal of right. Righteousness is its quality and glory is its feat.
The course of faith is bright. Its signpost is brilliant. Its lights are
luminous. Its extreme is high. Its racetrack is easy. Its milking is
ready. Its prize is very precious. Its people are old. Its knights are
noble. The virtuous deeds are its signboard. Chastity is its lights.
Death is its extreme. The world is its racetrack. The Resurrection is
its milking. Paradise is its prize. Hell is its punishment. God-fearing
is its equipage. The charitable are its knights. By way of faith, the
virtuous deeds are shown. By way of the virtuous deeds, the
understanding is gained. By way of understanding, death is feared. Death
is the seal of the world. Through the world, the other life is
approached. Through the Resurrection, Paradise is loomed. Paradise is
the regret of the people of Hell. Hell is the admonition of God-fearing.
God-fearing is the origin of charity. God-fearing is a purpose the
follower of which will never lose. Likewise, he who applied God-fearing
to himself will never be regret because it is the course through which
the winners achieved triumph. The losers were beaten because of
disobedience. Will the intelligent learn and the God-fearing ones
remember? Faith stands on four supports: on endurance, conviction,
justice, and jihad.

Endurance again has four aspects: eagerness, fear, abstention (from the
world) and anticipation (of death). So, whoever is eager for Paradise
will ignore the passions; whoever fears the Fire (of Hell) will refrain
from prohibited acts; whoever abstains from the world takes hardships
lightly; and whoever anticipates death will hasten towards good deeds.

Conviction also has four aspects: prudent perception, intelligence and
understanding, drawing lessons from instructive things and following the
precedents of past people. So, whoever perceives with prudence, wise
knowledge will be manifest to him, and to whomsoever wise knowledge
becomes manifest he appreciates instructive objects, and whoever
appreciates instructive objects he is just like past people. Justice
also has four aspects: keen understanding, deep knowledge, good power of
decision and firm forbearance. Therefore, whoever understands comes to
acquire depth of knowledge; whoever acquires depth of knowledge drinks
from the spring of judgment; and whoever exercises forbearance never
commits evil actions in his affairs and leads a praiseworthy life among
the people. Jihad also has four aspects: to ask others to do good, to
keep away others from doing evil, to fight (in the way of Allah)
sincerely and firmly on all occasions, and to detest the vicious. So,
whoever asks others to do good provides strength to the believers;
whoever desists others from evil humiliates the unbelievers; whoever
fights sincerely on all occasions discharges all his obligations; and
whoever detests the vicious and becomes angry for the sake of Allah,
then Allah will be angry in favor of him and will keep him pleased on
the Day of Judgment. Unbelief stands on four supports: on lechery,
exaggeration, doubt, and sedition.

Lechery has four aspects - coarseness, blindness, inadvertence, and
rebellion. The coarse will disgrace the believers, hate the jurists, and
insist on guilt. The blind will disregard the remembrance, have ill
mannerism, challenge the Creator, and be stirred by the Shaitan. The
inadvertent will aggrieve themselves, turn over their backs, regard
their seductions as rightness, be deceived by expectations, be befallen
by regret, be uncovered, and will suffer what he has not supposed. He
who rebels against God will doubt. God will exalt on anyone who doubts.
Then He will humiliate him by His power and disgrace him by His Majesty.
This is because he neglected and disregarded the Generous Lord.
Exaggeration has also four aspects: hankering after whims, mutual
quarrelling, deviation from the truth, and dissension. So, whoever
hankers after whims does not incline towards right. Except sinking in
the whims, he will not obtain anything more. Whenever a seditious matter
leaves him, another will cover him. He is living in confusion. He
whoever quarrels and disputes will be befallen by failure and his
affairs will be ragged. He whoever deviates from truth, for him good
becomes evil and evil becomes good and he remains intoxicated with
misguidance. He whoever makes a breach (with Allah and His Messenger),
his path becomes difficult, his affairs become complicated, and his way
of escape becomes narrow. He who takes a course other than the believers
will surely be apostatizing his religion.

Doubt has also four aspects: unreasonableness, fear, wavering, and
undue submission to every thing. So, about which of the bounties of your
Lord can the disputers persistently dispute? He who is afraid of what
befalls him has to run on his heels. He who wavers in doubt the tardy
will left him behind, the last will catch up with him, and the Shaitans
will trample him under their feet. He who submits to the destruction of
this and the next world will perish in them both. Only the bearers of
conviction may be saved. Sedition has four aspects: fondness of the
adornment, self-enticement, crooked interpretation, and confusion of the
right and the wrong. Adornment will preclude evidence. Self-enticement
leads to passion. Crookedness takes its adopter to a twisted
inclination. Confusion is complicated groups of darkness. This is
atheism and its supports and aspects.

Hypocrisy stands on four supports: whims, carelessness, rancor, and
greed.

Whim has four aspects: oppression, aggression, passion, and
insubordination. For those whoever oppress, their problems will be
increasing and they will be disappointed and defeated. For those who
aggress against other, they will not be secured against misfortunes, and
their hearts will not be sound. He who does not stop against his whims
will plunge into griefs. He who disobeys (God) will be intentionally
deviating lacking any excuse or evidence.

The aspects of carelessness are arrogance, pride, negligence, and
excessive expectation. Arrogance takes away from the right. Taking pride
in the present leads to negligence of the coming. Negligence is an
involvement in blindness. Because of expectation, man will have
knowledge of the account of his present manners. If he knows the account
of his present manners, he will die secretly due to the horror and fear
that he concludes. The aspects of rancor are conceit, boast, zeal, and
tribalism. The conceited will fall behind. The boastful are dissolute.
The zealous are stubborn. The tribalist is unfair. How bad is the matter
that is lying among falling behind, dissolution, and stubbornness. The
aspects of greed are complacency, fun, disputation, and haughtiness.
Complacency is abominated for God. Fun is vanity. Disputation is
misfortune for it drives to sinning. Haughtiness is ill amusement, play,
engagement, and substituting the bad for the good. That was hypocrisy
with its supports and aspects.

God is prevailing over His servants. His mentioning is exalted, His
authority is upright, His power is firm, His blessing is widespread, His
wisdom is luminous, His claim is evident, His religion is pure, His word
is accurate, His ranks are present, His attribution is wholesome, His
scales is fair, His messages are conveyed, and His keeping angels are
attendant. He then made the sin as guilt, the guilt as sedition, and the
sedition as profanity. He also made kindness as profit, apology as
repentance, and repentance as purity. He whoever repents to God will be
guided. He whoever follows seditious matters will surely be deviant
unless he repents to God, confesses of his guilt, and believes in the
kindness. God will not ruin except the perishing.

What great is God! How extensive are his repentance, mercy, good
tidings, and forbearance! How intense are the fetters, fire, power,
omnipotence, and vengeance the He has! He whoever wins obedience to God
will choose for His honor, and he whoever is keeping himself in
disobedience to Him will taste the harsh torture of His punishment.
There is lying the blissful end.

**Imam Ali's Words to Kumayl bin Ziyad**

O Kumayl, these hearts are containers. The best of them is that which
preserves (its contents). So, preserve what I say to you. People are of
three types: One is the scholar and divine. Then the seeker of knowledge
who is also on the way to deliverance. Then (lastly) the common rot who
run after every caller and bend in the direction of every wind. They
seek not light from the effulgence of knowledge so as to be guided, and
do not take protection of any reliable support so that they will be
saved. O Kumayl, knowledge is better than wealth. Knowledge guards you,
while you have to guard the wealth. Wealth decreases by spending, while
knowledge multiplies by spending. Knowledge is the ruler while wealth is
ruled upon. O Kumayl, adoration to the knowledgeable is belief, which is
acted upon. With it man acquires obedience during his life and a good
name after his death. The benefit of wealth vanishes when wealth
vanishes. Those who amass wealth are dead even though they may be living
while those endowed with knowledge will remain as long as the world
lives. Their bodies are not available but their figures exist in the
hearts. Look, here is a heap of knowledge (and Amirul-Muminin pointed to
his bosom). I wish I could get someone to bear it. Yes, I did find (such
a one); but either he was one who could not be relied upon. He would
exploit the religion for worldly gains, and by virtue of Allah's favors
on him he would domineer over the people and through Allah's pleas he
would lord over His devotees. Or he was one who was obedient to the
hearers of truth but there was no intelligence in his bosom. At the
first appearance of doubt he would entertain misgivings in his heart.

So, neither this nor that was good enough. Either the man is eager for
pleasures, easily led away by passions, or is covetous for collecting
and hoarding wealth. Neither of them has any regard for religion or
wisdom and conviction in any matter. The nearest example of these is the
loose cattle. This is the way that knowledge dies away with the death of
its bearers. O my Allah, Yes; but the earth is never devoid of those who
maintain Allah's plea either openly and reputedly or being afraid. As
hidden in order that Allah's pleas, proofs, and relaters of His Book
should not be rebutted. Where are they? By Allah, they are few in
number, but they are great in esteem before Allah. Through them Allah
guards His pleas and proofs till they entrust them to others like
themselves and sow the seeds thereof in the hearts of those who are
similar to them. Knowledge has led them to true understanding and so
they have associated themselves with the spirit of conviction. They take
easy what the easygoing regard as hard. They endear what the ignorant
take as strange. They live in this world with their bodies here but
their spirits resting in the high above.

O Kumayl, they are the trustees of God on His creatures, and the
vicegerents of Allah on His earth, His lamps in His countries, and
callers to His religion. Oh, oh, how I yearn to see them! I seek God's
forgiveness for you and me.

Imam Ali's Brief Commandment for Kuayl bin Ziyad

1. O Kumayl, begin every day with mentioning God's Name and saying,
"All might and power belong to God." Depend upon God. Mention us, utter
our names, and seek God's blessings for us. With the previous sayings,
encircle yourself and whatever is under your custody so that you will be
saved from the evil of that day.

2. O Kumayl, God educated the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family); he educated me and I educate the believers and leave behind me
the good education to the honorable people.

3. O Kumayl, I am the originator of every aspect of knowledge and
Al-Qa'im (peace be upon him) will be the sealer. O Kumayl, we are the
offspring of one another. God is All-hearing and All-seeing. O Kumayl,
follow no one but us, and you will be one of us.

4. O Kumayl, you need knowledge in every movement.

5. O Kumayl, before you have food, mention the Name of Him whose Name
bans every malady and presents remedy for any ailment.

6. O Kumayl, share others with you on dining tables generously, because
you will never endow anything to people. If you do so, God will reward
you widely. When others sit with you for a meal, use good traits,
relieve your sitter, and do not blame your servant.

7. O Kumayl, when you are on a dining table, take as long as possible
time so that your companion will have his sufficiency and others will be
bestowed from your food.

8. O Kumayl, when you have enough food, praise God for His provisions
to you raising your voice, so that others will imitate you and your
reward will be doubled.

9. O Kumayl, do not fill in your stomach with food, and leave a place
for water and flatus. Do not leave a meal unless you still covet it.
This will bring you health, since the source of physical health is few
food and water.

10. O Kumayl, blessing is in the wealth of him who defrays zakat,
offers to the believers what they need, and regards the relatives.

11. O Kumayl, give your faithful relatives more than what you give to
the other faithful believers. In addition, treat them more
compassionately and more kindly. Give alms to the poor.

12. O Kumayl, never disappoint a beggar. Give him even a grain of
grapes or a half single date. With God, the almsgiving are growing.

13. O Kumayl, modesty is the best dress of the believers, chastity is
his best beauty, learning is his honor, and negligence of gossips is his
dignity.

14. O Kumayl, there is a degree of superiority with every people.
Beware of discussing with the lowly even if they invite you to a
discussion. Be tolerant and be one of those whom God describes in His
saying: "When addressed by the ignorant ones, their only response is,
'Peace be with you.'"

15. O Kumayl, say the truth in every situation. Cherish the God-fearing
ones, desert the sinful ones, avoid the hypocrites, and dissociate with
the traitors.

16. O Kumayl, do not knock the doors of the unjust for associating with
them and earning from them. Beware of respecting them or attend their
sessions for God's wrath will befall you. If you have to attend there,
you should mention God uninterruptedly, depend upon Him, and seek His
guard against them. Turn the head down, deny their deeds secretly, and
glorify God openly so that you will be supported and saved against their
evils. 17. Chastity, tolerance, and patience are the most favorable
characters that the servants offer to God after their faith in Him and
His vicegerents.

18. O Kumayl, do not show your poverty to people. Forbear it for God's
sake dignifiedly and secretly.

19. O Kumayl, you can inform your brotherly friend of your secret. Who
is your true brotherly friend? He is that who does not disappoint you in
misfortunes, does not leave you alone in troubles and sins, does not
wait until you ask him for help, and does not let you inform him of your
problem. You may lead him to straightforwardness when he is leaning.

20. O Kumayl, the believers should be the mirrors of each other; when
they look at others, they should meet the needs and settle the problems.
21. O Kumayl, the believers are brothers. Brothers should never prefer
anything to each other.

22. O Kumayl, if you do not like your brother, then you are not his
brother. The true believer is he who follows our sayings. He who fails
to reach him is acting imperfectly to us. He whoever acts imperfectly to
us will not catch up with us. He whoever is not with us will be in the
lowest class of Hell.

23. O Kumayl, every concealed matter should be divulged in some way. If
we divulge one of our secrets to you and order you to keep it, you
should never show it to others. If you do so, then no repentance will
promote you. When no repentance will promote you, your fate will be
Laza -a class of Hell-.

24. O Kumayl, the divulgement of the secrets of Mohammed's family
(peace be upon them) is unforgivable and intolerable. Except the
faithful believers, do not narrate their sayings to anyone.

25. O Kumayl, in problems, say: "All might and power belong to God," so
that they will be solved. In graces, say: "All praise is due to God," so
that they will be doubled for you. If your sustenance is slowed, you
should seek God's forgiveness so that it will be increased to you. 26. O
Kumayl, by being loyal to us, save yourself from letting the Shaitan
have a share in your wealth and sons.

27. O Kumayl, faith is either steady or shaky. Beware of having shaky
faith. You will have steady faith only if you fit tightly to the patent
path that will not lead you to a bend and will not take you away from
the course.

28. O Kumayl, in obligatory acts, there is no permission. In
recommendable acts, there is no force.

29. O Kumayl, your sins are more than your good deeds. Your oblivion is
more than you reference to God. God's graces to you are more than your
deeds.

30. O Kumayl, there is no single piece in you empty of God's graces and
bestowment of good health. You should never neglect commending,
glorifying, praising, thanking, and mentioning Him in every situation.

31. O Kumayl, do not be one from them about whom God says:

They forget about God. He will make them forget themselves.

Hence, He ascribes sinfulness to them. He says: These are the sinful
people.

32. O Kumayl, the high ranks will not be obtained through offering the
prayers, fasting, and giving alms. The most important is to offer the
prayer with pure intendment, acceptable act, and sound submission. You
should regard when and what for you are offering the prayer. If it is
not offered correctly and legally, it will not be accepted.

33. O Kumayl, the tongue receives from the heart, and the heart
supplies the soul. Consider that with which you feed your heart and
body. If the source is illegal, God will not accept your praising and
thanking Him.

34. O Kumayl, you should realize and know that we do not permit anybody
to breach the trust of anybody. He whoever relates that I have permitted
anybody to breach the trust is surely wrong and sinful and his result
will be Hell. I swear I heard the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) say to me frequently just one hour before his death: "O
Abul-Hasan, give back what you are entrusted to its owner, whether he is
pious or sinful, in big and small things even if it is a thread or a
needle." He repeated this thrice each time he said it.

35. O Kumayl, jihad should be only under the leadership of the just
imam and spoils are legal only if a virtuous imam gives.

36. O Kumayl, without the advent of a prophet, the advocacy to God of
any person including the pious believers will be either right or wrong.
Moreover, it will be surely wrong unless God selects him for such an
advocacy.

37. O Kumayl, the religion is God's; therefore, He does not accept for
anyone to call for it except the apostles, prophets, and successors of
prophets.

38. O Kumayl, God is certainly generous, clement, great, and merciful.
He attracts our attentions to His traits and orders us to follow them
and invite people to adopt them. We did perform without slackness, put
them into practice without hypocrisy, believe in them without
disloyalty, and accept them without doubt.

39. O Kumayl, by God I am not slavish flatterer so as to be obeyed, I
am not awakener of desires so as not to be disobeyed, and I am not
coveting the food of the Bedouins -money of zakat- so as to be called
and given the name of 'Amirul-Muminin' (Leader of the believers).

40. O Kumayl, the seekers of the worldly pleasures will gain a
vanishing and ending life, while we will gain a steady and continuous
life.
41. O Kumayl, the all will be to the next life. We only hope for God's
assent and the high ranks of Paradise that He gives to the God-fearing
only.
42. O Kumayl, he who will not live in Paradise will surely suffer a
painful agony and permanent shame.

43. O Kumayl, thank God for His giving you success and for
everything.


