Narratives of Imam Al-baqir
===========================

The following maxims and words of wisdom are related to Imam Abu Ja'far
Mohammed bin Ali Al-Baqir (peace be upon him). Imam Al-Baqir's
Commandment for Jabir bin Yazid Al-Ju'fi It is related that Imam
Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said to Jabir:

O Jabir, you should win five matters from the people of your time: They
will not know you when you are present (in a gathering), they will not
miss you when you are absent, they will not seek your consult when you
witness a matter, and they will not listen to you when you provide an
opinion. I advise you to cling to five matters: you should not oppress
him who oppressed you; you should not cheat him who cheated you; you
should not be angry when you are belied; you should not be happy when
you are praised; you should not be miserable when you are dispraised.
Think of the dispraise that is said about you. If it is true, then it
will be more catastrophic for you to be disregarded by God than being
disregarded by people when you decline the right. If it was incorrect,
then it will be a reward that you gained without exerting any effort.

You should know that if all the people of your region say unanimously
that you are bad, this should not shake you, and if they all say
unanimously that you are good, this should not please you and make you
one of our followers. To be our follower, you should measure yourself
according to the criteria of God's Book. If you take its path, abstain
from what it warns, desire for what it urges, and fear of what it
cautions, then you should be stable and glad. In this case, whatever is
said against you will not injure you. If you oppose the instructions of
the Quran, then in what are you proud? The faithful believer should
engage himself in fighting against his desires for overcoming his
passions. Once, he wins and opposes his passion for God's sake, and once
his passions overcome him. Thus, he follows his whims, but he will live
again as God grants him a new life and will remember as God pardons his
flaws. As he seeks the refuge of repentance and God-fearing, he will be
supplied with guidance and knowledge as much as he fears God. This is
because God says:

Surely those who guard against evil, when a visitation from the Shaitan
afflicts them they become intelligent, then lo! They see.

O Jabir, regard God's few sustenance as very much so as to be able to
thank Him suitably. Regard your many acts of obedience to God as few so
as to lower yourself (before God) and seek His pardon. Refute the
present evil by the present knowledge. Use the present knowledge for
achieving honesty in your deeds. In the honesty of deeds, protect
yourself against the great inadvertence through the tension of
wakefulness. Bring the tension of wakefulness by the sincerity of fear.
Beware of the contentedness of ornamentation with the presence of life.
Be careful of the adventures of the whims by referring to the
indications of the mind. Stop at the overcome of the whim by seeking the
guidance of knowledge. Spare the well-intended deeds to the Day of
Judgment. Push yourself into the fields of satisfaction by guarding
against acquisitiveness. Refute the great acquisitiveness by the
preference of satisfaction. Obtain the sweetness of abstinence through
the disregard of hope. Cut off the causes of avarice with the coolness
of despair. Block the path of arrogance with self-realization. Conclude
to self-satisfaction by the sound commendation to God. Seek the physical
relaxation through freedom from care. Obtain the freedom from care
through fewness of mistakes. Attain soft-heartedness by the very much
mentioning of God in seclusions. Get the illumination of heart from the
continuance of sadness.

Protect (yourself) against the Shaitan by the honest God-fearing.
Beware of the false expectation, because it traps you in serious fear.
Adorn for God through sincerity of deeds. Approach God by means of
asking for meeting Him as soon as possible. Beware of negligence,
because it is an ocean in which the unsuccessful ones will sink. Beware
of inadvertence, because it is the source of hardheartedness. Beware of
slowness in matters that are unexcused, because it is the path of the
regretful. Remember the past sins through the tense sorrow and the
plenty of seeking forgiveness. Meet God's mercy and pardon by the good
review with Him. Seek the aid of the well-intended supplications and the
secret beseeching in darkness for achieving the good review with God.
Reach the great thankfulness through regarding the little sustenance as
great and regarding the many acts of obedience to God as few. Bring the
increase of graces through the great thanking. Beg to the great thanking
through fearing the vanishing of graces. Seek the continuance of honor
through killing avarices. Refute the humility of greed by the honor of
despair. Get the honor of despair from the strength of mind. Supply for
yourself from this world through the disregard of hope. Take the
initiative in seizing the opportunities whenever they are available. No
opportunity like the leisure times with good health. Beware of trusting
the dishonest. Evil is a custom such as the custom of having food.

Know that no knowledge like seeking safety no safety like the safety of
heart, no intelligence like opposing the whims, no fear like the fear of
him who avoid sinning, no hope like the hope of the supporter, no
poverty like the heart poverty, no richness like self-sufficiency, no
strength like overcoming the whims, no illumination like the
illumination of conviction, no conviction like belittling the worldly
pleasures, no knowledge like self-realization, no grace like good
health, no health like supporting for prosperity, no honor like
willpower, no abstinence like disregard of hope, no diligence like
competition for (attaining) the (highest) ranks, no justice like
fairness, no aggression like prejudice, no prejudice like accordance
with the whims, no obedience like performing the obligatory rites, no
fear like grief, no misfortune like unintelligence, no unintelligence
like littleness of conviction, no littleness of conviction like loss of
fear, no loss of fear like littleness of grief for loss of fear, no
misfortune like belittling the sin and satisfying with the current
conditions, no virtue like jihad, no jihad like struggling against the
whims, no power like stopping the rage, no disobedience like love of
survival, and no humility like the humility of greed.

Beware of the negligence of given opportunities, because it is a field
of loss.

**Another Words of Imam Al-Baqir with Jabir**

Jabir narrated: one day, Imam al-Baqir (peace be upon him) went out
saying, "O Jabir, by God, I am grieved and my heart is so engaged."
"What grieves you and in what is your heart engaged? May God make me
your sacrifice. Is it for the world?" I asked. He (peace be upon him)
answered:

No, Jabir, It is the grief for the care of the world to come. He whose
heart is occupied by the pure reality of faith will be far away from the
worldly pleasures. The adornment of this world is only playing and fun.
The Last Lodge is the true life. O Jabir, The faithful believer should
not incline and feel secure with the adornment of the world. You should
know that the seekers of the worldly affairs are people of inadvertence,
deception, and ignorance, while the seekers of the life to come are the
faithful believers, who work and abstain from this world's pleasures.
They are the people of knowledge, jurisprudence, pondering, learning
lessons, and test. They never tire of mentioning God.

You should know, Jabir, that the true rich men are the God-fearing
people. They are sufficed with the little worldly means. Their burdens
are light. They remind you, if you forget, of charity, and help you do
it. They postponed their lusts and desires and preferred the acts of
obedience to their Lord. They looked for the course of charity and the
loyalty to the disciples of God; they loved, pursued, and followed
them.

Consider this world as a lodging in which you reside for one hour only
and then you will leave, or as a funds that you got in dream and made
you happy, but when you woke up it was nothing. I exemplified for you so
that you will be intelligent, as you will practice it, if God prospers
you. Retain, O Jabir, these matters of the religion and the Lord's words
of wisdom that I am entrusting with you. Offer advice for yourself and
look in the standings that God has deposited with you with you in your
life. In the same way, you will find your pledge with Him when you will
be returned to Him. See if the world is the opposite of what I have
described for you, you should shift to the lodging of the blame, today.
It happens that one gets what he desires from the worldly affairs, but
it becomes the source of misfortune and unhappiness for him. Likewise,
it happens that one disliked a matter of the world to come, but when he
got it, it was the source of happiness for him.

**Imam Al-Baqir's Description of Swords**

As a man of his adherents asked him about the battles of Imam Ali
Amirul Muminin, peace be upon him, Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him)
said: God sent the Prophet Mohammed, peace be upon him and his family,
with five swords three of which are unsheathed until wars are ceased.
Wars will not ceased unless the sun will rise from the west. When this
will fall, all people will be secured. On that day, "Its faith shall not
profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn good through its
faith." The fourth sword is detained. The fifth is unsheathed; others
unsheathe it and we judge in it.

The three unsheathed swords are as follows:

One is unsheathed against the Arab polytheists. God the Glorified says:
Slay the idolaters wherever you find them, and take them captives and
besiege them and lie in wait for them in every ambush. But if they
repent -i.e. they believe- and keep up prayer and pay the poor rate,
they are your brethren in faith. These people are either killed or
convert to Islam. Their fortunes are regarded as spoils. Their progenies
are captives according to the practices of the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family). He captured, overlooked, and accepted atonement.
The second sword is against the Dhimmis. God the Praised says: And you
shall speak to men -i.e. the Dhimmis- good words. This Verse was
repealed afterwards by God's saying: Fight those who do not believe in
Allah, nor in the latter day, nor do they prohibit what Allah and His
Apostle have prohibited, nor follow the religion of truth, out of those
who have been given the Book, until they pay the tax in acknowledgment
of superiority and they are in a state of subjection.

Nothing will be accepted from the Dhimmis, who are enjoying the
protection of the Islamic state, except the tribute otherwise, they are
killed, their fortunes taken as spoils, and their progenies as captives.
If they accept to pay the tribute, it will be prohibited to take them as
captives and to seize their fortunes. In addition, it will be lawful to
marry from them. For those who declare war against us, it is lawful for
us to capture them and seize their fortunes. In addition, it is
prohibited to marry from them. Nothing will be accepted from them except
converting to Islam, paying the tribute, or being fought to death. The
third sword is against the non-Arab polytheists, like the Turks, Daylam,
and Khazar. In the beginning of the sura in which He mentions the
affairs of the atheists, God says: If you encounter the disbelievers in
a battle, strike-off their heads. Take them as captives when they are
defeated. Then you may set them free -after capture- as a favor to them,
with or without a ransom -between the Muslims and them-, when the battle
is over. Nothing will be accepted from these people except being killed
or converting to Islam. It is unlawful for us to marry from them as long
as they are in state of war against us.

The detained sword is that against people of rebel and interpretation.
God says: If two parties among the believers start to fight against each
other, restore peace among them. If one party rebels against the other,
fight against the rebellious one until he surrenders to the command of
God.

When this Verse was revealed, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) said: "One of you will fight for the interpretation of the Quran
in the same way I fought for its revelations." As he was asked about
that one, he (peace be upon him and his family) said: "He is the
repairer of the slippers -Imam Ali Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him)-."
Ammar bin Yasir said: "I fought under this pennon three times with the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). This is the fourth. By God I
swear, if they beat us to take us back to Hagar -a region-, we will be
sure that we are the right party and they are the wrong." With these
people, Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) followed the same practices
that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) with the people of
Mecca when he conquered it. He did not capture their families. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: "He who closes his door
and keep himself indoors will be safe. He who disarms himself will be
safe." In the same way, Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) instructed
his army -after the victory in the battle of Jamal- not to capture any
one, kill any wounded, or chase any absconder. He who disarmed himself
would be safe. The unsheathed sword is that of retaliation. God the
Glorified said:

Capital punishment for the murder of a person; an eye for an eye… The
custodians of the victim (the killed person) unsheathe this sword while
the judge is ours. These were the swords with which God sent Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family). He who denies them or even one of
them or anything of their narration or rulings will be reckoned as
disbelieving in that which God the Elevated revealed to His Prophet
Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family).

**Admonition**

One day, Imam al-Baqir (peace be upon him) was instructing and warning
a group of his adherents, who were encompassing him, while they were
absent-minded. The Imam (peace be upon him) felt angry; therefore, he
nodded the head down, then raised it and said: Had a small part of my
wording fallen in the heart of one of you, he would have been surely
dead. You are only soulless ghosts and lightless wicks. You are like
propped up hollow trunks of wood and manufactured statues. Why do you
not extract gold from stones? Why do you not take light from the
brightest illumination? Why do you not take the gem from the sea? Take
the good wording from him who said it even if he does not apply it to
himself. God says:

Those who listen to the word, then follow the best of it; those are
they whom Allah has guided. Woe to you, deceitful persons, why do you
not thank Him Who gives you the everlasting while you give Him the
passing? One dirham will pass away, while it will be compensated with
ten dirhams up to seven hundred folds that are doubled by the
All-generous the All-openhanded. God gave you in remuneration while it
is He Who feeds you, waters you, dresses you, heals you, protects you,
and guards you against him who chases you. Moreover, He shields you in
day and night, answers you in misfortunes, and intends to guide you
through tests. It seems you have forgotten the nights of your pains and
fears. You supplicated to Him and He responded. This obliges you to show
Him gratitude for His good deeds. Although, you forgot Him while He is
the only worthy of mentioning, and violated His orders. Woe to you, you
are only a thief among the thieves of sins. You hurry for committing any
passionate act or sin that is shown before you. Due to your ignorance,
you commit the sins as if you are not in God's sight or as if God is not
watching you. O seeker of Paradise, Your sleep is too extended, your
riding animal is too tardy, and your determination is too feeble. What
sort of seeker and sought you are!

O avoider of Hell, your riding animal is taking you hastily to Hell and
you are acquiring that which drives you into it rapidly. Look at the
graves. Their structures are near to each other while their inhabitants
are very far from each other. They constructed then destructed, achieved
tranquil then felt lonely, lodged then were troubled, and lived then
left. Except people of the graves, have you ever heard of remote
neighbor, near isolated, destructed former, troubled resident, and
leaving inhabitant? You are the son of three days; your birthday, the
day on which you will be taken to your grave, and the day on which you
will be resurrected to meet your Lord. That will be surely a horrible
day.

O you owners of admirable masses and camels kneeling near the springs!
Why do I notice that your bodies are constructive while your hearts and
destroyed? By God I swear, if your sights fall on what will you
unquestionably meet, you will say: "Would that we could return to the
worldly life. We would never reject any of our Lord's revelations and we
would be true believers." God the Majestic says: Whatever they had
concealed will be revealed to them. If they were to return to (the
worldly life), they would again worship idols, for they are liars.

**Short Maxims of Imam Al-baqir**

1. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said:

Use kind words with the hypocrite, love the faithful believer
sincerely, and regard your association with (even) the Jew who sits with
you.

2. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: No mixture is better than
the mixture of clemency and knowledge.

3. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The whole perfection is
knowledgeability of the religious affairs, steadfastness against
misfortunes, and moderation in living.

4. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: By God (I swear), the
arrogant is trying to strip God.

5. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him), one day, asked the attendants,
"What is personality?" Each of them provided his own opinion.
Afterwards, he (peace be upon him) said: Personality is to avoid greed
so as not to be humble, avoid begging so as not to be disgraced, avoid
niggardliness so as not to be insulted, and avoid ignorance so as not to
be opposed.

"Who can do all these?" wondered they. He (peace be upon him) answered:
He who wants to be like him who looks into the pupil of the eye, the
musk in an odor, and enjoys the same standing of a present caliph -king-
will be able to do so.

6. Before Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him), a man said: "O Allah, make
us do without people." The Imam instructed: Do not say such a statement;
you should say: O Allah, make us do without the evil ones. A faithful
brother cannot do without his brother.

7. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Do the right and seclude
from whatever does not concern you. Avoid your enemy. Beware of your
friend except the honest ones who fear God. Never accompany the sinful
and never show him your secrets. Seek the consult of those who fear
God.

8. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: A twenty-year friendship is
kinship.

9. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: You would better deal with
no one except him whom you did a favor.

10. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Three manners are the
charities of this world and the world to come: they are to pardon him
who oppressed you, regard him who ruptured relations with you, and
possess yourself when one's ignorance inflicts you.

11. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Oppression is of three
sorts; a sort God will not forgive, another God will forgive, and a
third God will not overlook it. Regarding the first one, it is
polytheism. The second is the secret oppression of oneself. The third is
the servants' oppressing each other.

12. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The servant (of God) who
abstains from supporting his brother and exerting efforts for settling
his need will suffer from exerting efforts for settling a need that
causes him to commit a sin and deprives him of the reward. The servant
who abstains from spending alms that pleases the Lord will spend many
folds of those alms in a field that displeases God.

13. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Anything of God's act is
good for the faithful believer.

14. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: God dislikes people who beg
each other importunately, but he loves it for Himself. Hence, God the
Glorified likes people to beg Him and ask for what He has in
possession.

15. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: People's admonitions will
not benefit him whom God does not make him learn lessons of admonition
from his own self.

16. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The scale of him whose
outer appearance is more preferable than his conscience is weightless.

17. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: It happens that you address
to a man, 'May God fling your enemy,' while that man's only enemy is
God.

18. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Three categories of people
should not say salaam: they are those who are in their ways for offering
the (congregational) Friday Prayer, those who walk in a funeral, and
those who sit in a public bathroom.

19. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: A scholar whose knowledge
is advantageous (for people) is better than seventy thousand
worshippers.

20. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: A servant will not be
scholar before he gets rid of envying those who precede him and
belittling those who are less than him in (grade) of knowledge. 21. Imam
Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: He who disobeys God does not know
Him.

He (peace be upon him) then recited the following poetic verses: You
disobey the Lord and show his love.

This is surely strange deed.

If your love is sincere, you will obey Him.

Certainly, the lover obeys the one he loves. 22. Imam Al-Baqir (peace
be upon him) said: The need for him who has newly been wealthy is like a
dirham in a snake's mouth; you need it but you fear the snake.

23. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The bearers of three ill
characters will not die before they suffer the consequence of such
characters: they are oppression, disregard of the relatives, and perjury
against God. The reward of the regard of the relatives is the most
hastened. Even the sinful people will be enriched and wealthy when they
regard each other (by means of good mutual relations). Perjury and
disregard of the relatives change countries into deserted wastelands.

24. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Deeds without knowledge are
not accepted. Knowledge is valueless unless it is matched to deeds.
Knowledge guides its bearers to act (good deeds). The deeds of the
unknowing persons are worthless.

25. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: God has appointed a group
of His creatures for doing favors. He made them love favors and love
practicing them. He also guided the seekers of favor to seek it from
them, and facilitated doing favors for them in the same way He made the
rainfall drop on the barren lands to enliven its people as well as them.
He also has appointed a group of His creatures for opposing the favors.
He made them hate favors and hate practice them. He banned the seekers
of favor from reaching them and banned them from doing favors in the
same way He bans rainfall from reaching the barren lands in order to
kill its people and them. However, God overlooks very much.

26. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: You can realize the love
that your brother bears for you through the love that you bear for
him.

27. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Faith is love and hatred.

28. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Our adherents -Shia- are
only those who fear and obey God. Their signs are modesty, piety,
fulfillment of the trusts, very much reference to God, fasting, offering
prayers, piety to (their) parents, aiding the neighbors especially the
poor, the destitute, the indebted, and the orphans, truth, reciting the
Quran, and avoiding mentioning people except for praising. In addition,
they are the most trustful of the people of their tribes. 29. Imam
Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Four characters are within the
treasures of charity: they are the concealment of neediness, secret
almsgiving, suppression of pains, and containment of misfortunes.

30. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The deeds of the truthful
are chaste. The provisions of the well-intended ones are increasable.
The ages of those who are benevolent to their wives are addable.

31. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Beware of laziness and
tedium. They are the keys to every evil. The lazy will not fulfill the
rights (that are incumbent upon them) and the tedious will not submit to
the right. 32. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: For those who
establish good relations with somebody for the sake of God and their
friendship is depended upon believing in God and being loyal to their
friends-all in the cause of seeking God's satisfaction, they will obtain
a glimmer of the illumination of God, security from His punishment, an
argument that make them happy on the Day of Resurrection, an enduring
honor, and a growing praise. The faithful believer is neither connected
nor detached to God the Exalted.

As he was asked about an explanations, Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon
him) said: 'Connected' means that the faithful believer is not a part of
(the essence of) God, and "detached" means that he is not a part of
another thing.

33. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: It is quite sufficient
self-cheating for a man to notice people's flaws that he himself enjoys,
vilify someone for a defect that he himself cannot abandon, or hurt his
associates by intruding in matters that do not concern him.

34. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Modesty is to accept to sit
in a place other than the first row of a session, to greet whomever you
meet, and to avoid disputation even if you are right.

35. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The (faithful) believers
are brothers of each other. They should not insult, deprive, or mistrust
each other.

36. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said to his son: Submit the
right, for he whoever refrains from giving something in its right way
will give its two-folds in a wrong way.

37. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Faith will be screened from
him who is given idiocy.

38. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Certainly, God hates the
speaker of obscene language.

39. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: God punishes physically and
mentally, such as harsh livelihood and incapability of worshipping.
However, no punishment is harsher than hardheartedness.

40. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: On the Day of Resurrection,
an angel will shout, 'Where are the tolerant ones?' Few people will
stand up. Then, he will shout, 'Where are the withholders?' Few people
will stand up (The reporter of this narration:) "What are the tolerant
and what are the withholders?" I asked. The Imam (peace be upon him)
answered: The tolerant ones are those who put up with performing the
obligatory rituals. The withholders are those who withhold themselves
from committing the prohibited matters.

41. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: God says: O son of Adam, if
you avoid what I have made unlawful, you will be the most pious of
people.

42. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The best adoration is the
chastity of the belly and the genitals.

43. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Good-humouredness and
bright-facedness achieve the others' affection and approaches to God.
Bad-humouredness and gloomy-facedness achieve the others' hatred and
take away from God.

44. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: I will surely attach my
favor with another so that the latter will keep the previous. To prevent
from doing new favors is to cut off the thanks for the previous ones. My
prestige has never allowed me to ignore settling the fresh needs.

45. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Pudency and faith are
knotted in one bind; whenever one (of them) goes, the other will
follow.

46. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: This world is given for the
good and the evil, while God dedicates this religion to certain
people.

47. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Faith is declaration and
act. Islam is declaration without act. Faith is the concern of the
heart. Islam is the laws of marriage, legacy, and stopping bloodshed.
Faith is a part of Islam while Islam is not necessarily a part of
faith.

48. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Those who teach a field of
knowledge will be rewarded with the same gifts of those who act upon it
without any shortage in their rewards. In the same way, those who lead
to a theme of deviation will undergo the same penalties that the
followers of such a theme will undergo without any lack of their
penalties.

49. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Flattering and envy are not
within the faithful believers' traits unless they are used for the sake
of seeking studies.

50. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Only the scholars are
permitted to say, 'God is the most knowledgeable,' when they cannot
answer a question.

According to another narrative: Only the scholars are permitted to say,
'I do not know,' when they cannot answer a question so that the asker
will not doubt.

51. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The first man whose tongue
spoke the Arabic was Ishmael -the prophet- son of Abraham -the prophet-
(peace be upon them). He was thirteen year old. Before so, he had spoken
the language of his father and brother. He is the Slaughtered.

52. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: May I tell you of the thing
that will take the unjust rulers and the Shaitan away from you if you do
it? Abu Hamza said: "Yes, you may, so that we will apply it (to out
conducts)."

It is the almsgiving. Give alms as early as possible. Almsgiving
blackens the Shaitan's face and stops the unjust ruler's resentment
against you on that day. Cling to cherishing each other for the sake of
God and helping each other in fields of charity. This will cut off the
unjust ruler and the Shaitan. Persist on seeking God's forgiveness
because it erases the sins.

53. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The tongue is surely the
key to every good and evil. You should seal your tongues as you seal
your money.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: "May God's mercy
be upon the faithful believer who withholds his tongue from saying any
evil saying. This will be the like of giving alms to himself." No one
will be saved from committing sins before he seals his tongue.

54. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: It is a sort of backbiting
to mention your brother's defects that God has concealed. It is not
problematic to mention his explicit flaws, such as nervousness,
hastiness, and the like. Falsehood is to accuse your brother of a
character that he does not have.

55. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: He who describes the right
course for people while he takes the other will be the most regretful on
the Day of Resurrection.

56. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Abide by piety, diligence,
honesty, and fulfillment of the trusts of the charitable as well as the
sinful. If the killer of Ali bin Abi Talib (peace be upon him) deposits
with me a trust, I will surely keep it for him.

57. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The regard of the relatives
purifies the deeds, increases the fortune, refutes the catastrophes,
makes the judgment easy, and postpones the death.

58. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: O people! You are targets
of the death in this world. You will not receive a new day of the age
unless after the expiry of another (that takes you near of death). Which
meal is empty of choking? Which drink is empty of throttling? Reform
that which you are going to face by means of that which you are leaving
behind. Today is profit while the owner of tomorrow is unknown. People
of this world are travelers who open their luggage in other world. The
principals that we are their branches fade away. How will the branches
remain after their principals? Where are those whose ages were longer
than ours and hopes were greater than ours? Surely will come to you, son
of Adam, that which you will not be able to challenge, and went away
from you that which you will not be able to regain. Never regard the
incomplete living every pleasure of which approaches you to death and
draws you near your expiry. You will soon be the missed beloved and the
soulless body. Hence, you should take care of yourself only and leave
whatever does not mean you. Seek God's help and He will help you. 59.
Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said:

He who does the like of what was done to him is rewarding properly. He
who doubles the favor is regarded as thankful, and he who thanks is
regarded as generous. He who realizes that the favors that he has done
were, first of all, for his good will not expect people's gratitude and
will not anticipate their affection to him. Do not expect that the
others will thank what you have done for yourself to protect your
prestige. You should know that he who asks you for a favor has not
honored his face against asking you; therefore, you should honor your
face against rejecting him. 60. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him)
said:

God arranges hardships for the faithful servant like the traveler who
arranges presents for his people. Likewise, He protects him against the
worldly temptations like physicians who protect their patients.

61. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: God gives this worldly
pleasures to whom He likes and whom He dislikes equally; but He gives
the religion to whom He likes only.

62. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: The Shias -adherents- of
Ali (peace be upon him) are surely those who meet the needs of each
other for the sake of (their loyalty to) our leadership, love each other
for the sake of our cherishment, and exchange visits for the sake of
proclaiming our affairs. They do not oppress when they are enraged and
do not exaggerate when they are pleased. They are blessing for their
neighbors and peace for their associates.

63. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Laziness injures both the
worldly and the religious affairs.

64. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Had the beggars realized
the reality of beggary, they would not have begged for anything. Had
those who do not settle others' needs known the reality of their deed,
they would have settled every need.

65. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Within the servants of God,
there are the blessed who live simply and people live in their
neighborhood. They are like rainfall for God's servants. On the other
hand, there are the accursed and inauspicious ones who neither live
peacefully nor let people live peacefully. They are like locust for
God's servants. They ruin everything they meet.

66. Imam Al-Baqir (peace be upon him) said: Receive people with the
best things with which you like to be received. God surely hates him who
damns very much, vilifies, reviles at the faithful believers, speaks and
spreads obscene language, and insists on beggary. God likes the bashful,
the indulgent, the chaste, and the seeker of chastity.

67. God surely likes exchanging salaams.


