Maxims of Imam As-sadiq
=======================

The following maxims and words of wisdom are related to Imam Abu
Abdillah Ja'far bin Mohammed As-Sadiq (peace be upon him). Imam
As-Sadiq's Commandment for Abdullah bin Jundab It is related that Imam
As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: O Abdullah, the Shaitan has arranged
his traps in this deceitful world to target our disciples only, but the
world to come is too great in their eyes to seek a substitute for it.
Oh, for hearts that are stuffed with illumination. For them, this world
is as same as a poisonous snake and an outlandish enemy. They found
amiability with God and they found strange that with which the luxurious
ones found amusement. They are surely my disciples. They uncover every
seditious matter and relieve every misfortune.

O son of Jundab, tt is obligatory upon every Muslim, who claims of
knowing us, to maintain judgment with his deeds everyday; if he notices
that he has done a good deed, he should do it increasingly, and if he
notices that he has committed an evildoing, he should seek God's
forgiving it so that he will not be disgraced on the Day of
Resurrection. Blessed be the servant -of God- who does not envy the
wrongdoers for their having the worldly pleasures. Blessed be the
servant who sought the world to come painstakingly. Blessed be him who
is not cheated by the false expectations. God's mercy be upon those who
were lanterns and lights. They advocated us through their deeds and all
efforts. They are unlike him who divulges our secrets.

O son of Jundab, the true faithful believers are those who fear God and
work hard so as the guidance they have been given will not be taken from
them. If they remember God and His grace, they feel apprehensive and
fearful. If God's Verses are recited before them, they will increase
their faith due to the power that He shows, and they depend upon their
Lord. O son of Jundab, in the old time, ignorance was erected and based.
This is because they betook God's religion playfully and jokingly to the
degree that he whoever did something for God's sake was intending
someone else. Those are surely the unjust. O son of Jundab, if our
Shias -adherents- opt for righteousness, the angels will shake hands
with them, they will get provisions from above -the heavens- and
below -the earth-, and God will respond to all their supplications.

O son of Jundab, speak only good wording about the sinful people of
your sect. You should supplicate to God importunately to guide them and
accept their repentance. He whoever proposes us, follows us, shuns our
enemies, says only what he knows, and says nothing about what he ignores
or deems it problematic will be in Paradise. O son of Jundab, decline is
the result of him who depends upon his acts. He who commits sins and
depends totally upon God's mercy will not be saved. The safe are those
who are in a situation between hope and fear, whose hearts are as if
they are in a claw of a bird due to their eagerness for the reward and
fear from the penalty. O son of Jundab, he who is pleased that God will
give him the women of Paradise in marriage and crown him with the light
should please his faithful brother.

O son of Jundab, sleep little at night and speak little in day. The
less thankful organs are the eye and the tongue. Mother of Solomon the
prophet (peace be upon him) instructed him, saying: "O son, beware of
sleeping. It make you needy on that day when people will be in
importunate need for their deeds."

O son of Jundab, the Shaitan has some traps with which he traps the
others. Keep yourselves safe against his snares and traps. (Abdullah bin
Jundab related) I asked, "O son of the messenger of God, what are these
traps and snares?" Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) answered: The trap
of the Shaitan is withholding from doing charity to the friends, while
his snare is sleeping away the settlement of the obligatory prayers.
Certainly, no worship is preferred to walking for visiting and providing
charity to the friends. Woe to those who are inadvertent against their
prayers, sleep inattentively, and mock at God and His marks. They shall
be weightless on the Day of Resurrection, and God will not speak to them
nor will He look at them on the Day of Judgment nor will He purify them.
They will face a painful torment. O son of Jundab, God will ease him who
begins his day thinking only how to save himself from Hell and seeking
few profits from his Lord. God will make Hell the lodge of him who
cheats, debases, and aggresses his friend. Like salt dissolving in
water, faith will dissolve in the hearts of those who envy a faithful
believer.

O son of Jundab, he who makes efforts for settling his friend's need is
as same as that who roams between Safa and Marwa . He who settels the
need of his friend is regarded as same as those whose blood was shed in
the battles of Badr and Uhud for God's sake . God did not punish a
nation before they had disregarded the rights of the poor among them. O
son of Jundab, inform our Shias -adherents- not to be highly tranquil.
Pursuance to our leadership is not obtained without piety,
painstakingness, and consoling the brothers for God's sake. He whoever
oppresses people is not within our adherents. O son of Jundab, the
characters of our Shias are many: they are generosity, openhandedness
with the friends, and offering fifty rak'as in day and night (seventeen
rak'as of the obligatory prayers and thirty-three rak'as of the
nafilas). Our Shias neither shout like dogs nor are they avaricious like
crows. They never lodge next to our enemies and never beg him who hates
us even if they starve. Our Shias never have the meat of eel and never
pass their hands over their slipper during the ritual ablution. They
keep up the offering of the Dhuhr -midday- Prayer and do not drink any
intoxicant.

(Abdullah bin Jundab related) I asked, "God make me your sacrifice,
where can I find such Shias?" Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
answered: You will find them on the summits of mountains and in
outskirts. Whenever you are in a city, you will know the faithful by
asking about the one whom the people of the city do not neighbor nor
does he neighbor them. That is the faithful believer. This is in the
Holy Quran. God says: "A man came running from the farthest part of the
city." That was Habib the carpenter. He was the only faithful believer.
O son of Jundab, all sins are forgivable except mistreating the people
of your sect. Every charity is acceptable except that which is done for
showing off.

O son of Jundab, love (others) for God's sake. Cling to the firmest
handle. Stick on the guidance so that your deeds will be accepted. God
says: I am All-forgiving to the righteously striving believers who
repent and follow the right guidance. Hence, nothing except faith will
be accepted, no faith without deed, no deed without conviction, and no
conviction without submission. The master of all these is guidance. The
deeds of him who follows the right guidance will be accepted and
ascended to the Divine Realm. God guides to the right path whomever He
wants. O son of Jundab, if you desire for neighboring the Glorified God
and residing in the Elevated Paradise in His vicinity, you should demean
the worldly pleasures, regard death permanently, and spare nothing for
tomorrow. You should know that you will get the reward of whatever you
precede -in charity- and get the punishment of whatever you delay.

O son of Jundab, he whoever deprives himself of enjoying his earnings
is collecting for others. He whoever complies with his passions is
complying with his enemy. For those who trust in Him, God will settle
their worldly affairs as well as the affairs of the world to come and
keep for them whatever they miss. He who does not choose steadfastness
for facing every misfortune, thanks for every grace, and easiness for
every complexity will surely be too short to continue. Be broad-minded
whenever a misfortune inflicts you, whether in your son, wealth, or
other matters. The fact of every misfortune is that God receives his
loan and takes his gift back so as to test your tolerance and thanking.
Trust in God in a way that you will not dare to disobey Him. Fear Him in
a way that you do not despair of His mercy. Do not believe the saying
and praise of the ignorant so that you will not be arrogant, tyrant, and
esteem your deeds exaggeratedly. Adoration and modesty are the best of
deeds. Do not waste your fortune and put up the others' fortunes through
what you are going to leave for them.

Satisfy yourself with what God is giving you. Never look to what others
have. Never expect (the good of) what you will not get. He who satisfies
himself will surely attain self-sufficiency. He who is not pleased will
never satiate. Take your share of the world to come. Never be arrogant
when you are rich and intolerant when you are poor. Never be so crude
that people desist from approaching you. Never be so humble that you
will be disgraced by whoever knows you. Never quarrel with him who is
higher than you. Never mock at him who is lower than you. Never dispute
about a matter whose rightful owners are the opposite party. Never
listen to the foolish. Never humiliate yourself before any person. Never
depend upon anyone's protection. Stop engaging yourself in a matter
before you check it completely and realize its entrance and exit so as
to avoid sorrow. Consider your mind as a kinsman whose opinion you seek.
Consider your knowledge as the father that you follow. Consider your
self as the enemy that you fight and the loan that you will defray. You
are assigned as the doctor of yourself and shown the prescription of
health, the malady, and the remedy. See how you will treat yourself. If
you have done favor to someone, you should not violate it by mentioning
it and showing the obligation on him. You should attach another favor to
the previous. This will be more fitting for you and will make your
reward in the world to come more fixed. Keep silent and you will be
reckoned as indulgent whether you were knowledgeable or ignorant.
Silence is an ornament before the scholars and a screen before the
ignorant.

O son of Jundab, once, Jesus son of Mary (peace be upon them) asked his
companions: "Supposing you pass by one of your friends and find that his
dress was raised and a part of his genitals was shown. Will you screen
him or reveal the genitals completely?" "We will surely screen him,"
answered they. "No, you will reveal the genitals completely," he
replied. Hence, they realized that he had provided them a proverb. "O
Spirit of God, How is that?" they asked. He (peace be upon him)
explained, "As you notice your friend's flaw, you do not cover him. I
tell you truthfully that you will not get what you want unless you leave
your desires. Likewise, you will not attain your hopes unless you become
steadfast against matters that you hate. Beware of looking (at foreign
women even one time), because it sets sexual appetite in the heart. This
will sufficiently be sedition. Blessed are those whose sight is in their
hearts not in their eyes. Do not go after people's defects as if you are
lords. You should inspect your defects like the slaves. People are
either sick or healthy. Be kind to the sick and thank God for the
health."

O son of Jundab, regard him who ruptured relations with you, give him
who deprived you (of his bestowals), treat kindly him who mistreated
you, greet him who reviled at you, be just to him who disputed with you,
and pardon him who wronged you in the same way you like others to pardon
you. Take lessons from God's pardoning you; do you not see that His sun
is covering the pious and the licentious and His rain is falling on the
virtuous and the wrongdoers?

O son of Jundab, do not give alms openly for the purpose of making
people second you. If you do so, then you have taken your reward. You
should not let your left hand know that your right hand has given alms.
He to whom you are giving alms secretly will surely reward you openly
before all people on the day on which it will not be harmful for you
that people witness your almsgiving. Low you voice because your Lord,
Who knows whatever you say secretly or openly, has already known your
question before you ask it. When you fast, you should not backbite
anybody. Do not oppress anyone while you are fasting. Do not be like
those who fast for showing off; their faces are dusty, hair is
disheveled, and mouths are dry just for making people know that they are
fasting.

O son of Jundab, all the good and all the evil are in front of you. You
will see the true good and the true evil after the world to come. God
the Glorified put all the good in Paradise and all the evil in Hell,
because they will persist. It is an obligation upon him whom God has
gifted guidance, honored with faith, granted intelligence, supplied with
a brain with which the graces are recognized, and given knowledge and
wisdom with which the worldly and religious affairs are managed, it is
an obligation on him to deem obligatory upon himself to thank God, never
show ingratitude, never forget, obey, and never challenge Him. This
obligation is for the old graces that the Lord considered perfectly, the
new ones that He gave after creation, the great rewards that He
promised, and the favor of imposing only the possible and guaranteeing
to help do it. He also called man to seek His help to perform the fewest
of what He imposed upon him. Nevertheless, man is ignoring and unable to
do what God ordered him to do. He dressed the garb of belittling the
bond between the Lord and him, pursued his whims, went on complying with
his lusts, and preferred the world to the world to come; yet, he hopes
to be in the Highest Paradise. You should never expect to have the ranks
of the doers of charity while you practice the deeds of the evildoers.
When the Falling Event will come to pass, the Resurrection will arise,
the Great Predominating Calamity comes, the All-omnipotent will maintain
the scale for judgment and the creatures will be resurrected for the Day
of Judgment, only then you will realize whose is the honor and
exaltation and whose is sorrow and disappointment. Hence, work in this
world so that you will win in the world to come. O son of Jundab, in one
of His revelations, God, the Majestic the Glorified, said: "I will
accept only the prayers of him who humiliates himself before My
greatness, abstains from the pleasures for My sake, spends his day with
referring to Me, never tyrannizes My creatures, serves the hungry,
attires the naked, treats the injured kindly, and finds a place for the
strange. The light of such people will shine like sunlight. I will give
him light in the gloom and composure in the situations of ignorance. I
will protect them by My might and assign My angels as their guards. I
will respond when they call on Me and give when they ask Me. They are
the like of the Highest Paradise; its fruits are unparalleled and it
never changes."

O son of Jundab, Islam is naked; pudency is its dress, decorum is its
adornment, good deed is its personality, and piety is its pillar.
Everything should have a basis. The basis of Islam is the adoration to
us-the Prophet's family. O son of Jundab, God, the Blessed the Exalted,
has a wall of light that is framed with aquamarine and silk and
decorated with fine green silk. This wall is fixed between our enemies
and our followers. When the brains will boil, the hearts will reach the
throats, and the livers will be fired due to the long period of the
situation of the Resurrection, the disciples of God will be taken into
that wall. They will be under God's security and protection. They will
have whatever they desire and whatever their eyes find sweet. The
enemies of God will be muffled by the sweat and thrilled by fear. They
will look at what God will arrange for them and say: "Why is it that we
cannot see men whom we had considered as wicked?" Then, God's disciples
will look and laugh at them. This is God's sayings:

We mocked at them. Can our eyes not find them?

On the Day of Judgment, the believers will laugh at the disbelievers,
while reclining on couches and reviewing the bounties given to them. At
that time, God will take everyone who supported any of our disciples,
even by a single word, to Paradise without judgment. Imam As-Sadiq's
Commandment for Abu Ja'far Muhammad Bin Annu'man Al-Ahwal Abu Ja'far
said: Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said to me: God the Glorified
imputed dishonor to some people in the Quran because they divulged
secrets. Abu Ja'far said: "God make me your sacrifice, where is that (in
the Quran)?" asked I. The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: This is in
His saying: When they receive any news of peace or war, they announce it
in public. He (peace be upon him) then added:

The divulgers of our secrets are as same as those who unsheathe swords
in our faces. God's mercy be upon him who buries under the feet whatever
he hears from our concealed issues. I swear by God, I know the evil
among you more accurately than a veterinarian's knowledge of his sick
animals. The evil ones among you are those who recite the Quran only in
public, offer the prayers in the final of their times, and do not
control their tongues. When Al-Hasan bin Ali (peace be upon them) was
stabbed and people mutinied, he conceded to Muawiya. Hence, his
followers came to him and said: "Peace be upon you, disgracer of the
believers!" He (peace be upon him) said: "I am not the disgracer of the
believers. I am their consolidator. When I noticed that you were weaker
than them, I conceded so that you, as well as I, would remain among
them. This is the same reason that made the Scholar crack the ship so
that it would be kept for its owners ." O son of Annu'man, as I say
something to one of you, he relates it to me before others. This will
make him deserve my curse and disavowal. My father used to say: "Nothing
is more delightful than taqiyyah . It is the shelter of the faithful
believers. Without taqiyyah, God would not have been worshipped." God
says in this regard:

The believers must not establish friendship with the unbelievers in
preference to the faithful. Whoever does so has nothing to hope for from
God unless he does it out of fear or pious dissimulation -taqiyyah-. O
son of Annu'man, beware of contention, because it makes void your deeds.
Beware of disputation, because it destroys you. Beware of
quarrelsomeness, because it takes you away from God. Those who preceded
you used to keep silence, while you are learning how to speak. If one of
them wanted to dedicate his efforts to worship, he would have to learn
keeping silent ten years before so. If he learnt it adequately, he would
go worshipping. Otherwise, he would say: No, I am not fit enough for so.
Only he who keeps silent against obscenity and tolerates harm in the
unjust state will be saved. These are the chaste, the pure, and the true
disciples. Moreover, they are the faithful believers. The most hated to
me are the distributors of the news, the gossiping, and those who envy
their friends. They are not from me and I am not from them. My disciples
are only those who submit to our affairs, pursue our tracks, and rest
upon us in every matter. I swear by God, if you provide gold as much as
this earth for God's sake and then envy a believer, you will be ironed
with that gold after it will be heated in Hell.

O son of Annu'man, the divulger of our secrets is more sinful than him
who kills us with his sword. He is surely more sinful. He is surely more
sinful.

O son of Annu'man, he whoever relates a narrative to us is murdering us
intentionally, not unintentionally. O son of Annu'man, in the shadows of
the unjust ruling regime, you should receive everybody that you fear
warmly. He who opposes the unjust government is killing and destroying
himself. God says: Do not push yourselves into perdition. O son of
Annu'man, the Shaitan is still attaching to us -the prophet's family-
those who are neither with us nor with our religion. When such an
individual is raised and regarded by people, the Shaitan will order him
to fabricate lies against us. Whenever such an individual goes, another
will come forth.

O son of Annu'man, he who says, 'I do not know,' if he does not find
the answer of a question is behaving fairly to knowledge. The faithful
believers who bear malice in a situation should get rid of that malice
as soon as that situation ends. O son of Annu'man, the scholar cannot
tell you of everything he knows, because he is God's secret that He
revealed to Gabriel the angel. Gabriel revealed it to Mohammed (peace be
upon him and his family), and he revealed to Ali (peace be upon him) who
revealed it to Al-Hasan (peace be upon him). Al-Hasan revealed to
al-Hussein (peace be upon him) who revealed to Ali (peace be upon him).
Ali (peace be upon him) revealed it to Mohammed (peace be upon him) who
revealed it to someone. Do not be hasty. This issue was about to be come
forth three times, but it was postponed because you declared it
publicly.

Your enemies are more acquainted with your secrets. O son of Annu'man,
Keep yourself safe. You have disobeyed me. Do not divulge my secrets.
Al-Mughira bin Saeed forged lies against my father and divulged his
secrets; therefore, God caused him to suffer the heat of iron. Likewise,
Abul-Khattab forged lies against me and divulged my secrets; therefore,
God caused him to suffer the heat of iron. For those who conceal our
affairs, God will adorn them with our affair in this world and the world
to come, give them their shares, and guard them against the heat of iron
and the narrow detention. Once, the Israelis were inflicted with such a
harsh famine that their animals and children perished. Hence, Moses the
prophet (peace be upon him) supplicated to God to save them. God said:
"O Moses, they have made public fornication and usury, constructed the
churches, and wasted the almsgiving."

Moses said: "O Lord, be merciful to them out of your compassion. They
do not understand." Thus, God told Moses that He would send rainfall on
them and test them for forty days. But they publicized this matter;
hence, God ceased rainfall for forty years. In the same way, as your
issue was about to come forth, you publicized the matter in your
sessions. O Abu Ja'far, what is your business with people? Leave them
alone and do not call anyone to this matter. I swear by God, if the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth support each other on deviating
a servant whom God wants to guide, they will not be able to do it. Let
people alone and do not say this is my brother, uncle, or neighbor. When
God the Glorified wants the good of somebody, He will make his soul so
fertile that he accepts any good matter and refuse any evil. Then God
will strike his heart with a word that corrects his matter totally. O
son of Annu'man, if you want your friend to keep your friendship, you
should not joke or dispute with him, show him pride, or mistreat him. Do
not inform your friend of all of your secrets except those which will
not harm you if your enemy knows them, because it is possible that your
friend becomes your enemy someday.

O son of Annu'man, a servant will not be a faithful believer before he
learns three characters; one from God, one from His Messenger, and one
from the Imam. The character that he should learn from God is the
concealment of secrets. God the Glorified says: He knows the unseen and
He does not allow anyone to know His secrets… The character that he
should learn from the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) is that
he should treat people courteously. The character that he should learn
from the Imam (peace be upon him) is to be steadfast against situations
of misfortune and crises until relief comes about.

O son of Annu'man, eloquence is neither the sharpness of the tongue nor
the much speaking. It is targeting the meaning and going for the
evidence. O son of Annu'man, he whoever sits with those who revile at
God's disciples is disobeying God. He whoever suppresses his rage for
our sake since he cannot show it will be with us on the Highest Peak.
God will cause to suffer the heat of iron and the narrow detention those
who begin their days with divulging our secrets. O son of Annu'man, do
not seek knowledge for showing off, pride, and disputation. Do not leave
it for the desire of ignorance, belittlement of knowledge, and feeling
shy of people. The protected knowledge is the like of a covered torch. O
son of Annu'man, when God the Glorified wants to do good to a servant,
He situates a white mark in his heart. Hence, the heart will be in
search of the right. Then he will be as hasty as a bird going back to
its nest for achieving your affair. O son of Annu'man, God causes the
adoration to us -the Prophet's family- to descend from the heavens. It
is situated in warehouses, like those of gold and silver, under the
Divine Throne. He descends it in limited quantities and gives it to the
best of His creatures only. It is in a cloud similar to that of rain.
When God wants to give it exclusively to whom He loves, he permits that
cloud to pour. It then pours, like rainfall, on the fetuses in their
mothers' wombs.

**Imam As-Sadiq's Message to a Group of His Adherents and
Companions**

Ask God for good health. Adhere to courtesy, decorum, tranquility, and
pudency, and promote yourselves against what the virtuous ones among you
promote themselves against. Remark favorably on the wrong people: be
steadfast against their oppression, beware of opposing them, and use
taqiyyah of which God ordered you when you sit, associate, and discuss
with them. You have to sit, associate, and discuss with them. They will
surely hurt you if they notice that you deny their beliefs. They will
surely subjugate you unless God protect you against them. Their hearts
bear malice and hatred against you more than what they show. You have to
associate with them.

The servant that God created as faithful believer will not die before
he hates and go away from evil. He whom God causes to hate and go away
from evil will be saved from arrogance and pride. Hence, his mannerism
and features will be well and his face will be smiling. He will acquire
the decorum, tranquility, and reverence of Islam, keep himself away from
matters that God forbids, and evade matters that enrage God. Moreover,
God will endow him with people's affection and courtesy and save him
from boycotting people and engaging in disputations.

The servant that God created him as disbeliever will not die before he
loves and favors evil. He whom God causes to love and favor evil will be
arrogant and proud. Hence, he will be hard-hearted, vicious, rude-faced,
famed of vulgarity, and shameless. God will dishonor him as nothing will
prevent him from committing the prohibited matters and the acts of
disobedience to God. He will hate obedience to God and its people. Far
away are the believers' manners from the disbelievers'. Ask God for good
health and seek it from Him. All power and might belong to God.
Supplicate to God very frequently. He loves the servants who supplicate
to Him. He promised them of response. On the Day of Resurrection, God
will change the believers' supplications into deeds due to which their
ranks of Paradise will be added. Refer to God very much in every hour of
every day and night. He ordered to mention Him frequently and He will
mention the believers who mention Him. God will remember graciously
every believer who mentions Him.

Keep us the prayers in general and the middle prayer in specific, and
stand up while offering prayers in obedience to God, as God ordered the
faithful believers before you in His Book. You should love the poor
Muslims. He whoever debases and humbles them will deviate from God's
religion and God will debase him. Our father the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said: "My Lord ordered me to love the poor Muslims."
You must know that God will throw hatred and belittlement upon him
whoever humiliates any of the Muslims, so that people will hate him
intensely. Fear God in regard to the poor Muslims; your brothers. It is
obligatory upon you to love them, since God ordered His Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) to love them. He whoever dislikes those whom
God ordered His Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) to love is
disobeying God and His Messenger. He who disobeys God and His Messenger
to death will be reckoned as one of those who returned into a rebel.
Beware of pride and arrogance, because arrogance is God's dress, and He
will surely subdue and humiliate him whoever tries to take His dress.
Beware of oppressing each other, because this is not a character of the
virtuous. God will make the results of any oppression against the
originator of that oppression and will give His victory to the wronged
party. He whom is given God's victory will surely overcome and prosper.
Beware of envying each other, because it is the origin of atheism.

Beware of standing against the wronged Muslim, because God will respond
to him when he supplicates to Him. Our father the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said: "The supplication of the wronged Muslim is
responded." Beware of desiring for anything that God forbids. God will
deprive those who violate the prohibited matters of Paradise and its
pleasures, delights, and everlasting awards.

**Imam As-Sadiq's 'Dispersal of Gem'**

Some of the Shias name the following words of Imam As-Sadiq (peace be
upon him) as 'dispersal of gems':

1. Inconsiderate judgment causes discrepancy, criticism causes enmity,
lack of tolerance causes scandal, divulgement of secrets causes
meanness, generosity causes cleverness, and niggardliness is
inadvertence.

2. To adhere to God, satisfy with His act, and trust Him-these three
matters gather the good of this world and the world to come for him
whoever holds fast to them.

3. He who neglects three characters will be deprived: they are to ask
from the generous, associate with the scholars, and attract the
attention of the powerful.

4. Religiousness, modesty, and generosity-these three matters bring
about the affection of others.

5. He who disavows three will attain three: he

who disavows evil will attain dignity; he who disavows arrogance will
attain nobility; he who disavows niggardliness will attain honor. 6.
Three characters bring about hatred: hypocrisy, oppression, and
self-conceit. 7. He who does not have one of three characters is not
regarded as noble: they are a mind that beautifies him, a fortune that
dispenses him of people, or a clan that supports him.

8. Envy, talebearing, frivolity-these three matters cause
degradation.

9. Three characters are not known only in three situations: the clement
are known only in situations of rage, the courageous are known only in
wars, and brothers are known only in situations of neediness.

10. He whoever enjoys three characters is certainly hypocrite even if
he offers prayers and fasts: he who lies when he speaks, breaches his
promises, and violates the trusts.

11. Beware of three categories of people: the traitor, the oppressor,
and the talebearer. He who betrays others for your sake will surely
betray you, he who oppresses others for your sake will surely oppress
you, and he who bears others' news to you will surely bear your news to
others. 12. No one should be regarded as trustful before he keeps three
things: funds, secrets, and honors. He who keeps two and betrays a third
is not trustful.

13. Do not consult the foolish, seek the help of the liar, or trust in
the affection of the weary. The liar brings near the remote and makes
the near remote, the foolish does his best for you but cannot attain
anything, and the weary disappoints you in your most reliable matter and
breaks your most associated matter.

14. Four things do not have sufficiency with four matters: the land
never has its sufficiency from rainfall, the eye never has its
sufficiency from looking, the female never has its sufficiency from the
male, and the scholar never has his sufficiency from knowledge.

15. Four conducts bring old age before its time: they are eating dried
meat, sitting on wetlands, scaling the stairs, and copulating with old
women. 16. Women are of three categories: one is for you, the other is
for you and against you, and the third is against you. The one that is
for you is the virgin. The one that is for you and against you is the
non-virgin. The one that is against you is the mother of sons of another
man.

17. He who enjoys three characters is surely a master: they are
suppression of the rage, pardoning the wrongdoings, and regard (others)
by means of soul and property.

18. Three things will inevitably suffer three matters: the horse will
inevitably suffer a stumble, the sword will inevitably suffer a false
strike, and the wise will inevitably suffer a slight fault. 19.
Eloquence is in three matters: to approach the intended meaning, evade
surplus wording, and explain big meanings with little words. 20. Safety
lies in three matters: controlling the tongue, extent of the house, and
feeling sorry for the faults.

21. Ignorance is in three matters; change of the friends, unproved
seclusion, and spying on unconcerned affairs.
22. He who enjoys three characters will suffer from their bad turns:
they are evil plots, breach, and rebellion. This is proved through God's
sayings:

Evil plots only affect the plotters.

Consider the result of their plot. We destroyed them and their people
altogether.
As for those who disregard their pledge, they do so only against their
own souls.
People, your rebellion will only harm yourselves. You may enjoy the
worldly life.

23. Three matters stop man from seeking rise: they are lack of
self-determination, lack of management, and lack of opinion.

24. Determination should be in three matters: they are serving the
powerful, obeying the father, and submission to the master.

25. Amiability is found with three individuals: they are the compliant
wife, the pious son, and the good friend.

26. He whom is given three characters will obtain three things:
satisfaction with what is given, despair of what is in people's
possession, and avoidance of curiosity.

27. Generosity is worthless unless three characters are done: being
openhanded in situations of prosperity and dearth, giving to the
deservers, and believing that the thanks that he received from those
whom he endowed is more valuable than what he had given to them.

28. Man is not excused in three matters: counseling with the
well-wishers, treating the envious courteously, and showing affection to
people. 29. Intelligence cannot be attained unless three matters are
achieved: submission to the right whomever its party is, acceptance for
people whatever is accepted for oneself, and treating the wrongdoer
considerately.

30. Favors will not remain unless three characters are enjoyed:
knowledge of matters that is incumbent for God the Praised in regard to
the favors, showing gratitude for them, and avoidance of finding faults
with them.

31. If you are inflicted with one of three matter, you will hope were
you dead: ceaseless, scandalous indignity, and overcoming enemy. 32. He
who refuses three will be inflicted with three: he who refuses safety
will be inflicted with disappointment, he who refuses a favor will be
inflicted with sorrow, and he who refuses having many friends will be
inflicted with loss.

33. It is obligatory upon everyone to avoid three matters: associating
with the evildoers, talking with women, and sitting to the heretic
people. 34. Generosity is proved through three matters: well mannerism,
suppression of anger, and turning the sight -from the forbidden views-.
35. He who trusts three is cheated: he who believes the impossible,
depends upon the distrustful, and acts greedily upon what he does not
possess. 36. He who uses three characters is spoiling his religion and
his world: he who mistrusts everything, believes every matter he hears,
and accepts to be controlled by his wife.

37. The best kings are those who enjoy three characters: kindness,
generosity, and justice.

38. Kings should never neglect three matters: protecting the borders,
looking closely into the affairs of the subjects, and selecting the
virtuous for the official jobs.

39. Three matters are obligatory upon the kings' friends and subjects:
the obedience to them, advising them in their presence and absence, and
supplicating to God to give them victory and goodness.

40. Three matters are obligatory on the rulers for both the chiefs and
the subjects: they must reward the doers of charity perfectly so that
they will be urged doing charity increasingly, cover up the wrongdoers'
deeds so that they will repent and stop bad behavior, and combine all
the subjects with fairness and justice.

41. Three kinds of people will surely worsen if the kings neglect them:
a mischievous lazy individual who strays from the commons, a caller to a
heresy whose slogan is enjoining good and forbidding evil, and people of
a city who vote for a chief who prevents the king from applying the laws
on them.

42. The intelligent should not underestimate anybody. The most people
whom should never be underestimated are three: the scholars, the rulers,
and the friends. He who underestimates the scholars will spoil his
religion, he who underestimates the rulers will spoil his worldly
pleasures, and he who underestimates his friends will spoil his
personality.

43. The clique of the rulers is of three classes. One is charitable. It
is the blessing of the ruler as well as the subjects. The second is
caring for guarding what is in their hand only. They are neither praised
nor dispraised. Yet, they are nearer to censure. The third is the
vicious. They are doomed. The ruler is dispraised because of the
existence of such a class.

44. All people require three things: security, justice, and
fertility.

45. Three persons disturb the life: the unjust ruler, the bad neighbor,
and the bad-tongued wife.

46. Residence is valueless without three things: gentle wind, profuse
fresh water, and a productive land.

47. Three matters result in sorrow: boasting, pride, and competition in
power.

48. Three characters are stuck to son of Adam: envy, acquisitiveness,
and appetite.

49. If one of three characters is found in an individual, he will have
them all in his excellence, solemnity, and beauty. They are piety,
clemency, and bravery.

50. He whom is given three characters will be perfect: intelligence,
beauty, and eloquence.

51. Safety will be the share of three categories until they attain
their purpose. They are women until they give birth, kings until they
die, and the absent until they return.

52. Three characters beget deprivation: insistence in beggary,
backbiting, and mockery.

53. The end of three matters is bad: the heroes' attack during wars in
inappropriate opportunities even if they triumph, to have medicine while
enjoying good health even safety is gained, and to ask the ruler even if
they settle the needs.

54. Every man claims accuracy of three matters: his religion, his whim
that overcomes him, and his policy of life.

55. People are of three classes: obeyed masters, equal individuals, and
opposed people.

56. The pillars of this world are three: fire, salt, and water.

57. He who seeks three things wrongly will be deprived of three things
fairly: he who seeks the worldly pleasures wrongly will be deprived of
the world to come fairly, he who seeks leadership wrongly will be
deprived of obedience fairly, and he who seeks fortunes wrongly will be
deprived of having it permanently fairly.

58. Strong-minded individuals should not do three matters: they should
not have poison as an experiment even if they will be saved, should not
tell their envious kinsmen of their secrets even if they will not
divulge, and should not work in seas even if their richness lies
there.

59. People of any town should not dispense with three individuals for
seeking their opinion regarding the affairs of their living and
religion. If they lack the existence of such individuals, they will be
regarded as uncivilized. Those are a pious knowledgeable jurist, an
obeyed virtuous ruler, and a trustful erudite physician.

60. A friend is tested through three matters. If he does them then he
is a true friend, otherwise he is false. You should ask him for some
money, deposit some money with him, and cause him to participate in an
unfavorable matter.

61. If people are saved from three things, they will be saved
comprehensively: the obscene tongues, the bad hands, and the bad deeds.
62. A master will never feel quiet if his servant does not enjoy anyone
of three characters: a religion that guides him (to the right),
mannerism that makes him polite, and fear that precludes him (from
committing evildoings).

63. Man needs three characters in order to live peacefully in his house
with his dependants. He should stick himself to them even if they are
not his nature: nice association, moderate affluence, and reasonable
jealousy. 64. Every craftsman requires three characters without which he
will not get earnings: skillfulness of his craft, fulfillment of the
trusts, and attracting the customers.

65. The mind of him who suffers one of three misfortunes will surely be
missing: a departing grace, an immoral wife, and a disaster in a dear
person.

66. Courage depends upon three characters each of which has an
advantage that the others do not have: generosity of souls, refusal of
humility, and seeking fame. If a hero has these characters together, he
will be the unbeatable champion and the most famous intrepid. If he
enjoys them all in different degrees, he will be more courageous and
more intrepid.

67. Three matters are obligatory upon sons regarding their parents:
showing gratitude to them for any situation, obeying them in every
matter they order or warn against except acts of disobedience to God,
and advising them secretly and openly.

68. Three matters are obligatory upon the fathers regarding their sons:
choosing good mother, choosing good name, and exaggerative discipline.
69. Brothers are in need of three characters so that their fraternity
will endure lest, they will differ and hate each other: treating each
other fairly, treating each other mercifully, and avoiding envy.

70. Relatives will surely suffer weakness and schadenfreude of their
enemies if they ignore three matters: they should avoid envying each
other so that they will not be various parties and, accordingly, lack
unity, should exchange visits so that they will enjoy intimacy, and
should cooperate so as to gain strength.

71. Husbands should never dispense with three matters in the course of
their relations with their wives: they should use adaptability so as to
gain the wives' compliance, amiability, love, and morality, should use
good demeanor as a means of gaining their love, and should improve their
livelihood.

72. Wives should never dispense with three characters in the course of
their relations with their good-natured husbands: they should guard
themselves against any filth so that they win their husbands' confidence
in good and bad situations, should take care of them so that this will
save them when they make a fault, and should show love to them through
coquetry and good appearance.

73. Favor is not perfect without three matters: it is not perfect
unless it is done as early as possible, regarded as little even if it is
much, and not regarded as an obligation on the one to whom it is done.

74. Pleasure is in three matters only: in loyalty, fulfillment of
rights, and offering help in misfortunes.

75. The evidence on judiciousness of views is three matters: good
reception, good listening, and good response.

76. Men are three: intelligent, foolish, and wicked. The intelligent is
that who replies when he is addressed, is right when he speaks, and
understands when he listens. The foolish is that who rushes when he
speaks, stuns when he talks, and does evil when he is incited. The
wicked is that who betrays when he is entrusted and insults when he
talks.

77. Brothers are on three categories: one is like food that you need
every time. This is the intelligent. The other is like the malady. This
is the foolish. The third is like remedy. This is the shrewd.

78. Three things confirm the status of their chooser: the messenger
shows the status of his selector, the gift shows the status of its
chooser, and the book refers to the status of its writer.

79. Knowledge is three: a decisive Verse, a fair duty, and a practiced
tradition.

80. People are of three categories: an ignorant that refuses learning,
a scholar whose knowledge weakened him, and a intelligent who works for
this world as well as the world to come.

81. Strangeness is absent in three characters: good mannerism,
abstinence of harm, and evasion of suspect. 82. Days are three: one is
past and unattainable, another is present and should be used, and the
third is not coming yet, and people have its hope only.
83. Faith will not promote those who do not enjoy three characters:
clemency with which ignorance is refuted, piety prevents from seeking
the prohibited things, and ethics with which people are treated
courteously.

84. Faith of those who enjoy three characters is perfect: they are
those whose rage does not take them out of the right, whose satisfaction
does not take to the wrong, and who pardon when they are powerful.

85. People of this world need three characters: luxury without
tiredness, abundance with satisfaction, and courage without laziness.
86. The intelligent should never forget three things: the expiry of this
world, the change of conditions, and the unexpected disasters. 87.
Faith, intelligence, and painstaking are three matters that are not
perfect in anybody.

88. Brothers are of three kinds: one is that who offers his soul for
you and the other offers his wealth for you. These two kinds of brothers
are genuine. The third is that who takes from you what he wants and
needs you for enjoyment. You should not reckon him with the trustful
(friends). 89. The servants will not attain the reality of faith before
they enjoy three characters: knowledge of religion, moderation of
livelihood, and steadfastness against misfortunes. All power belong to
God the High the Great.

**Imam As-Sadiq's Wording of the Quality of Adoration to the Prophet's
Progeny, Monotheism, Faith, Islam, Atheism, And Evil**

Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) asked the man who attended before him
about his manner. 'I am one of your followers and adherents,' answered
the man. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God will surely accept
the servant whom He loves and will surely give Paradise to him whom He
accepts.

'Which class of our followers are you?' asked the Imam (peace be upon
him). The man found no answer. Sadir intruded to ask the Imam (peace be
upon him), 'How many classes are your followers, son of the Prophet?'
Imam as-Sadiq spoke:

Our followers are three classes. A class is those who pretend
themselves our followers while the reality is the opposite, a class is
those who cherish us secretly and do not follow us in public, and a
class is those who cherish us openly and secretly. They are the highest
group. They drank from the fresh water and had knowledge of the
interpretation of the Book (of God), the distinction between the right
and the wrong, and the causes of everything. Therefore, they have become
the highest group. Poverty, destitution, and the varieties of crises are
hastier than racehorses to them. They have suffered hardship and damage
and they have been shaken and tested. Hence, they have been wounded and
slain, scattering in the remote countries. Through them, God heals the
ailed and richens the deprived. Moreover, you gain victory, rainfall,
and earnings only through them. They are the fewest, but the owners of
the greatest standings with God. The third class is the lowest group.
They loved us in public, but they pursued the kings' practices. Their
tongues are with us while their swords are unsheathed in our faces. The
second class is the middle group. They loved us secretly and ignored us
openly. I swear if they love us secretly not openly, they are the
fasting in days and the worshippers at night. The signs of seclusion are
shown on their faces. They are peaceful and submissive people.

The man declared, 'I am one of those who love you secretly and openly.'
The Imam (peace be upon him) said:

Our followers in secret and openness enjoy a number of indications with
which they are realized. As the man asked about these indications, the
Imam (peace be upon him) said: These are certain characters the first of
which is that they knew monotheism perfectly, they excelled in the rules
of God's oneness, and finally they believed in God's oneness and its
description. Then they recognized the outlines, facts, provisions, and
interpretation of faith. Sadir intruded, 'O son of God's messenger, I
have never heard you describing faith in such a form before.' The Imam
(peace be upon him) answered: Yes, Sadir. The asker should not ask about
faith before he knows the One in Whom he must believe.' 'O son of God's
messenger,' asked Sadir, 'Would you please explain what you have said?'
The Imam (peace be upon him) spoke:

He who claims that he knows God due to the imprint of the heart is
polytheist. He who claims that knows God by name, not meaning, is
declaring the contrary, because the name is new (created). He who claims
that he worships the name and the meaning is associating others with
God. He who claims that he worships the meaning by the description, not
realization, is referring to something absent. He who claims that he
worships the description and the described is nullifying God's oneness
because description is something other than the described. He who claims
that he adds the described to the description is belittling the great.
They have no true respect of God.

'What is the course to the true believing in God's oneness, then?' some
asked. He (peace be upon him) said: The door of search is opened and the
pursuit of the exit is existing. The knowledge of the present should
precede his description while the knowledge of the description of the
absent should precede the knowledge of him. 'How can we know the witness
before we know his descriptions?' they asked. He (peace be upon him)
answered: You should first know him, know his knowledge, and know
yourself through him. You should not know yourself through yourself. You
should also know that whatever he has is to him and through him. As an
example of this is Joseph's brothers when they addressed to him, 'Are
you Joseph?' He said, 'Yes, I am Joseph and this is my brother.' They
knew him through him. They neither knew him through others nor did they
know him by themselves due to the imprints of their hearts. God says:

You could not even plant one tree.

This means that you should not appoint a leader for yourselves out of
your whims and wills. As for three categories, God will not speak to
them, will not look at them on the Day of Resurrection, will not second
them, and will arrange for them a painful chastisement. They are those
who plant a tree that God did not plant, i.e. those who appoint a leader
for themselves out of their own whims, those who deny a leader that God
appoints, and those who claim that those two persons have anything to do
with Islam. God says: Your Lord creates and chooses to whomever He
wants. They do not have the choice to choose whatever they want.

**The Quality of Faith**

Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said:

The meaning of the quality of faith is the declaration, submission to
God and seeking His favors through the declaration, and the fulfillment
to Him through having knowledge of every obligatory matter, whether big
or small, beginning with the outline of God's oneness up to the last
chapter of obedience without missing anyone. All this should be
connected and matched up to each other. If a servant fulfills what is
imposed upon him according to what we have recently explained, he will
then deserve the quality of faith and will deserve the reward duly. This
is because the meaning of faith is the declaration and the meaning of
declaration is the sincerity of obedience. This proves that obedience as
a whole is related to each other. A believer loses the quality of faith
only when he ignores the matters due to which he deserved to have that
quality. He deserved the name and meaning of belief meritoriously only
when he fulfilled the grand duties connectedly and neglected and avoided
the disobediences. He also will not abandon the quality of faith when he
commits insignificant acts of disobedience to God and ignores the
insignificant acts of obedience. God says:

If you avoid the grand violating that which has been prohibited, your
sins will be forgiven and you will be admitted into an exalted dwelling.
This holy saying proves the fact that we have recently indicated.
Accordingly, forgiveness is obtained when the grand sins are avoided. If
a grand sin is committed, all of the acts of disobedience, whether grand
or insignificant, will be taken in the consideration of judgment. Hence,
castigation and penalty of all the acts of disobedience (to God) will
fall. This is the quality of faith and the quality of a believer who
deserves the reward duly.

**The Quality of Islam**

The meaning of the quality of Islam is the submission and fulfillment
of all the acts of obedience whose judgment is clear. If one declares
the all acts of obedience publicly, even if he does not believe with the
heart, he will deserve the name and meaning of Islam, warrant the public
friendship, his testimony will be accepted, the rulings of inheritance
will be valid for him, and he will enjoy the rights and obligations of
the Muslims. This is the quality of Islam. The difference between the
believer and the Muslim is that the latter will be believer when he is
obedient intentionally along with his public declaration. If he obeys
publicly only, he will be Muslim. If he obeys publicly and
intentionally, he will be believer provided that submission and seeking
favors through knowledge will be present. It happens that a servant is
Muslim but not believer. No one can be believer unless he is Muslim.


