Short Maxims of Imam As-sadiq
=============================

1. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who treats people kindly
will be accepted as arbiter.

2. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said:

To trust everybody in times of injustice and cheating is disability.

3. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: If problems are added to
each other, they will give birth of relief.

4. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: To recognize the actuality
of your friend, you should enrage him. If he keeps up his friendship, he
is true friend lest, he is false.

5. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Do not appreciate one's
affection before you enrage him three times.

6. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Do not trust your friend
perfectly, because the knockdown of the trustful is incurable.

7. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Islam is a definite rank.
Faith is one rank higher than Islam. Conviction is one rank higher than
faith. People have been given a rank lower than conviction.

8. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said:

To remove a mountain is easier than removing faith.

9. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Faith is in heart and
conviction is a number of inspirations.

10. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The desire for the worldly
pleasures causes grief and sadness. Abstinence from the worldly
pleasures brings about the rest of both heart and body.

11. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Life is to rent a house and
buy bread.

12. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who gains oppression is
not gaining welfare. He who mistreats people should not complain when
people mistreat him.

13. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: In homelands, exchanging
visits is the means of association. In travel, correspondence is the
means of association.

14. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: A believer is not perfectly
virtuous unless he enjoys three characters-knowledgeability of the
religious affairs, moderation in living, and steadfastness against
misfortunes.

15. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: An actual believer is that
whose sexual appetite does not overcome him and whose stomach does not
shame him.

16. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: A twenty-year friendship is
kinship.

17. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Favors should be done only
to the highborn or the religious. Those who show gratitude are very
few.

18. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Enjoining good and
forbidding evil should be practiced with a faithful believer that he
would learn a lesson, or an ignorant that he would earn. Enjoining good
and forbidding evil become surely worthless when they are applied with
the powerful tyrants.

19. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Those who enjoin good and
forbid evil should enjoy three characters: they should be aware of the
matters that they enjoin and the matters that they forbid, fair in the
matters that they enjoin and the matters that they forbid, and lenient
in the matters that they enjoin and the matters that they forbid.

20. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who suffers a misfortune
due to obtruding upon an unjust ruler will be neither rewarded nor
endowed with patience.

21. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: As some people showed
ingratitude for God's graces, He changed the graces into crises. As
other people showed steadfastness against the misfortunes that inflicted
them, God changed the misfortunes into graces.

22. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The prosperity of
coexistence and association are three thirds: two thirds are acumen and
one is overlooking.

23. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Revenging on the pauper is
extremely ugly.

24. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about personality, he
answered: Personality stands for that God should not see you in
situations against which He warned, and miss you in situations of which
He ordered.

25. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Thank him who did you
favor, and confer upon him who thanked you. Graces that are shown
gratitide will not removed while those that are shown ingratitude will
not persist. Thanks increase the graces and saves against poverty.

26. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: To miss a need is better
than asking it from other than its people. Bad mannerism in a misfortune
is more catastrophic than the misfortune itself. 27. As a man asked him
a short item of instruction that collects the welfare of this world and
the world to come, the Imam, peace be upon him, said: Never tell
untruths.

28. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about eloqunece. He
answered: Eloquence is to express the idea in as few as possible words.
The eloquent is that who attains his demand in the least effort.

29. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Debt is grief at night and
humility in day.

30. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: If your worldly demands are
attainable, you should check your religion.

31. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Treat your fathers piously
so that your sons will treat you piously. Keep yourselves away from the
strange women so that your harem will be chaste.

32. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who entrusts a betrayer
with a deposit will be deprived of God's warranty.

33. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said to Humran bin A'yun: O
Humran, look to him who is less powerful that you are and do not look at
him who is more powerful so that you will be more satisfied with what
God has allotted for you and will be a greater motive to deserve the
Lord's increase. Know that little permanent deed with conviction is more
favorable to God than the many deeds that are lacking conviction. You
should know also that no piety is more profitable than avoiding
committing the prohibited matters and the abstinence from harming and
backbiting the believers. No living is more pleasant than good
mannerism, no fortune is more advantageous than satisfaction with the
sufficient and the little, and no ignorance is more harmful than
self-conceit.

34. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Pudency is of two faces-
one is weakness while the other is power, submission, and faith.

35. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Negligence of others'
rights is humility. Certainly, the neglector of rights needs for forgery
in this regard.

36. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: It is sufficient for one of
the group to salute. Similarly, it is sufficient for one of the group to
respond the salutation.

37. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Salutation is voluntary
while responding is obligatory.

38. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Do not answer those who
speak before they greet you.

39. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Shaking hands is the
perfect greeting of the resident and embracement is the perfect greeting
of the traveler.

40. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Shake hands, because this
will confiscate malice. 41. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Fear
God even if to some extent. Construct a screen between Him and you even
if transparent.

42. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: As for those who control
themselves in rage, desire, fear, and lust, God will prevent Hell from
burning their bodies.

43. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Good health is a light
grace; it is forgotten when found and mentioned when missed.

44. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: In good days, God endows
with the grace of consent. In distress, He endows with the grace of
purification.

45. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: It often happens that God
endows a servant with a grace that he does not expect. It also happens
that one hopes for something while his goodness is in its opposite. It
also may happen that one is running for his doom, while he goes slowly
for his goodness.

46. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who does not arrange
show steadfastness agains every misfortune, show gratitude for every
grace, and show easiness for every complexity will surely be too short
to continue. Be broad-minded whenever a misfortune inflicts you, whether
in your son, wealth, or other matters. The fact of every misfortune is
that God receives his loan and takes his gift back so as to test your
tolerance and thanking.

47. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Everything has limits. The
limit of conviction is not to fear anything besides God.

48. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The (faithful) believer
should enjoy eight characters; he should be venerable in shaking
situations, steadfast against misfortunes, thankful in luxury, satisfied
with what God has decided to him, avoid oppressing the enemies, avoid
overtaxing the associates, should fatigue his body, and make people feel
glad with him.

49. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Knowledge is the comrade of
the faithful believer, clemency is his supporter, patience is the
commander of his army, lenience is his brother, and charity is his
father.

50. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said to Abu Ubayda who asked him
to supplicate to God for saving him from making his earnings pass by the
mediation of the servants: God has arranged to make people's earnings in
other people's hands. You should supplicate to God to make your earnings
in the hands of the charitable people, because this is a sort of
happiness, and not to make your earnings in the hands of the vicious,
because it is a sort of despondency.

51. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: As for those who practice
without guidance, they are like him who walks without choosing a
definite path. The more he walks, the remoter he becomes.

52. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The meaning of God's
saying, "Have fear of God as you should be," is that God should be
obeyed in such a way that He should not be disobeyed, mentioned in such
a way that He should not be neglected, and thanked in such a way that He
should not be shown ingratitude.

53. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who recognizes God
accurately will fear Him. He who fears God accurately will disregard the
worldly pleasures.

54. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The actual fearful is that
who cannot speak due to the intensity of fear.

55. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about the manners of
some people who were committing the acts of disobedience to God and
claiming that they were desiring for the mercy of God and kept on doing
so until death attacked them. He (peace be upon him) said: As for those
who act disobediently and claim expecting God's mercy until they die,
they are rocking on hopes. They are surely liars. They do not expect
God's mercy. He who expects something should seek it. Likewise, he who
fears something should escape it.

56. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: We love those who are
intelligent, knowledgeable, perceptive, expert, clement, courteous,
patient, veracious, and loyal. God gave the noble characters exclusively
to the prophets (peace be upon them). He who enjoys such characters
should thank God for them. He who does not enjoy them should supplicate
to God for them.

As he was asked about these noble characters, Imam As-Sadiq (peace be
upon him) said: The noble characters are piety, satisfaction, patience,
gratefulness, clemency, pudency, generosity, bravery, enthusiasm,
veracity, charity, fulfillment of the trusts, conviction, good
mannerism, and chivalry.

57. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The firmest handle of faith
is to love, hate, give, and deprive-all for God's sake.

58. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Nothing will follow a dead
person except three things: an alms that God gave permanently in his
life and it will follow him after death, a norm of guidance that others
pursue, and a virtuous son that supplicates to God for his favor.

59. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Lying invalidates the
ablution (for the prayers) and breaks the fasting.

The attendants said: "But we use to tell lies." He (peace be upon him)
said: I do not mean lying due to garrulity, but I mean forging lies
against God, His Apostle, and the Imams (peace be upon them).

The Imam (peace be upon him) then added: Fasting is not abstaining from
food or drink only. Mary (peace be upon her) said, -as the Quran
reported- "I have promised the Beneficent God to fast." This means to
keep silent. Thus, you should keep silent, turn the sights away (from
whatever God has forbidden), and stop envying and disputing with each
other. Envy consumes the faith like the fire when consumes the wood.

60. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The Divine Throne will be
shaken when one makes God the witness of a false matter .

61. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God knew that sin is better
for the believer than self-conceit lest, God will never test the
believers through the commitment of sins.

62. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He whose conducts are bad
is tormenting himself.

63. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Favor is well-known. Except
its reward, nothing is better than doing favor. It is God's gift to the
servants. Not everyone who likes to do people favor can do it, not
everyone who desires for doing favor will be able to do it, and not
everyone who can do favor will be permitted to do it. If God wills to
offer a grace to a servant, He gathers the desire, ability, and
permission to do favor for him. This is the perfect pleasure and honor
for both the seeker and the doer.

64. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Nothing like thanks in
increasing the favorable matters and nothing like patience in decreasing
the unfavorable matters.

65. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The most effective soldiers
of Eblis are women and rage.

66. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The world is the believer's
jail, patience is his fortress, and Paradise is his residence. The world
is the disbeliever's paradise, grave is his jail, and Hell is his
residence.

67. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God has not created
doubtless conviction more similar to unspoiled doubt than death.

68. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Whenever you see a servant
(of God) pursuing people's flaws and neglecting his own flaws, you
should then realize that he has been trapped (by the Shaitan).

69. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The server of food who
thanks (God for so) will be rewarded as same as those who fast just for
gaining the rewards of God, and the individual who is cured and thanks
(God for curing him) will be rewarded as same as the diseased one who is
steadfast against that disease (for the sake of God).

70. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Those who are not scholars
should not be regarded as happy, those who are not amiable should not be
regarded as laudable, and those who are not tolerant should not be
regarded as perfect. Those who do not guard themselves against the
scholars' blame and censure should not be expected to gain the welfare
of this world and the world to come. The intelligent should be veracious
and thankful so that their sayings will be trusted and they will be
given increasingly.

71. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: You should not trust the
betrayer after you had tested him and you should not accuse him whom you
trusted.

72. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about the people who
are most respected by God. He answered: The people who are most
respected by God are those who mention and obey Him more than the
others.

He, then, was asked about the people that are most disrespected by God,
Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) answered: The people that are most
disprespected by God are those who accuse Him.

"Is there anyone who accuses God?" I asked. The Imam (peace be upon
him) said: He who seeks God's decision and dissatisfies himself with it
when it comes opposite to his will is accusing God.

"Who else?" asked I. He (peace be upon him) answered: Then come those
who complain against God.

"Is there anyone who complaimns against God?" I asked. The Imam (peace
be upon him) said: They are those who exaggerate in complaining about
the misfortunes that they are suffering.

"Who else?" asked I. He (peace be upon him) answered: Then come those
who neglect showing gratitude when they are endowed with a grace and
show intolerance when they are inflicted by a problem.

"Who are the most respected by God?" asked I. He (peace be upon him)
answered: The most respected people are those who show gratitude when
they are given a grace and treat with their problems tolerantly.

73. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The weary are friendless
and the envious are fortuneless. Much looking into wisdom pollinates the
mind.

74. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Fear of God is sufficient
knowledge and deceit is sufficient ignorance.

75. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The best adoration is to
know God and behave humbly with Him.

76. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: One scholar is better than
one thousand worshippers, one thousand ascetics, and one thousand
hardworking persons in worship.

77. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Everything has its tax and
the tax of knowledge is to teach its people.

78. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Judges are four categories
three of whom will be in Hell while one only will be in Paradise. The
judge who judges unjustly intentionally will surely be in Hell. The
Judge who judges unjustly inadvertently will be in Hell. The judge who
judges justly but unintentionally will be in Hell. The judge who judges
justly intentionally will be in Paradise.

79. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about the character of
decency. He said: The decent is that who turns his sight away from the
forbidden views, holds up his tongue from the ill wording, and abstains
from oppressing others.

80. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God will not ask people
about things that are screened from them before He identifies them.

81. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: To put your hand to the
elbow between the jaws of a dragon is better than asking those who have
newly had fortune.

82. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The settlement of needs is
God's, but the ways are in the people's hands. You should thank God for
the settlement of your needs, and you should submit, accept, and
tolerate if they are not settled. Unsettlement of a need may be for your
good. God knows your good while you do not know.

83. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: A man's begging from
another man is an ordeal: if he gains what he asked for he will then
thank the one who did not give him and if he is refuted, he will censure
the one who did not refute him.

84. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God has installed the whole
goodness in leniency and courtesy.

85. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Beware of associating with
the lowly, because the association with them will never lead to
welfare.

86. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: As a man worries about a
little humility, this may engage him into a greater one.

87. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The most advantageous thing
is to precede people to the recognition of your own flaws. The heaviest
thing is to hide your poverty. The less fortunate thing is to provide
the advice to him who refuses it and to live next to an acquisitive
individual. The most relaxing thing is to despair of people's giving.
Never be weary or obscure. Be modest by submitting to the opinions of
him who is higher than you (in rank) and who did you favors when such
opinions oppose yours. You have submitted to his being higher than you
so as to avoid disagreeing with him. He who does not submit to anybody's
favor is surely self-conceited. You should know that he who does not
humble himself before God will never gain pride and he who is not modest
before God will never gain haughtiness.

88. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: To wear rings on the
fingers is a prophetic tradition.

89. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The most favorable friend
to me is that who shows me my flaws.

90. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Friendship is nil unless
its limits are kept. He who does not keep these limits should not be
regarded as friend. The first limit is that the inner self and the
appearance should be identical. The second limit is that the friend
should regard your goodness and his goodness and your evil as his evil.
The third limit of friendship is that a position or fortunes should not
change the friend's relation with his friends. The fourth limit is that
the friend should not deprive his friend of anything that he is capable
of doing. The fifth limit -which is the most comprehensive-, is that the
friend should never leave his friend alone in calamities.

91. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Comity is one third of the
mind.

92. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The believers' laughter
should be only a smile.

93. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: There is no difference
between depositing a trust with a betrayer or a negligent.

94. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said to Al-Mufaddel: I instruct
you to stick on six characters and relate them to my adherents -Shia-.
You should fulfill the trust of him who entrusts you with anything. You
should like for your brother whatever you like for yourself. You should
know that every matter has an end; therefore, you should beware of the
outcomes of matters. Similarly, every matter has a sudden event; hence,
beware of the sudden events. Beware of climbing an easy mountain if its
slope is uneven. Never promise your brother of a matter that you cannot
fulfill.

95. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God has not permitted
people in three matters: they should treat the parents kindly whether
they are righteous or wicked, abide by the pledge whether to the
righteous or the wicked, and fulfill the trust whether to the righteous
or the wicked.

96. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: I feel sympathetic to three
classes of people. Anyhow, they should be treated mercifully. They are
those who suffered humiliation after honor, those who became needy after
having been wealthy, and the scholars whom have been belittled by their
folks and the ignorant people.

97. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He whosever heart is
attached to the fondness of this world will be suffering three
matters-an everlasting care, an unattainable hope, and an unachievable
expectation.

98. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Lying and treachery are not
within the ethics of the believers. Two characters are not found
together in the hypocrites: they are good-looking and understanding of a
tradition.

99. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: People are equal like the
teeth of a comb. With the support of his brothers, a man can be regarded
as great. No goodness is expected in the friendship of those who do not
like for their friends whatever they like for themselves.

100. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Understanding is the
ornament of faith, self-possession is the ornament of understanding,
kindness is the ornament of self-possession, leniency is the ornament of
kindness, and easiness is the ornament of leniency.

101. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: You should regard him who
became angry with you three times without addressing any bad saying to
you as a true friend.

102. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: People will live in a time
when nothing will be dearer than a good friend and a legally gotten
dirham.

103. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who intrudes in
situations of accusation should never blame those who mistrust him. He
who conceals his secrets will possess the options. Every secret that
exceeds more than two persons will spread. Regard the best meaning of
your brother's saying and never search for an ill meaning in his saying
if there is a probability of good intention. You should adhere to the
veracious friends because they will be the allies in good days and the
shelter in misfortunes. Regarding your affairs, you should counsel with
those who fear God. You should regard your friends according to their
God-fearing. Keep yourself away from the vicious women and beware of the
good-natured ones. If they enjoin a good matter, you should oppose them
so that they will not seek the evil for you.

104. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The hypocrites will surely
forge lies if they relate something to God and His Apostle, will break
their promises to God and His Apostle, and will betray God and His
Apostle if they become rulers. This is God's saying: God will, for their
disregard of their promise and their telling lies, place hypocrisy in
their hearts which will not leave them until they face the consequences
of their deeds.

Do not be surprised that they want to be dishonest with you; they have
always been dishonest with God. However, He has power over them. God is
All-knowing and All-wise.

105. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: It is a sufficient
disgrace to wear a scandalous dress or ride on a scandalous aimal.

Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about the scandalous riding
animal. He said: The scandalous riding animal is the piebald animal.

106. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: You will not attain the
actual faith unless you love the remotest and hate the nearest all for
God's sake.

107. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who attributes the
grace that he acknowledges to God is showing gratefulness properly even
if he does not use the tongue (for verbal thanks). He who believes that
God will punish him for the sin that he committed is seeking God's
forgiveness even if he does not say it orally.

The Imam (peace be upon him) then recited God's saying: God will call
you to account for all that you may reveal from your souls and all that
you may conceal. God will forgive or punish whomever He wants. God has
power over all things.

108. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Beware of the two
annihilating characters-they are issuing verdicts out of your own
opinion and betaking what you do not know as creed.

109. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said to Abu Baseer: O Abu
Mohammed, do not spy on people's beliefs lest you will become
friendless.

110. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The gracious forgiveness
is to stop punishing for a sin and the gracious patience is that which
is empty of complaint.

111. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who enjoys veracity,
pudency, good mannerism, and gratitude is a faithful believer even if he
is fully sinful.

112. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: You will not be faithful
believer before you become fearful and hopeful. You will not be fearful
and hopeful before you work for what you fear and hope.

113. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Faith is not identified
through outer appearances and hopes. Faith is that which is pure in the
hearts and assured by deeds.

114. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: If a man is more than
thirty year old, he is middle-aged. If he is more than forty year old,
he is old man.

115. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Regarding monotheism,
people are of three classes: believer, denier, and anthropomorphist. The
denier is wrong, the believer is faithful, and the anthropomorphist is
polytheist.

116. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Faith is declaration,
practice, and intent. Islam is declaration and practice.

117. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Never break the respect
between your friends and you. If respect is broken between you, pudency
will vanish. Your amiability will endure as long as there is respect.

118. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who puts his friend to
shame will be deprived of his relationship with him. He who grieves his
friend will lose respect. 119. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
answered those who asked him about his seclusion in Wadi Aqeeq -a place-
(or with one of his wives whose name was Aqeeq): If you taste the good
flavor of seclusion, you will feel an aversion for even yourself. At
least, seclusion saves you from treating people punctiliously.

120. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Whenever God opens a door
to the worldly pleasures, He will open two to acquisitiveness.

121. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The believer is strange in
this world. He should not feel worry of its humility and should not
compete with its people for gaining its honor.

122. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about he path of rest.
He answered: The path of rest is the opposite of whims.

The Imam (peace be upon him) then was asked when would the sertvants
find rest. He answered: The servants (of God) will find rest on the
first day in Paradise.

123. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God does not gather
good-looking, understandability, and good mannerism for the hypocrites
and the corruptive.

124. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The flavor of water is
life and the flavor of bread is power. The source of the physical
weakness and power is the fats of the kidneys. The place of the mind is
the brain while severity and tenderness are in the heart.

125. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Envy is of two sorts: the
seditious envy and the inadvertent envy. As an example of the latter
sort is the angels' saying to God, when He decided to choose a deputy on
earth, "Are you going to appoint one who will commit corruption and
bloodshed therein, even though we (are the only ones who) commemorate
Your Name and glorify You?" This means that they suggested that the
deputy should be one of them. This suggestion was not out of seditious,
rejecting, and denial envy to Adam. As an example of the previous sort
of envy, which causes atheism and polytheism, is the Shaitan's envying
Adam (peace be upon him) and refuting God's order when he rejected to
prostrate (himself before Adam).

126. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Regarding the concept of
fatalism and indeterminism, people opt three different opinions. Those
who claim that everything is optional are belittling God's predominance.
They are wrong. Those who claim that God dragged the servants to disobey
Him and charged people with what is over their capability are misjudging
Him. They are wrong, too. There are also those who claim that God
charged the servants with what they can do and did not oblige them to do
what they cannot; hence, the servants thank Him when they do good and
seek His forgiveness when they do wrong. These are surely the proper
Muslims.

127. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Hasty walking removes the
believers' brightness and extinguishes their illumination.

128. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God surely hates the
oppressive wealthy man.

129. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Rage eliminates the
intelligence of the wise. He who cannot control his rage will not be
able to control his mind.

130. Al-Fudhayl bin Ayadh related: Abu Abdillah (As-Sadiq) (peace be
upon him) asked me, 'Do you know who is the avaricious?' 'The avaricious
is the niggardly,' I answered. He (peace be upon him) said: The
avaricious is eviler than the niggardly. The niggardly withholds what is
in his hand, while the avaricious resents people to gain something and
withholds what is in his hand. He wishes he would gain whatever is there
in people's possession whether legally or illegally. Moreover, the
avaricious is never satisfied and never profits by what God gives.

131. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The niggardly is that who
gains wealth illegally and spends it unsuitably.

132. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) asked one of his adherents about
the reason why one of his friends had been complaining against him. The
man said, 'He complained just because I had demanded him with my rights
wholly.' The Imam (peace be upon him) became angry as he said: Do you
think that demanding with the whole rights is not offense? Have you seen
those people about whom God said, "They fear the bad judgment?" Do they
fear that their Lord may oppress them? No, at all. They fear that their
Lord will demand with the rights perfectly. Hence, He named it, 'the bad
judgment'. Surely, demanding with the whole rights is offense.

133. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Muchness of the ill-gotten
properties will eradicate the earnings.

134. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Misdemeanor is embittered
life.

135. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Faith is one rank higher
than Islam and God-fearing is one rank higher than faith. However, they
are parts of one another. It happens that a believer speaks some bad
wording of which God did not threaten Hell. God says: If you avoid
violating the grand sins that which has been prohibited, your sins will
be forgiven and you will be admitted into an exalted dwelling. It also
happens that another believer, who is more quick-witted, is more sinful.
However, both are believers. Conviction is one rank higher than
God-fearing. Conviction is the most difficult thing ever given to
people. Some people are more certain than others. Some are more
steadfast against misfortunes, poverty, ailment, and fear than others.

136. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Richness and dignity are
touring. Whenever they notice a place of depending on God, they reside
there.

137. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Good mannerism is a part
of the religion. It increases the earnings.

138. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Morals are of two forms:
one is intent while the other is nature.

Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked, 'Which of them is better
than the other?' He answered: The intentional morals are better than the
natural, because the owner of natural morals cannot change them, while
the owner of the intentional morals is preserving the acts of obedience
(to God).

139. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The hearts of the pious
harmonize with each other as velocious as the mixture of the water of
rivers and the rainfall, even if they do not show harmony. The hearts of
the irreverent disagree with each other like the animals when they show
conflict after eating in one manger, even if they show agreement. 140.
Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said:

The actual generous charitable individual is that who spends his wealth
for fulfilling the rights of God. 141. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
said: O people of faith and deposits of concealment! Ponder over things
and remember when the oblivious are inadvertent. 142. Al-Mufaddel bin
Omar said: I asked Abu Abdullah (peace be upon him) about ancestry,
generosity, and sovereignty. He (peace be upon him) said: Ancestry is
the fortune, generosity is God-fearing, and sovereignty is
openhandedness. Have you not noticed that Hatem became the master of his
people because he was not the most generous? 143. Imam As-Sadiq (peace
be upon him) said:

Personality is of two sorts. The personality of residence is the
recital of the Quran, presence in mosques, association with the good
people, and studying the jurisprudence. The personality of traveling is
to offer victuals, joke in matters other than these which cause God's
satisfaction, reduce disagreement with the companions, and reduce
accusing them of bad things when you leave them. 144. Imam As-Sadiq
(peace be upon him) said: You should know I will fulfill the trust of
even the killer of Ali (peace be upon him) if he deposits something with
me or seeks my advice or consultation.

145. Sufian said: I asked Abu Abdullah (peace be upon him) whether it
is acceptable to praise oneself or not. He answered: It is acceptable to
praise oneself in cases of necessity. Joseph the prophet (peace be upon
him) said: "Put me in charge of the treasuries of the land. I know how
to manage them." The virtuous servant (of God) also said: "I am a
trustworthy advisor for you." 146. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
said:

God revealed to David the prophet (peace be upon him): O David, you
will and I will. If you satisfy yourself with that which I will, I will
provide you with what you will. If you reject that which I will and seek
that which you will, I will exhaust you without gaining what you will,
and there will be only that which I will.

147. Mohammed bin Qays said: I asked Abu Abdullah (peace be upon him)
whether it is acceptable to sell weapon to the two parties both of whom
is wrong. He (peace be upon him) said: Sell to them only defensive
weapons: armors, shields, helmets, and the like.

148. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Four characters are
invalid in four situations: treachery, seizing excessive shares,
stealth, and usury are invalid in hajj, umrah, jihad, and almsgiving.

149. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God gives the worldly
pleasures to those whom He loves as well as those whom He dislikes,
while He gives the faith only to whom He selects among the creatures.
150. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who declares himself as
the leader while there is someone who is more knowledgeable is
heresiarch and deviant.

151. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) was asked about the commandment
of Luqman. He answered: In the commandment of Luqman for his son, there
were the marvels. The most marvelous statement of that commandment was
his saying to his son: "Fear God so intensely as if He will punish you
even if you provide the good deeds of all people and all jinn, and trust
Him so perfectly as if He will be merciful to you even if you burden on
your back the sins of all people and all jinn."

Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) then said: Every believer inevitably
has two illuminations in the heart: one is the illumination of fear and
the other is the illumination of hope. These two illuminations are so
equal that one will never be heavier than the other in any amount.

152. Abu Basseer related: I asked Abu Abdullah (peace be upon him)
about faith and Islam. He answered: Faith is the avoidance of acts of
disobedience to God. Islam is to practice our rites and slaughter
animals as we do.

153. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He whosever word of
guidance is followed will be gaining the same reward of those who follow
it. He whosever word of deviation is followed will be charged of the
same punishment of those who follow it.

154. As some mentioned that the Christians claim that Jesus (peace be
upon him) was born on the twenty forth of December, Imam as-Sadiq (peace
be upon him) commented: They lied. Jesus the Christ was born in the
middle of June. Day and night become equal in the middle of March.

155. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Ishmael was five years
older than Isaac. He was 'the slain'. Listen to the saying of Abraham
(the prophet, peace be upon him): Lord, grant me a righteous son. This
means that Abraham is supplicating to God to give him a righteous son.
God says in Sura of As-Saaffat: We gave him the glad news of the birth
of a forbearing son.

This refers to Ishmael. Then God says: We gave him the glad news of the
birth of Isaac, one of the righteous prophets.

Hence, he who claims that Isaac was older than Ishmael is belying what
God revealed in the Quran.

156. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Piety, openhandedness,
steadfastness against misfortunes, and administration of the believers'
rights-these four characters are within the ethics of the prophets. 157.
Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: You should not regard a
misfortune against which you are granted steadfastness and due to which
you are rewarded as a true misfortune. The true misfortune is that which
you are deprived of its reward and prize.

158. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: There are definite
servants of God on this earth to whom people beseech for settling their
needs of this world and the world to come. They are the true faithful
believers. They will be secured on the Day of Resurrection. Certainly,
the most favorable believers to God are those who meet the living needs
of the poor believers and those who support, benefit, and protect the
believers against evil.

159. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Exchanging visits with the
relatives and charity will make the Judgment easier and guard against
sins. Hence, Build good relations with your brothers and treat them
charitably by good greeting and response at least.

160. Sufian Athawri related: I visited As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) and
asked for a commandment that I would apply on myself after him. 'Will
you surely apply it, Suffian?' wondered Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon
him). 'Yes, son of the Prophet's daughter, I will,' answered I. The Imam
(peace be upon him) spoke: O Sufian, the liars enjoy no personality, the
envious are persistently restless, the kings keep no fraternity, the
proud keep no friends, and the ill-mannered should not enjoy leadership.
As the Imam stopped, I asked for more. He (peace be upon him) added: O
Suffian, trust in God and you will be knowing. Satisfy yourself with
that which God has allotted for you and you will be rich. Associate with
others in the same way they associate with you and you will have more
faith. Do not accompany the lecher so that they will not teach you
matters of their lechery. Seek the advice of those who fear God the
Glorified.

As the Imam stopped, I asked for more. He (peace be upon him) said: O
Suffian, he who searches for honor without sovereignty, might without
need of brothers, and dignity without possessing wealth should shift
from the humility of the acts of disobedience to God to the nobility of
His obedience.

As he stopped, I asked for more. He (peace be upon him) said: O
Suffian, my father instructed me three matters and warned me against
three. He instructed me that whoever associate with the vicious will not
be saved, he who does not opt for good wording will regret, and he who
intrudes himself in bad matters will be indicted.

O son of the Prophet's daughter,' I asked, 'What about the three
against whom your father warned you?' He (peace be upon him) spoke: My
father warned me against associating with the envious, those who rejoice
at others' misfortunes, and the talebearers.

161. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Bad-temperedness, bad
humor, envy, obduracy, and oppression-these six characters should never
be in the believers' behavior.

162. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The believer should live
between two fears-the past sin that he does not know what God will do
about it and the remaining days that he does not know what misfortunes
he will encounter through them. Thus, the believer begins his day
fearfully and ends his day fearfully. Except fear, nothing mends the
believer.

163. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God will accept the few
deeds of those who satisfy themselves with the little sustenance. He who
satisfies himself with the few legal gotten sustenance will have light
burdens and pure earnings and will be released from the frame of
incapability.

164. Suffian Athawri related: I attended before Abu Abdullah (peace be
upon him) and said, 'O son of the prophet's daughter, how is your
morning?' He answered: Truly, I am grieved and my heart is engaged.

I asked, 'What made you grief and what engaged your heart? He (peace be
upon him) answered: O Athawri, he whose heart is occupied by the purity
of the decency of God's religion will surely be distracted from
everything. O Athawri, what is the world? What is its reality? Is it
more than a meal that you had, a dress that you put on, or a pack animal
that you rode? The believers do not trust the world and always expect
the imminent coming of the world to come. This world is the place of the
fated lapse while the world to come is the place of the eternal
settlement. The people of this world are the people of inadvertence. The
God-fearing ones are the people of the lightest burden and the most
supportive. When you are oblivious, they remind you and when they remind
you, they lead you to knowledge. You should regard this world as a
lodging that you are temporary taking and you will sooner or later leave
it, or as a fortune that you got in dreams, but when you woke up you
found nothing of it in your hands. It often happens that the matters for
which the desirous have often longed would distress them. It also
happens that the neglectors of matters will find happiness with them
when they have them effortlessly.

165. The Imam (peace be upon him) was asked about the evidence on the
existence of the One God. He answered: The evidence is the need of the
creatures to Him.

166. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: You will not be regarded
as (true) believers before you see the misfortunes as graces and the
luxury as disaster.

167. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The possession of four
thousand dirhams is fortune. The possession of twelve thousand dirhams
is treasuring up. Twenty thousand dirhams cannot be amassed by legal
ways. The possessor of thirty thousand dirhams will surely be suffering
perdition. The possessors of one hundred thousand dirhams are definitely
not reckoned with our adherents -Shia-.

168. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The signs of the accuracy
of a Muslim's conviction is to avoid pleasing people by means that
enrage God, thanking them for receiving God's sustenance, and blaming
them for matters that God has stopped. The earnings of the Muslims
cannot be driven into them due to somebody's acquisitiveness and cannot
be stopped due to somebody's refutation. If you try to escape getting
your earnings as same as you escape from death, it will surely catch up
with you as same as death when it will unquestionably catch up with
you.

169. Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Among our adherents -Shia-
are those whose voices do not exceed their hearing and whose detestation
does not exceed their bodies . They avoid praising us declaratorily,
regarding those who hate us, disputing with our supporters, and sitting
with those who revile at us.

Mihzam asked: "What about those who claim being Shia?" The Imam (peace
be upon him) answered: They will be distinguished, discriminated, and
inflicted by misfortunes. In few years, they will be perishing,
suffering plague, which will kill them, and encountering disagreements
that will scatter them. Our true adherents do not bark like dogs, covet
like craws, or beg even if they starve. Someone asked: "Where can I find
such adherents?" The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: You will find
them living in the outskirts. Their living is hardly sufficient. Their
dwellings are roving. When they are present, they are not recognized.
When they are absent, they are not missed. When they are ailed, nobody
visit them. When they betroth, nobody agree to them. When they noticed
an evil, they show displeasure. When the ignorant dispute with them,
they say, 'salaam' (or use nice wording with them). When the needy seek
their support, they treat mercifully. When death comes near to them,
they do not show grief. Although they live in different countries, their
hearts will not be different.

170. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: He who desires for
enjoying a long age should do things precisely. He who desires for
having his burdens -sins- lightened should put the screen of pudency. He
who desires for being praised and estimated should hide his beliefs.

171. Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: The best deeds of the
servants are three: they are to treat the believers fairly, to console
the friends, and to mention God in every situation. Some asked: "What is
the meaning of mentioning God in every situation?" The Imam (peace be
upon him) answered: This means to mention God when you want to commit a
sin so that He will prevent you from committing it.

172. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Hamza -A symbol in the
Arabic script representing the glottal stop- is an addition in the Quran
.

173. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Beware of joking, because
it causes rancor and drives into malice. Joking is the lesser
revilement.

174. Al-Hasan bin Rashid reported: Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him)
said: When a misfortune inflicts you, you should not complain about it
to the embracers of other sects. You should complain about it to your
brothers. You will certainly gain one of four: you will either find a
solution, get a financial help, win a responded supplication, or have a
counsel of wisdom. 175. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Do not
roam in marts frequently. Do not buy the minute things yourself. It is
abominable for the religious and the highborn to buy the minute things
themselves except in three states: buying the real estates, the slaves,
and the camels.

176. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Do not discuss matters
that do not concern you. Leave discussing most of the matters that
concern you until you find the appropriate time. It often happens that
the rightful discusser of a matter that concerns him will be exhausted
because he uses improper time. Do not dispute anyone; whether foolish or
clement. The clement overcomes you and the ignorant embarrass you.
Mention your absent friends in the same way you like him to mention you
when you are absent. This is the true action. When you act, you should
be certain that you will be rewarded for good deeds and punished for
evildoings.

177. Younus related: Before Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) I said:
"My loyalty to you -the Prophet's family- and recognition of your rights
are most favorable to me than this world with all of its insides." I
noticed the Imam was enraged. After a while, he (peace be upon him)
said: "O Younus, you have evaluated us in an improper measurement. What
is the world and what are its insides? It is no more than relief of a
trouble or screening of a defect. By loyalty to us, you are gaining the
endless life.

178. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: O adherents of Mohammed's
family, for those who do not possess themselves in rage, those who do
not respect the companionship and association and compromise of their
companions and associates and parties, and those who do not oppose
others in a peaceful way, all these are not belonging to us. O adherents
of Mohammed's family, exert all your efforts in fearing God. All might
and power belong to God.

179. Abdul-A'la reported: Abu Abdillah (peace be upon him) asked me
whether I had been associating the people of Medina. I answered
affirmatively. He told me to inform him of their news. I told that once
I was sitting among people of Medina when they were talking about
openhandedness. A man, named Abu Dukein, spoke, 'It is surely Ja'far
except that he is like this.' He then closed his hand. As he listened to
this story, the Imam (peace be upon him) commented: Woe to Abu Dukein!
His like is the feather; the wind flights it whenever it blows.

After a pause, he (peace be upon him) added: The Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said: "Any favor is charity. The best alms is that
which does not influence one's expenditure of his family members. Begin,
when you give alms, with those whose provisions are obligatory upon you.
The hand of the giver is better than the hand of the receiver. God does
not censure for the minimum sustenance." Do you think that God is
ungenerous or there is something more generous than Him? The true
generous and master is that who carries out God's rights correctly. He
who gains money illegally and spends it unrightfully is not generous.
Most surely, I desire for meeting God without taking anything that is
illicit for me. I have fulfilled the rights of God entirely. I passed no
single night without defraying God's rights in my fortune.

180. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Suckling after weaning is
void. Continuous fasting is void. Orphanage after maturity is void.
Keeping silent a day up to night is void. Migration after the conquest
of Mecca is void. Migration to the non-Muslim countries (after living in
a Muslim country) is void. Divorcement before marriage is void.
Manumission before slavery is void. The oath of sons, slaves, and wives
regarding their fathers, masters, and husbands is void. Vow of an act of
disobedience (to God) is void. Oath of rupturing relations is void.

181. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: No one can attain good
livelihood -even if he is so lucky- without passing through misfortunes.
Days will usurp the opportunities of those who waste today's opportunity
due to their expectation of tomorrow's opportunities. Days' custom is
the usurpation of opportunities and the habit of time is wasting them.

182. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Doing favors is the tax of
graces, intercession is the tax of the power, diseases are the tax of
bodies, and forgiveness is the tax of success. Everything whose tax is
defrayed will be guarded against loss.

183. In misfortunes, Imam as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) used to say: All
praise is due to Allah Who did not make my misfortune in my religious
affairs. All praise is due to Allah Who could, if He willed, make my
misfortune more catastrophic than what it is now. All praise is due to
Allah for the matter that He willed to be, and it was as He willed.

184. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: God says: For him who
saves a confused individual, I will consider him as thankful and will
lodge him in My Paradise.

185. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: If the world advances to
some people, it will garb them with the others' charms. If it leaves
some people, it usurps their own charms.

186. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: Daughters are advantages
and sons are graces. You will be rewarded for the advantages and asked
about the graces.


