Maxims of Imam Al-kadhim
========================

The following maxims and words of wisdom are related to the honest Imam
Abu Ibrahim (or Abul-Hasan) Musa bin Ja'far Al-Kadhim (peace be upon
him) Imam Al-Kadhim's Commandment for Husham and the Depiction of the
Mind God the Elevated portends good to the people of reason and
understanding in His Book. He says: Give the glad news to those of Our
servants who listen to the words and only follow the best ones. Tell
them that they are those whom God has guided. They are the people of
understanding.

O Husham bin Al-Hakam, God the Majestic has certainly submitted His
arguments to people perfectly through minds, explained everything
completely to them, and led people to His godhead through the guides. He
says: Your Lord is the only Lord. There is no God but He, the Beneficent
and Merciful. The creation of the heavens and the earth, the alternation
of nights and days, the ships that sail in the sea for the benefit of
the people, the water that God sends from the sky to revive the dead
earth where He has scattered all kinds of animals, the winds of all
directions, and the clouds rendered for service between the sky and the
earth are all evidence (of His existence) for those who use their
reason. O Husaham, God the Majestic provides the people's having a
Manager as the evidence on the acknowledgement of Him. He says: God has
made the day and the night, the sun and the moon, and all the stars
subservient to you by His command. In this there is evidence of the
truth for people of understanding.

God says: Ha Mim. I swear by the illustrious Book. We have made it an
Arabic reading text so that perhaps you may understand. God also says:
Also, of the evidence of His existence are His showing you lightening
which gives you fear and hope and His sending water down from the sky,
which revives the earth after its death. In this there is evidence (of
the truth) for the people of understanding. O Husham, God then preaches
to the people of reason and makes them desirous to the world to come. He
says: The worldly life is but useless amusement and sport (compared to)
the life hereafter, which is far better and is only for the pious. Will
you not then understand?

God also says: Whatever you (people) have been given are only the means
for enjoyment and beauty of the worldly life, but the means of enjoyment
(which you will receive from God) in the life to come will be better and
everlasting. Will you then not take heed? O Husham, God then warns the
unintelligent against His chastisement. He the Majestic says: Then We
totally destroyed the others. You pass by (their ruined town) in the
morning and at night. Will you then not understand? O Husham, God then
expounds that mind is always favoring knowledge. He says: These are
parables, which We tell to human being, but only the learned ones
understand them. O Husham, God then dispraises those who are incapable
of understanding. He says: When some people are asked to follow the
revelations of God, they say, "We would rather follow what our fathers
have followed," even though their fathers had no understanding and could
not find the true guidance.

God says: The wickedest beasts in the sight of God are the deaf and the
dumb who have no understanding. God says: If you ask them, "Who has
created the heavens and the earth," they will certainly say, "God has
created them." Say, "It is only God who deserves all praise, but most of
them do not know. God then dispraises the majority. He says: Most of the
people in the land will lead you away from God's guidance if you follow
them. …But many of them are ignorant. Hence, most of them have no
feeling.

O Husham, God then praises minority. He says: Very few of My servants
are grateful. … Except for the righteously striving believers who are
very few. No one believed in him, except a few. O Husham, God then
mentions the people of the reasonable understanding in the best way of
praise and describes them in the best wording. He says: God gives wisdom
to anyone whom He wants. Whoever is given wisdom, certainly, has
received much good. Only people of reason can grasp this. God also says:
This is a reminder for everyone who has a heart. 'Heart' in the previous
Verse stands for the capability of understanding. God also says: We gave
wisdom to Luqman.

'Wisdom' stands for understandability and intelligence.

O Husham, Luqman said to his son: "Show modesty before the right and
you will be the most reasonable. O son, this world is a deep ocean in
which many people have sunk. God-fearing should be your ship in this
ocean, faith the cargo, depending upon God its sail, reason its captain,
knowledge its guide, and patience the anchor." O Husham, everything has
its evidence. The evidence of being intelligent is pondering (over
things) and the evidence on pondering is silence. Likewise, everything
has its pack animal, and modesty is the pack animal of the intelligent.
It is sufficient ignorant to ride on that which you are told not to
ride. O Husham, if people tell that you have a pearl in your hand while
you are sure it is a nut, not pearl, this should not advantage you. If
people tell that you have a nut in the hand while you are sure it is a
pearl, not nut, this also should not harm you. O Husham, the main reason
beyond God's sending prophets and apostles is that people will
understand the commandments of God and His apostles. The best responsive
people will be the most understanding, the most knowledgeable of God's
commandments will be the most intelligent, and the most intelligent then
will be the most high-ranking in this world and the world to come.

O Husham, for every servant (of God), there is an angel invested with
full power over him. Whenever that servant shows modesty for the sake of
God, the angel will elevate him, and whenever he shows arrogance, the
angel will humiliate him. O Husham, God has two arguments against
people-one is explicit and the other is implicit. The explicit arguments
of God are the apostles, prophets, and imams. The implicit arguments are
the minds.

O Husham, the true intelligent is he whose legal-gotten provisions do
not divert him from thanking God and whose illegal-gotten provisions do
not divert him from being tolerant. O Husham, as for those who
extinguish the illumination of thinking with the long expectations,
erase the novels of wisdom with the curious wording, and extinguish the
lights of learning with the personal whims, they will back their whims
to ruin their brains. Those who ruin their minds will surely devastate
their worldly and religious affairs.

O Husham, how come do you expect that God will accept your deeds while
you are involving your mind with matters that are away from God's
commandments and you are complying with your whims and letting them
overcome your mind?

O Husham, the steadfastness against seclusions is a proof on willpower.
He who understands the commandments of God, the Blessed the Exalted,
will surely withdraw from the people of the worldly pleasures. He will
also be desirous for that which God has promised and will regard God as
the sociable in seclusion, the companion in loneliness, the fortune in
poverty, and the supporter instead of the clan. O Husham, the creatures
have been formed for obeying God. No safety is obtained without
obedience. The course of obedience is knowledgeability and the course of
knowledgeability is learning. Learning is possible through mind. There
should be a godly scholar who is the source of knowledge. Such scholars
can be recognized through the mind.

O Husham, the few deeds of the intelligent will be accepted and
doubled, while the many deeds of the followers of passions and the
ignorant will be rejected. O Husham, the true intelligent is that who
agrees to have minimum worldly needs with wisdom. He does not agree to
have little wisdom with all of the worldly pleasures. Therefore, his
trade has been profitable. O Husham, if you think it is fortunate for
you to have only what suffices you then you will be sufficed with the
least needs of this world. If you think it is not sufficient for you to
have the minimum needs of this world then all the worldly pleasures will
not suffice you. O Husham, the intelligent have left the pleasures of
this world. How is it then for the sins? The abstinence from the worldly
surplus pleasures is recommendable while the desistance from committing
sins is obligatory.

O Husham, the intelligent have abstained from the worldly pleasures and
desired for the world to come because they have known that world, as
well as the world to come, is demanding and demanded . The world will
surely trace the seeker of the world to come to give him his provisions
perfectly. The world to come will trace the seeker of the worldly
pleasures when death overcomes him to deprive him of the pleasures of
this world and the world to come.

O Husham, as for those who desire for being rich without fortune,
having peace of mind against envy, and enjoying safety of the religion,
they are advised to beseech to God imploringly for granting them perfect
intelligence, for the intelligent will surely satisfy themselves with
only what is sufficient for them. Consequently, he who satisfies himself
with only what is sufficient for him will be surely rich. Those who do
not satisfy themselves with what is sufficient for them will never
obtain richness.

O Husham, as describing the manners of virtuous people, God the
Majestic mentions that they are used to saying:

Lord, do not cause our hearts to deviate from Your guidance, and grant
us mercy. You are the Most Awarding One. This is because they realized
that hearts might be deviated or might regain their blindness and
ruination. He who does not understand God's commandments will not fear
Him. Similarly, he who does not understand God's commandments will not
have a mind that is founded on constant knowledge that he considers and
finds its factuality. Except those whose words and implicit beliefs
agree with their deeds and appearances, no one can enjoy the previous
characters. God has referred to the implicit affairs of the mind only
through indicative appearances. O Husham, Amirul Muminin used to say:
"The most favorable way of worshipping God is the intelligentness" .
Mind is not perfect for a man unless he enjoys many qualities: he should
save people from his atheism and evil and make them expect his reason
and good. His wealth should be offered and he should avoid useless
wording. His food should be his share from the worldly pleasures. He
should never stop seeking knowledge. He should prefer humility and
modesty with God to credit and honor with others. He should regard any
favor that he does as little and see all people better than him and he
is the most vicious among them. The enjoyment of such qualities is
surely the perfection of intelligence and the perfection of
personality.

O Husham, the deeds of the truthful will be purified, the provisions of
the well-meaning will be increased, and the age of those how treat their
friends and folks charitably will be elongated. O Husham, do not speak
wording of wisdom before the ignorant so that you will not wrong it. Do
not prevent the wise from receiving the wisdom lest you will wrong
them.

O Husham, as they left wisdom for you, you should leave the worldly
pleasures for them. O Husham, those who lack personality are surely
lacking the religion and those who are unintelligent are surely lacking
personality. The most high-ranking people are those who disregard the
worldly pleasures completely. Paradise is the only price of your bodies;
do not sell them with anything other than Paradise. O Husham, Amirul
Muminin (peace be upon him) used to say: "No one should sit in the
forefront of a session except those who can answer when they are
questioned, speak when others cannot, and own the most successful
opinion. He who does not enjoy these three characters and allow himself
to sit in the forefront of a session is surely idiot. Al-Hasan bin Ali
(peace be upon him) used to say: 'You should seek needs only from their
proper people.' 'O son of the Messenger of God,' some asked him, 'Who
are the proper people of needs?' He (peace be upon him) answered: They
are those whom God mentions in His Book and says about them: Only the
people of reason take heed. They are the owners of mind. Ali bin
Al-Hussein (peace be upon him) used to say:

To sit with the virtuous will invite to virtue, to sit with the
scholars will increase the mind, the obedience to the just rulers is the
perfection of honor, the investment of the wealth is the perfection of
personality, to guide the seeker of counsel is fulfillment of the rights
of favors, and the desistance from harm is a sign of the perfection of
mind. It will, sooner or later, achieve physical relaxation. O Husham,
the intelligent should not talk to the individuals that they anticipate
they will belie him, ask from individuals that they anticipate they will
not give, promise of things that they cannot do, hope for things that
harm them, or take the initiative in doing what they anticipate they
will not be able to accomplish.

Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) used to say to his companions:

I command you to fear God in secret and in public, be fair in both
states of satisfaction and rage, earn provisions in richness and
poverty, regard them who ruptured their relations with you, pardon them
who oppressed you, and treat them who ignored you kindly. All your
sights should be learning lessons, all your silence should be pondering
over things, all your wordings should be mention of God, and all your
nature should be generosity, for no stingy will be in Paradise and no
generous will be in Hell. O Husham, God will compassionate them who feel
properly embarrassed from Him by keeping the head with what it contains
(like the eye, the ear, and the tongue) and the abdomen with what is in
it, retain death and misfortune, and realize that Paradise is surrounded
by misfortunes and Hell is surrounded by the appetites. O Husham, for
those who abstain from engaging themselves in people's honors, God will
protect them from slipping on the Day of Resurrection. For those who
save people from (the results of) their rage, God will save them from
His wrath on the Day of Resurrection. O Husham, the true intelligent
should never tell lies even if it accords his whim. O Husham, in the
wisp of the Prophet's sword, there is written: The most insolent of
people is that who beats other than the one who beat him and kill other
than the one who killed him. He who votes for other than his true
masters is disbelieving in what God has revealed to His Prophet Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family). As for those who bring a heresiarch
matter or shelter an originator of a heresy, God will not accept their
remuneration or apology on the Day of Resurrection. O Husham, after the
acknowledgement of God, the best acts of the offertory to God are the
prayers, piety to the parents, and evasion of envy, self-conceit, and
pride.

O Husham, get ready for your coming days and prepare the answers for
them. You will be inevitably judged and interrogated. Learn lessons from
this world and its people. This life is surely long and short. You
should act as if you can see the rewards of your acts in your hands, so
that you will be urged acting so more importunately. Understand God's
commandments and learn from the changeability of this world and its
manners. The coming days of this world are certainly as same as those
which passed away; therefore, you should take examples from these days.
Ali bin Al-Hussein (peace be upon him) used to say:

All things that are under the sunlight in the east and west, in oceans
and lands, and plains and mountains; all these are just like a shadow
for the true disciples of God and the people of the acknowledgement of
Him. Is there no free man who will leave this valueless world to its
people? Paradise is the only price of your bodies; hence, you should
avoid selling them with any other price. He who satisfies themselves
with the worldly pleasures is surely satisfying himself with the
worthless.

O Husham, all people look at the stars, but no one can realize their
ways and places except those who have full acquaintance with astronomy.
In like fashion, you all study wisdom, but no one can benefit by it
except those who apply it practically. O Husham, the Christ (peace be
upon him) said to his disciples: O bad servants, the height of a palm
tree terrifies you as you remember its thorns and the difficulty of
climbing it, but you forget its good fruits and benefits. The same thing
is said about the world. As you remember the supplies of the acts of the
world to come, you remember its long time and forget the bliss,
illumination, and fruits that you will obtain there. O bad servants! To
find the sweetest taste of wheat, you should first cull its grains,
clean, and mill them properly. The same thing is said about faith. To
find the best taste of faith and to benefit by its results, you should
first have it as sincere and perfect as possible.

Truly I say to you: If you have found a torch the fuel of which is tar,
in a gloomy night, you will surely seek its light disregarding its
malodor. In a like manner, you should receive the wisdom from anybody
with whom you find it, disregarding the scope of his desire for it.
Truly I say to you, O slaves of this world! You will not attain the
honor of the world to come unless you abstain from whatever you desire.
Never postpone repentance to tomorrow. Before tomorrow, there is a day
and a night during which God's act is coming and going. Truly I say to
you: Those who are not indebted are surely less grievous than the
indebted even if they defray their debts properly. In the same way,
those who avoid committing sins are more relaxing and less grievous than
the committers of sins even if they purely repent and return to God. The
insignificant sins are the traps of the Shaitan who persuades you to
disregard such sins until they are amassed and surround you. Truly I say
to you: In wisdom, people are of two kinds; one is that who says the
wisdom utterly and applies it to his deeds, and the other is that who
says it utterly but wastes it through his evildoings. How difference
between the two! Blessed are the scholars by deeds. Woe to the scholars
by words.

O bad servants! Betake the mosques of your Lord as prisons of your
bodies and foreheads. Make your hearts the residences of God-fearing. Do
not make them the shelters of lusts. The most intolerant against
misfortunes will be certainly the fondest of the worldly pleasures, and
the most tolerant is the most abstinent. O bad slaves! Do not behave
like the swift gledes, the sly foxes, the perfidious wolves, or the wild
lions with their preys. Your conducts with people are in this form. You
hurry to some, cheat others, and betray others. Truly I say to you: It
is useless to have a sound physique while the interior is corrupted.
Hence, your sound bodies should not admire you when your hearts are
tainted. It is also useless to purify your skins when your hearts are
dirty. Do not be like sieves that let the good flour pass and hold the
bran. Likewise, you should not speak of wisdom while treason is filling
in your hearts.

O slaves of this world! Your like is the lamp when it gives light to
others and burns itself. O sons of Israel! Compete with each other in
attending the scholars' sessions even if you will have to kneel. God
will surely enliven the dead hearts by the illumination of wisdom like
the rainfall when it enlivens the derelict lands. O Husham, the
following is written in the Bible: Blessed be those who treat each other
mercifully, for they will be treated mercifully on the Day of
Resurrection. Blessed be the makers of peace between people, for they
will be exclusively favored on the Day of Resurrection. Blessed be the
pure-hearted, for they will be the pious on the Day of Resurrection.
Blessed be the modest in this world, for they will be scaling the
pulpits of majesty on the Day of Resurrection. O Husham, fewness of
wording is a great wisdom. You should keep silent, for it is a good
charity, a little burden, and a lightness of the sins. Fortify the door
of self-possession because patience is the door of self-possession. God
the Majestic surely hates those who laugh motivelessly and those who
walk aimlessly. The rulers should be acting like the shepherds whose
eyes are not turned away from their herd. They also should not treat
their subjects arrogantly. Be ashamed of God in secrets in the same way
you feel ashamed from people in public. You should know that the wording
of wisdom is the believers' lost. Adhere to the knowledge before it is
removed. The removal of knowledge is the absence of its people. O
Husham, learn whatever you ignore and teach the ignorant your knowledge.
Respect the scholars for their knowledge and avoid disputing with them,
and disrespect the ignorant for their ignorance and do not dismiss them.
You should approximate and teach them.

O Husham, the favors that you do not thank God for them are as same as
the sins for which you will be punished. Amirul Muminin (peace be upon
him) said: There are the slaves of God whose hearts are broken due to
fearing Him. Hence, they keep silent while they are eloquent and
intelligent. They compete with each other on offering the pure deeds to
God. They do not content with their many deeds and do not accept for
themselves the few deeds. They see themselves as vicious while they are
good and virtuous. O Husham, pudency is a part of faith and faith is a
part of Paradise while obscenity is a part of aversion and aversion is
in Hell. O Husham, speakers are one of three: winning, safe, or
perishing. The winning speakers are those who mention God. The safe
speakers are those who keep silent. The perishing speakers are those who
are engaged in bad wording. God has certainly forbidden Paradise from
including the impudent speakers of bad wording who do not care for what
they say and what is said about them.

Abu Tharr (God please him) used to say:

O seeker of knowledge, the tongue is the key to both good and evil. You
should seal your mouth as you seal your gold and currencies. O Husham,
the worst servants (of God) are those who are two-faced and two-tongued.
They are those who praise their friends when they meet them and backbite
them when they are absent. They envy their friends who obtain graces and
disappoint them when they are suffering a misfortune. Charity is the
foremost in rewarding and oppression is the foremost in punishment. The
most vicious slaves of God are those whom you hate to sit with for their
obscenity. Except the harvest of the tongues, nothing overturns people
on their noses in Hell. To leave what does not concern you is a sign of
the proper Islam -submission to God-. O Husham, you will not be true
believer unless to are fearful (of God's punishment) and hopeful (for
God's reward). You will not be true fearful and true hopeful unless you
avoid what you fear and work for what you hope. O Husham, God the
Majestic says: I swear by My majesty, glory, might, potency,
magnificence, and elevation, for the servants who prefer My biddings to
their biddings, I will install opulence in their minds, make the world
to come their concern, take the charge of saving their livelihood, make
their provisions in the heavens and the earth, and guarantee their
shares of profits in every transaction." O Husham, anger is the key to
every evil. The most perfect faithful believers are the most
well-mannered. If possible, you should associate only with those whom
you have done favors.

O Husham, lenience is felicity and clumsiness is evil portent.
Lenience, charity, and well mannerism boom the lodgings and increase the
provisions. O Husham, God says: Can any thing else be a response to a
favor but a favor? This holy saying is applicable to the believers and
the disbelievers and the charitable and the lecherous. He whom has been
done a favor should reward for it. To do favor to that who did you favor
is not a suitable reward, because he will have the merit of commencing
with doing the favor before you. O Husham, the like of this world is the
snake-it is soft to the touch but bearing poison in the interior. The
intelligent men fear the snake while the boys hurry to take it by the
hands.

O Husham, be tolerant in the acts of obedience to God and be steadfast
against the acts of disobedience to Him. This world is no more than an
hour. You will not find the pleasures of what has passed away and you
will not be able to recognize what is coming. Be patient in that hour
and you will attain bliss. O Husham, the like of this world is the
seawater-it leads the thirsty to more thirst until it kills him.

O Husham, beware of arrogance. He who feels arrogant, even if as small
as a grain of mustard seed, in the heart will not see Paradise. Pride is
God's dress and God will surely overturn those who try to take off His
dress on the faces in Hell.

O Husham, he who does not settle an account with himself every day, so
that he would seek more of the good deeds and seek God's forgiveness and
acceptance of repentance for the bad deeds, is not one of us.

O Husham, the world came to the Christ (peace be upon him) in the form
of a blue lady. He asked her, 'How many men did you marry?' 'Many,'
answered the world. 'Did they all divorce you?' asked the Christ. 'No,'
she replied, 'I killed all of them.' the Christ said, 'Woe to the rest
of your husbands. Why do they not learn lessons from the past ones?'

O Husham, the light of the body is in the eyes. If the sight is
luminous, the whole body will be bright. The light of the spirit is in
the brain. If the servant is intelligent, he will be having
acknowledgement of his Lord. If he has acknowledgement of his Lord, he
will see his religion obviously. If he ignores the affairs of his Lord,
he will be having no religion. Like the body that does not live without
a living soul, the religion does not live without the true intendment.
The true intendment is proved through mind only. O Husham, plants grow
in plain, not rocky, lands. In the same way, wisdom will grow in the
hearts of the modest, not the arrogant, because God has made modesty the
instrument of the mind and made arrogance the instrument of ignorance.
Do you not notice that he who raises the head to the ceiling will have
his head broken? Likewise, he who hands down will enjoy the shades and
the protection of the ceiling. Similarly, God will disgrace those who do
not behave humbly to Him and will exalt those who humble themselves for
Him. O Husham, how ugly poverty after richness is! How ugly the
commitment of sins after religiousness is! Moreover, to leave the
adoration of God after worship is uglier than the previous.

O Husham, except for either a heedful listener or a speaker of
knowledge, life is surely worthless.

O Husham, God has not distributed among the servant anything better
than intelligence. The sleep of the intelligent is preferred to the
staying up of the ignorant. God specified intelligence as a
qualification of the prophets so that their minds will be preferred to
all of the efforts of the diligent ones together. A servant will not
fulfill any of God's rights before he understands it. O Husham, the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said:

You should approach the silent believer, because he will surely provide
you with wisdom. The faithful believer should talk very little and act
very much. The hypocrite talks very much and acts very little.

O Husham, God the Exalted revealed to David the prophet (peace be upon
him):

Ask My servants not to make between them and Me scholars that are
seduced by the worldly pleasures. They will surely preclude the servants
from mentioning Me and block the way to My adoration and supplication.
Such scholars are the bandits of My servants. The least thing that I
will do to them is that I will take the charm of My adoration and
supplication from their hearts. O Husham, the angels of the heavens and
the angels of the earth will curse those who feel self-conceit. He who
treats his friends arrogantly and haughtily is certainly opposing God.
He who claims falsely is dragging himself away from his good. O Husham,
God the Exalted revealed to David the prophet (peace be upon him):

O David, warn and advise your companions against the fondness of
passions. The hearts of those who are fond of passions are certainly
screened from Me. O Husham, beware of showing pride to my disciples and
using your knowledge against them lest, God will hate you and, then,
neither your world nor will your world to come stead you. Regard this
world as a temporary lodging that you are waiting for leaving it. O
Husham, to sit to the religious is the honor of this world and the world
to come and to counsel with the intelligent and the well-wishers is good
omen, blessing, rationality, and success from God. Beware of opposing
the advise of the intelligent and the well-wishers so as to avoid
perdition. O Husham, beware of associating with everybody except the
intelligent and the trustful. You should be friendly with these two
persons only. You should escape the others like escaping from beasts.
The intelligent should be too ashamed from God to associate others in
the intent of his deed, because God is the only endower of the graces.
If you encounter two matters that you ignore which of them is the most
correct and acceptable, you should leave the matter that is more
favorable to the whim. The very much rightness lies in opposing the
whims. Beware of challenging the wisdom and giving it to the people of
ignorance.

Husham said: I asked the Imam (peace be upon him), 'What should I do if
I find somebody seeking wisdom but his mind is too narrow to receive
it?' He answered:

You should, in this case, deliver wisdom to him so kindly. If his heart
is too narrow to receive it, you should avoid seditious matters. You
should also avoid the answers of the arrogant. Knowledge will be
disgraced if it is given to the unconscious. Husham said: 'What should I
do if I cannot find a person who asks about wisdom properly?' said I to
the Imam (peace be upon him), and he answered: You should take the
opportunity of the ignorance of wisdom so as to be saved from the
seditious wording and the great sedition of the answer. You should also
realize that God did not elevate the modest people measure of their
modesty, but He elevated them according to the measure of His might and
glory. He did not secure the fearful according to their fear, but He
secured them out of His compassion and mercy. What do you think about
the Compassionate the Merciful Who curries favor with those who harm His
disciple? How will He then behave to those whom are hurt due to their
adherence to Him? What do you think about the Oft-Returning the Merciful
Who accepts the repentance of His enemies? How will He then behave to
those who accept Him and suffer people's enmity for His sake?

O Husham, the fear of the world to come will remove from the hearts of
those who favor the worldly pleasures. He who favors the worldly affairs
whenever he receives more knowledge will be remoter and remoter from God
and God will consequently intensify His wrath on him. O Husham, the true
intelligent is that who avoids what he cannot do. Most of correctitude
lies in opposing the passions. For those who depend upon hopes, their
deeds will be worse.

O Husham, if you consider the march of the death, you will be diverted
from hopes. O Husham, beware of greed. Never expect having what is in
people's hands. Deaden your expectation from the creatures. Certainly,
greed is the key to humiliation. It reduces the mind, kills the acts of
personality, soils the honors, and cancels knowledgeability. Abide by
adherence and depending upon God. Strive your whims so as to prevent
your essence from ruination. This is as obligatory as striving the
enemies. Husham said: I asked the Imam (peace be upon him) about the
kind of enemies whom should be striven before others. He answered: You
should begin with the nearest to you, the most inimical, the most
harmful, the most aggressive, and the most hidden despite his closeness
to you. It is Eblis who is instigating your enemies against you and the
source of the hearts' ill inspirations. You should regard him as the
most antagonistic enemy and you should be more tolerant in striving him
than him as he is trying to lead you to perdition. He is surely less
supported than you are and less harmful despite his great evil, provided
that you cling to God so as to be guided to a straight path. O Husham,
God is surely doing great favors to those whom He endows with a mind
that controls their whims, knowledge that controls their ignorance, and
opulence that controls their poverty.

O Husham, beware of this world and its people. People are four classes:
one is falling behind as he is embracing his whims, one is
self-conceited due to his knowledge and the more he learns, the more
arrogant he becomes. He towers up conceitedly before the less
knowledgeable due to his being more learned. One (of the four classes)
is ignorant worshipper who looks disgracefully to the less dutiful and
desires for being respected and reverenced. The fourth is heedful,
knowledgeable, and knowing, but he cannot drag people to the straight
path because he is either powerless or beaten. He is also grievous
because he cannot practice his knowledge. This one is the most ideal and
the most intelligent of people. O Husham, discern the mind and its
soldiers and the ignorance and its soldiers and you will be guided.

Husham said: I said, 'May God make me your sacrifice. We will not know
unless you instruct us. Hence, the Imam (peace be upon him) answered: O
Husham, the first thing of the mystical creatures that God created was
the mind. He was on the right side of the Divine Throne. As God asked
him to go, he went. As He asked him to come, he came. Hence, God the
Majestic said: I created you as great and preferred you to all of My
creatures. Then God created ignorance from the gloomy salty ocean and
asked it to go, and it went. But when God asked him to come, it refused.
Hence, God cursed it because it had behaved arrogantly.

God then arranged seventy-five soldiers for the mind. The ignorance,
seeing what God had given honorably to the mind, felt malicious and
said: O God, this is a creature as same as I, but you honored and
supported him while I, its opposite, am powerless. Support me with
soldiers like him. God the Exalted answered: Yes, I will, but if you
disobey Me, I will take your soldiers and you out of My mercy. As the
ignorance agreed to the condition, God gave it seventy-five soldiers.

Within the seventy-five soldiers of the mind was goodness, which is the
supporter of the mind. In the other side, God made evil as the supporter
of the ignorance. The soldiers of the mind and the ignorance are faith
and disbelieving, belief and unbelief, sincerity and hypocrisy, hope and
despair, justice and prejudice, satisfaction and displeasure, thanks and
ingratitude, moderation and greed, trust and acquisitiveness, compassion
and rudeness, knowledge and ignorance, chastity and profligacy,
abstinence and desirousness, lenience and clumsiness, self-respect and
taunt, modesty and arrogance, deliberation and rashness, composure and
imprudence, silence and chatter, submission and challenge, compliance
and defiance, pardon and malice, mercy and coarseness, conviction and
suspect, forbearance and bigotry, overlooking and revenge, opulence and
neediness, pondering and inadvertence, consciousness and oblivion,
relation and alienation, contentment and avidity, giving and
deprivation, amicability and enmity, loyalty and betrayal, obedience and
disobedience, succumbing and daring, affluence and scarcity,
understanding and idiocy, recognition and denial, humoring and
nastiness, purity and cheating, concealment and divulging, piety and
irreverence, factuality and falseness, favor and bad turn,
circumspection and publicizing, fairness and injury, God-fearing and
envy, cleanness and dirtiness, pudency and insolence, temperance and
excess, rest and fatigue, ease and difficulty, good health and ailment,
sufficiency and overindulgence, wisdom and capriciousness, sense of
worth and levity, pleasure and grief, repentance and insistence,
attention and negligence, supplication and disdain, activity and
laziness, delight and discontent, harmony and disagreement, and courtesy
and foolishness.

O Husham, these good attributes cannot come together in a personality
other than the personalities of the prophets, their successors, or
faithful believers who passed God's exam of faith. The other believers
should have some of the soldiers of the mind so that they will have a
perfect intelligence and get rid of the soldiers of ignorance. Only
then, they may catch the highest rank of the prophets and their
successors. God may lead you and us to His obedience.

**Imam Al-Kadhim's Words of Wisdom**

It was related that Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) had said:

The nafilas are the offertories of every believer to God. Hajj is the
jihad of every weak. Everything has its tax and the tax of the body is
the recommendable fasting. After the acknowledgement of God, the best
worship is expecting the Relief. He who supplicates to God before he
praises Him and blesses the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
is as same as throwing an arrow without the existence of a string. He
who is certain of the reward will give generously.

The moderate will never be needy. Moderation is the half of the
livelihood. Amicability is half of the intelligence. Very much care
drives into senility. Hastiness is the true clumsiness. Fewness of the
dependants is one of the two facilities.

To depress the parents is impiety to them. As for those who beat the
hand on the thigh or strike the hands together in misfortunes, their
rewards will be cancelled. No one will gain the reward of suffering a
misfortune unless he who forbears it and says: We are Allah's, and to
Him we will return . Favors are worthless unless they are done to the
highborn or the religious. God aids inasmuch as the need and endows with
steadfastness inasmuch as the misfortune. The graces will persist for
the moderate and the satisfied. The graces will be removed from the
immoderate and the exaggerative. The fulfillment of the trusts and
honesty bring earnings, while treachery and fabrication cause poverty
and hypocrisy. When God wills to punish a worm, He gives it two wings so
that it will fly and a bird will kill it. The believers' favors are
worthless unless they are disregarded, veiled, and provided as soon as
possible. He who disregards his favors is surely revering his friend to
whom he has done the favor, he who considers his favors is surely
disgracing his friend to whom he has done the favor, he who covers up
the favors that he does is surely honoring his deeds, and he who
fulfills his promises as soon as possible is surely giving pleasant
gifts.

**Imam Al-Kadhim's Wording to Harun ar-Rashid**

Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) visited Harun Ar-Rashid\* who had
intended to arrest him for accusations that were forged against the
Imam. Ar-Rashid gave the Imam (peace be upon him) a long roll that
contained many sayings that were falsely ascribed to Shiism. After he
had read the content, the Imam (peace be upon him) spoke: O Amirul
Muminin, we are the household who had to face fabricated lies. Our Lord
is forgiving and coverer. He does not accept to reveal the secrets of
His servants before the day when He will settle the account with them.
"The day on which property will not avail, nor sons. Except him who
comes to Allah with a heart free from evil."

My father told me that his father told him that Ali told that the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: "When two individuals
of the same family touch each other, their kinship will be stirred up
and them relax." Now, Amirul Muminin can cause our kinship to stir up by
shaking hands with me.

As soon as he heard these words, Ar-Rashid jumped from his seat and
extended his hand to the Imam (peace be upon him). Then he took him from
the right hand, embraced him, and asked him to sit to his right. He then
spoke, "I declare that you are honest, your father was honest, your
grandfather was honest, and the Messenger of God (peace be upon him and
his family) was honest. When you first visited me, I was the most
malicious and enraged with you because of what has been said to me about
you. But when you uttered your words and shook hand with me, I was
relieved and my rage was changed into satisfaction. After a while,
Ar-Rashid said to the Imam (peace be upon him), "I would like to ask you
why was Ali preceded to Al-Abbas in the matter of the heritage of the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), while Al-Abbas was the
Prophet's uncle and his father's brother. The Imam asked the caliph to
release him from answering this question. "No," insisted the caliph, "By
God, I will not allow you avoid answering this question. You should
answer it, now." Therefore, the Imam said, "If you will not free me from
answering this question, will you then guarantee my safety?" "Yes," said
Ar-Rashid, "I guarantee your safety."

The Imam (peace be upon him) spoke:

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) did not bequeath those
who did not migrate (to Medina) while they were able to migrate.
Al-Abbas, your father, believed but did not migrate, while Ali believed
and migrated. God says: The believers who did not leave their homes are
not your guardians until they too leave their homes. The color of
Harun's face changed. Hence, he asked, "Why are you not ascribed to Ali
your father, but ascribed to the Messenger of God (peace be upon him and
his family) who is your grandfather?"

The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: God ascribes Jesus to Abraham
the intimate (peace be upon them) from the side of his mother the Virgin
Mary -whom was never touched by any human being-. This is clear in God's
saying: We gave (Abraham) Isaac and Jacob. Both had received Our
guidance. Noah received Our guidance before Abraham and so did his
descendants: David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. Thus is the
reward for the righteous people. We also gave guidance to Zechariah,
John, Jesus, and Elias, who were all pious people.

God ascribes Jesus to Abraham from the side of his mother only. In the
same way, God ascribes David, Solomon, Job, Moses, and Aaron to Abraham
from the side of both their fathers and mothers so that God will give
Jesus an exclusive characteristic and an elevated standing for his
mother alone. This is in God's saying about Mary (peace be upon her):
"Behold," the angels told Mary, "God had chosen you, purified you, and
given you distinction over all women. God gave Mary distinction over all
women by the Christ who was born without the means of a father.
Likewise, our Lord chose Fatima (peace be upon her), purified her, and
gave her distinction over all women by Al-Hasan and Al-Hussein (peace be
upon them), the masters of the youth of Paradise.

Harun was confused by what he had heard. Therefore, he asked the Imam,
"How do you claim that an illegitimacy may occur on the part of women or
fathers to the man who does not settle the Khums?" The Imam (peace be
upon him and his family) said: Except you, no ruler, including Taim (Abu
Bakr), Edi (Omar), and the Umayyads at all asked such a question. No one
of my fathers was asked about such a question; therefore, do not cause
me to divulge it.

Harun threatened, "I will cancel my pledge of safety to you if I know
that you have divulged it." "I agree," said the Imam (peace be upon
him). Harun asked, "Numbers of the miscreants are increasing in Islam.
The miscreants whom are brought to us are ascribed to you. For you, the
Prophet's family, what is the miscreant?" The Imam (peace be upon him)
answered: The miscreants are everyone who rejects God and His Messenger.
They are those who oppose God and His Messenger. God says: You will not
find any people of faith in God and the Day of Judgment who would
establish friendship with those who oppose God and His Messenger, even
if it would be in the interest of their fathers, sons, brothers, and
kinsmen. God has established faith in their hearts and supported them by
a Spirit from Himself.

They are also the apostates who deviated from monotheism into atheism.
Harun asked the Imam about the first one who apostatized and became an
atheist. The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: The first one who
apostatized and became an atheist in the heavens was Eblis the cursed.
He showed arrogance and took pride in himself against Adam (peace be
upon him) the choice and confidant of God. The cursed said -as it is
mentioned in the Quran-: I am better than Adam, for You have created me
out of fire and Adam out of clay. Thus, he rejected the Lord's orders
and became atheist. His offspring inherited atheism from him. Harun
wondered whether Eblis has offspring. The Imam (peace be upon him)
answered: Eblis has offspring. Listen to God's saying:

When We told the angels to prostrate before Adam they all obeyed except
Eblis. He was a jinn and he sinned against the command of his Lord. Why
do you (people) obey him and his offspring instead of Me, even though
they are your enemies? How terrible will be the recompense that the
wrong doers will receive! I did not call (the unjust) to witness the
creation of the heavens and earth nor to witness their own creation nor
did I want to be helped by those who lead people astray.

They mislead the offspring of Adam through their false vanities and
lies. Meanwhile, they declare that there is no god but Allah. God
describes them in His following saying: If you ask them, "Who has
created the heavens and the earth," they will certainly say, "God has
created them." Say, "It is only God who deserves all praise, but most of
them do not know." This means that they declare so only with their
tongues because they used to say so as one of their customs. He who does
not believe, even if he declares with the tongue, will be suspicious,
envious, and resistant. The Arabs therefore used to say: "He who had no
knowledge of something will antagonize it, and he who cannot attain
something will dishonor and disbelieve in it." This is because he is
ignorant, not knowledgeable. Then Harun Ar-Rashid requested, "By the
right of your forefathers I beseech you, brief for us comprehensive
statements regarding what we have discussed." The Imam agreed. An
inkwell and papers were fetched. The Imam (peace be upon him)
recorded:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.

All the matters of the religions are gathered in four forms:

First, there is the unanimous matter. It is the consensus of the umma
on the necessary matters that they have to face. Second, there are the
generally accepted narrations. All the suspicious matters are advanced
to such narrations, and every result is extracted from them, for they
are the consensus of the umma. Third, there is the matter that may be
doubted or denied. Such a matter should be treated through providing
evidence, from the Book of God, provided that its interpretation is
unanimous, or evidence from the Prophet's tradition provided that it is
unanimously accepted. Fourth, there is the law that the intelligent
accede to its justice and neither the scholars nor the ordinary people
can suspect or deny it. These two matters relate to the question of
monotheism and whatever comes below and the question of the retaliation
of a scratching and whatever comes above. The previous has been the
matters to which the religious affairs are advanced. You should opt for
only what is proved evidently and should shun what is suspected or
obscure. Any of these three matters (the Book of God, the Prophet's
tradition, and the logical law) is the final authority to which God
refers in His saying:

Say, "Final authority belongs only to God. Had He wanted, He would have
given you all guidance. The final authority is attained by both the
ignorant through his ignorance and the knowledgeable through his
knowledge. This is because God is Just and He will never treat anybody
wrongly. He provides to His creatures attainable arguments and call them
to what they know, not ignore or deny. Harun Ar-Rashid offered gifts to
the Imam (peace be upon him)…

**Short Maxims of Imam Al-Kadhim**

1. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Anyone who acknowledges God
should not complain when his earnings are delayed and should not accuse
God of His acts.

2. As a man asked him about conviction, Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon
him) answered: The conviction is to depend upon God, submit to Him,
consent to His acts, and entrust Him with the affairs.

3. Abdullah bin Yahya said: Within the supplication that I wrote to
Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him), there was the sentence, 'Praise be
to God as much as the utmost of His knowledge.' The Imam answered my
missive saying: Do not say, 'the utmost of His knowledge,' because His
knowledge has no limits. You may say, 'the utmost of His
satisfaction.'

4. As a man asked him about the munificent, Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be
upon him) answered: Your question has two references. If you refer to
the created munificent, I can tell you that he is the one who fulfills
what God has imposed upon him, while the miserly is the one who
withholds what God has imposed upon him. If you refer to the
All-munificent God, I can tell you that He is the All-munificent whether
He gives or not. If He gives, He gives you what is not yours, and if He
does not give, He deprives you of what in not yours.

5. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said to one of his adherents:
Fear God and say the truth even if it will cause you to perish, for your
salvation lies in telling the truth. Fear God and leave the wrong even
if it will save you, for your perdition lies in telling the wrong.

6. As his agent swore he had not betrayed him, Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be
upon him) said to him: To betray me and waste my wealth are the same.
However, betrayal is more harmful for you.

7. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Beware of depriving anyone
in fields of obedience to God lest, you will lose two folds in fields of
disobedience to God. 8. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: The
believer is like the two pans of a balance - the more faith he enjoys
the more misfortunes he faces.

9. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said as he stopped near a grave:
It is quite proper to leave the first of a matter the end of which is
this (grave). It is also quite proper to fear the end of a thing the
first of which is this (grave).

10. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: He who speaks in the
Essence of God will perish, he who seeks power will perish, and he who
feels self-conceited will perish.

11. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: The supplies of this world
and the religion are difficult. Whenever you extend your hand towards
any source of the worldly supplies, you will found out that a sinful has
preceded you there. When you intend to obtain a source of the religious
supplies, you will not find anyone helping you.

12. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Four deeds are originated
from extreme solicitude. They are eating soil, crumbling the clay,
clipping the nails with the teeth, and biting the hair of the beard.
Looking at three things improves the sight. They are verdure, flowing
water, and handsome faces.

13. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Good neighborhood is not
abstinence from harm. It is to tolerate the harm (of the neighbors).

14. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Do not take liberties with
your friend. You should keep any quantity of respect among you lest you
will lose pudency.

15. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said to one of his sons: O son,
let not God see you committing an act of disobedience against which He
warned you, and let Him not miss you in an act of obedience to Him of
which He ordered you. Keep serious and do not convince yourself that you
are worshipping and obeying God perfectly, because no one can achieve
perfection in the fields of worshipping God. Beware of joking because it
extinguishes the illumination of your faith and disgraces you
personality. Beware of indolence and laziness because they both prevent
you from receiving your shares of the pleasures of this world and the
world to come.

16. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: When injustice
predominates over the right, it is unacceptable to expect good from
anybody before investigation.

17. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Kissing on the mouth is
not acceptable except from the wife and the little child.

18. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Try to divide your time
into four parts. The first part should be dedicated to (secret)
supplication to God, the second to seeking earnings, the third to
associating with the friends and the trusty people who show you your
defects and treat you sincerely, and the fourth to your legal pleasures.
Through this part, you can manage the other three parts. Do not think of
poverty and long age. He who thinks of poverty will be stingy and he who
thinks of long age will be acquisitive. Offer a share of the worldly
pleasures to yourselves by enjoying moderately the legal pleasures that
do not injure your personality. Make such pleasures help you fulfill
your religious duties perfectly. It is said that, "As for those who
neglect the legal worldly pleasures completely and adhere to the
religious duties or neglect the religious duties and adhere to the
worldly affairs, they are not from us.

19. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Learn the religious
question, for jurisprudence is the key of intelligence, the perfection
of worship, and the means to the high standings and the respectful
positions in this world and the world to come. The priority of the
knowledgeable over the worshipper is as same as the priority of the sun
over the stars. God will not accept the deeds of those who avoid
learning the religious questions.

20. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said to Ali bin Yaqttin: The
expiation of working with the (unjust) rulers is to treat the friends
with kindness.

21. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Whenever people perpetrate
unprecedented sins, God will inflict upon them unexpected misfortunes.

22. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: In the time of the just
ruler, you should thank and he will gain rewards. In the time of the
unjust ruler, you should tolerate and he will burden the punishment of
the sin.

23. Abu Hanifa related: After I had performed the hajj I went to Medina
to visit Abu Abdillah As-Sadiq (peace be upon him). I entered his house
and sat in the entrance waiting for his permission. After a while, a
male toddler went out. "O boy," I asked, "where should the stranger
excrete in your country?" The boy asked for a respite before he sat to a
wall and spoke: You should be away from riversides, places were fruits
fall, yards of mosques, and roadbeds. You should also hide against a
wall, lift up your dress, avoid turning the face or the back to the
kiblah, and then you can excrete anywhere.

I was highly admired by the wording of that boy. I therefore asked
about his name. "I am Musa bin Ja'far bin Mohammed bin Ali bin
Al-Hussein bin Ali bin Abi Talib," answered he. I then asked him about
the source of the acts of disobedience to God. He answered: The source
of any sin is unquestionably one of three: either the God, the God and
the servant, or the servant. If God is the source of sins -yet He is
not-, then it is improper for Him to punish the servants for what they
did not commit. If God and the servants are together the source of
sin -yet this is not accurate-, then it is improper for the stronger
partner to wrong the weak partner. If the servant is the source of the
sins -and this is quite accurate-, then the Lord may pardon out of His
generosity and liberty or punish for the commitment of such a sin.

After I had heard so, I left before I could meet Abu Abdillah since
that wording was sufficient for me.

24. Abu Ahmed Al-Khurasani asked Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him)
whether atheism preceded polytheism or the opposite. 'You have not been
accustomed to ask such questions,' answered the Imam, 'I do not know
that you intrude yourself in the theological discussions.' Abu Ahmed
confessed that it had been Husham bin Al-Hakam who ordered him to put
such a question before the Imam. The Imam, then, answered: Atheism
preceded polytheism. The foremost atheist was Eblis about whom God says:
He refused and he was proud, and he was one of the
unbelievers -atheists-.

Atheism is one thing while polytheism is not. Polytheism is to believe
in one (god) and associate others with him.

25. As he noticed two men reviling at each other, Imam Al-Kadhim (peace
be upon him) commented: The first person to revile is the more wrongful.
He should burden -the inconvenience- of his sin as well as the sin of
the other unless the other was the aggressor.

26. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: On the Day of
Resurrection, a caller will summon those whose rewards should be
presented by God individually. Except those who forgave and reformed
themselves, no one will attend.

27. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: The liberal well-mannered
ones are in the shelter of God Who will not abandon them until they
reside in Paradise. Prophets of God are all liberal. My father
incessantly commanded me to hold on liberality and noble manners until
he departed.

28. As-Sindi bin Shahek narrated: When Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon
him) was dying, I offered to enshroud him. He answered: We, the
Prophet's family, should cover the expenditure of our first pilgrimage,
the dowries of our women, and our coffins from our legal fortunes. 29.
Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said to Fadhl bin Younus: Convey the
good, say the good, and do not be yes-man.

"What is yes-man?" asked Fadhl, and the Imam instructed: Do not say, 'I
am with people,' or 'I am like others,' for the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said: "O people, they are only two ways - either
good or evil. Do not prefer the way of evil to that of good."

30. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) passed by an ugly villager,
greeted him, sat with him, talked with him for a considerable time, and
then asked him to settle his needs when he will be in need for him. Some
said, "O son of God's Messenger, how do you sit with this one and ask
him to settle your needs while he is in need for you?" The Imam (peace
be upon him) answered: He was one of God's servants, a brother in the
Book of God, and a neighbor in the lands of God. He and we enjoy the
same best father - Adam (peace be upon him) and the same best religion
that is Islam. Perhaps, our need will someday be in his hand and we will
have to sit modestly before him.

Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) then recited a poetic verse: We
regard even those who do not deserve our regard so that we will not be
friendless.

31. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Asking for -financial-
help is acceptable only in blood money that is imposed on an insolvent,
heavy debts, and extreme poverty.

32. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: The best kind of
almsgiving is to help the weak.

33. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: The astonishment of the
ignorant at the intelligent is greater than the astonishment of the
intelligent at the ignorant.

34. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: For the steadfast, the
misfortune is one, while it is two for the impatient.

35. Imam Al-Kadhim (peace be upon him) said: Only the sufferers of
injustice can realize its intensity.


