Maxims of Imam Ar-reza
======================

The following maxims are related to the gallant Imam Abul-Hasan Ali bin
Musa Ar-Reza (peace be upon him). Imam Ar-Reza's Answers to Al-Ma'mun in
relation to the comprehensives of the Sharia Al-Maumun (The Abbasid
caliph) sent Al-Fadhl bin Sahl Thurriyasatain, his vizier, to summon
Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him). When the Imam attended, the caliph
said, "I like you to summarize for me the legal and the illegal matters
in addition to the obligatory and the recommendable practices of Islam,
for you are certainly the argument of God against His creatures and the
core of knowledge." Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) agreed and asked
for an inkwell and a paper. He then asked Al-Fadhl to write down:

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful We are sufficed with
the confession that there is no god but Allah the One the absolute Who
did not have a wife or a son. He is self-Existent, All-hearing,
All-seeing, Almighty, All-existing, Everlasting, Light, All-knowing Who
is not ignorant, All-powerful Who is not incapable, All-sufficient Who
needs no one, and All-just Who does not wrong anyone. He created
everything. Nothing is like Him. There is no one match, opponent,
opposite, or equal to Him.

I declare that Mohammed is His servant, messenger, trusty, and choice
among the creatures. He is the master of the messengers, the seal of the
prophets, and the best in the worlds. There is no prophet after him and
there is no conversion or change to his religion. I declare that
everything with which Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) came
is the evident right. We believe in him as well as all the messengers,
prophets, and evidences of God that preceded him. We believe in his
truthful Book that "Falsehood can not reach it from any direction. It is
the revelation from the All-wise, Praiseworthy One." We also believe
that his Book is the prevalent over all the (heavenly) Books and that it
is all right from its beginning up to its end. We believe in its
decisive (Verses), allegorical, particular, general, promise, threat,
repealing, repealed, and news. No creature can ever bring its
equivalent.

We declare that the evidence and argument on the believers after the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), the manager of the Muslims'
affairs, the spokesman of the Quran, and the knowledgeable of its
rulings is his brother, successor, and trustee whose relation to him is
as same as Aaron's relation to Moses; Ali bin Abi Talib (peace be upon
him). He is the commander of the faithful believers, the imam of the
God-fearing, the leader of the white-forheaded honorables, the drone
(head) of the believers, and the best of the successors of the prophets.
After him come Al-Hasan and Al-Hussein (peace be upon them) successively
up to now. They are the Prophet's progeny, the most knowledgeable with
the Book (of God) and the Sunna, the fairest in issues, the most
favorable for leadership in every time, the firmest handle, the imams of
right guidance, and the argument against people of this world until God
seizes the earth and those living in it. He is surely the best of the
seizers.

We believe that anyone who opposes them (the Imams) is deviant,
misleading, and deserter of the right and the guidance. They (the Imams)
are the interpreters of the Quran and the spokespersons of the Prophet
with directness. He whoever dies before he acknowledges and follows them
by names is regarded as one of those who died before Islam.

Piety, chastity, honesty, goodness, diligence, keeping the deposit of
the pious and the sinful, lengthy prostration (to God), night worship,
avoidance of the forbidden acts, expectation of the Relief by means of
patience, good companionship, good neighborhood, doing favors
limitlessly, abstinence from injury, and treating the believers with
happy mien, advice, and mercy - all these are among the features of the
Imams' religion. The ritual ablution -as God instructed in His Book- is
washing the face and the hands and passing water over the head and the
feet. To do each action one time is the obligatory, and to do each
action twice is recommendable. Any addition is a rewardless sin.
Invalidators of the ablution are fart, urination, excretion, sleep, and
ceremonial impurity.

Anyone who passes water over the slippers (in the ritual ablution) is
opposing God, His messenger, and His Book. Besides, his ablution will be
invalid.

When Omar heard that Ali (peace be upon him) opposed people who used to
pass water over their slippers, he said to him, 'I saw the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) pass water over the slippers.' 'Was
it that before or after the revelation of Sura of Al-Ma'ida?' asked Ali
(peace be upon him). 'I do not know,' answered Omar. Then Ali (peace be
upon him) said, 'I am sure that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) did not pass water over the slippers since the revelation of
Sura of Al-Ma'ida.'

Bathing after the ceremonial impurity, wet dreams, and menstruation, in
addition to the bathing of those who wash the dead, are obligatory.
Friday bathing, the two eids bathing, bathing before arrival in Mecca
and Medina, bathing of the umrah, bathing of ihram, bathing of Arafa
Day, and bathings on firs, nineteenth, twenty-first, and twenty-third of
Ramadan - all these bathings are recommendable.

The obligatory prayers are as follows:

The Dhuhr Prayer is four rak'as, the Asr Prayer is four rak'as, the
Maghrib Prayer is three rak'as, the Esha' Prayer is four rak'as, and the
Fajr Prayer is two rak'as. These are seventeen obligatory rak'as. The
recommendable rak'as are thirty-four. Eight rak'as are performed before
the Dhuhr Prayer, eight are performed after it, four are performed after
the Maghrib Prayer, two (although considered as one) are
performed -while sitting- after the Esha' Prayer, and eight are
performed after midnight. Watr prayer is three rak'as followed by two.

The prayers should be performed as soon as their times fall. Every
single rak'a that is performed collectively is equal to two thousand
rak'as that are performed individually. Do not follow a sinful imam (of
a collective prayer). Follow -in the collective prayers- only those who
believe in the Wilaya (the Imamites ). Do not offer the prayers while
you are wearing skins of dead animals or beasts. Shortening the prayers
is valid after a traveler is four farsakhs away from his home country.
Four bareeds back and four forth. When prayers are shortened, fasting
should be broken. Qunut is in four prayers - the Dhuhr Prayer, the
Maghrib and Esha' Prayers, the Friday prayer, and the Asr Prayer. Qunuts
are performed before ruku' after qira'a.

The Funeral Prayer is five takbirs. It is empty of taslim because
taslim is performed only when there is ruku' and sujoud , and the
Funeral Prayer has no ruku' or sujoud. The graves should be squared, not
humped. Voices should be raised when 'bismillahir rahmanir rahim -in the
Name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful-' is recited with Sura of
Fatihah.

The obligatory zakat is five (silver) dirhams for each two hundred
dirhams. It is not obligatory in less than this quantity. For quantities
more than the previous, the zakat is one (golden) dirham for every forty
dirhams. It is not obligatory in less than forty dirhams. It is
obligatory only when a whole year lapses. It should be given only to the
Imamites. For the golden dinars, the obligatory zakat is half a dinar
for every twenty. The khums is paid only one time from the profits. The
obligatory zakat of wheat, barley, dates, raisins, and any grain the
quantity of which is five wasqs -a measurement- is one tenth provided
that it is irrigated by rainfall or a river. In case it is irrigated by
pails, the zakat then is half a tithe for both the insolvent and the
solvent. The zakat of the other grains is one or two handfuls. This is
because God does not impose on any soul a responsibility beyond its
ability and He does not overburden the servants. One wasq is sixty saas.
One saa is sixty rotls and four mudds. A mudd is two and quarter Iraqi
rotls. Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said: "It is nine Iraqi rotls
which is equal to six Medinian rotls." Zakat ul-Fitr is obligatory on
everybody apart from the age or the social class. It is half a saa of
wheat and one saa of dates and raisins. Because it is obligatory, it is
illicit to give the zakat ul-Fitr to other than the Imamites. Period of
menstruation is between ten and three days. The semi-menstruant should
perform the ritual bathing before she performs any prayer. The
menstruant leaves performing the prayers and does not settle the prayers
that she misses during her period of menstruation, but she should settle
the days of fast that she misses.

Fasting should be observed during month of Ramadan only when the new
moon is seen and should be stopped when the new moon (of the next month)
is seen. It is invalid to offer the Tarawih Prayer collectively. It is
recommendable to fast during three days every month - one day for every
ten days; a Thursday from the first ten, a Wednesday from the middle
ten, and a Thursday from the last ten -days of a month-. It is fine and
recommendable to fast during month of Shaban. The Messenger of God
(peace be upon him and his family) said: "Shaban is my month and Ramadan
is God's." It is acceptable to settle the missed fast of Ramadan in
different days. The hajj to the Holy House -of God- is obligatory upon
anyone who finds a way to it. 'Way' in this regard stands for supplies
and a riding animal -a means of transportation-. Except for people of
Mecca, any form of hajj except that of tamattu' is illict. It is also
illicit to opt for hajj of ifrad and hajj of qiran that the others
perform. Ihram is illicit before attaining the miqat. God says: Complete
the hajj and umrah in obedience to God.

It is illicit to immolate a castrate sheep because it is imperfect. It
is acceptable to immolate a sheep whose testicles are pressed between
two rocks so that it will lose libido.

Jihad is obligatory only under the leadership of a just imam. The
killed for defending their wealth, baggage, or themselves are martyrs.
It is illicit to kill any disbeliever in time of taqiyah, except the
murderers and the aggressors when safety is guaranteed. It is also
illicit to use the wealth of people, whether of other sects or not,
wrongly. Taqiyah is obligatory in its proper time -when it becomes
necessary-. Those who perjure out of taqiyah so as to save themselves
against harm are not to undergo the doctrinal provision.

Divorce is valid only when it is implemented according to the Islamic
laws that God the Majestic mentioned in His Book or the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) referred to in his Sunna. Any other form of
divorce is invalid, including the forms that oppose the Book. Similarly,
any form of marriage that opposes the Sunna is invalid. It is illicit to
marry more than four mistresses in one time. It is illicit for husbands
who divorced their wives three times, according to the Sharia, to have
them as wives anew before they marry other husbands. Amirul Muminin
(peace be upon him) said: "Be away from women whom are divorced three
times in one situation, for they are still wives."

It is recommendable to send blessings to the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) in every situation, including blowing of the wind ,
sneezing and so on. It is obligatory to cherish the disciples of God and
their disciples and to hate and disavow the enemies of God and their
masters. It is obligatory to treat the parents piously. In case they are
polytheists, you may not obey them, but maintain lawful relations with
them, because God says: Give thanks to Me first and then to your
parents, to Me all things proceed. If they try to force you to consider
things equal to Me, which you cannot justify, do not obey them.

Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) said: "Those who were described as
worshipping others besides God did not pray or fast for their sake. They
only obeyed them when they ordered to act disobediently to God. I heard
the Messenger of God (peace be upon him and his family) saying: 'He
whoever obeys any creature in acts other than those of obedience to God
the Majestic is converting to atheism and betaking a god other than
Allah.'" The legality of a fetus (of an eatable animal) is materialized
when the legality of (slaughtering of) its mother is materialized. The
faults of the prophets are regarded as insignificant and pardoned for
their prophecy.

The laws of inheritance are errorless provided that they are applied as
exactly as God has enacted. Except the husband or the wife, no one will
inherit (a dead person) with the parents and the sons. Those whom are
given shares according to the Book of God are more meritorious than
those whom are not. The inheritance of the agnation is not in the
religion of God. An immolated animal for the newborn baby, whether male
or female, should be slaughtered on the seventh day of age. On the same
day, the baby should be had his hair cut, his name should be chosen, and
a golden or silver alms that is as weighty as his cut hair should be
given. Deeds of the servants are created optionally not compulsorily. Do
not believe in fatalism or indeterminism. God the Majestic does not
punish an innocent for a sin that is committed by a sinful. Likewise, He
does not torment sons and children for the sins of their fathers. He the
Exalted says:

No one will be considered responsible for another's sins.

…nor can man achieve anything except that he had exerted his own
efforts in acting. God forgives, never treats unjustly, never orders the
servants to obey somebody that He knows he will oppress and deviate
them, and never chooses for conveying His message anyone that He knows
he would disbelieve and follow the Shaitan. Islam is something different
from faith. Every faithful believer is Muslim but not every Muslim is
faithful believer. A larcener is faithless in the moment he commits
larceny, a drunken is faithless in the moment he drinks -alcohol-, and a
murderer is faithless in the moment he kills a respectful soul. The
individuals that are subject to the doctrinal provisions are neither
believers nor atheists. God will not submit the faithful believers to
Hell after He promised them Paradise and eternal abode in it. He
whomever is submitted to Hell out of hypocrisy, sinfulness, or a grand
sin will not be joined with the faithful believers. Hell will surround
only the disbelievers. Any guilt due to which its committer will be
submitted to Hell is sin. The polytheists, disbelievers, hypocrites, and
committers of grand sins will be submitted to Hell.

Intercession is permissible for the seekers of intercession. It is
obligatory to enjoin good and forbid evil by way of the tongue. Faith
stands for the fulfillment of the ritual duties and the abstinence from
the forbidden acts. It is acknowledgement of the heart, uttered
declaration, and the application of the organs.

Takbir in Eid ul-Adha comes after ten prayers beginning with the Dhuhr
Prayer of Day of Immolation (the tenth of Dhu'l-Hijja ). Takbir in Eid
ul-Fitr comes after five prayers beginning with the Maghrib Prayer of
the night before breaking the fast. The puerperal should leave the
prayers for twenty days no more. She should offer prayers if she becomes
clean before this period, otherwise she should complete the twenty days.
Then, she should wash herself and apply the acts of the
semi-menstruant.

It is obligatory to believe in the tomb agony, Munkar and Nakeer, the
resurrection after death, the Judgment, the Balance, and the Path. It is
also obligatory to believe in the disavowal of the leaders of deviation
and their followers, compliance with the disciples of God, forbiddance
of the alcohol. The few amount of any beverage the much amount of which
is intoxicating is haram. The individual under constraint ought not to
drink wine because it may kill him. It is also obligatory to believe in
the forbiddance of having the meat of any animal that has a canine tooth
and every bird that has a claw, and the forbiddance of (eating) the
spleen because it is blood, any fish other than the shellfish, and any
bird that does not have a gizzard. Regarding eggs, it is halal to have
any egg whose edges are uneven and it is haram to have any egg whose
edges are equal.

It is also obligatory to believe in (the necessity of) the abstinence
from the forbidden matters, which are killing the soul that God forbade,
drinking alcohol, impiety to the parents, flight from fighting the
enemy, wrongful consuming of the orphans' property, having the dead
meat, the blood, the pork, and any animal that is slaughtered and
consecrated in the name of someone (or something) other than God except
in states of necessity. It is furthermore obligatory to believe in the
forbiddance of usury, unlawful trade after a proof is demonstrated,
gambling, cheating in weighing and measuring, false accusation of
married ladies, fornication, sodomy, perjury, despair of receiving
comfort from God, feeling of being secure from God's unexpected plans,
losing hope in God's mercy, supporting and approach to the unjust
rulers, false swearing, detention of the rights in solvency, arrogance,
atheism, squandering, treachery, concealment of testimony, diversions
that prevent from mentioning God such as singing and playing music, and
finally insistence on the insignificant sins.

The previous were the principals of the religion.

All praise is due to Allah the Lord or the worlds. All peace and
blessings be upon the Lord's Messenger and his family. Imam Ar-Reza's
Wording of Monotheism The following are excerptions from the long
narration and the well-known session in which Imam Ar-Reza (peace be
upon him) overcame all the theologians of the various sects opposing
Islam whom were gathered by Al-Ma'mun for disputation. …Imran As-Sabi
said to Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him): Do we declare the oneness of
God by reality or by description?

Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) answered: Certainly, God the Light,
the Initiator of this cosmos, and the Foremost is One without any
associate or any accompanying thing. He is Unique without a second. He
is neither realized nor unknown. He is neither decisive nor allegorical.
He is neither mentioned nor forgotten. He is not a thing that a familiar
name can fit Him. The Initiator has been self-Existent and light that is
dispending with everything. He did not exist in a definite time and will
not last for a definite time. He has not existed in anything, has not
hidden Himself to anything, and has not resorted to anything. No sayer
can invent a statement describing Him even if he thinks of light,
example, ghost, or shadow. All that was before the creation and in the
situation where there was nothing but Him. The same situation is in this
position. There are only imaginary attributes and a translation of a
picture in the mind purposed for making others understand. Did you
understand, Imran?

Imran answered affirmatively. The Imam (peace be upon him) then went
on:

You should know that imagination , volition, and will have the same
meaning although they are three expressions. The foremost of His
imagination, volition, and will is the letters that He made the origin
of everything and the answer for every problem. He has not decided in
His imagination a meaning, other than the finite and existent, for the
letters, because they are imaginary and God has preceded imagination
because nothing was before or with Him. Imagination, however, preceded
the letters; therefore, they became new by means of the imagination. The
imagination was existent when there was no trend before God. The
imagination of God is something different from Him. On that account, the
action of a thing is something different from it, the edge of a thing is
something different from it, the feature of a thing is something
different from the thing that is described with that feature, and the
border of a thing is something different from the thing that is related
to that border. Letters are broken up and scattered things that have no
single indication. When they are combined in a definite arrangement,
they will refer to other things like names and features. You should know
also that there is no feature to the indescribable, no name to the
meaningless, and no edge to the edgeless. All the names and features
refer to perfection and existence, but do not refer to encirclement,
like their referring to the terms such as squares, circles, and
triangles, because God can be recognized through names and attributes
and not through terms. God is not subject to any terms; therefore, the
creatures cannot recognize Him in the same way they recognize
themselves. If His attributes and names do not refer to Him, then the
creatures are worshipping His names and attributes, not their meanings.
If this is true, the worshipped god will be someone other than Allah,
since His attributes refer to something other than Him.

Imran asked: Is imagination a created being or not? Imam Ar-Reza (peace
be upon him) answered: Imagination is a created inactive being that
cannot be realized by inactivity. It is a created being just because it
is originated by God. Because it is called a thing, it becomes a created
being. There are only two things-God and His creatures. A created being
can be inactive, moving, variable, static, familiar, or obscure. Any
being that acquires a name is created.

**Imam Ar-Reza's Wording of Selection**

Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) was attendant in a session that
included the best scholars of Iraq and Khurasan when Al-Ma'mun asked
them about the exegesis of God's saying: We gave the Book as an
inheritance to Our chosen servants, among whom some are unjust against
their souls, some are moderate, and some are exceedingly virtuous by the
permission of God. This is indeed a great favor. They answered that the
Verse refers to all the umma.

Al-Ma'mun then turned to Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) and asked for
his opinion. The Imam answered: I do not agree with them. I say that God
the Blessed refers to the immaculate progeny of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) exclusively. Al-Ma'mun asked for an
explanation. The Imam (peace be upon him) explained: If God referred to
the umma, they all should be in Paradise. This is for His saying: …among
whom some are unjust against their souls, some are moderate, and some
are exceedingly virtuous by the permission of God. This is indeed a
great favor.

God then informs that all of them will be in Paradise. He the Majestic
said:

They will enter the gardens of Eden… Thus, the Verse refers to the
immaculate progeny of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
exclusively. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) then added: The immaculate
progeny are those whom God describes in His Book by saying: People of
the house, God wants to remove all kinds of uncleanness from you and to
purify you thoroughly. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
said about them: "I am leaving among you the two weighty things- the
Book of God and my progeny; my family. They will not depart each other
until they will join me on the Divine Pool. Consider how will you regard
me in treating them. O people, do not suggest to them, because they are
more knowledgeable than you. The scholars asked Abul-Hasan (peace be
upon him) whether the progeny of the Prophet and the Prophet's family
are the same. The Imam (peace be upon him) answered that they are the
same. The scholars claimed that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) is related to have said, "My umma is my family," and the
Prophet's companions agreed unanimously on the fact that Mohammed's
family is his umma. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) worded:

Well, tell me whether it is lawful for Mohammed's family to have any
alms in possession. "No, it is unlawful," answered the scholars. Then
the Imam (peace be upon him) asked: Tell me whether it is lawful for the
umma to have the alms in possession. "Yes, it is lawful for them,"
answered they. The Imam (peace be upon him) commented: This is one
difference between Mohammed's family and the umma. Woe to you! Where are
you misled? Do you ignore the Quran or are you transgressing people?
Have you not known that this narrative is obviously dedicated to the
guided choice ones exclusively? "How can you prove this, Abul-Hasan?"
asked the scholars. The Imam (peace be upon him) answered:

This is clear in God's saying:

We sent Noah and Abraham and placed prophethood and the Book among
their offsprings, some of whom have the right guidance. However, most of
them are evildoers. Hence, the inheritance of the Book is dedicated to
the guided ones, not the evildoers. In his supplication to his Lord,
Noah said -as God relates in the Quran-: Lord, my son is a member of my
family. Your promise is always true and you are the best Judge. He said
so after God had promised to save his family and him. However, God the
Exalted answered him: He is not one of your family. He is a man of
unrighteous deeds. Do not ask me about that which you have no knowledge.
I advise you not to become an ignorant person.

Al-Ma'mun asked: "Did God give distinction to the Prophet's progeny
over people?" The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: God the Majestic
the Omnipotent gave distinction of the Prophet's progeny over people in
the Wise Book. Al-Ma'mun asked for examples, and the Imam (peace be upon
him) cited: God says: God chose (and gave distinction to) Adam, Noah,
the family of Abraham, and Imran over all the people of the world. They
were the offspring of one another. In another place in the Quran, God
says:

Are they jealous of the favors that God has done to some people? We
have given to the family of Abraham the Book, Wisdom, and a great
Kingdom. Then God refers this to the believers at whom he addressed:
Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and your (qualified) leaders. In the
previous Verse, God refers to the qualified leaders to whom He gave the
Book and wisdom in inheritance, but people envied them for these two
things as He affirms in His saying: "Are they jealous of the favors that
God has done to some people? We have given to the family of Abraham the
Book, Wisdom, and a great Kingdom." The favors stand for the
(obligatory) obedience to the immaculate choice ones and the great
kingdom stands for the obedience to them.

"Does God the Elevated explains this selection in the Book?" asked the
scholars. The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: God explains this
selection obviously in twelve Verses in the Book and refers to it in
many Verses whose meanings are hidden. First, it is explained in God's
saying: And warn your nearest relations. Ubay bin Ka'b adds 'and your
selected family,' to the previous Verse, and the addition is recorded in
Abdullah bin Mas'ud's copy of the Holy Quran. When Othman (bin Affan)
ordered Zaid bin Thabit to compile the Quran, he bypassed that
statement, which is certainly a sublime standing, a great excellence,
and a grand honor for the Prophet's family whom are exclusively stated
in the previous Verse.

The second Verse of the selection is God's saying: People of the house,
God wants to remove all kinds of uncleanness from you and to purify you
thoroughly. Except the obstinate, no one can deny this merit because it
is obviously clear. The third Verse of selection is that in which God
gave distinction to the Immaculates over all others and ordered His
Prophet in His saying: If anyone disputes (your prophesy) after
knowledge has come to you, say, "Let each of us bring our children,
women, and ourselves to one place and pray to God to condemn the liars
among us."

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) carried out this order
when he brought Ali, Al-Hasan, Al-Hussein, and Fatima (peace be upon
them) for praying to God for condemning the lying party. Thus, God added
them to the Prophet. Do you know the indication of God's saying: "…and
ourselves…?" The scholars said: "This is the Prophet's personality."

Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) commented: This is not accurate. It is
an indication to Ali (peace be upon him). This can be proved by the
Prophet's saying: "Let the Luhai'as keep on doing so and I will
subjugate them to a man who is like myself-Ali." No one can precede this
particularity, disagree about this virtue, or overtake this honor. Thus,
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) compared Ali's
personality to his. The fourth Verse of selection is that when the
Prophet ordered everybody to leave the Mosque except his family. People
showed dissatisfaction for such a procedure and Al-Abbas discussed the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) in the question, but the
Prophet answered: "It was not I who dismissed you all except Ali. It was
God who did so." This is a clear explanation of the Prophet's saying to
Ali: "Your relation to me is as same as Aaron's to Moses."

"What is the relation between this and the Quran?" asked the scholars.
Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) answered: This is in the Quran in God's
saying: We sent a revelation to Moses and his brother to build houses
for their people in the Pharaoh's town and to build them facing one
another. This Verse shows Aaron's relation to Moses. It also shows Ali's
standing to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). Besides,
there is a clear evidence in the Prophet's saying: "Except Mohammed and
Mohammed's family, all the ceremonially impure and the menstruant are
forbidden from entering this Mosque."

"This explanation and evidence cannot be found with anyone other than
you, the Prophet's family," said the scholars. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be
upon him) commented:

Who can deny this fact? The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
said: "I am the city of knowledge, and Ali is its portal. He whoever
betakes himself to the city of knowledge should first see its portal."
The previous clear explanation of the virtue, honor, preference,
selection, and immaculacy cannot be denied by anyone except the
obstinate. All praise belongs to God for so. The fifth Verse of
selection is God's saying:

Give the relatives their dues. Almighty God gave this particularity to
the Prophet's family exclusively as a sign of their distinction over the
umma. When this Verse was revealed to the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family), he summoned Fatima, his daughter, and said to her, "Fadak
is one of the territories that we did not exhaust our horses or camels
to seize them; therefore, it is mine exclusively . Now, I gift it to you
and your offspring according to God's instructions." The sixth Verse of
the selection is God's saying:

(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to
you except (your) love of (my near) relatives." This is a particularity
for the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and his family
exclusively. Relating the sayings of Noah (peace be upon him), God the
Majestic says: My people, I do not ask any payment for what I preach to
you. No one except God has to give me any reward. I do not drive away
those who have faith (in my teaching); they will all receive mercy from
their Lord. I know that you are ignorant people. Relating the sayings of
Hood the prophet (peace be upon him), God says: My people, I do not ask
any reward for what I have preached to you. No one can give me my reward
except my Creator. Will you then not take heed? For the Prophet Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family), God orders him:

Say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to you except
(your) love of (my near) relatives." God imposed the love of the
Prophet's relatives only when He knows that they will never apostatize
and they will never deviate. It happens that a man may bear any bit of
malice in the heart for another, who is an intimate friend of him, when
a member of the family of the previous is an opponent to the latter. On
that account, God wants to make the Prophet's heart completely free of
malice against the believers; therefore, he ordered them to love the
Prophet's family. The Prophet then will not hate anybody who loves his
family and him. In the same manner, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) will hate those who dislike his family, because they have
ignored one of the duties of God. This is surely the most prominent
honor.

When the previous Verse was revealed, the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) addressed a sermon before his companions. He said: "All
praise and gratitude is due to Allah. O people, God has imposed upon you
a matter. Will you carry it out?" No one answered him. He therefore
repeated the same on the second day. But nobody answered him, too. On
the third day, he added: "O people, it is not gold, silver, food, or
drink that you should pay." Thus, they asked what it was. The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) then recited the Verse -"(Muhammad),
say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to you except
(your) love of (my near) relatives.""-. They agreed to carry out this
commandment. Unfortunately, most of them broke it.

My father related to me his fathers' relation that Al-Hussein bin Ali
(peace be upon him) had narrated the following:

Muhajirs and Ansar came to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) to offer him their estates and souls since -as they claimed- he
had to spend great sums of his own wealth for his personal expenditures
in addition to the continuous visits of the delegations. As a result,
God the Majestic sent the Faithful Spirit -the Angel Gabriel- to convey
to the Prophet His saying: "(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any
payment for my preaching to you except (your) love of (my near)
relatives."" This means that you should not hurt my relatives after my
death. As they left, some of them murmured, "He rejected our offers only
for urging us accepting (the leadership of) his relatives after his
death. This was surely something he himself invented in that session.
They also said horrible things that made God reveal His saying: They
say, "(Muhammad) has invented it by himself." Say, "Had I invented it,
you would not have been able to rescue me from God. He knows best what
you say about it. He is our witness and He is All-forgiving and
All-merciful" Accordingly, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) summoned them and wondered whether they had done something due
to which the Verse was revealed. They confessed that they had said
horrible things. When the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
recited the Verse before them, they wept heavily. Hence, God revealed:

It is He who accepts the repentance of His servants, forgives their
evil deeds and knows all about what you do. The seventh Verse of
selection is God's saying: God showers His blessings upon the Prophet
and the angels seek forgiveness for him. Believers, pray for the Prophet
and greet him with, "Peace be with you."

All the obstinate realize that when this Verse was revealed, some
people came to the Prophet and asked him to teach them how to pray for
him. He (peace be upon him and his family) instructed, "Say: O Allah,
bless Mohammed and Mohammed's family the way You blessed Abraham and
Abraham's family. You are surely Praiseworthy and Glorious." Can any one
of you disagree to this? "No, no one can," answered the scholars.
Al-Ma'mun said, "This is a unanimous thing. However, we need something
more evident about the Prophet's family excerpted from the Quran." Imam
A-Reza (peace be upon him) said: God says:

Yasin, by the Quran, the Book of wisdom, you are a Messenger and you
follow the right path. Who is that Yasin? "Undoubtedly," said the
scholars, "Yasin is Mohammed." Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him)
commented: God has given to Mohammed and his family (peace be upon them)
a characteristic that, except the heedful, no one can attain its
meaning. In the Quran, God blesses no one save the prophets (peace be
upon them). He the Exalted says: Peace be with Noah among all men in the
worlds. Peace be with Abraham.

Peace be with Moses and Aaron. God, thus, does not bless the family of
Noah, Abraham, or Moses. But He blesses Mohammed's family in His saying:
Peace be with the family of Yasin. Yasin is Mohammed (peace be upon him
and his family).

Al-Ma'mun expressed, "I have already known that only the core of the
prophecy can explain this clearly." Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him)
went on: The eighth Verse of selection is God's saying: Know that
whatever property you may gain, one fifth belongs to God, the Messenger,
the kindred, orphans, the needy and those who need money while on a
journey. In the previous Verse, God adds the share of the Prophet's
family to his share as well as the share of His Messenger. This is the
distinction between the Prophet's family and the umma whom God has
situated in a place and situated the Prophet's family in another higher
place. Besides, Almighty God chooses to the Prophet's family what He
chooses for Himself as He selected them. He begins with mentioning
Himself, His Messenger, and then the kindred. This is operative not only
in the distribution of the spoils of war, but also in everything that
God accepts for Himself and for them. God says: Know that whatever
property you may gain, one fifth belongs to God, the Messenger, the
kindred…

This holy saying is an affirmative declaration and an everlasting
commandment for them in the Book of God that, "Falsehood can not reach
it from any direction. It is the revelation from the All-wise,
Praiseworthy One." Regarding God's reference to the orphans and the
needy, it is natural that the share of the orphan should be stopped when
the feature of orphanage ceases to exist. The same thing can be said
about the share of the needy. While, on the other hand, the share of the
Prophet's kindred, whether they are needy or not, is incessant up to the
Day of Resurrection, because no one is wealthier than God or the
Prophet; however, their shares are incessant. God the Majestic has
decided for the Prophet's family anything that He decides for Himself
and His Messenger. As He decides for Himself and His Messenger a share
in the spoils of war, He decides for the Prophet's family a share. He
begins with Himself, His Messenger, and then His Messenger's family.

The same thing can be said about the commandment of obedience. God the
Exalted says: Believers, obey God, His Messenger, and your (qualified)
leaders. In the previous Verse, God begins with Himself, His Messenger,
and then His Messenger's family. The same thing occurs in the Verse of
Wilaya. God says: Only God, His Messenger, and the true believers who
are steadfast in prayer and pay alms while they kneel during prayer, are
your guardians -leaders-. In the previous Verse, God makes the
leadership of the Prophet's family and the obedience to the Prophet
connected to the obedience to Him. Likewise, He makes His share as well
as His Messenger's share of spoils of war connected to the shares of the
Prophet's family. All praise is due to Allah Who has given the Prophet's
family the greatest grace. As God refers to the classes to whom the alms
should be given, He deems Himself, His Messenger, and the prophet's
family far above them. He the Exalted says:

Alms are only for the poor, the destitute, the tax collectors, those
whose hearts are inclined (towards Islam), the slaves, those who cannot
pay their debts, for the cause of God, and for those who have become
needy on a journey. It is an obligation that God has decreed. God is
All-knowing and All-wise. You cannot find any indication to God, His
Messenger, and the Prophet's family with the above-mentioned classes.
This is because God has deemed Himself, His Messenger, and The
Messenger's family far above receiving the alms. Moreover, He has deemed
unlawful for Mohammed and his family to receive anything of the alms,
because alms are only the dirt of people, and it is unlawful for the
Prophet and his family to enjoy the dirt of people because they are
purified against any dirt or filth. In fine, because God has purified
and selected the Prophet's family exclusively, He accepts for them only
what He accepts for Himself and dislikes for them only what He dislikes
for Himself. The ninth verse of selection is God's saying:

Ask the people of the Reminder if you do not know. We -the Prophet's
family- are the people of the Reminder. "In this Verse," spoke the
scholars, "God refers to the Christians and the Jews."

Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) answered: How is this acceptable? If
it so, then God is asking us to follow their religion, and they can
claim that their religion is better than Islam! "O Abul-Hasan," said
Al-Ma'mun, "Do you have an explanation opposing the scholars'?" Imam
Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) spoke: The Reminder in the Verse is God's
Messenger. We are his people. This is clear in the Book of God. See
God's saying in Sura of At-Talaq: People of understanding and believers,
have fear of God. God has certainly sent you a reminder-a Messenger who
recites to you the illustrious revelations of God. Thus, the reminder is
God's Messenger and we are his people.

The tenth Verse of selection is God's saying: You are forbidden to
marry your mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal aunts, maternal aunts,
nieces, your foster-mothers, your foster-sisters, your mothers-in-law,
your step-daughters whom you have brought up and with whose mothers you
have had carnal relations. It would not be a sin to marry her if you did
not have carnal relations with her mother. You are forbidden to marry
the wives of your own sons and to marry two sisters at the same time
without any adverse affect to the such relations of the past. God is
All-forgiving and All-merciful." Supposing the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) is alive, is it licit for him to marry my daughter,
my granddaughter, or my offspring? "No," answered they, "It is
unlawful."

Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) continued: Is it licit for him to
marry the daughter of any of you?" "Yes," answered they, "It is lawful."
The Imam (peace be upon him), then, said: This is sufficiently clear
evidence that I am one of the Prophet's family members while you are
not. If you are the Prophet's family, then it is unlawful for him to
marry your daughters. It is unlawful for him to marry my daughter
because I am one of his family members while you are members of his
umma. This is another distinction between the Prophet's family and the
umma. The Prophet's family is a part of him while the umma members are
not unless they are his family. The eleventh Verse of selection is God's
saying: A believing person from the people of the Pharaoh who concealed
his faith said, "Would you kill a man just because he says God is my
Lord? He has brought you illustrious miracles from your Lord. If he
speaks lies, it will only harm him, but if he speaks the Truth, some of
his warnings may affect you. God does not guide a transgressing liar."
That man was the maternal cousin of the Pharaoh; therefore, God relates
him to the Pharaoh due to this relation, not religion. The same thing
can be said about us. We are the Prophet's because we are his family,
particularly, and followers of his religion, generally. This is another
distinction between the Prophet's family and the umma.

The twelfth Verse of selection is God's saying: Instruct your family to
pray and be steadfast in worship. In this Verse, God joins us with the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) in the same commandment. This
is a distinction over the umma. After the revelation of this Verse, the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) used to come near to the door
of the house of Ali and Fatima (peace be upon them) five times a day for
nine months. He was shouting: "The prayer! God's mercy be upon you." God
has not bestowed upon any of the prophets' progenies with such an
honored virtue that He has given exclusively to us. This is another
distinction between the Prophet's family and the umma. All praise is due
to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. All peace be with Mohammed, the
Prophet of God.

**Imam Ar-Reza's Account of Imamate, Imam, and Position of the
Imams**

Abdul-Azeez bin Muslim related: We were accompanying Imam Ar-Reza
(peace be upon him) in Marw. Once, we were in the central mosque when
people discussed the matter of imamate and referred to the great
variance of people's opinions in this regard. I then visited my master
Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) to inform him of people's discussion. He
then smiled and said: O Abdul-Azeez, people are ignorant and unaware of
their religion. Almighty God did not made His Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) die before He had perfected the religion for him. He
revealed to him the Quran in which there is the explanation of
everything and the manifestation of the halal, haram, doctrinal
provisions, rulings, and everything tha people may need completely. God
the Majestic says: Nothing is left without a mention in the Book. During
the Farewell Pilgrimage, which was the last days of the Prophet's
lifetime, God revealed to him: On this day I have perfected your
religion, completed My favors to you, and have chosen Islam as your
religion. The imamate is a part of the perfection of the religion.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) did not depart this
world before he had manifested to his umma the points of their religion,
showed them the -right- courses that they should take, situated them on
the right path, and assigned Ali (peace be upon him) as the leader and
Imam for them. As a matter of fact, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) did not leave anything without thorough manifestation. He
whoever claims that God has not perfected His religion is denying the
Book, and whoever denies the Book is converting to atheism. Do they
acknowledge the true standing of Imamate and its position in the umma,
before they choose for themselves? God gave Abraham the prophet (peace
be upon him) imamate as a third rank after prophecy and intimacy and as
a virtue by which He conferred honor upon him -Abraham- and praised him.
God says:

When his Lord tested Abraham's faith, (by His words) and he satisfied
the test, He said, "I am appointing you as the imam of mankind." Abraham
asked, "Will this imamate also continue through my descendants?" The
Lord replied, "The unjust do not have the right to exercise My
authority." Abraham the prophet (peace be upon him) was highly delighted
for gaining this rank; therefore, he hoped it would be passed to his
descendants. This Verse cancels the imamate of any unjust one until the
Day of Resurrection, and dedicates it to the choice ones exclusively.
Then God honors this imamate when He decides it to be in the offspring
of the immaculate choice ones. He says: We granted him -Abraham- Isaac
and Jacob as a gift and helped both of them to become righteous people.
We appointed them as imams to guide the people through Our command and
sent them revelation to strive for good deeds, worship their Lord, and
pay religious tax. Both of them were Our worshipping servants. The
successive generations kept on receiving the imamate in inheritance in
that order until it reached the Prophet Mohammed (peace be upon him and
his family). In this regard, God says:

The nearest people to Abraham, among mankind, are those who followed
him, this Prophet (Muhammad) and the true believers. In this manner, the
imamate became exclusive for them. Then the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) gave it to Ali (peace be upon him) to be successive in
his choice offspring upon whom God conferred knowledge and faith. This
is indicated in God's saying: Those who have received knowledge and have
faith will say, "By the decree of God, you have remained for the exact
period which was mentioned in the Book of God about the Day of
Resurrection. This is the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know."
This Verse shows the decree of God regarding the question of imamate
that will persist in the Prophet's progeny until the Day of
Resurrection, since there will be no prophet after the Prophet Mohammed
(peace be upon him and his family).

After all, how can those ignorant people choose for imamate out of
their opinions?

Imamate is the rank of the prophets and the heritage of the prophets'
successors. Imamate is the representation of God the Majestic and His
Messenger (peace be upon him and his family), the position of Amirul
Muminin, and the succession of Al-Hasan and Al-Hussein (peace be upon
them). The Imam is the head of the religious affairs, the system of the
Muslims, the goodness of the world, the stronghold of the believers. The
Imam is the rising principal and the noble branch of Islam. The
accomplishment of the prayers, zakat, fasting, hajj, jihad, the
availability of spoils and alms, the execution of the doctrinal
provisions and the rules, and the protections of the fronts and the
borders-all these are achieved through the Imam. The Imam legalizes
whatever God deems legal, forbids whatever God deems illegal, executes
the doctrinal provisions that God enacts, protects the religion of God,
and calls to the path of God through wisdom, good advice, and strong
evidence. The Imam is as same as the shining sun whose light covers the
whole world while it stands erect in the horizon and neither sights nor
hands can catch it.

The Imam is the luminous full moon, the bright lamp, the rising light,
the guiding star in tenebrous gloom, the guide to the right, and the
savior from demise. The Imam is the guiding fire on highlands, the heat
to the seekers of warmth, and the rescuer from dangers. He whoever
departs the Imam will surely perish.

The Imam is the raining clouds, the torrential downpour, the shady sky,
the plain land, the abundant spring, the brook, and the garden. The Imam
is the lenient custodian, the humane father, the full brother, the like
of the sympathetic mother to her baby, and the shelter of the servants.
The Imam is the trustee of God on His land and creatures, the argument
of God against the servants, the successor of God in His countries, the
caller to God, and the protector of the sanctities of God. The Imam is
purified from sins, freed from defects, given knowledge exclusively,
characterized with forbearance, the system of the religion, the
stronghold of the believers, the punishment of the hypocrites, and the
perdition of the disbelievers. The Imam is the unique in his time. No
one can catch up with him and no scholar can amount to him. There is no
substitute for him and there are no like or match to him. The whole
virtue is dedicated to him without seeking or acquisition. It is only
the choice of the Favorer Endower God. How is it then possible for
anybody to understand the reality and the quality of the Imam? How
impossible this is! Minds are too astray, intellects are too lost, wits
are too perplexed, the speakers are too mute, the poets are too
unversed, the authors are too impotent, the eloquent are too wordless,
and the scholars are too weak to describe a single feature or a single
virtue of the Imam's features and virtues. As a consequence, they
confessed of their shortcoming and inadequacy to do so. How is it then
possible to describe him as a whole or portray his manners? How it is
possible to find anyone who can do his role or represent him? How is
this possible while the Imam is as far as stars from the reach of the
debaters and the describers? Do they think they can find imamate in
anybody other than the Prophet's family?

They are deceived by their opinions and they are indulging in the false
hopes. They are surely climbing a rugged ascent and a slippery mount
that will surely cause them to stumble to the rock bottom because they
have intended to nominate an imam out of their opinions. How can they
nominate an imam while the true Imam is permanently knowledgeable that
ignorance never reaches him and a custodian that never betrays? He is
the core of the prophecy whose lineage is too honorable to be criticized
and no highborn individual can ever dare him. The Imam's tribe is
Koreish, his clan is Hashim, his root is the Messenger of God (peace be
upon him and his family), the master of the celebrities, and he is the
offspring of Abd Menaf. The Imam is that whose knowledge is increasing
and whose forbearance is perfect. He is cognizant of policy and worthy
of leadership. The obedience to him is obligatory. He is the executor of
God's commandments and the adviser of God's servants.

God leads the prophets and their successors (peace be upon them) to
success and the right, and gives them (a part of His stored) knowledge
and wisdom exclusively so that they become the most knowledgeable of
people. God the Majestic says: Is the one who guides to the Truth a
proper guide or one who himself cannot find guidance unless he is guided
(by others)? What is wrong with you that you judge (so unjustly)?

Relating the story of Saul, God says: God has chosen him as your ruler
and has given him physical power and knowledge. God grants His authority
to anyone whom He wants. About David the prophet (peace be upon him),
God says: David slew Goliath and God granted David the kingdom and
wisdom and also taught him whatever He wanted. Addressing to the Prophet
Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family), God says: God has revealed
the Book to you, has given you wisdom, and has taught you what you did
not know. Certainly God's favor to you has been great. About the Imams
of the Prophet's family, progeny, and offspring, God says: Are they
jealous of the favors that God has done to some people (the Imams)? We
have given to the family of Abraham the Book, Wisdom, and a great
Kingdom. Some have believed, others have disbelieved and tried to
prevent people from believing. For these people, only the intense fire
of hell is a sufficient punishment. When God selects someone (the Imam)
for managing the affairs of His servants, He grants him the inclination
to do so, fills in his heart with springs of wisdom, and bestows upon
him with fluency. Hence, he will have the ability to answer any question
and will say nothing but the truth. The Imam is therefore granted
successfulness, right guidance, and advocacy and will be saved from
error and flaw. He is given such characteristics so that he will be an
argument against the creatures and a witness on the servants (of God).
Can they then ensure such characters for the one they choose as imam out
of their opinions?

**Short Maxims of Imam Ar-Reza**

1. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The character of faith is
achieved only when the believer enjoys three qualities from his Lord,
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), and the leader -the
Imam- (peace be upon him). The quality that he should learn from his
Lord is the concealment of secrets, the quality that he should learn
from the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) is the courteous
behavior, and the quality that he should learn from the leader (peace be
upon him) is steadfastness against poverty and distress.

2. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: It is obligatory upon the
wealthy to improve the standard of living of his family.

3. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Praying and fasting is not
the true worship. The true worship is the pondering over God.

4. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Cleanness is one of the
prophets' customs.

5. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Perfuming, hairstyling, and
polygamy-these three matters are within the customs of the apostles of
God.

6. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The honest has not betrayed
you, but you have trusted the betrayal.

7. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: When God wants to do an
action, He seizes the minds of the servants and does that action
perfectly. Then, He gives them their minds back. Therefore, they wonder
how and when such an action occurred.

8. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Silence is one of the doors
of wisdom. It yields amicability and leads to every goodness.

9. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Every unnecessary act
requires surplusage.

10. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The elder brother is as same
as the father. 11. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said when he was
asked about the lowly ones: The lowly are those who possess things that
engage them from God.

12. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) used to dust the letters and
say:This is unproblematic. When he wanted to list his affairs for
memorization, he (peace be upon him) used to begin with 'In the Name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. I will remember, inshallah.'

13. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: When you want to mention a
present person, you should use his surname, but when you refer to an
absent person, you should use his name.

14. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The friend of any individual
is his mind and his enemy is his ignorance.

15. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Endearment to people is half
of intelligence.

16. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: God surely hates gossips,
squandering, and asking -for financial help- from the enemies.

17. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: A Muslim's mind is imperfect
before he enjoys ten characters-good is expected from him, evil is far
away from him, he regards others' little good deed as great favor and
regards his great favor as little, he is not disturbed by people who ask
him to settle their needs, he does not feel tired of seeking knowledge
all his lifetime, he prefers poverty for God's sake to richness, prefers
humility with God to honor with His enemies, and prefers obscurity to
fame. The tenth character! Do you know what is it?

They asked, 'What is it?' It is to regard anyone as better and more
pious than him. He classifies people into two kinds; either better and
more pious than him or eviler and lowlier than him. If he meets one of
those who are eviler and lowlier than him, he wishes the good of that
man might be hidden, and this will be better for him, while his own evil
is apparent, and this will be worse for him. When he meets one of those
who are better and more pious than him, he behaves modestly so that he
may join him. If he does so, his glory will be lofty, good deeds will be
acceptable, and his reputation will be good. Besides, he will be the
master of people.

18. As a man asked him about the exegesis of God's saying: "God is
Sufficient for the needs of whoever trusts in Him," Imam Ar-Reza (peace
be upon him) said: Trusting in God is of various grades, one of which is
to trust in whatever He does to you totally. You should satisfy yourself
with whatever occurs to you, since you believe that God will not fail to
bestow upon you with His good and custody and believe that everything is
subject to His estimation; therefore, you should trust in Him by
charging with Him whatever befalls you. Another grade of trusting in God
is to believe in the unseen acts of God that you cannot comprehend,
entrust their comprehension to Him as well as His custodians on them,
and rely on him in such acts as well as others.

19. Ahmed bin Najm asked Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) about the
self-conceit that invalidates one's actions. The Imam answered:
Self-conceit is of various grades, one of which is that when the evil
deeds seem to be attractive and virtuous; hence, the doer becomes
self-conceited because he thinks he is doing well. Another grade of
self-conceit is to believe that God owes you a great deal because you
believed in Him. In fact, you owe God a great deal because He guided you
to believe in Him.

20. Al-Fadhl related: I told Abul-Hasan Ar-Reza (peace be upon him)
that Younus bin Abdurrahman claimed that knowledge is an acquired thing.
The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: No, it is not. This is
inaccurate. God gives knowledge (or faith) to whomever He wishes. He
fixes it with a group and deposits with others. God will never seize it
from those with whom it is fixed, but he will seize it from those with
whom it is deposited.

21. Safwan bin Yahya said: I asked Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him)
whether knowledge is given to the servants out of efforts that they
themselves exert. He answered negatively. I also whether they will
receive any reward due to their knowledge. The Imam (peace be upon him)
answered: God has given them knowledge out of His grace and will reward
them for it out of his grace, too.

22. Al-Fudhail bin Yasar said: I asked Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him)
whether the acts of the servants (of God) are created or not. He
answered: By God, the acts are created (the planning for the acts, not
their bringing into being).

The Imam (peace be upon him) then added: Faith precedes Islam in one
degree and God-fearing precedes faith in one degree. Conviction is the
ever-best thing that has been given to sons of Adam -human beings-.

23. In his indication to the best servants, Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon
him) said: The best servants (of God) are those who feel delighted
whenever they do a good deed, seek God's forgiveness whenever they
commit an evildoing, thank God whenever they obtain something, behave
steadfastly whenever a misfortune befalls them, and pardon whenever they
are enraged.

24. As he was asked about the limit of trusting in God, Imam Ar-Reza
(peace be upon him) answered: The limit of trusting in God in to fear
nobody except Him.

25. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The banquet of wedding
ceremony is a recommendable tradition.

26. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Faith stands on four
supports-trusting in God, satisfaction with His acts, submission to His
commandments, and entrusting Him with all the affairs.

The virtuous servant said (as the Quran relates): I entrust God with my
affairs. God is Well Aware of His servants. God protected him against
their evil plans.

27. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Regard your relatives even
by (providing them) a mouthful of water. The best form of regarding your
relatives is to save them from your evil. God says:

Do not make your charities fruitless by reproachfully reminding the
recipient of your favor or making them feel insulted.

28. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Forbearance and knowledge
are within the signs of understanding. Silence is one of the doors of
wisdom. It yields amicability and leads to every goodness. 29. Imam
Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The reward of the one who seeks
earnings just for meeting the needs of his dependants is greater than
the reward of the fighter for God's sake.

30. Someone said to Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him): "How is your
morning?" He answered: I begin my day with a descending lifetime and
recorded deeds. Death is inevitable for us, Hell is behind us, and we do
not know what will happen to us.

31. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: You should not have any
hope, whether for a worldly or a religious affair, in those who lack
five characters: original lineage, generous quality, sedate manner,
noble personality, and God-fearing.

32. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: Victory is always the
confederate of the more forgiving party.

33. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The generous call people's
invitations to meals so that they will call his invitations, while the
stingy does not call their invitations so as to save himself from
inviting them.

34. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: We, the Prophet's family,
consider our promises as debts that we must defray. This is the way of
the Messenger of God (peace be upon him and his family).

35. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: People will live an age in
which good health will be divided into ten divisions, nine of which will
lie in seclusion and one in silence. 36. Muammar bin Khellad said to
Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him): God advance your relief. The Imam
commented: O Muammar, that is surely your relief. Mine is no more than a
knapsack of a sealed handful of flour.

37. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: To help the weak is the best
almsgiving.

38. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The servants (of God) will
not attain the reality of faith before they enjoy three
characters-knowledge of the religious affairs, moderation in livelihood,
and patience in misfortunes.

39. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said to Abu Hashim Dawud bin
Al-Qasim Al-Ja'fari: O Dawud, we have rights that are imposed upon you
through the Messenger of God (peace be upon him and his family), and you
have rights that are imposed upon us. We regard the rights of those who
acknowledge our rights, while we have nothing to do with those who do
not acknowledge our rights.

40. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) was someday attendant in the
session of Al-Ma'mun when people, including Al-Fadhl bin Sahl
Thurriyasatain, were discussing whether night preceded day in creation
or not. Al-Fadhl addressed the question at Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon
him). "Do you want me to extract the answer from God's Book or the
astronomical estimations?" "I like you to mention the astronomical
estimations first," said Al-Fadhl. The Imam (peace be upon him) spoke:
You claim that the world began with Cancer and the stars were in its
prospect. On that account, Saturn was in Libra, Jupiter in Cancer, Mars
in Capricorn, Venus in Pisces, the moon in Taurus, and the sun in Aries
in the middle of the sky. This occurs only in daylight.

"What about the Book of God?" asked Al-Fadhl. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be
upon him) answered: The answer is in God's saying: The sun is not
supposed to catch-up with the moon, nor is the night to precede the
day.

This means that day preceded night. 41. Ali bin Shuaib said: I, once,
visited Abul-Hasan Ar-Reza (peace be upon him). He asked, "O Ali, do you
know who is the best earner of livelihood among people?" I answered,
"You, my master, is more knowledgeable than me." He (peace be upon him)
said: The best earner of livelihood among people is that who improves
others' livelihoods out of his livelihood.

42. Imam Ar-Reza, peace be upon him, asked Ali bin Shuaib, "O Ali, do
you know who is the worst earner of livelihood among people?" "You are
more knowledgeable?" answered Ali. The Imam (peace be upon him) said:
The worst earner of livelihood is that who deprives others of improving
their livelihoods through his earnings.

43. O Ali, use good neighborhood with the graces, for they are
wild-they will not return if they leave.

44. O Ali, the evilest of people is that who deprives others of his
aid, eats alone, and lashes his slave.

45. In the Eid ul-Fitr, a man told Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him)
that he had broken his fast with dates and dust of the tomb. The Imam
answered: You have joined the prophetic tradition to the blessing.

46. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said to Abu Hashim Al-Ja'fari: O
Abu Hashim, intelligence is the gift of God while the ethics are
obtained through exertion of efforts. Thus, he whoever exerts efforts
for obtaining ethics will surely obtain them while those who exert
efforts for obtaining intelligence will not obtain anything except
increasing ignorance.

47. Ahmed bin Omar and Al-Husain bin Yazid related: We visited Imam
Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) and complained against the living changes
that we encountered after we had lived in luxury and comfort, and asked
him to supplicate to God to return our past luxury and comfort to us.
The Imam spoke: Which extent do you want to attain exactly? Do you want
to be kings? Are you pleased to have the same royalty of Tahir and
Harthama while your current beliefs are seized from you? "No," we
answered, "We will never be pleased to have gold and silver as much as
this world with all its contents if this causes us to change our current
beliefs."

He (peace be upon him) then added: God says:

Give thanks, O family of David, And very few of My servants are
grateful. Anticipate good from God, for God will treat those who
anticipate good from Him according to their anticipations. God will
accept the few deeds of those who satisfy themselves with the little
sustenance. He who satisfies himself with the few legal gotten
sustenance will have light burdens, his family will be living in
comfort, and God will show him the maladies and the remedies of this
world and will cause him to leave this world peacefully to move to the
Abode of Peace.

48. Ibn As-Sikkeet asked Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) about God's
current argument against people. The Imam answered: God's current
argument against people is the mind. It is the means by which the honest
with God and the liar are recognized. "This is by God the most accurate
answer," confessed Ibn As-Sikkeet.

49. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: You should not kiss the hand
of anyone, because kissing somebody's hand is as same as praying to
him.

50. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The mother is kissed on the
mouth, the daughter on the cheek, and the Imam between the eyes.

51. Imam Ar-Reza (peace be upon him) said: The stingy do not enjoy
comfort, the envious cannot enjoy pleasure, the enslaved cannot be
loyal, and the liars do not have personality.


