Maxims of the Prophet
=====================

The following are the long maxims and words of wisdom that are related
to the Prophet Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family).

**Long Maxims of the Prophet
The Prophet's Commandment for Imam Ali**

O Ali, to avoid pleasing anyone and discontenting God, thanking anyone
for a favor that God has given to you, and reproaching anyone for
something that God has not given to you-these are parts of the
conviction. The sustenance cannot be obtained through (any sort of)
niggardliness and will not be ceased when someone hates it. Out of His
wisdom and grace, God has made relief and delight lie in conviction and
satisfaction, and made care and grief lie in suspect and malice.

O Ali, no poverty is harsher than ignorance, no fortune better than the
intellect, no loneliness drearier than pride, no victory like
counseling, no intellect like moderation, no lineage like good manners,
and no worship like pondering (over things). O Ali, untruth is the
epidemic of talking, oblivion is the epidemic of knowledge, laziness is
the epidemic of worship, to remind reproachfully (of your favors) is the
epidemic of leniency, despot is the epidemic of courage, showing off is
the epidemic of handsomeness, and pride is the epidemic of (belonging to
good) ancestry.

O Ali, keep up saying the truth and your mouth should never utter any
single lie. Never approach any treason. Fear God as if you see Him
before you. Sacrifice your property and soul for the sake of your
religion. Ride the good manners and avoid the ill manners. O Ali, the
most favorable deeds to God are three: the best worshipper is he who
fulfills the obligatory duties of God properly. The most pious of people
is he who abstains from the forbidden matters. The wealthiest of people
is he who satisfies himself with that which God has given to him. O Ali,
three characters are the high moral standards: they are to regard him
who ruptured his relations with you, give him who deprived you (of his
bestowals), and pardon him who wronged you.

O Ali, three matters save you: (They are) to control your tongue (stop
saying obscene language or stop reviling at people), to weep for your
sins, and to contend with your home.

O Ali, three characters are the masters of deeds: they are to treat
people fairly, justify your friends, and to praise God under any
condition. O Ali, three categories (of people) are the guests of God:
they are a man who visits his faithful brother for God's sake. This man
is certainly God's guest, and it is incumbent upon God to honor His
guests and satisfy their needs. The second is a man who offers a prayer
and immediately offers another. He is surely God's guest and it is
incumbent upon God to honor His guest. The hajji and the performer of
umrah are the delegations to God, and it is incumbent upon God to honor
His delegations.

O Ali, three matters are rewarded in this world and the world to come:
the hajj eradicates poverty, the almsgiving eradicates catastrophes, and
regard of the relatives increases the age.

O Ali, the deeds of those who do not enjoy the following three
characters are nil: piety that impedes against committing acts of
disobedience to God the Glorified the Majestic, knowledge that protects
against the ignorance of the foolish ones, and an intellect that helps
in associating with people courteously.

O Ali, three men will be stood under the shade of the (Divine) Throne
on the Day of Resurrection: they are a man who likes for his friend
whatever he likes for himself, a man who stops doing any thing before he
realizes whether it pleases or displeases God, and a man who does not
find fault with his friends before he himself gets rid of that fault. A
man will find a new fault with himself whenever he gets rid of one. It
is quite sufficient for a man to engage with himself.

O Ali, three matters are within the doors to charity: they are
generosity, good wording, and steadfastness against harm. O Ali, it is
written in the Torah that four matters always accompany other four ones.
He who begins his day with acquisitiveness is beginning his day with
discontentment to God. He who complains about misfortune is complaining
his Lord. Two thirds of the religion of him who declines before a rich
man are gone. The people of this umma who will be in Hell are surely
those who deride and disregard the Verses (or signs) of God. Four
matters always accompany other four ones. He who holds a position of
leadership will surely act arbitrarily. He who does not seek others'
advice will surely regret. As you subjugate, you will surely be
subjugated. Poverty is the grand death.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was asked whether the
intended poverty is the financial neediness. He answered: No, it is the
poverty of the religion.

O Ali, except three, every eye will be weeping on the Day of
Resurrection. These three are an eye that spent a night sleeplessly for
God's sake, an eye that is lowered before what God has prohibited to
gaze, and an eye that shed tears due to fearing God. O Ali, blessed be
the face (of an individual) that God notices (him) weeping for a sin,
which no one has seen except Him. O Ali, three matters are destructive
and three others are rescuing. The three destructive matters are the
pursued passion, the obeyed niggardliness, and the self-conceit. The
three rescuing matters are to treat (others) fairly in both situations
of satisfaction and displeasure, to be moderate in both situations of
richness and poverty, and to fear God secretly and openly. Fear God as
if you see Him. If you do not see Him, He can surely see you.

O Ali, untruth may be acceptable only in three situations; in the
stratagem of wars, promising the wife, and for reconciliation between
people. O Ali, truth is discommended in three situations; in states of
talebearing, informing the husband of what he does not like to hear
about his wife, and telling the falsity of a speech of goodness.

O Ali, four matters go uselessly: to eat after (attaining) satiety, to
light a lamp in the moonlit, to seed in the briny land, and to do favors
to the undeserved. O Ali, four matters are the quickest in punishment:
to recompense the favor with mistreatment, to trespass him who does not
show hostility, to break the faith of the party who keeps up his faith,
and to rupturing the relations with the relatives who regard you
properly. O Ali, those who keep these four characters enjoy perfect
Islam. These characters are telling truth only, showing gratitude,
prudence, and good mannerism.

O Ali, the present richness is surely the fewness of asking from
people. To ask from people frequently is surely humility. It is also the
present poverty.


