Maxims of Imam Al-hadi
======================

The following narrations are related to the Imam Abul-Hasan Ali bin
Mohammed Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) the orthodox the steadfast. Imam
Al-Hadi's Message

the reply on Fatalists and Indeterminists and the verification of God's
justice and the belief of intermediacy From Ali bin Mohammed: Peace and
God's mercy and blessings be upon you and those who follow the right
guidance. I have received your message and known what you mentioned
about your disagreement in your religion, taking up the question of
fatalism, the various opinions of those who believe in fatalism and
those who believe in indeterminism that led you to depart and antagonize
each other. You then asked me an explanation of the whole matter. I have
understood everything.

You, God's mercy be upon you, should know that as we considered the
traditions and the numerous narrations, we could find out that all
things that are embraced by the Muslims who understand God's
commandments and affairs had been either right or wrong. The right,
however, should be followed while the wrong should be evaded. The entire
umma agreed unanimously on the fact that the Quran is undoubtedly right.
All the Islamic sects believe in the truthfulness and the verification
of the Quran. In this case, they all are true and following the right
way, for the Messenger of God's saying: "My umma never agree unanimously
on an incorrect affair."

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) then was telling the
fact that all the affairs on which the umma agree unanimously are
perfectly true provided that the different sects of the umma do not show
discrepancy. The Quran, hence, is perfectly true because they all agree
upon its revelation and precision. When the Quran verifies an event and
a sect denies it, it should necessarily believe it because they
originally agreed upon the true verification of the Quran. If such a
sect insists on denying such a verified event, it should be dismissed
from the religion. The foremost narration whose verification, credence,
and evidence are proved through the Book (of God) is the narration that
is related to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and
verified and recognized by the Book in such a way that their sayings
cannot oppose. It is the Prophet's saying: "I will leave among you the
two weighty things-the Book of God and my progeny: my family. You will
not deviate as long as you adhere to both of them, and they will not
depart each other until they will join me on the Divine Pool."

The evidences on the accuracy of this hadith are numerous in the Book
of God. As an example, we cite God's saying: Only God, His Messenger,
and the true believers, who are steadfast in prayer and pay alms while
they kneel during prayer, are your guardians. One whose guardians are
God, His Messenger, and the true believers should know that God's party
will certainly triumph" Sunnis related many narrations confirming that
Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him), once, gave his ring as alms while he
was kneeling in a prayer. God therefore thanked him for this act and
revealed the previous Verse in this regard. We also found that the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had said: "He whose master
was I, Ali will be his master." "Ali, your relation to me is as same as
Aaron's relation to Moses except that there will be no prophet after
me." "Ali will settle my debts, fulfill my promises, and will be my
representative on you after me."

The first narration from which the others were extracted is unanimously
acceptable for them (Sunnis) since they do not disagree about its
accuracy. Moreover, it agrees with the Book of God. As the Book, as well
as these numerous evidences, testifies the accuracy of the narration, it
becomes obligatory upon the umma to confess of its accuracy necessarily
as long as the Quranic evidences on such narrations are obvious. They
agree with the Quran and the Quran agree with them. Afterwards, true
narrations of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) that are
related to the Truthful (Imams) by trustworthy celebrities are proved.
On that account, it becomes obligatory upon every male and female
believer to accept such narrations as true. Besides, no one should
exceed them except the obstinate. This is because the sayings of the
Prophet's family are connected to the saying of God. God says:

Those who annoy God and His Messenger will be condemned by God in this
life and in the life to come. He has prepared for them a humiliating
torment. The like of the previous Verse is the Prophet's sayings: "He
whoever annoys Ali is annoying me, he whoever annoys me is annoying God,
and he whoever annoys God is about to be punished." "To love Ali is to
love me, and to love me is to love God." "Let the Wulai'as keep on doing
so and I will subjugate them to a man who is like myself, loves God and
His Messenger, and they love him-Ali, get up and go to them." "Tomorrow,
I will appoint (for the commandment of the army going to conquer
Khaibar) a man who loves God and His Messenger and they love him, a
conqueror not absconder, and he will not return before God gives his
victory." As the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) foretold of
the victory, every one of his companions looked forward to being the one
intended. The next morning, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) summoned Ali (peace be upon him) to give him the commandment of
that army who would conquer Khaibar. Furthermore, the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) named him conqueror not absconder and declared
that God and His Messenger loved him and he loved them.

The previous introduction was the evidence on our subject of discussion
and will help us prove our coming discussion of the matter of fatalism,
indeterminism, and intermediacy. All support and power belongs to God on
Whom we depend in all our affairs.

First, let us begin with the saying of Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon
him): "No fatalism and no indeterminism. It is an in-between position.
It is the soundness of the creation, the freedom of choice, the enough
time, the supplies like the riding animal, and the means of incitement
to the doing." Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) collects the
comprehensives of the merits in these five qualities. If a servant lacks
any of these five qualities, his deeds will be invalidated. The Imam is
telling the origin of the knowledge that people should seek and the Book
refers to its confirmation. The decisive maxims of the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) also testified so because the sayings of the
Prophet and his family never exceed the limits of the Quran. It is
obligatory upon the servants (of God) to follow the narrations that
agree with the revealed Verses and confirmed by the Quran. Only the
obstinate may breach such an obligation, as we have mentioned
previously.

We found out that the sayings of Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
regarding the confirmation on the in-between position and the denial of
both fatalism and indeterminism are testified and agreeable to the Book
after we had inspected the matter. We have also another narrative that
is related to Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) and suitable for our
topic. He was, once, asked whether God forced the servants to commit the
acts of disobedience to Him. The Imam answered: "God is too fair to do
this." He then was asked whether God gave the servants the ultimate
freedom of choice. The Imam answered: "God is too powerful and dominant
to do so."

It is also related that Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) said:
"Concerning the question of fatalism, people have three different
opinions. One is the belief that people enjoy an ultimate freedom of
choice in their acts. The adopters of such a belief are disregarding the
limitless dominance of God over everything. They are untrue.

Another opinion is the belief that God forces the servants to commit
acts of disobedience to Him and imposes upon them responsibilities that
are beyond their abilities. The adopters of such a belief are imputing
unfairness to God. They are untrue. The last opinion is the belief that
God imposes upon the servants responsibilities that fit their abilities
and He never overburdens them. They should thank Him when they practice
a good deed and should seek His forgiveness when they commit a sin. The
adopters of such a belief are perfect Muslims."

In the previous narration, Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) declares
that the adopters of fatalism and the adopters of indeterminism are
opposing the right. I have already shown that the adopters of fatalism
are inaccurate and the adopters of indeterminism are wrong. Hence, the
true is the intermediacy.

I will cite an example for each of these three beliefs for making the
question clearer, more understandable, proved by the Verses of the Book,
and verified by the intelligent. Success and protection are sought from
God only.

Fatalism, the adopters of which are inaccurate, is the claim that God
the Majestic forced the servants to commit acts of disobedience to Him
and will punish them for so. The adopter of such an opinion is
describing God's judgment as unfair and belying Him. He also renounces
God's sayings: Your Lord is not unjust to any one.

This is the result of what your hands have wrought. God is certainly
not unjust to His servants. God does not do the least bit of injustice
to anyone but people wrong themselves. In addition, numerous Quranic
texts confirm this fact. Those who claim being forced to commit acts of
disobedience are accusing God of forcing them to be guilty and deciding
His punishment as unfair. He who accuses God of unfairness is belying
His Book, and he who belies God's Book is ruled as atheist in consensus.
The adopters of such a belief are comparable to a slave who did not
possess his own freedom or any thing in this world. His master realized
this fact, but he ordered him to go for purchasing something without
giving him its value. The master claimed that he is just, fair, wise,
and impartial, and threatened the slave with punishment if he would
return without that thing although he realized that the vendor of that
thing was so careful that no one can take anything from him before
paying its value completely, and he did not hand the value to his slave.
As the slave could not fetch that thing to his master after he had gone
to the market for purchasing it, he came back disappointed. The master
was highly enraged and punished the slave.

If the master was truly fair and wise, he would not punish the slave,
as he knew that he did not possess anything and that he had not given
him the value of that thing. If he punishes the slave, he will be wrong,
transgressor, and liar in the claim of being fair, wise, and just. If he
does not punish the slave, he will break his false and unfair threat
that cancels justice and wisdom. God is too Glorious and Exalted to be
considered as they believe Him to be. He is the most High and Great.

The adopters of fatalism or its branches are accusing God of injustice
and imputing unfairness and oppression to Him, because they claim that
He imposed punishment on those whom He forced to be guilty. Those who
claim that God forced the servants to be guilty will inevitably believe
that He will save the guilty from His punishment. Those who claim that
God will save the committers of acts of disobedience from His punishment
are belying God's threat that is mentioned in many Quranic texts, such
as the following: There is no doubt that evildoers who are engulfed in
sins are the companions of Hell wherein they will live forever. Those
who wrongfully consume the property of orphans are, in fact, consuming
fire in their bellies and they will suffer the blazing fire. We will
make the rejecters of Our revelations suffer in Hell. As soon as the
fire destroys their skins, We will give them new skins so that they may
suffer more of the torment. God is Majestic and All-wise.

Those who belie the threat of God are atheists because they deny one of
the Verses of God's Book. They are also reckoned with those about whom
God says: Do you believe in one part of the Book and not in the other?
Those who behave in this way shall reap disgrace in this world and
severe punishment on the Day of Resurrection. God is not unaware of
things that you do. We believe that God will reward the servants for
their deeds and punish the guilty for their sins in the limits of the
ability that He gave them. He ordered to do definite matters and warned
against committing others. In His Book, God says: For a single good
deed, one will be rewarded tenfold. But the recompense for a bad deed
will be equal to that of the deed and no injustice will be done to
anyone.

On the day when every soul will see its good and bad deeds right before
its very eyes, it will wish for the longest period of time to separate
it from its bad deeds. God warns you about Himself.

Every soul will be recompensed for its deeds on this Day. There will be
no injustice. These decisive Verses deny fatalism and its adopters.
There are many others Quranic texts in this regard. The belief of
indeterminism that was denied by Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) who
also accused its adopters of inaccuracy is the opinion that God the
Majestic neglected and gave the servants an ultimate freedom of choice
regarding His commandments. This wording is quite deep if efforts are
exerted for explaining and understanding it. The Imams of the Prophet's
progeny (peace be upon them) referred to this point when they said: "If
God gives the servants the ultimate freedom of choice by means of
negligence, He must then accede to their choice and they will
obligatorily deserve the reward and it will be improper for Him to
punish them since he neglected them."

The opinion leads to one of two meanings:

First, the servants supported each other against God and obliged Him to
accede to their own choice necessarily, whether He liked it or not.
Accordingly, the Lord is weak.

Second, the Lord is too weak to make the servants abide by His
commandments and abstain from committing the matters against which He
warned; therefore, He gives them the ultimate freedom to choose among
His commandments according to their wills. Hence, they enjoy ultimate
freedom to choose faith or disbelief.

The like of that opinion is the master who purchased a slave to serve
him, acknowledge his favors of mastership, and carry out his orders. The
master claimed that he is predominant, powerful, and wise. He ordered
his slave to do definite matters, warned him against others, promised
him a great reward if he would carry out his orders, and threatened him
with painful punishment if he would break the orders. The slave did not
comply with his master's will as he broke the orders. In other words, he
did not keep any of his master's orders and commandments. He followed
his own will and did only what he liked to do. The master lacked the
ability to stop that slave and subjugate him to his orders and
instructions. He therefore had to give him the ultimate freedom of
choice and had to accept the slave's deeds that were practiced out of
the slave's, not the master's, will. As the master asked the slave to
fetch him something, the slave broke the order and fetched something
else that he himself chose. When the slave was back, the master asked
him the reason beyond fetching something he had not ordered. The slave
answered that he practiced according to his own will and choice because
he depended upon the ultimate freedom of choice that his master had
given to him.

The authorized persons are not forbidden from doing anything. On that
account, ultimate freedom of choice is impossible. Thus, the master
should be able to order his slave to follow his instructions and carry
out his commands according to his, not the slave's, will. The master
also should grant the slave a limited capacity due to which the slave
can follow the instructions and carry out the orders. When the master
orders the slave to follow definite instructions and warns him against
definite acts, he should inform him of the rewards for following such
instructions and the punishment for committing such acts. He should also
give notice against the punishment and interest him in the rewards by
describing them perfectly for the slave who, in that case, will realize
the power of his master through the capacity of carrying out the orders
and abstaining from the warned acts. Such being the case, the master's
fairness and justice will be comprehensive and his argument against the
slave will be obvious through his warnings.

If the slave carries out the master's instruction, he will be rewarded,
and if he does not stop breaking the master's instruction, he will be
punished.

If the master gives the slave the ultimate freedom of choice, he is
then too powerless to control the slave who may do good or evil or may
obey or disobey. Consequently, the master will be unable to punish the
disobedient slave or force him to obey. If the above-mentioned
characters are applied to God, then His power, godhead, orders,
instructions, rewarding, and punishment are all invalid. It also
contradicts the Book of God that says:

He -God- does not want disbelief for His servants. If you give thanks,
He will accept it from you." Believers, have fear of God as you should
and die only as Muslims (having submitted to the will of God)" We have
created jinn and human beings only that they might worship Me. I do not
expect to receive any sustenance from them or that they should feed
Me.

Worship God and consider no one equal to Him.

Believers, obey God and His Messengers and do not turn away from Him
when you hear (His commands). The adopters of the belief that God gave
the servants the ultimate freedom of choice in His instructions and
warnings are imputing powerlessness to Him, deeming obligatory on Him to
accede to everything they do, and deactivating His orders, promises, and
threats. This is because the free to choose can do anything out of his
will. He can disbelieve or believe and no one will have the right to
stop or forbid him. So therefore, the adopters of ultimate indeterminism
cancel God's promises, threats, and orders as well as everything that we
have already mentioned. They are included with those about whom God
says:

Do you believe in one part of the Book and not in the other? Those who
behave in this way shall reap disgrace in this world and severe
punishment on the Day of Resurrection. God is not unaware of things that
you do. God is too exalted to meet the descriptions of the
indeterminists.

Our opinion is that God the Majestic created the creatures out of His
power and gave them the ability to worship Him. He therefore orders them
to do certain things and warned them against others. He accepted from
the creatures to follow His orders that He chose for them out of His
satisfaction. He also warned them against committing acts of
disobedience to Him, censured the disobedient ones and will punish them.
All rights of option belong to God exclusively. Only He can choose
whatever He wills and orders to follow His chosen commandments and He
can warn against anything and punish for committing it because of the
ability that He granted the servants for carrying out His orders and
avoiding committing acts of disobedience to Him. He is obviously Just,
Fair, and thoroughly Wise. He perfected the argument for Himself by
excuses and warnings. He, absolutely, enjoys the right of option through
which He select anyone of His servants for conveying His message and
providing His arguments against people. As He chose Mohammed (peace be
upon him and his family) and selected him to convey His message to
people, the disbelieving ones said, out of envy and arrogance: Why this
Quran had not been revealed to a great man from either of the two
towns?

They meant Umayya bin Abissalt or Abu Mas'ud Ath-Thaqafi.

God canceled and rejected their choice and personal notions. He says:

Do they distribute the mercy of your Lord? It is We who have
distributed their sustenance in this world and raised the positions of
some of them above the others so that they would mock each other. The
mercy of your Lord is better than what they can amass. Thus, God chose
only what He wills and warned against only what He detested. He will
surely reward those who obey Him and will surely punish the disobedient.
Had He given people the freedom of choice, He would have acceded to the
choice of Koreish who selected Umayya bin Abissalt or Abu Mas'ud
Ath-Thaqafi since they preferred those two men to Mohammed (peace be
upon him and his family). Moreover, God disciplined the believers by His
saying: The believing men and women must not feel free to do something
in their affairs other than that which has been already decided for them
by God and His Messenger.

He did not permit them to choose for themselves out of their own ideas
and passions. He accepted from them only to follow His orders and avoid
the acts of disobedience to Him. These orders and warnings are conveyed
to them through the one whom God chose for the conveyance of His
message. On that account, he whoever complies with the chosen conveyer
will be guided to the right and he whoever disobeys will be astray and
subjected to the argument of God, which is the ability to follow God's
orders and avoid acting disobediently to Him. The disobedient will be
therefore deprived of God's rewards and will surely suffer His
punishment.

This opinion of intermediacy is neither fatalism nor ultimate
indeterminism.

Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) refers to the opinion of
intermediacy by the following narration: Abaya bin Rab'ie Al-Asadi asked
Imam Ali (peace be upon him) about the ability through which he can
stand erect, sit, and do whatever he wants. Amirul Muminin said: "What
do you think of that ability? Do you possess it without the interference
of God, or do you possess it as same as God possesses?" Abaya could not
find any answer. "You should answer, Abaya," said Amirul Muminin. "What
should I say?" asked he. Amirul Muminin said, "I will definitely kill
you if you claim that you possess this ability without the interference
of God, and I will kill you too if you claim that you possess it as same
as God possesses." "What should I say then, Amirul Muminin?" asked Abaya
confusedly and the Imam (peace be upon him) answered: "You should say
that you possess that ability through God Who is the only One that
possesses it perfectly. If He gives you the ability in possession, that
will be out of His favors. If he takes it back from you, that will be a
kind of His test. He is the true Possessor of everything that He gives
to you and the true Prevalent on everything that you can do through Him.
You have heard people frequently seeking ability of changing and power
as they say, 'All ability of changing and power belong to God ', have
you not?"

"Yes, I have," answered Abaya, "What is the interpretation of this
saying, Amirul Muminin?"

Imam Ali (peace be upon him) answered: "This means that we cannot avoid
the acts of disobedience to God except through His preservation, and we
do not have power to obey Him except through His help."

As he heard these answers, Abaya kissed the hands and feet of Amirul
Muminin (peace be upon him) out of his admiration. The following is
another narration that is related to Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him):
A man called Najda came to Imam Ali (peace be upon him) asking about the
acknowledgement of God. "O Amirul Muminin," he asked, "How do you
acknowledge your Lord?" Imam Ali (peace be upon him) answered: "I
acknowledge Him through the ability of discernment that He granted me
and the mind that guides me to this acknowledgement."

"Are you enforcedly disposed for this acknowledgement?" asked Najda.
Imam Ali (peace be upon him) answered: "If I am enforcedly disposed for
this acknowledgement, I should not be praised for a good deed that I
practice or censured for an evildoing that I commit. Moreover, if it is
so, then the doer of charity, not the evildoer, should be blamed. But I
knew that God is Existent and Everlasting while everything else is
created, changeable, and transient. Surely, the Everlasting Eternal
(God) is not like the transient created (things)." "O Amirul Muminin,"
spoke Najda, "I notice that you have spoken out of wisdom." Imam Ali
(peace be upon him) answered: "In fact, I am free. I will be surely
punished if I commit an evildoing instead of a good deed."

It is also related that an old man asked Amirul Muminin, in his journey
back from Syria (the battle of Siffin), whether their fight against the
Syrian people had been out of the act of God. "Yes, it was," answered
Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him), "You cannot climb a mount or descend
in a valley unless through the act of God." "O Amirul Muminin," asked
the old man, "Will I then sacrifice my fatigue for God's rewarding?"
Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) answered: "Do not ask it, old man.
God is certainly adapting for you a great reward while you are walking,
residing, and returning. You have not been enforced or compelled to do
any of your actions. Perhaps you thought it i.e. act of God, is an
inevitable and incumbent act. If it is so, then rewarding and punishment
are meaningless, promises and threats are illogical, and people will not
be subjected to the indefeasible things. That is the opinion of the
idolaters and the Shaitan's disciples. The orders of God the Majestic
are carried out optionally and He warns against things out of
admonition. He is not obeyed compulsorily and is not overcome when He is
disobeyed. He has not created the heavens and the earth and all that is
between them purposelessly, even though this is the belief of the
disbelievers. Woe to the disbelievers; they will suffer the torment of
fire."

The old man, then, kissed Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) on the
head and went on saying (as poetic verses):

"You are the Imam for the obedience to whom we wish for God's
forgiveness on the Day of Salvation. You have disclosed the obscured
points of our religion. God reward you with full satisfaction on behalf
of us. No one is excused for committing an evildoing out of wrongness
and disobedience to God." In the previous narrations, Amirul Muminin
(peace be upon him) provides evidences that are extracted from the Book
of God and rejects the opinions of fatalism and indeterminism, since
they -these two opinions- drag their adopters to wrong, atheism, and
denial of the Book. God guard us against deviation and atheism.

We do not believe in fatalism or indeterminism. We believe in the
opinion of intermediacy. The opinion of intermediacy stands for the test
and examination by means of the ability that God has granted to us and
asked to practice through it and we proved it -the opinion- due to the
Book and the beliefs of the pious Imams of the Prophet's family (peace
be upon them). As an example on the examination through ability, we cite
the following example: A wealthy master wanted to test his slave;
therefore, he gave him some of that wealth in possession and ordered him
to practice definite acts that the master liked and avoid spending the
wealth in definite fields. The wealth then can be spent in two
fields-either the fields that the master likes or the fields that the
master dislikes.

The master also lodged the slave in a house and informed him that he
would live there temporarily because, in the future, he would be taken
to another permanent abode where he would be either rewarded or
punished. If the slave spends that wealth in the fields that his master
liked and ordered, the master will give him the permanent rewarding in
the permanent abode of which he promised. But if the slave spends the
wealth in the fields that the master warned against, he will encounter
the permanent punishment in the coming permanent abode. The master
limited a definite time for living in the first temporary house. The
master would seize the slave and the wealth that he had given in
possession, although he is the actual possessor of the slave and his
wealth, when the deadline of living in the temporary house fell. Since
the master was just, faithful, fair, and wise, he would not seize the
wealth that he had given to the slave in possession before the falling
of the deadline of living in the temporary house.

Supposing the slave spent the wealth in the fields of which the master
ordered, the master then should fulfill his promise to the slave and
reward him, should he not? He would be doing favors to the slave as he
tested him in a temporary house and rewarded him, for being obedient,
with a permanent joy in a permanent abode.

Supposing the slave spent the wealth that his master gave in possession
in the fields against which his master had warned during his staying in
the temporary house, the punishment with which the master had threatened
would unavoidably befall him without the master's being wronging him,
since he had already instructed, informed, and warned against spending
the wealth in such fields. Hence, the master should fulfill his promises
and execute his threats so as to be described as the prevalent powerful
one. The master in the previous example stands for God the Majestic, the
slave stands for the human being, the wealth stands for the immeasurable
power of God, the test stands for the exhibition of His wisdom and
power, the temporary house stands for this world, the wealth that was
given to the slave in possession stands for the ability that God has
given to the human beings, the fields in which the master ordered to
spend the money stand for the ability to follow the apostles of God and
acknowledge whatever they relate to God the Majestic. The fields against
which the master warned stand for the courses of Eblis, the promise of
the master stands for the endless source of pleasure of Paradise, (the
temporary house stands for this world) , the permanent abode stands for
the life to come, and the test by the ability that was given to the
slave stands for the opinion of intermediacy.

The five qualities that Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
mentioned -the previous saying of Imam As-Sadiq: "No fatalism and no
indeterminism. It is an in-between position. It is the soundness of the
creation, the freedom of choosing, the enough time, the baggage like the
riding animal, and the means of incitement to the doing,"- are the
comprehensives of merits. I, hereby, am to explain them separately and
provide evidences from the Quran. Explanation of soundness of the
creation:

In his saying, "the soundness of the creation," Imam As-Sadiq (peace be
upon him) refers to the perfection of the human beings' creation, the
perfection of the senses, the stability of the mind, the discernment,
and the full ability of utterance. In this regard, God says: We have
honored the children of Adam, carried them on the land and the sea,
given them pure sustenance and exalted them above most of My creatures.
In the previous Verse, God informs that He preferred the human beings to
the other creatures, such as beasts, wild animals, submarine animals,
and birds as well as every active creature that man can perceive by the
discernment of the mind and articulation. This is clear in God's
sayings: We have created the human being in the best form.

Human being, what evil has deceived you about your Gracious Lord Who
created you proportionately and fashioned you in whatever composition He
wanted.

Furthermore, there are many Quranic texts confirming this fact. Thus,
the foremost God's grace on human beings is the soundness of the mental
power in addition to the preference to many other creatures by means of
the mind perfection and the discernment of the rhetoric. Every active
creature on this earth is independent by means of its senses and
self-perfection, whereas the human beings are preferred to other
creatures by means of their ability of speaking, which all the other
perceptive creatures lack. Through the ability of speaking, God made man
dominate the other creatures. Accordingly, the human beings have enjoyed
the ability of controling the other creatures, which have become under
man's predominance. This is clear in God's sayings:

God has made subservient to you the animals so that perhaps you will
glorify Him. It is God who put the oceans at your disposal so that you
could find therein fresh fish for food and ornaments to deck yourselves
with. He created cattle which provide you with clothes, food, and other
benefits. How beautiful you find them when you bring them home and when
you drive them out to graze. They carry your heavy loads to lands, which
you would not have been able to reach without great difficulty. Your
Lord is certainly Compassionate and All-Merciful.

On that account, God has called the human beings to follow His
commandments and obey Him, since He has preferred them to other
creatures by means of the sound creation and the perfect articulation
and knowledge after He had granted them the ability that is fit enough
for making them obey and follow His commandments. This is evident in
God's sayings: Have as much fear of God as best as you can, listen, and
obey.

God does not impose on any soul a responsibility beyond its ability.
God does not impose on any soul that which he (or she) cannot afford.
There are many other Quranic texts referring to this meaning. When God
seizes somebody's sense, He acquits him of carrying out the practices
that are done through that sense. God says: It is not an offense for the
blind, the lame, or the sick not to take part in the battle. Whoever
obeys God and His Messenger will be admitted to the gardens wherein
streams flow. God will make whoever turns away suffer a painful
torment.

In this Verse, God acquits all these classes of participating in jihad
as well as every act that they cannot practice owing to their
disability. As God gives the solvent the ability of defraying the zakat
and performing the hajj, He deems obligatory upon them to do these two
things. For the poor, He does not make it obligatory upon them to defray
the zakat or perform the hajj. He says: Those who have the means and
ability have a duty to God to visit the House (of God) and perform the
hajj rituals. God also says:

Those who renounce their wives by calling them mothers and then change
their minds about what they have said will have to set free a slave as a
ransom and only then will their carnal relations be lawful. This is what
you have been commanded. God is Well Aware of whatever you do. If one
cannot set free a slave, he must fast for two consecutive months, and
only then can he have lawful carnal relations. If this is also not
possible, he must feed sixty destitute people. This is the command of
God, so that perhaps you will have faith in God and His Messenger. Such
are the Laws of God, and those who disbelieve them will suffer a painful
torment.

The previous Verse is a proof on the fact that God (the Blessed the
Exalted) has not imposed upon the servants a responsibility that is
beyond their ability and has not warned them against a practice that
they cannot avoid. This is the soundness of the creation. Explanation of
the freedom of choice:

By the freedom of choice, Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) means that
nothing can watch, ban, or prevent man from carrying out the orders of
God. This is clear in God's reference to the weak ones whom are too
oppressed to have any means or way by which they can obey God. He says:
As for the really weak and oppressed men, women, and children who were
not able to find any means of obtaining their freedom or of having the
right guidance…

Hence, God asserts that the weak individuals whom are deprived of the
freedom of choice are acquitted if they are faithful believers.
Explanation of the enough time: By the enough time, Imam As-Sadiq (peace
be upon him) means the age in which the acknowledgement of God becomes
obligatory upon man, namely the time of the ability of discernment and
maturity up to death. Whoever dies before he realizes the perfection is
on the right (path). This is clear in God's saying:

One who abandons his home for the cause of God will find many places of
refuge in the vast land and one who dies, after having abandoned his
home to get near to God and His Messenger, will receive his reward from
God. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful. God acquits such persons of
any imperfection because they could not attain the perfection of their
religion due to time limitedness. God also acquits the immature ones of
the mattersthat are imposed upon the mature. This is clear in His
saying: Tell the believing woman to cast down their eyes, guard their
chastity, and not to show off their beauty except what is permitted by
the law. Let them cover their breasts with their veils. They must not
show off their beauty to anyone other than their husbands, father,
father-in-laws, sons, step-sons, brothers, sons of brothers and sisters,
women of their kind, their slaves, immature male servants, or immature
boys. They must not stamp their feet to show off their hidden ornaments.
All of you believers, turn to God in repentance so that perhaps you will
have everlasting happiness. Explanation of the supplies:

By the supplies, Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) refers to the
financial potency and the subsistence that help man carry out the Lord's
orders. This is clear in God's saying:

People who are weak or sick and those who do not have the means to take
part in the fighting are exempt from this duty if their intention
remains sincere about God and His Messenger. Righteous people shall not
be blamed. God is All-forgiving and All-merciful. This Verse shows that
God excused those who could not have enough means for expenditure, while
He convicted those who had enough means of subsistence and riding
animals owing to which they could perform the hajj rituals, participate
in jihad, and could practice the like obligatory matters.

God also excused the poor and imposed the rich to dedicate a share of
their resources to the poor. He says: (The recipients of charity should
be given to) the poor whose poverty, because of their striving for the
cause of God, has become an obstacle for them, and who do not have the
ability to travel in the land, they seem rich compared to the ignorant,
because of their modest behavior. You would know them by their faces.
They would never earnestly ask people for help. God knows well whatever
wealth you spend for the cause of God. In the previous Verse, God
acquits the poor and frees them from the responsibility of preparing for
whatever they cannot do or possess its means. Explanation of the means
of the incitement to the doing:

By the incitement to the doing, Imam As-Sadiq (peace be upon him)
refers to the intention, which is the motive of all the deeds. The heart
is the sense of the intention. God does not accept the deeds of anyone
who practices an action without true intention. Thus, He says about the
hypocrites: They (the hypocrites) speak words that do not come from
their hearts. God knows well whatever they try to hide. As a word of
reproof, God addresses to the believers:

Believers, why do you preach what you do not practice? It is most
hateful in the sight of God if you say something and do not practice it.
Anyone who says something faithfully will be driven by his intention to
apply his saying practically. If one says something without belief, the
reality of that saying cannot be seen.

Moreover, God accepts the true intention of a deed that does not accord
it because of an obstacle. This is clear in His sayings: No one verbally
denounces his faith in God unless he is forced but his heart is
confident about his faith. God will not take into account your
inattentive oath.

The Holy Quran and the Prophet's reported sayings prove that the heart
is the possessor of all the senses and the corrector of their deeds.
Nothing can cancel what the heart corrects.

The previous was an explanation of the five qualities to which Imam
As-Sadiq (peace be upon him) refers in clarifying the opinion of
intermediacy between fatalism and ultimate indeterminism. It becomes
obligatory upon everyone who has these five qualities gathered in his
personality to act perfectly according to the instructions of God and
His Messenger. The individuals who lack any of these five qualities are
acquitted of practicing the deeds that need that quality. Many Quranic
texts prove the test of ability that comprises the two opinions (of
fatalism and ultimate indeterminism) together. God says: We shall
certainly test you until We know those who strive hard for the cause of
God and those who exercise patience. We will also examine your deeds. We
gradually lead those who have called Our revelations mere lies, to
destruction. Their destruction will be such that they will not even
notice how it seized them.

Alif. Lam. Mim. Do people think they will not be tested because they
say, "We have faith?" In the following Verses, the word 'fitna' stands
for test: We tested Solomon by (causing death to his son) and leaving
his body on Solomon's chair. Then he turned to Us in repentance… The
Lord said, 'We tested your (Moses) people after you left them and the
Samiri made them go astray.'

(Moses said:) It is only Your test.

The previous Quranic texts are compared to each other and testify for
one another. In the following Verses, the word 'balwa' stands for test:
…But He wanted to test you through what He has given to you. Then He let
you face defeat in order to test you. We have tested them in the same
way as we tested the dwellers of the garden. It is He who has created
death and life to put you to the test and see which of you is most
virtuous in your deeds. When his Lord tested Abraham's faith, (by His
words)… Had God wanted, He could have granted them (unbelievers)
victory, but He wants to test you through each other. All the Quranic
texts in which the word 'balwa' is mentioned are dealing with the
subject of God's test and examination. Yet, they are numerous in the
Quran.

All these texts prove the test and examination. As a matter of fact,
God the Majestic has not created the people out of play, has not
neglected them, and has not shown His wisdom out of vanity. He asserts
this fact in His saying:

Did you think that We had created you for a playful purpose? One may
ask: "Did God have no knowledge of the servants' deeds before He had
tested them?" We answer that God has already known completely what the
servants will do before they did anything. This is proved by His saying:
If they were to return to (the worldly life), they would again commit
what they had been warned against, for they are liars. God has tested
them only for showing them His justice and for providing the argument
against them before He punishes them. The meaning of this notion is
proved in God's sayings: Had We destroyed them with a torment before the
coming of Muhammad they would have said, 'Lord, would that you had sent
us a messengers.' We have never punished anyone without sending them Our
messenger first. The Messengers were sent to give people the glad news
(of God's mercy) and warn them (of His punishment). On that account, God
tests the servants by the ability that He grants to them. This is the
opinion of intermediacy, which is a position between fatalism and
ultimate indeterminism. This opinion is also testified by the Holy Quran
and the reported sayings of the Imams of the Prophet's progeny (peace be
upon them).

One may cite the following question:

"What do you say about the exegesis of God's saying: 'God guides or
causes to go astray whomever He wants,' and the like Verses? To answer
this question, we cite that the previous Quranic text and its like have
one of two meanings: First, the Verses are notifications of God's
absolute ability. This means that God is able to guide to the right or
cause to go astray whomever He wants. However, if God subjects
people -out of His absolute ability- to believe or disbelieve in Him,
then they should not deserve the reward or the punishment. We have
already referred to this meaning in details.

Second, God's guidance stands for His introduction of the right path.
This meaning is clear in God's saying: We sent (introduced) guidance to
the people of Thamud but they preferred blindness to guidance so a
humiliating blast of torment struck them for their evil deeds. If God
forced them to accept the right way, they would not have gone astray.
Besides, not every allegorical text can be taken as evidence against the
decisive texts. God orders us to follow the decisive Quranic texts only.
He says:

It is God who has revealed the Book to you in which some verses are
decisive statements (which accept no interpretation) and these are the
fundamental ideas of the Book, while other verses are allegorical (may
have several possibilities). Those whose hearts are perverse, follow the
allegorical statements in pursuit of their own mischievous goals by
interpreting them in a way that will suit their own purpose. No one
knows its true interpretations except God and those who have a firm
grounding in knowledge. They say, "We believe in it. All its verses are
from our Lord." No one can grasp this fact except the people of reason.
Give the glad news to those of Our servants who listen to the words (of
the Quran) and only follow the best ones. They are those whom God has
guided. They are the people of understanding 'The best words' in the
previous Verse stands for the most decisive and the clearest. God lead
you and us to say and do what He likes and accepts, and save you and us
against the acts of disobedience to Him out of His grace and favor. All
praise is due to God as fit as He deserves. The blessings of God be upon
Mohammed and his immaculate family. Allah be sufficient for us. He is
surely the best guardian.

**Imam Al-Hadi's Answers to Yahya bin Aktham's Questions**

Musa bin Mohammed bin Ali Ar-Reza related:

I met Yahya bin Aktham in a public meeting and he asked me a number of
questions. I then came to my brother Ali bin Mohammed (peace be upon
him) who addressed to me several admonitions that made me accede to the
obedience to him. Afterwards, I said to him, "God make me your
sacrifice. Son of Aktham asked me various questions and sought their
answers." The Imam (peace be upon him) laughed and asked whether I could
answer him or not. "No," answered I, "I could not answer them." "What
were they?" asked the Imam (peace be upon him). I answered, "He asked
the following questions: Regarding God's saying: "The one who had
knowledge from the Book said, 'I can bring it to you before you even
blink your eye," was Solomon the prophet in need of the knowledge of his
successor Aassif? Regarding God's saying: "He raised his parents on the
throne and they prostrated themselves before him (Joseph)," did Jacob
and his sons who were all prophets prostrate themselves for Joseph?

Regarding God's saying: "If you have any doubt about what We have
revealed to you (about the Day of Judgment and other matters of belief),
ask those who read the Book that was revealed (to the Prophets who
lived) before you," who is the addressee in this Verse? If it was the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), he then doubted the Book. If
it was not him, to whom was the Book revealed then? Regarding God's
saying: "If all the trees in the earth were pens and the ocean, with
seven more oceans, were ink still these could not suffice to record all
the Words of God. God is Majestic and All-wise," what and where are
these oceans? Regarding God's saying: "All that the souls may desire and
that may delight their eyes will be available therein (in Paradise),"
Adam's soul desired for eating from that wheat, why was he then punished
for so? Regarding God's saying: "He grants… pairs of offspring to
whomever He wants," how should God marry two of the same sex while He
punished some people because they committed homosexuality?

Regarding God's saying: "Let two just people witness the divorce," how
is the testimony of a single woman admissible, while it is inadmissible
in other situations?

Ali (peace be upon him) said that the way of distinguishing the sex of
the hermaphrodite -for defining their shares of inheritance- is to test
their way of urination. Who should look at them while they urinate? If
it is proved that the hermaphrodite was female, how is it then allowable
for strange men to look at her organ of urination? If it was a male, how
is it then allowable for women to look at his organ of urination? In
addition, the self-testimony is inadmissible?

A man was in his way when he noticed that a herdsman was copulating
with one of the sheep. As soon as the herdsman knew that the man was
watching him, he pushed that sheep among the herd and it was not
distinguished. What is the legal way of slaughtering that sheep? Is it
halal or haram to have from its meat? It is familiar that the qira'a in
the night prayers -Maghrib and Esha' Prayers- can be only recited
loudly. It is also known that the Fajr Prayer is one of the day prayers.
Why is it then obligatory to raise the voice when reciting the qira'a of
the Fajr Prayer? About Ibn Jurmouz, Ali (peace be upon him) said: "The
killer of the son of Safiyya will be in Hell." Why did Ali (peace be
upon him) not kill Ibn Jurmouz while he was the imam?

In the battle of Siffin, Ali ordered his army to kill all the
attackers, the absconders, and the wounded, while in the battle of
Al-Jamal , he did not permit any soldier to kill an absconder or a
wounded. Moreover, he declared that everybody who would keep himself
indoors or disarm himself would be safe. If this ruling had been true,
the other should have been wrong. Should those who confess of committing
sodomy encounter the doctrinal provision, or should they be acquitted?"
After he had listened to the questions thoroughly, Imam Al-Hadi (peace
be upon him) ordered me to write down the answers -in a form of a
message to Yahya bin Aktham; the asker-.

In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful God guide you to the
right. I have received your questions through which you want to test us
out of your obstinacy so that you may find a gap for which you may
criticize us. God reward you according to your intention. We, hereby,
explain your questions. Lend your ears, open your mind, and engage your
heart for receiving our answers. You have been subjected to the
argument. Peace be upon you.

Regarding your question about God's saying: "The one who had knowledge
from the Book said, 'I can bring it to you before you even blink your
eye," that one was Aassif bin Burkhiya. Solomon the prophet (peace be
upon him) was not in need of the knowledge of Aassif, but he wanted to
introduce him as his successor before his nation that included people
and jinn. The knowledge of Aassif was only a part of Solomon's knowledge
that he delivered to his successor according to God's instructions so
that the nation would not conflict on the question of the prophet's
succession. During the lifetime of David the prophet (peace be upon
him), God instructed Solomon to solve a problem so that people would
recognize his prophesy and leadership after his father -David the
prophet (peace be upon him)- and they would be subjected by that
argument.

Regarding the prostration of Jacob (peace be upon him) and his sons, it
was out of their obedience to God and affection of Joseph (peace be upon
him). It was similar to the angel's prostration before Adam (peace be
upon him). That prostration was not intended to Adam personally. It was
a sign of their obedience to God and love to Adam (peace be upon him).
Thus, Jacob the prophet and his sons including Joseph prostrated
themselves as a sign of showing gratitude to God for their reunion. At
that very time, Joseph the prophet (peace be upon him) shows
thankfulness to God by saying (as the Quran relates):

My Lord, You have given me the kingdom and taught me the meaning of
dreams. You are the Creator of the heavens and the earth. You are my
Guardian in this world and in the life to come. Make me die as one who
has submitted to the Will of God and unite me with the righteous ones.
Regarding your question about God's saying: "If you have any doubt about
what We have revealed to you (about the Day of Judgment and other
matters of belief), ask those who read the Book that was revealed (to
the Prophets who lived) before you," the addressee in this Verse was the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). He, however, had no doubt
about what was revealed to him, but the ignorant ones used to wonder why
God had not appointed one of His angels as the apostle, since there was
no difference between the current apostle and them, for both were having
food and drink and walking in marts. Consequently, God revealed to His
apostle to, "ask those who read the Book that was revealed (to the
Prophets who lived) before" him, in the attendance of those ignorant
ones, whether God had appointed as apostles other than ordinary people
who were having food and walking in marts or not. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) had no doubt due to which God said: "If you
have any doubt." The doubt was mentioned out of God's fairness. -Because
the others had doubt about it, God added His Prophet, who had no doubt
at all, with them so that they would feel equality. God says:

If anyone disputes (your prophesy) after knowledge has come to you,
say, "Let each of us bring our children, women, and ourselves to one
place and pray to God to condemn the liars among us," In this holy
saying, God did not accuse them of being the lying party, yet they were
actually the lying party, because they would have rejected that assembly
of condemning the liars if they had been accused of being the liars. God
has already known that the Prophet would convey the messages perfectly
and that he would not be a liar. In the same way, God has known that the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had no doubt about what was
revealed to him, but He only wanted to compare him to the others out of
His ultimate fairness.

Regarding your question about God's saying: "If all the trees in the
earth were pens and the ocean, with seven more oceans, were ink still
these could not suffice to record all the Words of God. God is Majestic
and All-wise," it is quite true that the words of God will not come to
an end even if they are recorded with pens that are made of all the
trees on this earth and ink that is extracted from all the oceans on
this earth. These oceans are Spring of Sulfur, Spring of Nemr, Spring of
Barahut, Spring of Tabariya, Spring of -hot water of- Sabthan, Spring
of -hot water of- Africa (named Lasnan), and Spring of Bahroun. We are
the endless words of God and our merits are innumerable. All what a soul
desires and may delight the eye, including food, drinks, and means of
amusement, are found in Paradise. All these were permitted for Adam
(peace be upon him) to have except a certain tree against which God
warned Adam and his wife. That was the tree of envy. God instructed them
not to envy those whom He preferred to other creatures. Adam, however,
forgot this instruction when he envied (others). God did not find him a
good self-determining.

In His saying: "He grants… pairs of offspring to whomever He wants,"
God means that He may gift with boys and girls together. Every pair is
called, 'zawj'. God the Majestic is too elevated to refer to that which
you intend for the purpose of gaining a permission to commit it. "For
those who do so have committed a sin and on the Day of Judgment their
torment will be double. They will suffer forever in disgrace," unless
they repent to God. The one woman whose testimony is sufficiently
acceptable is the midwife provided that her testimony is sound. In case
her testimony is dissatisfied, there should be two women who supplant a
single man necessarily. Because a man cannot supplant two women in
testimony, it is admissible for one woman to testify if she swears.

Regarding your question about the problem of distinguishing the sex of
the hermaphrodite, Imam Ali (peace be upon him) has already solved this
problem when he instructed: "Expert people should stand beyond the
hermaphrodite with a mirror in the hand of each. They should look in the
mirrors at the ghost of the hermaphrodite to distinguish the sex."

Regarding the herdsman who copulates with one of the sheep, he should
slaughter and burn that sheep if he recognizes it. If not, he should
divide the herd into two parts and cast lots. He then should divide the
losing part into two halves and cast lots. He should keep on doing so
until two sheep remain. Lots should be cast with these two sheep so that
one of them will be slaughtered and burnt. Thus, the other sheep will be
saved. The qira'a of the Fajr Prayer should be recited loudly because
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) used to offer that prayer
before daybreak. It therefore should be reckoned with the night
prayers.

Regarding Imam Ali's saying: "The killer of the son of Safiyya will be
in Hell," he (peace be upon him) copied it from the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family). Ibn Jurmouz was one of the Kharijites who
mutinied against Imam Ali (peace be upon him) and were killed in the
battle of An-Nahrawan; therefore, Amirul Muminin did not kill him in
Basra (after he had killed Az-Zubair). Regarding your wonderment that
Imam Ali (peace be upon him), in the battle of Siffin, ordered his army
to kill all the attackers, the absconders, and the wounded, while in the
battle of Al-Jamal, he did not permit any soldier to kill an absconder
or a wounded and declared that everybody who would keep himself indoors
or disarm himself would be safe, I answer you that the commandment of
the adversary army in the battle of Al-Jamal was killed and they
remained without a commander. Therefore, they returned home without
having the intention to fight, oppose, or breach their allegiance to the
leadership of Imam Ali (peace be upon him). They were pleased when they
were left alone. The ruling, in such cases, is to stop fighting them and
to abstain from injuring them as long as they did not seek for help
against the other party. The adversary army in the battle of Siffin were
referring to a prepared group and a leader who was equipping them with
weapons-armors, spears, and swords. He was paying them seductive
salaries, planning for them, visiting the ill, healing the broken,
medicating the wounded, preparing a riding animal for the walkers,
providing the naked with clothes, and encouraging them to return to the
battlefield when they were defeated. For that reason, Imam Ali (peace be
upon him) did not treat those individuals as same as the soldiers who
were in the battle of Al-Jamal and did not apply the rulings of fighting
the monotheists to them. The Imam explained these rulings for them and
they had the freedom to reject or repent to the right. The ruling of the
rejecters was to fight them with the sword (weapons).

Regarding your question about the individual who confesses committing
sodomy, I answer that the representative of God may apply the punishment
of God on that individual or acquit him because God acquits. This is
clear in God's saying: This is Our gift to you so give them away free or
keep them as you like. You should know that the previous explanations
were the answers of all of your questions.

**Short Maxims of Imam Al-Hadi**

1. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said to one of his adherents:

In a friendly manner, blame (somebody) and say to him: When God intends
goodness for somebody, He makes him accept the blame of the friends.

2. Al-Mutawakkil (the Abbasid caliph) vowed he would give much money as
alms if he would recover his health. When he was healthy, he wanted to
fulfill his vow; therefore, he asked the scholars how much he should
give as alms so as to be regarded as much money. The scholars provided
variant opinions all of which were not accurate. The caliph then
submitted the question before Imam Al-Hadi Abul-Hasan (peace be upon
him), who answered: You should give eighty dirhams as alms.

When he was asked about this definition, the Imam (peace be upon him)
answered: God says to His Apostle (peace be upon him and his family):
God has helped you on many occasions.

As we counted these many occasions, they were eighty. However, God
regarded them as many. Al-Mutawakkil was pleased by this explanation and
gave eighty dirhams as alms.

3. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: There are definite places in
which God likes the servants to supplicate to Him. One of these places
is the tomb of Al-Hussein; master of the martyrs (peace be upon him).

4. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: Others will fear him who
fears God. He who obeys God will be obeyed. He who obeys God will not
care for the dissatisfaction of the creatures. He who enrages the
Creator should be sure of encountering the dissatisfaction of the
creatures.

5. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: No one can describe God with
attributes other than these with which He describes Himself. How can
anyone describe Him when senses are too short to perceive Him, illusions
are too short to comprehend Him, ideas are too short to mark Him, and
sights are too short to appreciate Him? He is remote in His nearness and
near in His remoteness. He created the how without being asked 'How?'
and founded the where without being asked 'Where?' He is out of how and
where. He is the One and Only. Exalted be His Majesty and sacred be His
Names.

6. Al-Hasan bin Mas'ud related: One day, one of my fingers was hurt, a
rider hit me in the shoulder, and a crowd of people caused my clothes to
be torn. In this manner, I visited Abul-Hasan Ali bin Mohammed (peace be
upon him) and said: "God protect me against the evil of such an
ill-omened day." Imam Al-Hadi worded:

O Hasan, do you accuse the guiltless of your guilt while you are
frequently visiting us? I then regained my intellect and noticed my
flaw; therefore, I said, "O Master, I seek God's forgiveness." The Imam
(peace be upon him) said: O Hasan, what was the fault with days that you
regard as evil portent while the fact is that you are punished for your
own deeds during them? I said, "O Son of God's Messenger, I seek God's
forgiveness and declare my repentance against so." The Imam (peace be
upon him) then added: To dispraise days and regard them as evil portent
is useless for you. God, however, will punish you for dispraising the
days for matters that are out of their control. O Hasan, do you not know
that the only rewarder and punisher for the deeds, sooner or later, is
God? "I know, master," I said. He (peace be upon him) then added:

Do not repeat it again and do not say that days have any effect in the
affairs of God. "I will, master," I said. 7. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon
him) said:

He who feels secure from God's unexpected retribution and painful
penalty will feel arrogant until God's act and inevitable decree (death)
will befall him. He whomever receives evidence from his Lord will
belittle the worldly misfortunes even if he is cut into pieces. 8. Dawud
As-Sarmi related: My master Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) ordered me
to do many actions then he tested whether I had retained them all. When
he noticed that I could not maintain them all, he took a pen and wrote
down: "In the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. I will remember
it, inshallah. All the matters are in God's hand." I smiled and the Imam
(peace be upon him) asked me about the reason. I said, "God make me your
sacrifice, this record reminds me of the report that one of our
acquaintances related to me on the authority of your grandfather Imam
Ar-Reza (peace be upon him). He said that whenever the Imam (peace be
upon him) ordered of a matter, he used to write down: "In the Name of
Allah the Beneficent the Merciful. I will remember it, inshallah." The
Imam (peace be upon him) said:

O Dawud, I am honest if I tell you that the neglector of the basmala is
as same as the neglector of the (obligatory) prayers. 9. One day, Imam
Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said:

Overeating of melon causes leprosy.

Some said, "The believers who are forty year old are saved from
insanity, leprosy, and mycobacterium. Are they not?" The Imam (peace be
upon him) answered: This is true, but the believers who violate the
orders of the Lord are not saved against the punishment of violation.

10. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: The thankful of a grace
should be happy for thankfulness more than it is for the grace.

11. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: God has made this world for
testing while He has made the life to come for receiving the result. He
has also made the misfortunes of this world the the cause of gaining the
rewards of the life to come and made the rewards of the life to come the
compensation for the misfortunes of this world.

12. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: The clement oppressor is
about to be acquitted for his clemency, while the foolish rightful one
is about to extinguish the illumination of his right with the blows of
his foolishness.

13. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: You should present thorough
obedience to those who present for you their thorough love and advice.

14. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: Do not feel secure from
those who disgraced their personalities.

15. Imam Al-Hadi (peace be upon him) said: This world is like a market
in which some profited and others lost.


