Narrations of Imam Al-askari
============================

The following maxims are related to Imam Abu Mohammed Al-Hasan bin Ali
Al-Askari (peace be upon him) the pure the guide. Imam Al-Askari's
Message to Is'haq bin Ismaeel An-Nisapuri God cover you and us with His
shelter and take care of all of your affairs through His power. I have
understood your message -God compassionate you-. Thanks to God, we -the
Prophet's family- sympathize our disciples and feel delight when God's
beneficence and favors are given to them incessantly. We also count
every favor that God, the Blessed the Exalted, bestows upon them. God
confer upon you, Is'haq, and your examples, whom God has compassionated
and led to the right, with His grace. God make His favor perfect for you
by taking you to Paradise. 'Alhamdu Lillah -All praise be to God-' is
the perfect thanks for any favor, apart from its greatness or magnitude.
I praise God too much to be compared to any wording of praise all over
times, for His conferment of graces upon you as He has compassionated
you, saved you from destruction, and eased your course to pass the
obstacle. By God, it was such an insurmountable obstacle. Its matter was
too intense; its course was too difficult; its trial was too hard; it
was mentioned in the ancient books. In the time of the late Imam (peace
be upon him) and in my days, you have had some affairs due to which I
dispraised your opinions for you have been practicing unsuccessfully.

You should know so fully, Is'haq, that he whoever quits this world with
blindness will be also blind in the world to come and in terrible error.
O Is'haq, it is not the sights that are affected with blindness; in
fact, it is the hearts that are in the chests. This is proved in God's
conveying the saying of the wrong ones in His Book of wisdom:

He will say, "My Lord, why have you brought me back to life blind;
before I could see?" The Lord will say, "This is true. But just as you
forgot Our (claim) that had come to you, so, too, are you forgotten on
this day. Which claim is more magnificent than the Lord's argument
against His creatures, the Lord's representative on His lands, and the
Lord's witness on His servants after the consecution of forefathers; the
prophets and forefathers; the successors of the prophets? Peace and
God's mercy and blessings be upon them all. Where are you taken away?
Where are you directing aimlessly like animals? Are you rejecting the
right and believing in the wrong? How are you denying the grace of God?
Do not be like those who believe in only a part of the Book and
disbelieve in the other. He whichever of you or others does so will gain
nothing more than debasement in this worldly life and a long-termed
agony in the permanent life to come. That is surely the greatest
debasement.

God, the Benefactor the Merciful, imposed upon you these duties not out
of His need for your performances of these duties. He imposed them out
of His mercy for the purpose of making a distinction between the bad and
the good, testing what you bear in your breasts, and examining what you
have in your hearts so that you will compete with each other to attain
His mercy and have different places in His Paradise. He, therefore,
imposed upon you to perform the hajj and umrah, offer prayers, defray
the zakat, fast, and embrace the Wilaya. He has also assigned for you an
entrance to the doors of the obligatory duties and a key to His course.
Without Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) and the successors
among his sons, you would have been confused, like animals, and you
would have been unable to know any of the religious ordinances. How can
a city be entered without its door? After He had done you the greatest
favor of assigning (definite) leaders after your Prophet, God said in
His Book:

On this day I have perfected your religion, completed My favors to you,
and have chosen Islam as your religion. God has also made incumbent upon
you to fulfill some rights for your leaders so that your wives,
property, food, and drinks will be lawful for you. God says:

(Muhammad), say, "I do not ask you for any payment for my preaching to
you except (your) love of (my near) relatives." You should know that
whoever behaves miserly does so against his own soul only. God is
Self-sufficient and you are poor. There is no god but Allah. The speech
with you about what is yours and what is against you has been very
long.

You would not see my handwriting and would not hear a single letter
from me after the departure of the past Imam (peace be upon him) except
for that God liked to perfect His favors for you. Meanwhile, you are
plunging in negligence of that to which you will inevitably return and I
have assigned Ibrahim bin Abda as my representative and you have
received my message that was conveyed by Mohammed bin Musa An-Nisapuri.
Help is sought from God only in every condition.

Beware of falling short of the duties of God lest, you will be with the
losing ones. Woe and away with them who disregard the acts of obedience
to God and rejected the admonitions of God's disciples. God has ordered
you to obey Him, His Apostle, and the men of authority (namely the
Imams, peace be upon them).

God compassionate (you for) your weakness and negligence and help you
tolerate your duties. Man is too deceived about his All-Generous Lord.
Had the solid rocks understood a part of that which is mentioned in the
(Holy) Book, they should have certainly been humbled and rent asunder
for anxiety, fear, and return to the obedience to God. Do whatever you
like, for surely "God and His Messenger will soon make your deeds
public, then you will return to Him who has absolute knowledge of the
unseen and the seen and He will inform you of what you have done." All
praise is due to Allah the Lord of the worlds. Peace be upon Mohammed
and his family entirely.

**Short Maxims of Imam Al-Askari**

1. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Do not dispute (with
others) lest you will lose splendor and do not joke (with everyone) lest
you will be disrespected.

2. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: As for those who accept to
sit in a place other than the first row of a session, God and His angels
will bless them until they leave that session.

3. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) answer the man who asked him a
miracle or a proof of Imamate: The punishment will be doubled for those
who refuted the miracle or proof of Imamate after it had been presented
to them according to their demand. He who shows patience will be
supplied with the support of God. People are accustomed to publicize
false missives that they themselves forge. We supplicate to God for
guiding us (to the right). Matters are either submission or destruction.
The end results of everything belong to God.

4. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) answered the man who reported to
him the disagreement of Shias: God has addressed to the intelligent
exclusively. People are of different classes: some are the discerning on
a way of salvation; they are holding fast to the right and clinging to
the branch of the origin; they are neither doubtful not suspicious; they
do not consider a shelter other than me.

Some are those who have not received the right from its very people;
they are like those who embarked on a ship; they ripple when the sea is
wavy and calm down when the sea is calm. Some are those are dominated by
the Shaitan; their one and only job is to refute the people of the right
and substitute the wrong for the right out of envy. Hence, leave those
who went astray to the right and left. When a shepherd wants to gather
the hoard, he will not need to exert efforts for so. Beware of divulging
our secrets and seeking power, for these two things drive into
perdition.

5. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Within the unforgivable
sins are the sins whose committers wish if they would not commit
anything else.

Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) then said: Polytheism of people is
more hidden that the creeping of ants of a black piece of cloth in a
gloomy night.

6. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: 'Bismillarrahmanirrahim -in
the Name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful-' is as near to the Great
Name (of God) as the iris to the white of the eye.

7. In the time of Imam Al-Hasan Al-Askari (peace be upon him), some of
the Shias disagreed about his Imamate; therefore, the following message
was publicized carrying his signature: No one of my fathers suffered the
(affliction of the) disagreement of such a group like I did. If this
matter of Imamate that you have believed in and embraced is temporary,
then I doubt it. If it is as permanent as the affairs of God, then what
is the meaning of this doubt?

8. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The mutual love of the
pious is a reward for them. The love of the sinful to the pious is a
virtue for the pious. The hate of the sinful to the pious is an
advantage for the pious. The hate of the pious to the sinful is
debasement for the sinful.

9. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: To greet everyone you pass
by and to sit in a place other than the first class of a session are
signs of modesty.

10. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Reasonless laughter is a
sign of ignorance.

11. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Within the misfortunes
that deal a death blow is the neighbor who overshadows any good feature
that he notices and propagandizes any defect that he notices.

12. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said to his adherents (Shias): I
command you to fear God, show piety to your religion, work hard for
God's sake, tell truths only, return the deposits to their owners
whether the are pious or sinful, prostrate yourselves before God for a
long time, and treat your neighbors courteously. These are the matters
that Mohammed (peace be upon him and his family) brought. Offer prayers
in the middle of your folks, attend their funeral ceremonies, visit
their ill ones, and fulfill their rights. I am pleased if people point
to you and say 'this is Shiite', when you behave piously, tell truths
only, return the deposits to their owners, and conduct courteously with
people. Fear God, be good (examples) and do not be evil. Attract
people's fondness of us and save us from every awful character, for we
are surely the people of every good thing that is said about us, but we
are definitely not the owners of any evil thing that is imputed to us.
We enjoy a (distinctive) right in the Book of God, a relation (of
kinship) to the Messenger of God, and a purification whose source is
God. Only can the liars claim of enjoying our distinctive features.
Refer to God very much, refer to death, recite the Quran, and bless the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family). A single blessing of the
Prophet is ten advantages. Retain the matter of which I have commanded
you. God keep you under His supervision. Peace be upon you.

13. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Very much offering of
prayers and fasting is not the worship; the very worship is the very
much pondering over the affairs of God.

14. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The worst servant -of God-
are those who are two-faced and two-tongued; they praise their present
friends and backbite the absent; they envy them for obtaining graces and
disappoint them when they suffer a misfortune.

15. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Anger is the key to every
evil.

16. In 260 A.H. , Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said to his
adherents: We have previously ordered you to put the rings in your right
hands when we were among you. Now, because you will no longer meet us
(normally), we order you to put your rings in your left hands until God
make your, as well as our, Question prevalent. This is surely the best
proof through which you can prove your being loyal to our leadership;
i.e. the leadership of the Prophet's family.

All the attendants took their rings out of their right hands to put
them in the left. The Imam (peace be upon him) then ordered: Convey this
commandment to all of our adherents (Shias).

17. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The least comfortable of
people is the spiteful.

18. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The most pious of people
is he who stops at suspicious matters. The best worshipper is he who
performs the obligatory religious affairs duly. The most abstinent of
people is he who abandons the unlawful. The most hardworking of people
is he who deserts sins.

19. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: You are plunging into
decreased deadlines and limited days. He who sows good will harvest
delight and he who sows evil will harvest regret. Each cultivator will
gain only what he has cultivates. The slow will not gain but his own
share. The acquisitive will not catch that which is not his. The source
of every advantage is God, and the actual protector from every evil is
God, too.

20. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The faithful believer is a
blessing for the believers and a claim against he disbelievers.

21. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The heart of the foolish
is in his mouth and the mouth of the wise is in his heart.

22. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The guaranteed sustenance
should not engage you from the ordained deed.

23. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The excessiveness of the
(ritual) ablution is as same as defect.

24. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The powerful will be
definitely humiliated if he ignores the right and the humble will be
definitely valued if he takes in it.

25. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Fatigue is the friend of
the ignorant.

26. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Nothing is above two
characters: believing in God and benefiting the friends.

27. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: The babies who dare their
fathers will surely treat them impiously when they attain maturity.

28. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: To show happiness before
the grieved is not a sign of good mannerism.

29. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Everything that you
dislike your life if you lose it is surely preferred to your life, and
everything that you desire for death if it befalls you is surely eviler
than death.

30. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: To educate an ignorant and
to prevent a habit are two impossible actions.

31. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Modesty is an unenviable
favor.

32. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Do not bestow upon anyone
with matters that are difficult for him.

33. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: Those who advice their
friend secretly are respecting them, and those who advice them openly
are humiliating them.

34. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: God's favors encompass
every misfortune.

35. Imam Al-Askari (peace be upon him) said: It is so ugly for a
believer to follow a passion that causes him humiliation.

This has been the end of the reports of the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) and the immaculate Imams (peace be upon them) regarding
the characters to which we have referred and the traditions that we have
specified as stipulations.

We have not referred to anything of the communications of Imam Al-Mahdi
(peace be upon him) the current Claim (of God) although they are
uninterruptedly retained by the prescient Shias, because we have not
received communications that fit the theme of our book. Anyhow, our
belief in Imam Al-Mahdi (peace be upon him) is as same as our beliefs in
his forefathers; the orthodox Imams (peace be upon them). Having
finished referring to the maxims of the Prophet and the Imams (peace be
upon them), I, hereby, refer to some maxims that are similar and related
to the topics of the previous so that the advantage will be more common
and the admonitions will be extended. Allah is the endower of success.
He is All-sufficient as our Guardian.


