God's Confidential Talk To Moses
================================

The following are God's confidential talks to Moses the prophet (peace
be upon him) son of Imran.

1. O Moses, do not have a long expectation in this world lest your
heart will be hard. The hardhearted are faraway from me. Deaden your
heart with fear (of God). Your dress should be worn-out but your heart
should be fresh. You should be unknown by the people of this earth but
well-known for the inhabitants of the heavens. Cry to me, for the plenty
of your sins, like the cry of the runaway from his enemy. Seek My help
to do so, for I am surely the best One Whose help is sought.

2. O Moses, I am above the servants and they are below Me. Everyone is
submissive to Me. Make yourself the supervisor on yourself. Do not
depend upon even your sons in the affairs of your religion except that
your son, like you, love the virtuous ones.

3. O Moses, be clean, wash yourself, and come near to My virtuous
servants.

4. O Moses, be their imam in their prayers and their judge in their
quarrels and maintain fair judgment among them according to that which I
have revealed to you. I have certainly revealed a clear-cut judge, a
luminous proof, and an illumination that explains the manners of the
past ones and foretells of what will happen to the next generations.

5. O Moses, I command you, the commandment of the merciful humanistic
one, with reference to the son of the virgin; Jesus son of Mary, the
rider of the she-ass and the owner of the burnoose, the oil, the olive,
and the mihrab. After him will come the rider of the red camel, the
infallible, the pure, and the purified. In your Book, he is mentioned as
the faithful reining over the (Heavenly) Books. He is genuflecting,
prostrating, desiring for God, and fearful (of God). His acquaintances
are the poor ones and his supporters are other peoples. In his time,
there will be hardship, quakes, and massacre. His name is Ahmed and
Mohammed Al-Amin (the honest). He is the descendant of the past
(prophets). He believes in all the Books and attests to all of the
apostles (of God). His nation will be compassionated and blessed. They
will have certain hours in which they call for the prayers. Believe in
him, for he is your brother.

6. O Moses, he cannot read and write. He is true servant and every
place that he puts his hand on is blessed. We will bless him. Thus has
it been in My (eternal) knowledge and thus have I created him. I
commence the Hour (of the Resurrection) to come with him, and I
terminate the keys of this world with his nation. Give your orders to
the unjust Israelites not to hide his name and not to disappoint him,
for they shall do it. To love him for My sake is an advantage. I am with
him, with his party, and he is with My party. My party will always be
the triumphant.

7. O Moses, you are My servant and I am your Lord. Do not humiliate the
modest poor ones and do not envy the rich ones. Be earnest when you
refer to Me, and be hopeful when you recite My reference. Let Me hear
the delight of the Torah when you use a tuneful submissive voice as you
recite it. Be tranquil when you refer to Me. Worship Me and do not
associate anyone (or anything) with Me. I am certainly the Grand Master.
I have created you from an insignificant drop of fluid, from clay that I
extracted from a gametic humble land, and it became human being. I am
its Creator. Blessed be My face and sacred be My made. There is nothing
like Me. I am the Everlasting the Eternal Who never comes to an end.

8. O Moses, when you supplicate to Me, be fearful, apprehensive, and
anxious. When you supplicate to me secretly, call on Me with a
frightened heart that is full of anxiety. Enliven the days of your age
with My Torah, convey My benevolent attributes to the ignorant, remind
them with My favors and graces, and tell them not to go too far in their
current seduction, for My punishment is painful and extremely severe.

9. O Moses, if your bond with Me is cut, you will not have any bond
tied to anyone else. Worship Me and stand before Me like the humble
servant. Reproach yourself. It is worthy of reproach. Do not show
arrogance against the Israelites because of (your having) My Book. These
words are sufficient admonisher that illuminates your heart. It is
furthermore the wording of the Lord of the worlds. Blessed and Exalted
be Him.

10. O Moses, whenever you call on Me, you will find Me. I will forgive
what you have done. The heavens are praising me out of their fear, the
angels are fretful of fearing Me, the earth is praising Me out of
desire, and all the creatures are praising Me submissively. Adhere to
the prayer, for I have a special consideration for it and It has a firm
pledge with Me. Add to it the zakat of the offer to Me. You should
defray it from your best property and food, for I accept nothing but the
best when it is intended purely to Me. Insert with it the regard of the
relatives. I am the Beneficent the Merciful. I created the relation of
kinship from My mercy so that the servants will compassionate each other
according to their relations of kinship. In the world to come, it will
have a ruling authority (as it will intercede for those who have
regarded it). I will surely disregard him whoever disregards it and
regard him whoever regards it. Thus will I do to him who neglects My
commandments.

11. O Moses, respect the beggars by means of a gentle rejection or a
little donating. Those who come to ask from you are neither human beings
nor jinn. They are the angels of the Beneficent whose purpose is to
examine what you are doing with that on which I have made you custodian
and examine how you will console (others) by means of that which I have
given to you. Submit to me by way of invocation and cry to Me by wailing
during reciting the (Torah) Book. You should understand that My calling
to you is as same as the call of the master to his slave, so that you
will attain the best of positions. This is a part of My favor to you as
well as your past fathers.

12. O Moses, do not forget Me under any condition and do not be happy
for the abundance of your property. To forget Me causes hardheartedness.
The abundance of property brings about the plenty of sins. The earth is
submissive, the heavens are submissive, and the oceans are submissive
(to Me). He who disobeys Me will surely be unhappy. I am the Beneficent
the Merciful. I am the Beneficent in all times. I convey hardship after
comfort and comfort after hardship. I bring kings after kings
consecutively. All this and My kingdom is everlasting and never-ending.
Nothing in the earth or in the heavens can hide from me. How can things
hide from Me when I am their only Originator? How do you not care
totally for Me when you will inevitably be returned to Me?

13. O Moses, make Me your refuge, deposit with Me your treasure of good
deeds, fear Me, and do not fear anything else. To Me will be the fate.
14. O Moses, resume your repentance, delay your sin, slow down while you
are standing before Me in prayers, and never hope for anyone other than
Me. Betake Me as the shelter against hardships and the fortress against
the challenging matters.

15. O Moses, compete with the people of goodness in doing good, because
goodness is good (like its name). Leave evil to the seduced ones. 16. O
Moses, make your tongue follow your heart and you will be safe. Refer to
me very much in days and nights and you will be successful. Do not
pursue the wrongdoing lest you will regret. The Fir (of Hell) is the
location of wrongdoings.

17. O Moses, use nice wording with them who abstain from committing
sins. Sit with them at all times, betake them as brothers in absence,
and treat them seriously so that they will treat you seriously.

18. O Moses, the few that is intended purely for Me is very much. The
very much that is intended for anyone (or anything) other than Me is
few. The best of your days should be the coming. Hence, you should
regard for the coming day and prepare your answers, for you will surely
be stopped for interrogation. The long age in this (worldly) time is
certainly short and the short age is long, since everything will come to
an end. Act as if you can see the reward of your actions so that this
will fill in you with desire for the life to come. The remaining age in
this world is as same as that which passed away. Each doer should act
sagaciously and experimentally. O son of Imran, think for yourself
deeply so that you may win tomorrow when you will be interrogated.
Therein, the wrongdoers will suffer defeat.

19. O Moses, satisfy yourself with the world and desert it, for it is
not yours and you are not its. What is your concern with the abode of
the unjust ones? For the good-doers only, it is the best abode.

20. O Moses, this world and its people are seditious matters for each
other. Everybody sees what he is in as excellent. As for the believers,
they see the world to come as excellent. They look at the world as a
source of misfortune. The bliss of the world to come precluded them from
enjoying the pleasures of their lives. It caused them to stay up to the
last hours of night like the rider who longs for the finish line. They
keep on depression and spend their nights with sadness. Blessed are
those. What great bliss they will see if only the screen is removed for
them! 21. O Moses, whenever you notice a rich man coming forward, you
should say that he is only a sin the punishment of which is immediate.
Whenever you notice a poor man coming toward you, you should say:
Welcome to the slogan of the virtuous people. Do not be arrogant and
unjust and do not be the friend of the unjust ones.

22. O Moses, an age the last of which is censured is not (a proper)
age, no matter how long it takes. It is harmless for you to be saved
from the consequence of that which has not reached you.

23. O Moses, The (Divine) Book has declared your fate clearly openly.
How can eyes sleep after that? How can any people enjoy their lives
unless they are negligent and pursuing their passions consecutively? For
a less matter, the truthful are anxious.

24. O Moses, order My servants to supplicate to Me, regardless of their
conditions, after they believe in Me. I am surely the most merciful
among the merciful ones. I answer the prayers of the distressed ones,
remove the hardship, change the condition, bring about comfort, thank
the few (deed), reward abundantly, and enrich the poor. I am the
Everlasting, the All-mighty, and the All-powerful. You should receive
any wrongdoer who seeks your refuge and comes under your shade with:
Welcome, you have resided in the widest yard; the yard of the Lord of
the worlds. In addition, you should seek (My) forgiveness to them.
Behave as if you are one of them. Do not puff up against them for the
favors that I have bestowed upon you. Tell them that they should ask Me
for My favor and mercy, for no one possess them except Me. I am the
Master of the great favor, haven of the wrongdoers, sitter of the
distressed ones, and forgiver of the guilty. You are occupying the place
that I like; therefore, supplicate to Me with a pure heart and honest
tongue. Be as exactly as I ordered you to be: comply with My orders and
do not be haughty against My servants for that which you have not
originated for yourself. Seek nearness to Me, for I am near to you. I
have not ordained you to do what is heavy for you; I only ask you to
pray to me so that I will answer you, to ask Me so that I will give you,
and to approach to Me through the things that I have supplied you with
their interpretation and I am responsible for revealing them
perfectly.

25. O Moses, look down to the ground, for it will soon be your grave.
Raise your sight toward the heavens, for there is surely a great
kingdom. Weep for yourself as long as you are (living) in this world.
Beware of perdition and destructions. Do not be deceived by the illusory
pleasures of this world. Do not accede to wrongness and do not be
unjust, for I am waylaying the unjust until I retaliate for the
oppressed ones.

26. O Moses, the single good deed is rewarded tenfold, while perdition
comes from the single bad deed. Do not associate others with Me. It is
illicit for you to associate anything with me. Be as close as possible
then aim at the target. Supplicate to Me like the supplication of the
desirous for that which is with Me and the regretful for what he had
committed. Blackness of night is erased by daylight and, in the same
manner, the good deeds erase the evildoings. Gloomy of night covers up
the light of day and, in the same manner, the evildoings blacken the
good deeds.


