God's Confidential Talks To Jesus
=================================

The following are God's confidential talks to Jesus the prophet son of
Mary (peace be upon them).

1. O Jesus, I am your Lord and the Lord of your forefathers. My name is
One, and I am the Unique Who created everything individually. Everything
is My made and everything will be returned to Me.

2. O Jesus, you are the Christ according to My order. You create
(things) from mud out of My permission and enliven the dead out of My
words. Desire for Me and fear Me. You will not find anyone that protects
you from Me except Me.

3. O Jesus, I offer to you the advice of the tender for you out of
mercy. It has become binding for Me to care for you because you are
seeking My satisfaction. You are blessed as you are mature, blessed when
you were child, and blessed wherever you are. I declare that you are My
servant and the son of My she-servant. Offer to Me the nafilas. Trust in
Me and I will protect you. Do not follow anyone other than Me lest, I
will disappoint you.

4. O Jesus, be steadfast against misfortunes, satisfy yourself with the
act (of God), and do only what pleases Me, for I am pleased when I am
obeyed, not disobeyed.

5. O Jesus, spend your times with mentioning Me with words and situate
the fondness of Me in your heart.

6. O Jesus, be awake in hours of inadvertence and provide for My sake
the nice words of wisdom.

7. O Jesus, be desirous (for My rewards) and fearful (of My
punishment). Deaden your heart with fear (of Me). 8. O Jesus, pass
nights with hunting for My satisfaction, and be thirsty in days for the
sake of the day on which you will be needy. 9. O Jesus, you will be
interrogated. Compassionate the weak as same as I compassionate you and
do not distress the orphans.

10. O Jesus, weep for yourself in seclusions, move your feet to the
places of offering prayers, and Let Me hear the delight of your
pronouncing My Name, for I have done you good.

11. O Jesus, many were the nations that I destructed for their
committing the sins from which I have protected you. 12. O Jesus, be
kind to the weak, raise your shameful sight to the heavens, for I am
close to you. When you want to refer to Me, you should do so
submissively with pure intention. If you do so, I will respond to you.

13. O Jesus, do not be deceived by him who shows mutiny to Me by
committing acts of disobedience (to Me). While he eats from My
sustenance and he serves someone other than Me. I answer him when he
prays to Me, but he returns to his previous disobedience. Is he
rebelling against Me? Or is he challenging My wrath? I swear by My
Essence, I will take hold of him so intensely that he will not find
anything that protects him from Me or accepts to shelter him. How will
he escape? Will he leave My earth or My heavens?

14. O Jesus, say to the unjust Israelites not to pray to Me while they
keep their ill-gotten property under their laps and preserve the idols
in their houses, for I took a pledge on Myself that I will answer him
whoever prays to Me, but, for those ones, I will substitute My cursing
them until they depart each other, for the answers of their prayers.

15. O Jesus, what is the pleasure of a transitory passion and what is
the delight of a temporal life? 16. O son of Mary, if you see what I
have prepared for my virtuous saints, your heart will melt and you will
give up your ghost out of your desire to have it. No abode like the
abode to come (namely Paradise) where the good people are next to each
other and the intimate angels visit them frequently. Furthermore, they
will be secured against the horrors of the Doomsday. The bliss of the
abode to come is unchangeable and intransient from its owners.

17. O son of Mary, join those who work for gaining the abode to come
competitively, for it is surely the wish of the wishful. It is, beyond
limits, handsome. You, son of Mary, will be highly delighted if you work
for it -Paradise- pursuing your fathers Adam and Abraham in gardens and
bliss where you will not desire for any change or substitute. Thus is My
rewarding the God-fearing ones.

18. O Jesus, run toward Me with those who are fleeing from the blazing
fire (of Hell). It contains manacles and fetters. No rest comes in there
and no grief goes out of it. It is just like a gloomy moonless night. He
who can escape it will surely win. It is the (eternal) abode of the
tyrants, the despots, and the oppressors as well as every coarse and
rude one.

19. O Jesus, how an evil refuge the world is for those who lean to it!
What an evil the abode of the unjust ones is! I warn you against
yourself. Have full acquaintance with Me.

20. O Jesus, you should take Me in consideration in every act that you
carry out. Declare that I created you and you are My servants, I made
you, and I descended you to the earth.

21. O Jesus, wean yourself from the destructive passions as well as
every lust that takes you away from Me. You should realize that I regard
you as the honest messenger; therefore, be careful.

22. O Jesus, I have created you from My words, and Mary gave birth of
you according to My order. I sent to her Gabriel; My spirit and the
honest among My angels. Thus, you could walk on this earth livelily. All
that was recorded in My eternal knowledge. 23. O Jesus, if I become
angry with you, the satisfaction of anyone else will not be useful for
you, and if I am satisfied with you, the dissatisfaction of anyone else
will not harm you.

24. O Jesus, mention Me secretly. Refer to me among your people and I
will refer to you among groups that are better than human beings. 25. O
Jesus, pray to Me as if you are helpless drowned.

26. O Jesus, do not swear by Me falsely lest, My (Divine) Throne will
be shaken. This worldly life is short in period and long in (false)
hope. I have an abode that is more favorable than whatever they
collect.

27. O Jesus, what will you do when I will take out a record of only the
truth and you will confess of your secrets that your were concealing and
deeds that you were doing? 28. O Jesus, say to the unjust Israelites:
You have cleaned your faces but sullied your hearts. Are you deceived
against Me? Or are you challenging Me? You are odorizing yourselves for
people of this world while your interiors are same as stinky carrions,
as if you are dead people! 29. O Jesus, tell them: clip your nails
against having ill-gotten property and shut your hearings against
listening to obscenity. Come to Me with your hearts; I do not want your
appearances.

30. O Jesus, be happy for the good deed (the you act), for it pleases
Me. Weep for the evildoing (that you commit), for it is vice. Do not do
to others the things that you hate to be done to you. If one slaps your
right cheek, give him the left one. Curry favor with Me as much as
possible. Neglect the ignorant ones.

31. O Jesus, be the guide of the good-doers , take part in their deeds,
and be their witness. Say to the unjust Israelites: O comrades of evil,
keep on doing so and I will metamorphose you into apes and pegs. 32. O
Jesus, say to the unjust Israelites: wisdom weeps from its fear of Me
while you are guffawing openly? Have you received a pledge of acquittal
from Me? Do you enjoy immunity against My agony? Or do you take no
notice of My punishment? I swear by Myself, I will make you the best
lesson for the coming (generations).

33. O son of Mary the Virgin, I command you to adhere to the master of
the Apostles; My dear Ahmed, the rider of the red camel, the
brilliant-faced, the pure-hearted, the powerful, the modest, and the
bountiful. He is surely the mercy for people and the master of sons of
Adam when he will meet Me (on the Day of Resurrection). He is the most
honorable of the forerunner to Me and the closest of the submissive to
Me. He is the Arab, the Meccan, the embracer of My religion, and the
steadfast for My sake, who will fight the polytheists for protecting My
religion. You should foretell the Israelites of his coming and order
them to have faith in him, believe him, follow him, and support him.

"O Lord," asked Jesus, "who is that one, so that I will please him as
properly as You have told." The Lord answered:

He is Mohammed; the messenger of God to all the people completely. He
is the owner of the closest standing to Me and he is the foremost
intercessor. Blessed be him. What a prophet he is! Blessed be his nation
who will keep on pursuing his path until they meet Me. All inhabitants
of this earth praise him (Mohammed, peace be upon him and his family)
and all inhabitants of the heavens are seeking (My) forgiveness to him.
He is trustworthy, blessed, and clean. For Me, he is the best of the
coming generations. He will come in the last of time. When he comes out,
the heavens will provide its rain, the land will take out its boons, and
people will see the blessings. I will bless anything on which he will
put his hand. He will be polygamous, but will have few children.

34. O Jesus, I have shown you everything that brings you near to Me and
I have warned you against everything that takes you away from Me. Now,
you have the choice.

35. O Jesus, this world is sweet and I have employed you in it;
therefore, avoid committing that against which I have warned you and
take only what I have given to you out of My favors.

36. O Jesus, look in your deeds like a guilty slave, and do not look in
others' deeds (like their lord). Abstain from receiving the worldly
pleasures. Do not be acquisitive for it lest, you will be perishing.

37. O Jesus, be intelligent, ponder over things, and find out about the
fate of the unjust ones. 38. O Jesus, all my explanations are advice for
you and all my sayings are true. I am the clear Right. Truly I say to
you: If you disobey Me after what I have told you, you will not find
against Me any custodian or protector.

39. O Jesus, discipline you heart by fear (of God). Look at those who
are lowlier than you and do not look at those who are higher. You should
know that fondness of this world is the head of every fault and sin; so,
do not be fond of it, for I do not like it. 40. O Jesus, clean your
heart for Me and mention Me very much in situations of seclusion. You
should know that I am pleased if you wag to Me livelily, not
soullessly.

41. O Jesus, do not associate anyone with Me and beware of Me. Do not
be deceived by your enjoying good health and do not please yourself (by
enjoying the worldly pleasures). This world is surely like a transient
shadow. The coming matters of this world are as same as the bygone.
Exert all efforts for the sake of the good deeds and adhere to the right
even if this causes you to be rent asunder and burnt in fire. Never
disbelieve Me after your acknowledgement (of Me) and do not be with the
ignorant ones, because similar things match each other. 42. O Jesus,
pour the tears of your eyes for My sake and fear Me with your heart.

43. O Jesus, seek My succor in situations of hardship, for I help the
distressed ones and answer the downhearted ones. I am the most merciful
of the merciful ones.


