Admonitions and Maxims of Jesus in the Bible
============================================

1. Blessed be those who compassionate each other; they will be
compassionated on the Day of Resurrection.

2. Blessed be those who reestablish relations between people; they will
be favored on the Day of Resurrection.

3. Blessed be the pure-hearted ones; they will visit God on the Day of
Resurrection.

4. Blessed be the modest in this world; they will inherit the pulpits
of kingdom on the Day of Resurrection.

5. Blessed be the poor; they will possess the realm of the heavens.

6. Blessed be the grieved; they will be delighted.

7. Blessed be those who starve and suffer thirst out of fear (of God);
they (exclusively) will be watered.

8. Blessed be the good-doers; they will be named the choice of God.

9. Blessed be those whom are insulted for their cleanness; they will
have the realm of the heavens.

10. Blessed be you when you are envied, insulted, or hear every false
ugly word. Only then, you should be happy and delighted, for your
heavenly rewards will be increased.

11. Jesus (peace be upon him) said:
O bad servants (of God), you criticize people for their conjecture, but
do not criticize yourselves for conviction.

12. O slaves of this world, you like others to say about you false
things and to advert to you.

13. O slaves of this world, you shave your heads, have your hair cut,
and nod your heads down. But you do not uproot hatred from your hearts.
14. O slaves of this world, you are just like the well constructed
tombs; they attract the attentions of those who look at them, while
their interiors contain only the bones of the dead that are full of
sins.

15. O slaves of this world, you are just like the lamp; it lights up
others' ways while it burns itself.

16. O sons of Israel, overcrowd the sessions of the scholars, even if
you have to run to them on your knees. God will refresh the dead hearts
by means of the illumination of wisdom in the same way the heavy
rainfall refreshes the derelict lands.

17. O sons of Israel, little utterance is a great perception;
therefore, keep silent for it is a good meekness, fewness of sins, and
forgiveness of guilt. Fortify the door of knowledge: the patience. God
hates those who laugh in a meaningless way and those who take impolite
courses. Moreover, God likes the rulers who behave like the caretakers
whose eyes are always watching their subjects. Be ashamed of God in your
secrets in the same way you are ashamed of people in your open deeds.
You should know that a word of wise should be the lost of the believers;
therefore, search for them before they are removed. The removal of the
words of wisdom is the demise of their relaters.

18. O seeker of knowledge, reverence the scholars for their knowledge
and stop disputing them. Disrespect the ignorant for their ignorance. Do
not dismiss them; you should favor and teach them. O seeker of
knowledge, you should know that any grace for which you do not show
gratitude is considered as a sin for which you will be judged.

19. O seeker of knowledge, you should know that any act of disobedience
of which you do not repent is considered as a matter of punishment that
you will encounter.

20. O seeker of knowledge, you are facing numerous misfortunes that you
do not know when they will befall you; hence, prepare for them before
they surprise you.

21. Jesus the prophet (peace be upon him) said to his companions:

Supposing you pass by one of your brothers and find that his dress was
raised and a part of his genitals was shown. Will you screen him or
reveal the genitals completely?

"We will surely screen him," answered they. Jesus (peace be upon him)
answered: No, you will reveal the genitals completely.

Hence, they realized that he had provided them a proverb. "O Spirit of
God, How is that?" they asked. He explained: As you notice your
brother's flaw, you do not cover him.

22. Truly I say to you: I am teaching you so that you will be learning,
not be self-conceited. You will never attain your wish before you desert
your passions and you will not win your hope unless you tolerate the
dismayed matters. Beware of gazing (at forbidden matters), for a single
look may delve passion in the heart. Passion, then, is a sufficient
seditious matter for its bearers. Blessed be those who make their sights
in their hearts and not make their hearts in the sight of their eyes. Do
not watch people's defects like lords. Look in their defects like slaves
(of people). Men are one of two: either diseased or healthy.
Compassionate the diseased and thank God for the good health.

23. O sons of Israel, do you not feel ashamed of God? You will not
drink something before you purify it from dirt, but you do not care if
you drink any quantity of ill-gotten milk. Have you not listened to that
which had been said to you in the Torah? It was said to you: "Regard and
reward your relatives." I, now, say to you: build good relations with
those who rupture their relations with you, bestow upon them who
deprived you, treat those who mistreated you with good turn, greet those
who reviled at you, treat justly those who disputed you, and pardon
those who wronged you in the same way you want your wrongdoings to be
pardoned. Learn lessons from God's overlooking your wrongdoings. You
have seen that God's sun of forgiveness has covered both the pious and
the sinful. Similarly, His rainfall of mercy has covered the virtuous
one and the evildoers among you. If you like only those who like you, do
favors only to those who do favors to you, and reward only those who
gave you, then what is your preference to the others? Even can the
foolish ones who lack favors and good thoughts do so. If you want to be
the dears and choice of God, you should treat those who mistreated you
with good turn, pardon those who wronged you, and greet those who turned
away from you. Listen to my wording, keep my commandment in your minds,
and fulfill my pledge and you will keen knowledgeable.

24. Truly I say to you: Your hearts are inclined to wherever your
treasures are. For that reason, people like their treasures eagerly. Put
your treasures in the heavens where mites cannot reach them and thieves
cannot find a way to them.

25. Truly I say to you: A servant cannot serve two lords, because he
will unquestionably prefer one to the other although he may exert all
efforts (for dealing with them equally). In the same manner, you cannot
love God and the worldly pleasures in the same time.

26. Truly I say to you: The evilest of people is the knowledgeable who
prefers his worldly pleasures to his knowledge; therefore, he loved and
sought the worldly pleasures and exerted all efforts for gaining them to
the degree that he would engage all the people in perplexity if only he
could. The enlargement of sunlight is useless for the sightless. In like
fashion, the knowledge of a scholar is useless for him unless he applies
what he knows to his conduct. Too many are fruits of the trees;
nevertheless, not all of them are edible and useful. Too many are the
scholars, but not all of them can use his knowledge soundly. Too large
is the earth, but not all of it is inhabitable. Too many are the
speakers, but not all their speeches are truthful. Be careful of the
lying scholars who wear wool dresses and nod the heads to the ground
(out of showing off) so that they will falsify to make wrongdoings. Like
wolves, they send their glances from below their eyebrows. Their sayings
contradict their actions. How can one expect to harvest grapes from
boxthorns or figs from colocynth? Thus are ineffectual and false the
words of the untruthful scholars. Not every sayer is honest.

27. Truly I say to you: Plants grow in plain lands, not in rocky lands.
Thus does word of wisdom develop in the heart of the modest, not the
arrogant. Did you not know that he who raises his head to the ceiling
will cause it fractured and he who lowers his head to the ceiling will
enjoy its shadow and protection? In the same manner, God will debase him
who does not humiliate himself to Him and will raise him who humiliates
himself to Him. Honey is not always saved in skins. Similarly, words of
wisdom are not always grown in the hearts. A skin may be a container of
honey provided that it is not pierced, rough, or malodorous. In the same
manner, hearts are good containers of wisdom provided that they are not
pierced by passions, soiled by greed, or hardened by bliss.

28. Truly I say to you: A fire that begins in one house will move to
many others to burn them all, unless the first house is destructed from
its base so that fire will not find wood to burn. In the same manner, if
the first wrongdoer is punished and stopped, no partial ruler, whose
steps are pursued, will come out after him. If fire had not found woods
to burn in the first house, it would not have burnt anything. 29. Truly
I say to you: He who did not warn his brother against the snake that was
stepping towards him and killed him is not acquitted of being a partner
in that killing. Likewise, he who did not warn his brother against the
consequence of an evildoing is not acquitted of being undergoing a share
in the punishment of that evildoing. He who did not censure an evildoer,
while he was able to do so, is considered as same as that evildoer. How
will the evildoer fear of committing wrongdoings while he is safe among
you, as long as you do not warn him against so, censure, or punish him?
How will the evildoers stop then? How will they stop feeling encouraged
to do evil deeds? You are sufficed with saying: I do not commit
evildoings and I do not care for anyone who intends to commit so. You
see evildoings but you do not reproach their committers. If your claim
(of neglecting the evildoers as long as you yourselves do not commit
such acts) was true, you would not be added to the wrongdoers when
penalties befell them in this world while you had not committed the
evildoings that they had done.

30. O bad servants, woe to you! How do you hope that God would save you
from the horror on the Day of Resurrection while you are neglecting the
acts of obedience to Him out of your fear of people and committing acts
of disobedience to Him out of your compliance with them? Furthermore,
you are fulfilling people's pledges that are contrary to your pledges
with God.

31. Truly I say to you: God will not save those who betake any of His
servants as lords from the horror of the Day of Resurrection. 32. O bad
servants, woe to you! Only for a lowly life and an awful passion, you
are neglecting the realm of Paradise and the horror of the Day of
Resurrection.

33. O bad servants, woe to you! Only for a transient favor and an
interrupted life, you are going away from God and detest meeting Him.
How will God then like meeting you when you dislike meeting Him? God
only likes to meet him who likes to meet Him and dislikes meeting him
who dislikes meeting Him. How do you claim that you are the chosen
people of God to the exclusion of all other people while you hate death
and hold fast to the world? The good smell of the embalmment and the
snow-white of the coffin are of no benefit to the dead, for all will be
buried in the dust. In the same manner, the adorned pleasures of your
world are of no benefit to you because they all will expire and wipe
out. The purity of your bodies and the translucency of your colors will
be of no benefit for your inescapable destiny will be death and you will
be forgotten in dust and encompassed by the gloom of your graves.

34. O slaves of this world, woe to you! You carry lamps in sunlight,
which is a sufficient light for you, while you leave them when you are
in darkness, which is its proper time. In the same manner, you have used
the illumination of knowledge for your worldly affairs while they are
settled for you and have neglected using it for your affairs of the life
to come for which you have been given (that knowledge). You confess that
the world to come is a true event (that will inevitably occur) but, in
the meantime, you arrange for your world. You confess that death is a
true event while you are escaping it. You confess that God hears and
sees (all your words and deeds) but, in the meantime, you do not care
for His recording your deeds for judgment. How can anyone who listens to
your confessions (and notices your deeds) believe you? The apology of
those who lie ignorantly is more justifiable that those who lie
attentively. Anyhow, no liar is ever justified.

35. Truly I say to you: A riding animal that is not tamed and trained
will not be ridden and will have its habits changed. In the same manner,
hearts that are not made softened by mention of death and not fatigued
by the continuous (rituals of) worship will be severe and hard. It is
useless for a dark house to put a lamp on its surface when its inside is
gloomy and dreary. Similarly, it is useless for you to have the
illumination of knowledge on your tongues while your interiors are
gloomy and dead. Hurry up to light up your gloomy houses (with lamps)
and hurry up to light up your hard hearts with wisdom before they are
overwhelmed by sins, and then they will be harder than rocks. How can
the incapable (ones) burden the heavy loads? How can the burdens be
taken down when their carriers do not pray to God to pardon them? How
are the clothes be cleaned when their owners do not wash them? How can
sins be acquitted when their committers do not atone for them? How can
anyone be saved from drowning if he does not embark on a ship while he
tries to cross the sea? How can anyone be saved from the seditious
matters of this world unless he is serious and diligent? How can a
traveler arrive in a place without guide? How can anyone win Paradise
before he understands the features of his religion? How can those who
disobey God attain His satisfaction? How can anyone know the defects of
his face without looking in a mirror? How can anyone have the affection
of his intimate friend in perfect without offering him a part of his
efforts? How can a servant have the affection of his Lord in perfect
without lending Him some of His sustenance?

36. Truly I say to you: Nothing will reduce from a sea in which a ship
sinks. Likewise, you will not affect God by any means through your acts
of disobedience to Him. In fact, you only harm yourselves. Sunlight is
not affected, no matter how many things are enjoying it. In fact, these
things receive their survival from sunlight. Likewise, God is not
affected by the abundance of His gifts and endowments that He provides
to you. In fact, it is you who are survived by God's sustenance. He
increases (His endowments to) those who thank Him, for He is Fully
Appreciative and All-knowing. 37. O bad workers, woe to you! You are
taking your wages completely, eating your sustenance (that is decided
for you), wearing dresses, building houses, and spoiling the works of
your employers. The employer will nearly demand you with the work that
you spoiled and will inflict on you that which will disgrace you; he
will give His orders to have your necks clipped from its origins, your
hands amputated from the articulate, and your bodies pulled on the
bellies and put on the public ways so that you will be lessons for the
God-fearing and examples for the wrongdoers. 38. O bad scholars, woe to
you! Do not think that time of your death will be postponed for you have
not yet faced death. As a matter of fact, death is about to inflict you
and take you away. From this moment, you should put the call to the
right in your hearings. From this moment, you should mourn yourselves.
From this time, you should weep for your evildoings. From this moment,
you should supply for yourselves and be ready. Take the initiative to
repent to your Lord.

39. Truly I say to you: the diseased looks at the delicious meals but
he cannot find them tasty because of the intensity of pain that he
feels. The same, the worldly-minded ones cannot find the good taste of
worship because they are controlled by fondness of (collecting)
property. The diseased enjoys the prescriptions of the skillful
physicians, but when he remembers the bitterness of the medicines, he
abhors the treatment. In the same way, people that are fond of the
worldly pleasures enjoy these pleasures and bliss, but when they
remember surprise of death, all these pleasures and bliss become
spoilt.

40. Truly I say to you: Everybody can see the stars, but only those who
have full acquaintance with their ways and situations can take them as
guides. In the same way, you all study wisdom, but only those who apply
it to their conducts can be guided to it. 41. O slaves of this world,
woe to you! To find the sweetest taste of wheat, you should first cull
its grains, clean, and mill them properly. The same thing is said about
faith. To find the best taste of faith and to benefit by its results,
you should first have it as sincere and perfect as possible.

42. Truly I say to you: If you have found a torch the fuel of which is
tar, in a gloomy night, you will surely seek its light disregarding its
malodor. In a like manner, you should receive the wisdom from anybody
with whom you find it, disregarding the scope of his desire for it. 43.
O slaves of this world, woe to you! You cannot understand like wise
people, cannot comprehend like clement people, cannot know like
scholars, cannot fear God like slaves, and cannot behave like generous
masters. This world is about to uproot you from your origins, knock you
over your faces, and overturn you on the nasals. Your evildoings are
about to seize you from the forelocks and knowledge will push you from
the back until they hand you over to the King; the Caller to account.
Therein, you will be naked and barefooted. God then will punish you for
your evildoings. 44. O slaves of this world, woe to you! It was only by
means of knowledge that you have been given authority over all
creatures, but you deserted knowledge without application (to your
conducts). You have advanced to this world to judge in it, prepare for
it, prefer it to anything else, and build for yourselves in it. Until
when will you live in this world? You have not dedicated any share of
your lives to God.

45. Truly I say to you: You will not attain the honor of the world to
come unless you abstain from whatever you desire. Never postpone
repentance to tomorrow. Before tomorrow, there is a day and a night
during which God's act is coming and going.

46. Truly I say to you: The insignificant and trivial sins are the
traps of Eblis who makes you regard them as insignificant and trivial;
but they will be added to each other until they become greatly numerous
and will surround you.

47. Truly I say to you: False praise and religious chastening are
within the major well-known evils. The fondness of this world is the
head of every evildoing.

48. Truly I say to you: Permanent prayer is the best thing through
which the honor of the world to come is attained and the worldly
misfortunes are alleviated. It is surely the closest thing to the
Beneficent; therefore, preserve in it and offer it as much as possible.
Every good deed approximates to God, but the prayer is the closest and
the most favorable for Him.

49. Truly I say to you: Every deed of the wronged ones who could not
regain their rights by means of wording, deed, or feeling of malice is
considered great in the Heavenly Kingdom. Have you ever seen light named
gloomy or gloomy named light? In the same way, a servant cannot be
faithful and disbeliever in the same time and cannot be fond of this
world and desirous for the life to come in the same time? How can a
sower of barley harvest wheat or a sower of wheat harvest barley? In the
same way, each one will harvest, in the life to come, only what he sowed
and will be rewarded according to what he did?

50. Truly I say to you: In wisdom, people are of two kinds; one is that
who says the wisdom utterly and applies it to his conducts, and the
other is that who says it utterly but wastes it through his evildoings.
How difference between the two! Blessed are the scholars by deeds. Woe
to the scholars by words.

51. Truly I say to you: Herbs will surely be wider and wider until they
spoil the crop unless they are cleared away. In the same way, for those
who do not clear the fondness of this world out of their hearts, it will
prevail all the area of their hearts until they will not find any taste
of fondness of the life to come.

52. O slaves of this world, woe to you! Betake the houses of your Lord
as prisons of your bodies. Make your hearts the residences of
God-fearing. Do not make them the shelters of lusts.

53. Truly I say to you: The most intolerant against misfortunes is
certainly the fondest of the worldly pleasures, and the most tolerant is
the most abstinent (from the worldly pleasures.)

54. O bad scholars, woe to you! You were dead and God gave you life,
were you not? But when He gave you life, you have deadened yourselves!
Woe to you! You were illiterate and God taught you, were you not? But
when He taught you, you have forgotten! Woe to you! You were
unintelligent and God made you understand, were you not? But when He
made you understand, have returned to ignorance. Woe to you! You were
deviate and God guided you (to the right), were you not? But when He
guided you, you have returned to deviation. Woe to you! You were blind
and God made you see, were you not? But when He made you see, you have
returned to your blindness.

55. Woe to you! You were deaf and God made you hear, were you not? But
when He made you hear, you have returned to your deafness. Woe to you!
You were dumb and God made you speak, were you not? But when He made you
speak, you have returned to your dumbness. Woe to you! You were asking
for triumph, were you not? But when God gave you triumph, you have
recoiled on your heels. Woe to you! You were humble and God gave you
dignity, were you not? But when He gave you dignity, you have oppressed,
assaulted, and acted disobediently. Woe to you! you were only a few
suppressed people in the land, afraid of being terrorized by the people
and God gave you shelter and supported you with His help, were you not?
But when He gave you shelter and support, you have become arrogant and
tyrannical. Woe to you! You will certainly suffer the humiliation on the
Day of Resurrection. God will debase and belittle you so heavily.

56. O bad scholars, woe to you! You are practicing the deeds of the
disbelievers, having the same desires of the heirs (of Paradise), and
enjoying the same tranquility of those whom are saved (from God's
agony). God's matters are not submitted to that which you hope or
choose. You are reproducing for death, building and establishing for
ruination, and preparing for your heirs.

57. Truly I say to you: Moses (peace be upon him) used to instruct you
not to swear by God falsely. I, now, instruct you not to swear by God
whether truly or falsely. You should say either 'yes' or 'no'. O sons of
Israel, have from the wild legumes and barley bread. Beware of wheat
bread, for I am afraid you will not thank for it properly.

58. Truly I say to you: Man is either healthy or ailed. Thank God for
good health and compassionate the ailed.

59. Truly I say to you: On the Day of Resurrection, you will receive
the answer of every single bad word that you uttered in your life. 60. O
bad servants, if you are about to immolate to God and remember that one
of your friends is angry with you, you should leave your immolation and
hurry up to please your angry friend. Only then you may return to your
immolation.

61. O bad servants, if your shirt is seized from you, you should offer
your other piece of wear, too. If you are slapped on one cheek, you
should offer the other one to be slapped, too. If you are employed
(freely) for a one-mile job, you should offer to work for another.

62. Truly I say to you: It is useless to have a sound physique while
the interior is corrupted. Hence, your sound bodies should not admire
you when your hearts are tainted. It is also useless to purify your
skins when your hearts are dirty.

63. Truly I say to you: Do not be like sieves that let the good flour
pass and hold the bran. Likewise, you should not speak of wisdom while
treason is filling in your hearts.

64. Truly I say to you: Leave evildoing before you seek goodness so
that you will be benefited. If you add the good with the evil, you will
not be benefited by the good.

65. Truly I say to You: Water will surely wet the dress of him who
wants to cross a river despite the great efforts that he exerts for
saving his dress from wetness. In the same manner, he who is fond of the
worldly pleasures will not be saved from evildoings. 66. Truly I say to
you: Blessed be them who stay awake at night in devotion. They will
inherit the permanent illumination, for they passed nights standing on
their legs in their places of prostration praying to their Lord on the
hope that He will save them from the hardship (of the Day of
Resurrection) tomorrow.

67. Truly I say to you: This world is as same as a ranch in which the
servants plant the sweet, the bitter, the evil, or the good. The result
of the good will be advantageous on the Day of Judgment, while the
result of evil will be only hardship and suffering on the harvest time.
68. Truly I say to you: The wise learns lessons from the ignorant while
the ignorant learns (false) lessons from his whims. I command you to
seal your mouths with silence so that they -your mouths- will not utter
unlawful things.

69. Truly I say to you: You will not attain your expectations unless
you show steadfastness against matters that you detest and will not
achieve your aims unless you leave that for which you crave.

70. O slaves of this world, truly I say to you: How can he whose
craving for the worldly pleasures is not stopped and whose desire for
it -the world- is not blocked attain the bliss of the life to come?

71. O slaves of this world, truly I say to you: You neither love this
world nor do you hope for the life to come. If you loved this world, you
would honor the acts by way of which you attained its pleasures. If you
hoped for the life to come, you would copy the acts of those who desire
for it. 72. O slaves of this world, truly I say to you: you hate people
for their conjecture, but do not hate yourselves for conviction. 73.
Truly I say to you: You feel angry if some of your defects are mentioned
before you, while you feel happy if characters that you do not enjoy are
ascribed to you (falsely).

74. Truly I say to you: The ghosts of the devils have found your hearts
the best abode in which they are regarded. God has given you this world
as a means by which you work for the life to come. He has not given it
to you so that it would engage you from the world to come. He has
extended the world for you so that you will realize that He is helping
you worship Him, not commit evildoings. He has ordered you to obey, not
challenge, Him in this world. He has provided you the legal matters as
means of help for you in this world, but He has not deemed lawful the
unlawful in this world. He has expanded the world so that you will
regard, not discount, each other.

75. Truly I say to you: The reward is desired, but it cannot be
attained without working for it.

76. Truly I say to you: A tree is not full unless it gives good fruits.
In the same manner, the religion is not perfect except by abstinence
from the forbidden matters.

77. Truly I say to you: Planting is worthless unless there is water and
soil. In the same manner, faith is worthless unless there is knowledge
and deed.

78. Truly I say to you: Water extinguishes fire. In the same manner,
clemency extinguishes rage.

79. Truly I say to you: Fire and water cannot exist in the same bowl.
In the same manner, understanding and blindness cannot exist in the same
heart.

80. Truly I say to you: No rain without clouds. In the same manner, no
deed intended for pleasing the Lord without a pure heart.

81. Truly I say to you: Sun is the light of everything, wisdom is the
light of every heart, God-fearing is the head of every word (or act) of
wisdom, the right is the door to every goodness, and God's mercy is the
door to every right. The keys of all the previous are supplications to
God, submission (to Him), and deeds. How can a door be opened without
its key?

82. Truly I say to you: A wise man does not plant any tree except those
that he accepts and does not choose for his male horse any female horse
except the filly that he accepts. In the same manner, the knowledgeable
believer should not do any action except those that satisfy his Lord.

83. Truly I say to you: The polishing cleans and sharpens the sword. In
the same manners, wisdom cleans and wipes the heart. The influence of
wisdom on the heart of the wise is as same as the influence of water on
wastelands. It is also considered as a torch in darkness that shows the
way to people.

84. Truly I say to you: To carry rocks from summits of mountains is
easier than talking to him who does not understand what you say.
Moreover, talking to him who does not understand you is as same as
soaking had rocks in water for softening them and as same as cooking
food for the inhabitants of the graves.

85. Blessed be him who detains his surplus wording for fear that God
may punish him for it, speaks only of what he understands, and does not
praise anyone for a wording before he notices the application of that
wording to the conduct (of the speaker).

86. Blessed be him who learns from the scholars that which he did not
know and conveys to the ignorant what he learnt.

87. Blessed be him who reverences the scholars for their knowledge and
stops disputing them, and disrespects the ignorant for their ignorance
and does not dismiss them; he favors and teaches them.

88. O disciples, truly I say to you: Your situation among people is as
same as the existent among the death. Do not die like other existents.
89. The Christ (peace be upon him) said:

God the Blessed the Exalted says: My faithful servants become sad when
I take the worldly pleasures away from them, while this is the most
lovable and the most favorable thing for Me. They feel happy when I
bestow upon them with many worldly pleasures, while this is the most
detestable and the remotest thing from Me.

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

All peace and blessings be upon Mohammed and his family.


