The Commandment of the Prophet For Me'aath Bin Jabal
====================================================

when he assigned him as the governor of Yemen

O Me'aath, teach them the Book of God and the high traits. Treat each
according to his rank, whether good or evil. Carry out God's orders
regarding them and never be negligent in this regard. Do not favor
anyone in the questions regarding (the fair distribution of) the estates
of God. They are not yours or your concern. Fulfill their trusts
disregarding how big or small they are. Show clemency and pardon on
condition that you will not neglect the right. The ignorant may say that
you have neglected the right of God. Offer apologies in every act in
which you expect a fault would fall, so that people will acquit you (of
negligence). Deaden the pre-Islamic customs except those that Islam
ordained.

Show the whole affairs of Islam, whether small or big. The prayer
should be the most important matter that you care for, because it is the
head of Islam after the confession of the religion. Remind people of God
and the life to come. Pursue the admonitions because they are the most
affective in the field of urging (people) doing actions that God favors.
Distribute the educated ones among people. Worship God to Whom you will
be taken and do not care for any blame in doing matters that He
pleases.

I command you to fear God, say the truth, fulfill the pledges, give the
deposits back to their possessors, avoid treason, show lenient wording,
begin in greeting people, regard the neighbors, compassionate the
orphans, work hard, neglect hopes, long for the life to come, worry
about the Final Judgment, adhere to the faith, learn the Quran, suppress
your rage, and behave with humility.

Beware of reviling at any Muslim, complying with any sinful, disobeying
any just leader, belying any truthful, and believing any liar. Mention
your Lord in any situation and show repentance whenever you commit any
sin. Show secret repentance for the secret sins and open repentance for
the open sins.

O Me'aath, I will shorten my commandments if I am certain we will not
meat each other until the Day of Resurrection, but I see we will not
meet ever again. Surely, the most favorable of you to me is that who
will meet me while he bears the same beliefs and qualities on which I
left him.

**Some Words of the Prophet**

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) sermonized:

Everything has its honor, and the honor of sessions is that in which
the direction of Kiblah is taken. He who wants to be the mightiest of
people should fear God, he who wants to be the most powerful of people
should depend upon God, and he who wants to be the wealthiest of people
should trust in what is in God's hand more than what is in his hand. May
I inform of the evilest of people? The attendants said: "Yes, you may,
God's Messenger." He (peace be upon him and his family) said: The
evilest of people are those who live alone, whose charity does not reach
people, and who whip their servants. May I inform you of the people that
are eviler than the previous?

The attendants said: "Yes, you may, God's Messenger." He (peace be upon
him and his family) said: The people that are eviler than the previous
are those whose favor is not expected and whose evil is not secured. May
I inform you of the people that are eviler than the previous?

The attendants said: "Yes, you may, God's Messenger." He (peace be upon
him and his family) said: The people that are eviler than the previous
are those who dislike people and people dislike them. Once, Jesus (peace
be upon him) orated before the Israelites. He said:

"O children of Israel, do not speak words of wisdom before the ignorant
so that you will not wrong these words. Do not prevent the wise people
from receiving the wisdom lest, you will wrong those people. Do not
reward the unjust ones otherwise, your favors will be null. O children
of Israel, matters must be one of three: a clearly right matter that you
should follow, a clearly wrong matter that you should avoid, or a
confused matter that you should commend to God." O people, you have
definite marks and identified ends: therefore, you should stop at your
marks and reach at only your ends. A faithful believer should live
between two points of fear: one is his past deeds that he ignores what
God will do about them and the second is the remaining life that he
ignores what God has arranged for it. The servant (of God) should take
from himself for himself, his worldly life for his life to come, his
youth for his old age, and his life for his death. By the Prevailing of
my soul I take the oath, no blame will be after death. Except for
Paradise and Hell, no abode will be there after this worldly life.

**The Prophet's Reference to Knowledge, Intellect, and Ignorance**

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) instructed:

Learn the knowledge, for to learn it is an advantage, to study it is (a
feature of) glorification of God, to search for it is (a sort of) jihad,
to teach it (to the ignorant ones) is charity, to instruct it freely is
a pious act because it is the sign of the halal and haram. It leads its
seekers to Paradise, entertains in loneliness, and associates in
estrangement. It is a guide in joy, a weapon against the enemies, and
the beauty of the friends. By knowledge, God raises some people to make
them the guides to goodness to the degree that their conducts are taken
as examples and their practices as lessons and the angels desire for
befriending them. Knowledge is the life of the hearts and the light of
the sights. It is the power of the weak bodies. God takes the bearers of
knowledge to the ranks of the beloved ones and grants them the
association with the virtuous one in this world and the life to come.

Through knowledge, God is obeyed, worshipped, acknowledged, and
confessed of His being One. Through knowledge, likewise, relations are
regarded and halal and haram are realized. Knowledge is the leader of
the intellect. God grants the intellect to the happy ones and deprives
the unhappy of it. The character of the intelligent is that he overlooks
the ignorant, pardons the wrongdoers, behaves modestly with the
lower-rank ones, and competes with the higher-rank ones for seeking
charity. The intelligent thinks before he utters: he will win when he
speaks good wording and will be saved when he abstains from speaking
evil. He clings to God firmly when he has to encounter a seditious
matter; therefore, he stops his hand (deeds) and tongue (words). He
hurries to the virtue wherever he notices it. He never leaves shyness
and never shows acquisitiveness. These ten characters distinguish the
intelligent.

The ignorant wrongs his who associates with him, oppresses him who is
less than he is, and attacks (wrongly) him who is higher than he is. He
utters without thinking in what he says. He commits sins whenever he
speaks and forgets when he keeps silent. He hurries to every seditious
matter that would certainly befall him and neglects and slows down for
the virtue. He does not care for the past sins and does not refrain from
committing new ones. He slows down from doing charitable acts. He does
not care for what passed and what he had lost. These ten characters
distinguish the ignorant.

**An Advice**

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said:

Why do I notice that the fondness of this world has overcome most of
people as if death has been afflicted to other than them and the right
in this world has been ordained on other than them? You are not eternal
after those whose news of death reach you and you are just like
traveling people who will soon return home. You have put the dead ones
in their graves and seized their heritage. Do you think you will be
eternal after them? Too far it is! Too far it is! Will the present not
learn a lesson from the past? They ignored and forgot every lesson in
God's Book and trusted the evil of every bad result. They did not expect
the falling of a catastrophe or misfortune.

Blessed are those whose fear of God engages them from fearing people.
Blessed are those whose earnings are acceptable, inner and outer selves
are sound, and morals are straight. Blessed are those who give the
surplus of their money as alms and prevent the surplus of their speech.
Blessed are those who behave modestly for God's sake, renounce the
worldly pleasures without refusing my Sunnah , refuse the delight of
this world without the desire for ignoring my practices, follow my pious
progeny after me, associate with the people of knowledge and wisdom, and
treat the poor kindly.

Blessed are those who earn money from the believers without need to act
disobediently to God, spend it in fields that do not cause acting
disobediently to God, give it to the poor, and leave the proud, the
arrogant, the greedy, the heresiarch, and the changers of my Sunnah.
Blessed are those who treat people with good mannerism, provide support,
and save them from evil.

**The Prophet's Sermon of the Farewell Pilgrimage**

In the Farewell Pilgrimage, The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) sermonized:

All praise is due to God. We praise Him, seek His aid and forgiveness,
and repent to Him. We seek His guard against the evils of our
wrongdoings and ourselves. No one will be able to deviate those whom God
guides and no one will be able to guide those whom God causes to
deviate. I declare there is no god but Allah exclusively without any
associate, and declare that Mohammed is His servant and messenger. O
slaves of God, I command you to adhere to God-fearing and urge you
obeying Him. I begin with God Who is the source of every good. O people,
listen to what I will show to you. I do not know whether I will meet you
the next year in this situation or not. O people, your souls and honors
are as sanctified as this day in this country among you up to the day on
which you will meet your Lord. Have I conveyed? O Allah, Be the
witness.

He whom is trusted with a deposit should fulfill his trust. The usury
of the pre-Islamic age is revoked. The first usury that I will revoke is
Al-Abbas bin Abdil-Muttelib's.

The revenge of the pre-Islamic age is revoked. The first revenge that I
will revoke is the Aamir bin Rabi'a bin Al-Harith bin Abdil-Muttelib's.
The whole traditions of the pre-Islamic age are canceled except the
custody -of the Holy House of God- and the watering (of the pilgrims).
Retaliation is the judge of the premeditated murder. The ruling of
quasi-murder, such as those whom are killed by a stick or a stone
unintentionally, is a one hundred camels -to be paid as blood money-.
Any additional number is a part of the pre-Islamic practices. O people,
the Shaitan despaired of being obeyed on this land, but he accepted to
be obeyed through your insignificant evildoings. O people, "Postponing
(of the sacred month) is only an addition in unbelief, wherewith those
who disbelieve are led astray, violating it one year and keeping it
sacred another, that they may agree in the number (of months) that Allah
has made sacred." The time has rotated as same as the day on which God
created the heavens and the earth. "Surely the number of months with
Allah is twelve months in Allah's ordinance since the day when He
created the heavens and the earth, of these four being sacred;" three
are consecutive and one is odd. They are Dhu'l-Qa'da, Dhu'l-Hijja,
Muharram, and Rajab, which falls between Jumada and Shaban. Have I
conveyed? O Allah, Be the witness.

O people, your women enjoy obligations that are imposed upon you, and
you enjoy obligations that are imposed upon them. The obligations that
are imposed upon them are that they should never take anybody to your
beds, should never let anybody that you hate enter your houses before
they take your permission, and should never commit any evildoing. If
they do so, God has permitted you to prevent them, leave them alone in
the sleeping-places, and beat them, but not so harmfully. If they desist
and obey you, you should assume their livelihood and clothing
adequately. You have taken them by the trust of God and they have been
lawful to you by the Book of God. Therefore, fear God in the questions
regarding women and advise each other for their good.

O people, "the believers are each others' brothers." It is illicit for
anyone to behave in (someone's) money before he obtains the owner's
permission. Have I conveyed? O Allah, be the witness.

After me, do not return to atheism by killing each other. I have left
among you what will protect you against deviation if you only adhere to.
It is the Book of God and my family-my household. O Allah, be the
witness. O people, your Lord is one and your father is one. You all are
from Adam and Adam was created from dust. "The best of you to Allah is
the most God-fearing." Except by means of God-fearing, no Arab person is
preferred to a non-Arab. Have I conveyed? The witness must convey this
to the absent.

O people, God has constituted the share of every heir. It is illicit
for any testator to will more than one third of the estate. The baby is
for the owner of the bed, and the share of the prostitute is the stone.
The curse of God, the angels, and all of people be upon those whoever
claim of being the sons of other than their fathers and those who claim
of being the subjects of other than their masters. God will not accept
from such individuals any excuse or compensation.

Peace and God's mercy and blessings be upon you.


