Short Maxims of the Prophet
===========================

1. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said:

Death is a sufficient admonisher, God-fearing is a sufficient wealth,
worship is a sufficient occupation, the Day of Resurrection is a
sufficient appointment and God is a sufficient Rewarder.
2. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: To believing in
God and to benefit His servants are the highest two characters of piety.
Polytheism and injuring the servants are the evilest characters.

3. As a man asked for words by which God may benefit him, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) said: Remember death repeatedly. This
will save you from longing for the worldly pleasures. Show gratitude
frequently and this will increase the graces upon you. Pray to God so
recurrently, because you do not know in which time God will respond for
your prayer. Beware of tyranny, for God has ordained that He will
support those whom are oppressed. He said: O men, your rebellion is
against your own souls. Beware of the evil plans, for God has ordained:
The evil plans shall not beset any save the authors of it.

4. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: You will care
excessively for (positions of) power. Then it will be an affliction upon
you and regret for you. How well is the wet nurse, and how bad is the
weaner!

5. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Any people who
commend their affairs to a woman will never see prosperity.

6. The Prophet was asked about the best friends. He (peace be upon him
and his family) answered: The best friends are those who help you when
you mention (a matter) and remind you when you forget. He then was asked
about the worst people. He (peace be upon him and his family)
answered:

The worst people are the scholars when they commit sins.

7. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: My Lord
commanded me to adhere to nine things: He commanded me to be sincere in
hidden and open situations, just in (situations of) satisfaction and
anger, temperate in poverty and richness, pardon him who wronged me,
give him who deprived me (of his bestowals), regard him who ruptured
relations with me, ponder over things while I am silent, mention Him
whenever I utter, and learn lessons from things that I see.

8. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Retain the
knowledge by recording.

9. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Catastrophes
should be expected when the sinful become masters, the masters become
the humblest, and the sinful ones are respected.

10. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Speedy walking
removes the beauty of the believers.

11. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The one who
was exposed to a theft will insist on accusing innocent people to the
degree that his sin becomes greater than the thief is.

12. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God surely
loves him who performs His duties munificently.

13. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: If your
leaders are the best of you, the wealthy are the kindest of you, and
your affairs are subject to consultation, then the surface of the earth
is better for you than its interior. But if your leaders are the evilest
of you, the wealthy are the most niggardly of you, and your affairs
become in the hands of your women, then the interior of the earth is
better for you than its surface.

14. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The grace of
this world is perfect for those who begin and end their day while
enjoying three matters: a healthy body, a safe course, and a secured
maintenance. The graces of this world and the world to come are complete
for those who enjoy an additional matter. It is the faith.

15. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Be kind to the
noble who suffers humility (after his nobility), the wealthy who loses
(his wealth), and the knowledgeable who becomes in the hands of ignorant
people.

16. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Most people
are examined in two characters. They are good health and peace of
mind.

17. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Hearts are
molded on cherishing those who treat them charitably and abhorring those
who treat them nastily.

18. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: We, the
prophets, are ordered to associate with people according to their
understandings.

19. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Cursed be him
who imposes his burdens on others.

20. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Worship is of
seven parts, the best of which is seeking legal earnings.

21. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God does not
force anyone to obey Him. To disobey Him does not mean that He is
overcome. He does not neglect the servants who possessed. He controls
what He has granted to them and possesses what he has given them in
possession. Nothing will oppose or preclude His obedience if the
servants order each other to cling to it. He is able to prevent the
servants from disobeying Him. This does not mean that He drags them to
the acts of disobedience to him.

22. As his son Ibrahim was dying, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) said: We will surely grieve for you, Ibrahim. But the late
is the introductory of the present and the last will definitely catch up
with the first. Then, he (peace be upon him and his family) shed tears
and said:

The eyes shed tears and the heart grieves, but we will say nothing but
what pleases the Lord. We are surely grievous for you, Ibrahim. 23. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Beauty is in the tongue
(wording).

24. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Knowledge is
not stripped from people, but the knowledgeable individuals are taken.
When the knowledgeable ones are no longer existent among people, the
ignorant ones, then, will be betaken as leaders and they will issue
verdicts ignorantly. Then they will deviate and mislead the others.

25. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Expecting the
Relief is the best jihad of my umma.

26. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The morals of
us-the family of the prophesy- are pardoning those who wronged us and
giving those who deprived us.

27. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
favorable disciples of my umma to me are the witty that pray
considerably and worship the Lord secretly. They are unknown for people
as their sustenance is hardly sufficient for them, but they keep up
steadfastness until death comes to them. Their heritage is little and
their mourners are few.

28. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God will
forgive the sins of every believer because of suffering from any sort of
fatigue, pain, grief, or care.

29. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God will never
take care of those who have, dress, and ride whatever they desire,
unless they desist.

30. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The like of
the believer is the ear: he once falls and once stands erect. The like
of the disbeliever is the cedar: he has a steady state that he never
feels.

31. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
examined (by being afflicted by worldly misfortunes so that the Lord
will test their faithfulness) people are the prophets followed by their
likes. A faithful believer is afflicted according to the degree of his
loyalty, believing, and good deed. Those who enjoy a true faith and good
deeds will be intensively afflicted, while those who bear insignificant
faith and commit evildoings are afflicted trivially.

32. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God will not
give any atheist or hypocrite anything of this world if it equals for
Him the amount of a mosquito's wing.

33. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The world
rotates. Your share will reach you even if you are weak, and the
misfortune will reach you even if you are so powerful. He who despairs
of what has passed him will enjoy a restful body. He who satisfies
himself with that which God has decided for him will have a delightful
eye.

34. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: By God I
swear, I have told you and warned you against any deed that takes you to
Hell and urged taking in all of the deeds that take you to Paradise. The
Faithful Spirit inspired to me that no soul will expire before it
completes its earnings. Slow down in seeking earnings. The slow of the
earnings should never make you seek God's sustenance through acts of
disobedience to God. The only way of obtaining God's sustenance is to
act obediently to Him.

35. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Allah hates
two sounds. They are the noise of mourning when a misfortune falls and
the sound of a pipe when a blessing falls. 36. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) said: Cheep prices and just rulers are signs of
God's satisfaction with His servants. Unjust rulers and expensive prices
are signs of His dissatisfaction with the servants.

37. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who enjoys
four characters will be lying in the grandest illumination of God: to
depend upon the declaration that there is no god but Allah and Mohammed
is being His messenger in all affairs, to say, 'We are surely Allah's
and to Him we shall return' in misfortunes, say, 'All praise be to
Allah' in situations of welfare, and say, 'I seek the forgiveness of God
and to Him I repent' in situations of committing sins.

38. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who is
given four things will not be deprived of four others: he who is granted
seeking the forgiveness of God will not be deprived of being pardoned;
he who is granted thankfulness will not be deprived of increase; he who
is granted repentance will not be deprived of acceptance; he who is
granted supplication to God will not be deprived of response.

39. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Knowledge is
kept in stores the keys of which is questioning. Ask as much as
possible, God compassionate you. The reward of asking is recorded for
four; the asker, the speaker, the listener, and the favorer.

40. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Ask the
scholars, speak with the wise, and sit with the poor.

41. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: I prefer the
merits of knowledge to those of worship. Piety is the best of your
religion.

42. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The angels of
the heavens and the earth curse those who issue verdicts baselessly.

43. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The reward is
obtained according to the volume of the examination (of God). God will
afflict (hardship) upon those whom He loves. God's satisfaction is
gained only by those whose hearts are content, while His dissatisfaction
is the share of those whose hearts are dissatisfied.

44. A man came to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and
said: "O God's Messenger, instruct me." He said: Never associate anyone
(or anything) with God, even if you suffer burning or harsh torture,
except in case that your heart is full of faith. Obey and treat your
parents kindly whether they are alive or dead. You should carry out even
if they order you to leave your family and fortune, for this is a part
of faith. Never neglect an obligatory prayer intentionally. The custody
of God does not include those who neglect an obligatory prayer
intentionally. Beware of consuming wine or any intoxicant, for they are
the keys to every evil.

45. A man from Bani -the tribe of- Tamim named Abu Umaya came to the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) and asked: "O Mohammed, to
what are you soliciting people?" The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) answered: "I call to Allah. I and those who follow me being
certain." I call to Him who relieves your injury if you supplicate to
Him, supports when any anguished one seeks His help, and richens when
any poor implores to Him.


The man then asked for instructions, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) said: Never be angry. The man asked for more, and the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Please people in the
same way you want them to please you. The man asked for more, and the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Never revile at people
so that they will not be your enemies. The man asked for more, and the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Never slow down in
doing favors to the deservers. The man asked for more, and the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) said: People will surely love you if
you love them. The man asked for more, and the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said: Meet your friend with a smiling face. Never
feel bored. Boringness deprives you of the welfare of this world and the
next world. Make your dress cover the half of your leg. Beware of
loosing the buttons and the shirts, for that is a fashion of conceit.
God does not like conceit. 46. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) said:

God dislikes the old man that commits adultery, the rich man that
wrongs others, the proud poor man, and the insistent beggar. God,
likewise, revokes the rewards of the giver who always reminds others of
what he has given to them and hates those who spend extravagantly, the
shameless, and the liars.

47. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who
pretends of being poor will be poor.

48. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Courtesy with
people is the half of faith and leniency with them is the half of
livelihood.

49. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: After
believing in God, the head of intelligence is courtesy, provided that no
right is neglected. Wit is a happy yield.

50. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: After
idolatry, the most insistent matter that I have been warned against is
the heated argument.

51. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who cheats,
injures, or deceives a Muslim is not one of our party.

52. In Al-Khaif Mosque, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
orated: God give victory to every servant who will listen to my words,
comprehend them, and convey to the absent. A recipient of knowledge may
benefit by it more than its conveyor. It happens that a conveyor of
knowledge is uneducated. A Muslim's heart should never cheat in these
three matters: they are working sincerely for the sake of God, bearing
goodwill for the imams of the Muslims, and clinging to their party. The
believers are brothers of equal souls. They should be one hand against
their enemies. The high-class Muslims should respect the pledge of the
lower class ones.

53. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: When a Muslim
deals with a Dhimmi, he should say, "O Allah, precede my good to his."
But when he deals with another Muslim, he should say, "O Allah, precede
the good of both of us."

54. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God bless the
servant who speaks out good wording to gain (the reward) or withholds
his bad wording to be saved.

55. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said:

The characters of faith are complete for those who enjoy three
characters: those whose satisfaction does not lead them to the wrong,
whose displeasure does not take them out of the right, and whose ability
does not lead them to seize what is not theirs.

56. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who attains
any bound unrightfully is one of the aggressors.

57. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: To recite
(some of) the Quran during the prayers is preferred to be recited in
other situations. To mention God is preferred to almsgiving. Almsgiving
is preferred to fasting. Fasting is a good advantage.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) then added: No word is
accepted unless it is applied practically. No word and no deed (are
accepted) without intention. No word, no deed, and no intention without
meeting the Sunnah.

58. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The source of
deliberateness is God and the source of hastiness is the Shaitan.

59. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: As for those
who learns (knowledge) for the purpose of disputing with the foolish
ones, vying proudly with the scholars, or attracting people's attentions
so that they will deify them, they should find themselves a place in
Hell. Leadership is not fit except for God and the proper people (of
leadership). God hates them who put themselves in other than the places
that God decides for them. Likewise, He will not take care of those who
claim of being leaders of people until they retract or repent to Him.

60. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Jesus, son of
Merriam (peace be upon them), said to the disciples: "Show affection to
God and curry favor with Him." "How can we do so?" asked they. "By
detesting those who commit acts of disobedience to Him," he taught, and
added, "Seek God's satisfaction through bearing malice toward them who
disobey Him." "Whom should we associate, then?" asked they. He
instructed, "Associate with those whose appearances remind you of God,
whose speech increases your good deeds, and whose deeds make you
desirous for the life to come."

61. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The obscene,
the niggardly, and the vulgar are the remotest from my morals.

62. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Misbehavior is
evil omen.

63. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: A man who does
not care for his speech or for what is said to him is surely a bastard
or a devil.

64. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: For every
obscene, indecent, and shameless individual who does not care for his
speech or for what is said to him, God has banned them from being in
Paradise. If you search for the family of such individuals, you will
find them bastards or semi-sons of devils.

"O God's Messenger," some asked, "Are there devils among people?" The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) answered them: There are
devils among people. Listen to God's saying (as an address to the
Shaitan): …And share with them in wealth and children.

65. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He whom you
help will help you. He who does not choose patience for encountering the
misfortunes will fail. People will surely defame those who defame them.
They, however, will not leave alone those who leave them alone.

"What should we do in this case, God's Messenger?" asked the
attendants. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) answered: You
should save them for your times of poverty.

66. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said:

May I lead you to the best moralities of this world and the life to
come? These moralities are to regard him who disregarded you, give him
who deprived you (of his bestowals), and pardon him who wronged you.

67. One day, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) went out
and saw some people trying to roll a rock (as a competition of power).
He (peace be upon him and his family) commented:

The most powerful of you are those who possess themselves in situations
of rage and the true champions are those who pardon (others' faults)
when they become more prevalent.

68. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God says: I
have accepted this religion for Myself. Except generosity and good
manners, nothing will raise it. You should honor the religion by these
two traits as long as you accompany it.

69. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
faithful of you are the most well-mannered.

70. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: High manners
elevate (those who embrace them) to the rank of the fasting people who
pass their nights with worship. "What is the best gift that the servants
obtained?" The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) was asked. He
answered:

The high mannerism is the best gift that the servants (of God) ever
obtained. 71. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The
high mannerism achieves cordiality.

72. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Happy mien
removes malice.

73. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The best of
you are the most well-mannered ones who go on intimate terms with people
and people go on intimate terms with them.

74. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Hands are
three; the begging hand, the giving hand, and the grasping hand. The
best of hands is the giving hand.

75. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Pudency is of
two categories; pudency of intelligence and pudency of idiocy. Knowledge
is the pudency of intelligence, and ignorance is the pudency of
idiocy.

76. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Backbiting is
licit against those who strip the dress of pudency.

77. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who
believes in God and the Day of Resurrection should fulfill the
promise.

78. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Keeping
others' deposits brings sustenance and breach of trusts brings
poverty.

79. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Sons'
affectionate look at their parents is a sort of worship.

80. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
catastrophic situations are to be decapitated compulsorily, to be
captured by the enemies, and to find a man laying on one's wife.

81. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Knowledge is
the comrade of the believer, clemency is his supporter, intelligence is
his guide, patience is the commander of his army, lenience is his
father, and charity is his brother. Adam is his lineage and God-fearing
is his ancestry. The seeking for legal earning is the personality.

82. As a man served the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) with
milk and honey together, he said:

It is enough to have only one of these two drinks. I neither drink them
both nor ban them. I behave modestly before God, for He will honor him
who behaves modestly before Him, humiliate him who behaves arrogantly,
grant earnings to the moderate, and will impoverish the wasters.
Finally, God will reward those who mention him frequently.

83. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The nearest to
me on the Day of Resurrection will be the most honest, the most faithful
for the trusts, the most well-mannered, and the closest to people.

84. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The Divine
Throne shakes and the Lord becomes irate whenever a sinful (individual)
is praised.

85. "What is prudence?" a man asked Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family), who answered: Prudence is to obey the wise man after you seek
his counsel.

86. One day, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) asked, "O
people, which individuals do you regard as heirless?" They answered,
"Those who die without leaving any descendant are the heirless." The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The true heirless is
that who dies before he dedicates one of his sons -no matter how many
they are- to the course of God.

He then asked, "O people, which individuals do you regard as pauper?"
They answered, "Those who do not possess any fortune are the paupers."
The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The true pauper is
that who does not provide anything of his wealth -no matter how big it
is- for the sake of God. He then asked, "O people, which individuals do
you regard as strong?" They answered, "Those who are too physically
powerful to be overcome are the strong ones." The Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said:

The true strong one is that whose self-possession dominates his wrath
that the Shaitan plants in his heart. 87. The Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) said:

He who acts ignorantly thwarts more than doing well. 88. The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) said: Sitting in a mosque in waiting
for the prayer is a sort of worship unless a matter is committed?

"What is that matter, God's Messenger?" asked the attendants. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) answered: That matter is
backbiting.

89. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The fasting
person is in state of worship even if he is sleeping in bed unless he
commits backbiting.

90. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who
publicizes an evildoing is (regarded) as same as the originator (of that
evildoing). A man who imputes dishonor to a Muslim for a matter will not
die before that matter is stuck to him.

91. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Three
categories will wrong you if you do not wrong them: they are the lows,
the wife, and the servant.

92. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Solidity of
the eye, hardheartedness, excessive acquisitiveness, and insistence on
committing a sin are signs of unhappiness.

93. As a man asked for instructions, the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) said: Never be angry. As the man asked for more, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) repeated: Never be angry.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) then added: The true
powerful man is not that who throws others down. It is that who possess
himself in (states of) rage.

94. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
complete believer is the most well-mannered. 95. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) said: Kindness gives embellishment to
everything it joins, and clumsiness ruins everything it joins.

96. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The well
clothing expresses richness. Treating the servants kindly suppresses the
enemy.

97. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: I have been
ordered (by God) to deal with people courteously in the same degree of
emphasis on delivering the Divine Message.

98. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Seek the means
of concealment for settling your affairs. Envy chases every grace. 99.
The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said:

Faith is two halves; one half is lying in patience and the other in
thankfulness.

100. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The proper
fulfillment of the pledges is a part of faith.

101. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Eating in
marts is lowness.

102. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: All the needs
are in God's hand while their means are in people's. Seek the needs from
God through people. You should be patient in praying to God to settle
you needs even if people settle them.

103. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: How strange
is the (faithful) believer! Any matter that God imposes upon him,
whether good or bad, is for his good. Misfortunes that befall him remit
his sins. If God bestows upon him or honors him, this means that He
favors him.

104. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: As for those
who consider the life to come as their greatest concern all over their
times, God will institute feeling of richness in their heart, arrange
their affairs, and prolongs their ages until they receive the sustenance
that is dedicated to them completely. As for those who consider the
attainment of the worldly pleasures as their greatest concern, God will
institute poverty between their eyes, disarrange their affairs, and give
them nothing more than their limited shares.

105. As a man asked him about the party of his umma, the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) said: The party of my umma is the community
of the right, regardless of their little number.

106. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God will
definitely fulfill the promise that He takes, but if He threatens a
punishment, He will have the option to do it or not.

107. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) asked: May I inform
of the closest to my mannerism?

"Yes, you man, God's messenger," said the attendants. He (peace be upon
him and his family) expressed: The closest to my mannerism are the most
well-mannered, the most self-possessed, the kindest to their relatives,
and the fairest in situations of rage or situation.

108. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who eats
and thanks is preferred to him who fasts silently -i.e. does not thank
the grace-.

109. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: To cherish a
believer for the sake of God is one of the greatest classes of faith. He
who loves, hates, gives, and bans-all for the sake of God is surely one
of the choices.

110. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God loves
most the servants who benefit others, carry out His right properly, and
make people like doing favors.

111. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: You should
reward them who do you favors. If you cannot reward them, you should
thank. Showing gratitude is a sort of rewarding.

112. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who is
deprived of kindness is deprived of goodness entirely.

113. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Never dispute
or joke with your friend and do not breach your promise to him.

114. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: It is
incumbent upon every believer to respect and fulfill the sanctities of
the religion, ethics, and food.

115. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The believer
is chipper and joker, while the hypocrites are rude and
quick-tempered.

116. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Richness is a
most excellent help on God-fearing.

117. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Aggression is
the quickest in punishment.

118. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The present
is of three sorts; a present for rewarding, a present for flattering,
and a present for the sake of God.

119. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Blessed are
those who leave a current passion for obtaining a promised one that they
have not seen yet.

120. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who
reckons tomorrow with the days of his age misbehaves with death.

121. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: What will you
do when your women become corrupt, your youth become sinful, and you
neither enjoin good nor forbid evil?

"Will that occur, God's messenger?" they asked. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) answered: This and eviler than it will fall.
What will you do when you forbid good and enjoin evil?

"Will that occur, God's messenger?" they asked. The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) answered: This and eviler than this will fall.
What will you do when you consider the evil as good and the good as
evil?

122. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Care not for
the evil omen. Do not carry out something that you suspect. Do not
oppress when you envy.

123. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: My umma
(people) are not blamed for nine things: for situations of the
unintentional flaw, oblivion, compulsion, ignorance, intolerability,
emergency, envy, evil omen, and the devilish insinuation regarding
people unless it is spoken.

124. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: You should
not be sad when you can no longer dream. The highly educated ones cannot
see visions.

125. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: All my people
will be virtuous if two classes of them become virtuous and will be
reprobate if these two classes become reprobate: they are the jurists
and leaders.

126. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
intelligent of people are the most fearful of God and the most obedient
to Him. The most unintelligent of people are the most fearful of the
rulers and the most obedient to them.

127. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: To Sit with
three categories of people is to cause your heart to die: they are the
lows, women, and the rich.

128. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The signs of
the people at whom God is angry but He does not afflict direct agony
upon them are: the high cost of their livings, short ages, loss of their
business, decay of their fruits, rarity of water in their rivers,
rainlessness, and overpowering of the evil ones over them.

129. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: If
fornication is widespread after me, sudden death will be common. If
people give a deficient measures, God will impose years of drought and
shortage upon them. If they desist from defraying the zakat, the
blessings of the plants, fruits, and minerals will be stopped. If they
rule unfairly, they will support each other on wronging and aggression.
If they breach their pledges, God will appoint their enemies as their
masters. If they rupture their (mutual) relations, their fortunes will
be in the hands of the evilest of them. If they do not enjoin good,
forbid evil, or follow the Immaculates (the Imams) of my family, God
will appoint the evilest of them as their masters and the prayers of the
pious men will not be responded.

130. When the Lord revealed: "And do not stretch your eyes after that
with which We have provided different classes of them, (of) the splendor
of this world's life, that We may thereby try them; and the sustenance
(given) by your Lord is better and more abiding," the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) said:

He whosever heart is not full of patience for the sake of God will
expire while he bemoans for the worldly affairs. He who stretches the
eyes to what is in people's hands will have a long grief, be
dissatisfied with what God has decided for him, and suffer an embittered
life. Those who think that God has not bestowed upon them with His
graces except in eating and drinking are surely ignorant and ungrateful.
Moreover, their efforts are surely nonsense and the punishment is very
close to them.

131. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Except
Muslims, no one will be in Paradise.

"O God's messenger," asked Abu Tharr, "What is Islam?" The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) answered: Islam is naked, God-fearing
is its cover, guidance is its underwear, pudency is its garment, piety
is its fashion, religiousness is its perfection, and good deed is its
fruit. Everything has a base, and the base of Islam is to cherish us;
the Prophet's family.

132. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Those who try
to satisfy a created being by means that cause the Creator's
dissatisfaction, God will set up on them that created being as absolute
master.

133. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God has
created some people for settling the others' needs. They like doing
favors and consider generosity as glory. God surely loves the nobilities
of character.

134. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: There are
some servants (of God) to whom people resort in needs. They will be safe
from the agony of God on the Day of Resurrection.

135. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: A (faithful)
believer should act upon the moralities that God favors. He should give
people when God bestows upon him and withhold when God withholds.

136. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: People will
surely live in an age in which a man will not care whether his religious
affairs are proper or not as long as his worldly pleasures are
satisfactory.

137. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God has
molded the hearts of His creatures on cherishing those who treat them
charitably and abhorring those who treat them nastily.

138. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Misfortunes
will befall my people if they do fifteen acts. "O God's Messenger," they
asked, "What are these fifteen acts. The Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) answered: If they dedicate the profits to themselves
exclusively, betake the deposits as profits, consider the almsgiving as
burdens, comply with their wives, become undutiful to their mothers,
respect their friends and disobey their fathers, raise their voices (of
disputation) in mosques, respect an evil man so as to avoid his
evildoing, appoint the lowliest of people as their chiefs, dress silky
clothes, consume wines, play on musical instruments, and the present
curse the past. When these matters occur, you should then expect three
events: the red wind, deformation, and decadency.

139. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: This world is
the prison of the believers and the paradise of the disbelievers.

140. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: People will
live in an age when they will turn into wolves. He who will not be a
wolf will be ravened be wolves.

141. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The most
uncommon (two) things in the last age (of time) are a trustworthy friend
and a legal-gotten dirham.

142. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Guard
yourselves against people through mistrusting them.

143. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The whole
welfare is obtained by intelligence only. The mindless have no
religion.

144. In the presence of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family),
some people praised a man so commendably that they ascribed to him all
the good characters. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
asked, "How was the intelligence of that man?" They said, "O God's
messenger, we are talking about his distinguishable adoration and
charity, and you ask us about his intelligence." The Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) worded:

Due to his idiocy, the foolish may commit sins that are greater than
those sins committed by the lewd ones. According to their intelligence,
the servants will have higher ranks and be close to their Lord.

145. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God has
divided the intellect into three parts. Those who enjoy these three
parts altogether are enjoying perfect minds, while the mindless are
those who do not have any of these parts. They are: good acquaintance
with God, good obedience to God, and good steadfastness against the acts
of God.

146. A Christian man of Najran came to Medina. He enjoyed a noticeable
eloquence, gravity, and grandeur; therefore, somebody addressed to the
Prophet, "O God's messenger, how intelligent that man is!" The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) reproached the sayer and said: The
intelligent individuals are only those who confess of the Oneness of God
and act upon the obedience to Him.

147. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Knowledge is
the intimate friend of the believer, clemency is his supporter,
intelligence is his guide, work is his custodian, patience is the
commander of his troops, kindness is his father, piety is his brother,
Adam is the lineage, God-fearing is the ancestry, and the seeking for
legal earning is the personality.

148. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: You must
reward the hand of help that is extended to you. Thanks must be
introduced if rewarding is impossible. If thank is also neglected, then
it is surely ingratitude.

149. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Shake hands
with each other, for it removes malice.

150. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: A faithful
believer may get used to any character except telling lies and
treachery.

151. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Some poetry
is (words of) wisdom and some speech has magical influence.

152. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) asked Abu Tharr,
"Which is the firmest handle of faith?" "God and His Messenger are the
most knowledgeable," answered Abu Tharr. The Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) said: The firmest handle of faith is to support, hate,
and give-all for the sake of God.

153. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: To Seek
goodness from God and to satisfy oneself with what He decides-these two
matters achieve happiness to man. To leave seeking goodness from God and
to show dissatisfaction with what God decides-these two matters bring
unhappiness to man.

154. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Sorrow is
repentance.

155. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Those who
injure the sanctity of the Quran do not believe in it.

156. As a man asked for an instruction, the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) said: Keep your tongue (from saying bad wording).

The man asked for more, and the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) repeated: Keep your tongue.

The man asked for more, and the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) repeated: Keep your tongue. Woe to you! Except the harvest of
their tongues, nothing overturns people on their noses in Hell.

157. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Doing favors
protects against violent death, secret almsgiving extinguishes the ire
of the Lord, and regard of the relatives prolongs the age. Every favor
is charity. People of charity in this world will be also the people of
charity in the world to come. Similarly, people of evil in this world
will be the people of evil in the world to come. People of charity will
be in Paradise before others.

158. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: God likes to
see the signs of His graces on the servants. He hates misery and
pretense of misery.

159. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Good request
is half of knowledge, and leniency is half of the livelihood.

160. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: As he gets
older, son of Adam -human being- will enjoy two characters; greed and
hope.

161. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Pudency is a
part of faith.

162. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: In the Day of
Resurrection, a servant's feet will not move before he is asked about
four matters. He will be asked how he had finished his age, how he had
spent the age of his youth, what earnings he had got, where from he had
got them, how he had spent them, and he will be also asked about his
affection to us; the Prophet's family.

163. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: For those who
treat people fairly, speak with them truly, and fulfill their promises,
their personality is perfect, their decency is apparent, their rewards
are incumbent, and it is forbidden to backbite them.

164. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: It is illicit
to violate anything of the believer: his honor, wealth, and blood-all
are sanctified.

165. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Regard your
relatives even by means of mere greeting.

166. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Faith is a
determination in the heart, saying with the tongue, and performance of
the pillars -of the religion-.

167. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Richness is
not the abundance of profits. It is the self-sufficiency.

168. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: To desist
from evildoing is charity.

169. Each intelligent and mindful individual of my umma is bound of
four matters. "What are they, God's messenger?" asked they. The Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) explained: They are to listen to
knowledge, retain, spread, and act upon it.

170. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Some speech
has magical influence, some knowledge has ignorance, and some sayings
are miraculous.

171. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: There are two
categories of prophetic practices: one is in the obligatory duties. To
commit oneself to such practices is guidance (to the right) and to leave
it is deviation. The other is the practices that are not in the
obligatory duties. To commit oneself to such practices is virtue and to
neglect them is not a sin.

172. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Those who
please a ruler by means that cause God's dissatisfaction are out of
God's religion.

173. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The offerer
of charity is better than the charity itself, and the committer of an
evildoing is worse than the evil itself. 174. The Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) said: As God moves some people from the humility of
the acts of disobedience to Him, to the honor of acts of obedience to
Him, He enriches them without wealth, supports them without need of a
clan, and entertains without need to a bosom friend. He who fears God,
God will make everything fear him and will make him who does not fear
Him fear everything. God accepts the few deeds of those who satisfy
themselves with few earnings from Him. For those who have the courage of
seeking legal earnings, their provisions will be easily obtainable, they
will be quite restful, and their dependants will be luxurious. For those
who abstain from pursuing the worldly pleasures, God will fix wisdom in
their minds, make it glide on their tongues, show them the malady and
remedy of the worldly defects, and move them from this world to the
eternal abode safely.

175. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Overlook the
faults of the mistaken.

176. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Ascetics is
to disregard hopes, thank for every favor, and refrain from committing
any forbidden thing.

177. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Never do any
charity showily and never neglect it because you feel shy.

178. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: I fear for my
people to encountering three matters: obeyed niggardliness, pursued
fancy, and deviate leaders.

179. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The physical
state of those who live in permanent worry is always unstable. The
mentality of the ill-mannered individuals is always bad. The personality
and dignity of those who dispute are missing.

180. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The evilest
of my people are those whom people respect for avoiding their evildoing.
He whom people respect for avoiding their evildoings are surely not
included with my umma.

181. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: He who begins
his day thinking of something other than God is not one of the people of
God. He who does not care for the affairs of the believers is not one of
them. He who succumbs to humility is not with us; the Prophet's
family.

182. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) wrote a missive to
Me'aath bin Jabal, consoling for the death of his son: From: Mohammed
the Messenger of God.

To: Me'aath bin Jabal.

Peace be upon you. All praise is due to God but Whom there is no god.
So then, I have received the news of your grief for your son whom God
took out of His act. Your son was one of God's pleasant gifts and loans
that He deposited with you. He enjoyed you with him for a period then
took him back in the limited time. We are surely Allah's and to Him we
shall return. Your grief should never waste your rewards. If you only
had known of the great rewards for this misfortune that befell you, you
would have realized that the misfortune had been too short to meet the
great rewards of God for people of submission -to Him- and
steadfastness. You should know that grief will never return the dead or
stop the fate. You should do well with consolation and work for
obtaining the promised rewards. You should never grieve for what will
unquestionably come to you, as well as all creatures. Peace and God's
mercy and blessings be upon you. 183. The Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) said:

The signs of the Hour of Resurrection are the great numbers of the
reciters of the Quran and the littleness of the jurists, the great
numbers of the rulers and the littleness of the trustees, and the great
quantity of rain and the littleness of plants. 184. The Prophet (peace
be upon him and his family) said:

You should convey to me the questions of those who cannot reach me. On
the Day of Resurrection, God will grant the conveyers of the questions
of those who cannot reach the rulers a secure foothold on the Path.

185. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Two words are
strange: they are a word of wisdom uttered by a foolish. You should
accept it. The other is a foolish word uttered by a wise man. You should
pardon it.

186. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: The lazy have
three signs: he slows until he neglects, neglects until he wastes, and
wastes until he commits a sin.

187. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: For them who
have the courage of seeking legal earnings, they will benefit
themselves, their provisions will be easily obtainable, and they will
save themselves from arrogance.

God accepts the few deeds of those who satisfy themselves with the few
earnings that are received from Him. God will blind the heart of those
who desire for the worldly pleasures and trust the world excessively,
each according to the measure of his desire. For those who abstain from
seeking the worldly pleasures and disregard worldly expectations, God
will endow them with knowledge that they will obtain without need for
learning, show them the right way without need for a guide, and will
save them from blindness as He makes them discerning people.

After me, there shall come peoples who will not overpower people except
by means of killing and arrogance, will not have wealth except by
stinginess, and will not gain respect except by means of pursuing their
whims and disregarding the religious affairs. God will give the rewards
of fifty veracious men to those who live in that time and tolerate
poverty while they can be rich, tolerate humility while they can be
masters, and tolerate people's dislike while they can obtain their
respect; provided that all are intended for the sake of God and for
obtaining the reward of the world to come.

188. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Beware of the
piety of hypocrisy: it is to pretend of piety while the heart is not
pious.

189. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Mercy falls
upon the dispraised charitable ones.

190. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Accept the
presents. The best present is the odor. It is light and
sweet-smelling.

191. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: Favors should
be done to the religious or the highborn people.

Jihad of the weak is the hajj, and jihad of women is their good
behavior with their husbands. Endearment is the half of the religion.

The moderate will never be poor.

Seek earnings through almsgiving.

God does not accept to make the earnings of their faithful servants
come from the sources that they expect. 192. A servant of God will not
attain the position of God-fearing before he leaves the licit if
suspected so as not to commit an illicit matter.


