Narrations of Imam Ali
======================

The reports that related the long maxims and words of wisdom of Imam
Ali bin Abi Talib Amirul Muminin (peace be upon him) are too many to the
degree that if we want to amass his sermons and words of one topic only,
monotheism for example, we will compile a volume that is not thinner
than this one altogether. However, we will refer to one sermon only in
the field of monotheism, then move to refer to other most common sermons
and sayings that fit the topics of our book only and are regarded as the
most favorable by the specialists as well as ordinary people. That will
be sufficient, inshallah.

**Imam Ali's Sermon of the Sincerity of Believing in the Oneness of
Allah**

The foremost in the worship of Allah is the acknowledgement of Him. The
origin of acknowledging Him is to believe in His oneness. The system of
believing in His oneness is to deny His being enjoying attributes,
because the minds testify that every attribute or attributed is new in
creation. Every creature testifies that it has a creator that is neither
an attribute nor an attributed. Every attribute and attributed testifies
that is has likes. Everything that has a like is new. Every new thing
testifies it has not been eternal, because eternity prevents newness.
Who recognizes Allah's essence does not recognize Him. Who decides an
end to Allah does not believe in His oneness. Who compares Him -to
anything- does not believe in Him. Who likens him -to anything- does not
recognize His actuality. Who imagines Him does not mean Him. Who claims
of fathoming Him does believe in His oneness. Who states that He has an
end does not believe in Him. Who points at Him does not believe in His
eternity. Who admits limitations for Him does not refer to Him. Who
recognizes parts for Him does not succumb to Him. Every idiosyncratic
matter is made. Except Him, every existent matter is imperfect.

The evidence on the existence of Allah is His made. The intellects
recognize the acknowledgement of Him. The conception proves His claim.
His portents are His evidences against His servants. When Allah created
the creatures, He made a screen between them and Him. His distinction
proves that He is different from them. The proof of His being free of
materiality is His creating the creatures from materials. The materials
are evidences on the neediness of the creatures. The proof of His being
foremost is His originating the creatures. Every originated substance is
unable to originate others.

His names are expressions. His deeds are means of understanding. His
essence is a truth. His quintessence distinguishes Him from the
creatures. Thus, whoever states a description for Allah ignores Him, and
whoever states a like for Him misses Him, and whoever states an essence
for Him passes Him up. To ask, "Where is Allah?" is to state a definite
place for Him, and to ask, "In which substance is He?" is to include
Him -to another thing-, and to ask, "Since when is He?" is to define an
end for Him, and to ask, "For what is He existent?" is to state a reason
for Him, and to ask, "How is He?" is to liken Him -to other things-, and
to ask, "When is He?" is to state a definite time for Him, and to ask,
"Till when is He?" is to state a definite deadline to Him. To state a
definite deadline to Allah is to part Him. To part Him means to describe
Him, and to describe him leads to disbelieving in Him. He whoever
divides Him is going away from Him.

Allah does not change when His creatures change and does not acquire
limits when others acquire such limits. He is single but not a number.
He is peculiar but not with the partition of needs. He is unseen but not
being inside a substance. He is evident but not in physical nearness. He
is clear but not seeable. He is Aware but not having corporeality. He
acts but without connotation of movements. He is arranging without
intellectual planning. He is managing without need to movements. He
hears without sense and sees without instrumentality. He is near without
physical closeness and remote without distance. He is existent but not
after nonexistence. Times do not accompany Him. Places do not include
Him. Changes do not affect Him. Descriptions do not limit Him. Tools do
not restrain Him. His being preceded times. His existence preceded
nonexistence. Origin is His eternity.

As He created the feelings, it is known that He does not need feelings.
As he created the essences, it is known that He does not have essence
(like the others). As He originated the creatures, it is known that He
had no originator. As He is different from things, it is known that
nothing matches Him. As he created comparable things, it is known that
nothing compares Him. He compared light to darkness and coldness to
hotness. He formed the opposites of these things and approximated their
different things. Difference refers to its Maker and comparison refers
to its comparer. He, the Glorified, made them the evidences on His
godhood and witnesses on His being not seen and speakers of His wisdom.
The composition of these matters speaks of their being created. Their
existence speaks of their nonexistence. Their movement speaks of their
transience. Their expiry declares that their Creator will never expire.
This is Allah's saying: "And of everything we have created two pairs
that you may be intelligent." He made difference between 'before' and
'after' so that it will be recognized that nothing was before Him and
nothing will be after Him. The instincts of the creatures prove that
their Maker has no instinct. The changeability of the creatures proves
that the Maker of their changes is unchangeable. The timing of the
creatures proves that the Maker of their timing is timeless. He made
screens among the creatures so that they will realize that there is no
screen between them and Him. The confirmation of godhood had been proved
to Him before the creation of the servants. The truth of lordship had
been proved to Him before the existence of the slaves.

The interpretation of hearing had been proved to Him before the
existence of anything that is heard. The meaning of knowledge had been
proved to Him before the existence of anything that is known. The
obligation of capability had been proved to Him before the existence of
anything that is under capability. He deserved the name of 'the Creator'
before He created the creatures, and deserved the name of 'the Maker'
before He originated things. He distinguished the things without any
means and collected them without any means. He arranged them without any
efforts. Thoughts do not reach His essence and understandings do not
comprehend His quintessence. "When?" does not apply to Him, "may" does
not make Him nearer, "probably" does not screen Him, "with" does not
compare Him, and "He" does not comprise Him. Tools limit themselves
only. Instrumentality refers to its likes. Deeds are found in the things
themselves. Apparatuses tell of their neediness. Opposition tells of the
opposite. Matches refer to their likes. Times refer to the events.
Descriptions are distinguishable by the help of the names. The matches
were discriminated from them. Their events referred to them. "Since"
prevented them from eternity. "May" stopped against their infinity.
"Unless" denied its fatalism. As they -things- separated, they referred
to their separator. As they varied, they referred to the originator of
their variation. The Creator is obvious to the minds through the things.
He hid from sight through them. Things proved that the Creator is more
exalted than being realized by thoughts. They proved the lessons.
Evidences were extracted from them. Through minds, the believing in
Allah is proved, and through declaration of Allah, the faith is
perfected.

There is no religion without recognition. There is no recognition
without believing. There is no believing without pure
monotheism -believing in Allah's oneness-. There is no monotheism
without sincerity. No sincerity if there is anthropomorphism. No denial
occurs with the believing in the descriptions -of the Lord-. No pure
believing occurs without dismissing the denial totally. Proving a part
of anthropomorphism proves the whole. The whole believing in Allah's
oneness does not materialize some of the denial. Declaration is the
denial of rejection. Sincerity cannot be reached if there is any amount
of denial. Everything that is found in a created matter is nonexistent
to the creator -of that matter-. Everything that is possibly occurring
to a created matter is impossibly occurring to the creator -of that
matter-. Motion, parting, and contacts are not applicable to the
Creator. How is it acceptable that a matter that He created can apply to
Him, a matter that He originated can affect Him, or a matter that He
launched can occur to Him? Otherwise, His essence would be variable, His
quintessence would be divisible, and eternity would not be described to
Him. Moreover, eternity would not have a meaning other than expiry, and
the creator would not have a meaning other than the created. If He had
back, he would have front. If He seeks perfection, He will be imperfect.
How is it then acceptable for a matter that is variable to have the name
of eternity? How is it then acceptable for a thing that is affected by
events and years to deserve perpetuity? How is it acceptable for a thing
that has parts to originate parts? In this case, He would be having
tools, and He would be changed into a guided thing after He had been a
guide, and His description would be compared to the others'
descriptions. The impossible hypothesis in not evidence and no answer
can be found for the impossible question.

That was a brief part of the Imam's sermon.

**Imam Ali's Commandment for his son Hasan bin Ali**

From the father who is (shortly) to die, who acknowledges the hardships
of the times, who has turned away from life, who has submitted himself
to the (calamities of) time, who realizes the evils of the worlds who is
living in the abodes of the dead and is due to depart from them any day;
to the son who yearns for what is not to be achieved, who is treading
the path of those who have died, who is the victim of ailments, who is
entangled in the (worries of the) days, who is a target of hardships, a
slave of the world, a trader of its deception, a debtor of wishes, a
prisoner of mortality, an ally of worries, a neighbor of griefs, a
victim of distresses, who has been overpowered by desires, and who is a
successor of the dead.

Now, (you should know that) what I have learnt from the turning away of
this world from me, the onslaught of time over me and the advancing of
the next world towards me is enough to prevent me from remembering
anyone except myself and from thinking beyond myself. But when I
confined myself to my own worries leaving the worries of others, my
intelligence saved me and protected me from my desires. It clarified to
me my affairs and led me to seriousness wherein there was no trickery
and truth, which was not tarnished by falsehood. Here, I found you a
part of myself, rather I found you my whole, so much so that if anything
befell you, it was as though it befell me and if death came to you it
was as though it came to me. Consequently, your affairs meant to me what
my own matters meant to me. So, I have written this piece of advice (to
you) as an instrument of seeking help through it, whether I remain alive
for you or cease to exist.

I advise you to fear Allah, O my child, to abide by His commands, to
fill your heart with remembrance of Him and to cling to hope from Him.
No connection is more reliable than the connection between you and Allah
provided you take hold of it. Enliven your heart with preaching, kill it
by renunciation, energize it with firm belief, humiliate it by recalling
death, make it believe in mortality, make it see the misfortunes of this
world, make it fear the authority of the time and the severity of some
changes during the nights and the days, place before it the events of
past people, recall to it what befell those who were before you and walk
among their cities and ruins, then see what they did and from what they
have gone away and where they have gone and stayed. You will find that
they departed from (their) friends and lodged in the house of
loneliness. Call in their houses: O empty houses, Where are your
habitants? Then stop on their graves and say: O ragged bodies and
separated organs, How have you found the lodge in which you are living?
O my son, Shortly, you too will be like one of them. Therefore, plan for
your place of stay and do not sell your next life with this world.

Give up discussing what you do not know and speaking about what does
not concern you. Keep off the track from which you fear to go astray
because refraining (from moving) when there is fear of straying is
better than embarking on dangers. Ask others to do good; you will thus
be among the good doers. Desist others from evil with your action as
well as your speech and keep off, to the best of your ability, from he
who commits it. Struggle for Allah as is His due; and the reviling of a
reviler should not deter you in matters of Allah. Leap into dangers for
the sake of right wherever it be. Acquire insight into religious law.
Habituate yourself to endure hardships. In all your affairs, resign
yourself to Allah, because you will thus be resigning yourself to a
secure shelter and a strong protector. You should ask only from your
Lord because in His hand is all the giving and depriving. Seek good
(from Allah) as much as you can. Understand my advice and do not turn
away from it, because the best saying is that which benefits. Know there
is no good in knowledge, which does not benefit, and if knowledge is not
made use of then its acquisition is not justified.

O my child, when I noticed that you were of goodly age and noticed that
I was increasing in weakness, I hastened with my will for you and wrote
down salient points of it lest death overtakes me before I divulge to
you what I have in my heart, or lest my wit be affected as my body has
been affected, or the forces of passions or the mischiefs of the world
overtake you making you like a stubborn camel. Certainly, the heart of a
young man is like uncultivated land. It accepts whatever is strewn on
it. So, I hastened to mould you properly before your heart hardened up
and your mind became occupied, so that you might be ready to accept
through your intelligence the results of the experience of others and be
saved from going through these experiences yourself. In this way, you
would avoid the hardship of seeking them and the difficulties of
experimenting. Thus, you are getting to know what we had experienced and
even those things are becoming clear to you, which we might have
missed.

O my child, even though I have not reached the age which those before
me had; yet I looked into their behavior and thought over events of
their lives. I walked among their ruins till I was as one of them. In
fact, by virtue of those of their affairs that have become known to me
it is as though I have lived with them from the first to the last. I
have therefore been able to discern the impure from the clean and the
benefit from the harm.

I have selected for you the choicest of those matters, and collected
for you their good points and have kept away from you their useless
points. Since I feel for you affairs as a compassionate father should
feel and I aim at giving you training, I thought it should be at a time
when you are advancing in age and new on the stage of the world,
possessing upright intention and clean heart and that I should begin
with the teaching of the Book of Allah and its interpretation, the laws
of Islam and its commands, its lawful matters and unlawful matters and
that I should not go beyond these for you. Then I feared lest you should
get confused as other people had been confused on account of their
passions and (different) views. Therefore, in spite of my dislike for
you being so warned, I thought it better for me to make this position
strong rather than leave you in a position where I do not regard you
safe from falling into destruction. I hoped that Allah would help you in
your straight-forwardness and guide you in your resoluteness.
Consequently, I wrote this piece of my will for you.

O my child, what I love most for you to adopt from my will is to fear
Allah, to confine yourself to what Allah has made obligatory on you, and
to follow the actions of your forefathers and the virtuous people of
your folks, because they did not fall short in seeing for themselves
what you will see for yourself, and they did about their affairs as you
would like to think (about your affairs). Thereafter, their thinking led
them to discharge the obligations they came to know of and to desist
from what they were not required to do. If your heart does not accept
this without acquiring knowledge as they acquired it, then your search
should first be by way of understanding and learning and not by falling
into doubts or getting entangled in quarrels.

Before you probe into this, you should begin by seeking Allah's help
and turning to Him for competence and keeping aloof from everything that
throws you into doubt or flings you towards misguidance. When you have
made sure that your heart is clean and humble and your thoughts have
come together and you have only one thought which is about this matter,
you should see what I have explained to you; but if you have not been
able to achieve that piece of observation and thinking which you would
like to have, then know that you are only stamping the ground like a
blind she-camel and falling into darkness while a seeker of religion
should not grope in the dark or create confusion. It is better to avoid
this.

The first and the last of my wording is that I praise the Lord of your
fathers, as well as you and my. He is the Lord of the heavens and the
earth. I praise Him with what He deserves and as He deserves and as He
loves and as it should be. We implore Him to bless our Prophet (peace be
upon him and his family) and his family and all of the prophets and
apostles of Allah as the blessing of all of those who blessed him. We
also implore Him to complete His grace on us in what He has guided us in
asking Him and responding to us. The virtues are complete only through
His grace.

Appreciate my advice, O my child, and know that He Who is the Master of
death is also the Master of life, that the Creator causes death as well;
that He Who destroys is also the restorer of life and that He Who
inflicts disease is also the curer. This world continues in the way
Allah has made it with regard to its pleasures, trials, rewards on the
Day of Judgment, and all that He wishes and you do not know. If anything
of this advice is not understood by you then attribute it to your
ignorance of it, because when you were first born you were born
ignorant. Thereafter, you acquired knowledge. There are many matters of
which you are ignorant and in which your sight first wonders and your
eye wonders then after this you see them. Therefore, cling to Him Who
created you, fed you, and put you in order. Your worship should be for
Him, your eagerness should be towards Him, and your fear should be of
Him.

Know, O my child, that no one received messages from Allah, the
Glorified, as the Prophet (may Allah bless him and his family) did.
Therefore, regard him as your forerunner and leader towards deliverance.
Certainly, I shall spare no effort in giving you advice and surely even
if you try you cannot acquire that insight for your welfare as I have
for you. Know, O my child, that if there had been a partner with your
Lord, his messengers too should have come to you and you would have seen
signs of his authority and power and you should have known his deeds and
qualities. But He is only One God as He has described Himself. No one
can dispute with Him in His authority. He is the Creator of everything.
He is too great to have His divinity proved by the encompassing heart or
eye. When you have understood this then you should do what is done by
him who is like you by way of his low position, his lack of authority,
his increasing incapability, and his great need of his Lord for seeking
His obedience, fearing His chastisement and apprehending His anger,
because He does not command you save for virtue and does not refrain you
save from evil. O my child, I have informed you about the world, its
condition, its decay and its passing away and I have informed you of the
next world and of what has been provided in it for its people. I have
recounted to you parables about it so that you may draw instruction from
them and act upon them. The example of those who have understood the
world is like those travelers who, being disgusted with drought-stricken
places set off for greenery and a fruitful place. Then they endured
difficulties on the way, separation from friends, hardships of the
journey and unwholesome-some food in order to reach their fields of
plenty and place of stay. Consequently, they do not feel any pain in all
this and do not regard any expenditure to be waste. Nothing is more
loveable to them than what carries them closer to their place of stay.
(Against this), the example of those who are deceived by this world is
like the people who were in a green place but they became disgusted with
it and went to a drought-stricken place. Therefore, for them nothing is
more detestable or abominable than to leave the place where they were to
go to a place, which they will reach unexpectedly and for which they are
heading.

I have accused you of various sorts of ignorance, so that you will not
reckon yourself with the scholars, then you will take pride in yourself
when you solve a problem. The actual well-educated is that who realizes
that he ignores more than what he knows; hence, he reckons himself with
the ignorant and receives more knowledge by seeking it painstakingly. He
keeps on being scholar, by desiring getting more information, benefiting
by what he learns, revering his teachers, keeping silence, bewaring of
faults, and feeling ashamed of mistakes. If he confronts what he does
not know, he will not deny his unawareness because he has already
declared his being ignorant. The actual ignorant is that who reckons
himself with the scholars -although he ignores many things- and depends
on his opinion. He is so far away from the scholars whom he disgraces.
He accuses everyone who does not agree with him of error and misguides
in the matters that he ignores. He denies and belies the matters that he
ignores, and says: I do not know this, and I see it is not accurate and
it will never be accurate. This is because such an ignorant is
overconfident of his opinion and less aware of his ignorance. He is
always involved in his confusing opinions, listening to his ignorance,
denying the right, perplexing in his unawareness, and exalting from
seeking knowledge.

O my child, try to understand my commandment and make yourself the
measure (for dealings) between you and others. Thus, you should desire
for others what you desire for yourself and hate for others what you
hate for yourself. Do not oppress as you do not like to be oppressed. Do
good to others as you would like good to be done to you. Regard bad for
yourself whatever you regard bad for others. Accept that (treatment)
from others, which you would like others to accept from you. Do not talk
about what you do not know even though what you know be very little. Do
not say to others what you do not like to be said to you.

Know that self-admiration is contrary to propriety (of action) and is a
calamity for the mind. When you have been guided on the right path,
humble yourself before Allah as much as you can. Know that in front of
you lies a road of long distance and severe hardship and that you cannot
avoid seeking it. Take your requirements of provision keeping the burden
light. Do not load your back beyond your power lest its weight become a
mischief for you. Whenever you come across a needy person who can carry
for you your provision to hand it back to you on the Day of Judgment
when you will need it, then accept him as good opportunity and get him
to carry it. Put in that provision as much as you are able to, for it is
likely that if you may need him (afterwards), you may not get hold of
him. If a person is willing to borrow from you in the days of your
affluence to pay it back to you at the time of your need then make use
of this opportunity. Know that in front of you lies an impassable
valley, your terminating point at the other end of this passage will
necessarily be either Paradise or Hell, wherein the light-burdened man
will be in a better condition than the heavy-burden one. Therefore,
prepare the place before getting down.

Know that He Who owns the treasuries of the heavens and the earth has
permitted you to pray to Him and has promised you acceptance of the
prayer. He has commanded you to beg from Him in order that He may give
you and to seek His mercy in order that He may have mercy on you. He has
not placed anything between you and Him that may veil Him from you. He
has not required you to get a mediator for you to Him, and if you err,
He has not prevented you from repentance. He does not hasten with
punishment. He does not taunt you for repenting, nor does He humiliate
you when humiliation is more appropriate for you. He has not been harsh
in accepting repentance. He does not severely question you about your
sins. He does not disappoint you of His mercy. Rather He regards
abstention from sin as a virtue. He counts your one sin as one while He
counts your one virtue as ten.

He has opened for you the door of repentance. Therefore, whenever you
call Him He hears your call, and whenever you whisper to Him He knows
the whispers. You place before Him your needs, unveil yourself before
Him, complain to Him of your worries, beseech Him to remove your
troubles, seek His help in your affairs and ask from the treasuries of
His mercy that which no one else has power to give, namely length of
life, health of body and increase in sustenance. Then He has placed the
keys of His treasuries in your hands in the sense that He has shown you
the way to ask Him. Therefore, wherever you wish, open the doors of His
favor with prayer. and let the abundant rains of His mercy fall on you.
Delay in acceptance of the prayer should not disappoint you because the
grant of prayer is according to the measure of (your) intention.
Sometimes acceptance (of prayer) is delayed with a view to its being a
source of greater reward to the asker and of better gifts to the
expectant. Sometimes you ask for a thing but it is not given to you, and
a better thing is given to you later or a thing is taken away from you
for some greater good of yours, because sometimes you ask for a thing
which contains ruin for your religion if it is given to you. Therefore,
your request should be for things whose beauty should be lasting and
whose burden should remain away from you. As for wealth it will not last
for you nor will you live for it.

O my child, know that you have been created for the next world, not for
this world, for destruction (in this world) not for lasting, and for
dying not for living. You are in a place, which does not belong to you,
a house for making preparations and a passage towards the next world.
You are being chased by death from which the runner-away cannot escape,
as it would surely overtake him. So, be on guard against it least it
overtakes you at a time when you are in a sinful state and you are
thinking of repenting but it creates obstruction between you and
repentance. In such a case you will ruin yourself.

O my child, remember death very much and the place where you have to go
suddenly and reach after death, so that when it comes you are already on
your guard against it and have prepared yourself for it and it does not
come to you all of a sudden and surprise you. Beware lest, you become
deceived by the leanings of the people towards worldly attraction and
their rushing upon it. Allah has warned you about it and the world has
informed you of its mortal character and unveiled to you its evils.

Surely, those (who go) after it are like barking dogs or devouring
carnivore who hate each other. The stronger among them eat away the
weaker and the big among them tramples over the small. Some are like
tied cattle and some like untied cattle who have lost their wits and are
running in unknown directions. They are flocks of calamities wandering
in rugged valleys. There is no herdsman to detain them. The world has
put them on the track of blindness and taken away their eyes from the
beacons of guidance. They have therefore been perplexed in its
bewilderings and sunk in its pleasures. They took it as a god so it
played with them. They too played with it and forgot what is beyond it.
Darkness is disappearing gradually. Now it is as though travelers have
got down and the hasteners will soon meet.

Beware, O my child lest, the abundance of its flaws dishonors you.

Know, O my child, that everyone who is riding on the carriage of night
and day is being carried by them even though he may be stationary, and
he is covering the distance even though he is staying and resting. Allah
has accepted nothing but ruining this world and prospering the next
world. O my child, you should abstain from the worldly affairs against
which Allah has warned you. If you will not accept my advise, you should
know with certainty that you cannot achieve your desire and cannot
exceed your destined life. You are on the track of those before you.
Therefore, be humble in seeking and moderate in earning because often
seeking leads to deprivation. Every seeker of livelihood does not get
it, nor is everyone who is moderate in seeking deprived. Keep yourself
away from every low thing even though they may take you to your desired
aims, because you will not get any return for your own respect, which
you spend. Do not be the slave of others for Allah had made you free.
There is no good in good which is achieved through evil and no good in
comfort that is achieved through (disgracing) hardship.

Beware lest bearers of greed should carry you and make you descend down
to the springs of destruction. If you can manage that there be no
wealthy person between yourself and Allah, do so, because in any case
you will find what is for you and get your share. A little received
directly from Allah the Glorified, is more dignified than that which is
more but is received through (the obligation of) His creatures, although
(really) all is from Allah.

If you see -and Allah's is the highest example- in what you seek from
the kings and from the lowly people, you will realize that the few
amounts that you receive from the kings is pride for you, while the much
amount that you receive from the lowly people is dishonor. Use economy
in your affairs and you will have a good result. No price will equate
anything of your religion and honor. The actual defrauded is that who
refused his share that Allah decides. Take only what comes to you from
the worldly affairs and leave what do not come to you. If not, you
should economize in seeking earnings.

Beware of associating with those whom you expect to ruin your religion.
Keep away from the rulers. Do not secure the Shaitan's trickeries and
say that you will desist when you see evil. This is the way that led
those who were before you to devastation. They believed in the Judgment
and did not accept to sell their next world with this one, but the
Shaitan shook them in his trickeries and deception. Hence, they were
involved in his destruction in front of a scanty benefit of this world.
The Shaitan moved them from an evil into another till he made them
despair of Allah's mercy and took them into disappointment. Finally,
they turned their faces to what violated Islam and its rulings.

If you are attracted to the worldly pleasures by currying favor with
the rulers and violate what I have warned you against, then you should
tie your tongue. Rulers are not guaranteed in rage. You should also not
follow their news, divulge their secrets, and intrude yourself among
them. Safety lies in silence. It is easier to rectify what you miss by
silence than to secure what you lose by speaking. Whatever is in a pot
can be retained by closing the lid. I should prefer you to retain what
is in your hands rather to seek what is in other's hands. Report only
the sayings of a truthful lest, you will be a liar. Falsehood is
humility. Subsistence with economy is better for you than many earnings
with extravagance.

Bitterness of disappointment is better than seeking from people. Manual
labor with chastity is better than the riches of a vicious life. A man
is the best guard of his own secrets. Often a man strives for that harms
him. He who speaks much speaks nonsense. Whoever ponders perceives. The
virtuous acquaintance is the best luck a man may target. Associate with
people of virtue; you will become one of them. Keep aloof from people of
vice; you will remain safe from them. Distrust should never control you
because it will destroy any association between others and you. Some say
that distrust is a part of prudence. The worst food is that which is
unlawful. Oppressing the weak is the worst oppression. Adultery is as
its name. Standing the misfortunes protects the heart -from flaws-.
Where leniency is unsuitable, harshness is lenience. Often cure is
illness and illness is cure. Often the ill-wisher gives correct advice
while the well-wisher cheats. Do not depend upon hopes because hopes are
the mainstay of fools. Kindle your mind with morality like fire when
kindled with wood. Do not be like the collector of firewood at night and
the scum of a flood. Ingratitude is meanness. Befriending the ignorant
is evil omen. It is wise to preserve one's experience. Your best
experience is that which teaches you a lesson. Lenience in behavior is
generosity. Make use of leisure before it changes into (the hour of)
grief. Determination is prudence. Slowness is a cause of deprivation.
Not every seeker achieves (what he seeks); and not every departer
returns. To lose provision means ruin. Every matter has a consequence.
Often a small quantity is more beneficial than a large quantity. What is
destined for you will shortly come to you. A trader undertakes a risk.
There is no good in an ignoble helper. Never trust a matter the end of
which is unknown. Self-possession achieves prevalence. Understanding
achieves proliferation. Meeting with people of virtue prospers the
heart. Be compliant with the world as long as it is in your grip. Beware
of ride the pack animal of disputation. Hurry in obliterating a sin by
repentance. Never betray those who trust you even if they betray. Never
divulge a secret even if its owner divulges. Do not put yourself to risk
as regards anything in expectation for more than that. Seek insistently
and you will receive what is destined for you. Accept the glorification.
Give generously. Use good wording with people.

The most inclusive word of wisdom is surely that you should love for
people what you love for yourself and hate for them what you hate for
yourself. Know that fulfilling the pledges and defending the horror are
parts of generosity. Disaffection is the sign of malice. The many
excuses are the sign of niggardliness. It may happen that withholding
with kindness is better than giving with severity. To build good
relations with the relatives is a part of favoring. No one will depend
upon you or trust your relations if you rupture your relations with the
relatives. Accusation is the face of enmity.

Bear yourself towards your brother in such a way that if he disregards
kinship, you keep to it; when he turns away, be kind to him and draw
near to him; when he withholds spend for him; when he goes away approach
him; when he is harsh be lenient; when he commits wrong think of (his)
excuse for it, so much as though you are a slave of him and he is the
benevolent master over you. But take care that this should not be done
inappropriately, and that you should not behave so with an undeserving
person. Do not take the enemy of your friend as a friend because you
will thus antagonize your friend. Never use trickery. It is the
character of the evil ones. Give true advice to your brother, be it good
or bitter. Help your brother in any case, and go with him wherever he
goes, and never retaliate him even if he throws dust in your mouth.
Prevail your enemy by doing favor to him. This is more successful. You
will save yourself from people by good manners and swallowing the anger.
I did not find a sweeter thing than swallowing one's anger in the end,
and nothing more pleasant in consequence. Never suspect in your brother
and never leave him without blaming. Be lenient to him who is harsh to
you for it is likely that he will shortly become lenient to you. Rupture
of relations is very ugly. What an ugly thing is the alienation after
brotherhood, enmity after affection, betraying those who trust you,
disappointing those who expect your good, and cheating those who confide
in you!

If you intend to cut yourself off from a friend, leave some scope for
him from your side by which he may resume friendship if it so occurs to
him some day. If anyone has a good idea about you prove it to be true.
Do not disregard the interests of your brother depending upon your terms
with him, for he is not your brother if you disregard his interests.
Your family should not become the most miserable people because of you.
Do not lean towards him who turns away from you. Do not turn away from
him who leans towards you when he deserves association. Your brother
should not be firmer in his disregard of kinship than you in paying
regard to it. You should exceed in doing good to him than is evil to
you, giving to him than is withholding, and favoring him than is
ceasing. Do not feel too much the oppression of a person who oppresses
you, because he is only busy in harming himself and benefiting you. The
reward of him who pleases you is not that you displease him. Livelihood
is of two kinds -a livelihood that you seek and a livelihood that seeks
you, which is such that if you do not reach it, it will come to you.

Know, O my child, time is changeable. Do not be one of those who blame
too much and are excused too little. How bad it is to bend down at the
time of need and to be harsh in riches. You should have from this world
only that with which you can adorn your permanent abode. Spend properly
and do not be the treasurer of others. If you cry over what has gone out
of your hands then also cry for what has not at all come to you. Infer
about what has not yet happened from what has already happened, because
occurrences are ever similar. Never show ingratitude to them who do
favor to you. Ingratitude is the vilest atheism. Accept others' apology.
Do not be like those whom preaching does not benefit unless you inflict
pain on them, because the wise take instruction from teaching while
beasts learn only from beating.

Respect the rights of those who respect your rights whether they were
high-ranking or lowly. Ward off from yourself the onslaught of worries
by firmness of endurance and purity of belief. He who gives up
moderation commits excess. The best share of a man is satisfaction. Envy
is the evilest companion. Despair brings about negligence. Niggardliness
brings about blame. A companion is like a relation. A friend is he whose
absence also proves the friendship. Passion is a partner of distress.
Suspension at situations of perplexity is success. Conviction is the
best expeller of care. Censure is the outcome of falsehood. Safety lies
only in honesty. The outcome of telling lies is the worst. Often the
near ones are remoter than the distant ones, and often the distant ones
are nearer than the near ones. A stranger is he who has no friend.
Mistrust should not make you lose your intimate friend. He who diets
will gain cure. He who transgresses right narrows his own passage. He
who stays in his position remains constant upon it. The best trait is
doing favor to others. The vilest evil is transgressing the less
powerful. Pudency is the course to every fine thing. The firmest handle
is piety. The most trustworthy intermediary is that which you adopt
between yourself and Allah. He who accepts your excuse is doing favor to
you. Excessive censure kindles the fires of disputation. Many diseased
persons were cured and many healthy ones passed away. When greed leads
to ruin, deprivation is an achievement. Not every defect can be
reviewed, and not every opportunity recurs.

Often a person with eyes misses the track while a blind person finds
the correct path. Not every seeker gains his objective, and not every
one that is on his guard can be saved. Delay an evil because you will be
able to hasten it whenever you desire. You should treat others kindly if
you want them to treat you kindly. Bear your brother in spite of his
defects. Do not censure excessively, because this creates malice and
drags to hatred. Seek the censure of those who find you excuses. The
disregard of kinship of the ignorant is equal to the regard for kinship
of the wise. Protecting the honor is a sort of generosity. Whoever
regards the world as great, it will humiliate him. He whomever puts
himself under censure will be enraged. Dishonor is so near to people of
transgression. It is fitter to breach loyalty with him who betrays. The
deadliest slip is that of the cautious ones. The cause of telling lies
is the worst. Lechery ruins the much amount. Economy develops the few
amounts. Fewness is humility. It is well-natured to respect the parents.
Errors pursue haste. A pleasure that begets sorrow is worthless. The
actual wise is that who benefits by experiments. Guidance removes
blindness. Your tongue is the translator of your mind. No harmony occurs
when there is incongruity. Visiting the neighbors is a pattern of
good-neighbor. He who uses economy will never fail. He who
abstains -from the worldly pleasures- will never suffer poverty. The
surface evinces the hidden. A seeker may seek his death. Never
substitute confidence for hope. Not every fearful thing is harmful.

It happens that joking is changed into seriousness. This world will
betray those who trust it and will humiliate those who glorify it and
will defeat those who try to prevail it and will disappoint those who
seek its refuge. Not every one who shoots will hit. When authority
changes, the time changes too. The best of your family members is he who
supports you. Joking creates hatred. A careful one often skimps. The
true conviction is the head of religion. Avoidance of disobediences is
the perfection of sincerity. The best wording is that which is supported
by deeds. Safety always accompanies righteousness. Supplication -to God-
is the key to mercy. Consult the friend before adopting a course and the
neighbor before taking a house. Consider this world as a temporary
lodging. Receive those who visit you. Accept the excuses of those who
make apology. Accept the surplus of people. Do not show anyone what he
dislikes. Obey your brother even if he disobeys you, and build good
relations with him even if he ruptures relations with you. Habituate
yourself to leniency and opt for the best moralities. Good mannerism is
a custom. Beware lest, you mention in your speech what may be dirty or
rouse laughter even though you may be relating it from others. Judge on
yourself before others judge on it. Do not consult women because their
view is weak and their determination is unstable. Cover their eyes by
keeping them under the veil because strictness of veiling keeps them and
you for long. Their coming out is not worse than your allowing an
unreliable man to visit them. If you can manage that they should not
know anyone other than you, do so. Do not allow a woman matters other
than those about herself. This is better for achieving prosperous and
peaceful life and permanent beauty. A woman is a flower not an
administrator. Do not pay her regard beyond herself. Do not encourage
her to intercede for others lest, she will be with that party against
you. Do not associate women for a long time so that you will not feed up
with them and they will not feed up with you. Keep a part of abstinence
from them in yourself. To abstain from women while they realize your
ability to associate with them is better than their being more powerful
than you are. Do not show suspicion out of place, because this leads a
correct woman to evil. You should use wisdom in treating them; you
should punish when they make a big or a small mistake. Do not punish so
excessively that you make the guilt seem to be grand and disgrace
censure.

Use good manners with the servants. Lessen your rage and do not use
excessive censure when there is no sin. If any of them makes guilt, you
should blame them. Blaming with amnesty is more effective than physical
punishment for the intelligent. Do not hold the mindless. Lessen
retaliation. For everyone among your servants fix a work for which you
may hold him responsible. In this way, they will not fling the work one
over the other. Respect your relatives because they are your wing with
which you fly, the origin towards which you return, and your hands with
which you attack. They are the propensity in time of crises. You should
honor the generous among them, visit the ailed, take part in their
affairs, and alleviate their problems. Seek Allah's aid in all your
affairs. He is surely the best supporter.

Place your religion and your world at Allah's disposal and beg Him to
ordain the best for you in respect of the near and the far, this world
and the next; and that is an end to the matter.


