Imam Ali's Commandment For His Son Hussein Bin Ali
==================================================

O son, I command you to fear God in richness and poverty, cling to the
word of right in satisfaction and rage, be moderate in richness and
poverty, be fair to your friends and enemies, work in activity and
laziness, and satisfy yourself with Allah is crises and luxury. O son,
an evil that is followed by Paradise is not a true evil, and a welfare
that is followed by Hell is not a true welfare. Every comfort other than
Paradise is valueless and every misfortune other than Hell is a good
health.

You should know, O my son, that he who notices his own flaws will give
up chasing others' flaws. Nothing will cover those who strip the covers
of piety. He who satisfies himself with Allah's distribution (of
sustenance) will not be sad for that which misses him. He who unsheathes
the sword of aggression will be killed with it. He who digs a well for
his brother will fall in it. The screens of the houses of those who tear
others' screens will be exposed. He who neglects his sin will see the
others' sins as great. He who overdoes will be exhausted. He who pushes
himself in the risks will be sunken. He who prefers his opinion will
deviate. He who clings only to his own views will make mistakes. He who
shows arrogance against people will be humiliated. He who associates
with the scholars will be respected. He who associates with the mean
ones will be disgraced. He who belittles people will be insulted. He who
intrudes himself in evils will be accused. He who jokes will be
disrespected. He who gives much of something will be known of it. Much
speech leads to much erring. Much erring leads to decreased pudency.
Little pudency leads to decreased piety. Little piety deadens the heart.
The dead-hearted will be in Hell.

O son, the actual foolish is he who looks in people's defects and
accepts the same defects for himself. He who ponders (over things) will
surely learn lessons. He who learns lessons will surely retire. He who
retires will be in safe. He who neglects the passions will live in
freedom. People will bear love to those who leave envy.

O son, the honor of the (faithful) believer is to dispense with people.
Satisfaction is a never-ending treasure. He who mentions death
frequently will satisfy himself with little worldly pleasures. He who
realizes that his words are within his deeds will speak of nothing
except what benefits him. O son, how strange that who fears the
punishment and does not cease -from doing evil- is! How strange that who
wishes for the rewards and does not repent or work is!

O son, intelligence casts on illumination, inadvertence casts on gloom,
and ignorance casts on deviation. The actual happy is that who learns
lessons from the others. Morality is the best heritage. The best friend
is the good mannerism. No growth can be expected from rupturing
relations with the relatives and no wealth should be waited from
lechery.

O son, good health is of ten parts, nine of which lies in silence
except in situations of reference to Allah, and one lies in the
abandonment of associating with the foolish ones. O son, for those who
dress the acts of disobedience to Allah in their meetings, Allah will
cast humility on them. He who seeks studies will surely learn.

O son, lenience is the head of knowledge, and idiocy is its epidemic.
Patience in misfortunes is one of the treasures of faith. Continence is
the adornment of poverty. Thanking is the adornment of richness.
Excessive visits create boredom. Tranquility is the opposite of prudence
if it precedes awareness. Self-esteem refers to weak-mindedness. O son,
many views have brought sorrow, and many words have deprived of grace.

O son, there is no honor higher than Islam, no generosity more glorious
than God-fearing, no fortress more protective than piety, no interceder
more successful than repentance, no dress fitter than good health, and
no wealth more sufficient than satisfaction with the sustenance. He who
confines himself to the minimum necessity will have rest before others
and will find himself a place in the tranquil life. O son,
acquisitiveness is the key to fatigue, the mount of exhaustion, and the
leader to the commitment of sins. Avidity is the comprehensive of
defects. The matters that you abominate from others should be sufficient
discipliners for you. Your friend should enjoy the same rights that you
enjoy. He who engages himself in an affair before examining the outcome
will suffer misfortunes. Planning before working saves from sorrow. He
who propounds the opinions will realize the places of errors. Patience
is a protector against poverty. Niggardliness is the dress of misery.
Acquisitiveness is the sign of destitution. A poor man who keeps good
relations is better than a wealthy one who breaks his relations (with
others). Everything has a food. Son of Adam -man- is the food of
death.

O son, do not make a sinner despair. Many adopters of sins enjoy a
happy end and many benevolent ones rupture their deeds and deserve Hell.
Allah may protect us from Hell.

O son, many disobedient ones may be saved and many benevolent ones may
fail. The provisions of those who adhere to honesty will be easily
attainable. The good lies in defying the passions. Hours reduce the age.
Woe to the aggressors, because of the presence of the best of judges and
the knower of the hidden of those who hide.

O son, violence against the servants -of Allah- is the worst supplies
to the world to come. Every dose has a choke and every meal has a lump
in the throat. No grace can be obtained unless another is missed. Rest
is very close to fatigue, misery is very close to bliss, death is very
close to life, and illness is very close to health. Blessed be those who
behave faithfully to Allah in action, knowledge, love, hatred, receipt,
leave, speech, silence, deeds, and words. Excellent is the knowledgeable
who acts seriously and gets ready as he fears death. He gives advice
when he is asked, and keeps peace when he is neglected. His wording is
true and his silence is an answer without exhaustion. Woe to those who
suffer deprivation, disappointment, and disobedience. They satisfy
themselves with what they hate from others and disgrace people for doing
what they themselves do.

O son, you should know that the affection of those whose wording is
lenient is obligatory. May Allah guide you to your prosperity and reckon
you with the people of his obedience, by the help of His potency. He is
surely All-benevolent and All-generous.

**Imam Ali's Sermon of Wasila**

We will have only a part of it that is necessary for our topics. All
praise is due to Allah who ceased the illusions to comprehend but His
existence, and screened the intellects to imagine His essence because it
is impossible for His essence to have a like or a form. His essence does
not vary or divide like figures, due to His perfection. He parted with
the things, not in places, adjoined them, not in a form of mixing, and
knew them, not by an instrumentality that is the only means of knowing.
There is no any other's knowledge lying between the known things and
Him, that He needs it to know them. If "was" is attached to Him, it
should refer to the eternity of existence. If "still" is attached to
Him, it should refer to the nullity of nonexistence. Glory be to Him,
and highly exalted is He above the sayings of those who worshipped
things other than Him and betook them as gods. We praise Him with the
praise that He accepted from His servants and the praise that he imposed
its acceptance upon Himself. I declare there is no god but Allah
exclusively without any associate, and declare that Mohammed is His
servant and messenger. These two declarations promote the word and put
down the deed. The scale from which these two declarations are taken is
flimsy, and the scale in which they are put is weighty. The obtainment
of Paradise, the salvation from Hell, and the passing the Path
successfully are gained through these two declarations. You will enter
Paradise by the declaration, and attain the -divine- mercy by the
prayer. Hence, give much of blessing your Prophet. "Surely Allah and His
angels bless the Prophet; O you who believe, call for (Divine) blessings
on him and salute him with a (becoming) salutation."

O people, surely there is no honor higher than Islam, no generosity is
more glorified than God-fearing, no stronghold is more protective than
piety, no interceder is more beneficial than repentance, no dress is
loftier than good health, no protection is more shielding than safety,
and no wealth more defensive against poverty than satisfaction. He who
confines himself to the minimum necessity will have orderly rest. Desire
is the key to fatigue. Monopoly is the means of exhaustion. Envy is the
epidemic of the religion. Acquisitiveness is the guide to inserting in
sins as well as deprivation. Aggression drives into perdition. Gluttony
is the comprehensive of the evilest defects. Greed often disappoints.
Hope is often false. Wish often leads to deprivation. Commerce often
ends with loss. He who engages himself in affairs without looking in
their outcomes will suffer scandalous misfortunes. Debt is the worst
necklace for the faithful believers.

O people, surely there is no treasure more beneficial than knowledge,
no glory more helpful than self-possession, no nobility more attainable
than mannerism, no beauty better than intelligence, no acquaintance
eviler than ignorance, no defect worse than falsehood, no guardian more
preserving than silence, and no absent closer than death.

O people, he who notices his own flaws will give up chasing others'
flaws. He who satisfies himself with the endowments of Allah will not be
sad for what is in the others' hands. He who unsheathes the sword of
aggression will be killed with it. He who digs a well for his brother
will fall in it. The screens of the houses of those who tear others'
screens will be exposed. He who neglects his sin will see the others'
sins as great. He who prefers his opinion will deviate. He who clings
only to his own views will make mistakes. He who uses arrogance with
people will be humiliated. He who belittles people will be insulted. He
who associates with the scholars will be respected. He who associates
with the mean ones will be disgraced. He who overdoes will be
exhausted.

O people, there is no wealth more favorable than the intellect, no
poverty harsher than ignorance, no preacher more attainable than advice,
no intelligence like planning, no worship like pondering, no support
firmer than seeking consult, no loneliness more desolate than
self-esteem, no piety like subsistence, and no self-possession like
tolerance and silence.

O people, Man enjoys ten characters that the tongue reveals. Hence, the
tongue is a witness that divulges the hidden, a judge that forms an
opinion, a speaker that provides answers, an interceder by which the
needs are settled, a describer by which things are recognized, a
commander that enjoins good, a preacher that forbids evil, a consolatory
that calms the grief, a thankful by which hatred is removed, and a
soother that amuses the hearings.

O people, to keep silence in judgments and to speak ignorantly are
worthless. O people, you should know that he who does not control his
tongue will be sorry, he who does not learn will be ignorant, he who
does not possess himself will lose indulgence, he who does not
stop -from doing evil- will not be intelligent, he who is not
intelligent will humiliate, he who humiliates will not be respected, he
who fears God will be saved, he who gets illegal property will spend it
without reward, he who does not leave people when they respect him will
be having to leave them while they debase him, he who does not give
people when he is wealthy will be deprived when he is needy, and he who
seeks glory dishonestly will be humble. Weakness is the companion of
those who oppose the right. People revere those who seek studies and
demean those who seek arrogance. No one will praise him who does not do
well.

O people, death should be preferred to humility, tolerance to
inertness, and grave to poverty. Blindness is better than much looks.
Time is two days; one is yours and the other is against you. You should
opt for endurance in the two, because both are tests. O people, man's
most surprising organ is the heart. It has matters of wisdom and
opposites. If hope occurs to him, greed will humiliate him. If greed
excites him, acquisitiveness will perish him. If despair controls him,
sorrow will kill him. If rage arises in him, fury will intensify in him.
If he is pleased due to satisfaction, he will neglect preservation. If
fear prevails him, grief will concern him. If security covers him,
arrogance will rule him. If a grace comes to him, pride will restrain
him. If some money moves toward him, richness will make him tyrannical.
If poverty bites him, misfortune will engage him. If a catastrophe hits
him, intolerance will uncover him. If intolerance fags him, weakness
will disable him. If he overeats, dyspepsia will attack him. Any
negligence harms him and every immoderation injures him.

O people, he whose charity is few will be humble. He who does well will
dominate. He whose wealth is much will preside over others. He whose
self-possession is high will be noble. He who thinks of Allah's Essence
will be atheist. He who gives much of something will be known of it. He
who jokes much will be disrespected. He whose laughter is excessive will
lose dignity. The ancestry of the impolite is of no value. The best deed
is protecting the honor through wealth. He who associates with the
ignorant is mindless. He who associates with the ignorant should prepare
himself for receiving gossips. Neither the wealth of the rich nor will
the poverty of the poor save them from death.

O people, hearts have witnesses that prevent from joining the negligent
people. The accurate understanding of the admonitions leads to be on the
lookout of falling in mistakes. Souls have imaginations of the fancy,
while minds restrain and warn against -the ill deeds-. There is hidden
knowledge in the experiments. Learning lessons -from things- drives into
well-mindedness. The matters that you abominate from others should be
sufficient discipliners for you. Your friend should enjoy the same
rights that you enjoy. He who pursues his opinions exclusively is
risking. Planning before acting saves against regret. He who surveys the
other opinions will recognize the situations of error. The minds will
rectify the opinions of him who abstains from curiosity. He who contains
his passions will protect his prestige. He who controls his tongue will
be secured and will meet his needs. The inwardness of men is realized in
the vicissitudes of time. Days show you the hidden secrets. The swift
lightning cannot awaken him who plunges into gloom. Eyes of reverence
and respect gaze at him who is well known of wisdom. The most honorable
wealth is to neglect hopes. Tolerance is a shelter against poverty.
Acquisitiveness is the sign of poverty. Niggardliness is the dress of
destitution. Affection is an advantageous kinship. A poor man who
regards his relations with you is better than a wealthy one who breaks
his relations with you. Exhortation is a cave for him who retains it.
The sorrow of him who releases his sight is very much. He who is
impatient is unbearable by his family. He who gets will seek more and
more. Hopes rarely come true. Modesty adorns with dignity. The treasures
of sustenance lie in the good mannerism. The flaws of him whose dress is
covered by timidity are hidden. Use reasonable words. The provisions
become easily obtainable for those who seek reasonable words.
Rationality lies in opposing the fancies. He who realizes the
(vicissitudes of) time truly will not bypass readiness. Every dose has a
choke and every meal has a lump in the throat. No grace can be obtained
unless another is missed. Every breath of life has a provision and every
seed has an eater. You are the food of death.

O people, you should know that everyone who walks on the surface of
this earth will eventually go beneath it. Night and day are expediting
in ruining the ages.

O people, ingratitude is meanness. Association with the ignorant is ill
omen. Kind wording is generosity. Beware of cheating. It is the
character of the mean. Not every sought matter can be gain and not every
absent may come back. Never curry favor with him who forsook you. Often
a remote one is in fact closer than the near. Consult the friend before
adopting a course and the neighbor before taking a house. Cover your
friend's flaw that you have its like. Overlook your friend's fault for
this will help you on the day when your enemy overcomes you. He who is
angry with him who cannot harm will have a long grief and hurt himself.
He who fears his Lord will stop his wrongdoing. He who cannot
distinguish good from evil is as same as an animal. Spreading the
supplies is a form of lechery. The worldly misfortunes are so scanty if
compared with the huge neediness of tomorrow. Your enmity is surely the
reason of your much commitment of sins and acts of disobedience to God.
Rest is very close to fatigue, and misery is very close to change. Any
evil that is followed by Paradise is not a true evil, and any welfare
that is followed by Hell is not a true welfare. Every comfort other than
Paradise is valueless, and every misfortune other than Hell is a good
health. The grand sins appear only when the conscience pricks.

Sincerity in a deed is more laborious than the deed itself. Goodwill is
more laborious than a long jihad. Unless it was piety, I would be the
most cunning of the Arabs. I command you to fear Allah in richness and
poverty, cling to the word of right in satisfaction and rage, use
moderation in richness and poverty, be fair to your friends and enemies,
work in activity and laziness, and satisfy yourselves with acts of Allah
in crises and luxury. Much speech leads to much erring. Much erring
leads to decreased pudency. Little pudency leads to decreased piety.
Little piety deadens the heart. The dead-hearted will be in Hell. He who
ponders over things will surely learn lessons. He who learns lessons
will surely retire. He who retires will be in safe. He who neglects the
passions will live in freedom. People will bear love to those who leave
envy. The honor of the faithful believer is dispensing with people.
Satisfaction is a never-ending treasure. He who mentions death
frequently will satisfy himself with little worldly pleasures. He who
realizes that his words are within his deeds will speak of nothing
except what benefits him. How strange that who fears the punishment and
does not cease -from doing evil- is! How strange that who wishes for the
rewards and does not repent or work is! Intelligence casts on
illumination. Inadvertence casts on gloom. Ignorance casts on deviation.
The actual happy is that who learns lessons from others. Morality is the
best heritage. The best friend is good mannerism. No growth can be
expected from rupturing relations with relatives. No wealth should be
waited from lechery. Good health is of ten parts, nine of which lies in
silence except in situations of mentioning Allah, and one lies in
neglecting associating with the ill-minded ones. Lenience is the head of
knowledge, and idiocy is its epidemic. Patience in misfortunes is one of
the treasures of faith. Continence is the adornment of poverty. Thanking
is the adornment of richness. Excessive visits create boredom.
Tranquility is the opposite of prudence if it precedes awareness.
Self-esteem refers to weak-mindedness.

Never make a sinner despair. Many adopters of sins enjoy a happy end.
Many benevolent ones rupture their deeds and deserve Hell. Violence
against the servants -of Allah- is the worst supplies to the world to
come. Blessed be those who act faithfully to Allah in action, knowledge,
love, hatred, receipt, leave, speech, silence, deeds, and words. A
Muslim is not a true Muslim before he becomes pious. He cannot be pious
before he becomes abstinent. He cannot be abstinent before he becomes
prudent. He cannot be prudent before he becomes intelligent. The actual
intelligent is only that who receives Allah's commandments heedfully and
works sincerely for the world to come. May Allah bless Mohammed the
Prophet and his immaculate family.

**Imam Ali's Instructions to his Companions

Four Hundred Topics of Religious and Worldly Affairs
Cupping recovers the body and strengthens the mind.**

To have the mustache cut is a part of cleanness and a part of the
Sunna. To odorize the mustache is an honor for the Recording Angels. It
is also a part of the Sunna. Oiling softens the skin, strengthens the
mind and the brain, eases the organs of ablution, removes disheveling,
and purifies the color. Brushing the teeth pleases the Lord and freshens
the mouth. It is a part of the Sunna. Washing the head with the mud of
rivers removes the dirt and purifies from uncleanness. Rinsing water in
the mouth and the nose during performing the ablutions purifies the
mouth and the nose. Using the sneezewort oil heals the head and cures
the body as well as all sorts of headache. Hair remover powders
strengthen and purify the body.

Nail-clipping immunizes against the greatest disease and brings
earnings affluently. Tearing out the armpit hair removes malodor. It is
a purifier and a part of the Sunna. To wash the hands before and after
eating increases the earnings. Bathing in the eids purifies those who
want to supplicate to God. It is observance of the Sunna. Night worship
heals the body, pleases the Lord, brings mercy, and it is adherence to
the prophets' ethics. Eating apples perfumes the stomach. Chewing gums
strengthens the teeth, removes the phlegm, and stops the malodor of
mouths. To sit in mosques from dawn to sunrise brings earnings better
than roaming around the world -for seeking earnings-. Eating quince
strengthens the weak hearts, cures the stomach, kindles the heart, gives
courage to the coward, and gives beauty to the fetus. Eating twenty-one
red raisins every day before breakfast saves from all diseases except
death. It is recommendable for Muslims to copulate with their wives on
the first night of Ramadan, for God's saying: It is made lawful for you,
during the nights of fasting, to have carnal relations with your
wives.

Do not wear other than the silver rings on the fingers, for the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) said: "God will never purify the hand
with iron ring." If you carve one of the Divine Names on the ring, you
should shift it from the hand that you use for cleaning after
defecation. Whenever you look in the mirror, you should say: "All praise
be to Allah Who created me perfectly, formed me perfectly, gave me
perfect things that others have had imperfect, and honored me with
Islam." You should be in your best adornment when you meet your friends
like that when you meet the strangers that you want to be in the best
style before them.

To fast for three days every month, as well as for the month of Shaban,
removes the doubts of the minds and the scruples of the hearts. To clean
the organs of defecation with cold water -after toileting- cuts the
hemorrhoids. The cleaning of dresses removes care and purifies for the
prayers. Do not tear out the gray hair because it is illumination.

Every single hair that grows gray in Islam will be illumination on the
Day of Resurrection. Muslims should never sleep while being ceremonially
impure. They should sleep only after cleaning themselves. If water is
absent, they may use the dry ablution . In sleeping, the believers'
souls ascend to God to accept and bless them. If their time of death is
falling, God will make that soul in the best form. If it is not, He will
take them back with the angels in charge of this liability to the body.
Muslims should not spit in the direction of the kiblah. If they do it
inattentively, they should seek God's forgiveness. You should not puff
in the place of the prostration of the ritual prayers, nor in the food,
drink, or amulet. You should not excrete on the public ways or urinate
on a roof or in flowing water. If you do so, you then should blame no
one but yourselves if something bad occurs to you. Water, as well as
air, has its people. You should not swing with your urination or urinate
against the wind. You should not lie on the back .

You should not offer the prayers when you are lazy and indolent. You
should stop engaging your minds when you stand before your Lord -in
prayers-, since the accepted parts of your prayers are only those that
are offered attentively.

Do not stop mentioning God in any place or situation. Do not turn the
faces in the prayers. God will say to the servant that turns his face in
the prayer, "Be with Me, My servant, I am certainly better for you than
that which you are turning to."

Eat the food that is left beyond the dining tables, because it is the
remedy of every malady, by God's permission, for those who seek cure.
Dress cotton clothes, for it is the Prophet's dress. He used not to
dress wool or hairy clothes except when they are described as medicine.
Whenever you suck your fingers after having food, God the Majestic will
say: Blessed be you. God loves beauty and loves to see the traces of His
graces on the servants. Regard your relatives even by greeting. God
says: Have fear of God by whose Name you swear to settle your
differences and have respect for your relatives. Do not spend your days
with mentioning your deeds and with gossips. There are surely keeping
angels with you. Mention God in every situation.

Bless the Prophet and his family, because God will respond to your
supplications when you mention the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) gently.

Do not have the hot food until it is cooled. As hot food was served to
him, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said, "Do not eat it
until it is cooled and becomes eatable. God will not accept to feed us
hot food when He put the blessings -advantage- in the cold food." Teach
your boys the knowledge due to which God will benefit them, so that the
apostates will not overcome them -in discussions-. O people, control
your tongues and submit to God completely. Return and keep the deposits
of everybody even the killers of the prophets. Mention God very much
when you are in marts and when people are engaged in their trades. The
reference to God repeals the sins and increases the advantages.

Do not be with the inadvertent.

The servants (of God) should not travel when the month of Ramadan is
approaching. This is for God's saying: Anyone of you who knows that the
month of Ramadan has begun, he must start to fast. No taqiyah -pious
dissimulation- in drinking the intoxicants and passing the hand over the
slippers -in the ritual ablution-. Confess that we -the imams- are
servants of God and say anything about our standings. He who cherishes
us should imitate our acts and seek the help of piety. It is surely the
best helper in this world and the world to come. Do not sit with anyone
who reviles at us, and do not praise us in public lest the rulers will
humiliate you because you show adoration to us. Stick to honesty,
because it is savior.

Seek importunately from God and work for obtaining His satisfaction and
for carrying out the acts of obedience to Him painstakingly. It is so
hideous for the believers to be in Paradise after being bare. Do not
engage us in seeking intercession for you on the Day of Resurrection due
to what you have committed. Do not expose yourselves before your enemies
on the Day of Resurrection.

Do not prove the opposite of your enjoying a great standing with God
through your adherence to the valueless pleasures of this world. Cling
to the commandments of God. There is nothing standing between your
pleasures and you but the arrival of God's messenger -the angel of
death- with the good tidings that delight you and make you eager to meet
God. The means of enjoyment, which you will receive from God in the life
to come, will be better and everlasting.

Do not disrespect your weak friends. God will surely disgrace him
whoever disgraces a believer and will not gather them in the same place
on the Day of Resurrection unless repentance is shown. You should not
make your brothers ask you for their needs if you have recently known
them. Exchange visits, treat each other mercifully, give each other, and
do not be like the hypocrites who say what they do not do. You should
marry, because the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: "For
those who desire for following my Sunna, they should marry. Marriage is
a part of my Sunna." Sire many sons, because I will take pride in your
great numbers.

Save your babies from the milk of the prostitutes and the mad women,
because milk transmits the wet nurse's -genetic- properties. Save
yourselves from having the meat of the birds that have no gizzard, back
nail, or craw. Avoid having the meat of every beast that has a canine
and every bird that has a claw. Do not eat the spleen because it is
originated from the putrid blood. Do not wear in black, because it is
the fashion of the Pharaoh.

Beware of the glands in the meat, because they activate the artery of
leprosy. Do not use comparison in the religious affairs. The religion is
out of comparison. There will come some people who will use comparison
in the religious affairs. They are surely the enemies of the religion.
The foremost in comparison was Eblis. Do not wear acuminate slippers,
because it is the Pharaoh's shoe. The Pharaoh was the first man who
acuminated such shoes. Oppose the consumers of intoxicants.

Eat dates because it is the remedy of the maladies. Pursue the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family), who says: "For those who open to
themselves a door of beggary, God will open to them a door of poverty."
Seek God's forgiveness very frequently, because it brings about
earnings. Do charitable acts as much as possible and you will find their
rewards in the day to come. Beware of disputation, because it causes
suspect.

Anyone who has a need to ask from God should choose one of three
hours-one is on Fridays, one is in midday when the wind blows, the
portals of the heavens are open, the mercy is descended, and the birds
are singing, and one is the last hour of night when dawn emerges. In
this hour, two angels are shouting (on behalf of God): Is there a
repentant to be accepted? Is there a beggar to be given? Is there a
seeker of forgiveness to be forgiven? Is there a seeker of a need?

Respond to the callers of God and seek earnings in the time between
dawn and sunrise. To ask God for earnings in this time is better than
wandering in lands -seeking for earnings-. It is also the very time in
which God distributes the earnings of His servants. Expect the Relief
and never despair of receiving comfort from God. The most favorable act
to God is the expectation of the Relief and the acts that are pursued
steadily.

Depend upon God after performing the two rak'as of the Fajr Prayer. The
demands are settled during that prayer. Do not go to the Holy Precinct
with your swords. Do not offer prayers while a sword is put before you,
for the kiblah is security. Encompass the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) during the hajj. To leave the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his family) is alienation. You are ordered not to alienate the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family). Encircle the graves the rights of
whose people are obligatory upon you, and visit them and seek earnings
there, because the dead will be delighted if you visit them. You should
ask your need near the graves of your parents after supplicating to God
for them. Do not disregard the insignificant sins when there is no way
to commit the grand ones. The insignificant will be added to each other
and reckoned with the grand ones.

Prostrate yourselves -to God- for long times. He who prostrates himself
for a long time will obey God and, hence, will be saved. Mention very
much death, the day on which you will be taken out of your graves, and
the day on which you will be stashed before your Lord, so that your
misfortunes will be alleviated. For those who suffer an ache in the eye,
they should recite the Verse of Kursi and believe that they will be
cured. Inshallah, they will be cured. Be wary of committing sins. The
reason of any misfortune, lack of earnings, or even a scratch, injury or
a wound is surely the commitment of a sin. God the Majestic says:
Whatever hardship befalls you is the result of your own deeds. God
pardons many of your sins. Mention God very much during having food. Do
not talk while you have food, because it is one of God's graces and
earnings for which you should thank and praise Him.

Associate with the graces properly before they vanish and testify
against you. As for those who are satisfied with the few earnings of
God, God will surely accept their few deeds. Beware of negligence,
because it causes regret when regret is useless. When you meet with your
enemies, you should speak little, mention God very much, and avoid
fleeing lest, you will enrage God and expose yourselves to His
chastisement.

If you notice that one of your party is wounded, engaged in a trouble,
or targeted by the enemy, you should strengthen him by your powers. Do
favor as much as possible, because it saves from violent death. If you
want to know your standings with God, you should first notice God's
standing with you when you commit sins. The best domestic animal is the
ewe. As for those who have one ewe in the house, the angels will
sanctify them once a day. For those who have two ewes, the angles will
sanctify them twice a day, and so on. Besides, God will bless them. The
unhealthy Muslims should have meat with yogurt. God has made power in
meat and yogurt. You should buy the needs of your journey to hajj
yourselves. God the Blessed says: Had they wanted to join you, they
would have prepared themselves.

Turn your backs to the sunlight, because it does away with the profound
diseases. In hajj, gaze at the Holy Hose of God very frequently, because
God dedicates one hundred and twenty states of mercy to the Holy House,
sixty of which are for the circumambulators -around the Kaaba-, forty
for the offerers of prayers there, and twenty for the gazers. Confess of
your sins that you can remember at the Holy House of God. Regarding
those that you do not retain, you should say: "O Lord, forgive us for
the sins that you have recorded but we have forgotten." It will be
incumbent upon God to forgive those who confess of their sins, mention
them in details and seek His forgiveness in that place. Advance with
supplications before the falling of misfortunes. The portals of the
heavens are open in six times-in rainfall, jihad, azan, recitation of
the Quran, midday, and dawn. It is obligatory upon those who touch a
cold dead body to perform the obligatory bathing. For those who wash
corpses ceremonially, they should perform the ritual bathing after
enshrouding the corpse. They should not touch the corpse lest, it will
be obligatory upon them to perform the ritual bathing. Except camphor,
you should not use any perfume for the corpse. The corpse is as same as
a garbing of the Hajj uniform. Instruct your folks to speak only good
wording near the corpse. As the harem of Bani Hashim asked her to
poetize near her father's corpse, Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family), said, "Leave mourning and supplicate
to God." Muslims should be the mirrors of each other. When you notice a
flaw of your friend, you should guide, advise, and treat him leniently.
You should not oppose him.

Beware of disagreement, because it is deviation. Cling to moderation
and treat each other kindly and mercifully. Before you ride the riding
animals for a journey, you should feed and water them. Do not whip the
animals on their faces because they praise their Lord.

If you lose the way or fear something in journeys, you should cry, "O
Virtuous, aid me." Some of your jinni brothers, if they hear you, will
respond, lead the astray, and keep your riding animals for you. If you
anticipate beasts will attack you, your riding animals, or your sheep,
you should draw a line around your animals and say: "O God, the Lord of
Daniel, the Well, and every beast, Guard my sheep and me." If you
anticipate drowning, you should recite God's sayings: In God's Name it
will sail and in His Name it will cast anchor.

They have not paid due respect to God. The whole earth will be gripped
in His hands on the Day of Judgment and the heavens will be just like a
scroll in His right hand. God is too Glorious and High to be considered
equal to their idols. If you fear the sting of scorpion, you should
recite God's saying: Peace be with Noah among all men in the worlds.
Thus do We reward the righteous ones. He was one of Our believing
servants. Offer a sacrifice to God on behalf of your male babies on the
seventh day of their age. When you have their hair shaved, you should
give silver alms as heavy as the weight of their cut hair. This is
obligatory upon every Muslim. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) did this to Al-Hasan and Al-Hussein.

When you hand over alms to a beggar, you should ask him to supplicate
to God for you, because his supplication for you will be responded while
his supplication for himself may not be responded because beggars often
lie. When you want to give alms, you should first kiss the alms because
it reaches God's hand before it is handed over to the beggar's. God the
Exalted says:

It is God who receives the welfare funds. Give alms at night, because
the night alms extinguish the Lord's wrath. If you compare your words to
your deeds, you will not speak but good wording. Spend for the cause of
God out of what He has provided to you. The spender enjoys the same rank
of the mujahid supporting for the cause of God. He who is certain of the
reward will surely spend generously. You should keep on your conviction
if suspicion occurs to you. Suspicion neither refutes nor repeals the
conviction. Do not perjure yourselves.

Do not sit to a table on which there is wine, because no one can guess
the very hour in which his soul is grasped. When you sit to have a meal,
you should sit like slaves and eat on the ground. Avoid sitting
cross-legged or putting one leg on the other. God surely hates those who
sit cross-legged. The prophets used to have dinner after darkness -of
the night-. Hence, you should not leave dinner lest your bodies will be
unhealthy. Fever is the pioneer of death and the jail of God on the
earth. God puts whomever He wills to His jail. Besides, it scraps off
the sins like the hair of a camel's hump when scrapped off. The source
of every malady is the interior of the body, except injuries and fever.
They appear to the body. Subside the heat of fever with viola and cold
water. The source of the heat of fever is Hell; therefore, Muslims will
be cured from it only after it overcomes their health.

Supplication obstructs the decisive act of God; hence, you should
prepare well and persevere with supplications. Ten advantages are the
reward of ablution after cleaning the body. Keep your bodies clean.
Beware of laziness, because the lazy will not carry out God's rights.
Remove malodors with water and keep your bodies clean, because God hates
the servants to be dirty and having the malodor that hurts their
associates.

You should not play with your beard or anything else during prayers so
that your attentions will not be drawn away. Take the initiative in
doing charity before you become engaged in other acts.

The true believer should exhaust himself and give rest to people. Your
wording should be mainly concerning God. Beware of sinning. A sin may
cause the earnings to be obstructed. Treat your sick folks with
almsgiving. Guard your wealth by defraying the zakat. Prayer is the
offertory of the pious. Hajj is the jihad of the weak. Correctitude with
husbands is the jihad of women. Poverty is the grandest death. Fewness
of dependants is one of the two facilities. Moderation is half of the
livelihood. Care is half of senility. Moderation protects from
neediness. Consultation protects from perdition. Favors are worthless
unless they are done to the highborn and the religious. Everything has
its fruit. The fruit of doing favor is to present it as soon as
possible. He who is certain of the reward will give generously. As for
those who beat the hand on the thigh in misfortunes, their rewards will
be cancelled. The best deed of the believers is expecting the Relief. To
depress the parents is impiety to them. Seek earnings through
almsgiving. Stop the various sorts of misfortune by supplication to
God.

Persist on supplicating to God before the falling of misfortunes. I
swear by Him Who split the seed and created the soul, misfortunes are
quicker to the believers than the falling of floods downward a hill and
speedier than workhorses.

Supplicate to God to endow you safety from hardships. It surely causes
the religion to vanish. The true happy is that who learns lessons from
others. Subdue yourselves to the good manners. The faithful servant may
attain the rank of the fasting worshipper through his good manners. God
will cause anyone who consumes wine intentionally to have from the
mixture of blood and mud, even if he shows repentance. Vows of acts of
disobedience to God are invalid.

Oaths for rupture of relations are invalid. The instructors who do not
apply their instructions to themselves are like those who try to shoot
without having a string. Wives should beautify themselves for their
husbands. Those who are killed during defending the wealth are martyrs.
The offended are neither praised nor rewarded. The oath of sons and
wives regarding their fathers and husbands is void. To keep silent for a
whole day up to night is void. Migration after the conquest of Mecca is
void. Migration to the non-Muslim countries -after living in a Muslim
country-is void. Seek what is with God, because it will suffice you from
what is in people's hands. God loves the honest craftsmen.

Prayer is the most favorable deed to God. The worldly pleasures should
never engage you from offering the prayers in their proper times. God
has censured those who disregarded the times of their prayers. He says:
Woe to the praying ones, who are unintelligent of their prayers. You
should know that the best of your enemies are showing off before each
other. This is because God the Majestic will never prosper them. He
accepts only what is intended to Him exclusively.

Act of charity will never corrode and the guilt will never be
forgotten. God is certainly with the pious and the righteous ones. The
believers should not dishonor, betray, accuse, disappoint, or disavow
each other. Accept your friend's excuse. You should justify him if he is
excuseless. To move a mountain from its place is easier than trying to
ruin a power in other than its deadline. Seek help from God and exercise
patience. The earth belongs to Him and He has made it the heritage of
whichever of His servants He chooses. The final victory is for the pious
ones.

Do not exercise a matter before attaining its proper time lest, you
will be regretful. You should not have a great hope in your lives lest,
you will be hardhearted. Treat the weak mercifully and seek mercy from
God the Majestic. Beware of backbiting. True Muslims should never
backbite each other, because God forbids this in His saying: Would any
of you like to eat the disgusting dead flesh of your brother? The
believers should not put one hand on the other during standing erect in
prayers like the disbelievers. You should not drink water while you are
standing erect, because this will causes you to be affected by the
cureless malady, unless God gives health.

If you notice a stinging worm during offering a prayer, you should
bury, spit, or hold it in the dress until you finish the prayer. Notable
turning invalidates the prayer. If you turn your face notably in
prayers, you should restart with the azan, iqama, and takbir. He who
recites suras of Tawhid and Qadr and the Verse of Kursi ten times before
sunrise will guard his wealth against any threatening matter. He who
recites suras of Tawhid and Qadr before sunrise will not commit any sin
even if Eblis exerts all efforts for driving him to commit sins. Seek
God's guard against the overcoming of the debts. The like of the
Prophet's family is the ark of Noah. He whoever fails to embark will
certainly be losing. To tuck up the clothes is purity for offering the
prayers. God the Exalted says: Cleanse your clothes.

This means tuck up your clothes. Licking the honey is healing. God
says: From out of their bellies comes a drink of different color in
which there is a cure for the human being. Begin and end with salt in
every meal. If people realize the benefits of salt, they will prefer it
to the antidote. God will save him who begins and ends with salt in
every meal from seventy unknown maladies. Fast for three days every
month, because this will be as if you are fasting all your days of life.
We fast two Thursdays -the first and the last Thursdays of the month-
and one Wednesday between them, because God created Hell on Wednesday.
Seek God's protection against Hell.

If you have a need to settle, you should opt for early Thursday,
because the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said, "O Allah,
bless my people in the first hours of Thursdays."

As soon as you leave your houses, you should recite God's saying: "The
creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation of the day and
the night are evidence (of the existence of God) for people of reason.
It is these who commemorate God while standing, sitting, or resting on
their sides and who think about the creation of the heavens and the
earth and say, "Lord, you have not created all this without reason.
Glory be to you. Lord, save us from the torment of the fire." Those whom
You submit to the fire are certainly disgraced. There is no helper for
the unjust. "Lord, we have heard the person calling to the faith and
have accepted his call. Forgive our sins, expiate our bad deeds, and let
us die with the righteous ones. Lord, grant us the victory that You have
promised your Messenger and do not disgrace us on the Day of Judgment;
You are the One who never ignores His promise."

You should also recite the Verse of Kursi, suras of Qadr and Fatihah,
because the settlement of needs of this world and the world to come lies
in the reciting of these Quranic Verses. Dress thick clothes, because
the religion of those who wear soft clothes will be weak. You should not
stand before your Lord the Majestic while you are wearing transparent
clothes. Repent to God and find yourselves a place in the adoration to
Him. God surely loves the repentant and the pure. The believers should
always refer to God and repent to Him. If a believer grumbles in the
face of his brother, their ties will be cut. If a believer ascribes
atheism to his brother, one of them will be surely atheist. The
believers should avoid accusing each other lest, their faith will be
dissolving like salt when dissolved in water. The portals of repentance
are open for everybody. Hence, repent to God purely so that your Lord
may forgive your sins. Fulfill your pledges.

The reason of the removal of any grace or luxury of any people was
surely the commitment of a sin. God is not unfair to the servants. Had
they supplicated to God, their graces would not have been removed. Had
they proceeded to God sincerely and intentionally without showing
slowdown or excess, God would have certainly saved them from misfortunes
and given them back what they had lost. In troubles, Muslims should not
complain about their Lord. They should complain to Him, because He
possesses the keys and arrangements of matters in the heavens, the
earth, and whatever is between them. He is surely the Lord of the Grand
Throne. All praise is due to Allah the Lord of the worlds. As soon as
you wake up, you should say -before you leave the bed-: "Sufficient unto
me is the Lord against he servants. Sufficient unto me is He. God is the
Sufficient as the best Guardian."

If you wake at night, you should gaze at the terminal points of the sky
and recite God's saying: The creation of the heavens and the earth and
the alternation of the day and the night are evidence (of the existence
of God) for people of reason. It is these who commemorate God while
standing, sitting, or resting on their sides and who think about the
creation of the heavens and the earth and say, "Lord, you have not
created all this without reason. Glory be to you. Lord, save us from the
torment of the fire." Those whom You submit to the fire are certainly
disgraced. There is no helper for the unjust. "Lord, we have heard the
person calling to the faith and have accepted his call. Forgive our
sins, expiate our bad deeds, and let us die with the righteous ones.
Lord, grant us the victory that You have promised your Messenger and do
not disgrace us on the Day of Judgment; You are the One who never
ignores His promise.

To look in Well Zamzam is a cure from maladies. Drink from its water
from the corner of the Black Stone. The Euphrates, the Nile, Sayhan, and
Jayhan-these four rivers are within the rivers of Paradise. Muslims
should not participate in battles under the leadership of one that is
not having full acquaintance of the Islamic laws and does not follow
God's commandments regarding the spoils of war. Muslims whom are killed
in such battles are regarded as supporters of our enemies in the
question of refraining from giving us our rights (of leadership) and
shedding our blood. Moreover, they will be reckoned as those who died
before Islam. The reference to us; the Prophet's family, is the cure of
hesitation, diseases, and inspirations of suspect. The adoration to us;
the Prophet's family, is the Lord's assent.

He who rests upon our affairs, course, and sect will be with us in the
garden of Paradise. The expectant of our Event is as same as him who
sacrifices himself for God's sake. As for those who stayed away from
supporting us after they had heard our call for help in war, God will
turn them on the nasals in Hell. We are the door of Paradise when you
will be resurrected and the situation will be too hard to find an exit.
We are the door of forgiveness and peace. He who enters from that door
will be saved, and he who lags will be perishing. God began the creation
with us, and will seal it with us, too. For us, He cancels whatever He
wills and by us, He saves against crises. For us, rainfall is descended.
Do not let the Shaitan urge you against God. When the advent of our
Qa'im -Executor- will fall, the heavens will cause its drops to descend,
the lands will grow its plants, the malice will disappear from the
hearts of the servants, and animals and beasts will be harmless in such
a way that a woman will walk from Iraq to Syria, putting the basket on
the head and treading only on green lands, without fearing or being
troubled by a beast.

You will be very delighted if you know your rewards for your residence
among your enemies and steadfastness against the harm that you
encounter. After my passing, you will suffer harsh injustice,
oppression, discrimination, depreciation in God's rights, and insecurity
to the degree that you will hope were you dead. When that will fall, you
should cling to the bond of God and avoid discrepancy. Adhere to
patience, prayers, and taqiyah. You should realize that God hates the
fickle servants. Never leave the right and its people. He whoever
prefers anything to us will surely suffer perdition, miss the worldly
pleasures, and leave this world overburdened with sins.

Whenever you enter your houses, you should greet your folks. If there
is nobody, you should say: "Peace of our Lord be upon us." You should
also recite sura of Tawhid. This will save you from poverty. Teach your
boys how to pray. When they are eight year old, you should discipline
them if they neglect the prayers. Refrain from approaching dogs. You
should wet your dress whenever dry dogs touch you. In case dogs are wet,
you should wash the dress. You should stop discussing our sayings that
you do not understand . When the right is proved, you should submit to
it. Do not rush in broadcasting the news (Regarding out secrets). The
exaggerative will be ascribed to us and the negligent will be attached
to us. He whoever adheres to us will catch up, and whoever lags behind
will be crushed. He whoever follows our course will be catching up, and
whoever takes any other course will be trodden. For our followers, there
will be groups of God's mercy, while our enemies' are groups of God's
wrath. Moderation is our course, and true guidance is our affair.

Inadvertence is illicit in the Watr Prayer, the first two rak'as of
every obligatory prayer, including the Fajr and Maghrib Prayers, and
every obligatory two-rak'a prayer even in traveling. The intelligent
should not recite the Quran unless he cleans himself -ceremonially- from
impurity. Give every sura its proper kneeling and prostration in
prayers. Men should not offer the prayers wearing a sash, because this
was one of people of Sodom's habits. It is acceptable for men to offer
the prayers wearing one dress by knotting the two margins on the neck.
It is also acceptable to offer the prayers wearing a thick shirt by
buttoning it up.

It is unacceptable for men to prostrate themselves on pictures or
pictured rug. It is licit only when the picture is under the feet or
covered by something. It is unacceptable for men to put pictured dirhams
in the pocket during offering the prayers. It is licit to put the dirham
in a bag or a clear dress.

It is unacceptable for men to prostrate themselves on a bag of wheat or
barley, an eatable thing, or bread. When you go to toilet, you should
first say: "In the Name of God. O Allah, take harm away from me and
protect me from the cursed Shaitan." When you sit in the toilet, you
should say: "O Allah, as you fed me and caused me to digest, save me
from its harm." When you finish and look at your excretion, you should
say: "O Allah, provide me with the legally gotten and save me from the
ill-gotten." The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) said: "For
every servant there is an angel the function of whom is twisting the
neck down so that the servant's eyes will fall on his excretion. Then he
says to him, 'O son of Adam, this is what you have exerted your efforts
for. See how you have got it and what it has become.' Therefore, you
should ask God for the legally gotten provisions." For the ritual
ablution, you should say before you touch the water: "In the Name of
God. O Allah, join me with the repentant and the pure ones." When you
finish the ablution, you should say: "I declare there is no god but
Allah exclusively without any associate and declare that Mohammed (peace
be upon him and his family) is His servant and apostle." Then you will
deserve God's forgiveness. God will forgive those who offer the prayer
with full recognition of its worth. Avoid offering a recommendable
prayer in the time of an obligatory one. You should also not leave
offering the nafilas unless there is an accepted excuse. You may settle
the missed nafilas afterwards. God the Majestic says:

…The constant in their prayers.

The constant in their prayers are those who settle the prayers that
they missed at night in days and settle the prayers that they missed in
days at night. Do not settle the nafilas in the time of the obligatory
prayers. You should offer the obligatory prayers first and then offer
any other prayer. A single prayer in the two Precincts -Mecca and
Medina- is equal to one thousand prayers in other places. To spend one
dirham as alms in (the season of) hajj is equal to one thousand dirhams
(that are given as alms in other situations). You should show reverence
during offering the prayers. To show reverence in one rak'a means to
have the whole prayer flawless. Qunut should be practiced before the
kneeling of the second rak'a of every two-rak'a prayer except the Friday
Prayer, which has two qunuts-one in the first rak'a and the other in the
second. In the first rak'a of the Friday Prayer, you should recite suras
of Fatihah and Jumu'a. In the second, you should recite suras of Fatihah
and Munafiqun.

After the two sajdas -of the prayers-, you should sit until your organs
repose, then you may stand up. This is our practice. With the
commencement of the prayers, raise your hands to the chest. When you
want to stand before your Lord -in the prayers-, you should face the
kiblah and stand erectly without bending. When you finish your prayers,
you should raise your hands upward for supplication and sit erectly. Ibn
Saba asked, "O Amirul Muminin, it is true that God is everywhere, is it
not?" "Yes, it is true," answered Imam Ali (peace be upon him). "Why do
we then raise our hands to the heavens?" wondered Ibn Saba. The Imam
answered: Recite God's saying: In the heavens there is your sustenance
and (it is) that which you were promised. We should seek the sustenance
from its center. It is that of which God promises in the heavens. The
prayers will not be accepted unless their offerers ask God to place them
in Paradise, protect them against Hell, and give them the women of
Paradise in marriage.

You should regard any prayer as the last. Smiling does not interrupt
the prayers, while guffaw interrupts it. If sleep overcomes the heart,
the ablution will be obligatory. If sleep overcomes you during the
prayer, you should interrupt and take a sleep, because you may
supplicate to God against yourself inattentively. For those who loved us
in secret, supported us by words, and fought with us with their hands,
they will be with us in Paradise and will be given a rank as same as
ours.

For those who loved us in secret but neither supported us by words nor
fought with us, they will be one rank lower than the previous. For those
who loved us in secret, but neither supported us by words nor deeds,
they will be with us in Paradise. For those who hated us and
disappointed us by words and deeds, they will be in the lowest point of
Hell. For those who hated us and disappointed us by words, not deeds,
they will be one level of Hell higher than the previous. For those who
hated us but did not disappoint us by words or deeds, the will be in
Hell.

The people of Paradise will look at the positions of our
adherents -Shia- in the same way you look to the stars in the sky. If
you recite any part of the suras that begin with tasbih , you should
say: "Praise is due to my Lord the Highest." If you recite God's saying:
"God showers His blessings upon the Prophet and the angels seek
forgiveness for him. Believers, pray for the Prophet and greet him with,
'Peace be with you,'" you should say, "Peace be upon him and his
family," very frequently in prayers and other situations. The less
thankful organ of the body is the eye; therefore, do not respond to it
so that you will not be diverted from mentioning God the Majestic. When
you finish reciting sura of Tin, say: "We also testify so."

When you recited God's saying: "(Muslims), say: We believe in God and
what He has revealed to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and their
descendants, and what was revealed to Moses, Jesus, and the Prophets
from their Lord. We make no distinction among them and to God we have
submitted ourselves," you should say: "We believe in God and what He has
revealed to us and to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, and their descendants,
and what was revealed to Moses, Jesus, and the Prophets from their Lord.
We make no distinction among them and to God we have submitted
ourselves." The following saying, in the last tashahhud of the
obligatory prayer, accomplishes the prayer properly even an invalidating
event occurs afterwards. The saying is: "I declare there is no god but
Allah exclusively without any associate, Mohammed is His servant and
apostle, the Hour -of the Resurrection- is undoubtedly to come, and God
will resurrect them who are in the graves."

Walking to the prayers is the best form of the worship of God the
Majestic. Seek welfare from the necks and feet of camels when they come
and go. As an amount of raisin was presented to him from Ta'if , the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) ordered to soak it in Well
Zamzam so that its bitterness would disappear. Thus, it was called
'siqaya'. Do not drink it when it is mellowed. If one of you takes all
the clothes off, the Shaitan will look at him greedily. Hence, you
should always screen your bodies. It is inappropriate for men to tuck
the clothes up the knees when they sit with others.

If you have eaten any of the bad smell food -such as onion and garlic-,
you should not attend in mosques. In prostration of the prayers, raise
your backs up.

If you want to wash yourselves, begin with the arms. If you offer a
prayer alone, you should raise your voices with the qira'a , takbir, and
tasbih, so that you can hear them. Take the right side when you finish
from offering the prayers. Supply yourselves with God-fearing, because
it is the best supply in this world. It is incumbent upon God to cure
him who conceals his ailment for three days and complains about it to
God only. The remotest servants from God are those whose main concern is
to satisfy the belly and the sexual appetite. You should not travel when
you anticipate an injury in your religious affairs.

In supplication, raise the voice in four matters-blessing the Prophet
and his family, asking the Lord for Paradise, seeking His protection
against Hell, and asking for marrying you women of Paradise. The
supplication of those who ignore blessing the Prophet will be rejected.
Paradise will hear the servant who asks it from God, and will ask God to
respond to him. Hell will also hear the servant who supplicates to God
to save him from it, and will ask God to protect that servant from it.
Likewise, women of Paradise will hear the servant who asks God to give
them to him in marriage, and will ask God to give him what he asks.

Singing is the mourning of Eblis for missing Paradise. When you want to
sleep, you should put the right hand under the right cheek and say: "In
the Name of God. I put my side for God, on the belief of Abraham, the
religion of Mohammed, and the leadership of those whose leadership is
imposed on my by God. God's will will only occur, and what He does not
will will never occur." He who says so before sleep will be guarded
against thieves and ruination, and the angels will ask God to forgive
him until he wakes up. As for those who recite sura of Tawhid before
they sleep, God will assign fifty thousand angels for guarding them on
that night. You should not lie down for sleeping before you say:

"I seek the guard of God's majesty, greatness, omnipotence, power,
mercy, compassion, forgiveness, might, influence, unique Godhead,
pillars, made, gathering, Apostle (peace be upon him and his family),
and all-powerfulness on myself, family, religion, wealth, sons, results
of my deeds, and my Lord's authority and provisions against the evils of
poisonous pests, vermin, jinn, mankind, whatsoever is walking on the
surface of this earth, whatsoever is going out of it, whatsoever is
descending from the heavens, whatsoever is ascending there, and every
creature the destiny of which is under my Lord's control. Surely my Lord
knows the right path. He is All-Powerful over everything. All might and
power belongs to God." The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
used to recite these words as amulets for Al-Hasan and Al-Hussein. He
ordered us to do so. We -the Prophet's family- are the keepers of God's
religion and the lanterns of knowledge. Whenever a great figure of us
passes away, another will appear. He whoever follows us will never
deviate, and whoever denies us will never be guided, and whoever
supports our enemies against us will never be saved, and whoever
disappoints us will never be aided, and whoever prefers the pleasures of
this deserted world to us will not find tranquility. As for them who
prefer the worldly pleasures to us, their regret will be very great on
the Day of Resurrection. This is proved through God's saying: Turn to
God in repentance before a soul says, "Woe to me because of my failure
to fulfill my duties to God. Woe to me for mocking God's guidance!"
Clean your babies from the fats. The Shaitan smells the fats and causes
your babies to cry in sleep. Moreover, the two recording angels disgust
the babies' fats.

Your first look at -strange- women is overlookable. You should not add
another. Beware of charm. God will treat the alcoholics as same as the
idolaters. "O Amirul Muminin," asked Hujr bin Edi, "Who are the
alcoholics?" The Imam (peace be upon him) answered: The alcoholics are
those who consume intoxicants whenever they find some. For forty nights,
the prayers of those who consume intoxicants will not be accepted. God
will detain anyone who intends to despise a Muslim's personality by a
saying, unless he submits an excuse, in the mixture of clay and blood.
Men should not sleep together under one cover. Women also should not
sleep together under one cover. Doctrinal lashing is the chastisement of
committing so.

Eat calabash, because it broadens the brain. Besides, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family) liked calabash. Eat citron before and
after meals. The Prophet's family (peace be upon them) used to eat
citron. Pear purifies the heart and alleviates its troubles by God's
permission. When you ready yourselves for offering a prayer, the Shaitan
comes to look at you enviously for he notices how God's mercy is
covering you. The worst of matters are the most recent.

The best of matters are those that achieve God's satisfaction. He who
adores to the worldly pleasures and prefers them to the world to come
will suffer insalubrious end result. If the offerers of prayers are
aware of God's mercy that cover them, they will not come to the end of
the prayers and will not accept to raise the head after being prostrate.
Beware of negligence of your duties. You should do them as soon as
possible. The sustenance that is decided for you will reach you even if
you are weak, and you will never stop the misfortune that is decided for
you even if you exert all efforts.

Enjoin good and forbid evil. When you put your feet in the stirrup, you
should recite -God's saying-: Glory belongs to Him who has made it
subservient to us when we would not have been able to do so ourselves.
To our Lord we shall all return. Before you begin a journey, you should
say: "O Allah, You are the companion in journeys, the helper in
transport, and the guard of the wife, property, and sons." When you
reside in a place, you should say: "O Allah, grant me a blessed landing.
You are the One who provides the safest landing." When you are in marts
for shopping, you should say: "I declare there is no god but Allah
uniquely without any associate, and declare that Mohammed is His servant
and messenger. O Allah, I seek Your safety from losing deals and
perjury, and seek Your safety from stagnancy."

Anyone who waits for the prayer time after the Asr Prayer is visiting
God. It is appropriate for God to honor His visitors and meet their
needs. Hajjis and performers of Umrah are the delegations to God. It is
appropriate for God to honor His delegation and favor them with
forgiveness. For those who serve undiscerning boys wine, God will detain
them in the mixture of clay and blood, unless they provide a justifiable
excuse. Almsgiving is a great shelter. It sets a screen between the
believers and Hell. For the disbelievers, almsgiving saves their fortune
from loss, advances the remuneration, and saves the body from diseases
while they -the disbelievers- will have nothing on the Day of
Resurrection. Because of their tongues, people of Hell will be in Hell
and people of the graves will have light. Keep your tongues and engage
them in the reference to God.

The makers of pictures will be asked about them on the Day of
Resurrection. You should say those who solve your problems: "God may
move away from you whatever you detest." Answer those who address to
you, "Nice bathing," after bathing, with: "God may comfort your mind."
For those who address to you, "God greet you with peace," you should
answer them: "God may greet you with peace and lodge you in the eternal
residence." Asking should follow praising; therefore, praise and extol
God the Exalted before you ask Him for meeting your needs. O suppliant,
do not supplicate to God for matters that are impossible. To
congratulate for having a male baby, you should say: "God may bless His
gift, cause him to attain maturity, and bestow upon you with his
goodness."

When you welcome somebody who has just arrived from Mecca -hajj-, you
should kiss his eyes and mouth with which he kissed the Black Stone,
which the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) had kissed. You
should also kiss his organ of prostration and his forehead. To
congratulate the fresh hajji, you should say: "God may accept your
rites, appreciate your efforts, recompense your expenditures, and give
you another opportunity to visit the Holy House of God." Beware of the
lowly, because they do not fear God the Majestic.

As God examined the creatures, He selected us and selected our
adherents -Shia- who support us, become happy when we are happy, unhappy
when we are unhappy, and offer their fortunes and souls for our cause.
They are from us and are attached to us. Any Shiite who commits a sin
against which we had warned will not die before he is inflicted by a
misfortune in his fortune, sons, or himself, so that he will meet God
guiltless. If such misfortune does not meet all his sins, death will be
very violent for him until all the sins are erased. The dead Shiite is
veracious and martyr, because he believed in our affairs, loved, and
hated for our sake, seeking God's favors purely and believing in God and
His Apostle.

For those who publicize our secrets, God will expose them to the
sharpness of swords. Circumcise your male babies on their seventh day of
age. Do not excuse for hot or cold weather, because circumcision
purifies the body. Moreover, the land on which an uncircumcised
individual urinates calls for the help of God noisily. Drunkenness is of
four kinds: they are drunkenness of youth, drunkenness of fortune,
drunkenness of sleep, and drunkenness of power. I like for the believers
to use the hair remover powders once every fifteen days.

Reduce having fish, because it dissolve the body, causes much phlegm,
and blocks normal breathing. To drink milk in doses is the cure of every
malady except death. Eat pomegranate with its inner tissues. This will
strengthen the stomach, refresh the heart, and save from the Shaitan's
evil inspirations. Eat endive. Every morning, a drop of Paradise covers
each grain of endive. Drink from rainfall, because it purifies the body
and saves from diseases. God the Majestic says: "He showered water from
the sky over you to clean you and remove satanic wickedness from you."
Black cumin has a share in the remedy of every malady, except death.
Beef is a malady the remedy of which is milk and fats of cows.

The best food for the expectants is ripe dates. God says:

"If you shake the trunk of the palm tree, it will provide you with
fresh ripe dates." Use dates for the backbones of your babies, because
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) did this to Al-Hasan and
Al-Hussein. If you want to copulate with your ladies, you should wait
until they have the same desire that you have. If your eyes fall on a
charming woman, you should come to your lady and copulate with her,
because all women have the same. You should also avoid allowing the
Shaitan to control you in any way. Finally, turn your sight away from
charming women. If you are bachelor, you should offer a recommendable
two-rak'a prayer and thank God a lot. In copulation with your lady, you
should speak as little as possible, because speaking during copulation
may cause deafness. Do not look inside your lady's vagina, because this
may cause leprosy. Before you touch your lady, you should say: "O Allah,
I have her vagina legal for me due to Your commandment and have accepted
her by Your security. If You decide to give us a son, make him a sound
male baby and do not let the Shaitan have a share in its composition."
Injection is one of the four medicines that the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) mentioned. It is the best medicine you ever use. It
extends the belly, cures from internal illnesses, and strengthens the
body. Use viola for the nasal troubles. The Prophet (peace be upon him
and his family) said: "If people are aware of what is there in viola,
they will take it in doses."

In the first and middle nights of the -Hijri- months, do not copulate
with your ladies, because the Shaitan search for sons in such times.
Avoid cupping on Wednesdays and Fridays. One of the hours of Wednesdays
is continuous ill omen. Besides, Hell was created on Wednesday.
Likewise, he whoever applies cupping in a definite hour on Fridays will
surely die.


