Imam Ali's Document of Instructions For Malik Al-ashtar When He Appointed Him As the Governor of Egypt and the Surroundings
===========================================================================================================================

This is what Allah's servant Ali Amirul Muminin has ordered Malik bin
al-Harith al-Ashtar in his instrument for him when he appointed him as
the governor of Egypt for the collection of its revenues, fighting
against its enemies, seeking the good of its people and making its
cities prosperous. He has ordered him to fear Allah, to prefer obedience
to Him, and to follow what He has commanded in His Book out of His
obligatory and elective commands, without following which one cannot
achieve virtue, nor (can one) be evil save by opposing them and ignoring
them, and to help Allah the Glorified, with his heart, hand and tongue,
because Allah takes the responsibility for helping him who helps Him,
and for protecting him who gives Him support. He is Strong and Mighty.

He also orders him to break his heart off from passions. Most surely,
(man's) self is wont to command (him to do) evil, except such as my Lord
has had mercy on; surely, my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful. He also orders
him to refer to Allah's Book in situations of seditious matters. It
explains clearly everything, and it is a guidance and mercy and good
news for those who believe. He orders him also to seek God's
satisfaction and avoid enraging Him and insisting on disobeying Him. It
is surely there is no escape from God except at Him.

Then, know O Malik that I have sent you to an area where there have
been governments before you, both just as well as oppressive. People
will now watch your dealings as you used to watch the dealings of the
rulers before you, and they (people) will criticize you as you
criticized them (rulers). Surely, the virtuous are known by the
reputation that Allah circulates for them through the tongues of His
creatures. Therefore, the best collection with you should be the
collection of good deeds through being moderate in what you collect and
in the way of treating your people. So, control your passions and check
your heart from doing what is not lawful for you, because checking the
heart means detaining it just half way between what it likes and
dislikes.

Habituate your heart to mercy for the subjects and to affection and
kindness for them. Do not stand over them like greedy beasts who feel it
is enough to devour them, since they are of two kinds, either your
brother in religion or one like you in creation. They will commit slips
and encounter mistakes. They may act wrongly, willfully, or by neglect.
So, extend to them your forgiveness and pardon, in the same way as you
would like Allah to extend His forgiveness and pardon to you, because
you are over them and your responsible Commander (Imam) is over you
while Allah is over him who has appointed you through what He has given
to you of the knowledge of His Book and the practices of His Prophet
(peace be upon him and his family). Do not set yourself to fight Allah
because you have no power before His power and you cannot do without His
pardon and mercy. Do not repent of forgiving or be merciful in
punishing. Do not act hastily during anger if you can find way out of
it. Do not say, "I have been given authority, I should be obeyed when I
order," because it engenders confusion in the heart, weakens the
religion, and takes one near ruin. Seek God's guard against the lowest
rank of despondency. If the authority in which you are placed produces
pride or vanity in you then look at the greatness of the realm of Allah
over you and His might the like of which might you do not even possess
over yourself. This will curb your haughtiness, cure you of your high
temper, and bring back to you your wisdom, which had gone away from
you.

Beware of comparing yourself to Allah in His greatness or likening
yourself to Him in His power, for Allah humiliates every claimant of
power and disgraces every one who is haughty.

Do justice for Allah and do justice towards the people, as against
yourself, your near ones and those of your subjects for whom you have a
liking, because if you do not do so you will be oppressive, and when a
person oppresses the creatures of Allah then, instead of His creatures,
Allah becomes his opponent, and when Allah is the opponent of a person
He tramples his plea; and he will remain in the position of being at war
with Allah until he gives it up and repents. Nothing is more inductive
of the reversal of Allah's bounty or for the hastening of His
retribution than continuance in oppression, because Allah hears the
prayer of the oppressed and is on the look out for the oppressors. For
those who opt for such a way, they will be the hostage of ruin in this
world and the world to come. The way most coveted by you should be that
which is the most equitable for the right, the most universal by way of
justice, and the most comprehensive with regard to the agreement among
those under you, because the disagreement among the common people sweeps
away the arguments of the chiefs can be disregarded when compared with
the agreement of the common people. No one among those under you is more
burdensome to the ruler in the comfort of life, less helpful in
distress, more disliking of equitable treatment, more tricky in asking
favors, less thankful at the time of giving, less appreciative of
reasons at the time of refusal, and weaker in endurance at the time of
the discomforts of life than the chiefs. It is the common people of the
community who are the pillars of the religion, the power of the Muslims,
and the defense against the enemies. Your leanings should therefore be
towards them and your inclination with them. Seek the most beneficial
and the most prosperous results. All power is God's. The one among the
people under you who is furthest from you and the worst of them in your
view should be he who is the most inquisitive of the shortcomings of the
people, because people do have shortcomings and the ruler is the most
appropriate person to cover them. Do not disclose whatever of it is
hidden from you because your obligation is to correct what is manifest
to you, while Allah will deal with whatever is hidden from you.
Therefore, cover shortcomings so far as you can; Allah would cover those
of your shortcomings, which you should like to remain under cover from
your subjects. Unfasten every knot of hatred in the people and cut away
from yourself the cause of every enmity. Accept the excuses and ward off
the suspected matters by the doctrinal punishments. Feign ignorance from
what is not clear to you. Do not hasten to second a backbiter, because a
backbiter is a cheat although he looks like those who wish well.

Do not include among those you consult a miser who would keep you back
from being generous and caution you against destitution, nor a coward
who would make you feel too weak for your affairs, nor a greedy person
who would make beautiful to you the collection of wealth by evil ways.
This is because although miserliness, cowardice, and greed are different
qualities, yet they are common in having an incorrect idea about Allah.
The worst minister for you is he who has been a minister for mischievous
persons before you, who joined them in sins, and managed their affairs
in the country. Therefore, he should not be your chief man that they
participate in carrying the trusts of which you are bound. They had
taken part in the authority of others and annihilated them or led them
to violent ends. They are abettors of sinners, brothers of the
oppressors, and the centers of every greed and injustice. You can find
good substitutes for them who will be like them in their views and
influence, who tested the entire affairs and had the ability of
distinguishing the good from the bad. They will give you the least
trouble and the best support. They will be most considerate towards you
and the least inclined towards others. They have never assisted an
oppressor in his oppression or a sinner in his sin. They had not had
previous conducts that oppressed the Muslims and the Dhimmis. Therefore,
make them your chief companions in privacy as well as in public.

Then, more preferable among them for you should be those who openly
speak better truths before you, who are the fairest to the weak people,
and who support you least in those of your actions, which Allah does not
approve in His friends, even though they may be according to your
wishes. They lead you to the right and make you see what benefits you.
Associate yourself with the God-fearing, the truthful, the intelligent,
and people of high ancestry; then educate them, so that they should not
praise you or please you by reason of an action you did not perform,
because excess of praise produces pride and drives you near haughtiness.
Inclination to these matters causes God's hatred.

The virtuous and the vicious should not be in equal position before you
because this means dissuasion of the virtuous from virtue and persuasion
of the vicious to vice. Keep everyone in the position that is his. You
will benefit your supporters and yourself by doing so. You should know
that the most conducive thing for the good impression of the ruler on
his subjects is that he should extend good behavior towards them,
lighten their hardships, and avoid putting them to unbearable troubles.
You should therefore, in this way follow a course by which you will
leave a good impression with your subjects, because such good ideas will
relieve you of great worries. Certainly, the most appropriate for good
impression of you is he to whom your behavior has not been good. The
most appropriate for having bad impression of you is he to whom your
behavior has been ill. If you realize this state for and against you,
you will be more cognizant in doing good and having good impression with
people in addition to what God will reward you in the world to come.

Do not discontinue the good lives in which the earlier people of this
community had been acting, by virtue of which there was general unity
and through which the subjects prospered. Do not innovate any line of
action, which injures these earlier ways because (in that case) the
reward for those who had established those ways will continue, but the
burden for discontinuing them will be on you. Keep on increasing your
conversations with the scholars and discussions with the wise to
stabilize the prosperity of the areas under you, and to continue with
that in which the earlier people had remained steadfast. This will
steady the right and refute the wrong. It is surely a sufficient
evidence and example. The right lines of action are the course to
obedience of God.

Know that the people consist of classes who prosper only with the help
of one another, and they are not independent of one another. Among them
are the army of Allah, then the secretarial workers of the common people
and the chiefs, then the dispensers of justice, then those engaged in
law and order, then the payers of head tax (Jizya) and land tax (kharaj)
from the protected unbelievers and the common Muslims, then there are
the traders and the men of industry and then the lowest class of the
needy and the destitute. Allah has fixed the share of every one of them
and laid down His precepts about the limits of each in His Book and the
Sunna of His Prophet by way of a settlement, which is preserved with us.
Now the army is, by the will of Allah, the fortress of the subjects, the
ornament of the ruler, the strength of the religion and the means of
peace. The subjects cannot exist without them while the army can be
maintained only by the funds fixed by Allah in the revenues, through
which they acquire the strength to fight the enemies, on which they
depend for their prosperity, and with which they meet their needs. These
two classes cannot exist without the third class namely the judges, the
executives, and the secretaries who pass judgments about contracts,
collect revenues, and are depended upon in special and general
matters.

These classes cannot exist except with the traders and men of industry,
who provide necessities for them, establish markets, and make it
possible for others not to do all this with their own hands. Then is the
lowest class of the needy and the destitute support of and help for whom
is an obligation, and every one of them has (a share in) livelihood in
the name of Allah. Every one of them has a right on the ruler according
to what is needed for his prosperity. The ruler cannot acquit himself of
the obligations laid on him by Allah in this matter except by striving
and seeking help from Allah and by training himself to adhere to the
right and by enduring on that account all that is light or hard.

Put in command of your forces the man who in your view is the best
well-wisher of Allah, His Prophet, and your Imam. The chestiest of them
in heart, the highest of them in endurance, and the most learnt of
knowledge and policy is he who is slow in getting enraged, accepts
excuses, is kind to the weak, and is strict with the strong; violence
should not raise his temper and weakness should not keep him sitting.
Also associate with considerate people from high families, virtuous
houses, and decent traditions, then people of courage, valor,
generosity, and benevolence, because they are repositories of honor and
springs of virtues. They guide to having good idea of Allah and
believing in His act. Strive for their matters as the parents strive for
their child. Do not regard anything that you do to strengthen them as
big nor consider anything that you have agreed to do for them as little
(so as to give it up), even though it may be small, because this will
make them your well-wishers and create a good impression of you. Do not
neglect to attend to their small matters, confining yourself to their
important matters, because your small favors will also be of benefit to
them while the important ones are such that they cannot ignore them.

That commander of the army should have such a position before you that
he renders help to them equitably and spends from his money on them and
on those of their families who remain behind so that all their worries
converge on the one worry for fighting the enemy. You should make them
know your preferring them to yourself, caring for their affairs, and
promising of more endowments, and materialize so by your good deeds,
evidences, and kindness. Your kindness to them will turn their hearts to
you. The most pleasant thing for the rulers is the establishment of
justice in their areas and the manifestation of the love of their
subjects, but the subjects' love manifests itself only when their hearts
are clean. Their good wishes prove correct only when they surround their
commanders (to protect them). Do not regard their positions to be a
burden over them and do not keep watching for the end of their tenure.
Do not give your army only their shares of the spoils. Moreover, you
should give each a share of the public treasure. Thus, you will
guarantee their help, and they will be motivated for supporting God and
His religion. Treat the distinctive courageous men exclusively by
endowment and praise. Continue praising them and recounting the good
deeds of those who have shown such deeds, because the mention of good
actions shakes the brave and rouses the weak, if Allah so wills.

You should appoint the most trustful and the righteous of them as
secret agents so that they will inform of the behaviors of each. Hence,
they will realize that you have full acquaintance with their
performance. Appreciate the performance of every one of them, do not
attribute the performance of one to the other, and do not minimize the
reward below the level of the performance. The high position of a man
should not lead you to regard his small deeds as big, nor should the low
position of a man make you regard his big deeds as small. A sudden flaw
or an ill speech should not deform the picture of a man of previous good
performance. Might is God's; He gives it to whomever He wishes, and the
good result is the God-fearing one's. If one of your soldiers or
distinctive warriors is martyred, you should treat his family as same as
a kind trusted custodian's treatment, so that they will not show any
sign of loneliness. This will bring about the hearts of your people to
you and they will feel it is important to obey you and will make it easy
for them to encounter misfortunes during your governorship.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) practiced some actions
with the polytheists. We have practices some with the wrong ones, who
turned their faces towards our kiblah and recorded themselves in the
record of our religion, after him. Addressing the people whom Allah the
Sublime, wishes to guide, He said:

O you who believe, obey Allah and obey the Prophet and those vested
with authority from among you; and then if you quarrel about anything
refer it to Allah and the Prophet if you believe in Allah and in the
Last Day of Judgment. He also said: …and if they had referred it to the
Apostle and to those in authority among them, those among them who can
search out the knowledge of it would have known it, and were it not for
the grace of Allah upon you and His mercy, you would have certainly
followed the Shaitan save a few. Referring to Allah means to act
according to what is clear in His Book, and referring to the Prophet
means to follow his unanimously agreed Sunna -traditions- in regard to
which there are no differences. We are the Prophet's people who extract
the decisive matters from the Book and distinguish the allegorical ones
and know the repealing that Allah has repealed and canceled its burden.
Deal with your enemies in the same way that we had with our enemies.
Keep on sending us letters in which you may inform us of every event so
that we will send you a general commandment. Allah is the helper.

Look in the matters of judge among people in a good intention. The true
judge is give back the rights of the oppressed from the oppressors,
supporting the weak against the strong, and instituting God's doctrinal
provisions according to their proper ways and courses. This will make
right God's servants and lands.

For the settlement of disputes among people select him who is the most
distinguished of your subjects in your view, and the fittest in fields
of knowledge, pudency, piety, and generosity. The cases (coming before
him) should not vex him, he should not insist on any wrong point, and
should not grudge accepting the truth when he perceives it; he should
not lean towards greed and should not content himself with a cursory
understanding (of a matter) without going thoroughly into it. He should
be most ready to stop (to ponder) on doubtful points, most regardful of
arguments, least disgusted at the quarrel of litigants, most patient at
probing into matters and most fearless at the time of passing judgment.
Praise should not make him vain, elation should not make him lean (to
any side), and propagation should not attract him. Appoint such people
as the judges. Yet, they are very few.

Then, very often check his decisions and allow him so much money (as
remuneration) that he has no excuse worth hearing (for not being honest)
and there remains no occasion for him to go to others for his needs.
Give him that rank in your audience for which no one else among your
chiefs aspires, so that he remains safe from the harm of those around
you. You should revere him when you associate with him, favor him in
sessions, agree to his judge, implement his rulings, support him, and
choose the best of his matches as his supporters. They should be
jurisprudents and people of piety and advise for the sake of God and His
servants. He may argue with them in any doubtful question, refer to them
in what he dos not attend, and they should be witnesses on his
settlement of disputations, God willing.

You should do the best for inspect the reporters of judge. They should
not disagree nor dispute regarding the judgment of God and the
traditions of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family).
Disagreement is waste of justice, inadvertence in the religion, and
cause of divergence. God has shown what to do, what to spend, and
ordered to refer to those with whom God has entrusted the knowledge of
His Book and authorized for issuing rulings, in the unfamiliar
questions. Divergence of judges occurs when tyranny controls them and
each depends on his own opinion without referring to those whose
leadership is imposed by God. Neither the religion nor will its
followers be righteous by such behaviors. Judges should issue verdicts
according to what they know from the Prophet's traditions and practices.
If it is impossible for them to judge in a question, they should refer
to the people of judging. If people of judging are absent, they should
discuss the question with the Muslims' jurisprudents. They should not
refer to other categories of people. Two judges should never issue
different rulings regarding one question before they file it before the
Leader. Hence, the Leader will judge in the question according to his
knowledge that he received from God. The two judges then should agree on
the Leader's ruling whether it corresponds or differs their opinions.
You should have a piercing eye in this matter because this religion has
formerly been a prisoner in the hands of vicious persons when action was
taken according to passion, and worldly wealth was sought. Write letters
to the judges of your regions ordering them to provide before you any
question of judgment about which they dispute. You should look in these
rulings and authorize any ruling that you find accordant to God's Book,
the Prophet's traditions, and the Imam's indication, and order the
judges to follow.

Regarding matters that you suspect, you should gather the jurisprudents
before you and discuss the matter with them. Authorize what they agree
upon unanimously. Each matter about which the subjects dispute should be
referred to the imam. The imam should seek God's aid and do his best for
instituting the doctrinal provisions and imposing the subjects to follow
his commandment. No power can be obtained unless through God. Look into
the affairs of your executives. Give them appointment after tests and do
not appoint them according to partiality or favoritism, because these
two things constitute sources of injustice, treachery, and injuring
people. Matters cannot be amended through unfairness. Elect people of
piety, knowledge, and policy for managing your affairs. Select among
them those who are people of experience and modesty, hailing from
virtuous houses, having been previously in Islam, because such persons
possess high manners and untarnished honor. They are the least inclined
towards greed and always have their eyes on the ends of matters.

Give them an abundant livelihood (by way of salary) because this gives
them the strength to maintain themselves in order not to have an eye
upon the funds in their custody, and it would be an argument against
them if they disobeyed your orders or misappropriated your trust. You
should also check their activities and have people who report on them
who should be truthful and faithful, because your watching their actions
secretly will urge them to preserve trust with and to be kind to the
people. Be careful of assistants. If any one of them extends his hands
towards misappropriation and the reports of your reporters reaching you
confirm it, that should be regarded enough evidence. You should then
inflict corporal punishment on him and recover what he has
misappropriated. You should put him in a place of disgrace, blacklist
him with (the charge of) misappropriation and make him wear the necklace
of shame for his offence.

Look after the revenue (land tax) affairs in such a way that those
engaged in it remain prosperous because in their prosperity lies the
prosperity of all others. The others cannot prosper without them,
because all people are dependent on revenue and its payers. You should
also keep an eye on the cultivation of the land more than on the
collection of revenue because revenue cannot be had without cultivation
and whoever asks for revenue without cultivation, ruins the area and
brings death to the people. His rule will not last only a moment.

Gather people of revenue all over the regions under your dominion, and
order them to inform you of the manners of their regions including ways
of prosperity and collection of the revenues. Then you should ask the
experts about what they had informed. If they complain of the heaviness
(of the revenue) or of diseases, or dearth of water, or excess of water
or of a change in the condition of the land either due to flood or to
drought or pestilence, you should remit the revenue to the extent that
you hope will improve their position. If they seek help in prospering
what they can do it with their fortunes, you should satisfy its
provisions. The result of your satisfying the provisions is their
prosperity. The remission granted by you for the removal of distress
from them should not be grudged by you, because it is an investment
which they will return to you in the shape of the prosperity of your
country and the progress of your domain in addition to earning their
praise, well intentions, and happiness for meeting out justice to them.
The land tax cannot be gotten through fatigue and exhaustion, yet it is
knots upon which you depend. If a matter occurs, you can depend upon
their strength because of the investment made by you in them through
catering to their convenience, and can have confidence in them because
of the justice extended to them by being kind and fair to them and their
realizing your excuses. Circumstances may so turn that you may have
asked for their assistance, when they will bear it happily, for
prosperity is capable of bearing whatever you load on it. The ruin of
the land is caused by the poverty of the cultivators, while the
cultivators become poor when the officers concentrate on the collection
(of money), having little hope for continuance (in their posts) and
deriving no benefit from objects of warning. Thus, you should behave
like him who desires to spare the praise of the subjects, the reward of
God, and the satisfaction of the Imam. No power can be obtained except
through God.

Then you should take care of your secretarial workers. You should
recognize the manners of each of them regarding what each needs.
Classify them into different ranks. Put the best of them in charge of
your affairs. Entrust those of your letters, which contain your policies
and secrets, to him who possesses the best character, who is the fittest
for consulting in the big matters among people of good opinions, advice,
and intelligence, the best keeper of the secrets, and is not elated by
honors lest, he dares speak against you in common audiences. He should
also not be negligent in presenting the communications of your officers
before you and issuing correct replies to them on your behalf and in
matters of your receipts and payments. He should not make any damaging
agreement on your behalf and should not fail in repudiating an agreement
against you. He should not be ignorant of the extent of his own position
in matters because he who is ignorant of his own position is (even) more
ignorant of the position of others. Appoint for the lower positions,
including the records of the taxes and the army, the people that you
strive in electing them because these positions are the most
comprehensive in the benefits of your subjects and you. Your selection
of these people should not be on the basis of your understanding (of
them), confidence, and your good impression, because people catch the
ideas of the officers through affectation and personal service and there
is nothing in it which is like well-wishing or trustfulness. You should
rather test them by what they did under the virtuous people before you.
Take a decision in favor of one who has a good name among the common
people and is the most renowned in nobility and trustworthiness, because
this will be a proof of your regard for Allah and for him on whose
behalf you have been appointed to this position (namely your Imam). Then
order them to use their positions fairly and to be lenient. Establish
one chief for every department of work. He should not be incapable of
big matters, and a rush of work should not perplex him. Then inspect
their manners that you missed as well as the affairs of the needy and
those whose messengers come to you frequently. You should also inspect
the manner of their office and how they accept their leader and
argument. Most of the secretaries are known of grumbling, loftiness, and
self-esteem except him whom God protects. People have no way other than
seeking their needs. Whenever there is a defect in your secretaries,
which you overlook, then you will be held responsible for it, and any
good behavior of them will be attributed to you in addition to the great
reward that you will win from God.

Now take some advice about traders and industrialists. Give them good
counsel whether they be settled (shop-keepers) or traders or physical
laborers because they are sources of profit and the means of the
provision of useful articles. They bring them from distant and far-flung
areas throughout the land and sea, plains or mountains, from where
people cannot come and to where they do not dare to go, like the
countries of your enemies. They are the craftsmen, by whose hands God
has made the professions operative. Keep their sanctity, secure their
paths, and give them back their rights, for they are peaceful and there
is no fear of revolt from them.

Their most favorable affairs are the most secure and the most
profitable. Look after their affairs before yourself or wherever they
may be in your area. Know, along with this, that most of them are very
narrow-minded, awfully avaricious. They hoard goods for profiteering and
fix high prices for goods. This is a source of harm to the people and a
blot on the officers in charge. Stop people from hoarding, because the
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his family) has prohibited it.
The sale should be smooth, with correct weights and prices, not harmful
to either party, the seller or the purchaser; whoever commits hoarding
after you prohibit it, give him exemplary but not excessive punishment,
because the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family) did so.

Fear Allah and keep Allah in view in respect of the lowest class,
consisting of those who have few means: the poor, the destitute, the
penniless and the disabled; because in this class are both the
discontented and those who beg. Take care for the sake of Allah of His
obligations towards them for which He has made you responsible. Fix for
them a share from the public funds and a share from the crops of lands
taken over as booty for Islam in every area, because in it the remote
ones have the same shares as the near ones. All these people are those
whose rights have been placed in your charge. Therefore, a luxurious
life should not keep you away from them. You cannot be excused for
ignoring small matters because you were deciding big problems.
Consequently, do not be unintelligent of them, nor turn your face from
them out of vanity. Be modest for the sake of God and God will exalt
you. Treat the weak ones modestly, and deal with them as if you are in
need of them. Take care of the affairs of those of them who do not
approach you because they are of unsightly appearance or those whom
people regard as low. Appoint for them some trusted people who are
God-fearing and humble. They should inform you of these people's
conditions. Then deal with them with a sense of responsibility to Allah
on the day you will meet Him, because of all the subjects these people
are the most deserving of equitable treatment, while for others also you
should fulfill their rights so as to render account to Allah.

Take care of the orphans and the aged who have no means (for
livelihood) nor are they ready for begging. Arrange salaries for them.
They are the servants of God. Seek God's favors through acting sincerely
to those people and keeping them in their proper positions in provisions
and rights. Deeds are regarded sincere when they are well intended.
People, or some of them, will not be tranquil even if you settle their
needs and fulfill their rights completely; therefore, they will ask you
for their needs openly. This is heavy on the officers; in fact, every
right is heavy. Allah lightens it for those who seek the next world and
so they endure (hardships) upon themselves and trust on the truthfulness
of Allah's promise to them. Be one of those people and seek God's help.
Fix a time for complainants wherein you make yourself free for them, and
sit for them in common audience and feel humble therein for the sake of
Allah who raised you. (On that occasion) you should keep away your army
and your assistants such as the guards and the police so that anyone who
likes to speak may speak to you without fear, because I have heard the
Messenger of Allah (peace be upon him and his family) say in more than
one place, "The people among whom the right of the weak is not secured
from the strong without fear will never achieve purity." Tolerate their
awkwardness and inability to speak. Keep away from you narrowness and
haughtiness; Allah would, on this account, spread over you the skirts of
His mercy and assign the reward of His obedience for you. Whatever you
give, give it joyfully, but when you refuse, do it handsomely and with
excuses.

Then there are certain matters, which you cannot avoid performing
yourself. For example, replying to your officers when your secretaries
are unable to do so, disposing of the complaints of the people when your
assistants shirk them, and being acquaintance of whatever reaches the
secretarial workers. Do not neglect or postpone such tasks. Appoint for
each affair one who discusses it with the officers in charge so that
your heart and mind will be quite tranquil. Whenever you want to
determine a matter, you should do it after you have discussed it
completely, reviewed it, and sought the consult of those to whom it may
concern, without shyness or inclining to an opinion the opposite of
which will prevail. Finish every day the work meant for it, because
every day has its own work. Keep for yourself the better and greater
portion of these periods for the worship of Allah, although all these
items are for Allah provided the intention is pure and the subjects
prosper thereby. The particular thing by which you should purify your
religion for Allah should be the fulfillment of those obligations, which
are especially for Him. Therefore, devote to Allah some of your physical
activity during the night and the day. God has imposed the extra
worship -nafila- exclusively on His Apostle. He said: Say your special
(tahajjud) prayer during some part of the night as an additional
(obligatory) prayer for you alone so that perhaps your Lord will raise
you to a highly praiseworthy position.

In other words, this is a special matter that God has imposed
exclusively on His Apostle as honor. For others, it is optional. God
says: And whoever does good spontaneously, then surely Allah is
Grateful, Knowing. Spare what you have provided for the sake of God and
His honor, and whatever (worship) you perform for seeking nearness to
Allah should be complete, without defect or deficiency, whatsoever
physical exertion it may involve. When you lead the prayers for the
people it should be neither (too long as to be) boring nor (too short as
to be) wasteful, because among the people there are the sick as well as
those who have needs of their own. When the Messenger of Allah (peace be
upon him and his family) sent me to Yemen I enquired how I should offer
prayers with them and he replied, "Say the prayers as the weakest of
them would say, and be considerate to the believers." Then, do not keep
yourself secluded from the people for a long time, because the seclusion
of those in authority from the subjects is a kind of narrow-sightedness
and causes ignorance about their affairs. Seclusion from them also
prevents them from the knowledge of those things, which they do not know
and as a result they begin to regard big matters as small and small
matters as big, good matters as bad and bad matters as good, while the
truth becomes confused with falsehood. After all, a governor is a human
being and cannot have knowledge of things which people keep hidden from
him.

No writ is big on the face of truth to differentiate its various
expressions from falsehood. Protect yourself against breaching people's
rights by using transparent seclusion. Then you can be one of two kinds
of men. Either you may be generous in granting rights; and then why this
hiding in spite of (your) discharging the obligations and good acts that
you perform? Or you are a victim of stinginess; in that case people will
soon give up asking you since they will lose hope of generous treatment
from you. In spite of that there are many needs of the people towards
you, which do not involve any hardship on you, such as the complaint
against oppression or the request for justice in a matter. Let the
matters that I have described for you be very useful for you. Surrender
yourself only with what achieves guidance and prosperity for you, God
willing. Further, a governor has favorites and people of easy access to
him. They misappropriate things, are high-handed and do not observe
justice in matters. You should destroy the root of evil in the people by
cutting away the causes of these defects. Do not make any land grants to
your hangers on or supporters. They should not expect from you the
possession of land, which may cause harm to adjoining people over the
question of irrigation or common services whose burden, the grantees
place on others. In this way, the benefit will be rather theirs than
yours, and the blame will lie on you in this world and the next.

Cling to fairness in judgment when you are in charge. Allow rights to
whomsoever it is due, whether near you or far from you. In this matter,
you should be enduring and watchful even though it may involve your
relations and favorites, and keep in view the reward of that which
appears burdensome on you because its reward is handsome.

If the subjects suspect you of high-handedness, explain to them your
position openly and remove their suspicion with your explanation,
because this would mean exercise for your soul and consideration to the
subjects while this explanation will secure your aim of keeping them
firm in truth. D o not reject peace to which your enemy may call you and
wherein there is the pleasure of Allah, because peace brings rest to
your army and relief from your worries and safety for your country. But
after peace there is great apprehension from the enemy because often the
enemy offers peace to benefit by your negligence. Therefore, be cautious
and guard yourself against any fearful matter. In God is the trust in
every matter. If you conclude an agreement between yourself and your
enemy or enter into a pledge with him then fulfill your agreement and
discharge your pledge faithfully. Place yourself as a shield against
whatever you have pledged because among the obligations of Allah there
is nothing on which people are more strongly united despite the
difference of their ideas and variation of their views than respect for
fulfilling pledges. Besides Muslims, even unbelievers have abided by
agreements because they realized the dangers, which would come in the
wake of violation (thereof). Therefore, do not breach your pledge. Do
not break your promise. Do not deceive your enemy, because no one can
offend Allah save the ignorant. Allah made His agreement and pledge the
sign of security, which He has spread over His creatures through His
mercy and an asylum in which they stay in His protection and seek the
benefit of nearness to Him. Therefore, there should be no deceit,
cunning, or duplicity in it. If an agreement of Allah involves you in
hardship do not seek its repudiation, because the bearing of hardships
through which you expect relief and a handsome result is better than a
violation whose consequence you fear, and that you fear that you will be
called upon by Allah to account for it and you will not be able to seek
forgiveness for it in this world or the next.

You should avoid shedding blood without justification, because nothing
is more inviting of Divine retribution, greater in (evil) consequence,
and more effective in the decline of prosperity and cutting short of
life than the shedding of blood without justification. On the Day of
Judgment Allah the Glorified, will commence giving His judgment among
the people with the cases of bloodshed committed by them. Therefore, do
not strengthen your authority by shedding prohibited blood because this
will destroy and shift the authority. Beware of encountering God's
wrath. God has appointed a custodian for the killed, and given him wide
authority. He says: And whoever is slain unjustly, We have indeed given
to his heir authority, so let him not exceed the just limits in slaying;
surely he is aided. You cannot offer any excuse before Allah or before
me for willful killing because there must be the question or revenge in
it. If you are involved in it by error and you exceed in the use of your
whip or sword, or are hard in inflicting punishment, as sometimes even a
blow by the fist or a smaller stroke causes death, then the haughtiness
of your authority should not prevent you from paying the blood price to
the successors of the killed person.

You should avoid self-admiration, having reliance in what appears good
in yourself, and love of exaggerated praise, because this is one of the
most reliable opportunities for Shaitan to obliterate the good deeds of
the virtuous. Avoid showing (the existence of) obligation on your
subjects for having done good to them, praising your own actions, making
promises and then breaking them, or speaking badly to them, because
showing (the existence of) obligation destroys good and self-praise
takes away the light of truth. Allah the Glorified says:

Most hateful is it unto Allah that you say what you yourselves do it
not. Avoid haste in matters before their time, slowness in their proper
time, insistence on them when the propriety of action is not known or
weakens when it becomes clear. Assign every matter its proper place and
do every job at the appropriate time. Do not appropriate to yourself
that in which the people have an equal share, nor be regardless of
matters, which have come to light with the excuse that you are
accountable for others. Shortly, it will be taken from you and given to
others, and the curtains of all matters will be raised from your view
and you will be required to render redress to the oppressed. Have
control over your sense of prestige, any outburst of anger, the might of
your arm, and the sharpness of your tongue. Guard against all this by
avoiding haste and by delaying severe action. Raise your sight to the
heavens when anything of this controls you so that your anger subsides
and you gain your self-control. You cannot withhold yourself from this
unless you bear in mind that you have to return to Allah.

If God wills for you guidance and prosperity, you should know that I
have collected for you in this commandment variety of matters that I
expect they will guide you. You should recall how matters went with us,
including a just government, a great tradition, a precedent of our
Prophet (peace be upon him and his family), or the obligatory commands
contained in the Book of Allah. Your leadership should depend upon these
matters. Then you should follow them as you have seen us acting upon
them and should exert yourself in following that I have enjoined upon
you in this document in which I have exhausted my pleas on you, so that
if your heart advances towards its passions you may have no plea in its
support. Except Allah the Praised, nothing protects against evil and
leads to welfare. Within the commandments of the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his family) that he had aid to me was his assertion of
performing the prayers, paying the poor-rate and treating the
bondservants kindly. I will finish my commandment with these matters.

I ask Allah through the extent of His mercy and the greatness of His
power of giving a good inclination that He may prompt me and you to
advance a clear plea before Him and His creatures in a manner that may
attract His pleasure along with handsome praise among the people, good
effect in the country, an increase in prosperity and a heightening of
honor; and that He may allow me and you to die a death of virtue and
martyrdom. Surely, we have to return to Him. Peace be on the Messenger
of Allah (May Allah show His blessings and plentiful salutation on him
and his pure and chaste descendants) and that is an end to the matter.

**Imam Ali's Sermon of Dibadge**

All praise is due to Allah the Maker of the creatures, the Creator of
mornings, the Enlivener of the dead, and the Resurrector of the
inhabitants of graves. I declare there is no god but Allah uniquely
without any associate, and Mohammed is His slave and apostle, peace be
upon him and his family. O servants of God, the best means by which
seekers of nearness to Allah the Glorified the Exalted seek nearness is
the belief in Him and His Prophet and what they brought, fighting in His
cause, for it is the high pinnacle of Islam, and (to believe) in the
expression of Divine purification for it is just nature and the
establishment of prayer for it is the basis of community, payment of
zakat for it is a compulsory obligation, fasting for the month of
Ramadan for it is the shield against chastisement, the performance of
Hajj of the House of Allah and its Umrah for these two acts banish
poverty and wash away sins and imply Paradise, regard for kinship for it
increases wealth and length of life and multiplication of numbers, to
giving alms secretly for it covers shortcomings and extinguishes the
Lord's wrath, giving alms openly for it protects against a bad death and
extending benefits (to people) for it saves from positions of
disgrace.

Go ahead with the remembrance of Allah for it is the best remembrance
security from hypocrisy, release from Hell, reminding of its sayer
whenever there is a distribution of welfare that God the Majestic
decides. It has a boom under the Divine Throne. Long for that which God
has promised to the pious, for His promise is the truest promise.
Whatever He has promised will inevitably fall as exactly as He has
promised. Tread the course of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
family) for it is the most distinguished course. Follow the Sunna of the
Prophet for it is the most right of all behaviors. Learn the Book of
God -the Quran- for it is the fairest of discourses and the most
far-reaching admonition, and understand it thoroughly for it is the best
blossoming of hearts. Seek cure with its light for it is the cure for
hearts. Recite it beautifully for it is the most beautiful narration.

Whenever the Quran is recited (to you), listen to it quietly so that
you may receive mercy. If you are guided to its knowledge, you should
apply what you know of it so that you may be successful. You should
know, O servant of God, certainly a scholar who acts not according to
his knowledge is like the off-headed ignorant who does not find relief
from his ignorance, but on the learned the plea of Allah is greater and
grief more incumbent, and he is more blameworthy before Allah. However,
both the ignorant and the learnt are perplexed, negligent, deviant,
engaged in sedition, having ill consequence, and encountering void
practices. O servants of God, do not hesitate so that you will not
suspect. Do not suspect so that you will not disbelieve. Do not
disbelieve so that you will not be regret. Do not be forbearing with
yourselves so that you will not overlook excessively and, consequently,
you will perish as your mildness towards things will misguide you to the
courses of the wrongdoers. If you realize the right, you should never
disregard it so that you will not suffer a clear loss.

O servants of God, it is a part of determination to fear God, and it is
firm to avoid exceeding the limits of depending upon God. O servants of
God, the most self-sincere is the most submissive to God, and the most
self-deceitful is the most rebellious to God. O servants of God,
certainly he who obeys God will be secured and delighted, and whoever
disobeys will be disappointed, regretful, and unsafe. O servants of God,
ask God for conviction, for it is the head of the religion, and beseech
to Him for good health for it is surely the best grace; therefore, seize
it for settling your worldly and religious affairs. Beseech to Him for
success for it is a firm pillar. Know that conviction is the best
comrade of the heart. God-fearing is the best of conviction. The best
affairs of the right are the determined, and the evilest of it are the
most recent. Every recent change is heresy, and every heresy is
deviation. Heresies ruin the Sunna.

The true unlucky is that who maltreats his religion, while the lucky is
that whose religion is steady and conviction is sound. The true happy is
that who learns lessons from others. The true unhappy is that whose
whims cheat him. O servants of God, know that little showing off is
polytheism. Conviction is the sincerity of doing. Passions lead to Hell.
Sitting with people of evil amusement causes the Quran to be forgotten
and invites the Shaitan. Postponement of the sacred months is an
increase of atheism. Acts of disobedience to God bring about the wrath
of the Beneficent. The wrath of the Beneficent drives to Hell.
Conversation with women causes misfortunes and deviates the hearts.
Secret gazing at women extinguishes the illuminations of the hearts.
Glimpse of eyes are the traps of the Shaitan. Sitting with the unjust
rulers kindles the fires of Hell.

O servants of God, be honest, because God is certainly with the honest,
and avoid speaking lies because this is the opposite of faith. The
honest is lying on the honor of safety and dignity, while the liars are
lying on the edge of deep wholes and perdition. Say the right so that
you will be ascribed to it and practice it so that you will be with its
people. Return the deposits of everybody so properly. Regard your
kinship even if your kinsmen disregard you. Do favors to those who
maltreated you. Fulfill your pledges. Be fair when you are arbiters. Be
tolerant when you are oppressed. Pardon and overlook him who wronged you
as same as you desire to be pardoned and overlooked. Do not take pride
in your fathers. Let not anyone of you defame another. How terrible is
the defamation after having true faith.

Do not mock each other, do not enrage each other, and do not take pride
against each other in your affairs. Do not backbite each other. Would
any of you like to eat the disgusting dead flesh of your brother? Do not
envy each other, for envy consumes the faith like fire when consumes
wood. Do not bear malice against each other, because malice is the
shaver -of the good attributes-. Meet people with salaams. Respond
others' greetings in a way better than its addressing. Treat the widows
and the orphans mercifully. Help the weak, the oppressed, the indebted,
in God's cause, the wayfarer, the beggar, the slave, the contractee
slave, and the poor. Support the oppressed ones, defray the obligatory
taxes, and strive yourselves for God's sake so suitably for God is
surely harsh in punishment. Strive for God's sake, receive the guests
hospitably, perform the ritual ablution properly, and offer the five
obligatory prayers in their times because they occupy a remarkable
standing with God. Good deeds performed on one's own initiative will be
rewarded.

God is All-knowing and Fully Appreciative. Co-operate with each other
in righteousness and piety, not in sin and hostility. Have fear of God
as you should and die only as Muslims having submitted to the will of
God.

O servants of God, you should know that hope rescinds the mind, breaks
the promise, urges on inadvertence, and causes regret. Disdain hope for
it is deception and the adherents to it will be sinful. Act in
situations of hope in the same way you act in situations of fear of God.
You should thank when an act that you hope for comes to you, and add
another hope to it, because God has promised the Muslims of good
rewarding and promised to multiply for the thankful. I have surely not
seen a coveter for Paradise asleep nor have I seen a dreader from Hell
to be asleep. I have not seen a thing more profitable than saving
supplies for the day on which the hidden will be revealed. He whom right
does not benefit must suffer the harm of the wrong, and he whom guidance
does not keep firm will be led away by misguidance towards destruction,
and he whom conviction does not benefit must suffer doubt. Beware, you
have been ordered insistently to march and been guided how to provide
for the journey. Surely, the most frightening thing, which I am afraid
of about you, is to follow desires and to widen the hopes.

So now, surely this world has turned its back and announced its
departure while the next world has appeared forward and proclaimed its
approach. Today is the day of preparation while tomorrow is the day of
race. The place to proceed to is Paradise while the place of doom is
Hell. Surely, you are in the days of hopes behind which stands hastening
death. Whoever acts during the days of his hope before approach of his
death, his action would benefit him and his death would not harm him.
But he who fails to act during the period of hope before the approach of
death his action is a loss and his death is harm to him. O servants of
God, hurry up to erect the pillars of your religion through offering
the -obligatory- prayers in their times, defraying the zakat in its
proper times, invocation and submission -to God-, regard of the kinship,
fear of the day to come, giving the beggars, showing respect to the
weak, learning and applying the Quran with its instructions, telling
truth only, fulfilling the pledges, and keeping the deposits till you
give them back to their owners. Work desirably for obtaining God's
reward, and fear His chastisement. Offer your wealth and souls for God's
sake. Equip yourselves with effects as many as saving you. Do the good
so that you will be rewarded with it on the day when the doers of good
will win the good. As I come to the end, I seek God's forgiveness for
you and me.

**Imam Ali's Maxims and Words of Encouragement, Warning, and
Admonition**

So now, surely slyness and cheating will be in Hell. Fear God and be
cautious of His power. God does not accept to surprise the servants with
destructions before He warns them. From this cause, a servant slackens
the efforts until he forgets the pledge -God's warning- and thinks he is
doing well. Thus, a servant sinks in guess, hope, and inattentiveness of
what has come to him. He ties himself in many knots, destroys himself
through exerting all efforts while God grants him a respite for the
pledge between them. He falls with the mindless, walks with the sinful,
disputes the believers about their obedience to God, and prefers the
falsification of the indifferent. These are the people whose hearts are
open for doubts. They dare forge lies against others and regard their
deeds as a way of seeking God's favor, because they pursued their whims
and changed and distorted the words of the wise people ignorantly and
blindly, seeking reputation and showing off, without right paths,
circulating indications, or familiar marks of their final hours or final
point of their lives. When God discloses the reward of their policies
and strips their cloaks of inadvertence, they welcomed that which will
fade away and turned the backs to that which is to come. They could not
get use of the wishes and demands when they attained them and did not
benefit by the times that they have had. Moreover, this was changed into
misfortunes for them. Now, they are escaping what they were seeking.

I warn you against this slippery ground and order you to fear God other
than whom nothing is helpful. The honest should help themselves if they
are truly honest. The true perceptive is that who listens, ponders,
thinks, understands, learns lessons, takes clear course that saves him
from falling behind, evades the path of misguidance, and does not give
any opportunity for the seducers to control him by means of abusing the
right, speaking incorrectly, or changing a truth. All power belongs to
God. Say only what is said to you, submit to what is narrated to you,
and do not impose on others what is not imposed upon you, because the
result will be against you due to your own deeds, words, and intentions.
Beware of doubt, because it was arranged for testing you. Seek ease. Use
good deeds and words for each other. Opt for submission -to God-. Feel
fearful and subservient to God. Treat each other modestly, fairly,
generously, and calmly. This is God's commandment. Beware of envying
each other or bearing malice, because they are the traditions of the
pre-Islamic era (Jahilism). A soul must see what it has done for the
future. Have fear of God for He is All-aware of what you do. You, O
people, should know certainly that God will not permit a servant to do
more than what has been counted to him in the Wise Reminder, even if he
exerts excessive efforts, finds more ways, and practices exaggerative
endeavors. Likewise, God will never preclude what has been counted in
the Wise Reminder for a servant despite his weakness and lack of
practice.

O people, neither skill nor will idiocy add or reduce a single atom of
one's (previously decided) lot. He who realizes this fact and acts upon
it will surely be the calmest in profits, while he who disregards this
fact will be the weariest in loss. It often happens that he whom is
bestowed with graces is waylaid through that bestowment, while he whom
people see as unlucky is in fact fortunate. Sober up, O listener, from
your inebriety, wake up from your inadvertence, slow down your haste,
and ponder over God's words that are not reneged and that are
inescapable and unavoidable. Then forsake your pride, leave your
arrogance, take heed, and remember your grave and abode, because it will
be your passage and destiny. You will be treated as you treat and you
will harvest only what you sowed, and whatever you did will be done to
you. Tomorrow, you will indisputably find only (the results of) what you
did. Benefit by considering the admonition that has been provided to
you. Understand what you have listened to and what you have been
promised, because, through this, you will be undoubtedly engaged in one
of two matters-either to obey God and follow what you have heard, or to
have God's claim instituted against you and you should submit to it
according to your knowledge.

Beware, and keep up seriousness. Not one can tell you the truth in the
way that an expert reporter can do. One of the firm decisions of Allah
in the Wise Reminder upon which He bestows reward or gives punishment,
and through which He likes or dislikes is that it will not benefit a
man, even though he exerts himself and acts sincerely if he leaves this
world to meet Allah with one of these acts without repenting, namely
that he believed in a partner with Allah during his obligatory worship,
or appeased his own anger by killing an individual, or declared an act
but he opted for another, or sought fulfillment of his needs from people
by introducing an innovation in his religion, or met people with a
double face, or moved among them with a double tongue, or using
arrogance or pride. Understand this because an illustration is a guide
for its like.

Beasts are concerned with their bellies. Carnivores are concerned with
assaulting others. Women are concerned with the adornments of this
ignoble life and the creation of mischief herein. On the other hand,
believers are humble, admonishers and afraid of Allah.


