The Introduction
================

**The Social Problem:**

Here the author spells out his main aim for writing the book. It is not
philosophy for philosophy's sake. The purpose is to present Islam as an
alternative system superior to capitalism and secular democracy on the
one hand and to Marxism and socialism on the other.

Although devoid of an articulate worldview or ideology, capitalistic
democracies are materialistic to the core. Dissociating themselves from
all transcendental principles, they claim to promote the interests and
rights of the individual and safeguard his economic, political liberties
and freedom of expression and thought. The interests of the individual
are regarded as primary and are emphasized at the cost of the interests
of society. The assumption is that since all individuals seek their
interests, the provision of individual freedom leads to the automatic
fulfillment of the interests of society, which are regarded as the sum
of individual interests.

However, due to the dominant materialistic outlook on life in
capitalistic societies, the pursuit of individual self-interest does not
transcend the purview of materialism. Nearly all moral values, most of
which do not lie within the purview of materialistic self-seeking of
individuals, are neglected, causing deep harm to society's welfare. The
rights of the minority are neglected. Unlimited economic freedom permits
a handful of capitalists to dominate the majority of people and to usurp
their freedoms and rights. With the immense economic resources at their
disposal, the wealthy capitalists take control of the mass media,
government, legislature and judiciary. Even foreign countries and
peoples are not secure from their greed for cheap raw materials, cheap
labour, and markets for finished products. Imperialism, hence, is a
direct outcome of capitalistic democracy.

In this dehumanizing hell of materialism and pursuit of individual
self-interest there is no place for love, mercy, self-denial or any
other higher human value.

Dialectical materialism sees all evils of capitalism to be rooted in
the institution of private property. If private property is abolished
and all property becomes public, passing from the possession and control
of the individual into those of the community, individual ambition will
die.

All will voluntarily pool the fruits of their labour for the common
benefit. The higher cultural values will be put within the reach of all
alike through community support and the diffusion of education.

Although communism solved some of the problems of capitalism at the
cost of immense human suffering, the remedy was only partial.
Dictatorship, repression, deprival of individual freedoms, constant fear
of imprisonment, torture and execution for the dissidents, loss of
economic vigour due to absence of individual initiative and motivation,
the debasement of man's dignity these are some of the outcomes of the
socialist solution.

In the view of Martyr al-Sadr, the evil of capitalism lies not in
private property but in the neglect of the spiritual dimensions of man's
being. Moreover, self-seeking is inherent in human nature; it is not a
product of the institution of private property, as alleged by Marx. The
failure of secular democracies lies in their emphasis on individualism
and their inability to stimulate and promote the higher spiritual aspect
of man's self-seeking nature, whose activation is vital for arising
man's altruistic potentialities so significant for society's welfare.
Marxism makes the mistake of abolishing private property while keeping
intact capitalism's destructive materialistic world view. As a result,
it ends up substituting a handful of bureaucrats and party officials for
a handful of capitalists who wield all power and control the society's
wealth and resources.

Both capitalism and communism fail to present a correct world outlook
and to formulate an ideology capable of solving the diverse problems of
human society. This failure is rooted in their materialist world view
and their inadequate understanding of man's nature.


