Relativism in Philosophy and Sciences
=====================================

After discussing Kant, Martyr al-Sadr directs his attention to other
relativistic tendencies in philosophy and sciences. 'Subjective
relativism' is such a tendency in philosophy (viz. in James, Schiller,
Vaihinger), which asserts that truth is nothing but what is necessitated
by an individual's specific circumstances and conditions of knowing. It
is supported by physiological idealism which asserts that sense
perception is symbolic, not representative, its quality being determined
by the workings of the nervous system, not external reality. This kind
of outlook makes all knowledge relative without exception, even
mathematics, which was excepted by Kant. Also, unlike Kant, it makes
truth vary with individuals.

In the field of science, there are some theories which lead to
skepticism despite the intention of their proponents. These are
behaviourism, Freudianism and historical materialism. Behaviourism,
which regards external stimuli and physiological conditioning as
preceding the mind and consciousness and as determinants of its
contents, unavoidably leads to a denial of the value of knowledge. The
author has discussed it elaborately in Chapter 5 of Part 2 of the
present work.

According to Freud, the contents of the conscious mind are determined
by the appetites, urges and instincts hidden in the unconscious, which
rule conduct and the conscious mind and its ideas. The Freudian view of
the mind as an instrument of the unconscious and its instincts leads to
skepticism by denying its function of mirroring and reflecting objective
reality. The author, here, promises to deal with Freud's views touching
upon the theory of knowledge in a future book, Our Society, which he did
not succeed in writing.

Historical materialism, which may be regarded here as a sociological
theory, also leads to skepticism by treating knowledge and ideas as part
of social composition. According to this theory, economic condition,
determined by the means of production, is the determining basis of
society. Knowledge and thought are thus linked to social structure and
the economic forces. Economic forces occupy the same position here as
unconscious urges in Freud's theory; both lead to loss of confidence in
the possibility of knowledge. The inevitable links between thought and
the economic factor in historical materialism contradicts with the
Marxist theory of knowledge which asserts confidence in the possibility
of knowledge.

Here the author makes an important remark : All theories that argue
against the objective value of knowledge involve a contradiction; by
eliminating confidence in knowledge they destroy their own foundation
and condemn themselves. In the light of this, behaviourism becomes a
product of Pavlov's physiology and stimuli; Freud's theory a product of
his unconscious urges; historical materialism also becomes a product of
the economic conditions in which Marx lived.


