Knowledge in Islamic Philosophy
===============================

At this point Martyr al-Sadr again recapitulates the main points in the
theory of knowledge of .Islamic philosophers. These points are as
follows.

1. Human knowledge is of two kinds: Conception and judgement (or
assent). Conception, in its various forms, has no objective value (not
in the sense that concepts are not derived from perception of reality,
but in the sense that they by themselves are not sufficient to take hold
of objective reality in the sense that judgements do). Only judgement
has the quality of essentially disclosing reality.

2. All knowledge of judgement type can be attributed to necessary
primary knowledge, whose necessity cannot (and need not) be proved and
whose truth cannot be demonstrated (on account of its self-evidence).
However, the mind is conscious of the necessity of accepting it.
Examples of such knowledge are the law of contradiction and the law of
causality. It is on these principles that all other judgements must be
based. The objective value of judgements depends on the degree to which
they rest upon these principles. It is possible in the light of these
principles to acquire knowledge in metaphysics, mathematics and natural
sciences.

In the natural sciences knowledge is acquired by applying the primary
principles through the mediation of experiment, which is not needed in
mathematics and metaphysics. This is the reason why the conclusions of
metaphysics and mathematics are, for the most part, certain, in contrast
to those of the natural sciences.

Sometimes the drawing of metaphysical conclusions may depend on
experimentation. In that case a philosophical theory has the same value
and rank as a scientific theory.

The concept we form of an external reality is two sided. One side is
the form of the thing it represents. In the other respect, it is
fundamentally different from the objective reality of that thing; it
enjoys none of the effectiveness and activity of the thing represented.
This difference between the idea and reality is the difference between
quiddity and existence, as described in Part 2 of this work.


