Knowledge in Dialectical Materialism
====================================

Dialectical materialism asserts the possibility of knowledge and
rejects idealism and relativism, as well as skepticism and sophistry. It
is here that the author, for the first time in his book, takes up
Marxist epistemology for a critical study. All that which was said
hitherto on the theory of knowledge, about the views of the Sophists,
Descartes, Locke, Berkeley, Hume and Kant was a preparation for
examination of the Marxist viewpoint on knowledge. Basing as it does its
theory of knowledge on the empirical doctrine, on dialectical movement
of thought and synthesis of contradictions, can it refute idealism and
avoid relativism and skepticism? The author's purpose is to show that it
fails in this venture.

Marxism and Refutation of Idealism:

Marxism fails to refute idealism by its stand that all knowledge is
derived from experience. It fails to notice that in the dispute between
idealism and realism sense experience cannot be a judge, for the
idealist claims that things exist only in sense experience while the
realist asserts that they exist independently of sense experience. The
realist cannot demonstrate the objectivity of sense experience i.e. of
its being representative of another independent reality by sense
experience itself. So also arguments from science can be valid only if
the objectivity of experience and experiment has already been posited.

The efforts of Marxist ideologues like Engels, Lenin, Roger Garaudy and
Georges Politzer are naive in that they try to refute idealism with
arguments from science, which are pointless as long as the objectivity
of science has not been established on philosophical grounds. Yet this
is something that Marxism cannot do, because:

(1) It does not accept necessary rational principles. According to it,
the principle of causality, for example, is an empirical principle.
Therefore, it cannot be considered a basis for the validity and
objectivity of sense experience.

(2) The dialectic explains external events by contradictions internal
to matter: natural events do not require an external cause. The idealist
can assert the same thing about phenomena and claim that knowledge and
experience arise out of their inner contradictions without the need of
any external cause in the form of an independent reality.

The author cites some naive arguments advanced by Marxists against
idealism which are derived from science or commonsense, but which in
fact side step the real issue or beg the question. Once again al-Sadr
concludes that it is not possible to base a sound realism except on the
basis of the rational theory of knowledge which asserts the presence of
necessary rational principles independent of sense experience.


