Sense Experience and the Thing-in-itself
========================================

Al-Sadr here quotes Marxist texts that state that there is no basic

difference between the thing-in-itself and the phenomenon, between
outward reality and the manner in which it appears to consciousness. But
there is a duality here, between appearance and reality, for according
to empiricism the senses perceive only the phenomena. Can Marxism
eliminate this duality and prove that external reality appears to us in
our percept s and ideas as it is?

The answer is, No, because knowledge according to materialism is purely
a physiological act. Unlike mechanical materialists, the dialectical
materialists claim that the idea of a thing is not its pure mechanical
picture. Since qualitatively different forms of motion can transform
from one to another, the physical motion of a thing changes into a
physiological motion in our senses. Then the physiological motion
changes into the psychological motion of the idea. To begin with such
changes are not admissible, and even if they be admitted it means that
Marxism does not succeed in revealing the relation between a thing and
its idea except as a relation between a cause and its effect or at the
most that of a reality and its reflected picture.

But why should we assume that this effect and cause differ from other
effects and causes and are distinguished from them by a special
characteristic, namely that the effect pictures its cause faithfully? Of
course, there are many physiological events that are effects of external
causes without having the capacity of picturing their causes. Even if
such a thing were admitted, how do we know that the idea (percept) fully
corresponds to the objective reality?

The Marxists answer this objection by asserting that thought is a part
and product of nature; rather its highest expression. Our knowledge is
nothing other than a superior product of nature; it cannot but reflect
the laws of the motions of matter. The products of thought, being the
products of nature, are not in contradiction but in agreement with the
rest of material nature.

Yet this is not sufficient for proving the possibility of knowledge.
Aren't idealist thought and theological and metaphysical thought as much
part of nature and products of it as dialectical materialism?


