Empiricism and the Possibility of Metaphysics
=============================================

Before the birth of empiricism, philosophy was considered responsible
for discovering the general laws of being. Its tool was syllogistic
reasoning and philosophic thought moved from general to more particular
propositions. Not only metaphysics and ethics but also such sciences as
physics and psychology lay within the sphere of philosophy. However, the
experimental method and induction took the sciences, each of them
devoted to a specific class of phenomena, out of the purview of
philosophy, which was left to deal with issues which fell within the
purview of pure reason. The empiricists claimed that there is no field
of knowledge beyond the field of experimentation that the sciences have
divided among themselves, leaving nothing for philosophy. The only scope
that was admitted for philosophy by some schools was that of discovering
the relations and links among the sciences and to postulate general
scientific theories based on the outcome of experiments in various
scientific fields. Foremost amongst them were the schools of Marxism and
positivism.

The logical positivists were not satisfied with the empiricist attacks
against metaphysics. They did not limit themselves, for instance, to the
assertion that metaphysics was useless since its propositions could not
be demonstrated by the scientific method. The positivists went on to
assert that the propositions of metaphysics were meaningless. The
criticism of the positivists against metaphysics can be summarized as
follows:

1. Metaphysical propositions deal with matters that lie beyond the
sphere of experience and experiment. Hence they cannot be verified.

2. Their being true or false makes no difference so far as the world of
experience is concerned.

3. Metaphysical propositions are meaningless because they do not give
any information about the world.

4. It is inappropriate to ascribe truth or falsity to them.

The author suggests the following lines for answering this criticism:

1. If we refute the empirical theory of knowledge and affirm the
existence of a primary knowledge prior to experience in the core of the
human mind, we can demonstrate that the mind has the capacity to confirm
the veracity or falsity of metaphysical propositions.

2. Although metaphysical propositions have no direct bearing on the
data of experience, these data are not altogether irrelevant to
metaphysical statements. Further clarification to be given later.

3. The logical positivists describe a proposition as 'meaningful' if
its truth or falsity can be affirmed within the limits of sense
experience.

This is equal to saying, "The content of metaphysical propositions lies
beyond sense experience". With this, the positivists assert an
indisputable truth, that the subjects of metaphysics are not empirical
something which the rationalists have stressed all along.

What would the positivist say about such propositions as relate to
nature but cannot be verified by sense experience, such as a statement
about the existence of mountains and valleys on the other side of the
moon? Positivism revises its original position to assert that that which
is important here is logical possibility, not actual possibility.
However, the notion of logical possibility is a metaphysical notion, and
thus positivism, in the last analysis, has to adopt a metaphysical
criterion of 'meaning'. Metaphysical propositions are as meaningful as
any other, in that they relate to realities independent of the mind and
the logical possibility of being true or false holds in their case.


