The Value of Knowledge (chapter 2)
==================================

**The Possibility of Knowledge:**

In this chapter Martyr al-Sadr is concerned not with the 'value' of
knowledge but rather with the possibility of knowledge as such. To what
extent does 'knowledge' (i.e. that which is considered to be knowledge)
capture the essence of reality and the secrets of the external world?

Marxism believes in the possibility of knowledge of objective realities
and rejects skepticism and sophistry. The world does not contain
anything that cannot be known. But is it appropriate for Marxism to
claim that definite knowledge is possible? Can it escape skepticism in
the ultimate analysis?

In order to understand the Marxist and Islamic positions on this issue,
the author considers it essential to review important doctrines
formulated by philosophers, beginning with the Sophists.

Greek Philosophy: In the fifth century B.C. a class of teachers emerged
in Greece that devoted itself to teaching of rhetoric and giving
professional advice to their clients in matters of law, court procedure
and politics. Protagoras (b.c. 500 B.C.) and Gorgias (fl.c. 427 B.C.),
two major skeptics, were the products of this class. Gorgias, for
instance, taught that the Real, about which the pre-Socratic
philosophers had argued, does not exist. If a world-stuff existed we
could never know what it was like; it is not what it appears, since the
senses lie. Even if Reality could be known, knowledge is incommunicable;
for, language, being mere noise, cannot convey the knowledge of reality
to other minds.

The Sophists rejected the possibility of knowledge and made truth a
purely subjective and relative affair. Hence metaphysics is idle
speculation and its results are worthless. There is no reality that
reason can know except the ever-changing flux of sensible experience.

Sophistry wished to destroy what philosophy had built hitherto. They
were opposed by Socrates (d.399 B.C.), Plato (428-347 B.C.) and
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who tried to maintain reason on its throne.
Aristotelian epistemology validated reason and recognized the value of
experience, and posited the possibility of certain knowledge.

The skepticism that reemerged after Aristotle was a compromise in that
it did not deny reality but denied the possibility of certain knowledge.
However, skepticism could not prevail in philosophy, and reason mounted
the throne offered to it by Aristotle, until skepticism emerged again in
the 16th century in an atmosphere of doubt and rebellion against the
authority of reason. Descartes emerged in this atmosphere and he tried
to bring back certitude to philosophy.

Descartes: Descartes (1596-1650) began his philosophy with sweeping
doubt. Ideas, he reasoned are susceptible to error and sense perception
is often deceptive. The point of departure for philosophical certitude
was the existence of his thoughts, which leads him to infer his own
existence: 'I think, therefore, I am'. This statement is true because it
is clear and distinct. He therefore adopts as a general rule the
principle that all things that we conceive very clearly and distinctly
are true.

Ideas seem to be of three sorts: (1) those that are innate, (2) those
that are foreign and come from without, (3) those that are the mind's
constructs. Descartes disposes of skepticism by first proving the
existence of God, whose idea belongs to the first class. Since we as
imperfect beings are not sufficient reason for the idea of perfection we
entertain the idea of God being the idea of an absolutely perfect being
the idea of God must have been caused by Him. God is thus the first
objective reality posited by Descartes. Now since God is good, the
innate ideas (which include the ideas of external bodies) which we have
such strong inclination to believe must be true. This is how Descartes
posits external reality and the possibility of science.

Al-Sadr points out that 'I think, therefore, I am', contains a
concealed syllogism: 'I think, every thinker exists, therefore I
exist'.

Moreover as pointed out by Ibn Sina, this argument from thought to
existence is invalid; for the thinking subject admits his existence in
the first phrase 'I think'.

Secondly, Descartes confuses between the idea of a perfect being and
the objective reality it represents. It is God, not the idea of God,
which is more sublime than human beings.

Descartes bases the whole edifice of existence on the proposition:

"It is impossible for God to deceive". He confuses between 'deception
is impossible', and 'deception is abominable', which is not a
metaphysical (judgement of fact) but an ethical (judgement of value)
proposition.

In any case, the author's purpose is not an elaborate criticism of
Descartes' philosophy but to present his view regarding the possibility
of knowledge. Descartes accepts the validity of innate rational
knowledge.

Locke (1632-1704) is the founder of modern empiricism. While he claims
that all knowledge is derived from experience there being no innate
ideas or principles he divides knowledge into three types:

(1) by intuition, (2) by rational demonstration, (3) by sensation. Our
knowledge of our own existence is intuitive, our knowledge of God's
existence is demonstrative, and our knowledge of things present to sense
is sensitive. This division of knowledge into three groups is
inconsistent with his empirical doctrine.

Locke makes a distinction between what he calls primary and secondary
qualities. The primary ones are in separable from bodies, such as
solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest, and number. The secondary
qualities are only in the percipient, such as colour, sound, smell,
etc.

Since there is no way, according to Locke, of knowing the primary
qualities except through the senses, this division is also inconsistent
with his empirical doctrine.

**The Idealists:**

The Platonic theory of Ideas, generally called 'realism', is referred
to as 'idealism' by the author. Whatever we may call it, it did not
involve any denial or doubt about reality. In metaphysics, idealism is
the theory that reality is of the nature of mind or idea. To al-Sadr, it
is an attempt to shake the foundations of objective reality and to
exterminate certainty. In order to study the role of idealism in the
theory of knowledge, he proposes to examine three tendencies in
idealism. These he calls 'philosophical', 'physical' and
'physiological'.

Philosophical Idealism: Its founder was Berkeley, who declared, 'To
exist is to know or to be known'. He denies existence to objective
realities existing independent of minds. Mind and its ideas exist. All
we know of 'matter' are the qualities of our sense (the secondary
qualities of Locke). Berkeley's idealism has been interpreted
differently and al-Sadr has selected an interpretation that he considers
best-known. He cites Berkeley's proofs in support of his doctrines.

The first one is intended to prove that all knowledge is based on and
comes from the senses. The main criticism against Berkeley is that he
takes for granted the law of contradiction in his proofs while denying
that there is any knowledge not rooted in sense experience. The author
interprets Berkeley as denying the independent existence of things and
offers reasons for rejecting this alleged denial of Berkeley.

The fact is that Berkeley's position is not understood clearly by the
author. Berkeley does not deny the reality of external objects. What he
denies is that such objects could exist by themselves and independent of
the Divine mind. That is, existence for him is synonymous with being the
object of consciousness. Things cannot exist except as ideas inside
minds. Why does Berkeley deny what Locke calls primary qualities? That
is because he is reluctant to recognize such qualities as extension,
number, motion, solidity and figure as being attributes of the Divine
mind, perhaps in accordance with the theological notions of the
scholastics.

If external objects are to be conceived as ideas in the Divine mind,
there is no place for matter and materiality in the external world,
matter being the main obstacle in the way of conceiving external objects
as Divine ideas. Hence he denies the primary qualities as representing
attributes of material bodies, and thus he annihilates matter. In some
ways Berkeley's thesis that existence is mental is similar to the theory
of God's 'knowledge by presence' ('ilm huduri) propounded by some Muslim
philosophers. In both the cases; things are conceived as objects of
knowledge, not as things in themselves independent of a perceiving mind.
On the whole, one may say that the reasons behind Berkeley's denial of
matter and corporeality are mainly theological, because he regards the
idea of material substratum as the base on which the concept of
thing-in-itself rests. Since corporeality cannot be a quality of Divine
ideas, Berkeley will not have any things-in-themselves. According to him
everything that there is thing- in-consciousness.

**The Nature of Judgement:**

However, to return to al-Sadr's criticism of Berkeley, it is obvious
that Berkeley's denial of the objectivity of thought leads to solipsism.
Berkeley's proofs involve a misunderstanding of the nature of knowledge.
Knowledge has two main divisions according to al-Sadr: conception and
judgement. The forms of objects exist on three levels in our
intellect:

(1) as percepts, on the level of sense perception, (2) as images, on
the level of imagination (and perhaps memory), and (3) as concepts, on
the abstract level of intellection. Mere concepts, in isolation from one
another, do not ensure the mind's movement from the subjective to the
objective realm. The presence of the form of an essence in our intellect
is one thing, while the objective presence of that essence in the
outside is something else (it is not clear whether this is true of sense
perception or only of imagination and conception).

Judgement, however, is different from conception. It is the point of
departure for the movement from conception to objectivity. 1. Judgement
does not arise in the mind by way of senses. It is rather an act of the
knowing mind.

2. Most importantly, it is an inherent property of judgement to reveal
a reality beyond the mind. Although the mind has no direct conjunction
with anything except its knowledge, it is inherent in judgement to be
essentially disclosive (kashfan dhatiyyan) of something outside
knowledge.

Berkeley's argument is based on a confusion between conception and
judgement. The empirical doctrine that all knowledge arises from
perception relates to the stage of conception. By failing to recognize
the difference between concepts and judgements, it makes it impossible
to move in the direction of objectivity.


