Answers To Objections
=====================

(1) It may be said that if it is inherent in judgement to essentially
disclose reality lying beyond knowledge, then all judgements must be
true, which is not the case. To solve this difficulty al-Sadr explains
the meaning of 'essential disclosure'. It is inherent in judgement to
point towards a reality independent of itself. Whether true or false, it
discloses judgement is not detached other than itself. Thus essential
disclosure of from judgement itself, even when there is error and
ambiguity (the author uses the word 'knowledge' instead of judgement in
this statement, which does not agree with the conception that knowledge
is something always true).

(2) The second objection is that if judgement may be erroneous, its
property of essential disclosure being unable to protect it from error,
how can we rely upon it? The answer is that if human thought did not
possess a number of judgements of indubitable certainty, no judgement
would be free of doubt and it would be impossible for us to know any
reality. It is here that the doctrine of necessary primary knowledge
comes to our rescue. This doctrine asserts that there is a knowledge
whose truth is secure and which is completely free from error. Error
occurs in inferring secondary judgements on the basis of primary
knowledge. Even Berkeley unconsciously believes in a store of certain
knowledge, for no one can demonstrate anything unless he bases his
demonstration on the fundamentals contained in primary knowledge such as
the law of contradiction and the principle of causality and necessity.

This discussion of philosophical idealism enables us to draw two
conclusions: (1) the acceptance of the essentially disclosing nature of
judgements, (2) the acceptance of basic principle of human knowledge
whose truth is necessarily secure. Even Berkeley's belief in the
existence of other minds and his proofs in favour of idealism assume the
acceptance of these two notions.

Realism (which in metaphysics means that reality is not reducible to
mind and thought, and in epistemology means the doctrine that objects of
knowledge and experience exist independently of their being known or
experienced) bases its arguments on these two principles.


