Idealism in Physics and Psychology
==================================

The nineteenth-century physicist explained nature in terms of
mechanical laws involving material bodies, particles and waves. The
developments in atomic physics abolished the classical conception of
matter. Matter was no more indestructible; mass and matter became
convertible to energy. As a result of this, the materialistic conception
of the world became inconsistent with the findings of empirical
science.

The discoveries in subatomic particle physics lead to an idealistic
tendency among some physicists. The concepts and theories of science,
they said, were only convenient ways of discussing reality, whose true
nature escaped the categories of thought and knowledge. This idealism,
or absence of faith in the objective value of knowledge was, according
to Martyr al-Sadr, the result of a philosophical error. They perceived
the debate between realists and idealists as revolving about the choice
of one of these two alternatives: Either the world is attributable to
mind and consciousness, or to a material reality existing outside
them.

This is a fallacious formulation of the primary issue involved, that is
whether the world has an objective reality independent of mind and
consciousness (which in the last analysis may not be material).

As a result, when they failed to posit the fundamental reality of
matter, they came to doubt the possibility of knowledge. However,
realism and materialism are not synonymous. If science is led to discard
the materialistic view of the world, or if any of its scientific axioms
collapse as a result of experiments, it should not lead us to reject
realism and deny the objective value of knowledge.

The evaporation of matter as a fundamental reality existing
independently of mind was a deadly blow to materialist philosophies,
including Marxism. However, the Marxist ideologues, such as Lenin, tried
to save face by insisting that the philosophical conception of matter is
different from the matter of science. The only necessary quality of
'matter', they pleaded, was its existence independent of mind, not the
corporeal qualities traditionally ascribed to matter.

This is a futile play with words, for it does not conceal the fact that
Marxism has to abandon its philosophical position. If to exist
independently of mind is the only necessary quality of matter, then
theological metaphysics, according to this new definition of matter, is
a materialistic philosophy!

The tendency towards idealism and agnosticism among the physicists was
the result of a psychological crisis that came due to the collapse of
certain scientific axioms. Materialism was such an axiom, but realism is
not. Realism is not the result of empirical proof or experiments; its
acceptance is inherent in human nature.

A similar skeptical tendency arose among the physiologists studying the
physiology of perception and the causal processes related to it.

They suggested that the objects given in sense perception are symbolic,
not representative of the external objects. This tendency was a
complication of the materialistic notion that knowledge was purely a
physiological act conditioned by the nature of the nervous system.


