The Glorious Qur’an as a Miracle
================================

Muhammad (SA), faced many people in his lifetime who did not believe in
him. They challenged him to produce a miracle to match those produced by
other prophets in the past. He retorted that it was quite unnecessary,
as the Noble Qur’an Itself was the supreme miracle for all times and all
places.

Many Muslim and non‑Muslim scholars have proved, in various ways, that
the Holy Qur’an is a miracle. This conviction is reflected in many books
and articles throughout the history of Islam. They render a variety of
sound and just reasons to substantiate this fact. As I have chosen to
let the Glorious Qur’an answer most of the questions, I think it would
be appro­priate to continue the same technique, and see how the
Munificent Qur’an Itself proves Its own miraculous nature.

Let us first define "miracle". The Arabic equivalent of miracle is
*mujizah,* which is a derivative of the root "’A‑J‑Z". This root
reflects the idea of being unable to, inability, impossibility.
*Mu’jizah* (or miracle) means something that no one can do except Allah
the Exalted (or His Messengers, with His Leave). What is the difference
between magic and miracle? The difference is that the former can be done
by a talented human being either out of his own creativity or by
learning from others. The latter, however, cannot be done by mankind.
Humankind is unable (‘ajiz) to do it on its own initiative, without the
Will of Allah the Exalted. In order to perform a miracle, one must be
empowered by Allah the Omnipotent exclusively. With this in mind, let us
now see how the Precious Qur’an Itself proves that It is a miracle:

82nd and 83rd revelations,33 9 years B.H.
-----------------------------------------

Allah the Exalted challenges the enemies of Muhammad (SA), to produce a
book like the Great Qur'an.

***"33 ‑ Or do they say "He fabricated the (message)"? Nay They have no
faith! 34 ‑ Let them then produce a recital like unto it, if they speak
the Truth!" (52:33 & 34)***

118th revelation, 4 years B.H.
------------------------------

Five years later, the challenge is reduced to only ten *Surahs,* instead
of a similar book.

***"Or they may say \`He forged it' say: \`Bring you then ten Surahs
forged, like unto it, and call (to your aid) whomsoever you can, other
than Allah! If you speak the truth!"' (11:13)***

121st revelation in the same year
---------------------------------

He confirms that the entire human race and the jimis cannot produce a
similar book.

***"Say: \`If the whole of mankind and jinns were to gather together to
produce the like of this Qur’an, they could not produce the like
thereof, even if they backed up each other with help and support."' (18:
88)***

131st revelation, 2 years B.H.
------------------------------

The challenge continues:

***"Say: \`Then bring you a book from Allah, which is a better Guide
than either of them (the Tawrah and the Qur’an) that 1 may follow it!
(Do), if you are truthful!"' (28:49)***

160th and 161st revelations, in the 4th year A.H.
-------------------------------------------------

Now, after 13 years of frequent challenge, Allah the Omnipotent confirms
again that people are unable to produce a Book like the Holy Qur'an. He
now further reduces the challenge from ten to only one *Sarah:*

***"37 ‑ This Qur an is not such as can be produced by other than Allah;
On the contrary it is a confirmation of (revelations) that went before
it, and a fuller explanation of the Book ‑wherein there is no doubt‑
from the Lord of the worlds. 38 ‑ Or do they say, \`He forged it'? Say:
\`Bring them a Sarah like unto it, and call (to your aid) any‑one you
can, besides Allah, if you speak the truth."' (10:37 & 38)***

164th and 165th revelations, in the 5th year A.H.
-------------------------------------------------

Again, He confirms the invitation to produce even one *surah* similar to
the Qur'anic *surahs.* For those who claim they can produce a similar
book but in reality have not been able to do so, He clearly reminds them
of the excruciating consequences:

***"23 ‑ And if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed from time
to time to our obedient, then produce a Surah like thereunto; and call
your witnesses or helpers besides Allah if your (doubts) are true. 24 ‑
But if you cannot ‑and certainly you cannot‑ then fear the Fire whose
fuel is men and stones ‑which is prepared for those who reject Faith."
(2:23 & 24)***

Therefore, the contestation continued for fourteen years during the
lifetime of Muhammad (SA), with frequent reminders. Today, after over
fourteen centuries, no one has matched even the smallest *surah* of this
Book. I hope that the above passage illustrates how the Noble Qur'an
Itself proves its miraculous nature (i.e. the inability of humankind to
produce a similar Writing).

Some people have claimed that their writings are Divine or their books
are comparable or even superior to the Glorious Qur'an. There are also
people who believe in these claims without either having assessed these
writings in the original text (excerpts, translations, interpretations
and commentaries are unacceptable for this assessment), or having
realised the perfection and glory of the true *wahy* from the Miraculous
Qur'an. I hope this and the next sections of this book can provide a
basis for the examination of such claims.


