Is there any Parallel to The Miraculous Qur’an?
===============================================

As The Holy Bible is the closest Scripture that people commonly compare
with the Noble Qur'an, and because these two Books are considered as
being of the same importance by some people, it might be appropriate
briefly to compare the two Books to get an idea about their fundamental
differences. This comparison is only superficial. It does not include
any quotations from either one of these Books. It is meant to be a
purely academic exercise, without the slightest prejudice.

First of all, any "book" must have a title, and it shall identify its
author(s) so that people can gain confidence about what they expect to
read, and whose voice the "book" represents. If someone is writing a
book about, say, computers, the word "computer" must appear in that book
at least once! Otherwise, it would be an irrelevant title, and could
confuse people. In the case of the Holy Bible, for example, not only
does the author remain unidentified, but also the title of the book,
Bible, is not even mentioned one single time. To begin with, this lack
of assurance compels the reader to **assume** that this is the word of
Allah the Exalted, or of The Prophet Jesus Christ (PBUH), or of others.

Unlike the Holy Bible, the Glorious Qur'an addresses Its title subject
within the Book frequently. In fact, the word "Qur'an" appears 58 times
in the Holy Qur'an. The count should increase when words other than
"Qur'an" such as "The Book" or "al‑Furqan" (the Criterion ‑to
distinguish between good and bad), *dhikr* (remembrance), *Tanzil*
(gradual descending of *wahy* to humankind), etc., were added. This
indicates how meaningful the title name "Qur'an" is, and how well it
blends with the material explained in it.

Table 1[^1] is a brief comparison of the Holy Bible and the Miraculous
Qur'an. One can easily see that the Holy Bible is composed of 66 books
and missionary letters, "according to" various Prophets, Disciples,
Saints, historians or other religious dignitaries, from memory. None of
them are "according to" the *rasuls* of Almighty Allah, The Prophet
Moses (PBUH) himself, or The Prophet Jesus Christ (PBUH) himself.

The Glorious Qur'an is only one Book, in it, every word of Allah the
Exalted is "according to" the *rasul* of Allah the Exalted, Muhammad
(SA) himself. In the Islamic world, the Scripture that contains the
sayings and traditions of Muhammad (SA), "according to" the Disciples
and religious historians, is called a book of *hadith* (plural,
*ahadith),* not the Qur'an Itself. Most *ahadith* were collected and
published in the 4th Islamic century. Each *hadith* must clearly
identify every individual who related a quotation, as well as the one
who received it. This linkage of information transmittal by prominent
figures must go all the way back to The Prophet (SA) himself. One of the
most important criteria by which a wrong *With* can be distinguished is
the very quality of linkage. A *hadith* is unaccept­able even if only
one of the links of the chain is unrenowned. Therefore, to be perfectly
correct, the Holy Bible should, at best, be compared with the books of
*ahadith,* not with the Great Qur'an.

The New Testament in English is a translation of another translation of
yet another translation. Even the best translator in the world has
"limita­tions", as a human being, when it comes to interpreting a Divine
Book, which originates from a source of "absolute" Knowledge. In the
case of the Noble Qur'an, science, research, time, history, nature and
analytical learn­ing have proved, again and again, that some of the
multifarious words were indeed wrongly translated in the past. Even
simultaneous translations differ from one person to another, sometimes
significantly.

One can envisage how much misrepresentation would have been entered into
the Glorious Qur'an if the original Scripture in the original Arabic
language had been unavailable for reference. The problem is that the
Holy Bible is not avail­able in the original words for reference (an Old
Testament in Hebrew and a New Testament in Aramaic). Consequently, there
is an inherent super­imposed misrepresentation in this Book causing
errors and contradictions. Some 50,000 errors and contradictions in the
Holy Bible have been recorded by the Christians themselves, back in
1957.[^2]

Books of the Old Testament were written years and centuries after the
death of our great prophet Moses (PBUH); similarly, Books of the New
Testament were written many years after the departure of our cherished
prophet Jesus Christ (PBUH). Unlike these two Testaments, the single
Book of the Final Testament (The Glorious Qur'an) was revealed, recited,
fully memorised, written and distributed within the lifetime of The
Prophet Muhammad (SA). This unique feature guarantees the authenticity
and accuracy of this Book. Universally accepted "original" volumes of
the Qur'an exist for reference in the exact original language.
Therefore, this collection of Divine Revelations is well preserved in
its original exactness and purity.

All of these features generate faith and interest in reading the Noble
Qur'an without a shadow of a doubt about its authenticity and
legitimacy. Almighty Allah says that The Qur'an will be saved until the
end.

***"We have, without doubt, sent down the Message and We will assuredly
guard it (against corruption)." (15:9)***

Almighty Allah's pure *wahy* and holy Truth will never be eclipsed even
though the enemies of Islam constantly mock it, and are determined to
abate, disparage, and invalidate It; as they have attempted to do for
over fourteen centuries.

[^1]: Table 1: Comparison of the Holy Bible and the Glorious Qur’an THE
HOLY BIBLE THE OLD TESTAMENT The 5 books of the Torah. The original
Hebrew version is unavailable. It is based on memories and traditions.
The first writings started in the 10th Century B.C. (mostly written in
the 7-8th Century B.C.) the last book was written as late as 516 B.C.
Later it was translated from Hebrew to Greek. This was the basis for
translations into other languages. THE NEW TESTAMENT These 4 Gospels of
Injjil were selected from among over 100 books of Injil in the 4th
century. No original version is available for reference, the last book
(St. John’s) was written in the year A.D. 94. None was written during
the lifetime of Jesus Christ (PBUH). Translated from Aramaic to Greek to
Latin, then to English. The first complete English Bible was compiled in
the fourteenth century (by hand). THE GLORIOUS QUR’AN Only one book, all
of it revealed by Allah the Exalted to Muhammad (SA), over 23 years in
194 revelations. The entire book was completed during the lifetime of
the Holy Prophet. The original Arabic version is available for
reference. Based on material from: A) Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc.
(1974) William Benton, publisher Helen Hemingway Benton, publisher ISBN
0‑85229‑290‑02, and B) The Holy Bible, New International Version
International Bible Society P.O. Box 62970, Colorado Springs, CO
80962‑2970, U.S.A., and C) Qisas‑i Qur'an (stories of the Qur'an) ‑ in
Arabic and Farsi Ninth edition, 1354 S.H.C. (1975) by Sadr ud‑Din
Balaghi Amir Kabir publisher, Tehran, Iran pages 316‑319 and 346‑347

[^2]: Awake! volume XXXVIII, number 17, September 8, 1957, p 25.
Brooklyn, New York, U.S.A.


