A Few Words about Islam
=======================

This is intended to be a very short resume of Islam, based only on a few
*ayat* of the Glorious Qur'an. To begin with let us consider this
*ayah:*

***"So set thy face (purpose, heart) steadily and truly to the din.
Instincts Allah has bestowed upon mankind are in harmony with the nature
He has created it. There is no altering of Allah's creation. By Allah,
that is the right religion (din), but most people know not." (30:
30‑31)***

*Dan* is an instinctive part of humankind. We are all born with it. If a
person does not feel this instinct, it is because of the influence of
the family and/or society that either has disassociated him (or her)
from it or has diverted him (or her) from the inborn natural Divine
religion, *din,* to some kind of man‑made, temporal sect. Without din, a
person wanders around aimlessly and spoils his life in darkness, though
he may be an "intellectual" in the eyes of some people.

The entire creation follows certain rules, conforms with certain
conditions and has a certain goal, all set by Allah the Exalted.
Humankind is no exception. Therefore the question remains: what is the
*dan* (a way of life) that would conform with the rules and conditions
and aims for our lives as set forth by our creator? Humankind had no
choice in its own creation, and is only a "created" being. Therefore, it
cannot depend on itself to search for the right way of life *(din),* as
it does not know all about the entire creation, and all the rules and
laws of the universe. Consequently, its own created creed is compelled
to be inadequate for the guidance of all people at all times.

Allah the Exalted has chosen Islam as the right way of life for all
people and all times (also refer to *ayah 5:3,* on page 29) Islam is in
accord with the creation of mankind, and its instinct and intuition. It
is harmonious with the universal mandate of creation, which is total
submission to the Will of Allah the Exalted.

Consider how the entire creation submits to the rules and conditions set
forth by Him; the entire galaxy, the moon, the earth, the earthquake,
the wind and the hurricane, the rain and the snow, the bees and the
birds, the trees, the vegetables and the flowers, and an endless list of
other beings. They all submit entirely to the set formula which has
proved to be the best for them for millennia. And this is the true
meaning of Islam. We should all learn Islam from Nature. Only the human
beings keep challenging Allah the Exalted, His messengers and His
Message, making life difficult for themselves.

***"Do they seek for other than the din of Allah while all creatures in
the heavens and on earth have, willing or unwilling, submitted to His
Will (embraced Islam)? And to Him shall they all be brought back."
(3:83)***

***"Verily the*** ***din*** ***(religion) before Allah is Islam
(Submission to His Will). And \`people of the book' did not dissent
there from except through envy of each other after knowledge had come to
them. But if they deny the Signs (ayat) of Allah, Allah is certainly
swift in reckoning." (3:19)***

According to Islamic belief, this world is only a farmland. We harvest
what we sow in it. Prosperity and success in the mind of a Muslim are
not con­ceived as worldly affluence and a rich life only. It is to
fulfil the worldly obligations in the way Allah the Exalted has
prescribed to earn His satis­faction for ultimate peace and security of
the soul in the next world. This life is short, the next is forever.
Which one is worth satisfying? This might be significant to observe that
both "this world" and "the next "are mentioned equally, 115 times each,
in the Noble Qur'an.

We said that the entire universe, including humankind, has a purpose.
Let us now see what the Glorious Qur'an says in this connection:

***"And I have not created the jinn and the human except that they
should worship (obey) Me." (51:56)***

Jinnkind and humankind are both free to choose, and it is up to them to
follow the instructions of Allah the Exalted or not. The Munificent
Qur'an teaches us that total submission to the Will of Allah the Exalted
will make our spirit, intellect, and talents flourish towards perfection
of our insight and toward the transformation of our "potential"
abilities into "real" abilities.

This causes great pleasure, and constitutes a "real" success, which is
but the reflection of our serving Allah the Exalted, and obeying Him
like a slave.

If we are not obedient to Allah the Exalted, then we are a slave of our
own wishes, and of satanic agents. The Glorious Qur'an is quite clear on
the fate of such people. Let us examine the following two *ayat:*

***"Have you then not seen him who takes his low (vain) desire for his
god. And Allah has made him go astray having knowledge, and has sealed
his hearing and his heart (understanding), and*** ***put a cover on his
sight. Who can then guide him after Allah (has withdrawn guidance)? Will
you not then be heedful?" (45:23)***

It seems clear that selfish desires can seal Allah's guidance resulting
in ignorance and going astray, no matter how intelligent and successful
one may appear to be. And:

***"Verily, Allah admits those who believe and do righteous deeds to
Gardens beneath which rivers flow. While those who reject Allah (cover
His words and disobey him) enjoy (this world) and eat as cattle eat. And
the Fire is their abode." (47:12)***

Therefore, it appears that the enjoyments of humankind, the most
honour­able part of creation, can become as low as those of animals when
they choose to disobey Allah the Exalted. Choosing, by free will, not to
reject, disobey and challenge Allah the Exalted seems to be the dividing
line between mankind and animals. This total submission to the Will of
Allah is the true meaning of Islam. Humankind adheres to it by free will
while the rest of beings do it automatically.

Having come to this point, we now ask what is the secret formula and the
procedure to achieve this position. The Glorious Qur'an has the answer:

***"... And We have sent down to thee the Book explaining all things, a
Guide, a Mercy and Glad Tidings to those who submit to the Will of Allah
(Muslims)." (16:89)***

This means that the Munificent Qur'an includes and explains everything
humankind needs to know. Or:

***"Nothing have We neglected in the Book " (6:38)***

And:

***"There is no compulsion in religion, the Right way is just made clear
from the wrong (by the Glorious Furqan)..." (2:256)***

Therefore according to the Glorious Qur'an Itself the secret formula to
ultimate bliss can be found in this Book. Everything that humankind
needs to know is in It and nothing is neglected in this Book of
Guidance. Allah the Exalted leaves people free to choose after the Final
Testament, al‑Furqan (the distinguisher between right and wrong), has
been sent down to humankind.

The Glorious Qur'an is the "written" form, and the Life of Muhammad (SA)
and the infallible *Imams* (PBUT all), is the "practical" form of
guidance to the Straight Path for the ultimate and true pleasure,
prosperity, peace and tranquillity *(salam).*


