Selected Phrases about the Qur’an in the Glorious Qur’an
========================================================

***73:1‑6: O thou folded in garments (refers to the holy Prophet). Stand
(to prayer) by night, but not all night. Half of it, or a little less.
Or a little more, and recite the Qur’an in slow, measured rhythmic
tones. Soon shall We send down to thee a weighty Message.***[^1]
***Truly the rising by night is most potent for governing (the soul),
and most suitable for (framing) the word (of prayer and praise).***

***27:6: And most certainly you are made to receive the Qur’an from the
presence of One Who is the Wise and the Knowing.***

***10:15: But when Our Clear Signs are communicated unto them, those who
rest not their hope on their meeting with Us, say: "Bring us a Qur’an
other than this, or change it." Say: "It is not for me, of my own
accord, to change it. I follow naught but what is revealed unto me. If I
were to disobey my Lord, 1 should myself fear the Penalty of a Mighty
Day."***

***28:85: Verily, He Who ordained the Qur’an for thee, will bring thee
back to the Place of Return. Say: "My Lord Knows best who it is that
brings true guidance and who is in manifest error."***

**17:45‑46:** ***When thou dost recite the Qur’an We place between thee
and those who do not believe in the Hereafter, a hidden barrier. And We
put coverings on their hearts (and minds) and a heaviness in their ears
lest they understand It. And when thou commemorate thy Lord ‑ Him alone
‑in the Qur an, they turn their backs in aversion.***

**41:26:** ***And those who disbelieve say: "Do not listen to this
Qur’an and make noise therein, that you may gain the upper hand."***

***12:3: We narrate unto thee the most beautiful of stories by Our
revealing to thee this Qur’an. Before this, thou too were certainly
among those who did not know.***

***18:54: We have explained in detail in this Qur’an, for the benefit of
humankind, every kind of similitude. But humankind is, in most things,
contentious.***

***27:76: Certainly, this Qur’an doth explain to the children of Israel
most of what they differ in.***

***34:31‑33: The disbelievers say: "By no means will we believe in this
Qur’an, nor in (any) that (came) before it." Couldst thou but see when
the unjust (disbelievers) will be made to stand before their Lord,
bandying words one with another. Those who were reckoned weak shall say
to the arrogant ones (those who were proud of themselves and acted as a
chiefs, superpowers, masters, and claimed false sacredness): "Had it not
been for you, we would certainly have been believers."***

***Those who were proud (masters) shall say to those who were deemed
weak: "Did we turn you away from Guidance after it reached you? Nay! You
(yourselves) were guilty."***

***Those reckoned weak shall say to the aggressors (masters): "Nay! It
was a plot by night and by day when you told us to disbelieve in Allah
and to set up equals to Him.". They will declare repentance when they
see the punishment. We shall put yokes on the necks of the disbelievers.
It would only be a requital for their (ill) deeds.***

***47:24: Do they not then earnestly seek to understand the Qur’an? Or
are there locks on their hearts (and minds)?***

***17:9: Verily, this Qur'an doth guide to that which is most upright
(or stable), and gives glad tidings to the Believers who perform deeds
of righteousness, that they shall have a magnificent reward.***

***7:204: And when the Qur'an is recited, then listen to it and remain
silent, that you may receive Mercy.***

***56:77‑80: That this is indeed a Qur’an, most honourable, in a Book
well­guarded, which none shall touch but those who are clean. A
revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.***

I would feel unaccomplished if I did not add a few words about this
passage. It describes the Glorious Qur'an with four characteristics: 1)
It is most honourable, which implies, besides the fact that It is worthy
of receiving honour, that It bestows great favours upon those who
receive It. *2)* It is well‑guarded; precious in Itself, and well
preserved in Its purity. *3)* None but the clean shall touch It. Clean
in body, clean in mind, clean in thought, clean in intention, and clean
in spirit. *4)* It is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds, and is
therefore universal for all.

There is more food for thought. Just open the Book and discover.
Reflection upon Divine Clear Signs *(ayat)* is considered an act of
worship.

[^1]: In my humble judgement, these five ayat are the 38th through 43rd
ayat out of the total 6,256 revealed to The Holy Prophet (only the first
five ayat of surah 96 and a total of 32 ayat in surah 68 were revealed
before). Therefore these ayat relate to the very early stage of wahy and
in my estimate this is probably the first time the word Qur'an is
revealed.


