Glossary
========

*‘Ad: ‘*Ad The community to which The Prophet Hud (PBUH) was sent.

*Ahadith:* See *Hadith.*

*Allah:* Literally Al‑Ilah meaning "The God", the One and Only, the
Compassionate, the Merciful, in His Pure, Unique, Eternal and Absolute
sense, on Whom all depend and to Whom no gods or goddesses are
associated. ***"He begets not, nor is He begotten, And there is not a
single one to equate with Him." (112)***

*Apostle:* See *rasul.*

*ayah:* Clear Sign from Allah, miracle. Shortest unit of the Qur'anic
text.

*ayat:* Plural of *ayah.*

*Diya'*: Light, brilliancy.

*Din:* The way of life as prescribed by Allah. Religion is the closest
word in English, but is not a precise representation. There are many
religions, whereas there is only one din, which started from the time of
The Prophet Adam (PBUH), was gradually completed by many prophets such
as Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus Christ (PBUT all), and Muhammad (SA), and
was finally perfected by Allah, the exalted in the form of Islam. The
word *din* has been mentioned in the Glorious Qur'an about 70 times, but
there is no mention of its plural form, *'adyan.*

*Du’a'*: Supplication.

*Fitnah:* Allurement, seduction, discord, riot, disturbance, civil war,
impiety, unbelief, sin, chastisement, madness.

*al‑Furqan:* The Criterion to distinguish between good and evil (one of
the names of the Glorious Qur'an).

*Furqan:* See *al‑Furqan.*

*Hadith:* A collection of words of Muhammad (SA) as quoted by reliable
sources who reported directly from him, and identification of a series
of reputable dignitaries who heard the quotations from one another
before it was finally documented. A complete reputable linkage is
necessary for an authentic *Hadith.* The plural is *ahadith.*

*Hadrat:* Excellency, Highness, a title used before the name of
Messengers, angels, imams, religious leaders, and pious personalities.

*Hijrah:* The victorious migration of Muhammad (SA) from Makkah to
Madinah, in A.D. 621, which initiates the Islamic calendar.

*Imamah:* Imamate, one of the five Shi’iy principles, the belief in 12
infallible imams, as leaders of Islamic community.

*Injil, the:* The Book of Divine Revelation to The Prophet Jesus Christ
(PBUH) (the source from which the New Testament is produced).

*Islam:* As a concept, in the form of a verbal noun, means "the state of
being submitted (to the will of Allah, the Exalted) at all times". As a
religion, in the form of a proper noun, it is the perfection of *din*
(please see *din)* before Allah. As a word, it has a variety of
meanings, most suitable for the final stage of Allah's *din.* Various
derivatives of its root denote perfection, safety, security and
protection, health and freedom from defect, salvation and preservation,
peace and tranquillity, salutation and greetings, reconciliation, and
most importantly, submission to the will of Allah, and obedience.

*Jinn:* Jinns are made of smokeless fire, men made of clay, and Angels
made of light. As in the case of mankind, there are both believers and
unbelievers, among jinnkind. Their bodies are mare subtle than those of
humans, and cannot be normally seen by mankind. But they are known to
have affected the lives of men in various ways.

*Ka’bah, the:* The Holy focal point representing the Oneness of Allah
and his Islam. There are indications that it was first built by The
Prophet Adam (PBUH). But it is certain that its construction goes back
at least to the time of The Prophet Abraham and his son Ishmael (PBUT).
After the establishment of truth of the Unity of Allah by The Prophet
Abraham (PBUH), people gradually fell into idol worship again for many
gener­ations until the time of Muhammad (SA), when the Kacbah was
cleared of idols, and the worship of One True Allah was re‑established.
Muslims, worldwide, turn to the Kacbah when praying, as a convergence to
the Oneness of Allah and the Unity of His *din.* The Kacbah is also a
focal point for the unity of Muslims when they gather together during
the pilgrimage. The rite of circumambulation around the Kacbah emulates
the circumambulation of angels around the Throne of Allah in the
Heavens.

*Khums:* a tax on surplus wealth.

*Madyan:* Midianites. The Prophet Jethro (PBUH) was missioned by Allah
for guidance of this community.

*Messenger:* See *nabiy* (Divine Prophet) and *rasul* (Divine Apostle).
Messenger is taken to mean either *nabiy* or *rasul.*

*Mishkah:* Niche.

*Mubin:* According to A. Yusuf cAli, the renowned translator of the
Glorious Qur'an, *mubin* means beautifully plain, clear, unambiguous,
self‑evident, not involved in mysteries of origin, history, or meaning,
one which everyone can understand as to the essentials necessary for him
(or her). *Mubin* has all these meanings, but it suggests, besides, some
quality of a shining light, by which we are able to *make* things clear,
to distinguish the true from the false. With this in mind, *perspicuous,
illuminating or enlightening* might be a good representation of *mubin.*

*Nabiy:* A messenger, selected by Allah, who is in communication with
Him and can bring back Divine news and information. He is not
necessarily charged with the mission of *risdlah.* Out of some 124,000
*nabiys* who have helped mankind since its creation, only 313 were
commissioned as *rasuls.*

*Nur:* Visible radiation, capable of causing a visual sensation, light,
lighted (lit), luminous body, reflection or manifestation of the source
(and The Truth).

*Peace:* A by‑product of justice. Peace can only be achieved when
justice prevails using one universal code of justice according to
Almighty Allah, and not various standards according to heads of states.

*Prophet:* See *nabiy.*

*Rasul:* A messenger, selected by Allah, who is charged with certain
Divine mission. He must also be a *nabiy in* order to be able to
communicate with Allah and accomplish his mission.

*Risalah:* The Divine mission for a *rasul,* planned by Allah the
Exalted.

*Shi’iy*: Shiite.

*Siraj:* Lamp, wick, a glowing subject (e.g. glow‑worm), sun. See also
*wahhdj* under which an *ayah* from the Glorious Qur'an includes both
words.

*Surah:* Each of the 114 chapters of the Glorious Qur'an is called one
*surah.*

*Tafsir:* Exegesis, commentary, explanation, interpretation. Please see
Note below.[^1]

*Tawrah, the:* The Book of Divine Revelation to The Prophet Moses (PBUH)
(the source from which the Old Testament is produced).

*Taqwa:* Piety, virtue, the opposite of being the slave of one's selfish
desires.

*Tawhid*: The paramount principle of Islamic unity. It starts with the
Unity or Uniqueness of Allah, the Exalted, [There is no gods) or
goddesses) except Allah], and penetrates globally through every aspect
of life and death, such as the Unity of the universe, religion *(din),*
mankind, race, Divine Plan, and so forth.

*Ta'wil:* Paraphrasing, commenting and expounding by going back to the
root and origin of the subject, interpretation. Please see Note below.
38

*Tafsir:* Exegesis, commentary, explanation, interpretation. Please see
the following note. 38

*Thamud:* Thamud community to which The Prophet Saiih (PBUH) was sent by
Allah for guidance.

*Wahhaj:* Stems from a root that denotes: to blaze fiercely, to kindle
(the fire), to be vehemently hot, to shine, intense heat or glow (of the
sun or fire). ***"And (have We not) built over you the seven firmaments,
and placed (therein) a lamp (the sun) [siraj] that glows intensely
(wahhaj]?" (78:12‑13)***

*Wahy:* The process of Divine revelation to messengers of Allah. For
more information please refer to Chapter II, section A), item 7, "What
is the Mother of the Book" on page 11, and also item 19, "What was the
first revelation..." on page 27.

*Ummah:* The Muslim community, brotherhood.

*Zakariyya:* Father of Yahya, John the Baptist (PBUH).

*Zakat:* a tax on certain produce of the land, mines, etc.

[^1]: There is not a sharp dividing line between ta'wil and tafsir. The
former is prohibited while the latter is encouraged (with certain
rules). The difference between the two is defined differently by
different scholars in the past. The essence of what has been recorded by
various scholars is given as follows, Ta’wil is an intellectual process
while tafsir is a verbal (literal) comment. Ta'wil has to do with the
meanings and tafs it has to do with words. Ta’wil is the discovery of
the core (interior) while tafsir is the findings from the outward
appearance (exterior). Ta'wil belongs to the allegorical ayat
(mutashabihat) whereas tafsir is for the fundamental ayat (muhkamat).
Please refer to ayah III:7 on page 14. An interpretation causing
differences is called ta’wil, otherwise it is called tafsir. Ta’wil has
to do with intellectual penetration whereas tafsir clarifies matter by
telling stories and giving comments. The history of the collection of
the Glorious Qur’an, Sayyid Muhammad Rida Jalali Na'ini (Farsi), 1365
S.H.C. (1986), p 313


