About the Author
================

Bahram Samii was born in the city of Shiraz, in 1939. Upon completion of
his Petroleum Engineering degree from the University of Tehran, he left
Iran to continue his education in the United States of America, in 1962.
He started his career with Standard Oil Company of California (now
Chevron) as soon as he received his Master's degree in Petroleum
Engineering from the University of Tulsa, Oklahoma.

In 1969, he joined the Iranian oil industry, and served in various
engi­neering departments until he joined the rapidly expanding
operations of the North Sea oil industry in Aberdeen, Scotland.
Incidentally, this move was made in mid‑October, 1978, only about four
months before the victory of the Islamic Revolution of Iran. His
employer, Occidental Petroleum Corporation, transferred Bahram from
Scotland to California, in 1983, to join the corporation's headquarters
of its worldwide engineering activities.

His job was the task of facilitating the Director of Europe and Middle
East Petroleum Engineering with economic studies for project ranking and
strategic decision making. 1986 was a critical year for the oil industry
in which many lost their jobs; Bahram was no exception. While many were
sad, Bahram kept saying: "Thank God Who may have planned something
better for me". This refers to the essence of a beautiful Iranian poem,
which says: "If God closes a door out of His Wisdom, He opens another,
out of His Grace."

A significant turning point was forming in Bahram's life. God's will was
to subdue his earthly matters and to compensate for this by arousing his
spiritual life. Initially, he himself, his colleagues, and his lovely
wife tried hard to set up various oil (and non‑oil) related businesses.
But it was obvi­ous to those around him that God had something else in
store for him. A variety of irresistible forces induced him more and
more toward the study of the Glorious Qur'an and the omnipotent Islamic
belief. All glory and thanks belong to God.

The most effective one of these forces were the love of his family and
the occurrence of certain grave events. This created the main driving
force pulling him closer to the spiritual aspect of life, and a desire
to learn about God and His recommended way of life. He found the
Glorious Qur'an the best guide to inspire him. The second important
feature was the charisma of a great man, Hadrat 'Imam Khomeini (R.A.).

Without having met him, and with miles of physical distance between
them, the radiant character of this great leader had a striking impact
on Bahram. Interestingly enough, misinformed Bahram was initially
somewhat suspicious of Ayatullah Khomeini's mission! However, his words
and deeds gradually convinced Bahram about the Great Ayatullah's
spiritual character, strength and wisdom (R.A.).

This generated curiosity to read first, his biography, then, about the
system that built his character (i.e. Islam) and finally the Glorious
Qur'an as the basis and foundation of Islam. The third great force was
the effect of certain spectacular dreams, dramatic visions, and prayer
sessions at the beginning of this drive.

Bahram is devastated by the extent to which the enemies of Islam, from
both within and without, have collectively managed to change the real
pic­ture of Islam, and that of Muslims into an ugly and unbecoming one.
No matter how divided they may be in their own beliefs, they become
united allies when they face Islam.

Bahram is deeply disturbed when he sees that they have managed to
deceive a worldful of people by manipulating and falsifying the rule of
God in order to justify their own illegitimate earthly desires or
practices. He is greatly concerned about the innocent young peo­ple who
could easily fall into their traps under various great‑sounding but
deluding and unpalatable banners.

With this brief background, the motivation for this work ‑ and hopefully
others in future ‑ becomes overwhelming and overpowering. He himself was
the victim of a lengthy period of unawareness, and he hopes to
com­pensate for this setback by raising the sense of awareness of others
of the *Reality,* and in particular, that of the innocent, lovely young
people living under the subduing and often misleading influence of
Western culture.


