Acknowledgements
================

Unending glory to God, The Exalted, Who granted me the primary
inspira­tion and stamina all along to complete this humble work. This
small contribution, if just and correct, is only a drop of appreciation
for His ocean of munificence.

Every individual member of my family was a source of motivation and
stimulation for the production of this modest contribution, possibly
with­out being aware of this influence. This work would never have been
initiated, pursued, or completed had it not been for their love, next to
the reverence and the cause of Almighty God. I felt their inspiration
behind every letter, word and keystroke, all along. May God bless them
with Great reward for their mysterious hidden inducement. They have
gracefully sacrificed the time, attention and other resources that would
have been available to them had I not diverted my attention to this
effort. May God always protect them from all devils and guide them in
the right direction.

I am greatly indebted to Muhsin Jahangiri, professor of philosophy at
the Faculty of Literature and Human Sciences of the University of
Tehran. He generously donated his time, in Oxford, to examine this very
humble contribution in detail from an ideological viewpoint. I am very
grateful for his valuable contribution and encouragement.

I am greatly indebted to the late Charles L. Janssens, retired professor
of French, German and English at various institutions (including the
University of Arizona, San Jose State University, California, and the
University of Houston, Texas) and ex‑Dean of the Faculty of Foreign
Languages and Literature at Jundi Shapur University, Iran.

He has kindly and sincerely donated much of his valuable time to
scrutinize this work from the English‑language point of view. It is
regrettable that Janssens passed away on 27th of November 1995, only a
few months after his lasting contribution in this work. May God bless
him for his sincere assistance.

Last, but definitely not least, I am also greatly indebted to 'Tahereh
Saffarzadeh, popular and prominent poet, whose thought‑provoking message
has reached all corners of the world. This dynamic pious lady studied in
Iran, England and America in contemporary literature with special focus
on major poets, practical literary criticism and translation.

On returning home, she felt mostly concerned about the anti‑traditional
and "westernized intellectuals" who lose their identity and become
disloyal and insincere toward their own countries, nations, and genuine
culture and heritage. Her sincerity toward the oppressed is obvious in
her wide‑ranging work. She has written eight volumes of poems in
addition to other valuable publications. She adores the Glorious Qur'an
incessantly and looks for her poetic expressions in this Noble Book and
the rich Islamic traditions, in a world governed by laic and vulnerable
minds.

Saffarzadeh, the most distin­guished poet of Islamic thoughts, has also
served as a university teacher, and in several reforming and
constructive cultural and educational projects. Currently she is in
charge of reviewing, composing and producing high standard university
books in English, in addition to other activities, including translation
of the Glorious Qur'an into English. She has helped me tremendously to
finalize this book.


