Preface
=======

By John Cooper

The Holy Qur'an, the scripture of the Islamic religion, was first
translated into English by Alexander Ross in 1649, after a French
version by Andre du Ryer. After three and a half centuries, and many
subsequent transla­tions, however, it still remains a closed text to
most English readers.

Many reasons can no doubt be found for the apparent difficulties
encountered in efforts to engage with the Qur'an in English; some of
these will be to do with problems of language, others with more complex
matters of religious, social, and political history and their influence
on a particular translator's motivation and the individual's response to
the Book, as the Qur'an calls itself.

It is rarely a comfort for the reader to be told that there exists a
vast learned literature, composed by Muslim scholars down through the
centuries, devoted to the genre of *tafsir*, or commentary on the
Qur'an; this can be rather more intimidating than comforting. Moreover,
the twentieth century has witnessed a growing literature in English on
the Qur'an, written both by Muslims and non‑Muslims, but which is also
more often than not directed at the scholarly reader, and can leave
someone wishing a simple introduction in a state of frustration.

What is very often needed by a person coming to this scripture for the
first time with a sincere desire to penetrate its meaning is some guide
as to how it influences the ordinary believer, how it exerts its effect
on his or her life, and how it penetrates the deepest layers of a
Muslim's conscience. This work by Bahram Samii marks a significant
effort to give just such an introduction.

The author has avoided an academic style, and has instead concentrated
on a simple exposition of the way in which the Qur'an presents itself in
its own terms and how this can be disclosed through a careful reading of
the text. It cannot, of course, be done without some knowledge of the
Arabic in which the Qur'an was revealed to The Prophet Muhammad (SA)
over four­teen centuries ago, and this terminology has been explained to
a sufficient degree for the non‑expert to understand the sometimes very
different meanings which such a vocabulary has when compared to its
contempo­rary English translations.

Naturally, the meaning of the Qur'anic text has been the subject of the
profoundest meditations and discussions throughout the history of
Islamic scholarship, and the author has incorporated some of this
material, especially through the comments of contemporary Muslim
translators and scholars; but this has been kept to a minimum so as to
avoid overburdening the reader with unnecessary complexities.

Whoever is beginning to read the Qur'an in English will be able to use
this work to understand how the book is not an impenetrable text but a
living guide for the life of the ordinary, thinking Muslim, the key to
the understanding of the Islamic view of the world and how the Muslim
relates to other views of the world in our times.

The author has not, however, made any compromises in order to present
his ideas, and what will strike the reader is the straightforward manner
in which he has managed to com­municate his own deeply committed
reflections on the Qur'an, reflections with which the reader will easily
be able to sympathize. This book will surely serve as an invaluable
companion for those setting out on the stimu­lating journey to discover
the message that the Qur'an extends to everyone who is prepared to
listen to what it has to say.

John Cooper,  
 Cambridge 1997.


