Foreword
========

**In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate**

The Great Qur'an is known to be the most authenticated Book in the
world. It is also the most widely and most frequently read Book, and has
main­tained this worldwide recognition for centuries. As you read
through the book in your hand, you shall discover why the Glorious
Qur'an is so popu­lar. The reading of the Holy Qur’an is considered a
pious duty by Muslims.

They believe that blessings flow even from the sound of its recitation.
There is historical evidence indicating that from the very beginning, it
made a profound impression on those who came to believe in it by hearing
it.

By now, people all over the world have enjoyed this pleasant internal
sensation for centuries, and shall continue doing so for the reasons we
shall read in this book. Many people, men and women, children or adults,
learn the entire Book by heart. Some people read the complete Qur'an
several times during the blessed month of *Ramadan.* Many commit
themselves to read it at least once in this month.

Not everybody, however, is familiar with this Holy Book. In fact, those
who have not had the opportunity to become acquainted with the Noble
Qur'an, may have a completely distorted impression about this unique
Divine Scripture, as it has been subjected to ardent misrepresentation
by powerful media for centuries.

The deeper one goes into the world of Qur'anic knowledge, the more
enjoyable the recitation of this Holy Book becomes. After all it is a
part of our instinctive nature; it is the purest Voice of our Loving
Creator. Its adoration is beautifully inherent in the heart of
humankind. *An Introduction To The Glorious Qur’an* is intended to give
a portrait of the Holy Qur’an in a manner which is easy to follow for
those who have not had the chance to become familiar with this Great
Book.

The grandeur of this Miraculous Scripture has often put beginners off,
but it has also caused scholars to find satisfaction in immersing
themselves deeply in the ocean of the Precious Qur'an. Therefore, some
of their writings can be found to be too deep and, perhaps, tiresome for
the uninitiated.

This book is designed for easy and exciting reading by letting the Great
Qur’an talk about Itself. This is why there is no "reference" section at
the end of this book; it mainly consists of *ayat* [^1] of the Glorious
Qur'an, com­ments by my humble self, and a few authoritative scholars,
as referenced in the text or endnotes.

This writing is meant to take you through a gradual and systematic
understanding of the Miraculous Book. Even those who are familiar with
the Glorious Qur'an may find this treatise stimulating when they obtain
a global overview of this Holy Guidebook for mankind.

The meaning of the Arabic word, *Al‑Qur’an,* is "The Reading, The
Recitation (aloud) and The Collection". The Miraculous Qur’an has
suc­cessfully created a new phase of human thought and has greatly
affected the lives of millions of people the world over.

While the Great Qur'an strictly prohibits the roots of all evils such as
interest (usury), oppression, corruption, adultery, intoxicants,
gambling, etc., it constantly reminds us of Divine mercy and compassion.
The Glorious Qur'an introduces the Hereafter as the ultimate residence
of peace, serenity, security and permanence for those who follow the
path of God, but of Hell‑Fire for those who do not. It leaves us totally
accountable for our deeds in this world: either we end up in the Garden
or in Hell.

The most important feature of the Holy Qur'an is its purity; every word
of it is the word of God the Exalted. It is not a book written by
Muhammad (SA), but as we shall see, the Glorious Qur'an is a collection
of revelations, exactly as revealed to Muhammad (SA). He was specially
chosen to be the "means" through which the words were revealed and
recited. His own words (collected by his disciples and known as
*hadith*(s) or tradition(s)) are distinctly different from the revealed
words of God, as will be dis­cussed later.

The Glorious Qur’an is a distinguished masterpiece of Arabic literature,
unmatched throughout the life of humankind. The Great Book Itself
chal­lenges humankind to match it, and says "you cannot!" It is a great
miracle that the Holy Qur’an has not been successfully challenged for
over 1400 years. In fact God has taken it upon Himself to protect it, as
it is mentioned in this Glorious Book Itself.

God gave miracles to all His prophets and apostles as proofs of their
Divinity: Gone are the apostles, prophets and their‑miracles, except for
the miracle of The Last Prophet, Muhammad (SA). God gave him a
nonperish­ing miracle, one whose hidden wisdom has been gradually
unravelled throughout the past fourteen centuries, and more is yet to be
discovered as knowledge improves. These subjects will be briefly dealt
with in this writing.

This Great Book repeatedly appeals to us to think, reason, and
under­stand why we believe what we believe, and forbids us to believe
blindly without pondering and reasoning. For those who wish to open
their heart and intellect, there is plenty of evidence in the Holy
Qur'an to consolidate their belief. Those who do not want to believe
will refuse to believe no matter how sound the proof may be.

[^1]: Please refer to the Glossary


