Physical Aspects of the Noble Qur'an
====================================

The Precious Qur'an consists of 114 *surahs*[^1] and 6256 *ayat,* some
77,436 words and about 320,211 letters.[^2] These numbers may be
reported differ­ently from scholar to scholar depending on the method of
counting the Arabic words and letters, and sometimes depending on the
division or grouping of certain *ayat.* The entire Book was revealed in
23 years through 194 revelations with the last revelation in the 11th
year after the *Hijrah* (the migration from Makkah to Madinah). On an
average basis, one *ayah,* of about 12 words was revealed per day (but
not, of course, every day in practice).

The longest *surah* in the Noble Qur'an is *surah al‑Baqarah* with 286
*ayat* and in it occurs the longest *ayah* (2:282). The shortest *surah
is surah al‑Kawthar (108)* with only three short *ayat.* A total of 92
*surahs* were revealed in Makkah before Muhammad (SA), migrated to
Madinah (begin­ning of the *Hijri* calendar), and the other 22 *surahs*
were revealed in Madinah.

The first *surah* of the Glorious Qur'an is *al‑Fatihah* (The Opening).
Each *surah is* named after some striking incident or purpose, or after
a key word in that *surah. To* emphasise the deserving importance of the
entire being, and the environment in which the human being lives,
Almighty God has granted many environmental names to the *surahs* of the
Holy Qur'an, such as The Night, The Day, The Spider, The Honeybee, The
Dawn, The Time, The Sun, The Moon, etc.

All the *surahs* of the Holy Qur'an begin with *Bismillahi 'r‑Rahmani
'r‑Raham* (in the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate) to keep
reminding us of His endless Mercy and His all‑encompassing Compassion,
except for *surah at‑Tawbah (9),* meaning Repentance. This may indicate
the degree of God's anger with those who insist on disobeying Him. In
contrast, this key word for the Grace, Blessing and Mercy of God has
been effectively used twice in the Opening *surah (al‑Fatihah).*

For the convenience of those who wish to read all the *surahs* of this
great book over a fixed period, the Glorious Qur'an is divided into 30
equal parts, each called one *juz' (plural, ajza'* meaning parts), or
into seven equal segments, each called a *manzil.* Each *juz'* is
subdivided into two *hizbs* (sections) which are further divided in four
*rubs* (quarters). Therefore, if one reads one *rub* every night, the
entire Qur'an will be read in about eight months. Similarly, if one
wishes to read the complete Qur'an in one week, one must read one
*manzil* a day. Large *surahs* of the Glorious Qur'an are also divided
into *rukuc* according to the meaning of the passage.

The Noble Qur'an has been well preserved in its original form
through­out fourteen centuries in two ways: 1) in writing, and 2) by
memorising and passing the words from the heart of one generation into
that of another. Two copies of the original standard Qur'an still exist
today, one in Istanbul[^3] (Turkey) and one in Tashkent[^4]
(Uzbekistan).

The Glorious Qur'an is considered to be so Holy that Muslims treat it
with enormous respect.

While It is being read:

• You must not speak  
 • You must not eat or drink  
 • You must concentrate quietly.

It is not to be touched unnecessarily. Before reading it or touching it:

• You must wash thoroughly  
 • You must be in the right frame of mind and have good intentions  
 • You must seek refuge in God from satan's wicked intentions  
 • Women should be clear from menstruation.

Upon completion of its recitation one should conclude the session with
certain phrases, at least stating that the Exalted God speaks the Truth,
His Blessings be upon Muhammad (SA) and his kinsfolk. But normally, a
longer prayer is recited.

When not being recited, it should be:

• Placed high up, so that nothing is put on top of it  
 • Kept covered with a light cloth to shield it from dust.

I shall refrain from describing this unique Book of Divine Guidance in
my own humble words and examine how the Great Qur'an Itself defines Its
own aspects.

[^1]: Please refer to the Glossary.

[^2]: "The history of the collection of the Glorious Qur'an", Sayyid
Muhammad Rida Jalali Na'ini (Farsi), 1365 (1986), p 148.

[^3]: Istanbul is a corrupted name for the city of Islambul. The old
Constantinople (during the Byzantine Empire) was re‑named Islambul by
the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II. Islambul is a Turkish expression meaning
"where Muslims are plentiful". Istanbul has no relevant meaning. The
closest expression is a Greek one, Eistanpolin, meaning "toward the
city!"

[^4]: This is known as the Tashkent Qur'an. It is related to the time of
‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, and was kept in Khaji 'Ubeydullah Ahrar mosque in
Samarqand. Later, It was moved to Petersburg museum during the Tzars'
rule in Russia. Late in 1918 It was brought back to Samarqand
ceremonially. This Valuable Qur'an was later moved to Tashkent museum
(reference: Tarikh al‑Mushaf al‑‘Uthmani by Shiykh 'Ismai’l Makhdum).


