The Beginnings
==============

The study of*mantiq* was initially part of the foreign disciplines, and
only in the twelfth century was it was accepted as an essential
preliminary to a Muslim education. The other essential elements were the
Islamic disciplines which prepared a scholar to read the Koran and
Traditions, and to extract from them theological and legal doctrines.
One such discipline was the etiquette of debate in which pragmatic
arrangements stipulated for a debate about legal principles were
extended to serve as rules for any kind of debate at all; it was to be
replaced by dialectic by the fourteenth century. Certain other Islamic
disciplines deal with language-related questions.

Muslim interest in*Mantiq* and philosophy started in the Abbasid
Caliphate (750-1258), approximately two centuries after the advent of
Islam. In the Prophetic and Rashidin era (the early few decades of
Islam)*Mantiq* philosophy were almost unknown for different reasons. It
was the 'nation building' era. The proximity to the Prophet's times and
the fresh understanding of the religion which was not influenced by the
inter-cultural encounters with other nations raised no need for
philosophy. In the Ummayyad era which succeeded the Rashidin Caliphate
philosophy and*Mantiq* were the business of non Muslims of the newly
incorporated countries such as Syria.

According to Ibn Khuldun's theory of associating prosperity of science
with urbanization early Muslims did not show interest in the sciences of
old nations as those Muslims were not urbanized yet. When the Islamic
State was firmly established and became prosperous they turned their
attention to those sciences. The cumulative nature of knowledge and the
emergence of Islamic schools of thought and sects contributed to the
spread of logic and philosophy as tools to be employed by different
groups albeit within the framework of Islam.

The schism which erupted between the intellectual leadership and the
political leadership, and the big schism between Islamic sects (in
particular Shiaites and Sunni Muslims) led each party to draw upon the
Koran and Hadith (Prophet's Tradition), employ exegesis and manipulate
human interpretations in ways that were not known during the time of the
Prophet and the Rashidin Caliphs. This coincided with the intercultural
encounter between Muslims and other nations particularly those which
represented the most important centers of earlier civilizations prior to
be incorporated within the Islamic civilizational orbit. These cultures
were introduced into the controversy.

The Abbasid Caliphate witnessed arousing passion for philosophy among
the ruling elite and Muslim scholars. Philosophy, besides that,
continued as a business for non Muslims. For Muslims it was meant to be
employed in the intra-and-inter religious dialogue and debate.

The above developments ushered in the translation movement which aimed
to introduce those cultures particularly the Greek philosophy into
Arabic. The beginning was with the Syriac decoctions of philosophy then
the Aristotelian texts and commentaries. The translation movement
continued to pick up momentum through the 9th century and by the 830s a
circle of translators were closely coordinated around Al Kindi (d. 870)
who

produced a short overview of the whole Organon and members of his circle
produced an epitome of and commentary on the Categories; an epitome of
On Interpretation; a version of the Sophisticated Fallacies; and
probably an early translation of the Rhetoric. The great Syriac
Christian translators Hunayn ibn Ishâq (d. 873) and his son Ishâq ibn
Hunayn (d. 910) began to produce integral translations of complete works
from the Organon, generally by way of Syriac translations. They
translated the Categories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics and
Posterior Analytics. Ishâq provided revised translations of the Topics
and the Rhetoric.


