Dissention from Aristotelian Legacy
===================================

The Avicennan Tradition of the Twelfth Century
----------------------------------------------

Avicenna (d. 1037) was beginning his career far away in the east, in
Khurasan (Persia). Led by his Intuition, he presented himself as an
autodidact able to assess and repair the Aristotelian tradition. Here is
what he says in the Syllogism of the Cure, written about midway through
his career:

'You should realize that most of what Aristotle's writings have to say
about the modal mixes are tests, and are not genuine opinions - this
will become clear to you in a number of places…' (Avicenna (1964), Qiyâs
204.10-12)

Of all his many works, it is Avicenna's Pointers and Reminders that had
most impact on subsequent generations of logicians. From it we may note
a few broad but typical differences from the Prior Analytics in the
syllogistic. First, the “absolute” (*mutlaqât* , often translated
“assertoric”) propositions have truth-conditions stipulated somewhat
like those stipulated for possibility propositions (so that, for
example, the contradictory of an absolute is not an absolute, absolute
e-propositions do not convert, second-figure syllogisms with absolute
premises are sterile). Secondly, Avicenna begins to explore the logical
properties of propositions of the form every J is B while J. Thirdly,
Avicenna divides syllogistic into connective (*iqtirânî* ) and
repetitive (*istithnâ'î* ) forms, a division which replaces the old one
into categorical and hypothetical (Avicenna (1971) al-Ishârât 309, 314,
374). We may call a logician “Avicennan” if he adopts these doctrines.

Avicennan logicians embarked upon repairing and reformulating Avicenna's
work. Just as Avicenna had declared himself free to rework Aristotle as
Intuition dictated, so too Avicenna's school regarded itself free to
repair the Avicennan system as need arose, whether from internal
inconsistencies, or from intellectual requirements extrinsic to the
system. A major early representative of this trend is ‘Umar ibn Sahlan
as-Sawi (d. 1148) who began, in his Logical Insights for Nasîraddîn, to
rework Avicenna's modal syllogistic. It was to be his students and their
students, however, who would go on to make the final changes to
Avicennan logic that characterized the subject that came to be taught in
the madrasa.

Tûsî and the Neo-Avicennan Response
-----------------------------------

The great Shî‘î scholar Nasiraddîn at-Tûsî (d. 1274) explains why
Avicenna explores it the way he does:

What spurred him to this was that in the assertoric syllogistic
Aristotle and others sometimes used contradictories of absolute
propositions on the assumption that they are absolute; and that was why
so many decided that absolutes did contradict absolutes. When Avicenna
had shown this to be wrong, he wanted to give a way of construing those
examples from Aristotle (Tusi (1971) Sharh al-Isharat 312.5-7).

Revisionist Avicennan Logicians
-------------------------------

By and large, the Revisionists adopt most of Avicenna's distinctions and
stipulations. But - on their preferred reading of the proposition - they
reject, among other inferences. If every J is possibly B, and every B is
necessarily A, it doesn't follow that every J actually becomes B such
that it is necessarily A. Kâtibî does not ampliate the subject term to
the possible (so that it would be understood as every possible B is
necessarily A), nor does he read each proposition as being embedded in a
necessity operator. Rather, he understands the possibility proposition
as follows: there are Js, and whatever is at one time J is possibly B.
This means that Kâtibî and the other Revisionists have a modal
syllogistic that differs significantly from Avicenna's. The way the
Revisionists put this difference is as follows:

Our statement every J is B is used occasionally according to the essence
(*hasab al-haqîqa* ), and its meaning is that everything which, were it
to exist, would be a J among possible individuals would be, in so far as
it were to exist, a B; that is, everything that is an implicand of J is
an implicand of B. And occasionally [it is used] according to actual
existence (*hasab al-khârij* ), and its meaning is that every J actually
(*fî l-khârij* ), whether at the time of the judgment or before it or
after it, is B actually (*fî l-khârij* ).

The distinction between the two considerations is clear. Were there no
squares actually (*fî l-khârij* ) it would be true to say a square is a
figure under the first consideration and not the second; and were there
no figures actually other than squares, it would be correct to say every
figure is a square under the second consideration but not the first
(Kâtibî (1948) Shamsiyya 91.1-4, 96.12-14).

In fact, the Revisionists are prepared to accept the Avicennan
inferences given an essentialist reading of the propositions, but this
is a half-hearted concession never pursued in their treatises. The
question is why, and I conclude this section by speculating as to the
answer.

Both groups, the Avicennan and the Revisionists, want to be able not
only to trace valid inferences, they want also to use the system they
produce for extra-logical purposes. They want arguments that are not
only valid, but also sound, that is, arguments that are not only
formally perfect, but that have true premises. To use the essentialist
reading to say every cow is necessarily four-stomached, as an Avicennan
would, is to claim necessarily, every cow is necessarily four-stomached;
this is much stronger in one important respect than the Revisionist
claim that there are actually cows, and everything that's actually a cow
is necessarily four-stomached.

Ghazâlî and Logic
-----------------

The twelfth century is one of the most complex periods of transformation
in Muslim intellectual history. This period has been called the Golden
Age of Arabic philosophy. The growth of logic in the preceding two
centuries was concordant with the advance of the medical sciences and
consequently it gained support with a wider audience. The century before
had seen the advent of the madrasa as the prime institution of learning
in the Islamic world (Makdisi (1981) 27-32), and Abu Hamid al-Ghazali
(d. 1111) had been appointed to the most prestigious of these new
institutions. Ghazali had successfully introduced logic into the madrasa
which attracted much more gifted logicians (Gutas (2002). al-Ghazali
took up Alfarabi's arguments in support of the utility of logic for
theology and law, especially in his last juridical summa, Distillation
of the Principles of Jurisprudence, a text which soon became a mainstay
of the madrasa.

It is in this period that the major change in the coverage and structure
of Avicennan logic occurred. The late twelfth century also saw Averroes
produce what was effectively the last of the work in the Farabian
tradition of logic, work which was to be translated into Hebrew and
Latin but which was neglected by Arabic logicians. Finally, through the
course of the twelfth century, the modified Avicennan logic that would
be adopted by the logic texts of the madrasa began to emerge.

Ghazali argued that, properly understood, logic was entirely free of
metaphysical presuppositions injurious to the faith. This meant that
logic could be used in forensic reasoning:

We shall make known to you that speculation in juristic matters
(*al-fiqhiyyât* ) is not distinct from speculation in philosophical
matters (*al-‘aqliyyât* ) in terms of its composition, conditions, or
measures, but only in terms of where it takes its premises from (Ghazâlî
(1961) Mi‘yâr 28.2-4).

Ghazali tended to an even stronger position towards the end of his life:
more than being merely harmless, logic was necessary for true knowledge.
However for all his historical importance in the process of introducing
logic into the madrasa, the logic that Ghazâlî defended was too dilute
to be recognizably Farabian or Avicennan.

AI-Ghaziili's position was largely formed by both his philosophical
preparation and his theological convictions. al-Ghazali as a
jurist/theologian was very much interested in the logical questions that
legal discussions could comprise. The attraction that the foreign
sciences held for al-Ghazali was in direct relation to their usefulness
in furthering the cause of theology. AI-Ghazali raised the possibility
that these sciences could be demonstrably true and that they might have
some bearing on religion, i.e., that when the specialized sciences
(mainly logic and physics) offered demonstrations which conflicted with
the literal readings of scripture, the latter must alter their status to
one of metaphor. And because al-Ghazali held the view that God could not
actuate something self-contradictory, literal readings should therefore
be subjected to demonstrable proofs where and when they appear to exist.
For example, when dealing with some of the well established facts of
cosmology such as eclipses he writes: "thus, when one who studies these
demonstrations and ascertains their proofs, deriving thereby information

about the times of the two eclipses, their extent and duration, is told
that this is contrary to religion, he will not suspect this science, but
only religion.

However, al-GhazalI also wanted to maintain that logic and the sciences
were doctrinal1y neutral, particularly where the world of natural
causation was concerned, and especially where they attempted to redefine
the ontological stature of the Qur'an. He states:

"As for logical sciences, none of these relates to religion either by
way of denial or by affirmation. They are no more than the study of the
methods or proof and standards of reasoning, the conditions of the
premises of demonstration and the manner of their ordering, the
conditions of correct definition and the manner of its construction.

In rejecting "the principle of necessary causal connection" which was
"the cornerstone of Aristotelian demonstrative science," al-Ghazal'i
entered into a paradox viz. the logical sciences to which he was
committed. How can logic and science adjudicate scriptures, but remain
doctrinally neutral in its first principles? al-Ghazal'i's intent was
not to indicate that demonstrative logic is philosophically uncommitted.
In stead, his purpose lay in the impossible attempt to prove that its
philosophical commitment is not given to an Aristotelian metaphysic.

Al-Ghazal'i was evidently reacting against what was then the well
established refusal at the time, to integrate useful aspects of formal
logic (i.e., the syllogism) into law. Attempting to avoid a
contradictory position where logic is concerned, al-Ghazal'i maintained
that logic could be disengaged from the heretical metaphysical framework
in which it was imbedded and be used as a tool or method in the realm of
al-fiqh. Whether he did so successfully or not is questionable. The
answer given by al-Ghazali is motivated by theological reasons first and
foremost. It is based on the parent eternal nature of the natural world
implied by emanationist (causal) theories which attempt either to lower
God's eternality to the finite stature of the world, or raise the
finitude of the world to God's eternality, much in the way al-Farabi
attempted to move from "evidence to absence". Both would be
contradictory statements about the sovereign nature of God as stated in
the Qur'an. Instead, al-Ghazali attempts to jettison the metaphysical
aspects of Greek thinking, while harmonizing its logical tools with
Islamic law.

Al-GhazalI's reformulation of the Greeks' tools of reasoning
(qiyas/syllogism) relates primarily to matters of law which denote items
given to "less clear speech" as opposed to "clear speech". These
ambiguous legal aspects might suggest (I) finding a text relevant to the
new case in the Qur'an or HadIth; (2) discerning the essential
similarities or ratio legis between two cases; (3) allowing for
differences lfuruq) and determining that they can be discounted; and (4)
extending or interpreting the ratio legis to cover the new case. But
under the auspicious abilities of qiyas that bore some affinity with a
fortiori forms of reasoning, al-Ghazali endeavored to include analogy,
and argumentum a simile. Al-Ghazal'i demarcates the qiyas from analogy
only on the basis that the former bears certain knowledge, while the
latter renders only probable inference. AI-GhazalI's insistence on
converting analogy to a first figure syllogism, a reformulation of
al-FarabI's

systemization of inductive reasoning, intentionally grounded legal
theory in an Aristotelian framework of knowledge. Here an awareness of
the dubious relationship between analogy and the syllogism (*qiyas* )
uncovers an inconsistency in the metaphysical system that supported it.
We can leave aside the dichotomous application of logic given by al
Ghazali who found it relevant in worldly (legal) affairs, but
troublesome when impinging on established metaphysical norms, or
theology (viz. the circumstances of God's unlimited freedom).

In sum it was Gazali's madrasa that provided the backbone of the
tradition, and a number of jurists came time and again to stress that
the study of logic was so important to religion as to be a fard kifâya,
that is, a religious duty such that it is incumbent on the community to
ensure at least some scholars are able to pursue its study. In Gazali's
words:

As for the logic that is not mixed with philosophy ….  there is no
disagreement concerning the permissibility of engaging in it, and it is
rejected only by he who has no inkling of the rational sciences. Indeed,
it is a fard kifâya because the ability to reply to heretical views in
rational theology (kalâm), which is a fard kifâya, depends on mastering
this science, and that which is necessary for a religious duty is itself
a religious duty.

lbn Taymiyya
------------

lbn Taymiyya is best considered a theologian and a jurist, one who often
leveled polemical accusations at Greek logic. Like al-Ghazali, lbn
Taymiyya was concerned with God's unlimited power and freedom of the
divine will, and so rejected causal theories which would tie God
explicitly to the natural world and qualify his involvement (causality)
with his world. Thus, al1 forms of unitary exposition (universals) were
rejected as conventions (nominal) by lbn Taymiyya.

Ibn Taymiyya's position rested on its own universal premise: that under
no conditions can universals (of any kind) be established outside the
mind of the one who experiences. Doubtless, the exception here is
prophecy. This amounted to a rejection of universals altogether, i.e.,
an anti-realist and nominalist position in metaphysics which claims that
where universals flourish in logical discourse, they do so only
mental1y, and not (in any sense) in reality. Thus, universals can be
established so long as it is understood that they function pragmatically
within the specific needs of a given context, that which still demands a
medium for human communication. Universals cannot obtain either
metaphysically, or theologically, where there is open and full
communication with God. The substance/accident debate collapses in Ibn
Taymiyya's nomimalist schematic. Essence and accident are but arbitrary
and relative demarcations set apart from each other in accordance with
usage. Ibn Taymiyya writes: "Furthermore, there is no doubt that what
the logicians held concerning the theory of definition is of their own
invention...Accordingly, it is necessary for them to distinguish between
what in their opinion is essential and what is not...whereby they deem
one attribute, to the exclusion of the other, to be of the essence.'
There is undoubtedly a strong element of relativism in Ibn Taymiyya's
epistemological thinking, especially as he contends that "people differ
in their faculties of perception in a way that cannot be standardized".

Ibn Taymiyya attacks the most delicate aspects of the syllogism-its
definitions and concepts which support its larger (conceptual)
relations. It is a strategy employed by lbn Taymiyya, simply because in
order for a syllogism to function correctly (demonstrating true, false
or even probable conclusions) an agreement must be reached concerning
the definitional terms (i.e., the universality of its contents). Here,
according to Ibn Taymiyya, philosophers and theologians, whether dealing
with an analogy or a syllogism per se, assume too much in the way of
universal terms that denote extra-mental realities. Ibn Taymiyya states:

"The universal exists only in the mind. If the particulars of a
universal exist in the extra mental world, then this will be conducive
to the knowledge that it is a universal affirmative".

The ideas penned by Ibn Taymiyya evoke Hume who also interrogated both
philosophy and theology on the matter of universals and their
relationship to the external world. In Book 1 (Of the Understanding) of
his A Treatise of Human Nature, Hume reduces the perceptions of the
human mind to what he calls impressions and ideas. Impressions are more
immediate in their presence before the mind and feed our ideas that are
faint and subject to greater discontinuity. Because Hume is considered
an

empiricist, both impressions and ideas are necessarily derived from the
external world. He writes:

"Now since nothing is ever present to the mind but perceptions, and
since all ideas are derived from something antecedently present to the
mind; it follows, that it is impossible for us so much as to conceive or
form an idea of any thing specifically different from ideas and
impressions."

As is the case with Ibn Taymiyya, ideas and impressions are unable to
form universals that can be placed back upon the external world. Hume
writes:

"We can never really advance a step beyond ourselves, nor can conceive
any kind of existence, but those perceptions, which have appeared in
that narrow compass".

The logical conclusion of this position implies that nothing new in the
way of knowledge could ever arise from syllogistics. Where definitions
break down, so too does the idea of advancing new knowledge. Ibn
Taymiyya holds that the links logicians make between concept and
definition is too pronounced. He feels that concepts that belong to this
or that vocational field are nothing more than an arbitrary invention of
the logician. In a rather dogmatic view of conception (which has no need
of formal definitions) Ibn Taimiyyah writes:

... all the communities of scholars, advocates of religious doctrines,
craftsmen, and professionals know the things they need to know, and
verify what they encounter in the sciences and the professions without
speaking of definitions. We do not find any of the leading scholars
discussing these definitions-certainly not the leading scholars of law,
grammar, medicine, arithmetic- nor craftsmen, though they do form
concepts of the terms used in their fields. Therefore, it is known that
there is no need for these definitions in order to form concepts.

By attacking the heart of the syllogism (identity), Ibn Taymiyya is left
with the circular question of just how legitimate rational concepts are
established. He might agree that this presents a problem of sorts, but
it is his dogmatism (or faith) which rescues him from having to deal
with the problem of phenomena more earnestly. His argumentative style
appears to suggest that while definitions are necessary for the
articulation of logical concepts, the necessary definitions of existence
are already established within the Qur'iin and have no need of logical
analysis. Ibn Taimiyyah writes:

He who reads treatises on philology, medicine or other subjects must
know what their authors meant by these names and what they meant by
their composite discourse; so must he who reads books on law, theology,
philosophy, and other subjects. The knowledge of these definitions is
derived from religion, for every word is found in the Book of God, the
exalted, as well as in the Sunnah of His Messenger.
