Domains of Logic
================

The Subject Matter of Logic
---------------------------

Al-Farabi, in his Ihsa' al-'ulum (Enumeration of the Sciences), defines
logic as an instrumental, rule-based science aimed at directing the
intellect towards the truth and safeguarding it from error in its acts
of reasoning. He states:

The subject matters (*mawdû‘ât* ) of logic are the things for which
[logic] provides the rules, namely, intelligibles in so far as they are
signified by expressions, and expressions in so far as they signify
intelligibles.

He defends the need for such a science of reasoning on the grounds that
it is possible for the mind to err in at least some of its acts, for
example, in those in which the intelligibles sought are not innate, but
are rather attained discursively and empirically 'through reflection and
contemplation'. Al-Farabi compares logic to tools such as rulers and
compasses, which are used to ensure exactness when we measure physical
objects subject to the errors of sensation. Like these tools, logical
measures can be employed by their users to verify both their own acts of
reasoning and the arguments of others. Indeed, logic is especially
useful and important to guide the intellect when it is faced with the
need to adjudicate between opposed and conflicting opinions and
authorities.

Al-Farabi's view of logic as a rule-based science which governs the
mind's operations over intelligibles forms the foundation for Ibn Sina's
later refinements. In the opening chapters of his*al-Madkhal*
(Introduction), the first logical book of his encyclopedic
work*al-Shifa'* (Healing), Ibn Sina describes the purpose of logic as
one of enabling the intellect to acquire 'knowledge of the unknown from
the known'. He defends the need for logic by arguing that the innate
capacities of reasoning are insufficient to ensure the attainment of
this purpose, and thus they require the aid of an art. While there may
be some cases in which innate intelligence is sufficient to ensure the
attainment of true knowledge, such cases are haphazard at best; he
compares them to someone who manages to hit a target on occasion without
being a true marksman. The most important and influential innovation
that Ibn Sina introduces into the characterization of logic is his
identification of its subject matter as 'second intentions' or
'secondary concepts', in contrast to 'first intentions'. This
distinction is closely linked in Ibn Sina's philosophy to his important
metaphysical claim that essence or quiddity can be distinguished from
existence, and that existence in turn can be considered in either of its
two modes: existence in concrete, singular things in the external world;
or conceptual existence in one of the soul's sensible or intellectual
faculties.

In*al-Madkhal* , Ibn Sina argues that logic differs from the other
sciences because it considers not conceptual existence as such (this
would be psychology), but rather the accidents or properties that belong
to any quiddity by virtue of its being conceptualized by the mind. These
properties, according to Ibn Sina, include such things as essential and
accidental predication, being a subject or being a predicate, and being
a premise or a syllogism. It is these properties that allow the mind to
connect concepts

together in order to acquire knowledge of the unknown; they provide the
foundation for the rules of reasoning and inference that logic studies.
They are moreover formal properties in the sense that, as properties
belonging to all concepts in virtue of their mental mode of existence,
they are entirely independent of the content of the thought itself; they
are indifferent to the intrinsic natures of the quiddities which they
serve to link together.

In the*Ilahiyyat* (Metaphysics) of al-Shifa', Ibn Sina introduces the
terminology of first and second 'intentions' or concepts in order to
express the relation between the concepts of these quiddities
themselves - which are studied in the theoretical sciences - and the
concepts of the states and accidents of their mental existence which
logic studies: 'As you know, the subject matter of logical science is
second intelligible intentions (al-ma'ani al-ma'qula al-thaniyya) which
are dependent upon the primary intelligible intentions with respect to
some property by which they lead from the known to the unknown'
(Ilahiyyat Book 1, ch. 2,). For example, the second intentions of 'being
a subject' and 'being a predicate' are studied in logic independently of
whatever first intentions function as the subject and predicate terms in
a given proposition, for example, 'human being' and 'rational animal' in
the proposition 'a human being is a rational animal'. The logical second
intentions depend upon the first intentions because the first intentions
are the conceptual building blocks of the new knowledge which second
intentions link together: but logic studies the second intentions in
abstraction from whatever particular first intentions the logical
relations depend upon in any given case.

Secondary Intelligibles
-----------------------

A more careful statement is provided by Avicenna. Concepts like “horse”,
“animal”, “body”, correspond to entities in the real world, entities
which can have various properties. In the realm of the mental, concepts
too can acquire various properties, properties they acquire simply by
virtue of existing and being manipulated by the mind, properties like
being a subject, or a predicate, or a genus. These are the subject
matter of logic, and it seems it is only mental manipulation that gives
rise to these properties:

If we wish to investigate things and gain knowledge of them we must
bring them into Conception (*fî t-tasawwur* ); thus they necessarily
acquire certain states (*ahwâl* ) that come to be in Conception: we must
therefore consider those states which belong to them in Conception,
especially as we seek by thought to arrive at things unknown from those
that are known. Now things can be unknown or known only in relation to a
mind; and it is in Conception that they acquire what they do acquire in
order that we move from what is known to what is unknown regarding them,
without however losing what belongs to them in themselves; we ought,
therefore, to have knowledge of these states and of their quantity and
quality and of how they may be examined in this new circumstance.

These properties that concepts acquire are secondary intelligibles; here
is an exposition of this part of Avicennan doctrine by Râzî:

The subject matter of logic is the secondary intelligibles in so far as
it is possible to pass by means of them from the known (al-ma‘lûmât) to
the unknown (al-majhûlât) not in so far as they are intelligible and
possess

intellectual existence (an existence) which does not depend on matter at
all, or depends on an incorporeal matter).. The explanation of
“secondary intelligibles” is that man Conceives the realities of things
(*haqâ'iq al-ashyâ’* ) in the first place, then qualifies some with
others either restrictively or predicatively (*hukman taqyîdiyyan aw
khabariyyan* ). The quiddity's being qualified in this way is something
that only attaches to the quiddity after it has become known in the
first place, so it is a second-order [consideration] (*fî d-darajati
th-thâniya* ). If these considerations are investigated, not absolutely,
but rather with respect to how it is possible to pass correctly by means
of them from the known to the unknown, that is logic. So its subject
matter is certainly the secondary intelligibles under the consideration
mentioned above (Râzî (1381 A. H.) Mulakhkhas 10.1-10.8).

In identifying the secondary intelligibles, Avicenna is able to place
logic within the hierarchy of the sciences, because it has its own
distinct stretch of being which is its proper subject matter.

So much for the first problem in Alfarabi's formulation of what the
subject matter of logic is; finding it to be secondary intelligibles
preserves the topic-neutrality of logic. Avicenna also has a view on the
second problem, the question of whether or not expression is essential
to a definition of logic and its subject matter.

There is no merit in what some say, that the subject matter of logic is
speculation concerning the expressions insofar as they signify meanings…
And since the subject matter of logic is not in fact distinguished by
these things, and there is no way in which they are its subject matter,
(such people) are only babbling and showing themselves to be stupid.

Conceptions and Assents
-----------------------

Khûnajî argued in the second quarter of the thirteenth century that the
subject matter of logic was Conceptions and Assents:

A thing is knowable in two ways: one of them is for the thing to be
merely Conceived (yutasawwara) so that when the name of the thing is
uttered, its meaning becomes present in the mind without there being
truth or falsity, as when someone says “man” or “do this!” For when you
understand the meaning of what has been said to you, you will have
conceived it. The second is for the Conception to be [accompanied] with
Assent, so that if someone says to you, for example, “every whiteness is
an accident,” you do not only have a Conception of the meaning of this
statement, but [also] Assent to it being so. If, however, you doubt
whether it is so or not, then you have Conceived what is said, for you
cannot doubt what you do not Conceive or understand… but what you have
gained through Conception in this [latter] case is that the form of this
composition and what it is composed of, such as “whiteness” and
“accident,” have been produced in the mind. Assent, however, occurs when
there takes place in the mind a relating of this form to the things
themselves as being in accordance with them; denial is the opposite of
that.

Note that an Assent is not merely the production of a proposition by
tying a subject and predicate together; “Assent, however, occurs when
there takes place in the mind a relating of this form to the things
themselves as being in accordance with them.” All knowledge, according
to Avicenna, is

either Conception or Assent. Conception is produced by definition,
Assent by proof. All Avicennan treatises on logic are structured in
accordance with this doctrine: a first section deals with definition,
which conduces to Conception, a second with proof, which conduces to
Assent.

Later logicians in the line of Fakhraddîn ar-Râzî made Conceptions and
Assents the subject matter of logic. We know that Khûnajî was the first
to do this thanks to a report in the Qistâs al-Afkâr of Shamsaddîn
as-Samarqandî (d. c. 1310). Samarqandî says:

This is the view adopted by the verifying scholars (al-muhaqqiqûn), but
Khûnajî (*sâhib al-kashf* ) and the people who follow him differed from
them and said: Logic may investigate the universal and the particular
and the essential and the accidental and the subject and the predicate;
they are among the questions [of the science]. You [Avicennan logicians]
are taking the subject matter of logic as more general than the
secondary intelligibles so that the secondary intelligibles and
(especially) the secondary intelligibles you have mentioned and what
follows after them may come under it as logic. It would be correct for
you to say that the subject matter of logic is known Conceptions and
Assents (*al-ma‘lûmât at-tasawwuriyya wa-t-tasdîqiyya* ) not in so far
as they are [what they are] but in so far as they conduce to what is
sought (*al-matlûb* ) …

Two logicians who followed Khûnajî on this were Abharî and Kâtibî. Here
is Abharî's statement:

The subject matter of logic, I mean, the thing which the logician
investigates in respect of its concomitants in so far as it is what it
is, are precisely Conceptions and Assents. [This is] because [the
logician] investigates what conduces to Conception and what the means
[to Conception] depends upon (for something to be universal and
particular, essential and accidental, and such like); and he
investigates what conduces to Assent and what the means to Assent
depends upon, whether proximately (like something being a proposition or
the converse of a proposition or the contradictory of a proposition and
such like) or remotely (like something being a predicate or a subject).
These are states which inhere in Conceptions and Assents in so far as
they are what they are. So certainly its subject matter is Conceptions
and Assents (Tûsî (1974b) Ta‘dîl 144.14-20).

Here is part of Tûsî's rejection:

If what he means by Conceptions and Assents is everything on which these
two nouns fall, it is the sciences in their entirety, because knowledge
is divided into these two; whereupon what is understood from [his claim]
is that the subject matter of logic is all the sciences. Yet there is no
doubt that they are not the subject matter of logic…

The truth is that the subject matter for logic is the secondary
intelligibles in so far as reflection on them leads from the known to
the unknown (or to something similar, as do reductive arguments or
persuasive arguments [146] or imaginative arguments and the like). And
if they are characterised by the rider mentioned by the masters of this
craft, Conceptions and Assents are among the set of secondary
intelligibles in just the same way as definition and syllogism and their
parts, like universal and particular and subject and

predicate and proposition and premise and conclusion (Tûsî (1974b)
Ta‘dîl 144.21-u, 145.pu-146.3).

It is hard to know precisely what is being disputed. What we can note at
this stage is that one point at issue has to do with the claim that
Avicenna's identification of secondary intelligibles as logic's subject
matter is inaccurate, and too narrow to achieve what he hopes it can.

Arguments aim to bring about Assent; more precisely, when Conceptions
have been gained that produce in the mind both the meaning of the terms
in a given proposition, and the form of composition of these terms,
Assent “occurs when there takes place in the mind a relating of this
form to the things themselves as being in accordance with them…” In
fact, different kinds of discourse can bring about one or other kind of
Assent, or something enough like Assent to be included in a general
theory of discourse..

Since Avicenna had finished explaining the formal and*quasi* -formal
aspects of syllogistic, he turned to its material aspects. With respect
to these, syllogistic divides into five kinds, because it either conveys
an Assent, or an Influence (ta‘aththur) of another kind (I mean an
Imagining or Wonder). What leads to Assent leads either to an Assent
which is Truth-apt (jâzim) or to one which is not. And what is Truth-apt
is either taken [in the argument] as True (haqq), or is not so taken.
And what is taken as True either is true, or isn't.

That which leads to true truth-apt Assent is Demonstration; untrue
truth-apt Assent is  Sophistry. That which leads to truth-apt Assent not
taken as true or false but rather as (a matter of) Common Consent*(‘umûm
al-i‘tirâf* ) is - if it's like this - Dialectic (*jada* l), otherwise
it's Eristic (*shaghab* ) which is, along with Sophistry (*safsata* ),
under one kind of Fallacy Production (*mughâlata* ). And what leads to
Overwhelming though not Truth-apt Assent is Rhetoric; and to Imagining
rather than Assent, Poetry (Tûsî (1971) Sharh al-Ishârât 460.1-461.12).

Tûsî immediately goes on to lay out grounds for Assent to propositions,
for example, because they are primary, or because they are agreed for
the purposes of discussion. Propositions to be used as premises for
Demonstration make the most irresistible demands for our Assent;
premises for lower kinds of discourse make weaker demands.


