Logic and Language
==================

Al-farabi explains how logic, grammar and language relate to each other:

And this art (of logic) is analogous to the art of grammar, in that the
relation of the art of logic to the intellect and the intelligibles is
like the relation of the art of grammar to language and expressions.
That is, to every rule for expressions which the science of grammar
provides us, there is a corresponding [rule] for intelligibles which the
science of logic provides us (Ihsa' al-'ulum, in Amin 1968: 68).

al-Farabi argues that logic and grammar both have some legitimate
interest in language, but whereas grammatical rules primarily govern the
use of language, logical rules primarily govern the use of
intelligibles.

More precisely, al-Farabi explains that although grammar and logic share
a mutual concern with expressions, grammar provides rules that govern
the correct use of expressions in a given language, but logic provides
rules that govern the use of any language whatsoever in so far as it
signifies intelligibles. Thus, logic will have some of the
characteristics of a universal grammar, attending to the common features
of all languages that reflect their underlying intelligible content.
Some linguistic features will be studied in both logic and grammar, but
logic will study them as they are common, and grammar in so far as they
are idiomatic. On the basis of this comparison with grammar, then,
al-Farabi is able to complete his characterization of the subject matter
of logic as follows: 'The subject-matters of logic are the things for
which logic provides the rules, namely, intelligibles in so far as they
are signified by expressions, and expressions in so far as they signify
intelligibles' (Ihsa' al-'ulum, in Amin 1968: 74).

**Alfarabi adds:**

Logic shares something with grammar in that it provides rules for
expressions, yet it differs in that grammar only provides rules specific
to the expressions of a given community, whereas the science of logic
provides common rules that are general for the expressions of every
community. This is to say - logic is something of a universal grammar
or, more strictly, providing a universal grammar is one of the tasks of
logic.

Avicenna recognizes and attempts to deal with the close nexus between
language and thought:

Were it possible for logic to be learned through pure cogitation, so
that meanings alone would be observed in it, then this would suffice.
And if it were possible for the disputant to disclose what is in his
soul through some other device, then he would dispense entirely with its
expression. But since it is necessary to employ expressions, and
especially as it is not possible for the reasoning faculty to arrange
meanings without imagining the expressions corresponding to them
(reasoning being rather a dialogue with oneself by means of imagined
expressions), it follows that expressions have various modes (ahwâl) on
account of which the modes of the meanings corresponding to them in the
soul vary so as to acquire qualifications (*ahkâm* ) which would not
have existed without the expressions. It is for this reason that the art
of logic must be concerned in part with investigating the modes of
expressions… But there is no value in the doctrine of those who say that
the subject matter of logic is to investigate expressions in so far as

they indicate meanings…but rather the matter should be understood in the
way we described.

Ibn Sina criticized attempts to introduce linguistic concerns into the
subject matter of logic. In al-Madkhal, Ibn Sina labels as 'stupid'
those who say that 'the subject matter of logic is speculation
concerning expressions in so far as they signify meanings (ma'ani)'.
However, Ibn Sina does not deny that the logician is sometimes or even
often required to consider linguistic matters; his objection is to the
inclusion of language as an essential constituent of the subject matter
of logic. The logician is only incidentally concerned with language
because of the constraints of human thought and the practical exigencies
of learning and communication. 'if logic could be learned through pure
thought so that meanings alone could be attended to in it, then it would
dispense entirely with expressions'; but since this is not in fact
possible, 'the art of logic is compelled to have some of its parts come
to consider the states of expressions' (al-Madhkal, in Anawati et al.
1952: 22-3). For Ibn Sina, then, logic is a purely rational art whose
purpose is entirely captured by its goal of leading the mind from the
known to the unknown; only accidentally and secondarily can it be
considered a linguistic art.

As Sabra says, Avicenna seems to hold that “the properties constituting
the subject matter of logic would be inconceivable without the exercise
of a particular function of language” (Sabra (1980) 764).

However, Ibn Sina and al-Farabi were concerned to distinguish logic from
grammar as many Arabic grammarians - whose linguistic theories were
developed to a high degree of complexity and sophistication - were
contemptuous of the philosophers for importing Greek logic, which they
saw as a foreign linguistic tradition, into the Arabic milieu. This
attitude toward Greek logic is epitomized in a famous debate reported to
have taken place in Baghdad in 932 between the grammarian Abu Sa'id
al-Sirafi and Abu Bishr Matta, a Syriac Christian who translated some of
Aristotle's works into Arabic and is purported to have been one of
al-Farabi's teachers. Abû Bishr argued that speakers of Arabic need to
learn Greek logic. For him Logic comes ahead of Grammar:

"The logician has no need of grammar, whereas the grammarian does need
logic. For logic enquires into the meaning, whereas grammar enquires
into the expression. If, therefore, the logician deals with the
expression, it is accidental, and it is likewise accidental if the
grammarian deals with the meaning. Now, the meaning is more exalted than
the expression, and the expression humbler than the meaning".

The extant account of the debate is heavily biased towards al-Sirafi,
who attacks logical formalism and denies the ability of logic to act as
a measure of reasoning over and above the innate capacities of the
intellect itself. His principal claims are that philosophical logic is
nothing but Greek grammar warmed over, that it is inextricably tied to
the idiom of the Greek language and that it has nothing to offer
speakers of another language such as Arabic.

Yahya ibn 'Adi, makes his case for the independence of logic from
grammar based upon the differences between the grammar of a particular
nation and the universal science of logic. He argues that the subject
matter of grammar is mere expressions (*al-alfaz* ), which it studies
from the limited

perspective of their correct articulation and vocalization according to
Arabic conventions. The grammarian is especially concerned with language
as an oral phenomenon; the logician alone is properly concerned with
'expressions in so far as they signify meanings' (*al-alfaz al-dalla
'ala al-ma'ani* ) (Maqala fi tabyin, in Endress 1978: 188). To support
this claim, Yahya points out that changing grammatical inflections do
not affect the basic signification of a word: if in one sentence a word
occurs in the nominative case, with the appropriate vocalization, its
signification remains unchanged when it is used in another sentence in
the accusative case and with a different vocal ending.


