Chapter Xiii
============

The Time of the Imam
--------------------

The time of the Imam, peace be on him, was marked by terrible waves of
racial, popular inclinations, religious creeds, and ideological trends
that had no relationship with Islam and met it in no way. Those
ideological movements conflicted with each other in a conflict that had
neither calmness nor stability, to the extent that that conflicted
included most of the times. The reason for that is that the Islamic
conquest carried the cultures and sciences of the nations to the Arab
and Islamic world. Besides Islam brought a great wave of sciences and
thoughts. In the meantime it urged the Muslims to be free and to be
specialists in all kinds of knowledge. That brought about an ideological
change in the Islamic society. The thoughts appeared in different kinds
of culture the like of which the society did not come to know in the
bygone times. The scientific abilities that burst in that time headed
for the ideological part of life. Accordingly, the Islamic doctrines and
the religious sects were formed. The community was divided into parties
that witnessed great disputes, quarrels, and arguments. So the clubs
were full of bloody fights and violent struggle, especially as it
concerns proving the Creator, His positive and negative attributes,
decree and determination, and the subject matter of the creation of the
Quran. The most prominent group in this field was that of the
theologians. Many books were written on this subject. They are full of
many examples of those disputes and arguments.

Among the most dangerous and heated thoughts at that time was the
atheistic thought propagated by those foreigners who harbored malice
against the Muslims and Islam, for they were disturbed by the spread of
Islam and its authority on the earth. Such people thought that they had
no ability to face Islam through war and force. So they spread their
corrupt beliefs among those weak, young Muslims. They propagated vague
errors and imaginations among the Muslims, to the extent that a group of
those deceived and vainglorious responded to them. As for Imam Musa,
peace be on him, and the great thinkers from among his companions faced
those coming beliefs through criticizing them with strong, scientific
proofs, explaining their corruption and their remoteness from reality.
Their arguments had the nature of loyalty to the truth and taking care
of the interests of the Muslims. Large part of those who had such
beliefs confessed their error and their corrupt trend. So they returned
to the doctrine of the truth and correctness. Because of that, the
movement of Shiism appeared, and the scientific abilities of its leaders
spread. So great part of the Muslims adopted it. This affair disturbed
the responsible, and they resisted it through persecuting and severely
punishing its followers. They prevented them from speaking in the
ideological fields. So Imam Musa, peace be on him, was forced during the
days of al-Mehdi to send a letter to Hisham. He

asked him to refrain from theology due to the dangerous situation, and
Hisham refrained from that until al-Mehdi died.[1]

It is necessary to talk briefly about these subject matters; similarly,
it is necessary to deal with some important events that happened at that
time and to know the policy of the then government. That is because
studying the life of the Imam, peace be on him, depends on having
knowledge of these affairs. Besides they show us great part of the
political and social problems at that time. I (the author) think that a
researcher is in need of having knowledge of such matters.

### Al-Shiubiya

Rwait Ronaldson, an orientalist, maintained that the appearance of the
movement of al- shiubiya, intense conflict between the Arabs and the
rest of other peoples were the most important events happened at the
time of Imam Musa, peace be on him.[2]

This viewpoint is very surface. It indicates that its owner did not
study the Islamic history deeply, that he did not understand the
beginning and development of the events in history. For al- shiubiya was
not born at that time. Rather it began before it for a long time. We
will give proofs of that.

It is necessary to pause to inquire into this important event, which is
the greatest of all the events with which the Islamic world was
afflicted. That is as follows:

#### A. The Definition of al- shiubiya

The linguists have differed over the definition of this word (al-
shiubiya). In the book al-Lisan, al- shiubi is he who degrades the
importance of the Arabs and sees that they have no excellence over other
than them. In the book al-Sihah, al- shiubiya is a sect that does not
prefer the Arabs to non-Arabs. So according to the first definition, al-
shiubi is he who degrades the value and dignity of the Arabs and sees
that they have no excellence over those other than them. According to
the second definition, al- shiubi is he who regards the Arabs and those
other than them as equal. Ibn Abd Rabba maintained this definition in
his al-Aqd al-Ferid, saying: Surely, al- shiubiya are the men of
equality.

The modern writers have differed over defining the meaning of al-
shiubiya. Al-Adawi has maintained that al- shiubiya has been derived
from al- shiub, meaning the return to the past of peoples, vainglory
throughout geographical and historical fanaticism, leaving the Arabs
message aiming at creating new society evaluating man according to his
work and service.[3]

As for al-Duri, he believes that the concept of al- shiubiya is
complicated, that the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Keshi, Rijal, p. 172. [2] 'Aqidat al-Shi'a, p. 163. [3]
Al-Mujjtama' al-'Arabi wa Munahadat al-Shi'ubiya, p. 12.

secret movements that affected Islam, did to demolish the Arabic,
Islamic supreme authority or to demolish Islam or the trends that tried
to destroy Islam from inside are called al- shiubiya.[1]

Kurd Ali sees that al- shiubiya are the people who show fanaticism
toward the Arabs and prefer the non-Arab to them.[2]

This is the meaning of al- shiubiya in the viewpoints of the linguists
and the modern writers. They all have not agreed on a certain definition
for this word.

#### B. Its Beginning

According to the historical inquiry, this destructive movement started
at the time of the Second Caliph (Umar b. al-Khettab), to the extent
that he was the victim of it. That was when he was assassinated by Abu
Lulua as a result of the conspiracy among those forces who harbored
malice against him.

As for the factors of its beginning, they resulted from that the supreme
authority did not treat the Arabs and the non-Arabs equally in rights
and duties. For the Second Caliph gave a religious verdict that none of
the non-Arabs had the right to inherit except those who were born in the
Arab land.[3] He also harassed them through taxes. Moreover, through his
money policy, created classes in Islam. For example, in giving, he
preferred al-Badriyyin[4], and the Emigrants to the Ansar (the
Supporters). This required classifying the people according to the
tribes and their lineage. So the genealogists became active to record
the lineage and classifying the tribes according to their origins. Of
course, this made the non-Arabs hate the Arabs and look for their
defects.

Uthman, the Third Caliph, also followed this policy. He ordered his
governor over Baghdad to prefer the Arabs to non-Arabs.[5] This unjust
policy brought about many difficulties and discords to the Muslims. It
divided their ranks and spread hatred and malice among them.

#### C. Its Development

The movement of al- shiubiya greatly developed during the days of the
Umayyad and the Abbasid governments. This abominable fanatical instincts
took place among the Muslims. The Arabs showed pride toward the rest of
other peoples. They praised their qualities. They said: Surely we have
moral qualities by which we have been distinguished. We are the greatest
of all the people in entertaining guest, relieving the grieved, and
helping the seeker of help. We slaughter for night

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Judhur al-Tarikhiya lil shi'ubiya, p. 11. [2] Al-Islam wa
al-Hidara al-'Arabiya. [3] Al-Muwatta', vol. 2, p. 12. [4] Those who
took part in the Battle of Bedr. [5] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 63.

comer our only she-camel. We have good intuition, proverbs, and
wonderful speech. We are the greatest of the people in memorizing our
lineage. We know our lineage and name our forefathers. Besides Islam
grew among us and spread at our hands. It is we who spread it and
conveyed its message. These are the most important proofs on which the
Arabs depended in their excellence and precedence over those other than
them.

This immoderate fanaticism of the Arabs disturbed the other peoples of
the Islamic Empire. So they went too far in mentioning their qualities
just as the Arabs did. They degraded their importance, mentioned their
bad deeds and their defects such as burying a new-born girl alive for
fear of poverty, and the dependence of their economic life on invasion
and loot. They disparaged them for their arid land and their simple
life. In the mean time, they mentioned the greatness of the Roman
Emperor, the Indian wisdom, the Greece logic and philosophy, the Chinese
industry and arts, the Persian luxury and civilization. They said that
the Arabs were the least of all the peoples in such things. So they have
neither pride nor glory. As for their declamation and boast of Islam, it
is that Islam is not only the religion of the Arabs but also it is the
religion of all people. Islam itself has fought against pre-Islamic
inclinations, buried their thoughts, and destroyed their preferences. It
has regarded all Muslims as equal and fear of Allah as the measure for
supremacy and excellence. Allah, the Most High, says: Surely the most
honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of his
duty)[1].

Many books have been written on mentioning the defects of the Arabs and
disparaging them. In this respect Abu Ubayda Muammar b. al-Muthenna has
written many books of which are: Arab Thieves (Lusus al-Arab), Arab
Bastards (Addiya al-Arab), Good Qualities of the Persians (Fedaail
al-Furs). On this subject matter al-Haythem b. Adi wrote several books
of which are: Big Book of Defects (Kitab al-Methalib al-Kebeer), Book of
Rabias Defects (Kitab Methalib Rabia), Names of the Qurayshi Unchaste
Women in the Pre-Islamic, and the Names of their Children (Asma
Beghaayaa Quraysh fi al-Jahiliya wa Isma men weledna). Ahmed al-Bukhtkan
wrote: Vengeance of Non-Arabs on the Arabs (Intisaaf al-Ejem alaa
al-Arab), Excellence of Non-Arabs over the Arabs and their Pride (Fedl
al-Ejem alaa al-Arab wa Iftikhariha).[2] Spites became public among the
Muslims and discords spread among them at that time.

The Persian poets boasted themselves on the Arabs and went too far in
degrading their dignity. Abu Nuas, a Persian poet on the side of his
mother, satirized the Arabs, saying:

The wretched one stopped at the ruins to ask them; and I stopped to ask
about the wine shop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, 49, 13. [2] Ibn al-Nedeem, Fihrast, p. 123.

He wept over those bygone from among Asad. May your wealth be not much!
Say: Who are the Banu Asad?

Who are Temeem? Who are Qays and the like? The Arabs are nothing with
Allah!

Abu Nuas talked again in his poetry about one of the Arabs qualities. He
said that vainglory and dissension were famous among the members of
their tribes. He also said that when two Arabs from two different tribes
sat together, they quarreled and vied in glory with one another. So each
of them boasted himself on his tribe and his family, whilst the Persians
did not have such qualities. He says:

I drank with them (the Arabs) to get used to their morals. As for
drinking wine with the Persians, it was normal and decided.

They revere each other and intone when they speak. Their hidden (words)
are understandable.

The free of Persia have the most precious selves; and their pride is not
available during their association.

When I drink with an Arab group, Temeem begin mentioning their
vainglory. They prepare their bows for Qays. Tameem are captured; and
their gathering is defeated.

I do not guard against the evil of children of the non-Arabs. For the
way of their drinking wine is good.

They do not show haughtiness toward a drinking companion when they
become drunk. They greet the Arabs when they aggress against them.

When I sit among them, they show humbleness and respect toward me.

That brought about the spread of disagreement between the Arabs and the
rest of the people and the fanaticism of each party for his people. On
top of those racists who continually satirized the Arabs was Bashshar b.
Burd. He always disparaged them and degraded their position. A desert
man came in to Majjzaa b. Thour al-Sudusi in Basrah. Bashshar was
present at his gathering and wearing the uniform of poets. The Bedouin
asked Bashshar, asking:

-What are you?

-A poet.

-Are you an Arab or non-Arab?

-There is no relationship between non-Arab and poetry!

So Bashshar became angry. He kept silent for a while. Then he turned to
Majjzaa and said to him: Abu Thour, may I say something?

Say whatever you whish, Abu Maadh, replied Abu Thour.

O my friend, I do not over look compulsion, nor do I disdain a non-Arab
and a

neighbor.

I will tell the one who boasts of the Arabs about me and about him when
he has made pride known.

At the time when you were clothed in silk after nakedness and sat with
the generous a round the wine.

O one whose parents are shepherds, do you vie in glory with the sons of
the free; sufficient unto you is a loss!

When you were thirsty for pure water, you made the dog take part in
licking the rim.

You want to break the non-Arabs through an oration, and the hunting of a
mouse makes you forget noble deeds.

You wear old clothes and graze the sheep in the desert.[1]

The movement of al- shiubiya reached zenith during the days of al-Mehdi
and of Harun. That was because of the influence and control of the
Beramika over the government.

Anyway, this inclination created an enmity among the Muslims and divided
their ranks. The Arab and non-Arab poets and writers satirized and
cursed each other. Al-Khuzaymi says:

O Abu al-Seghd, when a camel lends me its glory, then that is a harm.
And of my neighbors morals is ignorance.

O Camel, if you show vainglory or adorn yourself, then the religion and
reason is far above pride.

I think that people are equal in life; and I think that no grave has
exaltedness and excellence over another.

That Yehabir did not bear me, Jerm and Aqel did not include me did not
harm me.

If you do not protect the old with a new glory, then that which was
before does not avail you.[2]

Indeed talking about al- shiubiya is painful. For this quality and other
corrupt qualities lead to the division of the Muslim, the split of their
unity, the spread of enmity and hatred among them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ahmed Hasanayn, Bashshar b. Burd Shi'rahu wa Akhbarahu, p. 56. [2]
Duha al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 66.

### The Attitude of Islam toward it

The attitude of Islam is distinguished by strictness toward all corrupt
qualities that split the unity of the Muslims and spread disagreement
among them. Since the appearance of its light, Islam has declared that
the Muslims are one hand, the link of the religion is stronger than that
of lineage. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, condemned
all racial, fanatical instincts. A hypocrite sneered at the adhan of
Bilal, for he was unable to pronounce the letter sheen, and he
pronounced it seen. He would say: Ashed anna la ilaha illa Allah. Bilal
wen to Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and told him
about the sneering of the people at him. Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, became displeased and said:

Indeed the seen of Bilal is sheen with Allah.

Condemning the hypocrites, he, may Allah bless him and his family, said:
Indeed the seen of Bilal is better than your sheen.

While the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was sitting with
Selman al-Farisi, Bilal al-Hebeshi, Suhayb al-Rumi, and other weak
believers, al-Eqre b. Habis al-Temimi, Uyayna b. Husayn al-Ferazi, and
other Arab chiefs came and said to him:

O Allahs Apostle, put these (people) aside, that we may be alone with
you. The Arabs delegates come to you, and feel shame when they see us
sitting with these (people). When we go away, then you sit with them.

So Allah, the Most High, revealed to his Prophet this verse: And do not
drive away those who call upon their Lord in the morning and the
evening, they desire only his favor; neither are you answerable for any
reckoning of theirs, nor are they answerable for any reckoning of yours,
so that you should drive them away and thus be of the unjust.[1]

Accordingly, Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
approached them, talked with them, and paid no attention to the words of
those hypocrites.[2]

One of those whose hearts reconciled boasted himself on his lineage and
mentioned the days of his father during the pre-Islamic period before
Selman al-Farisi. He repeated that on some other occasions, so Selman
rose and told the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, about
that. Thus he, may Allah bless him and his family, went to his mosque in
terror. He was sorrowful and astonished, so he declared before the
people his famous words: Selman is (one) of us, Ahl al-Bayt!

He also said: It is forbidden for Selman to take alms!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, Surat al-An'am, verse 52. [2] Majjma' al-Bayyan, vol. 7, p.
305.

He, may Allah bless him and his family, condemned all kinds of division
among the Muslims. He, may Allah bless him and his family, said: No Arab
has an excellence over a non-Arab except through fear of Allah! Allah
says in His Holy Book: O you men! Surely We have created you of a male
and a female, and made you tribes and families that you may know each
other; surely the most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you
most careful (of his duty); surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.

This brilliant policy was followed by Imam Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, the testamentary of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, and gate of the city of his knowledge. When he
took the reins of government, he regarded all the Muslims as equal in
giving and the like. He treated them with one treatment. He did not make
any distinction among them. He regarded them as equal in position. He,
peace be on him, has declared that in his world document in which he has
shown human rights. He, peace be on him, said to Malik: People are two
kinds: They are either your brother in the religion or your like in
creation. A Qarashi lady came to him and asked him to increase her
salary. She saw an old woman sitting by the gate of the mosque. She
asked her about her salary, and she answered that she received it from
the public treasury. She came to know that she received an amount equal
to that the old woman did. So she became displeased, caught the old
woman, and shouted: Is it an act of justice and fairness that Ali gives
me an amount equal to that of this Persian (old woman). She entered the
mosque while she was repeating that at the top of her voice. When she
reached the Commander of the faithful, she rudely said to him: Why do
you give me an amount equal to that of this salve woman?

The Imam looked at her. Then he took a handful of earth. He turned the
handful of earth with his hand and said: Some of this earth is not
better than some of it.

Then he recited these words of Him, the Exalted: O you men! Surely We
have created you of a male and a female, and made you tribes and
families that you may know each other; surely the most honorable of you
with Allah is the one among you most careful (of his duty); surely Allah
is Knowing, Aware.

This policy exited the Arabs spites and Qurashs grudge against him. So a
companion of his asked him to change his policy, saying: O Commander of
the faithful, give these properties. Prefer these noble from among the
Arabs and Quraysh to non-Arabs.

These cheap words hurt the Imam, and he said: Do you order me to seek
victory through oppression?

Ali b. Abi Talib, the pioneer of justice and equality on earth, refused
to prefer the Arabs to non-Arabs and regarded that as tyranny and
aggression against the Muslims rights.

This policy made the unjust forces to unite in a bloc and to cooperate
with each

other to war against him. In this respect al-Medaini has said: Indeed
among the reasons for that the Arabs deserted Ali b. Abi Talib was his
following the principle of equality among the people. For he did not
prefer the noble to those less noble, nor did he prefer an Arab to a
non-Arab, nor did he flatter the heads and the tribes.[1]

This brilliant policy was an extension to the message of the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, and following to his method.

The Arabs and the non-Arabs witnessed this bright justice Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, followed. So they followed
it and adopted it as a unique model. They asked the Muslim rulers to
follow it and to put its program into effect. Accordingly, they met
different kinds of exhaustion and severe punishments from the tyrannical
rulers who ruled the community with an abominable policy void of justice
and truth.

### Ahmed Amins Fabrications

Ahmed Amin is among those who harbored malice against the Shiites. For
he said: Indeed Shiism was the shelter and curtain of al-shiubiya.[2]

A handful of earth is on Ahmed Amin and on those other than him from
among those who write for neither the truth nor for history nor for the
interests of the community. Rather they write according to certain
objectives to whom the colonists dictate, that they may divide the ranks
of the Muslims, to possess alone their wealth, and put them in the
places of their influence.

Indeed the Shiites take their teachings from the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt,
who resisted all the destructive movements, took toward al-Shiubiya and
the like a decisive attitude marked by strictness and hardness. Imam
Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, ordered the racists
to be killed with the sword because they intended to split the unity of
the Muslims.

Can Ahmed Amin and the like of him from among those who believe in his
beliefs give proof of that the Shiism was the shelter of al-Shiubiya and
other than it from among the destructive instincts?

With pride the Shiites have hoisted the flag of Islamic justice and
lightened the Islamic history through their heroic, brilliant struggle.
Were it not for their great sacrifices and their noble attitude toward
the tyrannical and the oppressive, Islam would have neither name nor
trace. Therefore, they are the shelter of Islam, the truth, and justice.
They are the shelter of every social movement aiming at establishing
justice and putting an end to oppression.

Anyway, al-Shiubiya and the rest of the slogans disagree with the Shiite
reality

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 1, p. 180. [2] Duha
al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 63.

taken from the core and essence of Islam. Certainly these accusations
fastened to the Shiites have no purpose except creating a gap among the
ranks of the Muslims to abase them, to undermine them, and to send them
far from their true religion seeking for them exaltedness, dignity, and
independence.

Surely the Muslims are in a dire need of unifying their words and ranks,
getting rid of discords and fanatical instincts. That is because before
them is the Imperialistic America and its ally, Israel, that schemes
against the Arabs and the Muslims in broad daylight and at dark night,
spares no effort to war against Islam, to usurp Arab homeland, to
dismiss its inhabitants, and to establish a country for the Jews.
Unfortunately, the Muslims are heedless of the great danger and the
affliction surrounding them.

America and the western countries support Israel with all kinds of fatal
weapons, supply it with the whole economic and military helps, that they
may destroy the Arabs, control their oil and their minerals.

Therefore, it is incumbent on every writer to enlighten the Muslims and
to warn them against this dangerous affliction.

Anyhow, we are wide of the subject, but the painful circumstances, the
misfortunes and disasters from which the community suffer have urged us
to exceed this subject matter. After this let us return to deal with
some problems took place at the time of the Imam, peace be on him. They
are as follows:

### Atheism and Hypocrisy

The atheistic movement appeared at the Abbasid first time. The devious
principles aiming at chaos and mischief spread during it. Some simple
people the propagation colored whatever it wished adopted it. They
followed them with out awareness and guidance. However the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt along with their great students from among the Muslims thinkers
resisted that ideological invasion, falsified the coming thoughts,
refuted the vague errors of the atheists, and saved the Muslims from
them.

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, spared no effort to save the Islamic
country from the unbelievers and mischief-makers. His son Imam Musa,
peace be on him, helped him in this holy field of jihad. A group of
their students-who armed themselves with rational programs, famous for
strong explanation, good opinion, sharp insight, and firm
argument-cooperated with them. They held gatherings and debates in the
public places, in the houses of the ministers and the kings. They
debated with the atheists on theological matters. Through strong proofs
they proved that those beliefs were false, to the extent that some
leading atheists withdrew from their creeds and followed the way of the
truth and correctness. In the meantime the local governments persecuted
and severely punished the atheists. Unfortunately, they punished the
innocent more than the hypocrites. They used the accusation of atheism
as means for throwing the innocent into prisons. It is necessary to
speak

briefly about this important subject matter, which is the most important
of the events to take place at the Abbasid time.

#### The Beginning of Atheism

Atheism is a psychological aspect. It is the most dangerous of all the
social diseases and the greatest of them in destroying mans civilization
and progress. It urges men to deny the Great Creator, to deny the Day of
Resurrection, to accuse the Apostles of lying, and to believe that man
is not under the domination of another power, that he manages and
creates all his life affairs.

This disease results from a violent excitement that separates the
vigilant feeling from the thought and the faith in Allah. It results
from either the desires of the soul or from the disease of deprivation
clinging to it.[1]

When man is infected by this dangerous disease, the psychological
deterrents that prevent him from committing sin and abominable deeds
completely collapse, his soul is void of all good instincts, and he
follows dark trends. In this respect the Holy Quran says: And (as to)
those who disbelieve, their guardians are Shaitans who take them out of
the light into the darkness.[2]

When soul goes too far in committing sin, it rushes into the fields of
vices and it is not prevented from that by any law in the world. For
this reason social education is necessary, for it takes care of
purifying conscience, directs man to the righteous way, plants in soul
all good instincts that urge him to believe in Allah and the Day of
Resurrection and prevents him from committing crimes and offences.

As such education is not available, a flood of problems faces man in the
fields of behavior and morals, social links and other humane values
disappear.

Anyway, atheism and all evil instincts subject man to danger and are a
sign of destruction that includes all life elements.

#### Kinds of Atheism

There are various kinds of atheism such as denying the Creator, the Most
High, denying His positive or negative attributes, disbelief in the
Prophets and the Messengers, and denying the Day of Resurrection. The
title including them all is denying one of the requirements of the
religion.

The most dangerous of all kinds of atheism is denying Allah, the
Exalted. This is the western atheism as Nietzsche says: Allah has
died![3] The Marxist ideology stands on it. I (the author) have
explained it in one of my books.[4] As for the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Haqiqat al-Nafs wa Amradiha. [2] Qur'an, 1, 57. [3] Tarikh al-Ilhad
fi al-Islam. [4] I (the author) have objectively mentioned that in my
books al-'Amal wa Huquq al-'Amil fi al-Islam, Nizam al-Hukum wa al-Idara
fi al-Islam.

atheism in the early Islamic times, it resulted from doubts about one of
His attributes and denying Islam. We will explain that.

### At the Umayyad Time

The marks of atheism appeared at the Umayyad time. For one of the
Umayyad kings declared the word of atheism and apostasy from the
religion. An example of that is Yazid b. Muawiya. When he killed the
grandson of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, his
plant of sweet basil, master of the youth of the Garden, Imam al-Husayn,
peace be on him, he recited the poetry line of Ibn al-Zubra:

Hashim played with the dominion, so no news came, nor was a revelation
revealed!

He inherited this atheistic instinct from his grandfather, who said
before Uthman b. Affan: Catch it (the office of the Caliphate) just as
the boys catch the ball with their own hands. By him by whom Abu Sufyan
swears, there is neither garden nor fire! However, Uthman did not blame
him, nor did he punish him.

Most their kings had such a belief. Fore example, when al-Waleed opened
the Holy Book of Allah and read the verse any every insolent oppressor
was disappointed, he became angry, placed the Holy Book as a target, and
threw arrows at it, and said:

You threaten me with an insolent oppressor, and I am an insolent
oppressor!

When you come to your Lord on the Day of Resurrection, say: O My Lord,
al-Waleed torn me up!

This clearly indicates his atheism and his apostasy from the religion.
Most Umayyad kings had such an atheistic instinct. They appointed some
atheists to educate their children. Abd al-Semed, the educator of
al-Waleed, was an atheist.[1] Merwan b. al-Jud, the educator of the last
Umayyad king, Merwan b. Muhammed, was an atheist. Ibn al-Nedeem says:
Surely, Ibn al-Jud made Merwan and his children atheists.[2] Al-Duri
said that Ibn al-Jud was on top of those who propagated the Manawiya at
his time.[3] The most prominent atheist at the Umayyad time are Younis
b. Abi Qurrah, Ammarah b. Hems, al-Mutiee b. Ayas, those who lived
through the Umayyad and the Abbasid governments, and who were called the
three Hammads, namely, Hammad Ajrad, Hammad al-Zubrqan, and Hammad
al-Rawiya.[4]

Indeed the roots of the atheistic thought were formed during the Umayyad
time that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Abu al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani. [2] Ibn al-Nadeem, al-Fihrast,
p. 472. [3] Al-Judhur al-Tarikhiya lil Shi'ubiya, p. 26. [4] Al-Amali,
vol. 1, p. 134.

was the source of all the destructive movements.

#### D. At the Abbasid Time

During the first Abbasid Age the summons to atheism clearly appeared,
and all the destructive doctrines became active. Felhauzen maintains
that there was a close relationship between the summons to the Abbasids
and atheism. He says: The then Abbasids gathered the atheists around
them and did not neglect them but after that.[1] The summons to the
Manawiya, the Mezdakiya, the Khuramiya, and the Zeradishtiya started.
The Khuramiya carried the banner of the armed revolt and the summons to
it spread in Persia. It summoned (the people) to the communism of
Mezdek.[2] We will deal with some of these doctrines as follows:

### The Manawiya (Manism)

Manis thought was the greatest of the atheistic doctrines in spreading
at that time. It was an old and was established by Mani, son of Fatiq,
the Persian wise man. He was born in the year 215 or 216 A. D. He
appeared at the time of Shahpoor. He was killed by Behram. He maintained
the prophethood of al-Mesih (Jesus Christ) and denied that of Musa
(Moses). He claimed that the world was made and composed of two old
origins: light and darkness, and that they were eternal. He dined all
things except those resulted from an old origin.[3]

Manism maintained the transmigration of souls depending on what Mani
mentioned in a book of his where he said: The souls that leave bodies
are of two kinds: the souls of the truthful and those of the devious.
When the souls of the truthful leaves bodies, they go during the morning
light to the light that is above the orbit and stay in that world with
everlasting delight. When the souls of the devious leave bodies and want
to join the most high light, they come back down and transmigrate with
the souls of the animals until they become free from the defects of
darkness, and then they join the most high light.[4]

Mani imposed on his followers one tenth in all the affairs, supplicating
the Truth, leaving lying, murder, theft, fornication, magic, worshiping
idols, and killing living things. He regarded the existence of man as a
crime committed by his parents. He thought that man must cease to exist.
Besides he thought that mans good deeds resulted from the god of good
and his evil deeds resulted from the god of evil. His thoughts were
described by Abu Nuas when he satirized Aban, a leading member of this
thought, saying:

One day I sat with Aban. May Abans good be not much.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Duwal al-'Arabiya, p. 489. [2] Al-Judhur al-Tarikhiya lil
Shi'ubiya, p. 41. [3] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 224. [4] Al-Ferq
bayna al-Firaq, p. 271.

We were present in the tent of the Emir at al-Nehrwan.

When the first (morning) prayer approached the adhan, he rose, showed
fluency and eloquence.

We said whatever he said until the adhan came to an end.

He said: How did you bear witness for that while you were not
eye-witnesses?

I will not bear witness forever until I be an eye-witness.

I said: Glory belongs to my Lord! And he said: Glory belongs to Mani!

I said: Isa is the Apostle of Allah! And he said: From Satan!

I said: Musa is the one who secretly addressed the Guardian, the
Benefactor (Allah)! And he said: Therefore, your Lord has an eye and a
tongue!

Did his soul create him? Or who (did create him)?

So I left my place because of an atheist who adorned himself through
disbelieving in the Most Merciful (Allah).[1]

The Manism spread atheistic movement at the Abbasid time. Ibn al-Muqaffa
was among their prominent figures. He translated from Persian into
Arabic Manis, Ibn Daysans, and Merqiyuns books.[2] He also wrote a book
in which he propagated Manism and attacked the Islamic principles. He
began the book in the name of the Light, the Most Merciful, the
Merciful. Al-Mehdi said: All the books on atheism belong to Ibn
al-Muqaffa.[3] He passed by a Persians fire house and recited the
following poetry line:

O Atiqas house, I praise you out of fear of the enemies and the heart is
entrusted to you.

Surely I grant you alienation. I swear by you that I incline to
alienation.[4]

It was said that he did not respect the Quran and tried to oppose it.[5]
Ferinshiko Gabriel doubted about the ascription of that to him.[6] He
claimed that he was killed not because of that he was accused of
atheism, rather it was because of his demanding security from al-Mansur
to Abd Allah b. Ali. So he harassed al-Mansur, and he ordered him to be
killed.[7]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] 'Abd al-Rahman Sidqi, Abu Nu'as Qisat Hayatihi, p. 63. [2] Abu
al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 12, p. 87. [3] Mu'jam al-Udaba',
P. 15. Al-Amali, vol. 1, pp. 93-94. [4] Al-Amali, vol. 1, p. 94. [5]
Tarikh al-Ilhad fi al-Islam, p. 43. [6] Majallat al-Dirasat al-Sharqiya,
vol. 13, p. 1932. [7] Jahshyari, p. 110.

Anyway, Manism was the greatest of all the principles in attacking the
Muslims at that time.

#### The Mezdakiya (Mezdekism)

Mezdikism was among the principles that spread during the Abbasid Age I.

It was a kind of communism and urged the people to free themselves from
all the social values. Al-Sheristani has mentioned some of Mezdiks
principles, saying: He made the people take part in it just as they take
part in water, fire, and grass.[1] Al-Teberi has said: Mezdek and his
companions said: Surely Allah has placed livelihoods on the earth, that
people may divide it among themselves equally. However, people have
wronged each other in respect with them. They claimed that they took
from the rich to the poor, regain from the wealthy to the needy, that
whoever has additional money, women, and possessions, then he is not
more appropriate than those other than him. So the lowly violated that
and took it as booty.[2]

Those who had malice against the Islamic values adopted these principles
and spread them among the Muslims. Some people embraced them to satisfy
their low desires and their dissoluteness. As a result immorality and
abominable deeds spread among the people. We will mention that.

### The Zeradishtiya

The Zeradishtiya was among the principles that appeared at the Abbasid
time. It maintains two gods: the god of good, and the god of evil.
Al-Kherbutli talked about some of their principles, saying: The essence
of Zarathushtras principles is that there are many, various events in
the world: Some of them are good, and some of them are evil; these
events do not create themselves; rather they stand on an origin.
Zarathushtra thinks that it is impossible to ascribe good and evil to
one origin. For this reason it was necessary for him to explain the
world of faith through the existence of two different, contradictory
forces. One force is pure and sacred, from which result life and natural
elements. The other force is wicked and dirty from which issue blights,
perishing, destruction, evil and affliction that befall man. The first
force is called Ihriman, meaning the god of evil or Satan. The other is
called Mezad that means the god of good and light.[3]

Zarathushtra thinks that life does not perish, that it is happy or
unhappy through the pleasures in life, and that its ordeal is three days
after death. Then the wind carries it until it reaches the straight path
(sirat). It is judged there fore three days. The good souls go to the
Garden, and the evil ones are driven to the fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 229. [2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 2,
p. 88. [3] Al-Majus wa al-Majusiya, p. 149.

The Zeradishtiya spread during the Abbasid Time 1. It was adopted by
some simple, deceived persons. It spared no effort to war against the
Islamic values, to untie the social links, and to make the Muslims
abandon morals and the Islamic manners.

Anyway, these principles, which spread during the Abbasid time, clearly
show us that there was ideological emptiness, shallow thinking, that
ignorance prevailed, that the Muslims had no knowledge of the reality of
their religion, which urged them to be mentally aware and be free from
all kinds of ignorance and inactivity.

Heresies and vague errors appeared at that time in astonishing and
strange way. Al-Rawendiya, who claimed that al-Mansur al-Dewaniqi was
their lord who feed and watered them, took place at that time.[1]
Al-Meqanna al-Khuresani created a heresy. He maintained the
transmigration of souls and claimed that he was a god. He claimed that
Allah created Adam, and He turned into His form. Then he turned into the
form of Nuh, then into Ibrahim. Then he turned into the form of the
prophets, then into the form of the Prophet Muhammed, may Allah bless
him and his family. Then he changed into the form of Imam Ali b. Abi
Tali, peace be on him. After him he turned into the form of his
children, and then into the form of Abu Muslim al-Khuresani. After him,
He moved to him. He asked his followers to serve him and to prostrate
themselves in prayer before him.[2] He commanded them not to pray and
not to pay zekat (alms). He made it lawful for them to sleep with
women.[3]

Al-Muqanna was skillful in engineering. He made an artificial moon. The
moon appeared and the people saw it from the distance of a month. Then
it disappeared. Al-Muqanna deceived the people with that. Concerning
that false moon, Abu al-Ala al-Marri says:

Beware, the moon whose head is veiled is misguidance and error; it is
like Al-Muqannas moon.

Anyhow, these destructive movements divided the Islamic society and made
the cultural movement disordered.

### The Summoners to Atheism

The summons to atheism and all the destructive principles at that time
stood on some unknown people suffering from psychological diseases.
Yezdan b. Badhan was one of them. He was famous for atheism and
hypocrisy. He went to the Sacred House of Allah during the season of
hajj. When he saw the people circumambulating the Kaaba, he said: They
look like cows treading on wheat. This statement of his created waves of
anger and displeasure in the souls of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 147. [2] Ibid., p. 367. [3] Wafayat
al-A'yan, vol. 1, p. 453.

good and those clinging to their religion. Al-Alaa b. al-Haddad
addressed caliph Musa al-Hadi and urged him to kill Yezdan b. Badhan,
saying:

O one entrusted by Allah over His creatures, inheritor of the Kaaba and
the

Pulpit, what is your opinion of an unbelieving man who likens the Kaaba
to a threshing floor, and the people circumambulating the Kaaba to cows
treading on wheat and darnel?

So Musa al-Hadi ordered him to be killed and to be crucified.[1]

Yet another examples of the unbelievers is Bashshar b. Burd. He went too
far in summoning the people to atheism. He urged them to warship fire.
He declared that when he said:

Iblis is better than your father Adam; therefore distinguish, o group of
the wicked.

Fire is his element; Adam is a piece of clay. Clay is not as high as
fire.

Clay is dark, and fire shines. Fire has been worshipped since it came
into existence.[2]

He insisted on his creed until he was killed.[3]

Among them was Salih b. Abd al-Qudus. He was among the most prominent
atheists. Al-Mehdi ordered him to be executed, and he declared his
repentance. When was about to release him, he heard him reciting:

The enemies cannot reach an ignorant one, O he who makes the ignorant
reach you.

The old man does not leave his morals until he is buried in the earth of
his grave.

When al-Mehdi heard the last line, he ordered him to be killed and said
to him: You will not leave your manners until you die![4]

Among their great figures are the three Hammads: Hammad Ajrad, Hammad
al-Rawiya, and Hammad al-Zuberqan. Among them are Ibn al-Muqaffa, Younis
b. Abi Ferwa, Mutee b. Ayas, Abd al-Kareem b. Abi al-Awja, Ali b.
Khaleel, and Yehya b. Ziyad al-Harithi. The biographers have mentioned
many examples of their heresies and vague errors, which indicate their
unbelief and their apostasy from the religion.[5]

Any way these atheists spared no effort to spoil the Islamic society, to
spread

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al - Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 10, p. 15. [2] Abu al-Farajj al-Asfahani,
al-Aghani, vol. 3, p. 24. [3] Abu al-Fida', the Events of the Year 166
A. H. [4] Tarikh al-Khulafa', p. 275. [5] Al-Murtada, Amali. Abu
al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani.

chaos, and corruption among the Muslims. They also intended to distort
Islam through fabricating traditions, that they might degrade the
dignity of Islam. Abd al-Kareem b. Abi al-Awja had confessed that before
he was ordered to be killed, saying: You want to kill me because I have
fabricated four thousand hadiths (traditions).

The atheists spoiled and distorted Arabic literature. Khelef al-Ahmer
and Hammad al-Rawiya did that. Concerning the latter, al-Sayyid
al-Murteda has said: Surely Hammad is famous for fabricating narration,
composing poetry and ascribing it to the early poets, to the extent that
the narrators have said: Hammad has spoiled the poetry because he is
able to compose it. He writes poetry similar to that of the poets and
put it into theirs. So the correct poetry has mixed with that
incorrect.[1]

In this manner, they spoiled the religion, the language, and the rest
elements of the Arab and Muslim community. They also prevented Islam
from spreading all over the world.

### The Atheists are persecuted

The ruling authorities at the Abbasid time officially persecuted the
atheists in the last years of the caliphate of al-Mehdi and during the
short-termed caliphate of al-Hadi. In the year 163 A. H. al-Mehdi
ordered the atheists to be arrested. He ordered Abd al-Jebbar, a Muslim
inspector of market, to arrest all the atheists in the country. He
arrested some of them and brought them to the Caliph, and he ordered
some of them to be killed and the rest to be severely punished. The
atheists were severely persecuted between the year 166 A. H and the year
170 A. H. They were tortured by certain judges such as Abd al-Jebbar,
Umar al-Kelwazi, Umer, and Muhammed b. Isa.

Al-Mehdi launched a wide-ranged campaign against the atheists. He
ordered a divan to be established for them. The security forces and the
detectives spared no effort to look for them. They killed all the
atheists they arrested except those who announced their repentance.
Al-Mehdi himself went through some countries to look for them. He went
to Syria to search for them. He came to know that some of them fled Iraq
to Aleppo. So he ordered them to be arrested and to be driven to courts.
Then he ordered them to be killed after their atheism had been
proved.[2]

Al-Mehdi went too far in pursuing the atheists and killing them.
Al-Seyuti says: Al-Mehdi went too far in pursuing the atheists,
destroying them, looking for them in all the cities, and killing them
for an accusation.[3] When he was about to die, he ordered his son
al-Hadi to kill them, saying:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Amali, vol. 1, p. 132. [2] Abu al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani,
vol. 6, p. 67. [3] Tarikh al-Khulafa', p. 273.

O my little son, if this authority comes to you, then prepare yourself
for this group (the atheists). For they summon the people to follow
something apparently good such as refraining from criminal frauds,
renouncing the world, working for the hereafter. Then they made it
forbidden for them to eat meat and to touch pure water. They order them
to refrain from killing pests as a sign of clinging to (religion) and of
giving up sins. Then they order them to worship two things: the first is
light, and the other is darkness. Then they make it permissible for them
to marry their sisters and their daughters, to wash (themselves) with
urine and kidnap children from the road, that they might bring them out
of darkness into light. Therefore execute them, kill them with the
sword, and seek through them nearness to Allah, the One without partner.
For I saw your grandfather al-Abbas in sleep giving me two swords and
ordering me to kill the followers of the two (beliefs: light and
darkness).[1]

Al-Hadi carried out his fathers will. He killed and executed all the
atheists. Al-Rashid and the rest of the Abbasid kings followed the same
policy toward them. They gave no way to the destructive groups to spoil
the Muslims. They put an end to all the summoners to atheism and
hypocrisy.

The caliphs employed all ways to war against the atheists and to put an
end to these wicked souls. When they arrested an atheist, they ordered
him to spit at Manis picture or to slay a bird called pheasant. As for
spitting at Manis picture, it means degrading the creator of Manis
thought. In the meantime it means that the unbeliever withdrew from his
thought. As for slaying a bird, it means that slaying a bird was
forbidden according to the Manism. As for slaying the bird pheasant, it
has not been mentioned in the books we have, as professor Gorge Fida
says.[2]

Anyway, the caliphs launched a violent campaign against the unbelievers.
Unfortunately this campaign was against the innocent more than it was
against the real atheists. We will explain that.

### Going too far in Accusing

Those accused of atheism and apostasy from religion were not real
atheists. Rather some of them were accused of atheism for some political
reasons. The caliphs used this accusation as means to put an end to
their opponents from among the Hashimites. For example, one of the sons
of Dauwd b. Ali and of Yaqub b. al-Fedl were accused of atheism and were
brought to Al-Mehdi. As this Caliph had made a covenant not to kill
them, he ordered them to be imprisoned. However, he ordered his son
al-Hadi to kill them after his undertaking the caliphate.

The accusation of atheism included all those who opposed the caliphs and
refused to perform the prayers behind them. An example of that is
Shurayk al-Qaadi (the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al- Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 6, p. 388. [2] Al-Ilhad fi al-Islam, pp.
28-29.

judge). He did not believe in performing the prayers behind al-Mehdi. So
al-Mehdi ordered him to be brought. He was brought before him and he
said to him: O son of the adulteress! Slow, Commander of the faithful,
Shurayk retorted, she fasted and performed prayers!

O atheist, said al-Mehdi, I will kill you!

Shurayk smiled and said: Commander of the faithful, the atheists have
signs through which they are recognized. They drink wine and associate
with songstresses! So al-Mehdi kept silent and was unable to answer.[1]

This story indicates that the caliphs went tool far in accusing people
of atheism to the extent that they included all those whom they hated.
Shurayks answer also indicates that the atheism were recognized through
some marks such as drinking wine and associating with songstresses. As a
result the atheist was dissolute and mischievous. For this reason Adam,
the grandson of Umar b. Abd al-Aziz, was arrested. He was accused of
atheism because he was dissolute and mischievous. He went too far in
drinking wine. While he was drunk, he composed some poetry lines in
which he violated the sacredness of the religion. He says:

Give me and my bosom friend to drink wine throughout the long night.

It has a clear, yellow color; it is like excellent musk.

It tastes like ginger on ones tongue.

Its bright smell comes from a distance of a mile.

Whoever attains three (drinks) of it forgets the open road.

When he attains five (drinks) of it, it leaves him like the killed.

At that time he does not know who goes and who comes.

Surely my ear is heavy toward the words of him who blames me for it.

On account of the strong veneration, I am not obedient and submissive.

Say to him who reviles you because of it, whether a jurist or a noble,
leave it and hope for another (kind) of the nectar of the fresh, cool
water.

You feel thirst today, and tomorrow you will be given to drink delicious
wine.

For this reason al-Mehdi took him and accused him of unbelief. He
ordered him to be flogged three hundred times, that he might confess
that, while he denied that and said: By Allah, I have not associated
with Allah in the twinkle of an eye. When have you come to know that a
Qarashi becomes an atheist? However, delight has overcome me, and poetry
has controlled my heart. I am among the Qurayshi boys. I drink wine. I
say what I said for dissoluteness. Then he gave up wine. He hated

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Kuthayr, Tarikh, vol. 10, p. 53.

seeing wine and said:

I drank (wine). When it was said (to me), Do you not give up (wine)?, I
gave up, and my garment is pure from the harm of meanness.[1]

Adam was accused of atheism, while he was not an atheist. He was
overcome by poetry, that he might say obscene language through it. The
caliphs did not restrict themselves to that, rather they regarded as an
atheist everyone who discussed the traditions of the companions (of the
Prophet) or refute them.[2] The reason for that is that they wanted to
accuse the Shiites of apostasy from the religion, that they might
legally shed their blood. Abd al-Rahman Bedawi says: Indeed the
accusation of unbelief at that time went side by side with joining the
decree of the Rafidites (Shiites), as professor Fida sees.[3]

Joining the Shiite doctrine during those black periods was the most
important of all crimes. This crime was more dangerous than that of
atheism in the responsible viewpoint. The repentance of the one accused
of atheism was accepted, and he was pardon. As for the one accused of
showing friendship to Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, he was regarded as
an atheist and apostate from the religion, thought he believed in Allah
and His Apostle and performed the Islamic duties.

Anyway, the Abbasid caliphs often used the accusation of atheism as
means to execute the Shiites and to throw them into dark prisons. They
showed oppression in respect with that, for the Shiites declared war
against all the oppressive and tyrannical people. They gave many
sacrifices to put an end to the oppressors. They regarded the rulers as
among the Imams of oppression and error, so they resisted them and
spared no effort to destroy their thrones. We will soon mention that in
detail.

### The Imams debate with them

The answers of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, to the
atheists was distinguished by scientific thinking and decisive proofs
that proved the genuineness of the Islamic thought in all sides of its
laws, the falsehood of the atheists and their invalid beliefs. The
effect of those debates on their souls was stronger than all the means
used by the local governments to suppress them. As the government lacked
thinking, they restored to the force of iron and fire and throwing into
prisons to suppress and destroy them. However, this is the weapon of the
feeble. For beliefs cannot be refuted by anything except by scientific
means. It is impossible to be overcome by something other than that.

As for the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, they depended on
scientific

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Abu al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 1, pp. 60-61. [2] Tarikh
Baghdad, vol. 14, p. 7. [3] Tarikh al-Ilhad fi al-Islam.

means during their debates full of all ways of conviction and that give
no way to doubt in respect with the invalidity of their opponents
beliefs. Accordingly many atheists confessed their invalid beliefs and
came back to the way of the truth and correctness. Besides some of them
stated that the Imams were the masters of mankind, and that perfect
humanity could not be ascribed to anyone other than them. Ibn al-Muqafa
and Abd al-Kerim b. Abi al-Awja acknowledged that. That was when Ibn
al-Muqafa saw the Muslims circumambulating the Kaaba and said: None of
those (people) deserve the name of humanity except that (Imam Jafar b.
Muhammed, peace be on him). As for the rest they are mobs and beasts.

Ibn Abi al-Awja hurried to the Imam and asked him: O Shaykh, may Allah
have mercy on you! In which thing do we believe? In which thing do they
believe? The thing in which they and we believe is one.

The Imam, peace be on him, answered him saying: The thing in which you
believe may be similar to that in which they believe. They believe in
the hereafter and the threat. They maintain that there is a god in the
heaven, and that there is inhabitedness therein, while you claim that
the heaven is destruction and there is none in it.

Abd al-Kareem said: If the affair was just as we believe, then what has
prevented Allah from appearing before his creatures and summons them to
serve Him, that they may not differ over Him? Why has He disappeared and
sent messengers to them? If He appeared, then it would be easy (for
mankind) to believe in Him.

The Imam answered him: How has He who has shown His power in your soul
and in your growth disappeared?

The Imam, peace be on him, gave him additional proofs of the existence
of Allah. Then Ibn Abi al-Awja left the Imam and went running to his
companions, saying to them: This is not a human being! In this world, he
is outwardly a body, but inwardly he is a soul. Then he indicated with
his hand to the Imam, peace be on him.[1]

It is necessary for us to pause to mention some of their debates as
follows:

### Imam al-Sadiqs Debates

Hadith and theology books are full of Imam al-Sadiqs many debates in
this respect. The Imam gave firm proofs of the authenticity of the
Islamic thought and the falsehood of the beliefs of his opponents. We
will mention some of them as follows:

1. Ibn Abi al-Awja came in to Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and he
asked him:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., pp. 68-69.

-O Ibn Abi al-Awja, are you created or not?

-I am not created.

-If you were created, then how would you be?

So Ibn Abi al-Awja became perplexed and gave no answer.[1]

2. Abu Shakir al-Daysani, an atheist, came in to Imam al-Sadiq, peace be
on him, and said to him:

-O Jafar b. Muhammed, show me the way to the One Whom should I worship!

Abu Abd Allah said:

-Sit down!

A boy came. The boy was carrying an egg in the palm of his hand. The
Imam, peace be on him, ordered him to hand him the egg, and he handed it
to him. Then he, peace be on him, said:

-O Daysani, this is a compact, protective container; inside it is the
thin (substance of an) egg which is surrounded by what could be compared
with fluid silver and melted gold. Neither the fluid silver mixes with
the melted gold; nor does the melted gold mixes with the fluid silver.
So it is as it is. No reforming exterior comes out of it and tells (you)
about its goodness, nor does a corrupt interior comes into it and tells
you about its corruption. None knows that it has been created for a male
or a female. Then it splits open showing a form like (for example) a
peacock. Therefore, do you think that it has a Creator?

Al-Daysani bowed his head and thought about the Imams words. Shortly
after that, he raised his head and said: I bear witness that there is no
god but Allah, the One without a partner; and I bear witness that
Muhammed is His Servant and Apostle. I bear witness that you are an Imam
and Allahs proof over His creatures. I have repented of what I had
believed in![2]

3. Hisham b. al-Hekem narrated, saying: [An Egyptian atheist came to
know that Imam Abu Abd Allah had knowledge. So he went to Medina to
debate with him. He did not find him. He was told that the Imam was in
Mecca. So he went to it and met him. He approached and greeted him. Then
Abu Abd Allah (al-Sadiq) asked him:]

- What is you name?

- Abd al-Malik.

- What is you kunya?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabrasi, al-Ihtijajj. Bihar al-Anwar. [2] Al-Ihtijajj.

- Abu Abd Allah.

-Who is the king whose servant is you? Is he among the kings of the
earth or among the kings of the heaven? Tell me about your son: Is he
the servant of the heaven god or of the earth one?

The atheist kept silent and was unable to answer. So Abu Abd Allah said
to him: Say! The atheist became perplexed. So the Imam, peace be on him,
looked at him and said to him: After you have finished circumambulating
the Kaaba, come to me. When the atheist had finished circumambulating
the Kaaba, he went to the Imam. The Imam, peace be on him, asked him:

-Did you know that the earth has bottom and top?

-Yes.

-Did you go to its bottom?

-No.

-Did you know what was beneath it?

-I did not know. However, I imagine that there is nothing beneath it.

-Imagination is feebleness unless you are sure.

-Have you ascended to the heaven?

-No.

-Do you know what is therein?

-No.

-Have gone to the east and the west and seen what is beyond them?

-Therefore, I wonder at you! You have not gone to the east and the west.
You have not descended to the bottom of the earth, nor have you ascended
to the heaven. You have not come to know what is there and what is
beyond them. Nevertheless you have denied what is in them. Does the sane
deny what they do not know?

-None has told about that except you!

-Therefore, you have doubt about Him. Perhaps, He is He. And perhaps, He
is not He.

-Perhaps!

-Fellow, he who has no knowledge has no proof over him who has
knowledge; and the ignorant have no proof over the knowledgeable. O
brother of the inhabitants of Egypt, learn from me! Do you not see that
the sun and the moon, day and night alternate and do not precede each
other? They go and do not return. They are forced. They have no place
except their place. If they could go and not come, (they

would do). If they were not forced, then why did night not become day,
and day (become) night? O brother of the inhabitants of Egypt, by Allah,
they are forced. Surely the thing in which you believe and of which you
have an imagination is of time. If it was it that which made them go,
then why did it not make them return? If it made them return, then why
did it not make them go? Do you not see that the earth and the heaven
are raised? The heaven does not fall on the earth, nor does the earth
slope down that which is beneath it. By Allah, their Creator and Manager
has caught them.

The Egyptian kept silent and was unable to give an answer. He thought of
the dimensions of the words of the Imam. He found in them guidance and
truth, so he returned to correctness. He declared his faith and became
Muslim.[1]

4. An atheist went to the Imam, peace be on him, and asked him:

-Did you see Allah when you worshipped Him?

-I am not one who worships someone whom I have not seen.

-Then how did you find Him when you saw Him?

-The eyes do not see Him in terms of human eye-sight. Rather the hearts
see Him trough the inner realities of faith (iman). He is not attained
through sense perception, nor is He compared to people. He is known
without comparison.[2]

5. An atheist went to the Imam, peace be on him, and asked him about
many problems of which is:

-How do creatures worship Allah and do not see Him?

-The hearts see him through the light of faith. The intellects prove him
through their alertness just as the eyes do. The eyes attain Him through
what they see, such as good structure and firm creation, then the
apostles and their communications, the Books and their clear verses. The
knowledgeable have restricted themselves to what they have seen of His
Greatness without seeing Him.[3]

Through this debate, the Imam, peace be on him, gave many proofs of the
existence and oneness of Allah. Many debates have been narrated on his
authority in this respect. To mention them requires elaborateness and
being wide of the subject. So we are satisfied with these small debates
narrated on his authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabari, al-Ihtijajj. [2] Ibid. [3] Ibid.

### Imam Musa

Imam Musa, peace be on him, played an important role in defending the
Islamic thought, refuting the vague errors of the atheists, and
falsifying their beliefs. We will deal with some theological questions
about which the Imam was asked:

#### 1. His confuting the Movement of Allah

Through the chain of the authorities of the non-Shiites (amma), it has
been mentioned that Allah comes down in the last one third of night and
calls out in the heaven: Is there anyone who supplicates (Me) and asks
(Me) for forgiveness?

Those who regard Allah as body deal with the surface structure of these
traditions without interpreting them or carefully consider their chain
of authorities, that they might establish that Allah had a body. The
Imam, peace be on him, was informed about that, and he said: Surely
Allah does not come down and is in no need of coming down. His existence
is the same in nearness and remoteness.[1] No close thing is far from
Him, nor is a distant thing is close to Him. He is in no need of
anything; rather all things are in need of Him; and He is the possessor
of might.[2] There is no god but Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

As for the words of the describers, He, the Blessed and Exalted, comes
down, they are of those who ascribe him to decrease or increase.[3] All
moving things are in need of that which moves them or that through which
they move.[4] Whoever has doubts about Allah perishes.[5] Therefore, be
careful in respect with His attributes lest you should define Him
through increase, decrease, mobilization, movement, disappearance,
coming down, rising, and sitting down. For Allah is far above the
description of the describers, the depict of the depicters, the
imagination of the imagining. And rely on the Mighty, the Merciful, Who
sees you when you stand up and your turning over and over among those
who prostrate themselves before

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] It means that Allah is far above movement and going from place to
another. For the one distinguished by movement is possible, and for his
existence in places is not one. When he is present in one place, he is
absent from another. When he is close to one thing, he is far from
another. When he has a purpose in a certain place, he must move and go
to attain the purpose. As for Allah, the Most High, it is impossible for
Him to do that. For His ratio to all places is one. None of the places
is nearer to Him than another. Therefore, he is in no need of movement,
and His existence is the same in nearness and remoteness. [2] Certainly
all things are in need of Allah, the Exalted. For it is He who gives
existence to them. If He, the Most High, was in need of a thing, then
the lack of a thing required the thing of which it was in need through
one whereness. That is impossible, for it requires the vicious circle,
which is invalid. [3] The Imam, peace be on him, refers to the corrupt
beliefs that result from maintaining that Allah, the Most High, comes
down the heaven. For that requires movement. [4] He, peace be on him,
refers to another proof of the invalid thoughts of those who claims that
Allah comes down the heaven. For that also requires His movement. [5]
He, peace be on him, warned against corrupt doubts, for it brings about
destruction and apostasy from the religion, and for that Allah, the
Exalted, is far above these corrupt beliefs whose incorrectness is known
by all people even those who have little knowledge.

Allah.[1][2]

The Imam, peace be on him, talked to his companions about negating
movement from Allah, the Most High, saying: I do not say that He is
standing and remove Him from His place, nor can I find Him in a place
where He is, nor can I find Him move through a thing such as foundations
and limbs, nor can I define Him through a word. However, that is as
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, says: Be, so there it is through His
will without hesitation in a soul. (He is) eternal and signal. He is in
no need of a partner to mention His kingdom to Him and to open to Him
the doors to His knowledge.[3]

The Imam, peace be on him, wanted not to describe Allah, the Most High,
through the rising the linguists maintain, that His disappear from the
place where He had been before His rising is required; similarly he did
not describe Him through His being in a place, that His being a limited
body is required. He also did not describe Him through the movement of
the whole His body or through the movement of the limbs, for this
requires from Him change and the need of others; Allah, the Exalted, is
above all of that. The Imam, peace be on him, explained Allahs way of
creating things, that is not through speech; rather His command when he
desires a thing, He says to it: Be, so there it is. Allah, the Most High
does what He wills through His will without using any tool or a limb,
without hesitation or thinking. In creating things He is in no need of a
partner to help him nor a minister to manage for Him His affairs, seeks
help from him or mention to Him His Kingdom and power.

#### 2. Negating Body from Allah

Among the things maintained by the atheists at that time is: Allah, the
Most High, has a body just as the rest of beings. Hisham b. al-Hakam
believed in that before his repentance and his returning to the true
way. Imam Musa was informed about his beliefs, and he said in the answer
to him: Which obscenity and indecency is greater than the statement of
him who describes the Creator of things with body or form or creation or
limitation or limbs?! Allah, the Exalted, is far above that![4]

Al-Shahristani mentioned that Hisham b. al-Hakam had essays on comparing
Allah to human being, and that Hisham b. Salim al-Jewaliqi agreed with
him on that. Among the things they said is that Allah, the Exalted, is
seven spans (of the hand) in His own span, that He is in a certain place
and a certain direction, that He, the Most High, looks like human being.
His upper part is hollow; and his lower part is solid. He glares and
shines. He has five senses, a leg, a nose, an ear, and an eye. He has
black hair hanging down His ears. However, He is neither flesh nor
blood.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, 26, 219. [2] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 125. [3] Ibid. [4]
Ibid, p. 105. [5] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal.

Some researchers criticized ascribing that to Hisham, for that he was
trustworthy and knowledgeable, and that he was on top of the Muslim
thinkers. So how is ascribing that to him correct? These beliefs might
issued from him because he maintained some atheistic beliefs before he
got acquainted with the Imam. However, when he communicated with the
Imam, peace be on him, he returned to the way of the truth and
correctness; he became among the great Muslim thinkers. We will explain
that when we speak about his life.

Abd al-Rahman told the Imam, peace be on him, about Hishams statements
on comparing Allah to human body as follows: Surely Allah is a body;
nothing like the likeness of Him. (He) is Knowledgeable, Hearing,
Seeing, Powerful, Speaking, and articulate. The speech, the power, and
knowledge proceed in the same manner; nothing of them is created.

So the Imam refuted that, saying: May Allah fight him! Did he not know
that the body was limited, and that the speech was other than the
speaker? Allah forbid! I am clear before Allah of this statement.
(Allah) is neither a body, nor a form, nor a limitation. All things
apart from him are created. All things happen according to His will and
His desire without a speech nor hesitation in soul nor utterance through
a tongue.[1]

Among the things he, peace be on him, was asked about in respect with
the attributes of Allah is that he was asked about the body and form of
Allah, and he, peace be on him, answered: Glory belongs to Him the like
of Whom there is nothing! (He) is neither body nor form![2]

#### 3. The Meaning of Allah

Vague errors and heresies spread during that time. The Imam, peace be on
him, was asked many questions about the selfness and attributes of
Allah. Among the questions about which he was asked is: the meaning of
Allah. So he, peace be on him, answered: He has controlled the small and
the great.[3]

This explanation the Imam expressed is the explanation of a thing
through which that requires it. For the meaning of Godhood requires Him
to control all things, small and great, present and absent, and all
things wherein. In the book al-Mehasin it has been narrated that he was
asked about the meaning of these words of Allah: The Beneficent is firm
in power[4], and he, peace be on him, answered: He Has controlled all
small and great things.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 106. [2] Ibid., p. 104. [3] Ibid., p. 115.
[4] Ibid., 20, 5. [5] Al-Tabrasi, al-Ihtijajj.

#### 4. His Knowledge

The Imam was asked about the knowledge of Allah, the Exalted: Had Allah
been knowledgeable of things before He created and formed them? Or had
He been unknowledgeable of that until He created them and wanted to
create and form them, so He came to know of what He created when He
created and what He created when He created?

So he, peace be on him, answered: Allah had still been knowledgeable of
things before He created them just as His knowledge of things after He
came to know of the creation of things.[1]

Muhammed b. Hamza wrote to him a letter in which he asked him about the
knowledge of Allah. This is the text of the letter: Surely, your
followers have differed over the knowledge (of Allah). Some of them say:
We say that Allah had still been knowledgeable before creating things.
And some of them say: We do not say that Allah had not still been
knowledgeable, for the meaning of to know is to do. If we prove
knowledge, then we will prove an eternal thing along with Him. So, I
think, may Allah make me your ransom, that you must teach me of that to
which I restrict myself and do not exceed it.

Accordingly, the Imam, peace be on him, wrote him back: Allah is
eternally knowledgeable, may His name be blessed and exalted.[2]

His answer to this question is very short due to the fact that the
questioner was unable to understand the answer. For this question is
among the most difficult philosophical questions. The early philosophers
differed over it. The Aristotelians followed their teacher Aristotle.
They maintained that the knowledge of Him, the exalted, of things had
been before them. Platos followers believed that the knowledge of Allah,
may His name be exalted, is simultaneous to things. The two parties gave
many proofs that included a kind of obscurity and vagueness. As the
questioner was unable to understand such subjects, the Imam gave him a
short answer.

#### 5. Allahs Will

Saffwan b. Yehya asked the Imam about Allahs will: Does it (will) issue
from Allah or from creatures?

He, peace be on him, answered: The will of the creatures is the pronoun
and the verb that seems to them after that. As for that of Allah, it is
His creating (things) only, for He neither deliberates nor intends nor
thinks. He does not have these attributes, for they are the attributes
of the creatures. Therefore, Allahs will is the verb only. He says to
it: Be, so there it is without a word nor utterance nor a tongue nor
intention nor thinking. There is no howness to that just as there is no
howness

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 107. [2] Ibid.

to Him.[1]

The explanation of his statement is that mans will is a psychological
manner takes place after his imagining the thing appropriate for him and
his believing in its being positive and useful with scientific believing
not hypothetical one. So when a thing reaches the level of superiority
in the depth of ones mind, the determination of finding it takes place.
As for Allahs will, it is not something new added to His Holy Selfness,
for the occurrence of an attribute or a manner in His Selfness is
impossible. The will for Him is nothing but His creating things, for He,
the Exalted, is far above deliberation and reflection.

#### 6. Allahs Desire

Ali b. Ibraheem said: [I heard Abu al-Hasan Musa, peace be on him, say:]
Nothing occurs except what Allah wills, desires, ordains, and decrees.

What is the meaning of desires? I asked him.

The beginning of the verb, he replied.

What is the meaning of ordains? I asked him.

To ordain the length and width of a thing, he answered.

What is the meaning of decrees? I asked him.

When He decrees (a thing), He says to it: be, he replied, therefore,
that is the thing which nothing can avert.[2]

The short explanation to his speech is that man has optional deeds of
which are will, desire, estimation, and carrying out. As He, the Most
High, regarded the out beings as among His own verbs, they were preceded
by desire, will, estimation, and carrying out, issued from His knowledge
and His power. Therefore, they should be preceded by desire, will,
determination, and decree. The desire and the will must be achieved in
finding an optional deed. The meaning standing in the soul through its
relationship with the doer is called a desire, and through its
relationship with the verb is called will; the estimation is the
specification of the amount of the verb. The decree is the final
decision between which and the verb there is no means. When the decree
of Him, the Most High, associated with a thing, He carried it out; it is
the thing which nothing can avert.

#### 7. The Formative and Legislative Will

The Imam, peace be on him, said: Surely, Allah has two wills and two
desires: the will of ordainment, and the will of determination. He
prohibits and desires; He commands and does not desire. Did you not know
that He prohibited Adam and his wife from eating of the tree. He desired
that. If he had not desired that they would

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 127. [2] Ibid., p. 150.

not eat, their desire would have not overcome the desire of Allah, the
Exalted. He commanded Ibrahim to slay (his son) Ishaq. He did not desire
to make him slay him. If He had desired, the desire of Ibrahim would
have not overcome the desire of Allah, the Most High.[1]

The explanation of his statement is that will is divided into the real,
formative will and the nominal, legislative will. So mans will that
associates with his own deed is a formative will that urges his limbs to
find deed; along with it, it is impossible for limbs to refuse to obey
except due to a certain obstruction. As for the will that associates
with the deeds of others such as that he orders a thing to be done or
ordered it not to be done, it is not formative; rather it is
legislative. For it does not affect finding or leaving the verb by
others; rather it depends on his formative will.

As for the formative will of Allah, it is that which associates with a
thing, there is no escape from finding the thing, and it is impossible
for it to stay behind it. As for His legislative will, it is that which
associates with the deed in respect of its being good and righteous. As
for Allahs prohibiting Adam from eating and He willed that, and the
command of Him, the Exalted, to Ibrahim to slay his son and He willed
that, the command and prohibition in respect with them were legislative.
Similarly the meaning of the desire is the formative desire. The
narration declared that Ibrahim was ordered to slay his son Ishaq, not
Ismail. This opposes the traditions narrated on the authority of the
Imams of guidance, peace be on them, and which indicated that Ibrahim
was ordered to slay his son Ismail, and not Ishaq.

We are satisfied with this amount of his answers to the atheists and his
refuting their vague errors. The Imam has another legacy related to the
prophethood and the Imamate. Al-Mejjlisi has mentioned it in his book
al-Bihar. Al-Kulayni has also mentioned it in his book al-Usool. If we
dealt with it, then we had to write a big book on it. For this reason we
are satisfied with what we have mentioned as proof of his taking care of
refuting the vague errors and confuting misleading thoughts that spread
among the Muslims.

Anyway, an atheistic movement invaded the time of the Imam. The enemies
of Islam and those who harbored malice against its victories led that
movement. They thought that they had no means to resist it except
through spreading destructive beliefs among the Muslims, that they might
weaken the ideological side. However, shortly after that, those thoughts
disappeared; those misleading thoughts and heresies were buried through
the good efforts of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, and the
leading thinkers from among their students. That was when they set off
with great enthusiasm to defend Islam and to protect it from the vague
errors of the atheists and the misleading people.

Those atheistic waves, which spread during that time, clearly indicate
that the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 151.

society led a bad life full of ideological differences and doubts about
the Islamic thought. Without doubt, the debates of the Imams, peace be
on them, played an important role in returning the Muslims to the way of
the truth and correctness. With this point we will end our talk about
the ideological invasion that befell the Muslims, and that was the most
important event at that time.

### Bad Manners

In most of its periods, the Abbasid time was the time of amusement and
dissoluteness. During it the people were interested in delight and
singing. They rushed to enjoy all kinds of the forbidden things such as
drinking wine, playing gambling, drinking with slave girls and boys, and
the like from among the things made forbidden by Allah. The ruling
persons encouraged them to practice such abominable deeds. For they
themselves were immersed in abominable deeds, sins and urging the people
to that amusement. We regard the poets of that time as a measure for the
corrupt manners, for they correctly represented the whole trends and
inclinations of the society. Their poetry represents neither earnestness
nor activity in the public life, nor does it picture any reality of
cultural life. Rather the poetry describes wine, songstresses, urging
people to practice pleasures and low desires. Their poems in this
respect are black pages in Arabic literature. An example of this is that
the poets of the Abbasid royal palace met and said: Where shall we spend
our evening. They invited each other to their houses. So Abu Nuas
suggested that that invitation should be poetry and not prose, and that
the group had to decide the best of them in composing poetry.
Accordingly, Dawud b. Razeen al-Sabati said:

Rise (and go) to the house of amusement and the hidden shadow of a house
in which are flowers, narcissus, jasmine, fragrant musk, redolent
plants, a songstress with coquetry and sedate reason, who sings all the
original, clear (poems) of Ibn Razeen.

They all composed poems urging (people) to practice pleasures,
amusement, and dissoluteness. This kind of corrupt poetry indicates that
mischief and bad manners, and that the people abandoned the religious
teachings that forbade that. The poetry represents the characteristics
of the life in that time. For their sentiments and feelings clung to
amusement and dissoluteness. Their hearts clung to wine. So they
described and praised it. Abu Nuas devoted his mental efforts to
describing cups, glasses, vats (of wine), barmen, vintners, drinking
companions, and grapevines. He mentioned different kinds of wine and how
they were made. He made a distinction between this and that in taste,
color, and smell. He explained the intoxication and its movement in
limbs and heads. He not only explained that in a technical way, but also
he explained it with love. He loved wine so much that he adorned it.

Drinking wine was associated with singing and dancing at that time. The
princes and the ladies from among the high life in Baghdad took part in
certain concert parties. Private house prepared for wine, singing,
beating tambourines and drums

spread there. The gardens in the outskirts of Baghdad were full of bars
to which the poets, the youth, and the young ladies frequently went. In
a poem of his, Muti b. Ayas described the bar in Sabahs garden. The
abbeys also became places of drinking wine, love, and dissoluteness.

Baghdad, rather all cities of Iraq, became houses of amusement, drinking
wine, and dissoluteness. Accordingly, the people followed their low
desires and abandoned the Islamic values that forbade that. That brought
about bad manners. The people were absorbed in sin, abominable things,
and corruption. Dissoluteness included celebrating boys in love poems.
Abu Nuas and the like went too far in practicing such an art. This
matter made bad manners spread among the people.

Without doubt the policy of the Abbasid First Time Government was
responsible for this wave of corruption and dissoluteness. For those
kings played an important role in spreading amusement, abominable
things, and corruption.

### Misery and Unhappiness

The overwhelming majority in the Islamic countries suffered from poverty
and deprivation. It was burdened with oppression and misery. Properties
were piled-up with special groups of the singers and the dissolute. They
practiced all kinds of pleasures and went too far in following their low
desires. As for the general populace, they suffered from hunger and
poverty due to the oppression of the rulers and their tyranny in taking
kharaj (land taxes). Persecuting the society and the bad economic life
have been described by Abu al-Atahiya, a great social poet, in his poem
he wrote to the king of Baghdad. In it he has mentioned.

Who gives on my behalf successive pieces of advice to the Imam?

Surely I see that the prices of the subjects are high.

I see that the earnings are insignificant. I see that the necessity is
widespread.

I see that the worries of the time come and go.

I see that the orphans are miserable, empty houses.

They, hopeful male and female, yearn for you.

They complain (to you) of hard work with weak, loud voices.

They hope for your relief out of what they have faced that they may see
well-being.

The misfortunes of hunger enter into evening and upon the morning
(causing) hunger.

Who relieves the hungry stomachs and naked bodies?

I have reported to you conclusive news from the subjects.

This is the social conditional that prevailed the time of Harun.
Millions of the subjects were naked and hungry, whilst the treasury in
Baghdad was full of their

properties. However, none had the right to use them except the caliphs,
their children, and their oppressive, dissolute ministers. As for those
who did not flatter the rulers, they led a life of poverty and misery.
Now, let Abu al-Atahiya tell us about that Golden Time, as the
historians say:

The dry loaf of bread you eat in a corner, and a narrow room where you
are alone or a mosque far from the people is better than the hours in
the shade of the high palaces.

This statement tells (you) about my state.

Blessed is he who hears it! By my life, it is sufficient.

Therefor, listen to the advice of the loyal one called Abu al-Atahiya.

These kinds of hopelessness, pessimism, and pain mentioned by the poet
of the Abbasid society resulted from the corruption of the then rulers
and their bad power. For their crooked policy spread among the people
poverty and deprivation, while it placed wealth among a special class
that went too far in practicing pleasures. They decorated their palaces
with excellent furniture and their walls with silk. They planted flowers
in their gardens, to the extent they brought to them excellent flowers
from India. They went too far in creating different kinds of enjoyments.
When they were tired of a certain enjoyment, they changed it into
another. Abu al-Faraj al-Asfahani said: Some of them were about to bang
his head against an iron bar due to the good singing. The result of that
was the spreading of poverty among the popular classes.

Anyway, the Abbasid governments at the Abbasid Time 1 plundered the
properties of the Islamic peoples, spread poverty throughout their
countries, spent the money in central budget on prostitution, amusement,
and spoiling morals. So the masses were sure of the corruption of those
authorities and of their illegal rule. In the meantime, they were sure
that the Alawids were the summoners to social justice, the shelter of
the oppressed and persecuted.

### The Policy of the Abbasid Government

During most of its times, the Abbasid government stood on oppression and
tyranny. It did not witness social and political justice. Through their
governing, the Abbasids followed a special dictatorial method. They
controlled all the judicial and administrative authorities. There was no
administrative and consultative council to deal with the affairs of the
subjects, their interests, the means of their development and progress.
The nature of the government was dictatorial. The caliph decided
according to his personal viewpoints, for he was the shadow of Allah on
earth, as they say. So he went too far in practicing dictatorship,
plundering properties, preventing freedoms, and forcing the people to do
what they hated.

In most of its historical periods, the Abbasid government was similar to
the

Umayyad one in material and form. Lithfy Dilla Fida says: Certainly the
administrative system followed by the Abbasids was in essence the system
of the Umayyads.[1]

The official circles damaged the rights of the common people, while they
flattered the notables, the heads, and the possessors of influence. Amin
al-Rayhani says: The oppressive did not suffer from adversities. Rather
the miserable, those who paid taxes and answered the summons to jihad[2]
suffered from adversities. It was they who suffered from oppression and
tyranny. For their affair was simple with those rulers who alone
possessed distributing good and evil among those whom they liked and
disliked. They spent the wealth of the miserable Muslim peoples on their
low desires and on their followers. They sometimes admired a song, so
they gave to the singer a lot of money. In the meantime they hated the
word of a reformer, so they shed the reformers blood and confiscated his
properties. When al-Mutazid, the Abbasid Caliph, was angry with a
military commander, he ordered the military commander to be buried
alive.[3] Many Abbasid rulers were famous for violence, oppression, and
shedding blood.

Al-Atabi was asked the state of the then government: Why do you not seek
nearness to the ruler through your poems?

I saw him give ten thousand (dirhams) for nothing, and he ordered
someone to be thrown down the wall for nothing, replied al-Atabi, I do
not know which of the two men I follow.[4]

Muhammed b. al-Harith was ordered to go to al-Wathiq, and he said: I was
very afraid. I was afraid that someone had informed the Caliph against
me or a certain misfortune had happened.[5]

When al-Mamun killed his minister al-Fedl b. Sahl, he entrusted the
ministry with Ahmed b. Abi Khalid, but he refused to accept it and said:
All those who undertook the ministry were endangered.[6] The reason for
that is that the caliphs did not follow a certain law; rather they
decided according to their personal inclinations. So they divided death
and life among those whom they liked and disliked.

The caliphs ordered people to be killed in group for a certain piece of
information. An example of that Abu Jafar was informed against a man
called al-Fudayl, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-'Asr al-'Abbasi al-Awwal, p. 45. [2] Al-Nekebat. [3] Tarikh
al-Islam, vol. 3, p. 18. [4] Al-Mustatraf, vol. 1, p. 215. [5] Abu
al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 3, p. 215. [6] Tayfur, p. 215.

secretary of his son Jafar. He was informed that al-Fudal played with
Jafar. So he sent two men and ordered them to kill him wherever they
found him. He wrote a letter to Jafar to inform him what he had ordered
them. He said to the two men: Do not give the letter to Jafar until you
have killed al-Fudayl. When they reached al-Fudayl, they beheaded him.
Al-Fudayl was a righteous person. Al-Mansur was told that he was an
innocent person, and that he was quick in killing him. So he repented of
that. He gave ten thousand dirhams to a messenger and ordered him to go
to al-Fudayl before he had been killed. However, the messenger came and
found him a motionless corpse. Accordingly, Jafar condemned that and
said to his retainer: What does the Commander of the faithful say in
respect with the murder of a chaste, religious, Muslim man without a
crime?

So Suwayd answered him: He is the Commander of the faithful. He does
whatever he pleases. He is more knowledgeable of what he does.

The kings killed the people and shed their blood according to their low
desires. They did whatever they wanted, for they were the Shadow of
Allah on earth. They were not asked about sin or crime.

During the Abbasid days, the Islamic countries suffered from oppression
and tyranny. For the Abbasids employed violence in carrying out their
plans. For the first time in Islamic history the leather rug (for
executing people) was put by the throne of the Caliph. The Caliph
employed it and the headsman as means to ascend the throne, as Philip
Hety says.

The Abbasid Caliphs followed this policy throughout their times. They
did not yield to the truth and justice; rather they yielded to their low
desires and feelings. The boys, the women, and the corrupt drinking
companions played an important role in managing the affairs of the
government, distributing gifts and salaries among the people, and
depriving them of them. All these things did not depend on the Law of
Allah; rather they resulted from the caliphs personal inclinations,
which were very far from justice.

### The Muslim Sects

Perhaps the most important things took place at the Abbasid Time 1 were
the Muslims sects, who differed over the origins and branches of the
religion. The certain thing is that the Abbasid authorities founded the
Muslim sects, fed them, and made them grow. They forced the people to
embrace them. I (the author) think that they wanted to send the Muslims
far from the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, who represented the true Islam and
its revolutionary trends aiming at putting an end to social oppression,
saving the people from the political tyranny.

During the Abbasid time, the Alawids went to the fields of the holy
jihad, that they might protect the society from the Umayyads violence
and severe punishments, and return to society the Islamic noble
principles, which depended on spreading justice, freedom, equality,
ease, stability, perfect faith in the individuals

rights, securing the means of his daily bread, and his security. Islam
regarded that as a basic rule for developing the society and making it
lead a free, noble life.

For these noble principles the Alawids went to the fields of struggle
and jihad. So they met difficult problems, their limbs were cut off,
their blood was shed, and they were executed. The masses were sure that
the Alawids were the protectors and leaders of this community, that the
society would obtain the means of its livelihood and its welfare except
through their government. Accordingly, they supported them. The slogans
of the revolutionaries and of the demonstrators were the summons to
al-Rida from among the Family of Muhammed. The violent revolt that broke
out all over the Islamic countries put an end to the Umayyad government,
toppled it and removed its traces. However, the Abbasids usurped the
authority. When the affairs went well with them, they spared no effort
to destroy the Alawids and their followers, who were the source of the
aware forces in Islam.

The terrible plan the Abbasid government drew to destroy the Shia and
all the opposing forces includes the following:

1. They founded the Islamic doctrines, divided the Muslims, and made
them busy with ideological beliefs, that they might divert them from
thinking of political affairs. Accordingly, the clubs in Baghdad, Kufa,
Basrah, Medina, and all the cities of the Islamic world were full of
theological debates and philosophical discussions. All these debates and
discussions were about the ideological frame in Islam. The scientific
life at that time was directed to this side only; it was not direct to
any side of the political life the Muslims led.

2. They wanted to isolate the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt from the Muslims, to
impose supervision on them, to prevent the Muslims from communicating
with them and taking the principal features of the religion from them.

The Abbasids felt that the people were in need of understanding the
affairs of their religion. So al-Mansur al-Dewaniqi entrusted Imam
Malik, the head of a Muslim sect, with writing a book on Islamic
jurisprudence, that he might force the people to follow it. However,
Malik refused that, but he finally responded to him out of pressure and
wrote al-Muwatta.[1]

The Abbasid government supported the Imams of the doctrines and spread
their jurisprudence. It forced the people to follow them. Besides it
gave a lot of money to them and greatly honored them. Al-Rashid ordered
his governor over Medina not to carry out any order without consulting
Malik; similarly, he sat on the ground to hear his speech.[2] He ordered
the pilgrims to be told that none had the right to give religious
decisions except Malik. So the people overcrowded around him, and the
delegates came to him from all over the Islamic countries to listen to
his speech

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Zarqani, Sharh al-Muwatta', vol. 1, p. 8. [2] Al-Zawi, Menaqib
Malik.

and to take religious verdicts from him. None was able to approach Malik
because he was officially respected. Some strong black young men
surrounded him. They severely punished him who intended to criticized
him. Ismail al-Fezari said: I came in to Malik and asked him to narrate
me some traditions. He related to me twelve traditions, and then he
ceased. So I said to him: Relate to me more traditions, may Allah honor
you. He had some black young men standing behind him. He commanded them
to take me out of his house, and they did.[1]

Certainly the Abbasid government took great care of Malik and other than
him from among the Imams of the sects, that it might undermine the
entity of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, and put an end to
the Shiites, who were the greatest of all the people in opposing it. It
is important for us to pause to talk about the Shiite sect, who carried
the standard of righteousness, revolted against the tyrannical rulers,
whose history is full of achievements, laudable deeds, and serving the
Muslims. That is as follows:

### The Meaning of the Shia

In Arabic the Shia means followers and supporters. This meaning includes
all those who follow Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, and his household. Al-Fayruz Abadi said: Mans Shiites are his
followers and supporters. This name includes all those who follow Ali
and his household, peace be on them, to the extent that it concerns them
only.[2]

Ibn Manzur said: The origin of the Shia is the sect of people; it
includes one, two, plural, masculine, feminine. This name is used to
those who follow Ali and his household, may Allah be pleased with them
all, to the extent that it concerns them. If it is said, so-and-so is a
Shiite, it means that belongs to them.[3] The linguists have unanimously
greed on the explanation of the Shia we have mentioned.

### The Beginning of the Shia

The certain thing is that the Shia was formed during the time of the
great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. He was the first to
put this good seed, to make it grow, and to take care of it. Imam Kashif
al-Ghita said: The leader of the Islamic Law (the Prophet) was the first
to put the seed of Shiism in the field of Islam. This means that the
seed of Shiism was but beside that of Islam. The one who planted it (the
Prophet) took care of watering it until it grew up and flourished during
his life. Then it produced fruit after his death. My proofs of that are
his holy hadiths (traditions). (I will not mention them) through the
chain of the authorities of the Shiites and the Imami narrators lest it
should be said: They are invalid because the maintain the return or
their narrator draws the fire to his own loaf of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sharh al-Intiqa', vol. 2, p. 42. [2] Al-Qamus, vol. 3, p. 47. [3]
Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-'Arab, vol. 10, p. 55.

bread. Rather (I will mention) them from among the traditions of the
Sunni scholars and their great figures and through their trustworthy
chain of authorities. Then he, may Allah have mercy on him, has
mentioned what al-Sayuti has narrated in his book al-Durr al-Mantur in
respect with the explanation of these words of Him, the Exalted: Those
are the best of mankind. He said: [Ibn Asakr narrated on the authority
of Jabir b. Abd Allah al-Ansari, who said:] We were with the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family. When Ali, peace be on him, came, the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said: By Him in whose hand
is my soul, surely this (Ali) and his Shiites are the successful on the
Day of Resurrection. Then he, may Allah have mercy one him, has
mentioned a group of traditions confirming what we have mentioned.[1]
Abu Hatem al-Razi said: The first name to appear in Islam was Shia. This
was the name of four companions (of the Prophet), who are Abu Dharr,
Selman, Ammar, and al-Muqdad. When the time of the (Battle of) Siffin
came, the followers of Ali, may Allah be pleased with him, were famous
for this name.[2]

This thought began at the dawn of Islamic history. It was founded by the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and was embraced by his
great companions, who believed in Islam and fought bravely for it, such
as Abu Dharr, Selman, Ammar, al-Muqdad, and the like of them from among
the Muslims great figures.

All Shiite researchers have confirmed the correctness of this viewpoint.
The late Shaykh al-Muzaffari says: Surely, the summons to Shiism began
on the day when the great savor Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his
family, called out: There is no god but Allah. When these words of Him,
the Exalted, were revealed to him: And warn your nearest relations[3],
he gathered the Hashimites and warned them, saying: Whoever helps me in
this matter will be my brother, my testamentary trustee (wasi), my
helper (wazir), my heir and my successor after me. However, none
answered him to what he wanted except al-Murtada (Ali). So the Prophet
said to them: This is my brother, my testamentary trustee (wasi), my
helper (wazir), my heir and my successor after me. Therefore, listen to
him and obey him.

Al-Muzaffary added: The summons from the leader of the message (the
Prophet) to following Abu al-Hasan (Ali) walked alongside the summons to
the two witnesses. For this reason, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari was among the
Shiites of Ali.[4]

If we look at the reality with a look free from inclinations and
sentiments and distinguished by scientific investigation, we will find
the reality, originality, and depth of this statement. The following
points confirm it:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Asl al-Shi'a wa Usoolaha, pp. 87-88, Beirut edition. [2] Roudat
al-Jannat, p. 88. [3] Ibid., 26, 214. [4] Tarikh al-Shi'a, p. 9.

1. The great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, left after him
great principles that developed the individual and social life of his
community. He left behind him great inheritance the like of which people
have never found throughout their historical stages. He has declared
human rights and brought high objectives aiming at mans security,
welfare, and happiness.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, took great care of
spreading his message. So it was important for him to appoint someone
after him to protect his principles, to keep his message, and to spread
it among the peoples on earth. Of course, every leader of a message
certainly takes this procedure.

2. There was a necessity that required the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, to entrust the affair to someone after him. This
necessity is that there were forces that harbored malice against Islam,
schemed against it by day and night, and spared no effort to put out its
light. These forces were the hypocrites the Holy Quran has dispraised
and against whom the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
warned his community. These forces were represented by Abu Sufyan, and
most the Umayyads. Therefore, how did the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, neglect the affair of the succession after him and leave
his community lead a life of chaos? This means that he wanted to empower
the wicked forces to destroy his objectives and put an end to his
principles and message. It was impossible for the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, to do that.

In addition to that is that the Arab Peninsula was not familiar with the
summons to regulation and stability of which the message of Islam took
care of. For it contained great development in respect with world of
economy, policy, administration, and all the regulations that take care
of general security, keeping political stability, the general balance in
the individual and social life. The Arab Peninsula was not fully aware
of this great development, nor was it fully aware of the real dimensions
of the message of Islam and its great renaissance. So it was incumbent
on the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, to appoint a
successor after him, that his message might continue achieving its
activities and objectives.

Yet there is a very important thing that required the great Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, to appoint a successor after him. This
thing was the outside situation. The Romans, the Persians, and the like
from among the governments of the world were afraid of the progress and
spread of Islam. Their peoples were eager for embracing Islam, that it
might save them from tyranny and oppression, protect them from despotism
and dictatorship. Those countries waited for an appropriate opportunity
to destroy Islam and were ready to send all their troops to put an end
to it. Of course, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was
fully aware of that. Therefore, how did he neglect the affair of the
caliphate, which was in the same position to backbone in respect with
his community?

Certainly, the local chaos and the outside danger required the Prophet,
may Allah

bless him and his family, to take great care of the affair of the
succession after him. As for the statement that he, may Allah bless him
and his family, neglected it, it has no aspect of scientific research,
and it is very far from the thinking of the aware, wise personality of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, the like of which
people have never seen in awareness and understanding the realities of
affairs.

I (the author) think that if a person is free from tribalism, imitation,
reflects on the reality accurately and deeply, he will come to know that
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, took great care of
succession and regarded it on top of the important affairs.

3.If we carefully consider the events happened during the time of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, we will conclude that he
appointed the pioneer and gave proofs of the leader who would undertake
the cultural and political leadership after him, and that he definitely
adopted and prepared this matter, that he might keep the future of his
mission, protect its achievements from collapse and disappearance.

The great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, chose Imam Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, to undertake the general
and timely authorities; we will give proofs of that. This choice was not
because of preference and love for relationship. For that is very far
from the thinking of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
for he yielded to nothing except the truth, justice, and the interests
of his community. Rather, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, appointed Imam Ali, peace be on him, over this important office
because he had unique abilities, noble tendencies, and abundant power to
undertake the huge responsibilities. Imam Ali was nearest of all the
people to Allahs Apostle, the greatest of them in understanding and
awareness of his objectives and principles, the most similar of them to
him in clinging to the true Islam. He accompanied the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, when young. The Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, supplied him with his knowledge, and he, peace be on
him, has expressed that, saying:

Certainly, you know my position of close kinship and special
relationship with the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. When
I was only a child, he took charge of me. He used to press me to his
chest and lay me beside him in his bed, bring his body close to mine and
make me smell his smell. He used to chew something and then feed me with
it. He found no lie in my speaking, nor weakness in any act. I used to
follow him like a young camel following in the footprints of its mother.
Every day he would show me in the form of a banner some of his high
traits and commanded me to follow it. Every year he used to go in
seclusion to the hill of Hira, where I saw him but no one else saw him.
In those days Islam did not exist in any house except that of the
Prophet of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and Khadija, while
I was the third after these two. I used to see and watch

the effulgence of divine revelation and message, and breathed the scent
of Prophethood.

Imam Ali, peace be on him, spent a great part of his life with the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who took care of him and
was kind to him. He took part beside him in the fields of jihad and the
fields of the scientific experience of the success of the Islamic
message, and his knowledge of its methods and its philosophy, his
abilities and genius. All things required his nomination for the office
of the caliphate, as preference the best to those other than him and as
a guarantee for the interests of the community.

4. As for the events narrated from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, concerning his nominating and appointing Imam Ali as a
successor after him, they are so many that many books have been written
on them. Among these books are al-Wasiya by al-Masudi, al-Alfayn by
al-Allama (al-Hili), Talkhis al-Shafi by al-Tusi, and others. Al-Allama
(al-Hili) has mentioned in his book over thirty books on the will of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, to Imam Ali.[1] The Shiite
theologians have mentioned many proofs of that. We will mention some of
them as follows:

A. The Shiites have proved their belief in this subject matter through
Hadith al-Manzila (the Tradition of the Position) in which the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, has said: You are in the same
position in respect with me as Harun was to Musa except that there is no
prophet after me.[2] Shaykh al-Mufid think that this tradition is a
proof of the Imamate of Imam Ali, saying: That is because Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, decided his (Imam Alis)
merit over the group, support, help, succession during his life and
after his death, and the Imamate for him, due to the fact that Harun
received all these positions from Musa during his lifetime.[3]

B. Surely the most reliable, clearest, and the greatest of all the
proofs in including the attitude the Shiites maintain is The Hadith of
Khum. For on that immortal day the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, appointed Imam Ali, peace be on him, as a successor after him
and asked the Muslims to pledge allegiance to him. He took Ali by the
hand and addressed the Muslims, saying: This is my successor after me
among you; therefore, listen to him and obey him.[4]

The Hadith of Khum is a decisive, unquestionable proof. It is part of
Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ithbat al-Wasiya, pp. 3-4. [2] Iman Ahmed b. Hanbal, Musnad, vol. 1,
p. 179. Hulyat al-Awliya', vol. 7, p. 195. Tarikh Baghdad, vol. 1, p.
324. Al-Nisa'i, al-Khasa'is, p. 14. Asad al-Ghaba, vol. 4, p. 46.
Al-Turmidhi, Sahih, vol. 2, p. 301. Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 368.
Kanz al-'Ummal, vol. 3, p. 154. Majjma' al-Zawa'id, vol. 9, p. 109. [3]
Al-Nikat al-I'tiqadiya, p. 51. [4] Al-Shafi, Telkhis, vol. 2, pp. 56-70.

Whoever denies it denies Islam, as al-Alaili says.

C. There is a group of traditions confirms that which the Shiites
maintain. Of this group is his statement before the Muslims: This is my
brother, my testamentary trustee, and my successor among you; therefore
listen to him and obey him.[1] There are tens of traditions similar to
this one. They clearly show that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, appointed Imam Ali, peace be on him, as a caliph over the
Muslims.

D. The dangerous events that accompanied the demise of the great
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, indicate that he at the
last moment of his life time tried to reinforce the Imamate of Imam Ali
and to support it through all means. This is clear through the
following:

Firstly, he, may Allah bless him and his family, took care of preparing
the troops of Usama while he was in the last hours of his life time. He
made it incumbent on the Muslims among whom were some of his great
companions to join them immediately. He ordered them to leave Median
soon. Apparently, he intended to void Medina of those craved after the
caliphate. However, the people tarried and did not obey the Prophets
commands. They looked for some excuses.

Secondly, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, ordered ink
and parchment, that he might write for the community a document after
which it would never go astray. Those who craved after the government
came to know of his purpose, so they created violent disputes. They
accused the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, of delirium. So
they spoiled his command and they prevented him from his purpose.
Accordingly, he, may Allah bless him and his family, rebuked them and
ordered them to leave his house. Then he turned to those present and
asked them to take care of his household. Of course, through this
procedure he wanted to reinforce the pledge of allegiance to Imam Ali at
Ghadir Khum. However, the people prevented him from that.

E. The pure family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
protested against Abu Bakr and refrained from pledging allegiance to
him, especially as it concerns the positive attitude Fatima, the
mistress of the women of the world, peace be on her, took toward him.
She wonderfully protested against him. When she was about to die, she
asked (her husband) Imam Ali to bury her in the dark lest one of the
members of the government of Abu Bakr should come to know of her burial.
All these things clearly indicate that the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, appointed Imam Ali as a successor after him.

The flagrant protests issued from Fatima, mistress of the women of the
world, peace be on her, from the pure family of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, and from the Muslim great figures such as
Ammar b. Yasir, Abu Dharr,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 2, p. 63. Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 2, p.
22.

Selman al-Farisi, and al-Muqdad are among the most reliable proof of
what we have mentioned. I (the author) think that the protest of the
daughter of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and his
sweet basil, against Abu Bakr and her strict, violent attitude toward
him was the reason for focusing the Shiite thought, providing it with
originality and subsistence. For the Shiites have used this protest as a
reliable proof of what they believe in respect with that Ahl al-Bayt,
peace be on them, were more appropriate for the succession (after the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family).

With this point we will end our talk about the foundation of the
Shiites. According to these brief proofs, the Shiism began at the time
of the leader of the message (the Prophet), may Allah bless him and his
family, for it was he who planted its seed and made its origins grow.

### The Ideological Frame of Shia

The Shiites maintain all the Islamic, ideological fundamentals whether
they concern Allahs positive and negative attributes or His decree and
predetermination or other than that their theological books have
mentioned. They also maintain the Imamate. They believe that it is among
the obligatory fundamentals of the religion. They have stipulated that
the Imam should be infallible and the most knowledgeable of the people
of his time. We have objectively mentioned that in the first part of the
book.

As for the legislative side, they take the branches and affairs of the
religion from the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt. They believe in all the
traditions narrated or said by them. The traditions narrated or said by
the Imams are among the four proofs a Shiite jurist use when he gives a
religious decision. The Shiites take their ideological frame in respect
with the fundamentals and branches of the religion from the true Islam
and from that which narrated on the authority of the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt for whom love has been made obligatory by Allah and whom the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, has regarded as equal to
the Holy Quran.

### Love for Ahl al-Bayt

Among the Shiite principles is showing sincere love for Ahl al-Bayt (the
members of the House), peace be on them. They deeply love and follow
them as a sign of obedience to Allah, the Exalted, Who says: Say I do
not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near relatives.[1]
Allah, the Most High, has limited the reward of the message of His great
Apostle to the love for his near relatives. Many traditions narrated on
the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
indicating that love for them is a sign of faith and detesting them is a
sign of hypocrisy, that whoever loves them loves Allah and His Apostle,
and that whoever

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., 42, 23.

detests them detests Allah and His Apostle. The Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, has guaranteed that whoever clings to them will
never deviate from the way of the truth and correctness, as it has been
mentioned in Hadith al-Theqelayn. He, may Allah bless him and his
family, has compared them to Noahs Ark, saying: The likeness of my
family among you is like the likeness of Noahs Ark. Whoever embarked it
was saved (from drowning); and whoever stayed behind it drowned and
died. For this reason love for the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on
them, and faith in their Imamate are among the essential affairs with
the Shiites and among their true beliefs. The Shiites regard him who
harbors malice against the Imams and denies their outstanding merits as
like him who denies one of the Islamic, well-known necessities. Rather
he denies (the Islamic) message though he apparently confesses
al-shehadetayn.

The Shiites are not excessive in their love for the Imams; rather they
restrict themselves to the obligatory taking from that which narrated on
their authority in respect with religious laws, and social, good
manners. We have in detail mentioned that in the introduction of the
book.

### The Revolt against Oppression

The history of the Shiites is full of bitter struggle and violent
revolts against the oppressive, tyrannical rulers. The Shiites have set
off to the fields of the brilliant jihad since the dawn of their
history. They have raised the slogan of the Islamic justice and demanded
it to be established on the arena of life. They have also resisted all
kinds of social oppression. So, really, they are the flowing spring from
which the revolts against the tyrannical flow.

The first summons to the inclusive reform started by the Shiite men
during those difficult periods when terrorism and tyranny prevailed, for
the authorities imprisoned all those who talked about reform or summoned
the people to it. However the Imams of the Shiites and their great
figures went to the fields of honor and sacrifice. They criticized the
deeds of the oppressive and condemned their behavior. They carried out
violent revolutions history has recorded for them with a pen of honor
and light. They have been provided by the essence of revolt and
sacrifice by Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
the leader of human justice on earth, for he was the first Muslim leader
revolted against those arrogant, demanded justice and equality. During
the short period of his government, he created true awareness and a
revolt in the souls of his followers against all the oppressive
dictators. Examples of that are: Hijr b. Adi and his righteous
companions revolted against Muawiya. Some righteous people from among
this community revolted against oppression, demanding Islamic justice
and the Quranic precepts to be put into practice. The first one of their
Imams to die a martyr was Imam al-Husayn, master of martyrs, peace be on
him. He refused the oppression prevailing at his time and revolted
against Yazid b. Muawiya, the dictator. Through his revolt, he, peace be
on him, has changed the course of history and taught the oppressive a
wonderful lesson which is not forgotten until the Day

of Resurrection. After him his grandsons and those of his brother
al-Hasan, peace be on him, carried out continuos revolutions that
astonished the oppressive, divided the unity of the dictators,
enlightened the public opinion, and provided it with the essence of
revolt against all the tyrannical and despotic.

The Shiites maintain that if government is not in the hand of the Imams
of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, the community will suffer from
oppression and tyranny, that justice and equality will never spread
among it. Al-Wardi says: The Shiites were the first to hold the cultural
revolt in Islam against tyranny. The essence of revolt is in their
theory. The thought of the Imamate they maintain urged them to criticize
the ruling class, (to declare) their opposition throughout the stages of
their history, to regard all governments as usurping and oppressive
except those undertaken by an infallible Imam. For this reason they
continually carried out revolutions. They did not calm down, nor did
they flag.[1]

Through their continuous revolts, the Shiite figures wanted to establish
social justice, to put an end to all kinds of oppression and corruption.
For this reason they offered many sacrifices to achieve this noble
objective aiming at removing the corrupt government from the country.

According to these revolutionary doctrines the Shiites have made it
forbidden to cooperate with the oppressive rulers or to mange their
official jobs. Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said to his companions: I
dislike to make a contract with them (the oppressive). The oppressive
and their helpers are in the Fire until Allah decides among his
servants.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, said to Ziyad b. Abi Selema: O Ziyad, if I
fell off a high mountain and cut into pieces, it would be better for me
than undertaking a work for them (the oppressive) or walking on a carpet
of a man from among them.

The Imam, peace be on him, made it forbidden (for Muslims) to present a
case against each other (in the courts) of the rulers of the unjust
states. They gave a religious decision that what the judges did was
invalid. Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, warned the jurists against
communicating with those oppressive rulers, saying: Jurists are the ones
entrusted by the apostles. So, if you see them incline to the rulers,
then beware of them![2]

The Muslim, good class responded to these verdicts of Ahl al-Bayt, peace
be on them. They refrained from communicating with the rulers. They made
light of and disparaged all those who worked for them. An example of
that is that Ibn al-Mubarek condemned Ismail b. Ibrahim al-Qereshi when
he became a judge. He wrote him the following poem:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Wa ''az al-Salateen, p. 293. [2] Hulyat al-Awliya, vol. 3, p. 194.

O you who has appointed a falcon over knowledge to hunt the properties
of the miserable!

You trick for the world and the pleasures wherein with a trick that
destroys the religion.

You have become mad through it (job), while you had been the medicine of
the mad.

Where are your bygone narrations on the authority of Ibn Ayun and Ibn
Sireen?

Where are your detailed narrations on leaving the doors of the rulers?

If you said that you were forced, then that would be invalid. The donkey
of knowledge has slipped in clay![1]

The Shiites have offered Islam and Muslims all the valuable services,
and hoisted the flag of justice on earth. They are the greatest of all
the Muslim sects in going to the fields of jihad to make high the word
of truth and justice.

### Courage and Intrepidity

The leader of the Shiites and their great figures have strong courage
and intrepidity. They are not afraid of authorities, nor do they yield
to tyrannical governments. They bravely declare the Word of Allah and
condemn abominable things.

An example of them is Abd Allah b. Afif al-Azdi. He was blind, but Allah
lighted his heart with the light of faith. He revolted against Ubayd
Allah b. Ziyad when he delivered a speech after the murder of Imam
al-Husayn, master of the martyrs, peace be on him, and cursed him. He
refused his statement before the people in the mosque of Kufa, saying:
You, your father, and he who has appointed you as a governor are liars,
O retainer of Banu Allajj! Why have you killed the Prophets grandson and
ascended the pulpits of the Muslims? Where are the children of the
Emigrants and of the Ansar to take vengeance on you and on your
tyrannical (leader), the cursed one, son of the cursed one by the tongue
of the trusted Prophet? He referred to Yazid b. Muawiya.

Through this great way people can put an end to oppression, remove
unhappiness and tyranny from society, and achieve the objectives of the
community. The Shiite leaders condemned the deeds of the kings and of
the governors throughout the stages of history. Al-Kumayt b. Ziyad
al-Asadi, for example, satirized the Umayyads and made comparison
between them and the Alawids, saying:

They (the Alawids) are politicians, but they are not like those who
treat people and sheep in the same manner!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 1, p. 278.

They are not like Abd al-Malik, al-Waleed, Sulayman, and Hisham!

Another time he satirized Hisham and the sons of Merwan, saying:

The day of riding it is a misfortune upon the enemies. He is mistaken in
what he has said about it.

Our speech is the speech of the guiding prophets; we perform the deeds
of those people who lived before Islam.

He addressed the Umayyads through these brave poetry lines:

Say to the Umayyads even if you are afraid of the sword and
estrangement:

May Allah make hungry him whom you have satisfied and make satisfied him
who has been hungry through your oppression.

The Umayyads persecuted, tortured, and severely punished al-Kumayt, but
he was firm in his thought and faith.

Al-Ferezdeq, a poet, appeared at that time. He criticized the Umayyads
and openly dispraised them. He bravely defended his thought. Among his
noble attitudes is that he praised Imam Zayn al-Abidin, peace be on him,
and dispraised Hisham b. Abd al-Malik when he pretended that he did not
recognize the Imam. He said to him before the people:

This is he whose ability the valley (of Mecca) recognizes, and whom the
(Sacred) House recognizes (as do) the sanctuary and the area outside the
sanctuary (al-hill).

This is the son of the best of all Allahs servants. This is the pure,
pious man, the pure eminent man.

Your statement, who is this? does hot harm him. The Arabs and the
non-Arabs recognize him whom you have denied.

So the Umayyads were displeased with al-Ferezdeq and took vengeance on
him. However, he paid no attention to that. He went on mentioning their
defects. He satirized Hisham b. Abd al-Malik when he imprisoned him,
saying:

He turns the head, which is not the head of a master; and he has a
cross-eye whose defects are manifest.

The Shiite writers and poets disparaged and satirized the oppressive. An
example of that is Dibil al-Khezai. He defamed the Abbasids and exposed
their bad deeds. He satirized them through a number of poems through
which he shook their entity. He made the people displeased with them. He
satirized al-Rashid, al-Amin, al-Mamun, al-Mutasim, and Ibrahim b.
al-Mehdi. He satirized al-Mutasim through these painful poetry lines,
saying:

He has become an Imam, while he is not rightly guided. He has neither
reason nor mind.

The Abbasid kings are seven in the books. No book has come to us on
their eighth one.

Similarly, the Companions of the Cave were seven good ones in the cave;
and their eighth one was a dog.

I regard their dog as higher than you in position, for you have a sin,
and he had no sin.

Through inspiration from his thought, Dibil disputed with the oppressive
and took vengeance on them. He satirized and condemned the Abbasids, to
the extent that they made him homeless. Terror and fear pursed him. He
said his famous statement: I have carried my gibbet on my shoulder for
forty years; I have found none to crucify me on it!

Surely the history of the Shiites is full of heroism and mutiny against
oppression, vengeance on social tyranny, demanding the peoples rights,
defending the interests of the miserable and the weak whom those
tyrannical circles deprived of their rights.

Exemplary Punishments on the Shiites

As the Shiites were the strongest organizations who demanded the
responsible to establish social justice, human values, they were
subjected to severe vengeance by the governors and the kings. Those
governors and kings practiced on the Shiites all kinds of force and
violence. They deprived them of life through throwing them into dark
prisons. The pursed them and practiced on them exemplary punishments.
They cut off their hands and legs. They gouged their eyes and crucified
them on the trunks of the date-palms.[1] An example of that is that
Muawiya subjected them to oppression and tyranny. He wrote a letter to
all his governors mentioning in it: If you come to know that someone
loves Ali and his household, then delete his (name) from the Divan and
do not give a salary to him. Then he sent them another letter saying: If
you accuse someone of loving these people (the Alawids), then severely
punish him and demolish his house. [2]

Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him, talked about the ordeals and misfortunes
wreaked by the oppressive upon their Shiites, saying: Our Shiites
(followers) were killed in all the cities; their hands and their legs
were cut off for a suspicion. All those who loved us were imprisoned,
their properties were plundered, and their houses were demolished.[3]

During those dark periods, the Shiites met many political and social
problems; there is no way to imagine them because they were horrible and
bitter. Some poetry

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 15. [2] Hayat
al-Hasan b. 'Ali, vol. 2, pp. 302-307. [3] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh
Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 15.

lines have been ascribed to an Imam of the Shiites. In them he has
mentioned the disasters that befell them, saying:

We, the sons of the chosen one, have ordeals our Kazim stand.

Our ordeal is great among the people. The first and the last of us is
inflicted.

The people are delighted with their Id, while our Id is a funeral
ceremony.

All the Muslims are delighted with their Ids. However, the Shiites felt
that their Ids were funeral ceremonies due to the ordeals they met. The
accusation of Shiism was among the most dangerous crimes that brought
about exhaustion and severe punishments. Rather the mere communication
with the Shiites or greeting them brought about death and severe
punishments. When Ibrahim b. Herthema went to Medina, a man visited him.
He said to the man: Go away from me! Do not let them shed my blood![1]
Mansur al-Nimri has mentioned in a poem of his the harm and tyranny that
befell the Shiites, saying:

The Prophets family and those who love them hide themselves out of fear
of killing.

They are isolated from the community of monotheism, while the Christians
and the Jews are secure!

Al-Fedl b. Dukayn became a Shiite. His son came to him crying. He asked
him: What wrong with you?

Father, he replied, the people say that you are a Shiite.

He composed, saying:

I am still concealing (my being a Shiite) to the extent that (I have
become) a non-Arab in returning the answer to the askers.

That I and you may be safe from the speech of the informers. Can a
living thing be safe from the people?[2]

His son cried because of this accusation that brought about severe
punishments by the responsible. All those who were accused of love for
Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, were subjected to ordeal and tribulation.
Abd Allah b. Amir, a poet, and better known as al-Abli, has referred in
one of his poems to the exhaustion he met due to his love for them:

They exiled me when I praised Ali, and they thought that that was a
dangerous illness in me.

By my Lord, I will (love them) forever until my heart is full of love
for Ali and his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh Baghdad, vol. 6, p. 127. [2] Ibid., 12, p. 351.

children. I love them because of my love for the Prophet.

The love is for religion, not for the world. The most wicked of all
kinds of love is that which is for the world.

Al-Teghrai says:

The love for the family of Musa is manifest and their friendship for the
children of his brother is apparent.

Their Imam is from among the progeny of the first Harun. They have
become rightly guided through them; and every people have a guide.

Similarly, the Christians honor a kind of stick.

However, when one loves the family of Ahmed (Muhammed), they kill him or
accuse him of atheism.

This is the dangerous illness. The reasons of those in the cities and in
the deserts have gone astray.

They have not kept the Prophet Muhammeds right in respect with his
family; and Allah is watching.

Another poet says:

Surely through their love for their Prophet, the Jews have become safe
from the disgrace of their treacherous time.

Through their love for Isa, the possessor of the cross (the Christians),
proudly walk in the villages of Nejran.

However, the believers are thrown into the fires in the cities.

The authorities took all the procedures against those who praised the
Alawids or mentioned them in a good manner. Also they intentionally
tired the Alawids. A loyal decree issued from Baghdad and was sent to
Egypt. It has been mentioned in the decree: The Alawids should not be
given country estates. They should not ride horses nor should they go to
any part of al-Fustat. They should be prevented from taking slaves
except one slave. If there is a dispute between an Alawid and another
person, then speech of the Alawid should not be accepted, and the speech
of his opponent should be accepted without any proof.[1] It incumbent on
the Alawids to go to the capital, that they might be under the
supervision of the government. Al-Rashid ordered his governor over
Median to order the Alawids to guarantee each other. He ordered them to
be brought before the authority every day. If any of them had been
absent, he should have been punished.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Kindi, al-Wilat wa al-Qudat, p. 198. [2] Imam al-Sadiq wa
al-Madhahib al-Arba'a, vol. 1, p. 117.

The oppressive used all means to severely punish the Alawids and their
followers. They harbored so great malice against the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be on them, that they severely punished all those who
mentioned them.

Al-Meqrizi has mentioned: Yazid b. Abd Allah, the governor of Egypt,
ordered a solider to be punished. When the solider felt the pain of
whip, he adjured the governor by the right of al-Hasan and al-Husayn,
peace be on them, to pardon him. However, the governor ordered him to be
flogged thirty times because of this oath. Then he wrote a letter to
al-Mutawakil in Baghdad and informed him of the solider. So al-Mutawakil
ordered him to be flogged a hundred times and ordered him to be sent to
Baghdad.[1]

A poet recited a poem before al-Mutawakil and dispraised the Alawids and
their followers. So al-Mutawakil ordered three thousand dinars to be
scattered over his head and to be collected for him. He appointed him as
a governor over al-Bahrain and al-Yemen and gave him four robes of
honor.[2]

The ordeal of the Shiites was difficult and hard, for they met violent
political and social problems. They were afflicted with deprivation of
all the natural rights. I (the author) think that no sect met the
persecution and tyranny the Shiites met. For the Umayyad and the Abbasid
rulers went too far in abasing them and forcing them to do what they
hated.

### Wonderful Resistance

The Shiites resisted the violent attacks of the rulers, defended their
doctrines, and protected their message. They paid no attention the to
tyranny and terrorism of the ruler. The carried out the following
wonderful deeds:

#### A. The Secret Propaganda

The Shiites secretly and continually resisted the tyranny and oppression
of the Abbasids. They made widespread propaganda against them. They
exposed their arrogance, their disparaging the subjects, their
possessing alone their affairs, and other things. They wanted to make
the subjects hate the then standing government. The Shiite propaganda at
the Umayyad time could create collective feelings against that
government until it overthrew it. At the Abbasid time it spared no
effort to strip the Abbasid government of legality. It indicated that
all those who joined them or cooperated with them were sinful and were
not clinging to their religion. Those campaigns enlightened the public
opinion, opened the door to the continuos revolt against those
tyrannical rulers, and deprived them of the confidence of the masses in
them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh Baghdad, vol. 4, p. 153. [2] Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi
al-Tarikh, vol. 7, p. 38.

#### B. Forming Parties

During their first time, the Shiites formed secret parties, and those
parties formed groups of people and organizations. Each group and
organization was headed by a person called al-Dai (the summoner).[1] The
Shiites played an important role in moving the society. For they were
able to establish some Shiite governments in some Islamic countries.
They founded a state in Morocco. The state was founded by Ubayd Allah
al-Mehdi in the year 296 A. H. It included Siqlya and the south of
Italy. They also formed a state in Egypt at the hand of the great leader
Jawher al-Siqili in the year 358 A. H. They founded the Nezari State of
Death (Dawlet al-Mout al-Nezariya) in Persia in the year 483 A. H. This
state was founded by al-Hasan b. al-Sebbagh. They founded a state in
al-Bahrain in the year 270 A. H. This state was founded by al-Hasan
al-Ahwazi, Hemdan b. al-Ashath, and Abu Saeed b. Merewayh al-Jenabi. The
Fatimid state founded al-Ezher Mosque in Egypt. This mosque was the
first science foundation to be founded by the Shiites. The Shiites built
castles and strongholds in Syria (Sham).

The reason for this important political success was the secret
organizations founded by the Shiites in their first times. The Shiites
had records including the names of the Shiite summoners. When Muhammed
b. Abd Allah was deserted, he ordered the records to be burnt.[2] Some
companions of the Imams had secret records containing the names of the
Shiites.[3] The then ruling authorities spared no effort to find them,
but they failed.

Any way those secret parties and organizations played an important rule
against the standing government, enlightened social thoughts, opened the
way for the revolutionaries to help them liberate their countries from
abasement and tyranny. They also did their best to spread Shiite beliefs
all over the Islamic countries. So the Shiites became so powerful that
the authorities were unable to force them to follow their desires. This
affair forced al-Mamun to appoint Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, as a
successor after him.

#### C. The Debates

Though the supervision over the Shiite great figures was strict and
pressure on them was strong, they debated with the Imams of the other
Islamic doctrines on some theological affairs such as the Imamate. Those
debates were hold in the public places, and in the house of Yehya
al-Bermeki. Some times they were hold in the royal palace of Harun, who
listened to them and admired them. Those debates were hold by Hisham b.
al-Hekem, Hisham b. Salim, and Mumin al-Taqq. Thanks to the strong
proofs given by these great figures, the beliefs of the Ahl al-Bayt,
peace be on them, spread. The Shiites were the greatest of all the
Islamic sects in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-'Aqida wa al-Shari'a fi al-Islam, p. 177. [2] 'Umdat al-Talib, p.
82. [3] Al-Nejashi, Rijal.

the fields of the theological researches. The fundamentals of their
beliefs have depended on logic and objective research, so Kradfwa has
described them: The possessors of the free thoughts.[1]

Anyway, the Shiite great figures have given many wonderful proofs of the
authenticity of their beliefs. These proofs have made people follow the
Shiite beliefs.

#### D. Writings on Walls

Because of the hard ordeals and difficult misfortunes in those black
conditions, the Shiites were unable to find a way to spread their pain
and their sorrows. The strict supervision and the strong pursuit
prevented them from presenting their misfortunes. So some of them resort
to write their fears on walls to inform the people of them. An Alawid
wrote on the wall by which al-Mehdi, the Abbasid, passed the following
poetry lines:

By Allah, when the people sleep, I do not sleep out of fear.

The men of aggression have made me homeless. I have committed no sin
except mentioning the hereafter.

I have believed in Allah, while they have not believed (in Him). So they
have regarded my faith as evil.

When I al-Mehdi saw that, he had pity on him and wrote under each poetry
line: Allah and I have given you security; therefore, appear whenever
you wish. A person asked him about the person who had written them, and
he answered: Surely he is Isa b. Zayd.[2] Dhu al-Nun al-Mesri mentioned
that he walked through a village, and that he saw some poetry lines had
been written on a wall of its:

I am the son of Mina, al-Misharayn, Zamzam, Mecca, and the Magnified
Kaaba.

My grandfather is the chosen Prophet; and my father is he whose
authority is incumbent on all Muslims.

My mother is the chaste (one) from whom (men) seek light if we do not
number her as equal to Maryam (Mary).

The grandsons of Allahs Apostle are my uncles and (fore)fathers; and his
pure (grand)sons are nine stars.

If you cling to the cord of their authority, you will be successful on
the day when the successful will be rewarded and you will lead a life of
ease and comfort.

The Imams of this creation after their Prophet; if you do not know that,
then know

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hadara al-Islamiya, vol. 1, p. 127. [2] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin,
pp. 411-412.

(it).

I am the Alawid, the Fatimid who is full of fear; and days fill man with
(fear).

Thus, I feel that the earth is narrow through it is wide; and I cannot
obtain the sky through a ladder.

So I have stopped at the house in which I have written my poetry;
therefore, read and acquaint yourself with whatever you like.

And submit to the Command of Allah in all circumstances; whoever does
not submit (to His command) is not a follower of Islam.

Dhu al-Nun has said: I have come to know that he was an Alawid who
escaped from the authority. That was at the time of Harun. Al-Mejjlisi
assumed that the poetry lines belonged to Imam al-Kazim, peace be on
him. We have discussed that in the previous chapters of the book.

Anyway, the Alawids and their followers met severe ordeals and
misfortunes during those black periods of time, to the extent that they
wrote on walls their sorrows, that the people might come to know of the
oppression and persecution they met.

The last poetry lines picture a side of the protest of the Alawids
against the rulers, that they might obtain their rights in undertaking
the caliphate and the affairs of the Muslims. For they were the most
appropriate of the people in the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family. They were his successors over his community. So whoever
cling to them will be successful on the Day of Resurrection. This was
mentioned by their grandfather, the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. The Alawids have such clear lineage, outstanding qualities, and
achievements; however, they were fearful and homeless. They were afraid
of the oppressive who deprived them of their rights and usurped their
legacy.

#### E. Practicing Teqiya

The Abbasid officially intended to persecute the Shiites in all the
fields. They pursued and severely punished them. They endangered them
and destroyed them. Accordingly, the then Imams of the Shiites were
forced to order their followers to practice teqiya (precautionary
dissimulation), that they might keep the lives of the remaining rest of
them, their blood and their properties.

Teqiya is caution, alertness, hiding and concealing faith. The Holy
Quran has referred to that teqiya is permissible: Let not the believers
take the unbelievers for friends rather than believers; and whoever does
this, he shall have nothing of (the guardianship of) Allah, but you
should guard yourselves against them, guarding carefully; and Allah
makes you cautious of (retribution from) Himself; and to Allah is the
eventual coming.[1] The Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, strictly

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., 3, 28.

ordered their followers to hide their beliefs and not to show it and to
conceal the love for them. Muammar b. Khallad has narrated, saying: [I
asked Abu al-Hasan Musa, peace be on him, about undertaking the affairs
of the Imam, and he, peace be on him, said: Abu Jafar, peace be on him,
said:] Teqiya (precautionary dissimulation) is my and my fathers
religion. He who has no teqiya has no faith.[1]

Durust b. Abi Mansur has related, saying: I was with Abu al-Hasan Musa;
and al-Kumayt b. Zayd was also with him. The Imam asked him: Are you who
says:

I have come to the Umayyads; and the affairs have destinies?

I have said that, replied al-Kumayt, by Allah, I have not withdrawn from
my religion. I am your follower and I hate your enemy; however, I have
said it according to teqiya.

So the Imam, peace be on him, said that teqiya was permissible even if
(it led) to drinking wine.[2]

Teqiya brought about the strong displeasure of the Shiites with their
opponents. It also made them firmly cling to their beliefs and
principles. Professor Ajnas Gold Teshir says: The Shiites were unable to
express their thought openly. In the meantime they were displeased with
their strong opponents. This displeasure resulted from the a sentiment
of extreme spite and revolutionary fanaticism.[3] Some stupid opponents
criticized the Shiites for the affair of teqiya. Were it not for this
wise plan, the Shiite doctrine would not remain on the surface of the
earth, and the name of Ahl al-Bayt would go in vain. That is because of
the hard ordeals that surrounded them, and the black disasters that they
met from the beginning of their history and accompanied them for many
years.

Shaykh al-Tusi says: No sect met (what the Shiites met), nor did a
doctrine was afflicted with which the Shiites were afflicted.[4]

The teqiya was legislated to spare the blood of the Shiites, to protect
their properties and honors from those tyrannical rulers who spared no
effort to destroy and put an end to them.

### The Shiite Sects

The Shia was divided into many sects. Those sects happened due to the
pressure practiced on them, their incapability to meet the Imam of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be on him. Some hypocrites used that as means to divide
their ranks. Dr. Abd al-Rezaq Muhyi al-Din has talked about the reasons
of their division, saying: The thought

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Wasa'il, Chapter on al-Amir bil Ma'ruf wa al-Nahy 'an al-Munker.
[2] Ibid. [3] Al-'Aqida wa al-Shari'a fi al-Islam, p. 181. [4] Al-Shafi,
Talkhis, vol. 1, p. 59.

(of Shiism) was always liable to threat on the side of the caliphs. This
made its followers to spread it secretly and to put it into practice in
the remote cities. The thought put into effect secretly is liable to
confusion and division in respect with the number of the Imams. For this
reason the Shiite sects are many and they differ with each other.
Moreover, their Umayyad and Abbasid opponents had the means of power and
propagation. So they said many things about their doctrines and ascribed
to them that of which they were innocent.

Besides the Imams of the (Imami) Shiites were afraid of spreading their
beliefs openly. They were isolated from their followers due to the
prohibition imposed on them. They put into effect teqiya that required
the Imam to keep pace with the jurisprudence and ideological
fundamentals of the Sunnis, in addition to that a large number of the
Shiites were ignorant of the fundamentals of the Imami doctrine.[1]

These factors mentioned by Professor Abd al-Rezaq led to the division of
the Shiites into sects and tribes, their difference over the number of
the Imams. The following is a brief account on their sects:

#### 1. Al-Kaysaniya

They were the followers of al-Mukhtar b. Ubayd al-Theqefi. They were
called so due the name Kaysan. It was said that al-Mukhtar was called
Kaysan. He was given this name by Muhammed b. Imam Ali, the Commander of
the faithful, when he entrusted him with demanding the blood of Imam
al-Husayn, master of martyrs, peace be on him.[923] Other than that was
also said. This sect maintained that the Imam after al-Husayn, peace be
on him, was Muhammed, that he was al-Mehdi, of whom the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, had given good news, who would fill the
world with fairness and justice, that he is living and never dies, that
he has disappeared in the Mountain of Redewa, and that there are with
him honey and water. In this respect al-Sayyid al-Himyari says:

The Imams from among Quraysh, the rulers of the truth, are four equal
ones.

(They are)Ali and the three from among his well-known sons.

A grandson is a grandson of faith and kindness; a grandson Kerbela made
disappear; a grandson who will never dies, lead the horses, be followed
by the standard; none has seen him for a time; he has disappear in (the
mountain of Redewa); he has honey and water.

Some of them exaggerated when they said: (Muhammed) b. al-Hanafiya was
the Imam after Imam (Ali) the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. He was before al-Hasan and al-Husayn. Al-Hasan inwardly summoned
(the people)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Adab al-Murtada, p. 56. [2] Al-Sayyid al-Murtada, al-Fusool
al-Mukhtara.

through his command. Al-Husayn appeared with the sword through his
permission. They were two summoners to him, and were commanded by
him.[1]

The Kaysaniya believed in transmigration of souls. They took this belief
from the Indian philosophy. They did not absolutely believed in the
transmigration of souls; rather they restricted that to the Imams
only.[5] This sect came to an end and had no followers throughout the
Islamic countries.

#### 2. Al-Zaydiya

Al-Zaydiya have built their ideological frame on the revolt to remove
oppressive governments and to establish justice. They have maintained
that any Alawid person comes out in revolt with the sword is an Imam to
whom obedience is obligatory. All those who claim the Imamate and are
sitting in their own houses are not Imams and it is not permissible to
follow them.[3]

More likely, they maintained that due to the oppression and tyranny the
Shiites met during those terrible times. The Umayyad government regarded
as atheistic all those who loved Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them. To this
meaning al-Kumayt, the poet of Islam, refers:

They indicate with their hands to me and their statement is: verily this
is unsuccessful, while the indicters are more unsuccessful (than me).

A sect has accused me of unbelief and a sect says that I am an evil-doer
and guilty.

They criticize me for (my) love for you out of their deception and
deviation; rather they mock (at me), while I wonder at them.

They say: His inclination and opinion are Turabi; (such was) I called
and nicknamed by them.[4]

Abd Allah b. Kuthayr al-Sehmi refuted those who criticized him for his
love for the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
saying:

I am the man whose defects are the love for the Prophet, the children of
Abu al-Hasan, and their father, who was good in the wombs and the
backbones.

Is it a sin that I love them? Rather love for them is the expiation for
sin.[5]

A person wanted to degrade the position of al-Sayyid al-Himyari. The
person said to him: O Rafidi![6]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Khaqani, Rijal, p. 129. [2] Al-Madhahib al-Islamiya, p. 70. [3]
Firaq al-Shi'a, pp. 74-75. [4] Al-Hashimiyat. [5] Al-Jahiz, al-Bayan wa
al-Tabiyyin, vol. 3, p. 360. [6] Rafidi is the one who refuses a certain
thing.

So al-Sayyid al-Himyari said to him:

In spite of you, we refuse the men of error and abominable things![1]

These oppressive measures hurt the feelings of the Shiites and they
urged them to believe in revolt as a basic rule to build their
ideological entity. Al-Zaydiya maintained that. They believed that Zayd
b. Ali, a great revolutionary, was the Imam and after him was his son
Yehya, who followed the example of his father in raising the flag of the
revolt against the Umayyad government. They did not follow the text (the
tradition) which is a basic rule for the Imamate with the Shiites. They
refused to maintain the Imams of guidance. For they did not respond to
them through going in revolt with the sword against the Umayyad
government. Their justification for that was that the positive
resistance was not useful, unsuccessful, and would bring to the Muslims
hardships and misfortunes. They adopted the negative resistance against
the authority and made it forbidden for the Muslims to cooperate with
it.

Al-Zaydiya maintained the Imamate of Zayd because he resisted the
Umayyads and went to the fields of jihad saying: When people hate the
heat of the sword, they become lowly. This was the slogan of al-Zaydiya.
Zayd recited the words of his father, saying:

O Zayds son, did Zayd not say: Whoever loves life lives lowly?

Be like Zayd, for you are Zayds soul, and take a dense shade.[2]

#### 3. Al-Imamiya

This sect has clung to the essence and reality of Islam. They followed
the Prophets pure family, from whom Allah took away uncleanness. They
maintained all the traditions narrated from them in respect with the
fundamental and branches of Islam, to the extent that their doctrines is
better known as the doctrine of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them. They are
distinguished from the rest of the Islamic doctrines by the following:

A. They have opened the horizons of reason; they have not isolated
reason from the real life. They have regarded the things perceived by it
as one of the four proofs from which a jurist concludes a religious
verdict. Moreover they regarded it as a referee among the contradictory
traditions. All the things agree with the decision of reason are
regarded as proof; all the things deviate from it are worthless. For
this reason the Shiites are the greatest of all the Islamic sects in
taking care of the decision and freedom of reason and in making use of
it.

B. They have opened the door to ijtihad[3]. For this reason their
jurisprudence keeps

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Murtada, al-Fusool, vol. 1, p. 61. [2] 'Aqa'id al-Zaydiya. [3]
The capability of deriving religious decisions.

pace with the time development and treats all new events on which there
is not Islamic text. This has brought about great development in the
Shiite jurisprudence and made it take the first place in the Islamic
jurisprudence, for it is serious, deep, and developed. Accordingly, the
jurists and men of law in the world have admired it. Professor Muhammed
Abu Zehra says: They (the Shiites) did not yield to the regime of the
authority in closing the door to jurisprudence, nor did their education
yield to the regime of the state, nor did their schools follow that
program followed by most Islamic schools. Rather they followed the way
of Ahl al-Bayt in refusing cooperation with the government. Their door
to ijtihad has not been closed; it is still open. This is among the
things of which the Shiites are proud before all the present Islamic
groupings.[1]

C. They have a generous, huge inheritance of that which has been
narrated from their Imams, peace be on them. This inheritance is full of
all the elements of development and progress such as good manners, rules
of conduct, society, short wise sayings, morals, creative foundations of
economic and social development of the community, taking care of
administrative and political affairs. All these things have been
mentioned in Imam Alis Nehjj al-Belagha, which is the greatest book
after the Holy Quran, and which has different kinds of knowledge.
Definitely some secrets of its chapters have not been discovered,
especially as it concerns the creation of the heavens and others, for
many explainers of the words of the Imam, peace be on him, have not
understood them fully. The Shiites have al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, which is
the Gospel of the family of Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his
family. This great book is full of the most wonderful cultural legacy
the like of which people have not found. It contains Imam Zayn
al-Abidins supplications. The Imam has the Treatise on Rights (Risalet
al-Huquq). This treatise takes care of the rights of the community
against the government, and vise-versa. It also takes care of the rights
of the members of society against each other. Though the book is brief,
it is the greatest of all the books written on Islam. If we review all
that which narrated from Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and the rest of
the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, then we will find a flood of
sciences and arts. They split open the doors to them and put their
foundations such botany, chemistry, medicine, and other sciences that
have taken part in developing scientific and cultural life during those
times, and whose waves included the rest of the times. The Imami sect
has the greatest scientific inheritance the like of which no religious
or social sect has.

D. They have objectively taken care of the philosophy of government.
They have clung to the office of the Imamate. The theologians have
limited the values and concepts of the Imamate aiming at the righteous
government Islam has brought. This government stands on pure justice and
truth through which the community is developed in economic and social
fields, its rights and interests are protected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Shafi'i, p. 234.

The philosophy of the Imamate the Shiites maintain positively takes care
of the policy of government of the country. In their viewpoints it
stands on a firm foundation of justice whose plans and objectives none
can carry out except the infallible Imam who does not yield to sentiment
and inclination; rather he follows the public interests. We have
witnessed that in the government of Imam Ali, peace be on him. He
adopted among the Muslims a kind of policy the like of which the Muslims
and other than them have never witnessed throughout the stages of
history. He treated the subjects with justice and equality. He denied
his personal interests and others.

Any way the Imami Shiites maintain that the Imamate stands on a deep
foundation of awareness and understanding, that it is confirmed by the
most wonderful reliable proofs from the Quran, the sunna, and the
decision of reason.

E. They renounce the excessiveness in respect with the Imams, peace be
on him; and they decide that it is apostasy from the religion.

These are the essential affairs that distinguish the Imami Shiites from
the rest of the Shiite sects.

#### 4. Al-Fetehiya

This sect maintained that Abd Allah al-Afteh was the Imam after his
father Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him. Abd Allah al-Afteh was Ismails
brother. He was the eldest son of the Imam. The Fetehiya supported their
claim with a tradition. They took the beginning of the tradition and
left its end. This tradition is these words of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be
on him: None has the right to undertake the office of the Imamate except
the eldest son provided that he has no defect. As for Abd Allah, he was
a broad-headed. It was said that he was broad-legged. However, his
followers added to him some laudable deeds and achievements. Abd Allah
lived for seventy days after his fathers death.[1] He had no son.[2]
This sect also called al-Ammariya whose leader was called Ammar.[3]
Perhaps he was Ammar b. Musa al-Sabati over whose traditions the
traditionists have differed.

#### 5. Al-Semetiya

They claimed that the Imam after Jafar b. Muhammed was his son Muhammed.
Then his sons after him undertook the office of the Imamate. They were
ascribed to one of their heads who was called Yehya b. Abi Sumayt.[4] It
was said that he was called Yehya b. Shumayt, and that he was among the
commanders of al-Mukhtar al-Theqefis troops.[5] This sect claimed that
the Awaited Imam would be among the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Milal wa al-Nihal, vol. 1, p. 274. [2] Al-Tabseer fi al-Deen, p.
23. [3] Abu al-Hasan al-Ash'ari, Maqalat al-Islamiyyin wa Ikhtilaf
al-Musalleen. [4] Ibid. [5] Firaq al-Shi'a, p. 77.

children of Muhammed b. Jafar.[1]

#### 6. Al-Khettabiya

They were the followers of Abi al-Khettab, Muhammed b. Abi Zayneb. They
went out in revolt during the time of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him.
They warred against Isa b. Musa, the governor over Kufa. They were
seventy men. They were killed by Isa. None escaped him except one man
who was critically wounded. This man was numbered as among the dead. So
he escaped Isa, and then he recovered. This man was called Abu Selema,
Salim b. Mukerram al-Jemmal, whose nickname was Abi Khedija. Abu
al-Khettab, the head of this sect was captured and brought before Isa b.
Musa, and he ordered him to be killed. So he was killed at Dar al-Rizq
on the bank of the Euphrates. Isa ordered him and a group of his
companions to be crucified. Then he ordered them to be burnt. Then he
sent their heads to al-Mansur, and he ordered them to be crucified on
the gate of the city of Baghdad for three days. Then he ordered them to
be burnt. One of the followers of Abi al-Khettab said: Neither Abu
al-Khettab nor his companions were killed. Al-Khettabiya also claimed
that they warred against Isa according to an order from Imam al-Sadiq,
peace be on him, and that he sent Abu al-Khettab as a prophet to the
people.[2]

#### 7. Al-Nawusiya

They claimed that Imam Jafar b. Muhammed, peace be on him, was alive and
did not die, that he was al-Qaim al-Mehdi. This sect was called
al-Nawusiya because its head was called Ajlan b. Nawus from Basrah.[3]

8. Al-Ismailiya

They maintained that the Imam after Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, was
his son Ismail. They denied that Ismail died during the life time of his
father and said: Ismail will not die until he under takes the office of
the Imamate.[4] Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, refused this idea during
his life time. When his son Ismail died, he sent for some of his
companions and made them bear witness for his death. We have mentioned
that in detail in the previous chapters of the book.

Al-Ismailiya insisted on denying the death of Ismail. They thought that
Imam al-Sadiq made some of his Shiites bear witness for the death of his
son because he had felt the dangers that would threaten the life of his
son, whom he had appointed as the successor after him. They said that he
ordered him to hide himself. So Ismail secretly left Medina and headed
for Damascus. Al-Mansur came to know of that, and he order his governor
their to arrest him. However, his governor there had already adopted the
doctrine of al-Ismailiya. Accordingly, he showed the letter to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabseer fi al-Deen, p. 23. [2] Firaq al-Shi'a, p. 71. [3] Al-Farq
bayna al-Firaq. Al-Razi, I'tiqad Firaq al-Muslimeen. [4] Abu al-Hasan
al-Ash'ari, Maqalat al-Islamiyyin wa Ikhtilaf al-Musalleen, p. 98.

Ismail. So Ismail left Damascus and headed for Iraq. They claimed that
he had been seen in Basrah in the year 151 A. H., and that he passed by
an invalid person, and Allah healed him through him. They also claimed
that Ismail secretly went to his followers until he died in Basrah in
the year 158 A. H. Moreover, they said that he had children whose names
were: Muhammed, Ali, Fatima, and that he appointed his eldest son as an
Imam after him in the presence of some loyal summoners.[1]

Any way, our sources have not confirmed these claims. They have
unanimously agreed that Ismail died during the lifetime of his father,
just as we have mentioned in the previous chapters of the book.

Al-Ismailiya have regarded the Imamate as a high position and gone too
far in sanctifying it. In his praising Imam al-Muiz, an Ismaili Imam,
Ibn Hani has said:

What you please, not what the fates please, so decide, for you are the
one, the supreme.

You look like the Prophet Muhammed; and your ansar (supporters) are like
the Ansar.

You are the one of whom the religious scholars and the traditions have
given good news in their books.

This is the Imam of the pious, who has stunned the tyrannical and the
unbelievers.

This is he through love for him salvation is hoped, and through whom
sins and burdens are forgiven.

This is he whose intercession is useful tomorrow; and the fire goes out
when it sees him.

In his poem, Ibn Hani goes on giving high qualities to al-Muiz li
Dinillah. Through that he expresses the beliefs of al-Ismailiya, shows
excessiveness toward their Imams and gives to them many attributes of
Allah, the Most High. Another of their poets went too far in describing
their Imams, saying:

Love for them is a religious duty obligatory on men. Disobedience to
them is a ruinous disbelief leading to the fire.

They are the firmest handle and way to guidance. They are the utmost
objective which none can obtain.

Were it not for them, Allah would not create his creation, light and
splendor were not in the world.

They are the large tree of the religion that produces guidance, gives
shade and is high through blessing and piety, defends him who sits in
its shadow, releases and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh al-Da'wa al-Islamiya, pp. 142-143.

protects the ignorant from death.

Whoever carefully considers the beliefs of al-Ismailiya, he will find
them full of excessiveness and immoderation in respect with the love for
their Imams. They regarded their present young Imam as a world lamp,
available everywhere, the one who will save souls from everlasting
unhappiness, and lead the world to the Ideal Reality.

#### 9. Al-Waqifiya

It was an errant sect, deviated from the religion, betrayed Allah and
His Apostle, and plundered the wealth of the Muslims. They maintained
that Imam Musa, peace be on him, was alive and did not die, that he was
raised to the heaven just as al-Mesih Isa b. Maryam, peace be on him.
They believed that he was al-Qaim who would fill the world with justice
and fairness as it was filled with oppression and tyranny. They claimed
that the person who was imprisoned in the prison of al-Sindi b. Shahik
was not Imam Musa, peace be on him; rather he was someone like him. So
it is necessary to give a brief account on the affairs of this sect:

### A. The Reason for al-Waqf

They reason for that they restricted the Imamate to Imam Musa, peace be
on him, and their denying his death is: When the Imam, peace be on him,
was in the dark prisons, he appointed some representatives to receive
the money sent by some believers. Some of them could collect a lot of
money. An example of that is that Ziyad b. Merwan al-Qendi had seventy
thousand dinars. Ali b. Hamza had thirty thousand dinars. Other than
them had sums of money similar to these. When the Imam, peace be on him,
died, these people denied his death. They bought country estates and
house for the money they had. When Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, asked
them to return the money, they refused to give it to him and denied the
death of his father.[1] Al-Husayn b. Muhammed has mentioned: The
Ashathis collected thirty dinars from the zekat due on their properties
and on the rest of the other rights. So they sent these funds of money
to two agents of Imam Musa, peace be on him, in Kufa. One of them was
called Hayyan al-Serrajj. The Imam, peace be on him, was then in prison.
When they received the money, they bought houses and corps for it. When
the Imam died, they denied his death, announced that he would not die,
and that he was the awaited al-Qaim (al-Mehdi).[2] However, some of them
returned to the way of the truth and correctness. They handed over the
money they had taken to Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, and acknowledged
his Imamate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12, p. 308. [2] Ibid.

### B. Its Spread

The doctrine of al-Waqf spread and was adopted by many people. Among
them were a large number from among the companions of the Imam, peace be
on him, and the narrators of his traditions. We will mention them in
detail when we speak about the group of the narrators and companions.
The reason for spreading this idea is: Those who propagated it had been
known for their good conduct and their clinging to the religion. So they
deluded the simple Shiites and greatly misled them. Besides they spent a
lot of money buying consciences. Yunus b. Abd al-Rahman has narrated,
saying: When Abu Ibrahim Musa, peace be on him, died, most of his people
had a lot of money. This was the reason for their restricting themselves
to his Imamate and their denying his death. For they craved after the
money. For example Ziyad b. Merwan al-Qendi had seventy thousand dinars.
Ali b. Hamza had thirty thousand dinars. When I saw that and came to
know of the truth and of the affairs of Abu al-Hasan al Rida, peace be
on him, I talked about that and summoned the people to it. So they
(Ziyad and Ali) sent for me and said to me: What has made you say that?
If you want money, we will enrich you. They decided to give me ten
thousand dinars and said to me: Refrain (from saying that). However, I
refused and said to them: The two persons called al-Sadiq, peace be on
them, told us: When the heresies appear, the (religious) scholar should
show his knowledge. If he does not do that, he is deprived of the light
of faith. As I was not ready to leave jihad in the way of Allah, they
showed enmity toward me and harbored malice against me.[1]

Through these manners and tempting ways the doctrine of Waqf was spread.
However, shortly after that this doctrine was destroyed; the believers
came to know that it was false; and the lying of those who summoned the
people to it appeared.

### The Imams condemn al-Waqf

In many traditions the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, have
condemned the thought of al-Waqf, criticized its leaders and the
narrators of their traditions, and warned the people against their vague
errors. Al-Hekem b. al-Ays has mentioned, saying: [I and my uncle
Sulayman b. Khalid visited Abu Abd Allah, peace be on him, and he
asked:]

-Who is this boy? He indicated with his hand to me.

-My nephew.

-Does he have any knowledge of this affair (the Imamate)?

-Yes.

-Praise belongs to Allah, Who did not create him Satan. I seek refuge
for your son

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., vol. 11, p. 308.

with Allah from the discord of our Shiites.

-What will be that discord?

-Their denying the Imams and their restricting themselves to the Imamate
of my son Musa. They will deny his death and claim that he would be the
Imam after me. Surely there will be no Imam after me. Those are the most
wicked of the creation![1]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, said to Ali b. Abi Hamza al-Tai, a great
figure of al-Waqifiya: O Ali, You and your companions are like
donkeys![2] Muhammed b. al-Fudayl came in to Imam Abu al-Hasan al-Rida,
peace be on him. Then he turned to him and said: May I be your ransom, I
am the successor after Ibn Abi Hamza, Ibn Mahran, and Ibn Abi Saeed.
They are the leaders of al-Waqifiya and are the greatest of the people
of the world in showing enmity toward Allah, the Most High.

So the Imam said to him: If you are rightly guided, then you are not
harmed by him who has gone astray. They have accused Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, of lying. They have accused so-and-so of
lying. They have accused Jafar and Musa, peace be on them, of lying. And
I follow the example of my forefathers!

-May I be your ransom, you said to Ibn Mahran: May Allah take away the
light of your heart and make poverty enter your house!

-How is he? And how are his companions?

-My master, they are in the worst condition. They are grieved in
Baghdad. Al-Husayn is unable to go (to Mecca) to perform (hajj)
al-Ummrah![3]

A Shiite wrote a letter to Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. He asked him
about al-Waqifiya, and he answered him: A Waqifite is the one who
deviates from the truth and insists on performing a bad deed. If he dies
while insisting on the bad deed, then the hell fire and evil destination
will be his shelter![4] Another Shiite asked him whether it was
permissible to pay zekat to the Waqifites, and he prohibited him from
that and said to him: They (al-Waqifiya) are unbelievers, polytheists,
and hypocrites![5]

Many traditions on the authority of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, have
been mentioned on dispraising them, criticizing their reports, regarding
them as polytheists having no links with Islam and no relationship with
Ahl al-Bayt, peace

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 1, pp. 359-360. [2] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12,
p. 309. [3] Al-Keshi, Rijal. [4] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12, p. 309. [5]
Ibid.

be on them. Accordingly, we should not regard this sect and the other
previous sects as among the Shiites. That is because some of them denied
some of the fundamentals of the religion such as al-Khettabiya, who
claimed that Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, sent Abu al-Khettab to the
people as a prophet. Therefore, how this sect and the like could be
regarded as among the Shiites? It is worth mentioning that the Shiites
worship Allah, the One without partner. They believe that the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, is the last of the prophets and
master of the apostles. Surely, regarding some of these sects, who have
no faith in the Oneness of Allah, as among the Shiite sects is flagrant
oppression toward this sect who has adopted Islam and believed in all
that which Allah has revealed, and who have spared no effort to raise
high the word of monotheism.

Any way, as al-Waqifiya had bad beliefs and Ahl al-Bayt disparaged them,
they were given the nickname of al-Memtura (covered with rain), as a
sign of likening them to dogs. Generally speaking, al-Waqifiya invented
the thought of al-Waqf, that they might plundered the money of the
Shiites. This sect has come to an end.

These are some sects which have been regarded and numbered as among the
Shiites. Some sects began and grew at that time and after it; they had
nothing to do with the Shiite beliefs which have been built on
monotheism and faith in all that which Islam has brought.

#### 10. Al-Qeramita

This sect has been added to the Shiites, while it does not belong to
them; rather it does not have the nature of Islam. It has been given
such a name because its founder was called Qermutewayh. They claimed
that the Imam after Jafar al-Sadiq was his grandson Muhammed b. Ismail,
that he was alive and would not die until he ruled the earth, spread
justice and good all over the world, and that he was al-Mehdi of whom
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, had given good news.[1]
They became strong during the caliphate of al-Mutazid Billah, the
Abbasid. They revolted against the then government and controlled many
Islamic regions. They had many beliefs not similar to that of Islam.
Their stories and days have been mentioned in many books of history.[2]

### The Problem of the Excessive

Among the most important problems they Shiites met was that of the
atheistic movement of the excessive. This accusation has been fastened
on the Shiites to distort the real meaning of Shiism.

I (the author) firmly believe that the then authorities played an
important role in creating that movement. They encouraged it and went
too far in supporting it, that they might regarded as lawful shedding
the blood of the Shiites and prove against

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Noubakhti, Firaq al-Shi'a. [2] Abu al-Husayn al-Melti,
al-Tenbeeh. Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi al-Tarikh. Al-Farq bayna al-Firaq.

them apostasy from the religion.

It is important to mention some of their corrupt beliefs. They claimed
that the Imams were gods. Some of them claimed that they were prophets.
They believed in the transmigration of souls. The Imams of Ahl al-Bayt
were displeased with such beliefs, so they condemned them and warned the
Muslims against them. It was reported on the authority of Imam Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, that he said: Unbelief has
been based on four pillars: lasciviousness, excessiveness, doubt, and
suspicion.[1]

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, cursed Muhammed b. Muqlas al-Kufi, an
excessive leader. Then he wrote to all the countries to curse and to
renounce him.[2] He, peace be on him, made it incumbent on his
companions to boycott them. He said to them: Do not sit with them, do
not eat and drink with them, do not shake hand with them, and do not
inherit them.[3] He, peace be on him, said: The least thing through
which one withdraws from faith is that he sits with an excessive person
and listens to his speech and believes his words. Surely, my father
related to me on the authority of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, who said: Two kinds of my community have no share in
Islam: the excessive and the fatalists.[4]

When Abu al-Khettab was killed in Kufa, the Imam, peace be on him, said:
May Allah curse Aba al-Khettab, those killed with him, and those who had
mercy on them.

Bashshar al-Shuayri, a summoner to the excessive, came in to Imam
al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and he said to him: Go away! May Allah curse
you! By Allah, I will never sit with you under a ceiling!

Bashshar went out in shame. Then the Imam said to his companions: Woe
unto him! Did he not believe in that which the Jews did? Did he not
believe in that which the Magians did? Did he not believe in that which
the Sabians did? By Allah, none has belittled Allah as this sinful has
done! He is Shaytan, son of Shaytan! He has come out of the sea to
mislead my companions! Therefore, beware of him! The present should tell
those absent: Surely, I am the servant of Allah, son of the servant of
Allah! I was in the backbones and the wombs! Certainly I will die and be
raised from the death! Then I will be questioned (by Allah)! By Allah, I
will be questioned about what this liar has said in connection with me!
What wrong with him! May Allah make him grieved! He is secure on his
bed, while he has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Kafi, p. 369. [2] Da'a'im al-Islam, pp. 62-63. [3] Imam al-Sadiq
wa al-Medhahib al-Arba'a, vol. 4, p. 151. [4] Al-Khisal, p. 37.

terrified me and deprived me of sleep![1]

He, peace be on him, said about al-Mughira b. Saeed: May Allah curse
al-Mughira b. Saeed and the Jewish woman to whom he went frequently! He
learnt from her magic, jugglery, and fables. Surely, Mughira lied to my
father, so Allah deprived him of faith. Some people have lied to me.
What wrong with them? May Allah make them taste the heat of the iron! By
Allah, we are mere servants Allah created and chose. We can do neither
harm nor benefit. If He has mercy on us, then (He does that) through His
mercy. And if He chastises us, then that is because of our sins. By
Allah, we have no proof against Allah. And Allah will not forgive us
(our sins). We will die, be buried, raised from the dead, resurrected,
stand (before Allah), and be questioned. What wrong with them? May Allah
curse them! They have hurt Allah, Allahs Apostle in his grave, the
Commander of the faithful (Imam Ali), Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn,
peace be on them. Here I am among you. I spend the night on my bed in
fear and terror. They are secure while I am fearful. They sleep on their
bed, while I am fearful, sleepless, and scared! Before Allah I renounce
what al-Ajjda, and Abu al-Khettab have said in respect with me.

Many traditions have been narrated on the authority of Ahl al-Bayt,
peace be on them, in this connection. The traditions indicate that the
excessive are unbelievers and atheists. They also show that it is
incumbent on the Muslims to combat them, not to associate with them, and
isolate them. It is strange that some authors have criticized the
Shiites on account of this atheistic sect. They have regarded them as
among the Shiites though there is no relationship between the two
parties.

Certainly the doctrine of Shiism has been based on the Oneness of Allah,
regarding Him as far above polytheism, and the equal. This true sect
(the Shiites) does not believe in excessiveness and other atheistic
thoughts. Moreover it has spared no effort to keep and defend Islam
since the dawn of its history.

With this topic we will end our speech about the ordeal of Islam during
that time when the Muslims were divided into parties and sects by the
then authorities, that they might suppress the movement of Shiism and
make the Muslims busy with some ideological problems.

### The Problem of the Creation of the Quran

A dangerous problem happened during the time of the Imam. The problem
was that of the creation of the Quran. For the Muslims differed over it.
Because of it some of them suffered from the displeasure and vengeance
of the government, and the anger of the people. This thought happened at
the end of the time of the Umayyad government. It was invented by al-Jud
b. Dirham, the teacher of Merwan, the last Umayyad Caliph. Al-Jud was
the first to speak about the creation of the Quran.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Imam al-Sadiq wa al-Medhahib al-Arba'a, vol. 4, p. 155.

He wrote this subject matter and published it in Damascus. Then the
authorities summoned him; so he escaped from them and went to Kufa.
There al-Jahm b. Saffwan learnt this idea from him. It was said that he
learnt that from Aban b. Saman, who had taken it from Taloot b. Asam,
the Jewish.[1] Khalid b. Abd Allah al-Qesri, the governor of Kufa,
killed al-Jud on the day of Id al-Adha. He said that al-Jud had said: To
Musa Allah did not address His Word, speaking (to him), nor did He take
Ibrahim as a friend![2]

After the death of al-Jud some people secretly believed in this thought.
They believed in it openly at the time of Harun al-Rashid when the
affair of the Mutazilites appeared and their thoughts spread. They
openly said that the Quran had been created. Bishr al-Murisi was the
most important person in summoning the people to this belief. He wrote
many books on it. Al-Rashid heard of that, and he said: I have been
informed that Bishr al-Murisi say that the Quran had been created. By
Allah, if Allah made me find him, I would kill him in a way with which I
had never killed a person! When Bishr came to know of that, he hid
himself throughout the days of al-Rashid.[3]

One of them said: I came in to al-Rashid. There was a beheaded man
before him. The swordsman was cleaning his sword on the mans back. Then
al-Rashid said: I killed him because he said that the Quran had been
created. Then this thought grew and spread widely until the time of
al-Mamun. This movement became active during that time, and the people
talked about it. The authority helped the Mutazilites and the Shiites
with that. Al-Mamun declared his opinion in respect with that belief,
and then he forced the people to follow his viewpoint.

Anyway, those who maintained this thought revolted against mental
inactivity. They freed and released reason, so they were liable to
ordeal, torture, and severe punishment. This problem is regarded as
among the dangerous events took place at that time. It was explained by
the Mutaziliti philosophers and others.

### The Disaster of the Bermekis

Imam Musa, peace be on him, predicted that the Bermekis would face
misfortunes, disasters, the removal of favor, and a sudden vengeance.
That was when he said: Bermeks family are miserable! They do not know
what will happen to them! That happened just as he predicted. The
greatest disaster in history happened to them. The world was in their
hands. It flourished for them. They enjoyed the pleasures and ease
wherein. However, the time invaded them through his disasters and made
them lead a life full of abasement and disgrace. That was when their
properties were confiscated, Jafar was killed, his father Yehya and the
rest of his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Serh al-'Uyun p. 159. [2] Duha al-Islam, vol. 3, pp. 161-162. [3]
Al-Nijum al-Zahira, vol. 1, p. 215.

family were thrown into a dark prison. The following are some reasons
for their disaster:

#### 1. Jafar betrays al-Abbasa

A historian thinks that the reason for the disaster of the Bermekis is
the story of al-Abbas, daughter of al-Mehdi. The story can be summarized
as follows: When al-Rashid drank, he did not show patience toward Jafar
b. Yehya and his sister al-Abbasa. So he decided to marry her to Jafar
provided that the latter should not sleep with her. However he did not
fulfill his promise and stipulation. He slept with her and she became
pregnant. When she gave birth to a baby, she had fear for her baby. So
she sent it to Mecca. When al-Rashid came to know of that, he killed the
baby and severely punished the Bermekis.[1]

This story is incorrect for these reasons: firstly, al-Rashid did not
pay attention to that, for he was dissolute and absorbed in his low
desires. We have mentioned that in details. If he had had these
religious or social feelings, he would not have permitted his sister
Aliya to sing him songs and send him wine as a gift, to the extent that
her dissoluteness and treason spread all over the social circles.
Secondly, Jafar controlled al-Rashid. He possessed his heart and his
feelings, to that extent that he sat with him in one uniform with two
pockets.[2] Jafar was so influential that he married al-Alya to Ibrahim
b. Abd al-Malik b. Salih al-Abbasi. Harun did not know that. When Jafar
told him of that, he regarded his conduct as permissible. He also took
hold of other affairs of Harun al-Rashid. All these things indicate that
he had great influence with him. Then how did he doubt him while he was
the dearest of the people to him? Thirdly, most reliable historical
resources have refuted this story. For example, al-Jehshyary has
confuted it quoting the statement of Mesrur, al-Rashids servant. That
was when he was asked about the reason for that al-Rashid severely
punished the Bermekis, and he said: It seems that you want to say just
as the common people say in respect with the affair of the woman? By
Allah, this is incorrect.[3] As for Ibn Khaldun, he has fully denied
that and thought that it is a fable, saying: Surely the social and
religious position did not permit her to commit such a crime, and
especially with one of her retainers.[4]

Any way this is an imaginary story. However some historians have taken
care of it and written it in an imaginary way.

#### 2. The Accusation of Shiism

Some historians think that the only reason for the disaster of the
Bermekis is their inclination to the Alawids. Al-Teberi has mentioned on
the authority of Abu Muhammed al-Yezidi, who was the most knowledgeable
of the people in respect

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 547. [2] Ibn Badrun, Sharh Qasidat Ibn
'Abdun, pp. 222-223. [3]Al-Jahshyari, p. 254. [4] Al-Muqaddama, p. 12.

with the Bermekis, saying: Whoever says that al-Rashid killed Jafar for
a reason other than that of Yehya b. Abd Allah is mistaken.
Al-Jehshyary: Al-Rashid accused Yehya of his inclining to Yehya
al-Alawi, and that he gave him two thousand dinars during his revolt.[1]
In his book al-Aghani, Abu al-Ferajj al-Asfahani has said: The Bermekis
hated al-Rashids displeasure with the Alawids and regarded this deed of
his as forbidden.[2]

This statement is similar to the previous one in weakness. For the
Bermekis sought nearness to al-Rashid through informing him against the
Alawids. They were among those who brought about the imprisonment and
murder of the Imam, peace be on him. Al-Saduq has narrated on the
authority of Saffwan b. Maan, who said: Surely Yehya al-Bermeki was not
satisfied with provoking al-Rashid to kill Imam al-Kazim, peace be on
him; rather he provoked him to Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. So Harun
said to him: Does what we did toward his father not suffice us? Do you
want me to kill them all?[3]

Sayyid Nimat Allah al-Jazairi: The real reason for the destruction of
the Bermekis was the supplication of Abu al-Hasan al-Rida, peace be on
him, when he stood at Arafa. That is because they informed (al-Rashid)
of his father, al-Kazim, peace be on him.[4]

Without doubt the Bermekis had no affection toward the Alawids. They
went too far in punishing them severely apart from al-Fedl b. Yehya, for
he inclined to Imam al-Kazim, peace be on him, entertained him when he
was in his prison in Basrah, and permitted Yehya al-Alawi to go to the
Sacred House of Allah (Mecca). Perhaps they said that the Bermekis
inclined to Shiism was because of him.

#### 3. Their wide Influence

Perhaps, among the main reasons that urged al-Rashid to punish the
Bermekis severely is their wide influence and their controlling the
affairs of the government, to the extent that al-Rashid was afraid that
his kingdom would come to an end. Professor Muhammed Kurd has maintained
this viewpoint, saying: The Bermekis were so kind to the people that the
great figures devoted themselves to them. They were in the same position
in respect with the Caliph. When al-Rashid saw that his kingdom was
liable to danger due to the influence of the Bermekis, he ordered them
to be captured and killed, their properties to be confiscated. He had
fear of them for his kingdom.[5]

There are may attitudes indicate that they decided to revolt against
al-Rashid and to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Jahshyari, p. 243. [2] Al-Tamadun al-Islami, vol. 4, p. 146. [3]
'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida. Sahifat al-Abrar, vol. 2, p. 396. [4] Zehr
al-Rabi', p. 205. [5] Al-Islam wa al-Hadara al-'Arabiya, vol. 2, p. 213.

hand over that caliphate to some people other than the Abbasids. An
example of that is that Jafar talked about Abu Muslim and his important
role in taking the caliphate from the Umayyads and handing it over to
the Abbasids, saying: Surely Abu Muslim took the authority from some
people and handed it other to others through killing and shedding blood.
The (good) man is he who hands it over without shedding blood. Al-Rashid
was informed of his statement, so he was afraid and hurried to afflict
them with disaster.[1]

Any way, I (the author) think that the only reason for that al-Rashid
severely punished Jafar and the rest of his family is their wide
influence and their strong seizing the reins of government. In his house
was twenty-five clerks who belonged to Yehya b. Khalid.[2] Were it not
for that al-Rashid surprised them, he would not be able to put an end to
them, and they would destroy him because of their close relationship
with the military commanders, and their abundant kindness to the people.
If they had revolted against him, they would have found a great popular
support from the Muslims who had harbored malice against the Abbasid
government. Besides they had perfect relationship with the Persians, who
were the most important pillar in the Islamic government.

The historians have mentioned other reasons for their disaster. Some of
them have mentioned forty reasons. A group of historians has inclined to
each of the reasons for the disaster of the Bermekis such as that their
enviers informed Harun against them. We are satisfied with this brief
account of the reasons for the severe punishments they received.

### The Execution of Jafar

Jafar was playing in his palace. He did not know what had been scheming
against him. Abu Zekar al-Ama was singing him a song:

Do not go away! Death will come to every young man!

This poetry line contains a prediction on a dangerous event. While the
singers were singing him this poetry line, Mesrur al-Khadim came into
him carrying a weapon and without permission. When Jafar saw him, he
became afraid and shook all over. Mesrur told him about what he had been
ordered to do. So Jafar begged him and reminded him of his kindness to
him. He asked him to give him a respite until the following morning,
that Harun might become calm and pardon him. However, he prevented from
responding to him. Then he ordered him to go to the palace of the Caliph
to hear his statement and his decision concerning him. So he responded
to him and went with him. Mesrur came in to Harun, and he angrily rose.
He did not control himself, and his conditions had changed. So Mesrur
quickly said to him: O Commander of the faithful, all things have come
to an end, Jafars head is

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bara'at al-'Abbasa, p. 53. [2] Ibn Khaldun, al-Muqaddama, p. 13.

close to you!

So Harun understood the affair and promised to kill him because he was
late in executing Jafar, saying: If you came and did not bring me Jafars
head, I would send someone to firstly bring me you head and his head
secondly.

So Mesrur immediately came out and brought him Jafars head.

Al-Rashid spent that night without tasting sleep. He impatiently waited
for the light of the morning. Before the light of the dawn, he ordered
Herthema b. Ayun to carry the corpse of Jafar and hand it over to
al-Sindi b. Shahik, that he might crucify his head in the middle court
of the city of al-Mansur, divide the corpse into two parts and crucify
each part at a bridge head in Baghdad. He also ordered him to announce
the state of emergency and to command the military forces to be ready to
face any popular revolt. In the meantime he ordered him to siege the
houses of the Bermekis, to confiscate the movable and immovable
properties, to arrest them, and to throw them in dark prisons.

The speech on the Bermekis spread in the east and west of the country.
It was the talk among the gatherings. Rather the following generations
talked about them. So the hearts of their supporters and their brothers
melt. Their opponents and enviers gloated over them. For that high
stronghold was destroyed; and the attack of the Bermekis was in vain.

With this point we will end our speech about the disaster of the
Bermekis. It indicates that Harun employed violence, severe punishments,
and tricks. He severely punished the dearest of all the people to him.
From this we can understand that he was very strict toward the Alawid
and their followers. For he used all his abilities to exhaust them, to
scare them, and to punish them severely. According, Imam Musa faced
severe, painful ordeal. That is because Harun was merciless.

With this we will end our talk about the time of the Imam, peace be on
him. We have mentioned some important events at that time. As for the
talking about all the affairs, it will make the book unduly long.
