Chapter Xv
==========

The Imams Children
------------------

Imam Musa, peace be on him, had good, pure children who were the best of
the children of the Muslims in that time in fear of Allah,
righteousness, behavior, piety, refraining from sins and false things in
the world. Many of them led a perfect, religious life. That is because
the Imam directed them to the righteous direction, and poured into their
souls ideals, faith in Allah, full dedication to the thought, and deeds
for serving the truth. Concerning them Ibn al-Sabbagh has said: Surely
each of the children of Abu al-Hasan Musa, peace be on him, had a
memorable excellence.[1]

Al-Shaykh al-Tubrisi has said: Surely each of the children of Abu
al-Hasan Musa, peace be on him, had a famous excellence and a laudable
deed.[2]

They inherited from their forefathers virtue, honor, and glory, so
through their behavior they were wonderful examples for virtue and
perfection.

Some of them declared a revolt against the government of the Abbasids
that they might make happy the Muslims, save them from the tyranny and
oppression of the Abbasids, just as we will mention. Before we mention
their biographies, we have to mention that the genealogists and the
traditionists have greatly differed over their number. That is as
follows:

1. They were thirty-three; sixteen males, seventeen females.[3]

2. They were thirty-seven; eighteen males, nineteen females.[4]

3. They were thirty-eighty, twenty males, eighteen females.[5]

4. They were forty, eighteen males, twenty-two females. [6]

5. They were sixty, twenty-three males, thirty-seven females.[7]

There are narrations other than these. The names of both males and
females are as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p. 256, (Iran Edition). [2] A'lam al-Wara. [3]
Tuhaf al-Azhar wa Zulal al-Anhar. [4] Sihah al-Akhbar. Al-Fusool
al-Muhimma, p. 256. Al-Bihar. [5] Kashf al-Ghumma, p. 243. Tadhkirat
al-Khawas, p. 84. [6] Sir al-Silsila al-'Alawiya. [7] Al-Mujjdi. 'Umdat
al-Talib. Menahil al-Darb fi Ansab al-'Arab.

### The Males:

Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, Ismail, Jafar, Harun, Hamza, Muhammed,
Ahmed, Qasim, Abbas, Ibrahim, Hasan, Abd Allah, Zayd, Husayn, al-Fedl,
Sulayman, Salim, Saeed,[1] Aqeel, Ibrahim the elder, and Abd Allah.[2]

### The Females:

Um Abd Allah, Qusayma, Lubaba, Um Jafar, Umama, Kelthem, Burayha, Um
al-Qasim, Mahmuda, Amina the elder, Aliya, Zaynab, Ruqaya, Hasna, Aisha,
Um Salama, Asma, Um Farwa, Aamina, Um Abeeha, Halima, Remla, Maymuna,
Amina the younger, Asma the elder, Zayneb, Zayneb the elder, Fatima the
elder, Fatima, Um Kulthum the elder, Um Kulthum the younger, Um Kulthum
the youngest. Al-Ashnani (an author) has added to them: Attfa, Abbasa,
Khadija the elder, Khadija,[3] and Sarha.[4] Accordingly, the number of
the ladies from among his children is thirty-seven. Shaykh al-Aftuni has
written a poem on their names, saying:

And his children are: Ali the lamp, Ibrahim and al-Abbas comes after
him.

And Qasim, Jafar, Muhammed, Harun, Ismail, then Ahmed.

And Hamza, Ishaq, Abd Allah, Zayd, Sulayman, Ubayd Allah.

Two Ruqays, Hasan, then Hasan, Zayneb, Um Salama (who were) endowed with
insight.

Um Abeeha, with whom the number is complete. All of them are the
children of noble mistresses, not ignoble.

In his poem, al-Aftuni has mentioned twenty-two persons. He is among
those who believe that they were twenty-two persons; this statement is
very weak, for their number is more than that. We will mention a brief
account of those whose biographies we have found:

#### 1. Imam al-Rida

He is the eighth Imam from among the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt from whom
Allah kept away the uncleanness and thoroughly purified. Through him
Allah gave life to Islam and strengthened the Muslims. So the Imam,
peace be on him, was among those who renewed the religion, defended it,
and struggled for it. We will briefly talk about some of his affairs:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] 'Umdat al-Talib. [2] Ahsan al-Kibar. [3] Al-Mujjdi. [4] Tuhfat
al-Azhar.

### His Birth place and day

He, peace be on him, was born in Yethrib (Medina), in the year 148 A. H.
It was said that he was born in Rabi al-Awal 11, in the year 153 A.
H.[1] The Prophetic family celebrated that brilliant day with delight
and happiness, for the best of the inhabitants of the earth after his
forefathers came to them. As for Imam Musa al-Kazim, peace be on him, he
took his baby and performed on his behalf the rites of birthday. He said
the adhan in his right ear and the iqama in his left ear. On the seventh
day he sacrificed a ram on his behalf, shaved his hair, and gave to the
needy silver equal to it.

### His Early life

He grew up under the care of Islam and was brought up in the school of
faith. His father Imam Musa, peace be on him, undertook bringing him up.
He poured into his soul his ideals, took care of him, had pity on, drew
to him the way through his behavior and guidance. Imam al-Rida attained
during his early life the highest kind of Islamic education, which took
care of planting in souls the essence of virtue and perfection.

### His Noble Moral Traits

Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, had noble moral traits similar to those
of his forefathers from among the pure Imams through which they were
distinguished from the rest of the people. Ibrahim b. Abbas has talked
about the noble moral traits of the Imam, peace be on him, saying: I
have never seen, nor have I heard of someone better than Abu al-Hasan
al-Rida; I have witnessed of him what I have not witness of other than
him. I never saw him angering anyone by something he said, nor did I
ever see him interrupting anyone, nor refusing to do someone a favor he
was able to do, nor did he ever stretch his legs before an audience, nor
leaned upon something while his companion did not, nor did he ever call
any of his servants or attendants a bad name, nor did I ever see him
split or burst into laughter; rather his laughter was just a smile. When
he was ready to eat, he seated with him all his attendants, including
the door man and the groom. He slept a little bit by night and fasted
too much. He used to fast three days a month and said: Surly such a kind
of fasting is equal to eternal fasting. He did many favors and gave
plentiful alms in secret; he did most of that during dark nights. Do
not, therefore, believe anyone who claims that he saw someone else
enjoying such a accomplishment.[2]

### His Knowledge

Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, was like his forefathers in his
scientific abilities and talents. The narrators have unanimously agreed
on that he was the most knowledgeable of the people of his time. He gave
religious verdicts to the people in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 486. [2] Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p. 107.

the Mosque of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, while
he was twenty and some years. Abd al-Salam b. Salih al-Harawi has said:
I never saw anyone more knowledgeable than Ali b. Musa al-Rida, peace be
on him. Every scholar who met him admitted the same. Al-Mamun gathered
once a large number of theologians, jurists and orators and he (al-Rida)
surpassed them and every one of them in his own respective branch of
knowledge, so much so that the loser admitted his loss and the
superiority of the winner over him. I have heard him saying: I used to
take my place at the theological center and the number of the learned
scholars in Medina was quite large, yet when a question over-taxed the
mined of one of those scholars, he and the rest would point at me, and
they would send me their queries, and I would answer them all.

Muhammed b. Isa took care of recording the questions about which Imam
al-Rida, peace be on him, was asked; and they were eighteen thousand
questions.[1]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, praised the talents and knowledge of his son
Imam al-Rida. That was when he said to his sons: This is your brother
Ali b. Musa, the learned scholar of Muhammeds Household. Therefore,
question him about your religions and memorize what he tells you. For
surely I have heard Jafar b. Muhammed, peace be on him, saying to me:
Most surely, the learned scholar of Muhammeds Household is in your
loins. Would I wish I had met him, for he is named after Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, meaning his grandfather Imam Ali b. Abi
Talib, peace be on him.[2]

Since the dawn of their history till this day of men, the Shiites firmly
and without doubt believe that the Imam should be the most knowledgeable
of the people of his time, that he should have great scientific
abilities and talents the like of which none should have. Al-Mamun, who
was the most knowledgeable and cleverest of the Abbasid kings, did not
maintain that. He believed that such an opinion was a kind of
exaggeration. So he thought that the best way to disparage Imam al-Rida
was through entrusting the great scholars of different religions and
creeds with questioning him about various kinds of sciences and arts. He
thought that the Imam would be unable to answer them, and he (al-Mamun)
would use that as means to spoil the Shiite doctrine and to invalidate
the belief in the Imamate. Of course, this is very reliable thinking. As
a result he gathered the Catholic archbishop, the High Rabbi, the
leading Sabians of whom was Umran the Sabian, the Hindu high priest,
followers of Zoroaster and Festami, Nestus the Roman medical scientist,
and the theologians of whom was Sulayman al-Merwazi. He ordered them to
question Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. They asked him about the basic
philosophical and theological problems. The Imam in detail answered
them,[3] and they admitted their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Shar Aashub, al-Menaqib, vol. 4, p. 351. [2] Kashf al-Ghumma,
vol. 3, p. 107. [3] Al-Menaqib, vol. 107.

incapability and their falling short. As for al-Mamun, he drew on
himself disappointment and disgrace, for most of those scholars believed
in the office of the Imamate; and the event increased the Shiites in
faith and made them sure of their beliefs.

### The Narrators of his Traditions

As for those who narrated his traditions, they are his son Muhammed
al-Jewad, Abu Uthman al-Mazini al-Nehwi, Ali b. Ali, Ayyub b. Mansur
al-Nisapuri, Abu al-Salt Abd al-Salam al-Herewi, al-Mamun b. al-Rashid,
Ali b. Mehdi b. Sedeqa, who has a book on his authority, Abu Ahmed Dawud
b. Sulayman b. Yusuf al-Qezwini, who has a book on his authority, Amir
b. Sulayman al-Tai, who has a big book on his authority, Abu Jafar
Muhammed b. Muhammed b. Hayyan al-Tammar. As for the Imams of hadith who
narrated on his authority, they are Adam b. Abi Iyas, Nasr b. Ali
al-Jahghami, Muhammed b. Rafi al-Qushayri, and others.[1]

### Some of his Wise Sayings and Viewpoints

Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, has a wonderful intellectual legacy full
of noble ideals and high values containing behavioral rules and
educational programs. He also has interesting researches in philosophy,
theology, the explanation of the Quran, medicine, and the like. We will
mention some of his wise sayings and viewpoints:

1. He, peace be on him, said: If one lacks five attributes, do not
expect to gain anything good out of him for your life in this world or
for the life to come: if his lineage is known to be untrustworthy, if
his nature lacks generosity, if his temper lacks balance, if he lacks a
noble conduct, and if he lacks fear of his Lord.[2]

2. He, peace be on him, said: No servant of Allah achieves true belief
except when he acquires three attributes. He derives juristic deductions
from the creed; he is wise regarding his livelihood; he is patient while
facing calamities.[3]

3. He, peace be on him, said: One who struggles to satisfy the needs of
his family shall have more rewards than those who make jihad in the way
of Allah.[4]

4. He, peace be on him, said: Faith is in four (attributes): reliance on
Allah, satisfaction with Allahs decree, submission to Allahs command,
and entrustment to Allah. The righteous servant (the believer of Phaross
family) said: And I entrust my affair to Allah.... So Allah protected
him from the evil (consequences) of what

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tehdhib al-Tehdhib, vol. 7, p. 387. [2] Tuhaf al-'Uqool, p. 446. [3]
Ibid. [4] Ibid.

they planned.[1]

5. He, peace be on him, said: Regimen does not mean giving up a thing;
rather it means reducing it.

6. He, peace be on him, said: Man feels aversion for three days: on the
day when he is born and sees the world; on the day when he dies and sees
the people in the hereafter; and on the day when he is raised to life
and sees precepts he did not see in the world. Allah greeted Yehya on
these three days and removed his fear, saying: And peace be on him on
the day he was born, and on the day he dies, and on the day he is raised
to life. Isa b. Maryam greeted himself on these three days, saying: And
peace be on me on the day I was born, and on the day I die, and on the
day I am raised to life.[2]

7. He, peace be on him, said: If one walks behind another, he will
subject the followed to tribulation and abase himself.[3]

8. He, peace be on him, said: Establishing justice and showing kindness
make boons continue.[4]

9. He, peace be on him, said: Wealth is not accumulated except by five
means: extreme miserliness, a long-standing optimism, an overwhelming
care, a boycott of the relatives, and a preference of this life over the
life to come.[5]

10.He, peace be on him, said: Assisting the weak is better for you than
your act of charity.[6]

11. He, peace be on him, said: Whoever loves the disobedient, then he is
disobedient; whoever loves the obedient, then he is obedient. Whoever
helps the oppressive, then he is oppressive; whoever deserts the just,
then he is unjust. There is no kinship between Allah and anyone. None
can attain the friendship of Allah except through obedience. (In this
respect) Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said to the
Banu Abd al-Muttalib: Give me your (good) deeds, not your ancestry and
lineage. Allah, the Most High, said: So when the trumpet is blown, there
shall be no ties of relationship between them on that day, nor shall
they ask of each other. Then as for those whose good deeds are
preponderant, these are the successful. And as for those whose good
deeds are light, these are they who shall have lost their souls, abiding
in hell.[7]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid. [2] Noor al-Abbsar, p. 140. [3] Al-Yaqubi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p.
181. [4] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 2, p. 24. [5] Ibid., vol. 1, p. 276.
[6] Tuhaf al-'Uqool, p. 446. [7] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 2, p. 235.

12. He, peace be on him, said: Allah abhors heresy, the loss of ones
funds (through foolishness), and excessive questioning.[1]

With this we will end our talk about the wise sayings narrated on the
authority of Imam al-Rida, peace be on him.

### His Imamate

Many traditions narrated on the authority of Imam Musa, peace be on him,
regarding the Imamate of his son al-Rida. The textual nomination was
narrated on his authority by Dawud b. Kuthayr al-Raqqi, Muhammed b.
Ishaq b. Ammar, Ali b. Yaqteen, Naeem al-Qabusi, al-Husayn b.
al-Mukhtar, Ziyad b. Merwan, Dawud b. Sulayman, Nasr b. Qabus, Dawud b.
Razeen, Yazid b. Sulat, Muhammed b. Sinan al-Makhzumi.[2]

### The Regency

The certain thing is that Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, was forced to
accept the regency, for al-Mamun forced him to accept that and
threatened him with killing if he refused to respond to him. So the Imam
was unwillingly responded to him.[3] Al-Mamun nominated the Imam to be
his heir apparent due to some dangerous political factors that forced
him to do that. The reason for that was not that he inclined to the
Alawids and that he showed intense love and sympathy toward them, as
some people say; that is unreal. Those who believe in this have not
accurately, deeply, and inclusively understood the events. Al-Mamun did
that dangerous affair because he was forced to do it. I (the author)
think that the most important political factors are as follows:

1. The Abbasid government faced dangerous local revolts headed by the
sons of Imam Musa, peace be on him, who were Ibrahim the elder, Zayd,
and the like. They declared some revolts against the Abbasid government
because they suffered from tyranny, oppression, and persecutions. The
revolt was headed by Abu al-Saraya, who was like Abu Muslim al-Khuresani
in determination, alertness, and intense courage. Most Islamic peoples
responded to this revolt, and may Islamic regions such as al-Hijaz, the
Yemen, part of Iraq, and others were controlled by the revolutionaries.
We will in detail explain that in the chapters that follow.

Al-Mamun stayed awake at night to find some ways to get rid of that
danger that was about to happen. After a serious thinking, he thought
that the best way to put out the fire of the war and to get rid of his
opponents was that he had to entrust the regency to Imam al-Rida and to
make him take part in the caliphate, that he might win the inclination
of the revolutionists, make them refrain from mutiny and rebellion
against him, and that he might win the inclination of the Alawids who

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhaf al-'Uqool, p. 243. [2] Al-Menaqib, vol. 4, p. 367. Usool
al-Kafi, vol. 1, pp. 311-319. [3] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 2, pp.
140-141. Keshf al-Ghumma. Al-Menaqib.

gave the Imam preference over them due to his knowledge, his merit, and
his renouncing the world. This political plan was very successful, for
through it al-Mamun could put an end to the revolt and divided its
headquarters as soon as he declared that. The revolutionaries withdrew
from their intentions and determination; they declared their consent and
delight with that, as well as they showed that they would support
al-Mamun and submit to his supreme authority and government. As a result
al-Mamun took a rest and felt secure from the most important dangers
threatening his government.

2. Most commanders and leaders of the military units al-Mamun employed
to war against his brother al-Amin inclined to the Alawids. Some
historians say that they warred against al-Amin provided that al-Mamun
should appoint Imam al-Rida as his heir apparent, and he responded to
them. If this was correct, then he was forced to respond to them out of
fear of their revolt against him.

3. The terrible events that took place between al-Amin and al-Mamun
required the public opinion to detest and hate al-Mamun, for his armies
caused mischief in Baghdad; they destroyed its palaces and houses, and
it lost its splendor, its embellishment, and its beauties. On Baghdad
some poets composed elegiac poems of which is the following:

I wept blood for Baghdad when it lost the fresh, elegant life.

The enviers envied it, and its inhabitants were destroyed by the
catapult.[1]

The country was subject to inclusive famine and lack of security. So the
people of Baghdad felt terror and fear. They did not forget their ordeal
during those days; rather they talked about it for tens of years.

The thing that increased the wrath of the general populace against
al-Mamun is that his armies won a victory over his brother al-Amin and
had no mercy on him. They did not pardon him; rather they killed him and
his followers, cut off their heads and sent them to al-Mamun. The people
were displeased with that a brother killed his brother. They unanimously
agreed on that that was a horrible crime, that the person who committed
such a crime had no atom of mercy and nobility, and that he was not
worthy of undertaking the affairs of the Muslims and of being a ruler
over them.

After these events al-Mamun intended to win the affection of the people
and to change their wrath against him into love and consent. So he
decided to entrust the regency after him to the descendant of the
Prophet and the learned scholar of the family of Muhammed, may Allah
bless him and his family, Imam al-Rida, for the Muslims unanimously
agreed on showing love to him, magnifying him, admiring him, and that he
was worthier of undertaking the affairs of the Muslims than those

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh al-Khulafa', p. 299.

other than him. Through that al-Mamun won the affection, respect, and
praise of the general populace. Through that he also made them imagine
that he established relationships with his womb relatives who were
boycotted, gave security to the people who were afraid, and gave life to
the family of the prophet who suffered from the tyranny and oppression
of the Abbasids.

These are some factors that moved al-Mamun to appoint Imam al-Rida as
his heir apparent. The Imam, peace be on him, was fully aware of this
plan, so he vigorously refrained from accepting the succession after
him. As he found no way to get rid of it, he accepted it according to
some conditions, that he might show the people that he hated and
renounced the government. The conditions are as follows:

1. He did not command nor order.

2. He did not give religious verdicts nor give legal decisions.

3. He did not appoint nor dismiss.

4. He did not change anything from how it was then.[1]

These conditions are evidence for that the Imam renounced the
government, for they made him apart from it as well as they made him
isolated from the political ruling board. If the Imam had come to know
that that was real and that al-Mamun had been truthful, he would not
have demanded those conditions, and would not have been far from any
positive act for the government.

Any way al-Mamun showed his great delight at that and issued a royal
decree on holding celebrations and spreading decorations all over the
country. Then he ordered the black color which was the symbol of the
Abbasids to be removed from clothes and flags; he ordered it to be
changed into green color which was the symbol of the Alawids; he ordered
Imam al-Ridas name to be written in the dirham and the dinar; he gave to
the people valuable prizes and huge gifts; he ordered the poets to
praise and laud the Imam, so al-Abbas al-Khatib talked, lauded al-Mamun
very much, and ended his speech with these words of him:

It is necessary for the people to have a sun and a moon, so you are the
sun and this is that moon.[2]

The poets competed with each other for praising the Imam, peace be on
him, and lauding al-Mamun. Abu Nuas, the poet of the royal palace, did
not take part in these competitions, so al-Mamun blamed him for that,
saying to him: You have come to know of the social position of Ali b.
Musa al-Rida and of that with which I have honored him. Therefore, why
have you delayed your praising him while you are the poet of your time.
As a result Abu Nuas carefully thought and wrote these

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Menaqib, vol. 4, p. 363. [2] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 2, p.
146.

immortal lines that go along with time, saying:

It was said to me: You are the most unique of all the people in some
arts of the famous speech.

You have wonderful jewels of speech that produce pearls in the hands of
him who attains it.

So why have you left praising (Ali) b. Musa and those qualities that
have come together in him?

I said: I can not find the right way to praise him whose grandfather was
served by Jibril.

These wonderful poetry lines surpassed all the praising poems. Al-Mamun
approved them; he and other than him admired them. He gave him an amount
of money just as he gave all the other poets and preferred him to
them.[1]

Abu Nuas looked at the Imam and saw his face shone with the lights of
the Imamate and fear of Allah. So he walked towards him and said to him:
O Son of Allahs Apostle, I have composed some poetry lines on you, and I
want you to hear them from me. Recite them, replied the Imam. He recited
them, saying:

Their clothes are clear and pure; blessings are called down upon them
wherever they are mentioned.

Whoever is not an Alawi when you trace back his ancestry, then he has no
pride since the past time.

So when Allah created and perfected mankind, He purified and chose you,
O People.

Therefore, you are the exalted chiefs; you have knowledge of the Book
and of what has been mentioned in the suras.

Accordingly, the Imam said to him: You have composed some poetry lines
the like of which none has ever composed. Then he said to his retainer:

-Have you anything of our expenditure?

-Three hundred dinars.

-Give it to him.

Then he said to his retainer: Perhaps he has regarded them as little,
give him the mule.[2] And he gave it to him.

The pledge of allegiance regarding the regency of the Imam, peace be on
him, was

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 143. Wefeyat al-A'yan, vol. 2, p. 433. [2] 'Uyun Akhbar
al-Rida. Wefeyat al-A'yan.

taken from the people all over the Islamic countries. The orators sat on
the pulpits to mention the Imams merits and knowledge and to invoke
Allah for him. A Shiite saw the Imam wearing a robe of honor and saw the
standards waving over his head. He became delighted and happy. That
appeared on the expressions of his face. So the Imam asked him to draw
nearer to him. When he approached, the latter secretly said to him: Do
not busy your mind of anything of what you see; do not be delighted at
it. They will not go well with me![1] That happened just as the Imam had
predicted. Shortly after that, al-Mamun denied him and spared no effort
to assassinate him just as we will mention.

Al-Mamun harbors Malice against the Imam

Al-Mamun harbored malice against the Imam; his soul was full of enmity
and evil against him. That is because the Imams merits appeared; the
gatherings mentioned his achievements and his noble qualities; the
people talked about his talents and abilities; they talked about nothing
except about his outstanding merits and those of his forefathers.

The thing that made al-Mamun increased his malice against the Imam is
that he asked him to lead the people in the Id prayer, and he refused
that. Al-Mamun insisted on that very much, so the Imam was forced to
perform it according to some conditions. The Imam stipulated that he
should go out to perform the prayer just as his grandfather Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and his grandfather Imam
Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, had done. So
al-Mamun said to him: Go out as you wish. He commanded the military
commanders and all the people to go to Abu al-Hasan. They went to the
door of Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. When the sun rose, he, peace be
on him, washed and put on a white turban of cotton. One end of it he
made hang on his breast and the other between his shoulders. Then he
said to his retainers: Do whatever I do. He took his staff in his hand
and walked; he refused to ride (any mount). Then he said four times:
Allah is greater! The military commanders officially prepared; they
carried weapons, and decorated themselves with the best decoration. The
Imam, who looked like a full moon, went out and stopped at the door. He
said four times: Allah is greater! Then he said: Allah is greater for
His guiding us! Allah is greater for His giving us of the cattle
quadrupeds! Allah is greater for His trying us! The land was full of
saying Allah is greater and crying. For through the Imam appearance and
state, the people remembered his grandfather the Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, who came to save the world, and came to know
of the error of those kings who showed arrogance and vainglory.

He, peace be on him, said: Allah is greater, at every ten steps. The
people thought that the heaven and the earth repeated these words after
him. Maru was full of crying. Al-Mamun heard of that and became afraid
of it. So al-Fedl said to him:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p. 271.

Commander of the faithful, if al-Rida reaches the place of prayer for
the festival in this way, the people will break out in rebellion. We are
afraid for our lives. So send instructions to him to go back. Al-Mamun
thought that al-Fedls opinion was right. He sent a letter to the Imam
and asked him to go back. The Imam, peace be on him, went back without
leading the people in prayer.[1] This attitude showed the people the
spirituality of the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. It also showed them their renouncing the world, their refusing
the pomp of kingdom and super authority. The people greatly admired the
qualities concerning which al-Behri has said:

When you came out, they remembered the Prophet. When you came out of the
ranks, they said: There is no god but Allah! Allah is greater!

You reached the place of prayer shining with the light of guidance.

You walked with the walking of one who was humble before Allah and who
showed neither vainglory nor pride.

If a yearning one affected other than that which he could do, then the
pulpit would walk towards you.[2]

The narrators said: The going out of the Imam to the place of the prayer
in this way was among the strongest reasons that made al-Mamun harbor
malice against him and moved him to assassinate him.

### The Assassination of the Imam

The merits of Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, spread like light among the
people; the gatherings were full of mentioning his achievements and
noble deeds. The religious scholars came from all the countries and
overcrowded at the door of his house to ask him to give them religious
verdicts and to ask him about the mothers of questions in different
fields such as Islamic jurisprudence, explanation of the Quran,
theology, philosophy, medicine, and the like. He, peace be on him,
answered them from his abundant knowledge he inherited from his
grandfather Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, who was the gate of
the city of the knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. The religious scholars spread among the people what they saw of
his sciences and excellence. So the people loved him and clung to him.
The intelligence informed al-Mamun of that, and he burst with anger
toward the Imam and harbored malice against him. So he ordered Muhammed
b. Amru al-Tusi to dismiss the people from the Imam and to prevent them
from attending his gatherings.

Al-Mamun had fear for his kingdom and supreme authority. He was careful
of that the people would break out in rebellion against him. As a result
he decided to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, pp. 189-190. Al-Menaqib, vol. 4, pp. 371-372.
Keshf al-Ghumma. [2] Al-Menaqib, vol. 4, p. 473.

assassinate the Imam. He took some grapes and mixed them with poison,
and then he asked the Imam to come. When the Imam came, he gave him a
bunch of grape and said to him: O Son of Allahs Apostle, I have never
seen grape better than this!

The Imam looked at him and said to him: Perhaps, there is grape better
than it in the Garden! He refused to take the bunch of grape from him.
However, al-Mamun insisted on that and forced the Imam to have some of
it. The Imam ate some of it and threw the rest away. He left the
gathering, and al-Mamun asked him: Where to?

To the place to which you have ordered me to go, replied the Imam.

The Imam quickly went to his house. He suffered from severe pain, for
the poison cut off his intestines. Meanwhile, he suffered painful
loneliness and being away from his family and his homeland. Shortly
after that, he passed away. That great soul ascended to its Creator! It
was of Allahs Light! Allah created it to light with it the utter
darkness, to guide the perplexed, to make the oppressed secure, and to
make the fearful take refuge with it. How ever, the evil, tyrannical
forces put out the light of the star and deprived man of making use of
its light!

The Islamic world was afflicted with that great tragedy and lost much
good out of his death. The exaltedness and glory of the Muslims came to
an end. They missed him who showed affection to them, was kind to them,
guided them to good, and sent them far from sins and evil acts.

As for al-Mamun, he impatiently looked forward for the death of the
Imam. When he heard of his death, he affected sadness to cover the crime
and said to the people: I hoped I died before you, but Allah refused all
things except what He willed![1]

He ordered him to be prepared for burial. When the Imam was washed and
shrouded, he was carried to his final resting place.

The people escorted the Imam to his final resting-place in a way the
like of which Khuresan never witnessed throughout its historical stages.
Al-Mamun walked behind the great coffin; he was bare-footed and headed,
saying at the top of his voice: Your death has made a gap in Islam;
Allahs decree has overcome my decree in respect with you![2]

The sacred body was brought to the graveyard. A grave beside that of
Harun al-Rashid was dug for it and buried in it. Along with it was
buried clemency, knowledge, and generosity. A lamp from among the Imams
of guidance was buried in the land of Tus. That pure land has become
sacred and reached the zenith in honor and glory, for all the Muslims
had surrounded it with a halo of honoring and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Keshf al-Ghumma, vol. 3, p. 123. [2] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 2,
p. 241.

sacredness. Al-Mamun was asked about the reason for burying the Imam
beside his father Harun al-Rashid, and he answered: That may Allah
forgive Harun due to his neighboring to al-Rida! This is a weak thought,
for every person is buried along with his own deeds; the honor of
neighboring does not benefit him. For this reason Dibil al-Khazai
refuted al-Mamun, saying:

There are two graves in Tus: (The grave of the one who is) the best of
all the people, and that of the most wicked of them; this is among the
lessons.

The dirty one (Harun) does not take advantage of the grave of the pure
one (al-Rida); and there is no harm on the pure one due to his being
near to the dirty one.

How far! Every one is hostage to that which his hands earn; therefore
take or leave whatever you wish!

This is the thinking of justice and truth. Haruns nearness and
neighboring to the Imam will not avail him, for his hands were stained
with the blood of the progeny of the Prophet; he spread among them
killing and execution, and made sadness and mourning live in their
houses.

With this brief account we will end our talk about the life of this
great Imam; may success help us have the honor of making a research on
his affairs and conditions.

### 2. Ibrahim the elder

The thing that urges man to search and investigate is that a group of
historians believed that there was only one of the Imams children was
named Ibrahim, and that the Imam had no other son called Ibrahim. Other
historians believed that there were other sons of the Imam called
Ibrahim. They mentioned that they were two: One was called Ibrahim the
younger, and the other was named Ibrahim the elder. This was
investigated by the late Sayyid Bahr al-Ulum in his book al-Rijal. He
has mentioned: Apparently, there is only one of the children of Abu
al-Hasan Musa, peace be on him, was named Ibrahim. This has been
mentioned by al-Mufids al-Irshad, al-Tubriss al-Alam, al-Sarawis
al-Menaqib, and al-Arbalis Kashif al-Ghumma. They have mentioned several
children and have not mentioned except one man (named Ibrahim).

He added: Apparently, there are numerous Ibrahims just as it has been
mentioned by the author of (the book) al-Umda and other than him from
among the genealogists, for they are more knowledgeable than other than
them in this respect.[1]

The viewpoint of al-Hajja al-Sayyid Bahr al-Ulum is trustworthy, for the
great figures who have mentioned Ibrahim have not mentioned that there
are not numerous Ibrahims; likewise they have not mentioned all the
children of the Imam; rather they have mentioned some of them. Besides
the genealogists have

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bahr al-'Ulum, Rijal, pp.424-432.

established that there are numerous Ibrahims; and they are more
knowledgeable than other than them in these affairs. After this we have
to return to talk about the affairs of this pure Sayyid, Ibrahim.

Ibrahim was a great master with great importance and was among the
prominent religious scholars of his time. He narrated traditions on the
authority of his forefathers.[1] Ibn Shaddqam narrated on the authority
of his grandfather that Ibrahim was a meritorious, perfect scholar, from
among the Imams of the Zaydis, and was a great, generous Shaykh.[2]
Al-Shaykh al-Mufid has said: Ibrahim was a generous Shaykh.[3]

The proof of that he was with great importance is that Imam Musa, peace
be on him, placed him among his testamentary trustees, that he might
mention his name, honor him, and promote his position. We will mention
some of his affairs:

#### A. With the Waqifites

A biographer has accused him of his being a Waqifite depending on the
narration of Bakr b. Salih who has said: [I visited Ibrahim after the
death of his father and asked him:]

-What is your opinion of your father?

-He is alive.

-What is your opinion of your brother Abu al-Hasan?

-He is trustworthy, truthful.

-He says that your father has died.

-He is most knowledgeable.

Ibrahim asked Bakr to tell him about the saying of his brother Imam
al-Rida, peace be on him, concerning that, and he answered him that he
thought that he had died. After he had heard that, he said: He was more
knowledgeable in what he said. So Bakr asked him:

-Did your father appoint a testamentary trustee (of the Imamate)?

-Yes.

-Whom did he appoint as a testamentary trustee (of the Imamate)?

-Five of us, and he has given Ali (al-Rida) precedence over us.[4]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Taaj al-Din, Ghayat al-Ikhtisar. [2] Tuhfat al-Azhar. [3] Al-Irshad.
[4] Usool al-Kafi. 'Uyun Akhbar.

This narration indicates that Ibrahim inclined to the Waqifites;
similarly it indicates that he respected and admired his brother Imam
al-Rida, peace be on him. Al-Mamaqani, a researcher, made use of this
narration and indicated that Ibrahim was reliable and had good
intention. He has said: Generally speaking, whoever carefully considers
this narration comes to know that the man (Ibrahim) was very
Allah-fearing. That is because the vague error (shubha) was religious
and did not require raising the hand from the truth in regarding his
brother as trustworthy and truthful, admitting his fathers will, the
testamentary trustees (of the Imamate) were a group, and Imam al-Rida,
peace be on him, was given precedence over them. If there was nothing in
the mans biography except this narration, then it would sufficient for
him who is discerning and endowed with insight to be satisfied with
Ibrahims justice and piety and with that his faith in the waqf was
something accidental with him and disappeared.[1]

Any way, many researchers have declared Ibrahims justice and innocence
of this accusation

#### B. With Imam al-Rida (P.B.O.H)

Al-Kulayni has mentioned that Ibrahim and his brother al-Abbas disputed
with Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, just as we will mention in al-Abbass
biography. Of course, such a thing harms Ibrahims trustworthiness and
justice. However, he has not mentioned whether Ibrahim the younger or
the elder (had such a dispute with the Imam). Regardless of these deeds,
none can criticize Ibrahim at all.

#### C. With Abu al-Saraya

It is necessary for us to have, even if briefly, knowledge of the event
of Abu al-Saraya, for it meets with more than one of the children of the
Imam, peace be on him.

The great leader Muhammed b. Ibrahim, better known as al-Tabtabai,[2]
broke out that important revolt in its beginning, put its designs and
plans. He saw that with which the Muslims were afflicted such as
excessive oppression, and what the Alawids suffered such as different
kinds of punishment and exhaustion. He was very merciful and kind to the
weak. His pure soul moved him to declare the revolt. The historians
mentioned that he was in one of the streets in Kufa. He saw an old woman
following the loads of dates; she picked up what fell from them and put
them into an old bag. He asked her about that, and she answered: Surely
I am a woman and has no husband to provide for me; and I have daughters
who have no work; therefore I follow this way to feed myself and my
children.

When he heard that from her, he burst into tears, and said to her: By
Allah, you and the like of you will make me revolt against (the
Abbasids), and they will shed

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 3, p. 34. [2] Ibn Khaldun, Tarikh, vol. 4, p.
8.

my blood![1]

Of course, such feelings and kindness to the poor moved him to demand
their rights and to declare a revolt against the oppressors.

He managed the affairs; he contacted some Arab leaders and Muslim
figures asking them to help him taking part in resisting the oppression
and overthrowing the then standing government. He met the Arab leader
Nasr b. Shith[2] and urged him to take part in the revolt. He mentioned
to him the oppression and tyranny his family and his followers faced,
saying: Until when are you abased, deprived of your rights, and your
followers wronged?[3]

These words made him boil with anger and made him hurry to declare his
revolt. Yet among the reasons that moved him to declare his revolt was
the differences and division that took place among the Abasids because
of the discord that took place between al-Amin and al-Mamun. For they
made the country lack stability and security, spread disorders among
them and made them looked forward to someone to save them from that in
which they were.

### Abu al-Saraya joins the Revolt

The revolt became very firm and dangerous when Abu al-Saraya joined it.
Abu al-Saraya was an Alawi; he showed great friendship and love for the
Alawids, felt pain for the violence and persecution that befell them,
did his best to overthrow the Abasid government and to hand it over to
the Alawids. We will briefly speak of the affairs of this inspired,
great leader:

He was al-Sari b. Mansur, from among the Banu Shayban who were from
among the children of Hani b. Masud. It was said that he belonged to the
Banu Tamim, who lived in the Arab Peninsula. He resided for a period of
time in the eastern part of the Euphrates. He took part in many battles
and practiced their operations. He was on the side of the leader Yazid
b. Mizyad in Armenia to fighting against the Khuramiya. When Yazid died
and his son headed the army, Abu al-Saraya joined him and accompanied
him until he was removed (from the leadership of the army). After that
Abu al-Saraya joined Ahmed b. Mizyad. Al-Amin sent Ahmed b. Mizyad to
war against Hirthima, who declared rebellion and mutiny against
(al-Amin). However, Hirthima asked Ahmed to meet him, that he might
inform him of his affairs.

Ahmed met with Hirthima, and he explained to him the reasons for his
going out in revolt (against al-Amin). He explained to him that the
community suffered from the tyranny and oppression of the Abasids. So
Ahmed inclined to him and joined his camp. Then he headed for the Banu
Shayban in the Arab Peninsula and asked

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 339. [2] Nasr b. Shith was a head of one
of the Arab tribes that lived in Iraq. He had an 'Alawid inclinations.
[3] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 519.

Hirthima to give them salaries, so over two thousand horsemen joined
him. After al-Amin had been killed, Hirthima decreased the salaries of
the army. This displeased Abu al-Saraya, and he decided to withdraw from
him. Abu al-Saraya asked the permission of Hirthima to go to Mecca to
perform the hajj, and he permitted him and gave him twenty thousand
dirhams. Abu al-Saraya took the money and divided it among his
companions. Through that he could attract their hearts and feelings.
Then he asked them to follow him to Ayn al-Tamr. When they arrived at
it, they killed the governor over it and confiscated his properties.
Then they met another Abbasi governor; they took his possessions and
divided them among themselves.

Hirthima sent an army to war against Abu al-Saraya. When the two armies
met, the army of Hirthima was defeated and suffered heavy causalities.
Then Abu al-Saraya headed for al-Anbar[1]. When he arrived in it, he
controlled the local administration. He killed its governor, Ibrahim
al-Sharawi, and confiscated all his properties. Then he took his army
and went on destroying the Abbasid governors and their hirelings. He
arrived in al-Riqqa and met Ibrahim. As a result they decided to
overthrow the Abbasid government and to pledge allegiance to al-Rida
from among the family of Muhammed.[2]

Abu al-Saraya practiced some battles, went to war, and came to know of
its methods. He was endowed with the strength of will, determination,
and decision. Muhammed b. Ibrahim entrusted him with the general,
military leadership. He had confidence in him; he trusted to him the
affairs and plans of the revolt.

### The Declaration of the Revolt

Muhammed and Abu al-Saraya agreed on the declaration of the revolt and
overthrowing the Abbasid government. So Abu al-Saraya headed his troops
and advanced towards Naynawa; he headed for the grave of the master of
the martyrs (al-Husayn), peace be on him. He visited the great Shrine
for a long time. He recited the poetry lines of Mansur al-Nimri, saying:

May my own soul be sacrificed for al-Husayn when he left early in the
morning for death, running, not returning.

That day attacked with its sword the shoulder of Islam.[3]

You hurried to death lest an urgent vengeance should befall the people.

Allah does not hasten when you hasten; Allah is not heedless of what you
see.

She (Fatima) is wronged, and the Prophet, her father, turns (his) eye in
all directions; (and he is) interested (in the tragedy).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1]. A city in Iraq. [2] Ibn Khaldun, Tarikh, vol. 7, p. 243. [3] The
poet has linked Islam to a camel.

Are there any brave men to rise for her through drawing their sharp
swords and spears?

Then he said in a loud voice: If there is anyone of the Zaydiya, let him
rise! So some people rose and came nearer to him, and he delivered a
long sermon in which he lauded the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them, mentioned their laudable deeds, and that with which
they were singled out. Then he mentioned the deeds of the community
toward them such as wronging them. Then he mentioned al-Husayn, peace be
on him, saying: People, suppose that you were not present with al-Husayn
and did not help him, then what has prevented you from (helping) him
whom you have met and followed, while he will tomorrow go out (in
revolt) to avenge his blood, his right and the heritage of his
forefathers and to establish the religion of Allah? What has prevented
you from helping and supporting him? From this direction of mine, I am
heading for Kufa to carry out Allahs command, to defend His religion,
and to help the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt)? So if you intend to
go, then follow me! Abu al-Saraya took his troops and headed for Kufa.
As for Muhammed, he declared the revolt on the day on which he and Abu
al-Saraya had agreed. Many people pledged allegiance to him. He
impatiently waited for the coming of Abu al-Saraya, to the extent that
his companions were hopeless of him and blamed Muhammed for seeking help
from him. Muhammed was sad because of Abu al-Sarayas delay. While he was
anxious and worried, Abu al-Saraya and his army reached him. So he
became very pleased. When Abu al-Saraya saw him, he dismounted his
horse, walked towards him, and embraced him. They both went to Kufa.
When they arrived in it, the people overcrowded, pledged allegiance to
them, and showed their great delight with that. They pledged allegiance
to them in a place in Kufa called Qasr al-Duratayn.[1]

When Muhammed had enough troops, he declared his revolt in the month of
Jamadi al-Thaniya, in the year 199 A. H.[2] The revolutionaries advanced
towards Kufa and occupied it. They attacked its governor, al-Fedl b.
Isa, and confiscated his possessions in the palace. As for Abu
al-Saraya, he refused that and issued intense commands to prevent his
fighters from looting and plundering and to put an eye on the
mischief-makers. Meanwhile he ordered them to return all the looted
things to their owners. Al-Fedl b. Isa turned the back in flight. So the
affair of Abu al-Saraya became strong, and he won a wonderful victory.
Accordingly, the governor of Iraq, al-Hasan b. Sehl, sent an army of
three thousands horsemen headed by Zuhayr b. al-Hasan to war against Abu
al-Saraya. When the army reached Kufa, Abu al-Saraya resisted it with
strength and determination; he

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 533. [2] Ibn Khaldun, Tarikh. In the book
Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, it has been mentioned: "He declared the revolt in
the month of Jamadi al-Ula."

defeated it, forced it to withdraw, and controlled all its equipment.[1]
It was afflicted with failure and loss. Abu al-Saraya won a victory; his
enemy was defeated. Fear and terror spread among the Abbasids, and they
were sure that the revolt was successful.

### The Death of Muhammed

Unfortunately, the revolutionaries were afflicted with the death of the
great leader Muhammed b. Ibrahim during that decisive period of time.
Most sources have mentioned that he died a natural death; while some
other sources have mentioned that Abu al-Saraya poisoned him and
assassinated him, that he might get rid of him. Most probably, he died a
natural death, for the revolt was still at the beginning. It was
impossible for Abu al-Saraya to assassinate him in the critical period
of time, for he was not sure that the revolt would succeed.

Any way, Abu al-Saraya ordered Muhammeds pure corpse to be prepared for
burial. After it had been washed and shrouded, Abu al-Saraya and some
Zaydis went out in the dark night. They carried the pure corpse and sent
it to the Cemetery of al-Ghary. They buried it there.[2] In the
following morning, Abu al-Saraya gathered the people and announced the
death of Muhammed and condoled them on his death. The people wept in
loud voices, so Abu al-Saraya turned to them and said: Abu Abd Allah has
appointed the one who looks like him as his testamentary trustee, who is
Abu al-Hasan Ali b. Abd Allah. If you consent to him, then he is the
consent; otherwise, choose (someone else) for yourselves.

The people looked at each other and kept silent. So Muhammed b. Muhammed
b. Zayd, a young Alawi, said: O Family of Ali, surely the religion of
Allah is not supported by failure, and the hand of this man (i.e. Abu
al-Saraya) is not evil with us. For he has given vent to our anger and
avenged (the blood of al-Husayn).

Then he turned to Ali b. Ubayd Allah and asked him: What do you say, Abu
al-Hasan? For he advised us to choose you. Stretch out your hand to
pledge allegiance to you.

Then he said: Surely, Abd Allah (i.e. Muhammed b. Ibrahim), may Allah
have mercy on him, chose me. He had confidence in himself, and he did
his best to (accomplish) Allahs right. (As for me), I will not refuse
his will as a sign of neglecting his command, nor will I leave this
(matter) as a sign of refraining from it. However, I fear that I may
busy myself with it and leave other things that are more praiseworthy
and better than it in the final result. So undertake leadership, may
Allah have mercy upon you. We have entrusted you with the leadership
over us. We are satisfied with you and have confidence in you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Khudari, p. 239. In the book Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, it has been
mentioned: "'Abdus b. 'Abd al-Samad was the commander of the army." [2]
Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 539.

Then he turned to Abu al-Saraya and asked him: What do you see? Are you
content with him?

If you are content, then I am content; and I say what you say, replied
Abu al-Saraya. Muhammed b. Muhammed stretched out his hand, and the
people pledged allegiance to him. In the mean time he firmly organized
the affairs of his government. For example, he appointed some governors
over the Islamic cities conquered by Abu al-Saraya. That was as follows:

1. He appointed Ismail b. Ali as governor over Kufa.

2. He appointed Ibrahim b. Imam Musa b. Jafar as governor over the

Yemen.

3. He appointed Zayd b. Musa as governor over al-Ahwaz.

4. He appointed al-Abbas b. Muhammed as governor over Basrah.

5. He appointed al-Hasan b. al-Hasan al-Aftas as governor over Mecca.

6. He appointed Jafar b. Muhammed b. Zayd as governor over Wasit.[1]

He also appointed Rouh b. al-Hajjajj as commander over the police, and
he entrusted the judiciary to Asim b. Aamir.

Currency was minted in Kufa and it was written in it this Holy Verse:
Surely Allah loves those who fight in His way in ranks as if they were a
firm and compact wall.

The affairs went well with Abu al-Saraya, and the revolt spread in the
regions of the Islamic world. The Abbasids came to know of the danger
that threatened them with the removal of their government overnight. The
governor of Iraq, al-Hasan b. Sahl was afflicted with a quick failure,
so he wrote to Tahir b. al-Husayn to send him to war against Abu
al-Saraya. Also someone wrote him a letter in which he mentioned the
following poetry lines:

Certainty uncovers the mask of doubt; and the sedate opinion is your
best

scheming.

Act carefully before he will execute against you an affair whose evil
will

move a hidden illness.

Do you entrust Tahir with fighting the people while he has believed in

Supporting them and showing obedience to them?

He will cause to you difficulties that lead to a violent war.

He will display the things hidden in his heart; when the hidden things

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., pp. 532-533.

Appear, they will not disappear.

So take care of sureness, for its features have become luminous, while

Doubts have become dark.

Then do what you want through a decisive opinion; consider it carefully,

And leave that which does not occur.

When al-Hasan read these poetry lines, he changed his mind and wrote to
Herthema b. Ayun asking him to go quickly to him. He sent to him
al-Sindi b. Shahik, but there was between al-Hasan b. Sahl and Herthema
an enmity and mutual alienation. So when the letter reached him, he
said: We paved the way to the caliphate and cleared its sides for them,
and then they took hold of the affairs and possessed alone the direction
over us. When they face a certain attitude because of their bad
management and their losing the affairs, they intend to set it right
through us. No, by Allah, we will not honor them until the Commander of
the faithful (i.e. al-Mamun) come to know of their bad words and deeds.

Al-Sindi turned away from him when he despaired of him. Then a letter
from al-Mansur b. al-Mehdi came to him. When he read the letter, he
responded and returned to Baghdad. When he arrived at al-Nehrwan, the
people of Baghdad went out to receive him. At the head of them were the
prominent figures and the military commanders. When they saw him, they
dismounted. He stopped at his house. Al-Hasan b. Sahl ordered the
recorders of the army to be brought to him. They were brought to him and
he chose what he liked of men. The Muslim public treasuries were opened
for him. So Herthema gathered troops, to the extent that he had thirty
thousands of horsemen and infantry soldiers. When the number and
equipment went well with him, he advanced towards Kufa. He passed
through al-Medain, which was under the control of Abu al-Saraya. He
controlled it and defeated its governor. Then he crept towards Kufa. The
two armies met at the Palace of Ibn Hubayra. A battle took place between
them. Many followers of Abu al-Saraya were killed. Herthema insisted on
fighting against Abu al-Saraya, and he responded to him. The troops of
Abu al-Saraya scattered, and he was unable to defend Kufa, which was the
capital and center of his revolt; so he was forced to leave it and to
head for al-Qadisiya. Herthema occupied Kufa. Abu al-Saraya left
al-Qadisiya and headed for al-Sus. The people of al-Sus closed the gates
at his face. He asked them to open them, and they opened them. The
governor of al-Sus asked Abu al-Saraya to leave it, but he refused. A
battle took place and a group of Abu al-Sarayas followers were killed,
so Abu al-Saraya escaped. He went to Khuresan and stopped at a village
called Barqana. The governor of Barqana went out for them. He held a
meeting with them. He gave them security provided that he should send
them to al-Hasan b. Sehal, and they responded to him. Immediately, he
sent them to him. Al-Hasan b. Sehal was then in al-Medain. When the
prisoners of war reached him, he ordered Abu al-Saraya to be killed.
After Abu al-Saraya had been killed, al-Hasan

b. Sehal ordered his head to be crucified in the eastern part of Baghdad
and his body to be crucified in the western part of it.[1] The period of
time between the revolt of Abu al-Saraya and his murder was ten
months.[2]

Certainly, there is a close relationship between the event of Abu
al-Saraya and Zayd, Ibrahim, and the like of them from among the
children of the Imam. That is because many of them took part in it, but
Zayd and Ibrahim were at the head of those who took part in it, for they
were entrusted with authority over some Islamic countries. Several
reports have been mentioned concerning what Ibrahim met when his
movement failed and came to an end. The reports are as follows:

The first: When Abu al-Saraya appointed him as a governor over the
Yemen, he went to it, and its people yielded to him after a short battle
took place between the two parties.[3]

The second: He was an emir over the Holy Mecca. When he heard of Abu
al-Saraya, he appeared in Mecca in the year 201 A. H. He summoned the
people to himself and a great deal of them responded to him. So he
undertook the authority there and killed many people of those who
maintained the viewpoints of the Abbasids. He performed the hajj in that
year. He was the first Alawi to perform the hajj in that year. As a
result al-Mamun was afraid of him, so he deceived him through appointing
him as ruler over the Yemen. When Ibrahim went to Sana, he was deceived
and taken as a prisoner of war by Ibn Fahan.[4]

The third: He was in Mecca when Abu al-Saraya was killed. When he heard
of that, he went to the Yemen and controlled many areas of it and
summoned the people to himself.[5]

The fourth: He dominated the Yemen; his government included the coast
and the eastern top of the Yemen. He lead the people in the hajj during
the time of al-Mamun. He delivered a speech among the people in the Holy
Shrine, and then he invoked Allah for al-Mamun and his heir apparent
Imam al-Rida, peace be on him.[6]

The fifth: He warred against al-Mamun. His army was defeated, and he
went to Mecca. When al-Mamun went to Baghdad, Ibrahim went to him, and
he gave him security.[7]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 549. [2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 10, p. 231. [3] Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin, p. 534. [4] Tuhfat al-Azhar. [5] Tarikh al-Duwal
al-Islamiya. [6] Mukhtasar Akhbar al-Khulafa'. [7] A'yan al-Shi'a, vol.
5, p. 481.

These some reports which have been mentioned in respect with him. Most
probably, Ibrahim conquered the Yemen and controlled it. His
determination collapsed when the movement of Abu al-Saraya failed. So he
asked al-Mamun for security, and he gave it to him. The thing that
confirms this is that Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, interceded for
al-Mamun, who was in Khuresan, and he released him.[1]

### The Death of Ibrahim

The pure Sayyid Ibrahim passed away in Baghdad in the year 213 A. H.,
and it was said in the year 210 A. H.[2] The biographers have
unanimously agreed on that he died of poison, and that it was al-Mamun
who poisoned him. The people escorted him to his final resting place in
a great way. Ibn al-Sammak[3] lowered him into his grave and recited:

Al-Imam al-Murtada died poisoned, and the time has folded

Virtues and sciences.

He died wronged at al-Zawra just as his grandfather (al-Husayn) died

Wronged in Kerbela.

The yellow sun lamented over his death, and the grieved moon stroke its

Face.[4]

His pure body was buried beside the grave of his father Imam Musa
al-Kazim, peace be on him. Al-Sayyid al-Araji has said: Ibrahim was
buried at al-Qadifa; there is a manifest dome over him. The people visit
his grave and ask the blessing of it. The general populace (amma) claim
that the grave belongs to al-Murtada, Alam al-Huda. This is an
imagination, for al-Murtada was carried to the Holy Har and was buried
beside his brother and his father according to the unanimous agreement
of the religious scholars. The one who is buried there is Ibrahim
al-Murtada, al-Kazims son.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhfat al-Azhar. [2] Mukhtasar Akhbar al-Khulafa'. [3] Ibn
al-Sammak's full name is Abu al-'Abbas Muhammed b. Sabeeh. He was the
retainer of the Banu 'Ijil, an ascetic Kufan. He had good speech and
wise sayings. He met a group of the first stage of Islam and reported
traditions from them such as Hisham b. 'Urwa, al-'Amash. He narrated
traditions from Ahmed b. Hanbel and the like. He went to Baghdad during
the time of al-Rashid. He stayed in it for a period of time. He died in
Kufa. This has been mentioned in the book al-Kuna wa al-Alqab. [4]
Mukhtasar Akhbar al-Khulafa'. [5] Menahil al-Darb fi Ansab al-'Arab.

#### 3. Ibrahim the Youngest

He was given the nickname of al-Murtada. He was the youngest of the
children of his father. His mother was a Nubian and her name was
Najiya.[1] Al-Abddali, a genealogist, has said: Ibrahim the youngest,
al-Kazims son, was a learned and worshipful. He was not Abu al-Sarayas
companion; rather that was his brother Ibrahim the elder.[2] Some
sources have mentioned that he appeared in the Yemen during the days of
Abu al-Saraya.[3] He was the grandfather of al-Murtada and al-Radi and
of the noble Musawis.[4] This is what we have found in his biography. He
was buried in Kerbela six cubits behind the grave of his grandfather
al-Husayn, peace be on him.[5] It was said that he died in the eastern
part of Baghdad and was buried in the cemetery of Bab Raz.[6]

#### 4. Ahmed

His mother was a slave-wife. She was the mother of his two brothers
Muhammed and Hamza. She was among the respected ladies. She was given
the Kunya of Umm Ahmed. Imam Musa, peace be on him, was very kind to
her. When he left Medina for Baghdad, he left with her the inheritances
of the Imamate and said to her: Whoever comes to you at any time and
asks you for the trust, then know that I have died a martyr, that he is
the successor after me and the Imam to whom obedience is obligatory on
you and on all the people. He ordered his son al-Rida, peace be on him,
to keep the house. When al-Rashid poisoned him in Baghdad, Imam al-Rida,
peace be on him, went to her and asked her for the trust. Umm Ahmed
asked him: Has your father died a martyr? Yes, he replied, I buried him.
Give me the trust my father gave to you when he went to Baghdad. I am
his successor and the real Imam over all mankind and jinn. Umm Ahmed
wept and gave him the trust. Then she pledged allegiance to him.[7] The
following is an account on some of his affairs and conditions:

### His Position with his Father

Imam Musa, peace be on him, took great care of his son Ahmed, and he had
a high position with him. He preferred him to the rest of his children.
He gave him one of his country estates.[8] Apparently, he regarded him
as one of his testamentary trustees.[9] Ismail, son of the Imam,
narrated the great care his father took to his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhfat al-Azhar. 'Umdat al-Talib, p. 190. [2] A'yan al-Shi'a, vol.
5, p. 482. [3] Al-Nafha al-'Anbariya. [4] A'yan al-Shi'a. [5] Ibid. [6]
Menahil al-Darb fi Ansab al-'Arab, p. 397. [7] Tuhfat al-'Alam, vol. 2,
p. 87. [8] Al-Irshad, p. 77. [9] A'yan al-Shi'a.

brother Ahmed, saying: My father and his son (Ahmed) went to one of his
estates. There was with Ahmed twenty men from among the servants and the
attendants of my father. When Ahmed rose, they rose with him; and when
he sat down, they sat down with him. Yet, my father looked after him; he
was not heedless of him. That the Imam took care of him and was not
heedless of him is a proof of that he showed love and sincerity toward
him.

### His fear of Allah and Worship

Ahmed was Allah-fearing and righteous. He released a thousand slaves to
seek nearness to Allah, the Most High.[1] A poet composed a poem on
that, saying:

Ahmed b. Kazim, the king of light and master of the great, released a

thousand (slaves).

The proof of his righteousness and piety is that when the story of the
death of Imam Musa became famous in Medina, the people gathered at the
door of Ahmeds house. The people went out along with Ahmed. They thought
that he was the Imam after his father, for they saw his greatness, his
worship, and his following the Islamic teachings. They thought that he
was the successor and Imam after his father, so they pledged allegiance
to him. He took the pledge of allegiance from them and ascended the
pulpit and delivered an eloquent sermon, saying: O People, you have
pledged allegiance to me, and I will pledge allegiance to my brother,
Ali b. Musa al-Rida. Know that he is the Imam and successor after my
father. He is the friend of Allah. Allah and His Apostle have made it
incumbent upon you and me to obey him. All those who were present
yielded to his speech. They left the mosque headed by Ahmed. They stood
before the Imam and admitted his Imamate.[2] This tradition is a proof
of his faith and piety. Some extinct Shiite sects believed in his
Imamate and claimed that he was the Imam after his father.

### His Knowledge

He was among the knowledgeable people of his time. He narrated many
traditions on the authority of his father and of his grandfathers. He
wrote the Holy Quran with his blessed hand.[3] However, we have found
nothing of his literary inheritance.

### With Abu al-Saraya

Some sources have mentioned that Ahmed was among those who took part in
the movement of Abu al-Saraya. Ibrahim and Ismail, the two sons of Abi
Sammal, have narrated, saying: When the affair of Abu al-Hasan happened,
we went to his son Ahmed for a time. When Abu al-Saraya went out in
revolt, Ahmed went out with him. Muhammed b. Ahmed b. Usayd went to
Ibrahim and Ismail and said to them: This man (Ahmed) went out in revolt
along with Abu al-Saraya, so what do

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Irshad. Tuhfat al-'Alam. [2] Tuhfat al-'Alam. [3] Lub al-Ansab.

you say? So they criticized him for that, withdrew from him, and said:
Abu al-Hasan is still alive, and we will follow him.[1] Some
traditionists believe that his going out in revolt with Abu al-Saraya
defames his justice.[2] However, we condemn that, for al-Shaykh al-Mufid
and other prominent religious scholars have regarded him as trustworthy.

### His Death

The famous narration is that he died a natural death. Muin al-Deen, who
died in 791 A. H., has mentioned that al-Sayyid al-Amir, Ahmed b. Musa,
went to Shiraz and died there after the death of his brother Ali
al-Rida, peace be on him, during the days of al-Mamun.[3] Some sources
have mentioned that he died a martyr. That was when he heard that
al-Mamun betrayed his brother Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. He was very
sad for him. So he left Baghdad to take vengeance on him. There was
along with him three thousands from among the grandsons of the Imams.
They went to war against al-Mamun. When they arrived in Qum, the
governor fought against them. So a group of his companions died as
martyrs. As for Ahmed, he went to al-Ray, but its governor battled
against him. Some of his companions died as martyrs. He and the rest
went to Asfareen, a district of Khuresan. They stopped at a salty land
between two mountains. As a result the army of al-Mamun attacked them,
fought against them, and killed them. As for Ahmed, he died as a martyr
and buried there. People visit his grave there. Al-Sayyid Muhsin
al-Amin, may Allah have mercy on him, has commented on that, saying:
This is something strange and contradicts the (reports that say) that
his grave is in Shiraz. He added: This narration is similar to some
fabricated stories.[4]

Any way, it is well known that Ahmed died in Shiraz and buried there.[5]
His grave is better known as the grave of Sayyid al-Sadat. He is now
called Shah Chragh (the King of Light).[6] His grave remained hidden,
but it appeared during the Emir Muqarrib al-Deen, Masud b. Badr, who
built a building over it. It was said that Ahmed was found in his grave
sound and unchanged; and there was in his finger a ring in which it was
written: Might belongs to Allah; Ahmed b. Musa. So the people recognized
him through it. The Atabik, Abu Bakr, built over it a building higher
than the first one. Lady Tashi, a righteous woman famous for worship and
asceticism, rebuilt it. She built over the Holy Shrine a high dome and a
high school beside it. Then she ordered her grave to be dug beside it.
That was in the year 750

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Keshi, Rijal, p. 294. [2] Ma'rifat Akhbar al-Rijal. [3] Al-Kuna
wa al-Alqab, vol. 2, p. 317. [4] A'yan al-Shi'a, vol. 1, p. 286-287. [5]
Fulk al-Najat, p. 337. [6] Jami' al-Ansab, p. 77. Muntaha al-Alqab.
Al-Kuna wa al-Alqab.

A. H.[1] The famous explorer Abu Abd Allah al-Tanji, better known as Ibn
Batuta, talked about his visiting the Holy Shrine and about the honoring
of the Iranian people to that Sacred Shrine. He has said under the title
Mentioning the Holy Shrines in Shiraz: Among them is the Shrine of Ahmed
b. Musa, brother of al-Rida Ali b. Musa b. Jafar b. Muhammed b. Ali b.
al-Husayn b. Ali b. Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with them. The
people of Shiraz regard it as a great shrine. They ask the blessing of
it and supplicate Allah through its excellence. Lady Tashi, mother of
Sultan Abu Ishaq, ordered a large school to be built beside it. There is
in it a corner in which is food for visitors. The reciters of the Quran
always recite the Quran. Among the habits of Lady Tashi was that she
visited this Shrine every Monday night. On that night, the judges, the
jurists, and the noble came together. Shiraz is the greatest of Allahs
earth in having noble people. I have heard from the trustworthy that the
number of the noble who have high ranks wherein is one thousand, four
hundred, and some. Their head is Azd al-Din al-Husayni. When the people
are present in the Blessed Shrine, they recite and finish the Quran. The
reciters recites (the Quran) with sweet voices. Food, fruits, and candy
are brought. When the people have finished eating, a preacher preaches
to them. That is after the noon prayer until dinner. The Lady is in a
room with a window towering over the Mosque. Then drums are beaten, and
trumpets are blown at the gate of the Shrine just as this is done at the
gates of the kings.[2] With this subject matter we will end our talk
about the biography of this great Sayyid.

#### 5. Ishaq

He was given the nicknames of al-Amir[3] and al-Amin.[4] In his book
al-Rijal, Shaykh al-Tusi has numbered him among the companions of Imam
al-Rida, peace be on him.[5] In his al-Kafi, al-Kulayni has narrated a
tradition narrated by Ishaq on the authority of his uncle and on the
authority of his grandfather Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him. Ishaq had
daughters of whom was Ruqayya, who lived for a long time and died in
Baghdad in the year 316 A. H. Among his grandsons is the pious one Abu
Talib al-Mehlus, and Abu Jafar Muhammed al-Surani, who was killed in
Shiraz.[6]

Ishaq died and buried in Medina in the year 240 A. H. Hemd Allah
al-Mustawfi has mentioned that Ishaq died and buried in Sawa (a city in
Iran).[7]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sadd al-Azrar, p. 292. [2] Tuhfat al-Nuzzar fi Ghara'ib al-Amsar wa
'Aja'ib al-Asfar, vol. 1, p. 127. [3] Al-Mujjdi. 'Umdat al-Talib. [4]
Bahr al-Ansab. [5] Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 1, p. 132. [6] Jami' al-Ansab,
p. 47. [7] Ibid.

#### 6. Ismail

He was among the great religious scholars of his time and was at the
head of those Allah-fearing and righteous. He was appointed by Abu
al-Saraya as an Emir over Persia.[1] When the movement failed, he lived
in Egypt, and then his children and his grandsons lived in it.

The proof for his high position and piety is that when Yehya b. Saffwan
died, Imam Abu Jafar ordered him to pray over him and to represent him
in (performing) that (payer).[2] He wrote many books he narrated on the
authority of his forefathers. Some of these books are the following:

1. Kitab al-Tehara (A Book on Purity).

2. Kitab al-Salat (A Book on Prayer).

3. Kitab al-Zekat (A Book on Zekat).

4. Kitab al-Soum (A Book on Fasting).

5. Kitab al-Hajj (A Book on Hajj).

6. Kitab al-Janaiz (A Book on Funerals).

7. Kitab al-Talaq (A Book on Divorce).

8. Kitab al-Nikah (A Book on Marriage).

9. Kitab al-Hudud (A Book on the Punishments Stipulated in the Quran)

10. Kitab al-Dua (A Book on Supplication).

11. Kitab al-Sunan wa al-Aadaab (A Book on Traditions and Good

Manners).

12. Kitab al-Ruya (A Book on Dreams).[3]

The greatest one of his books on which the traditionists depend is his
book entitled al-Jafariyat. Al-Nuri has mentioned: Al-Jafariyat is among
the well-known, old books on which (the traditionists) depend.[4] Our
great religious scholars have regarded his many books as a proof of
praising him and of his abundant knowledge.[5] Ismail died and buried in
Egypt.[6] However, Hamd Allah al-Mustawfi

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid. [2] al-Keshi, Rijal. [3] Al-Nejashi, Rijal. Al-Fihrast. Ibn
Shahrashub, al-Ma'lim. [4] Mustadrakat al-Wasa'il. The late Sayyid Abu
al-Hasan depended on this very much. [5] Al-Ta'liqa. Ibn Dawud, Rijal.
[6] Tuhfat al-'Alam, vol. 2, p. 34.

has mentioned that he was buried in a district of Shiraz.[1]

#### 7. Jafar

His Kunya was Abu al-Hasan. His mother was a slave-wife.[2] He was known
as al-Khawari, a village in Sacred Mecca. He often lived in the village,
so he and his children were ascribed to it. So they were called
al-Khawariyun. They were also called al-Shajariyun, for they stopped at
the places with many trees.[3] He had fourteen children: six males, and
eight females.[4]

#### 8. Al-Hasan

His mother was a slave-wife. He had very few children. Abu Nasr
al-Bukhari has said: Al-Hasan b. Musa had a boy called Jafar whose
mother was a slave-wife. It is said that he had children; and something
other than that was said. Ibn Tabtaba and Abu al-Hasan al-Umari have
said: Al-Hasan b. Musa had only one boy called Jafar, who had three
boys: Muhammed, al-Hasan, and Musa.[5] The books of history and
genealogy have not specified when and where he died.

#### 9. Al-Husayn

He was nicknamed al-Sayyid Ala al-Din.[6] He was a Sayyid of great
importance and with a high social position.

The proof of his high position is the narration of al-Bizanti, in which
it has been mentioned that he asked Imam al-Jewad: Which of your uncles
is the kindest to you? Al-Husayn, he replied. Imam al-Rida, peace be on
him, said: By Allah, he is truthful. By Allah, he is the kindest of them
to him and the best of them.[7] Al-Husayn related, saying: We are
Hashimite young men. While we were sitting around my brother Abu
al-Hasan al-Rida, peace be on him, Jafar b. Umar al-Alawi passed by us.
He was shabby. We looked at each other and laughed at his appearance. So
Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, said to us: In the near future, you will
see that he has a lot of money and many followers. He added: After a
month, he became the governor of Medina; his conditions became well. He
along with retainers passed with us.[8] Al-Barqi has said: Al-Husayn
died in Kufa and buried at al-Abbasiya. His grave is near to Umm
al-Barur. Those who are close to it call it the grave of al-Husayn.[9]
The late Sayyid Jafar Aal Behar al-Ulum has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Jami' al-Ansab. [2] Tuhfat al-Azhar. [3] Menahil al-Darb, p. 567.
[4] Al-Mujjdi. [5] 'Umdat al-Talib. Bahr al-Ansab. [6] Tuhfat al-'Alam,
vol. 2, p. 31. [7] Al-Bihar, vol. 13, p. 45. [8] Ibid., p. 66. [9]
Tarikh al-Kufa, p. 56.

said: The grave of al-Husayn is in Shiraz. It has been mentioned by
Shaykh al-Islam Shahab al-Din in his historical book entitled Shiraz
Nama. The summary of what he has mentioned is as follows: Qattlagh was a
governor over Shiraz. He had a garden where the Shrine of the mentioned
Sayyid was. The doorkeeper of that garden was among the men of religion
and generosity. On Friday nights he saw a light coming out of a hill in
that garden. He told Qattlagh about that. The latter saw what the former
had seen. When he asked about that place and discovered it, he came to
know that it was a grave in which was a great body with perfect
greatness, majesty, freshness, and beauty. There was a copy of the Quran
in one of his hands, and in the another was a drawn sword. Through the
signs and comparisons, they came to know that the grave belonged to
al-Husayn b. Musa. So he built for it a dome and a corridor. Apparently,
this Qattlagh Khan is other than the one who fought against his brother
Sayyid Ahmed. It is possible that the garden belonged to him; and the
governor who ordered his shrine was someone other than him. For Qattlagh
is a nickname of a group (of people) such as Abu Bakr b. Sad al-Zunki.
He has also said: Some of them wrote that al-Sayyid Ala al-Din Husayn
went to that garden, and they came to know that he belonged to the Banu
Hashim, so they killed him in that garden. After a period of time, when
the traces of the garden disappeared and nothing of it remained except a
high hill, they recognized his grave through the mentioned signs. That
was during the reign of the Safawi State. A man called Ali Mirza left
Medina and lived in Shiraz. He was rich, so he built a high dome over
him and endowed properties and gardens for him. When he died, he was
buried beside the Shrine. Then the endowments were in the hand of his
son Mirza Nizam al-Mulk, a minister in that state, and then after him
they were in the hands of his grandsons. Shah Ismail al-Safawi ordered
Sultan Khalil, the governor of Shiraz, repaired the Shrine and enlarged
its previous building in the year 810 A. H.[1]

#### 10. Hamza

His Kunya was Abu al-Qasim. His mother was a slave-wife. He was
knowledgeable, meritorious, perfect, solemn, great, with a sublime
position and high rank, and respected by the Shia (khassa) and non-Shia
(amma). He traveled along with his brother Imam Ali al-Rida, peace be on
him, to Khuresan. He devoted himself to serving him, did his best to
achieve his objectives, sought his good pleasure, and obeyed his orders.
When he arrived in Su Sad, a village in Tirtisber, some followers of
al-Mamun attacked and killed him. His grave is in Bustan (garden). He
had two boys; one of them was called Ali, and the other was called
al-Qasim Abu Muhammed, to whom belong the Safawi Sayyids.[2] Some
sources have mentioned that his grave is in al-Ray near to the grave of
the great

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhfat al-'Alam, vol. 2, p. 31-33. [2] Tuhfat al-Azhar.

Sayyid Shah Abd al-Azim.[1] It was said that he was buried in Qum.[2]

#### 11. Zayd

His mother was a slave-wife. He is better known as Zayd al-Naar (fire).
He was a Zaydi in thought- that is to say that he maintained the
doctrine of the Zaydis who believed in going out in revolt against the
authority, not because of that he believed in the Imamate of him who
went in revolt (against the authorities), just as they believed. He was
a joker.[3] The following are some of his affairs:

### A. With Abu al-Saraya

Those who wrote the biography of Zayd have unanimously agreed on that
Zayd was among those who went in revolt along with Abu al-Saraya, and
that he was appointed by him as a governor over Basrah. However, the
narrations have differed over explaining his conditions after the
failure of the revolt. The following are some of them:

The first (narration): When Zayd entered Basrah and overcame it, he
burnt the house of the Abbasids and set fire to their date-palms and all
their possessions, so he was called Zayd al-Naar. Al-Hasan b. Sehl
warred against him and won a victory over him and sent him to al-Mamun,
and he was caused to come in to him in chains. So al-Mamun forgave him
his sin and sent him to his brother al-Rida, who swore (by Allah) that
he would never talk with him.[4]

The second (narration): When the revolt of Abu al-Saraya failed, Zayd
disappeared. However, al-Hasan b. Sehal sought him, and he was showed
the way to him. He imprisoned him, and he remained in the prison in
Baghdad until Ibrahim al-Mehdi, known as Ibn Shakla, appeared. Then the
people of Baghdad gathered around the prison and took him out of it. So
he (Zayd) went to Medina, burnt the houses, killed a group of people,
and summoned the people to pledge allegiance to Muhammed b. Jafar b.
Muhammed. So al-Mamun sent an army to him, and it arrested him and took
him to him. He said to him: O Zayd, you went out in revolt in Basrah,
and you left to start with the houses of our enemies from among the Banu
Umayya, Thaqeef, Ghani[5] and its inhabitants, and the family of Ziyad.
You intentionally burnt the houses of your cousins. He said to him: O
Commander of the faithful, I made a mistake in all the directions. If I
returned to go out in revolt, I would start with our enemies. So
al-Mamun laughed and sent him to his brother al-Rida, peace be on him,
and said to him: I have left his crime to you; therefore, educate him
well. When Zayd stood before the Imam, he scolded him and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Fulk al-Najat, p. 337. Zendigan Hazrat Musa b. Ja'far (a Persian
book). [2] Nasikh al-Tawarikh (a Persian book). [3] Al-'Uyun. [4] 'Umdat
al-Talib. Bahr al-Ansab. [5] Ghani is a tribe of Ghattfan.

released him and swore (by Allah) that he would not talk with him as
long as he lived.[1]

The third (narration): When Abu al-Saraya was killed, the Talibiyyin
scattered; some of them disappeared in Baghdad, and some of them
disappeared in Medina. Zayd was among those who disappeared. Al-Hasan b.
Sehal sought him, and he was shown the way to him. When Zayd was brought
to him, he ordered him to be imprisoned. Then he ordered him to be
brought out of prison and to be beheaded. So al-Hajjajj b. Khuthayma
opposed him, saying: O Emir, I think that you must not hasten to invite
me to come to you, for I have a piece of advice.

So he responded him to that, and he said to him:

-O Emir, has a command concerning what you are going to do come to you
from the Commander of the faithful?

-No.

-So why are you going to kill the cousin of the Commander of the
faithful without asking his permission, his command, and asking his
opinion of him? Then he related to him the story of Abd Allah b.
al-Aftas, (which is as follows): Al-Rashid ordered Jafar b. Yehya to
imprison Abd Allah b. al-Aftas, but Jafar killed him without asking his
permission. He sent him his head along with Nouruz gifts on a tray.
Al-Rashid ordered Mesrur al-Kabir to kill Yehya b. Jafar and said to
him: When Jafar asks you about the crime for which you are going to kill
him, say to him: I will kill you because you had killed my cousin Abd
Allah b. al-Aftas you killed without asking my permission. Then
al-Hajjajj asked al-Hasan: O Emir, do you feel secure that an event may
take place between you and the Commander of the faithful, and he
protested against you in the same way through which al-Rashid protested
against Yehya b. Jafar? So al-Hasan said to al-Hajjajj: May Allah reward
you good. Then he ordered Zayd to be returned to prison, and he remained
in prison until Ibrahim b. al-Mehdi appeared in Iraq. So the people in
Baghdad attacked the prison and released Zayd. However, the police
arrested him and sent him to al-Mamun, and he sent him to his brother
al-Rida, who released him.[2]

The fourth (narration): When Zayd went in revolt in Basrah, al-Mamun
sent him al-Hasan b. Sehal, and he won a victory over him and sent him
in chain to al-Mamun, who was in Maru. Then al-Mamun said to his brother
al-Rida: Your brother revolted against us and did what he had done;
before him Zayd b. Ali b. Zayn al-Abidin had revolted against us. Now,
we have pardoned him as a sign of honoring you. We have given him to
you. Were it not for that you had a great position, we would crucify
him. The thing he has done is not simple. So Imam al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Jami' al-Ansab, p. 65. [2] Al-Bihar, vol. 3, p. 65. 'Uyun Akhbar
al-Rida, vol. 3, p. 65.

Rida, peace be on him, said to him: Do not compare Zayd to Zayd b. Ali,
for the latter was among the religious scholars of the family of
Muhammed. He was angry for the religion of Allah, and went out in revolt
to struggle against the enemies of Allah, to the extent that he died a
martyr. Then the Imam ordered Zayd to be released and swore (by Allah)
not to talk with him.[1]

These are some narrations that show Zayds conditions after the failure
of the revolt of Abu al-Saraya. They are different over explaining his
conditions, but they agree on that al-Mamun released him and forgave
him, that Zayd was not punished by the authorities, and that he was not
liable to any detested thing.

### B. With Imam al-Rida

The relationship between Zayd and Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, was not
good. That is because a narration has been narrated from Imam al-Rida,
peace be on him, in which he disparaged him and degraded his importance.
Al-Hasan b. Musa b. Ali al-Washsha al-Baghdadi narrated, saying: I was
in Khuresan (as a guest) with Ali b. Musa al-Rida, peace be on him. His
brother Zayd was in his gathering. He was talking with a group of people
in competing with them in glory, saying: We. We! As for Abu al-Hasan
(al-Rida), he was busy talking with a group of people. When he heard
Zayds statement, he became displeased, and his condition changed. So he
turned to Zayd and said to him: O Zayd, have you been deluded by the
statement of the Kufan narrators who said that Fatima guarded her
chastity, so Allah prevented her progeny from (entering) the Fire? No,
by Allah, (that will be for none) except for al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and
her womb relatives. Musa b. Jafar, peace be on him, obeys Allah, fasts
by day, and performs prayers by night, while you disobey Him. Then you
want to be equal to him on the Day of Resurrection and to be dearer than
him with Allah. Surely Ali b. al-Husayn said: The one from among us who
performs good deeds will have double reward; and the one from among us
who performs evil deeds will have double chastisement.

Then he, peace be on him, turned to al-Hasan and asked him: How do you
read this verse: He said: O Nuh, surely he is not of your family; surely
he is (the doer of) other than good deeds?

Al-Hasan replied: Some people read: Surely he is (the doer of) other
than good deeds. And some of them read: Surely he is not a good deed.
Therefore, whoever reads it as: Surely he is not a good deed, then he
negates him from his father.

The Imam, peace be on him, said: No, he was his fathers son, but when he
disobeyed Allah, the Great and Almighty, He (Allah) negated him from his
father. So are those who are of us and do not obey Allah, the Great and
Almighty, are not of us. If you obey Allah, the Great and Almighty, then
you are of us.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhfat al-Azhar. [2] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, p. 65. 'Uyun Akhbar
al-Rida, p. 346.

Al-Hasan b. al-Jahm reported, saying: I visited al-Rida, peace be on
him, and was with him his brother Zayd b. Musa. The Imam turned to him
and scolded him, saying: O Zayd, fear Allah, for we attained what we
have attained through fear of Allah. So whoever does not fear Allah, he
is not of us, nor are we of him. O Zayd, beware of insulting our Shiites
through whom you assault, so the light of your face goes. O Zayd, the
people have detested our Shiites, showed enmity toward them, regarded
their blood and properties as lawful because of their love for us and
their faith in following us. So if you perform evil deeds toward them,
then you will wrong yourself and invalidate your right.[1] In other
narrations Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, has shown his displeasure with
him.

### C. His Death

Those who wrote the biography of Zayd have differed over the time of his
death. So it was said that he died during the days of al-Mamun, and that
it was he who poisoned him, and he died of it.[2] It was said that he
lived until the end of the Caliphate of al-Mutawakil and died in
Saamrraa.[3] It was said that he died during the days of al-Mustaeen.[4]
As for his grave, according to the first viewpoint, is in Selhad, a
village in Asfehan. A dome has been built over it, and it has a
shrine.[5]

#### 12. Al-Abbas

In his book al-Rijal, al-Shaykh al-Tusi has numbered him as among the
companions of Imam al-Kazim, peace be on him, and he has said: Al-Abbas
is trustworthy. Some traditionists have condemned his being trustworthy
due to his dispute with Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, without any
right. In Usool al-Kaafi, Chapter on the Textual Nomination of the
Imamate of Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, al-Kulayni has narrated the
will of his father Imam Musa, peace be on him. We will mention its text
in the following chapters of this book. In it the Imam required his
children not to open it. When he, peace be on him, died, one of his
children brought a suit against Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, before
the judge of Medina, and he ordered Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, and
his brothers to be brought. When they were brought, al-Abbas addressed
the judge, saying: May Allah set you right and make (us) enjoy you,
surely at the bottom of this letter a treasury and jewels. He (Imam
al-Rida) wants to veil it and to take it alone. Our father has left
every thing for him and has left us dependent. Were it not for that I
prevented myself, I would openly tell you a bout a certain thing.

These rude words angered Ibrahim b. Muhammed, and he said to him:
Therefore, by Allah, you telling about something we do not accept from
you, nor do we

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, pp. 348-349. [2] Al-'Umda. [3] 'Uyun Akhbar
al-Rida, p. 347. [4] Jamharat Ansab al-'Arab, p. 55. [5] Tuhfat
al-Azhar.

believe you in it. Then you are with us blamed and cast away. We know
that you are a liar young and grown-up. You father was more
knowledgeable (than us) of you, if you were good. You father knew you
outwardly and inwardly. He did not entrust you with two dates.

Ishaq b. Jafar seized him by the neck and said to him: Surely you are
stupid, weak, foolish along with that which issued from you yesterday.

The people unanimously agreed on blaming and scolding him. As a result
the judge turned to Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, and said to him: O
Abu al-Hasan, rise. That is enough lest you father should curse me
today. No, by Allah, none is more knowledgeable of a son than his own
father. No, by Allah, in our viewpoint, your father is not light in his
reason, nor is he weak in his opinion.

Accordingly, al-Abbas turned to the judge and asked him:

-May Allah set you right, open the letter and read what is in its
bottom.

-That is enough lest your father should curse me.

-I will open it.

-That is up to you.

Al-Abbas rose without shame. He took the will and opened it. He found
that he was excluded from the will and that the only one whom the will
included was Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. Al-Abbas was exposed and was
befallen by abasement and humiliation. So Imam al-Rida, peace be on him,
turned and said to al-Abbas and his brother: O My brother, surely I know
what has incited you to do that; it is the debts against you. Then he,
peace be on him, turned to his retainer Saeed and ordered him to repay
the debts against his brother and to spend on them. He said to them: By
Allah, I will not leave helping you and showing kindness to you as long
as I walk on earth; therefore, say whatever you wish.

However, al-Abbas said to him: You give us something of the surpluses of
our properties; what we have with you is more!

The Imam, peace be on him, answered him with clemency, mercy, and
pardon, saying to him: Say whatever you wish, for the honor is yours; so
if you do well, then that is for you with Allah; and if you do evil,
surely Allah is Merciful, Forgiving. Most surely, you know that on this
day of mine I have no child nor inheritor other than you. If I have
banned or saved up something of which you think, it will be for you and
return to you. By Allah, since the death of your father, I have spent
all things in the way you see.

Yet, al-Abbas said: By Allah, it is not so; and Allah has not given you
an opinion over us, but you clearly envy us!

Then he said some rude words, so Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, said to
him: There is neither force nor strength save through Allah, the Most
High, the Great!

As for me, my brother, I take care of delighting you. O Allah, You know
that I like to set them right, am kind to them, visit them, merciful to
them, take care of their affairs by day and night; therefore reward me
good through that. If I am other than that, then You are the Knower of
the unseen. So reward me with that which I deserve, evil for evil, and
good for good. O Allah, set them right and set right for them (their
souls); drive away Satan from us and them; help them obey you; grant
them success to (attain) Your guidance. As for me, my brothers, I take
care of delighting you and do my best to set you right; and Allah is a
witness of what we say.

However, al-Abbas answered him with vainglory and impudence: I know your
tongue well; and your spade has no clay with me![1]

In this manner the narrators have mentioned al-Abbas; and only Allah
knows the real condition. Al-Abbas had a boy called al-Qasim, whose
mother was a slave-wife called Nedam. He hid himself from the
authorities in Sura. He planted vegetables and lived on their returns.
None recognized him there. The people surrounded him, for he was ascetic
and worshipful. When they asked him about his name and lineage, he
refused to give it to them. Al-Abbas married a woman, and the woman born
him a female. A man called Isa visited him. The man wanted to go to
Mecca to perform the hajj. When he wanted to say good-by to al-Abbas, he
asked him about his need, and he said to him:

-I have a need with you.

-What is it?

-I want you to take my daughter to Medina. When you arrive in it, ask
(the people) about the street so-and-so. When you enter it, leave the
girl there and go away.

Isa traveled to Mecca. When he arrived in Medina, he left the girl in
the specified place. The girl went to a house and knocked at the door.
The door was opened for her, and she came in. Shortly after that, the
people in the house cried loudly. Isa asked them about the reason for
their crying, and they said to him: Al-Qasim b. al-Abbas has died; and
this is his daughter. He was astonished at that. When he returned home,
the people told him about the death of al-Qasim. He told them that
al-Qasim was Imam Musas grandson, and then he told them about the affair
of al-Qasims daughter. Accordingly, a group of believers built a dome
over his pure grave, which people visit up to now.

#### 13. Abd Allah

His mother was a slave-wife. He was known as al-Awkalani; and his
children were called al-Awkalaniya. Concerning him, Ali b. Ibrahim
narrated, saying: When Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, died, we went to
Mecca to perform the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 2, p. 130.

hajj. Many Shiites from all countries were present to look at Abu Jafar.
His uncle Abd Allah b. Musa came in. He was a noble, old man wearing
coarse garments. Some signs of prostration were between his two eyes. He
sat down, and Abu Jafar came out wearing a fine, flaxen shirt[1] and a
white pair of sandals. Abd Allah rose for him, received him, and kissed
him on the forehead. The Shiites rose as a sign of honoring and
magnifying for him. Abu Jafar sat on a chair. The people looked at each
other, for the Imam was still young. He was then nine years old. One of
the people asked Abd Allah:

-May Allah set you right, what is your opinion of a man who fornicates
an animal?

-His right hand is cut off; and he is flogged the prescribed punishment.

When Imam al-Jewad heard this verdict that disagreed with Islamic Law,
he became angry and said to him:

-O Uncle, fear Allah. Surely, it is something so great that on the
Resurrection Day you will stand before Allah, the Great and Almighty,
and He will ask you:

-Why did you give to the people a religious decision without knowledge?

-Did your father not say that?

-My father was asked about a man who exhumed a woman and fornicated her.
So my father said: His right hand is cut off because of exhuming (the
grave), and he is flogged the prescribed punishment of fornication. That
is because the sacredness of the dead woman is similar to that of a
living one.

-You are right, my master. I ask Allahs forgiveness.

The people admired the Imam. They questioned him, and he answered them.

This narration indicate that Abd Allah hastened and made a mistake in
the religious verdict, but he showed remorse and was humble before the
Imam. This deed removes from him that criticism and promote him to the
level of (Allahs) friends and of those Allah-fearing. Our sources have
not mentioned when and where he died.

#### 14. Ubayd Allah

His mother was a slave-wife. He had three daughters, whose names are:
Asma, Zaynab, and Fatima. He had also eight sons whose names are:
Muhammed al-Yemeni, Jafar, al-Qasim, Ali, Musa, al-Hasan, al-Husayn, and
Ahmed.[2] To him belong many Alawi houses of great importance and
position. He died and buried in Kufa.[3]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Bihar, vol. 13, p. 129. [2] Al-Mujjdi. [3] Tarikh al-Kufa, p. 56.

#### 15. Al-Qasim

He was a branch of the pure branches of the Imamate and was a gust of
the sacred gusts of the Prophethood. He was the unique of his time in
his piety, righteousness, his ordeal, and his tribulation. We will
mention some of his affairs as follows:

### A. The Imam loves him

Imam Musa, peace be on him, showed great affection and love for his son
al-Qasim. That is because he came to know that his son was
rightly-guided, righteous, virtuous, and gifted with unique abilities.
He, peace be on him, praised him and preferred him to the rest of his
children except his son Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. Yazid b. Sulayt
narrated, saying: I asked Imam Musa, peace be on him, to appoint the
Imam after him, and he, peace be on him, said: O Abu Ammarah, I want to
tell you that I have appointed my son Ali. If the affair was up to me, I
would appoint my son al-Qasim, for I love him and have piety on him, but
that is up to Allah, the Most High.[1]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, showed this love for al-Qasim, for he
thought that he was the best of his children in piety, fear of Allah,
and clinging to the religion. Among the aspects of his honoring him is
that he entrusted him with carrying out some of his tasks. Sulayman
al-Jafari narrated: I heard Abu al-Hasan (Musa) saying to his son
al-Qasim: My little son, arise and recite Surat al-Saffaat by the head
of your brother until you complete it. Al-Qasim recited it. When he
reached these words of Him, the Exalted: Then ask them whether they are
stronger in creation or those (others) whom We have created[2], the boy
died. So the people prepared him for burial. Then Yaqub b. Jafar said to
the Imam. When one was about to die, you ordered us to recite Surat
Yasin by him. Now, you have ordered us to recite Surat al-Saffaat. He,
peace be on him, said: When it is recited by someone about to die, Allah
hasten his rest.[3]

This tradition indicates that Imam Musa, peace be on him, had great
confidence in al-Qasim and preferred him to those other than him. Of
course such preference resulted from his merits and his achievements.

### B. The Authorities pursue al-Qasim

When Harun al-Rashid went too far in pursuing, murdering, and exhausting
the Alawids, al-Qasim fled Yethrib (Medina). He hid himself and
concealed his name, that he might not be recognized. He reached Sura and
resided there as a stranger and far from his household and his homeland.
He had fear for himself. He hid his own affairs lest someone should
recognize him. The trustworthy sources have not mentioned anything about
his life and what he met in his exile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi. [2] Qur'an, 37, 11. [3] Ibid.

### C. His Death

Al-Qasim lived in Sura throughout his short-termed lifetime. He suffered
from loneliness and fear of the authorities. Suspicions surrounded him.
The painful sufferings of his household came to his mind. The most
painful thing that hurt him was the heavy misfortune that befell his
father Imam Musa, peace be on him, his imprisonment in dark prisons,
making his brothers homeless, and other disasters and misfortunes.
Sadness melted his heart; and illness made him weak, to the extent that
death approached him while he was at the dawn of youth and bloom of
life. When he felt that death was close at hand, he introduced himself
to the people, for he then had no fear. Then he passed away.

Alas! What bitter and horrible ordeals and misfortunes the children of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, met!

The Muslims in that area wept bitter tears because they fell short of
paying attention to the rights of the grandson of their Prophet, for
they were ignorant of him. Then they buried his pure corpse in its final
resting place. They buried along with him knowledge, piety, and
righteousness. As for the year of his death, we have not found it. Most
probably, he died during the days of Harun al-Rashid. We are not sure
that he died during the time of al-Mamun, for the Alawids did not hide
themselves during his time.

### D. His Shrine

As for his Holy Shrine, it is now in Sura called al-Buqa al-Tayyiba (the
Good Ground), at al-Qasim district. This district has been ascribed to
his Holy Name; it is one of the districts of al-Hashimiya, which is a
district of Babil Province (previously al-Hilla). Al-Hamawi has
mentioned: Surely, the Holy Shrine is at Shusha. He has said in respect
with specifying it: It is in the land of Babil, beyond the Hilla of the
Banu Mizyad. At it is the grave of al-Qasim b. Musa b. Jafar, and near
to it is the grave of Dhu al-Kifl.[1] Safy al-Din[2] and al-Zubaydi[3]
said the same thing as he said. This is a clear mistake, for the one who
is buried in this ground is al-Qasim b. al-Abbas b. Imam Musa, peace be
on him. This has been mentioned by Ahmed b. Anba,[4] a genealogist, and
al-Hajja al-Sayyid al-Qezwini.[5] Without doubt these Sayyid
genealogists are more knowledgeable of the graves of their forefathers
than others. As for what al-Mejjlisi[6] has mentioned that the grave of
al-Qasim is near to al-Ghari, he meant the figurative nearness, not the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mu'jam al-Buldan. [2] Marasid al-Ittila'. [3] Tajj al-'Aroos, vol.
4, p. 318. [4] 'Umdat al-Talib, p. 219. [5] Fulk al-Najat, p. 336. [6]
Bihar al-Anwar.

real one, just as al-Shaykh al-Mamaqani[1] has mentioned.

The Holy Dome was rebuilt and lighted by electric lamps by the one
knowledge and virtue have lost, great Allama, late Shaykh Qasim Muhyyi
al-Din.

It is worth mentioning that al-Qasim had no children; just as some
genealogists have mentioned.[2]

### E. Visitation to it is Desirable

The great Sayyid Ali b. Tawus has mentioned that paying a visitation to
the Holy Shrine of al-Qasim is desirable. He has compared it to that to
the grave of al-Abbas b. Imam Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, and to that to Ali the elder, son of Imam al-Husayn, peace be
on him. He has mentioned the special visitation to it.[3]

It has been ascribed to Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, that he said in
respect with the visitation to al-Qasim: Whoever cannot pay a visitation
to me, let him visit my brother al-Qasim. Al-Sayyid Ali b. Yehya b.
Haddeed al-Husayni has composed a poem on this tradition, saying:

O Sayyid concerning whom a truthful statement has been mentioned and

Our trustworthy (traditionists) narrate.

Through an authentic chain of authorities it has been mentioned from his

Brother on the side of his mother and father.

Surely, I have guaranteed Aden Gardens for him who visits me without

Doubt.

And if he cannot visit my grave, for he cannot reach it, then let him
visit, if

He can, the grave of my brother al-Qasim and praise him well.[4]

With this brief account we will end our talk about the life of this
great Sayyid. That is because our sources have not given us a detailed
picture of his noble life.

#### 16. Muhammed

His Kunya was Abu Ibrahim. He was generous, great, and venerable. He was
better known as al-Aabid due to his too much ablution and prayers. He
performed an ablution and prayed ever night. He slept a little bit and
then he rose to worship Allah, the Most High, until the light of morning
shone. One of the followers of his father has said: When I see Muhammed,
I remember the words of Allah, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mamaqani. [2] Bahr al-Ansab, p. 53. [3] Musbah al-Za'ireen.
Al-Sayyid Muhsin al-'Amili, Mifftah al-Jannat, vol. 2, p. 151. [4]
Al-Sayyid 'Abd al-Razzaq Kammuna, Meshahid al-'Itra al-Tahira.

Exalted: They used to sleep but little in the night.[1][2]

The narrators have mentioned that he entered Shiraz and disappeared in
it. He sold copies of the Holy Quran and released a thousand slaves.[3]
He had seven children, males and females. The females are: Mrs. Hekima,
Kelthem, Burayha, and Fatima. The males are: Jafar, Muhammed, and
Ibrahim. As for Ibrahim, he is better known as al-Mujab.[4] The
historians have said: Ibrahim greeted the grave of al-Husayn, peace be
on him, and he heard a voice from the grave returning his greeting.[5]
He revolted against the Abbasids and controlled the Arab Peninsula. He
was buried by the grave of his grandfather Imam al-Husayn, peace be on
him. Priding himself on him and his grandfather Imam Musa, peace be on
him, one of his children has said:

From where do the people have the like of my grandfather Musa and his

Son al-Mujab?

When he addressed the grandson (of the Prophet), and he answered him

With the most honorable answer.[6]

Ibrahim had one son called Muhammed.[7] The pure Sayyid Muhammed died
and was buried in Shiraz. His grave was hidden until the time of Bek b.
Sad b. Zunki. Who built over it a dome in the district called Bagh
Ghattlagh. The grave was rebuilt several times during the time of Sultan
Nadir Khan. In the year 1296 A. H., it was rebuilt by al-Nawwab Uways b.
al-Nawwab al-Azam Shah Zada Ferhad al-Qajari.[8] In the present time
Muhammed has a shrine people visit and ask the blessing of it. The good
Sayyids, and kind, righteous people live near to it. They make vows to
it.[9]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, 51, 17. [2] Al-Fusool al-Muhimma, p. 256. [3] Tuhfat
al-'Alam, vol. 2, p. 31. [4] Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 3, p. 192. [5]
Ghayat al-Ikhtisar. 'Ayan al-Shi'a, vol. 5, p. 463. Tedhikart al-Ansab.
[6] 'Ayan al-Shi'a, vol. 5, p. 463. [7] Tanqeeh al-Maqal, vol. 3, p.
192. [8] Tuhfat al-'Alam, vol. 2, p. 31. [9] Jami' al-Ansab, p. 108.

#### 17. Harun

His mother was a slave-wife. He had eight children; none of them had
children except his son Ahmed.[1] It was said that he had no
children.[2] It was said that the Abbasi government practiced pressures
on him; so clashes took place between him and the police. He was wounded
and went to Shahristan. There lived he in a village with farms. He
became healthily weak; so the owner of the farms treated him until he
got well. There resided he for a period of time until his affairs became
famous. While he was having food, the police of al-Mamun attacked and
killed him. He was buried there. The famous narration is that he died in
one of the villages of Taliqan, and he was buried there.[3] He has a
shrine people visit. The shrine was founded in the year 853 and on it
has been written: This is the grave of the son of the Imam, son of the
Sultan of the Allah-fearing and Imam of the friends (of Allah), Musa
al-Kazim.[4]

These are the entire biographies of some sons of the Imam, peace be on
him. Our resources have not mentioned the rest of them. Some other
sources have mentioned the names of other sons of the Imam, other than
those we have mentioned. Many books of genealogy have neglected their
names and biographies. The following are their names along with a brief
account on some of their affairs:

#### 18. Awn

Al-Shiblenji has mentioned him and said: To him belongs the lineage of
our master, our protector, the great Shaykh, the one brought nigh, one
who gathered together the two honors, the honor of lineage, and the
honor of knowledge of Allah, and literature, possessor of the manifest
miracles, Abu al-Hasan, father of the young people, Ali b. Umar, b.
Muhammed b. Sulayman b. Ubayd b. Isa b. Alawi b. Muhammed b. Hemham b.
Awn b. Musa al-Kazim b. Jafar al-Sadiq b. Muhammed al-Baqir b. Ali Zayn
al-Abidin b. al-Husayn b. Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be on him. A virtuous
poet has composed a poem on this lineage, saying:

Ali b. Faruq Abu Muhammed, then Sulayman, al-Rida the directed one.

Ubayd, Isa, Alawi, Muhammed, Hemham, Awn, Kazim, the supported

one.

Jafar al-Sadiq, say Muhammed, Zayn, Husayn, and Ali al-Sayyid.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Mujjdi. [2] Jami' al-Ansab, p. 55. [3] Ibid. [4] Zendigani Hezret
Musa b. Ja'far, p. 260. [5] Noor al-Abbsar, p. 138.

#### 19. Idris

To him belongs al-Sayyid Khaja Muin al-Din al-Sengeri.[1]

#### 20. Shams

Ahmed b. Muhammed al-Jilani al-Nejefi, [2] a genealogist, has mentioned
him. Al-Sayyid al-Rawdati has mentioned the tree of his children.[3]

#### 21. Sharaf al-Din

To him belong the Khalkhali Sayyids; their tree has been established.[4]

#### 22. Salih

He had two sons better known as the two brave Sayyids; they have a tree.
He died in Tejrish (Iran). His grave is built; and there is a huge
building around it.[5]

With this Sayyid we will end our talk about the males from among the
children of the Imam, peace be on him. Now, we have to mention the
biographies of some ladies from among his daughters:

### 1. Aamina

She died in Egypt. People visit her grave their. The doorkeeper of her
shrine narrated one of her miracles (as follows): A person brought him
some oil and asked him to kindle it to make light for one night. The
doorkeeper put it into lamps, but nothing of it was kindled. He was
astonished at that. He dreamt of lady Aamina saying to him: Return his
oil to him and ask him from where did he bring it? That is because we
accept nothing except good things. In the morning the owner of the oil
came, and the doorkeeper said to him:

-Take your oil!

-Why?

-Nothing of it was kindled. I dreamt of her, and she said to me: We
accept nothing but good things.

-The Lady is truthful. Surely I am a man who is mekkas[6].

Then he took the oil and went away.[7]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Kenz al-Ansab, p. 74. [2] Sirajj al-Ansab, vol. 44. [3] Jami'
al-Ansab, p. 9. [4] Ibid., p. 44. [5] Kenz al-Ansab. [6] The mekkas was
the one who took things illegally. [7] Noor al-Abbsar, p. 180.

### 2. Hekima

Her brother Imam al-Rida, peace be on him, ordered her to go to
al-Khayzaran, mother of Imam al-Jewad, when she gave birth to him. She
narrated the way in which he was born and the miracle that happened to
him at that time.[1]

### 3. Fatima

She is better known as al-Sayyida Masuma. She and her two sisters Zaynab
and Um Kulthum narrated a tradition about the excellence of their
grandfather (Imam Ali) the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
and about the excellence of his followers.[2] She loved her brother Imam
al-Rida very much. When al-Mamun asked Imam al-Rida to go to Maru to
entrust him with the regency, Fatima followed him in the year 201 A. H.
When she arrived in Sawa, she became ill. She asked about the distance
between Sawa and Qum, and it was said to her that it was ten leagues
(about thirty miles). So she asked the people to carry her to Qum, and
they carried her to it. She stopped at the house of Musa b. Khazrajj
al-Ashri. It was said that the people of Qum received her. When she
arrived there, Musa b. Khazrajj al-Ashri took the reins of her she-camel
and led her to his house. She remained with him for seventeen days, and
then she died. He ordered her to be washed and shrouded. Then he prayed
over her and buried her in a ground belonged to him. Then he built over
her shrine a shelter of mats made of reed. Then Zaynab, daughter of
Muhammed b. Ali al-Jewad, ordered a dome to be built over it.[3]
Al-Hasan b. Muhammed al-Qumi has narrated a tradition on the excellence
of paying visitation to her grave, saying: I visited Imam al-Sadiq,
peace be on him, and he said: Surely Allah has a Sacred City, which is
Mecca; His Apostle has a Sacred City, which is Medina; the Commander of
the faithful has a Sacred City, which is Kufa; and we have a Sacred
City, which is Qum. A woman called Fatim of my children will be buried
in it. Whoever pays a visitation to her will enter the Garden. He, peace
be on him, said that before the birth of Imam Musa.[4] It has been
mentioned in a book of history that the dome over her Sacred Shrine was
built in the year 529 A. H. by the late lady Shah Bikem, daughter of
Imad Bik. As for the gold and other jewels on her grave, they belong to
Sultan Feth Ali Shah al-Qajari.[5]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Sharashoob, al-Ma'lim. [2] Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 729. [3]
Al-Bihar, vol. 2, p. 312. [4] Tuhfat al-'Alam, p. 36. Al-Bihar. [5]
Tuhfat al-'Alam, p. 37.

### 4. Fatim the younger

Her grave is in the middle of an old mosque, at Bad Kuba.[1]

These are the entire biographies of the ladies and gentlemen from among
his children we have found.

Certainly all virtues and achievements gathered together in the lives of
the Imams children. The lives of some of them were full of revolt and
wrath against the oppressive; so they went to the fields of struggle and
combat to save the community from its bitter conditions and from the
horrible dictatorship in its affairs and economy. However, the
circumstances did not go well with them; so their revolts failed. It is
worth mentioning that al-Mamun did not take decisive measures toward
them; rather he pardoned them, that he might please the general populace
who had piety on the children of their Prophet, showed great love and
affection for them. With this we will end our speech of this chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid.
