Chapter Xvi
===========

The Reasons for his Imprisonment
--------------------------------

It is necessary for us to talk about the reasons that moved Harun
al-Rashid to imprison Imam Musa, peace be on him, in dark underground
prisons, to make him far from his family and his homeland, and to
deprive him of meeting with his followers. Perhaps, that is, as we
think, is of the severest ordeals and misfortunes from which the Imam
suffered throughout his lifetime.

We have elaborated on the kings of his time, studying their affairs,
their acts in the political and social fields, their persecuting the
Muslims in the general and the Shia in particular. We have also
elaborated on the heavy problems and events by which the time of the
Imam was marked. We have in detail dealt with the biographies of his
companions, the narrators of his traditions and sciences. To speak at
great length about that may be regarded as wide of the subject. However,
I (the author) think that there is no escape from presenting that. That
is because encompassing it is necessary for those who want to study the
personality regarded as on top of Islamic society. Of course, to
understand that discloses to us a big part of the life of Imam Musa,
peace be on him.

I thick that gentle readers are interested in understanding the reasons
for which the Imam was imprisoned and in knowing the role of his great
ordeal during the days of persecuting him in the prison of Harun, the
tyrannical. We will mention that in details. The following are some
reasons for imprisoning him.

### 1. His High Personality

Imam Musa, peace be on him, was the most brilliant Islamic character at
that time. That is because he was of the Imams of the Muslims, among the
testamentary trustees of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, over his community. Besides a large group of Muslims adopted his
Imamate. The Muslims, regardless of their different creeds, have
unanimously agreed on admiring and respecting the Imam. We have
mentioned a chapter on the opinions of the great writers and scholars in
respect with magnifying and praising him.

The people of his time talked about his sciences, his fear of Allah, his
piety, and his miracles. Harun al-Rashid himself was among those who
magnified him. He thought that the Imam was more appropriate for the
Islamic Caliphate than him. This was related by al-Mamun when he said to
his drinking companions:

-Did you know who taught me Shiism?

-No, by Allah, we did not know.

-Al-Rashid taught me that.

-How was that while al-Rashid killed these household?

-He killed them for power, for power is blind.

Then al-Mamun related that to them, saying: One year I went with him
(al-Rashid) to perform the hajj. When he arrived in Medina, he said: Let
no man from its inhabitants or from the Meccans whether they are of the
children of the Emigrants and the Ansar or of the Banu Hashim unless he
makes me know his lineage and his family. The delegates came to him one
by one. They made the chamberlain know their lineage. Harun gave them
permission (to meet him) and gave them gifts according to their rank and
position. One day al-Fedl b. al-Rabi, his chamberlain, walked towards
him and said to him: There is a man at the door; he claims that he is
Musa b. Jafar b. Muhammed b. Ali b. al-Husayn b. Ali b. Abi Talib.

When Harun heard of that, he ordered those sitting in his gathering to
cling to respect and calmness. Then he said to his chamberlain: Permit
him; and let him not dismount except on my carpet.

The Imam, peace be on him, walked towards (Harun). Al-Mamun described
him, saying: Surely he was an old man; worship exhausted him. He looked
like an old, small (water) skin; prostration injured his face. When
Harun saw him, he rose for him. The Imam wanted to dismount, but
al-Rashid shouted: No by Allah, (you should not dismount) except on my
carpet. So the chamberlain prevented him from dismounting. We looked at
him with admiration and magnification. He walked riding his mount to the
carpet. The chamberlains and the leading figures of the people
surrounded him. Harun received him. He kissed him on the face and the
eye. He took him by the hand and seated him in the front of his
gathering. He asked him about his conditions, talked with him, and said
to him:

-O Abu al-Hasan, how may (persons) are dependent on you?

-Over five hundreds.

-Are they your children?

-Most of them are followers and servants. As for my children, they are

thirty and some.

-Why do you not marry the women to their cousins?

-The hand falls short of that (lit. I do not have money).

-What about the country estate?

-It sometimes produces and sometimes does not produce.

-Are you indebted?

-Yes.

-How much?

-About ten thousand dinars.

-Cousin, I will give you an amount of money to marry your children and
to

plant your country estates.

-You have linked your womb (relatives). Allah has thanked you for this
beautiful intention. The blood relationship is touching and close. The
lineage is one. Al-Abbas is the uncle of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, and full brother of his father. He is the uncle of
Ali b. Abi Talib and full brother of his father. May Allah not send you
far from doing that. He has opened you hand, made your origin honorable,
and made high your lineage.

-Certainly, I will do that, Abu al-Hasan.

-Surely Allah, the Great and Almighty, has made it incumbent on rulers
to relive the poor from among the community, to pay the debts of the
indebted, and to clothe those naked. You are appropriate to do that.

-I will do that, Abu al-Hasan.

Then the Imam, peace be on him, went away. Harun rose to honor him; he
kissed him on the forehead. Then he turned to his children and said to
them: Go before your uncle and master; take the stirrup; arrange his
clothes; and accompany him to his house. They set out to serve the Imam.
Meanwhile, the Imam, peace be on him, confided a secret to al-Mamun. He
gave him good news of that he would be a caliph. He asked him to be kind
to his children. After they had served the Imam and accompanied him to
his house, al-Mamun said: I was the boldest of the children of my father
(in asking him). When the people scattered, I (al-Mamun) asked him:

-O Commander of the faithful, (a man came in). You magnified (the man),
rose for him from your gathering, received him, seated him in front of
the gathering, sat down behind him, and then you ordered us to take the
stirrup on his behalf. Who was that man?

-This is the Imam of the people, the Proof of Allah's mercy to His
creation (Hajjatullah) and His caliph among His servants.

- O Commander of the faithful, do these qualities not belong to you? Are
they not in you?

-I am outwardly the Imam of the masses by force and through oppression,
while Musa b. Jafar is the Imam in truth. And surely he, by Allah, is
more worthy of being the successor of the Messenger of Allah as the
caliph than I am and anyone else among all the people. And by Allah, If
you yourself attempt to take such caliphate from me, I shall take it
away from you even if that means gouging your eyes, for power is blind.

Harun remained in Yethrib (Medina) for some days. When he intended to
leave, he ordered a little amount of money to be given to the Imam; the
amount was two hundred dinars. He asked al-Fedl b. al-Rabi to apologize
to the Imam on his behalf. Al-Mamun was astonished at the little gift
his father gave to the Imam in spite of his magnifying and respecting
him. He said to him: O Commander of the faithful, you gave five thousand
dinars to the children of the Emigrants and of the Ansar, all Quraysh,
the Banu Hashim, and those who had unknown lineage. You magnified and
respected Musa b. Jafar; nevertheless, you gave to him two hundred
dinars which was the meanest gift you gave to any of the people.

Harun became displeased with al-Mamun and shouted at him, saying:
Silence! May you have no mother! If I gave this (Imam Musa) what I had
promised, he would hit me in the face with one hundred thousand swords
of his followers. The poverty of this and of his household is safer to
me and you than making their hands open.[1]

This narration clearly indicates that Harun thought that Musa, peace be
on him, was an Imam, that he was the Proof of Allahs mercy to His
creation (Hajjatullah) and His caliph among His servants, that he had a
special right to undertake the Islamic caliphate, and that there was
none worthier of it than him. However, the thing that moved him and
other than him to deprive him of the caliphate was love for the world,
for power is blind. Besides, in his statement, Harun has mentioned the
reason for depriving the Imam of giving according to his position. He
was afraid that if the economic circumstance went well with the Imam, he
would revolt against him. This is the economic war some states use
against their opponents to exhaust and undermine them.

Certainly, Harun came to know of the position of the Imam. He thought
that he was Allahs caliph among His servants, and that he was the
inheritor of the knowledge of the prophets. He asked him about the
events to happen after him, and he, peace be on him, told him about
them. He asked him about al-Amin and al-Mamun, and he told him about
what would happen between them. That hurt him, and he felt great and
severe pain. Al-Asmai has narrated, saying: [I was absent from him in
Basrah for a year. Then I came and visited him. He ordered me to sit by
him, and I sat down. Then I rose, so he ordered me to sit down, and I
sat down. When the people scattered, he asked me:]

-Asmai, do you not like to see my sons, Muhammed and Abd Allah?

-Yes, Commander of the faithful. Surely I like to do that; I have come
to greet them. Harun al-Rashid ordered them to be brought. They came and
stood before their father. They greeted him, and he ordered them to sit
down. Muhammed sat on his right hand, and Abd Allah sat on his left
hand. Then he ordered me to compete

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Bihar, vol. 11, p. 270-272.

with in literature. I asked them about all kinds of literature, and they
correctly answered. So al-Rashid asked me:

-What is your opinion of their literature?

-Commander of the faithful, I have never seen anyone better than them in
cleverness, understanding, and mind. May Allah prolong their lifetimes
and provide the community with something of their mercy and pity. Then
al-Rashid took and embraced them. Then he wept, and his tears flowed
down his beard. Then he permitted them to rise. They rose and went away.
Then he said:

-Asmai, they will show enmity toward each other and hate one another. A
battle will take place between them, to the extent that blood will be
shed. Many people will prefer their death to their life.

-I was astonished at that and asked him: Commander of the faithful, have
the astrologers told you about that on their birthday? Have the
religious scholars related it (to you) in respect with their affairs?

-The religious scholars have narrated it on the authority of the
testamentary trustees, on the authority of the prophets in respect with
their affairs.

Al-Mamun said: Al-Rashid heard from Musa b. Jafar all that which would
take place between us.[1]

The Imams high position and the Muslims faith in his Imamate made
al-Rashid harbored malice against the Imam and imprison him in dark
underground prisons.

### 2. Haruns Malice

Malice was among al-Rashids psychological qualities. He harbored malice
against all the remarkable personalities of his time. He was displeased
when he heard the people talk about any person with a high social rank.
He wanted to prevent the people from that lest they should turn away
from him. He wanted to monopolize good reputation.

Al-Rashid envied al-Beramika when their name became famous and the
people talked about their laudable deeds. Malice destroyed his heart,
and he severely punished them. Then he erased them and removed their
oppression from earth. Of course, he had malice against Imam Musa, peace
be on him, for he was the most brilliant personality during his time.
The people talked about the Imams merits; the circles reported his
knowledge and his talents. Many Muslims believed in his Imamate; they
believed that he was worthier of the office of the caliphate than
al-Rashid. High-ranking officials such as Ali b. Yaqteen and Ibn
al-Ashath believed in the thought of the Imamate. Harun himself thought
that Imam Musa was worthier of this important office than him. He was
displeased when he knew that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Dimyari, Hayat al-Hayawan, vol. 1, p. 77.

there was among the people someone better than he. He was restless when
he came to know that the masses and popular circles believed that the
Imam was worthier of the Imamate than him, and that he was excellent in
knowledge, excellence, and achievements. Harun was displeased when he
heard that the Muslims unanimously agreed on that the Imam was great,
and that they reported his merits and knowledge. Accordingly, he decided
to imprison Imam Musa and to veil him from the people.

### 3. His Craving after Power

Harun craved after power and lost himself in loving his supreme
authority. He sacrificed for them all sacred things and values. He
showed his craving after power through his words: If Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, attempted to take such caliphate from
me, I should take it away from him even if that meant gouging his eyes.

Yes, if Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, attempted to
take such caliphate from him, he would take it away from him even if
that meant gouging his eyes.

Harun severely craved after power, so how was it possible for him to
release Imam Musa? How was it possible for him to be pleased with the
Imam, while he came to know that the people loved and respected him?

Harun was alert. He went out wearing clothes other than his formal ones.
He went out disguised to hear the conversations of the general populace,
to understand their trends and desires. He heard them say nothing except
that they praised and lauded the Imam. He came to know that they loved
the Imam and wanted him to undertake their affairs. Accordingly, he
committed an offence; carving after power and malice moved him to kill
the Imam.

### 4. His Hating the Alawids

Haruns soul was full of hatred toward the Alawids. He inherited the
enmity toward them from his forefathers. It is worth mentioning that his
forefathers severely punished the Alawids. They showered them with
painful punishments, drove them to graves and prisons. They pursued
them, and they escaped aimlessly out of fear and terror.

As for Harun, he surpassed his forefathers in exhausting the Alawids. He
buried them alive. He spread among their houses orphanhood, mourning,
and sadness. He used all his abilities to destroy them. He imposed on
them house arrest in Baghdad and prevented the people from visiting
them. He deprived them of their natural rights.

Harun was very displeased when he saw Imam Musa, head and master of the
Alawids, led a life of ease, tranquility, and security. As a result his
meanness and his inherited enmity moved him to imprison the Imam and to
deprive the Muslim community of making use of his knowledge, his pieces
of advice, and his

teachings.

### 5. Informing against him

Some people sold their consciences and religion. They were void of
humanity. So they informed Harun against the Imam, that they might
flatter him through that and attain some of his world. Islam and Muslims
have been afflicted with such people. Oppressors seek help from them
throughout history to carry out their plans aiming at spreading
oppression, tyranny, and corruption on earth.

These criminals informed Harun against the Imam through various ways:

#### Collecting Money for him

Some wicked people went to Harun and informed him that a lot of money
was collected for Imam Musa from all the Islamic countries. They
informed him that the Imam bought a country estate called al-Beseriya
for thirty thousand dinars. This piece of information moved Haruns
hidden rage and malice. That is because he followed a certain policy to
make the Alawids poor through imposing on them an economic siege. This
can simply be concluded from his answer to his son al-Mamun: Their
poverty is more lovable to me than their riches. Ibn al-Sabbagh believed
that this informing was among the reasons that moved Harun to imprison
Imam Musa.

#### His Seeking the Caliphate

Since its dawn, the Islamic society has been inflicted with a group of
those who sell their consciences, sanctify nothing except material and
that which achieves their low desires. Such people torture and harm
Muslims very much, for they hurt the reformers who seek general
interests for their homelands and community.

The history of Islam if full of the acts of these destructive people who
represent the strong factors of evil and corruption. Were it not for
them, the supreme authority was unable to do oppression and tyranny. A
group of such people informed Harun against Imam Musa, peace be on him.
They kindled rancor in his heart against him and exited his hidden
malice against him. They said to him: He (Imam Musa) seek the Caliphate.
He writes (letters) to all Muslim countries and summon them to him. He
urges them to revolt against your government. Yehya al-Bermeki was on
top of those informers. The narrators say that the reason for his
informing is that al-Rashid put his heir apparent under the care of
Jafar b. Muhammed b. al-Ashath. This (procedure) displeased Yehya, and
bitter suspicions came to his mind. He feared that if Muhammed undertook
the affairs, his state and that of his children would come to an end,
and that Jafar would took the reins of government. Yehya came to know of
Jafars inclination to the Alawids. He knew that Jafar went to Imam Musa,
peace be on him. So he was alone with him and told him about his thought
and that he had an inclination to the Alawids. Jafar was pleased with
that, and he told him about his faith. When Yehya heard that from him,
he informed al-Rashid against him. Al-Rashid became displeased with
Jafar but he did not subject

him to any detested thing. That is because he remembered his good deeds
and those of his forefathers to the Abbasids.

Jafar came in to al-Rashid, and he gave him a wide place among his
gathering. A conversation took place between them. Al-Rashid regarded
the conversation as good, so he ordered twenty thousand dinars to be
given to Jafar. As a result Yehya became angry. On the following day, he
came in to Harun and said to him:

-Commander of the faithful, I had already told you about Jafars
doctrine. Do you deny that? There is a decisive criterion.

-What is it?

-When he receives an amount of money from a person, he gives one fifth
of it to Musa b. Jafar. Without doubt, he will give one fifth of the
twenty thousand dinars to him.

-This is a decisive criterion.

Immediately Harun sent for Jafar. When the messenger reached him, he
understood that Yehya informed Harun against him. He had no doubt that
Harun sent for him in the dark night to kill him; so he performed the
ghusl for the dead. He went to (Harun) al-Rashid. When Harun saw him and
smelt the camphor, he asked him:

-What is this?

-Commander of the faithful, I have come to know that Yehya informed you
against me. When your messenger came to me at this hour (of night), I
came to know that you became displeased with that which said against me.
So you sent for me to kill me.

-No, but I have been informed that you send to Musa b. Jafar the fifth
of the money sent to you. You have done that in the twenty thousand
dinars I gave to you. So I like to know that.

-Allah is Greater! Commander of the faithful, command a servant of yours
to bring it to you.

Al-Rashid sent a servant of his, and he brought it to him. It was as it
had been before. Yehya took nothing of it. Harun became delighted and
said:

-We have come to know of the first lie of the one who informs against
you. You are truthful, Jafar. Go home safely. I will not accept the
words of anyone concerning you.

Accordingly, Yehya became ashamed. He brought on himself disgrace and
loss. His angry and fury increased. So he spared no effort to overthrow
Jafars position and to remove his comfort. He decided to inform Harun
against Imam Musa, peace be on him, that he might hurt Yehya. He said to
Yehya b. Abi Maryam:

-I want you to lead me to a man from among the family of Abu Talib. He
must love the world, that I may give him generously.

-Yes, that is Ali b. Ismail b. Jafar.

Yehya sent for Ali. When he met with him, he said to him:

-Tell me about your uncle Musa, his Shiites, and the money sent to him.

-Yes, I have such information.

Ali told Yehya about all things he wanted. So Yehya asked him to go with
him to Baghdad, that he might make him meet (Harun) al-Rashid. He
responded to him. When Imam Musa, peace be on him, heard that Ali would
go with Yehya, he sent for him and asked him:

-I have heard that you want to travel?

-Yes.

-Where?

-Baghdad.

-What will you do there?

-I am indebted and poor.

-I will pay your debts and undertake your affairs.

Ali paid no attention to the Imams words. Satan whispered evil to him.
So he responded to the summoner of mean desires and deserted the Imam.
When he intended to leave, the Imam, peace be on him, said to him: Do
not make my children orphans! Then he ordered three hundred dinars and
four thousand dirhams to be given to him. Then he, peace be on him,
said: He (Ali) will inform (Harun) against me to shed my blood and to
make my children orphans!

A companion of his asked him: May Allah make me your ransom, why have
you given (money) to him while you know his behavior?

The Imam, peace be on him, replied: Yes, my father related to me on the
authority of his forefathers, on the authority of Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, who said: Surely if blood relation is
cut off and is linked, Allah will cut it off.

Ali went out and covered the desert. He arrived in Baghdad and came in
to (Harun) al-Rashid. He greeted him and said to him: I did not think
that there was two caliphs on earth until I saw (the people) greet my
uncle Musa b. Jafar and call him caliph.

It was said that Ali said to Harun: Money is carried to him (Imam Musa)
from the east and the west. He has treasuries. He has bought a country
estate for thirty

thousand dinars and called it al-Beseriya.

When Harun heard that, he lost his mind and boiled with anger. He
ordered two hundred thousand dirhams to be given to Ali, provided that
he should get them from a district in the east. So the collectors went
to collect the money for him.

Ali came into the W. C. and fell into it. His belly was split open and
his intestines came out. Then he came out of the W. C. suffering from
deadly pain. It was said to him: The money has just come. What shall I
do with it while death is close at hand? he asked.

It was said that he came back home and perished on the same night when
he met with Harun. [1] So he sold his life in the hereafter for his life
in the world. He did not take advantage of it. He drew on himself
disgrace and painful chastisement.

A source has mentioned that Yaqub b. Dawud[2] was among those who
informed Harun against Imam Musa. This is a very weak opinion. That is
because al-Mehdi imprisoned Yaqub in an underground prison, for he
released some Alawids. Yaqub remained in prison throughout the Caliphate
of al-Mehdi and of al-Hadi. When Harun became a caliph, the Bermekis
interceded for him with him. So Yaqub was released while he had become
blind. Al-Rashid made him choose between residing in Baghdad and
residing in another Islamic country. As a result Yaqub chose to live in
Yethrib (Medina). He stayed there and was far from policy. He was busy
managing his personal affairs until he died. Therefore, none thinks that
he informed Harun against the Imam.

### 6. The Imams Demonstrations

Among the reasons that motivated Harun to arrest the Imam and to throw
him in a dark, underground prison is that the Imam, peace be on him,
indicated to him that he was the most appropriate for the great Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, of all the Muslims. That is because
he was among his grandsons and his inheritors, and because he was more
appropriate for the Caliphate than other than him. The Imam gave his
demonstrations to Harun in the Holy Shrine of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. That was when Harun paid a visitation to it.
The notables, the nobility, the military commanders, and the
high-ranking officials surrounded Harun. That was when he walked towards
the Holy Shrine, greeted the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and said: Al-salamu alayka (peace be on him), O Cousin!

He prided himself on that and boasted of his close relationship to the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. He wanted to say that he
undertook the Caliphate due to his nearness to Allahs Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. Imam

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] 'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida. Al-Toosi, al-Ghayba. Al-Bihar. Al-Menaqib. It
was said that Muhammed b. Isma'il informed al-Rashid against him. [2]
'Uyun Akhbar al-Rida.

Musa was then present. He greeted the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, saying: Al-salamu alayka (peace be on him), O Father!

So al-Rashid lost his mind and became displeased. That is because the
Imam preceded him to that glory and pride. He burst with anger and said:
Why have you said that you are nearer to Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, than us?

The Imam, peace be on him, answered with an answer al-Rashid was unable
to refute or discuss. He asked him: If Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, was raised from the dead and asked you for your
daughters hand, would you respond to him?

Glory belongs to Allah, replied Harun, I would pride myself on that
against the Arabs and the non-Arabs.

The Imam explained to him why he was nearer to the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, than him saying: But he would not ask me for
my daughters hand, nor would I marry (my daughter) to him. That he is
our (grand) father, not your (grand) father. For this reason we are
nearer to him than you.

Then the Imam, peace be on him, wanted to support his statement with
another proof, so he asked Harun: Was it permissible for him to come in
to your womenfolk when they were unveiled?

No, replied Harun.

But it was permissible for him to come in to my womenfolk, replied the
Imam, so we are nearer to him than you.[1]

The Imam gave a decisive proof to his opponent. He stunned him and gave
him no way to defend himself. He clothed him in the garment of failure
and disgrace. He explained to those around him that al-Rashids belief
was invalid. That is because the Imam was more appropriate for the
Prophet than him and worthier of the Caliphate than him, for he was his
grandson and his inheritor.

As al-Rashid was exhausted by such demonstrations, he returned to the
methods of those weak. He ordered the Imam, peace be on him, to be
arrested and to be thrown into a prison.[2]

7. His Specifying the Borders of Fedek

Among the reason which filled Haruns soul with malice against the Imam,
peace be on him, and urged him to arrest him and to kill him was that
the Imam, peace be on him, determined the borders of Fedek. He indicated
that it included most of the Islamic areas. That was when Harun asked
him about it to return it to him. So he,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Akhbar al-Duwal, p. 113. [2] Tedhkirat al-Khawas, p. 359.

peace be on him, refused to take it except with its defined borders. So
al-Rashid asked him:

-What are its borders?

-If I determine them, will you refuse them?

-Do that, by the right of your grandfather.

-As for the first border, it is Adan. As for the second border, it is
Semerqend. As for the third border, it is Afriqya. As for the fourth
border, it is Sayf al-Beher, beyond the Islands and Armenia.

-Therefore, we will have nothing.

-I had come to know that you would not refuse them.

Harun became displeased, so he decided to punish the Imam severely.[1]
That is because the Imam explained to him that some Islamic regions from
Adan to Sayf al-Beher belonged to his authority, that Harun and the
caliphs before him possessed alone power and usurped the Caliphate from
the members of the House (Ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them.

### 8. The Imams firm Attitude

Imam Musas attitude toward Harun, the tyrannical, was negative; it was
strict and solid for the truth and justice. We have explained that in a
chapter of this book. The Imam prevented his Shiites (followers) from
cooperating with the ruling authority. An example of that is that he
prevented his companion Saffwan al-Jammal to hire his camels to Harun,
while the people used to hire them to go to Mecca to perform the hajj.
So Saffwan was forced to sell his camels. Harun came to know that. He
harbored malice against Saffwan and intended to kill him. Yet another
example is that the Imam prevented Ziyad b. Abi Selema from working for
the authority. The Imams religious verdict concerning obeying Harun and
other tyrannical rulers spread among the Islamic circles. Accordingly,
Harun became angry and displeased.

Certainly, the Imam, peace be on him, did not flatter and tolerate
Harun. His attitude toward him was frank and clear. That was when he
came to him in his beautiful palace the like of which was neither in
Baghdad nor in other than it. Harun, who was delighted with ecstasy of
power, asked the Imam:

What is this house?

The Imam answered him paying no attention to his power and might, saying
to him: This is the house of the sinners! Allah, the Most High, has
said: I will turn away from My communications those who are unjustly
proud in the earth; and if

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Menaqib, vol. 2, p. 381.

they see every sign they will not believe in it; and if they see the way
of rectitude they do not take it for a way; and if they see the way of
error, they take it for a way.[1]

Harun shook all over and became full displeased. So he asked the Imam:

-To whom does this house belong?

-It belonged to our Shiites for a period (of time); and it is a trial
for other than them.

-Why does the owner of the house not take it?

-It was taken from him prosperous; and he does not take it unless it is
prosperous.

-Where are your Shiites?

-The Imam, peace be on him, recited these words of him, the Exalted:
Those who disbelieved from among the followers of the Book and the
polytheists could not have separated (from the faithful) until there had
come to them the clear evidence.[2]

So Harun became exited and said angrily:

-Are we unbelievers?

-No, but (you are) just as Allah, the Most High, has said: Have you not
seen those who have changed Allahs favor for ungratefulness and made
their people to alight into the abode of perdition.[3]

Accordingly, Harun became angry and spoke rudely to the Imam.[4] The
attitude of the Imam, peace be on him, toward Harun was strict, for he
thought that Harun usurped the office of the Caliphate.

To here we will end our speech about some reasons that moved Harun to
imprison Imam Musa, peace be on him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, 7, 146. [2] Qur'an, 98, 1. [3] Ibid., 14, 28. [4] Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 11, p. 279.
