Introduction
============

(1)
---

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

If a researcher reviews any side of the life of Imam Musa, peace be on
him, he will surely find a generous, brilliant legacy full of good and
beauty, having bountiful giving and a brilliant guidance for the
community.

Surely Imam Musas life in all dimensions is distinguished by firmness
for the right, steadfastness in front of events, luminous behavior
concerning which no deviation and crookedness have been reported. It is
marked by balance and is harmonious with that of the great Prophet, with
his line and direction, and with his literal sticking to Islam.

Among the unique aspects that marked his personality is the
steadfastness in front of the difficult events and the hard ordeals
showered upon him by his contemporary tyrants, who went too far in
persecuting him and punishing him severely. (For example), Harun
al-Rashid insisted on wronging him; he intentionally arrested him and
threw him in dark prisons where he remained for many years suffering
from pain and misfortunes; nevertheless he showed no grumble, no
complain, and no impatience toward that which had befallen him; on the
contrary he showed gratitude to Allah and praised Him very much for
giving him devotion to serve Him and giving him dedication to obey Him.

The biographers have unanimously agreed that Imam Musa was the greatest
of the people in obeying and worshiping Allah to the extent that he had
calluses like that of a camel because of too much prostration (for
Allah); he had calluses just as his grandfather, Imam Zayn al-Abidin had
and had been given the nickname of Dhu al-Thafanat (the one with
calluses). He stunned the intellects through his too much worship when
he was a prisoner. He fasted by day and spent the night sleeplessly for
worshiping Allah, so al-Fedl b. al-Rabi made a statement about the
worship of the Imam, peace be on him, when he was a prisoner in his
house. This shows that the Imam freed himself from the world and devoted
himself to Allah. We will mention this statement when we speak about the
imprisonment of the Imam.

Harun was astonished at the Imams too much piety and worship. He showed
his astonishment when he said: Surely, Musa is one of the monks of the
Hashimites.

When Imam Musa was imprisoned in al-Sindis house, he dedicated himself
to worshiping Allah; he was always busy remembering Him, the Exalted.
Al-Sindis family looked down upon the Imam and saw his behavior which
was similar to that

of the Prophets, so al-Sindis sister believed in the Imamate, and as a
result of the Imams behavior, Kashajim, al-Sindis grandson, became one
of the eminent Shiites of his time.

Surely, this behavior dominates hearts and feelings, for it is full of
the meanings of highness, nobility, renouncing the world, and devotion
to Allah.

Yet among the qualities of the Imams noble personality is generosity.
The historians have unanimously agreed that he was the most generous of
the people, the greatest of them in giving to the needy; his purses were
proverbial, so the people said: We wonder at him to whom Musas purses
come while he complains of poverty. He bestowed upon the poor and the
deprived in the dark night lest someone should recognize him; he
generously spent what he had on the weak and the afflicted; he showered
them with too much giving; and he saved many of them from the bitterness
of poverty and deprivation.

The narrators have unanimously agreed that Imam Musa, peace be on him,
had immense abilities of knowledge; he was the most knowledgeable of the
Muslims of his time. The (religious) scholars and the reporters
surrounded him; they hurried to write down his religious edicts
concerning all mishaps and events; they reported on his authority all
kinds of knowledge and art, especially as concerning Islamic legislative
system; he provided them with his own generous abilities. In this
respect he is regarded as the first of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt to split
open the chapter of the lawful and the forbidden[1].

After his father Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, Imam Musa, peace be on
him, managed the affairs of his science university. The university is
regarded as the first cultural foundation in Islam and the first
institute from which a group of great scholars on whose top were the
Imams of the Islamic school graduated. It played an important role in
developing the intellectual life and growing the scientific movement in
that time. It lasted for many times conveying the sprit, guidance and
message of Islam. It aimed at spreading awareness and an intellectual
renaissance. We will talk about its results in the chapters that follow.

Imam Musa was the most brilliant of the Imams of the Muslims in
knowledge, taking care of spreading the Islamic culture and displaying
the Islamic reality.

In addition to his many unique tendencies is his clemency and his
restraint of anger; clemency was among his qualities and elements. The
historians have unanimously agreed that he repelled offence with
kindness and guilt with pardon just as his grandfather the great
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, had done. He repelled
offence, harm, and detested things issued from those who had harbored
malice against him with patience and beautiful forgiveness, to the
extent that he was nicknamed al-Kazim (the restrained); this nickname is
the most famous

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fiqh al-Islami, Medkhel li Diraset Nizam al-Mu'amelat, p. 160.

of all his nicknames.

If we review the Imams unique tendencies and abilities and what has been
reported on his authority in the fields of behavior and morals, we will
find him full of all the elements of humanity and its constructive, good
concepts. I (the author) hope that this book will include some sides of
the Imams brilliant tendencies or at least shed light upon him.

(2)
---

The Shia do not sanctify the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them,
with sanctification void of deep awareness; rather with sanctification
really and essentially depends in all dimensions on accuracy, scrutiny,
and perception according to their reliable proofs that are far from
argument and discussion. Surely the faith of the Shia, rather of all the
Muslims, concerning the requirement of showing love toward Ahl al-Bayt
is taken from the reality and essence of Islam and from the core of its
message. For Islam has made it incumbent on all Muslims to have in their
souls and inner souls the deepest affection and the sincerest love. This
has been shown in Ayat al-Mawada, in which Allah, the Exalted, says:
Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relative.[1] The explainers of the Quran have unanimously agreed that
this verse has been revealed concerning Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on
them[2]. Imam al-Shafii refers to the meaning of the verse through his
statement:

O Family of Allahs Messenger, love for you is a religious duty revealed
by Allah in the Quran.

Authentic hadiths on the requirement of the love for Ahl al-Bayt have
been ensured by many lines of transmission. The Prophet said: I fight
him who fights them and make peace with him who makes peace them. He
compared them to the Holy Quran when he, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: I leave behind me among you two things which, if you
cleave to them, you will never go astray, one is greater than the
another-that is Allahs Book which is a rope extended from the heaven to
the earth, and my family, my household. They never scatter until they

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, Surat al-Shura, verse 23. [2] Al-Razi, Tefseer, vol. 7, p.
406. Al-Durr al-Menthur, vol. 7, p. 7. Al-Nisaburi, Tefseer. Abu Na'eem
has narrated through his chain of authority on the authority of Jabir,
who said: "A Bedouin came to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and said to him: 'O Muhammed, show me Islam, and he said to him:
'You should bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One without
a partner, and that Muhammed is His servant and His Apostle.' He asked:
'Do you ask of me any reward for it?' He answered: 'No, but love for
near relatives.' He asked: 'My or your relatives?' He replied: 'My
relatives.' Give (me your hand) to pledge allegiance to you. May Allah's
curse be upon those who do not love you and your relatives. The Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, said: 'Amen!'"

come to me at the (sacred) waters (of Heaven). Take care how you follow
me with regard to them.[1]

The Muslims have unanimously agreed on reporting Hadith al-Thaqalayn,
which is the most authentic of the prophetic traditions and most famous
of them. It contains one of the important sides of the Islamic faith.
Besides it is the clearest of all the proofs on which the Shiites depend
regarding devoting the Imamate to Ahl al-Bayt and regarding their being
protected from errors and inclinations. For the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, compared them to the Holy Quran, to which falsehood
shall not come from before it nor from behind it; they do not leave each
other. It is natural that any disobedience issued from (Ahl al-Bayt) in
respect with the religious precepts was regarded as scatter from the
Holy Quran, for the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family had
negated their leaving each other until they would come to him at the
sacred waters (of the Heaven). Therefore, the meaning of the tradition
about the infallibility of Ahl al-Bayt and the requirement of love for
them is manifest and clear.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, repeated this tradition
in other places, for it aims at saving the community and its
straightness from deviation in the ideological fields and others. That
is if it does not cleave to Ahl al-Bayt, does not go before them and
does not stay behind them.[2]

He, may Allah bless him and his family said: My household is like Noahs
Ark. Whoever embarked it was safe and whoever remained behind it
drowned. My household among you is like the gate of forgiveness (Baab
Hitta) among the children of Israel; whoever entered through it was
forgiven.[3] In his valuable book al-Murajaat, Imam Sharaf al-Din has
said: And you know that the meaning of their being like Noahs Ark is
that whoever resorts to the blessed Imams to take the fundamentals and
branches of the religion from them is safe from the chastisement of the
fire. Whoever remains behind them is like him who took refuge in the
mountain on the Day of the Flood, that it might protect him from Allahs
punishment; yet that drowned into the water and this is in the fire; I
seek refuge in Allah.

The meaning of their compared to the Gate of Forgiveness (Baab Hitta) is
that Allah appointed that gate as one of the aspects of humbleness
before His magnificence and as a sign of submitting to His decree; in
this manner it was a reason for forgiveness. This is the point of
resemblance. Ibn Hajar tried it when he said: After he had mentioned
these traditions and the like.

And the point of their being compared to the Ark is that whoever loves
and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] .Al-Turmidhi, Seheeh, vol. 2, p. 308. Asad al-Ghaba, vol. 2, p. 12.
[2] Heyat al-Imam al-Hasan, vol. 1, p. 90. [3] Mejjma' al-Zewa'id, vol.
9, p. 168.

magnifies them as gratitude for the favor of Him Who has honored them
and follows the guidance of their scholars is safe from the darkness of
the acts of disobedience. Whoever remains behind them drowns in the see
of the ingratitude for the favors and perishes in the deserts of
tyranny. And as for the Gate of Forgiveness (Baab Hitta), it is that
Allah had regarded entering that gate, the Gate of Ariha or Bayt
al-Maqdis, along with humbleness and seeking forgiveness as a reason for
forgiveness. And He has appointed for this community the love for Ahl
al-Bayt as a reason for it (forgiveness).[1]

These are some traditions in respect with Ahl al-Bayt. They are clear in
their meaning about the requirement of the love for them. The Muslims
have unanimously agreed on this matter. However, the thing that concerns
us is that we should mention the aspects of this sincere love the Shia
have and which really has the mark of excessiveness and immoderation
toward Ahl al-Bayt, just as their opponents have accused them while they
are innocent of that. I (the author) think that the speech about such
researches is one of the reasons for spreading friendship among Muslims
and making peace among them. Meanwhile it removes from our way the evil
enmities, the results of disunity and division the generations have left
behind them.

Surely the aspects of the love the Shia show toward the pure family (of
the Prophet) are as follows:

Firstly, surely the Shia take the fundamentals and branches of the
principal features (maalim) of the religion from the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt. They have unanimously agreed that the worship according to
their sayings, their deeds, and their justificatives are part of the
Sunna which should in kind be put into practice. In this manner the Shia
have built their ideological frame on what has been handed down from Ahl
al-Bayt. In the legislative fields they do not follow other than them
from among the rest of the Muslim schools. That is not because of the
partiality or fanaticism for Ahl al-Bayt. Rather, this has been
stipulated by the decisive traditions reported from the great Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family. Among these hadiths is Hadith
al-Thaqalayn and other authentic ones. The hadiths are ensured by many
lines of transmission. The Muslims have unanimously agreed on them. The
hadiths clearly indicate the requirement of cleaving to the pure family
(of the Prophet). They also require the Muslims to worship according to
what has been reported from them after dogmatization or regarded
supposition regarding issuing them (the haditihs) from them. This
meaning has fully been clarified, explained, and proved by His Eminence,
the late, Sharaf al-Din, may Allah have mercy on him. He has said in his
valuable book al-Murajaat: Surely, our worship in the basics of
jurisprudence (Usool) through other than al-Asharis school and in
branches through other than the four schools is not because of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Muraja'at, p. 54.

partiality, fanaticism, doubt about the independent reasoning (ijtihad)
of the Imams of these schools. (And not because) the fact that they have
no justice, no faithfulness, no honesty, and no exaltedness in knowledge
and deed.

But it is due to the fact that the religious proofs have made it
incumbent on us to adopt the school of the Imams from among the Prophets
household, (who were) the place of the message, frequently visited by
the angels, place of descent of inspiration and revelation. So we have
devoted ourselves to them in the branches and beliefs of the religion,
the principles and rules of jurisprudence, the knowledge of the Sunna
and the Book, the sciences of ethics and behavior and good manners.
(That is out of) yielding to the rule of the evidences and proofs, and
(due to) worshiping according to the Master of the prophets and the
messengers, may Allah bless them all.

If the proofs allow us to oppose the Imams from among Mohammeds family
or if we are able to obtain the intention of seeking nearness to Allah,
the Glorified, in the place of performing (worship) according to the
school of other than them, we will follow the majority (jamhur). For
that is as a sign of confirming the agreement of friendship and of
strengthening the bonds of brotherhood. However it is the proofs that
interrupts the believers viewpoint and come between him and what he
desires.

And he added: I do not think that someone dare to say that they (the
Imams of the schools) are better in knowledge or deed than our Imams.
For our Imams belong to the pure family (of the Prophet). They are the
life ships of the community, the gate for its forgiveness, security for
it from difference in religion, eminent men for guiding it, the
important men of Allahs Apostle, and his survival ones among his
community. And he (the Prophet), may Allah bless him and his family, had
said: Do not go before them nor remain behind them, lest you should be
perished, for they are more knowledgeable than you. However, it is
policy, and what will make you realize what it required in the early
stage of Islam![1]

The head of al-Azhar, Shaykh Saleem, has confirmed this brilliant side
of Imam Sharaf al-Dins speech. He has said: Rather, it may be said that
your twelve Imams are better to be followed than the four Imams and
other than them. For all the twelve (Imams) are in agreement on one
school they had clarified and confirmed while the difference in all the
chapters of the jurisprudence of the four (schools) is famous. So its
sources cannot be understood and set right; and it is well-known that
what one person clarifies is not exactly equal to what twelve Imams
clarify, all this is of (the things)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[hr] Ibid., pp. 40-41.

concerning which the just has no pause and the unjust has no
viewpoint.[1]

Shaykh Shaltut, head of al-Azhar Mosque, has confirmed this aspect. He
has declared that the Imami jurisprudence is the firmest of all Islamic
jurisprudence in original thought, deep reasoning, and closeness to
reality.

It is natural that this aspect to which the Shia have cleaved and
declared in all fields has no side of immoderation; yet it is
distinguished by moderation and has no deviation in all dimensions.

Secondly, the Shiites have unanimously agreed that the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be on them, are from among the honored servants of Allah,
that they say nothing before Him and act according to His commands, and
that they are the followers of the Reminder. They maintain that their
Imams were charged with authority, Allahs residue, His choice, His party
and containers of His knowledge, that they are the rulers over mankind,
pillars of the country, gates of faith. They think that Allah preserved
them from temptations, purified them from defilement, kept away the
uncleanness from them, and thoroughly purified them. Imam Ali, the
commander of the faithful has described them in his statement: They are
the life of knowledge and death of ignorance; their clemency tells you
of their knowledge; their outward (tells) you of their inward, and their
silence (tells you) of their wise reason; they do not oppose the truth
nor do they differ over it; they are the supporters of Islam, intimate
friends for seeking refuge; through them the truth has returned to its
origin, the falsehood has been removed from its place and its tongue has
been cut off from its source; they have comprehended the religion with
the mind of awareness and care, not with the mind of hearing and
narration, for the narrators of knowledge are many (while) those who
take care of it are few.[10]

The great poet of Islam, al-Kumayt, has described them in one of his
wonderful poems, saying:

They are close to generosity and far from the injustice in the ties of
the precepts.

They give right answer on the matter over which the people differ. They
have established the rules of Islam.

They are sufficient protectors at war when it becomes hot.

They are like rain when the people suffer from drought; they are like a
shelter for the nursemaid of orphans.

They are overweighing in opinion, having perfect justice in behavior,
and knowledgeable at heavy affairs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 144. [2] Shaykh Muhammed 'Abda, Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 2,
p. 259.

They are leaders, but they are not like those who rule the people and
the sheep in the same way.[1]

These are some qualities of Ahl al-Bayt described by the poet of faith,
al-Kumayt. It is worth mentioning that al-Kumayt was a contemporary of
them. He associated with them, tried their ethics, so he believed in
them, Allahs peace be on them, as a copy having no second in the history
of mankind in knowledge, generosity, and taking care of the religion. He
hurried to struggle for them, composing on them his poems called
al-Hashimiyat, which give an account of a great side of the Shiite
beliefs giving proofs of them, sometimes through verses of the Holy
Quran and sometimes through the Prophets traditions (sunna).

Any way, the Imami Shia renounce immoderation concerning their Imams and
they have unanimously agreed that the excessive are deviated and rebels
against the religion.

Surely the reality of excessiveness means raising the Imam to the rank
of Allah, the Worshiped. The excessive said to Imam Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him: You are! You are!

What am I, he asked them.

You are Allah, the Creator, they answered.

He asked them to repent, but they did not withdraw from their error, so
he intended to burn some of them. While they were driven to the fire,
they said: Surely, he is Allah! It is He who chastises with fire![2]
This is the thinking of the excessive: atheism in the religion,
rebellion against worshiping Allah, and apostasy from Islam. As for the
attitude of the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt toward them, it was severe and
violent. They decided that the excessive had to be killed, that it was
forbidden for the Muslims to associate with them, and that they had to
be isolated from Muslim masses. Imam Musa, peace be on him, cursed
Muhammed b. Bashir when he was excessive in respect with him. He invoked
Allah against him and renounced him.[3]

Surely, the belief of the Shia concerning the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt has
been taken from the spirit and core of Islam, and it has, praise belongs
to Allah, has no excessiveness nor deviation from wise thinking, but it
is clear and pure; besides it is distinguished by originality, logic,
and proof.

Thirdly, surely the most prominent aspect of worshipping the Shia show
toward their Imams is that they commemorate their remembrance and praise
their outstanding merits. They hold commemorative ceremonies to mention
the heavy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hashimiyat. [2] Al-Tenbih wa al-Radd 'alaa Ahl al-Buda', p. 14.
[3] Al-Kashi, Rijal, p. 298.

misfortunes and calamities that had befallen their Imams. They review
their behavior and their ideals full of fear of Allah, love for good,
general deeds, devotion to the way of truth and service of the
community. The Shia also visit their pure shrines in order to ask the
blessing of them and to seek nearness to Allah through them, for such
visitations are the greatest of all kind of aspects of love Allah has
made incumbent on Muslims to show toward the Prophets family.

These are some aspects of the friendship the Shia show toward the Imams,
peace be on them; such friendship has neither defect of excessiveness
nor immoderation in love for them; according to this moderate love, we
will talk about Imam Musa, peace be on him, with faithfulness and
sincerity. In this respect I am (the author) a researcher loyal to truth
through every possible way.

(3)
---

The thing that requires a question is that we find no Imam from among
the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt could peacefully and tranquilly live and was
far from fear, terror, and exhaustion. All the Imams suffered from the
severest kind of wrong, injustice, and persecution; their sorrowful end
was either killing or poison. Perhaps, the most important reasons for
that, as we think, are as follows:

According to their social rank and their general authority over the
community, the Imams, peace be on them, were responsible for taking care
of the community, keeping its rights, and securing its interests. They
did not confirm the surfeit of the oppressive and the hunger of the
oppressed. They criticized the rulers of their times for their policy.
It is worth mentioning that the rulers paid no attention to good,
general acts. They depended on selfishness, enslavement, and forcing the
people to do what they had disliked. Many of those rulers such as
Muawiya b. Abu Sufyan, Yazid b. Muawiya, Merwan b. al-Hakam, and the
like were not earnest in the affairs of the subjects or were loyal to
their matters or looked after their interests. Rather it has been
reported that they were serious in spreading social oppression and
showing injustice toward their subjects, that they devoted themselves to
pleasures and impudence; for example, their palaces were full of a
sector of singers, songstresses, and wine. They did not remember Allah
and the hereafter though they claimed that they represented Islam, which
entrusted them with undertaking the affairs of the religion. However,
they did not represent it at any way, for their behavior was contrary to
all its laws and precepts; that is according to the unanimous agreement
of all the historians.

The attitude of the infallible Imams, peace be on them, toward the
ruling tyrants of their times was distinguished by severity and
strictness; toward them they did not incline to peace and silence;
rather they declared resistance and opposition against them, and that is
of two kinds:

### 1. Positive Resistance

Yazid b. Muawiya, the tyrant of his time, made public unbelief and
atheism. He rebelled against the will of the community. He decided to
debase it, to enslave it, and to force it to do what it disliked. So
Imam Husayn, peace be on him, chose this revolutionary way. He, peace be
on him, was forced to declare the revolution. For he, peace be on him,
came to know that his supporters were few in number, that his friends
would desert him, that the swords and the spears would compete with each
other to plunder his holy body. He stated that when he was in Holy
Mecca, saying: I am as longing for my ancestors as Yaqub was longing for
Yousif. The death I will meet is better for me; I can see the desert
wolves cutting off me limbs between al-Nawawis and Karbala, filling
their empty stomachs with my own flesh; their is no escape from the day
has been written by the pen.[1]

Imam al-Husayn told the people about what he would meet in Kerbela such
as cutting off his limbs on its highland, his yearning for this
brilliant fate through which his beliefs aiming at achieving social
justice among people won a victory.

The Master of Martyrs, Imam al-Husayn, performed this great sacrifice to
remove from the body of the community that error practiced by the
Umayyad government. His holy martyrdom played an effective role in
waking and enlightening the Muslim masses, for revolutionary operations
were increased to the extent that they were able to overthrow the
Umayyad government and remove all its traces from the Arab and Muslim
world.

### 2. Negative Resistance

This sound way was chosen by some pure Imams because they knew that the
positive resistance would be not useful for overcoming the events due to
the standing political conditions which would certainly abort the
revolution and damage the Islamic matter. Accordingly they declared the
negative resistance of whose aspects were that it was forbidden to
cooperate with the ruling machinery of government and to plead cases in
its courts just as it has been written down by the Imami jurists in the
book of judgment. This was a useful way with a great effect on achieving
the sound objectives the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, wanted.
This negative way was confirmed by Imam Musa, peace be on him during his
talk with Saffwan al-Jammal; we will mention it in the chapters that
follow.

This brilliant policy was followed by Mr. Ghandi during his liberating
India, for he made it forbidden for the Indians to cooperate with the
British Colonialism and to respond to it. This policy was wonderfully
successful, for the colonists were forced to withdraw from India and to
grant it a political independence.

Unfortunately, the Alawid revolutionists from among the Hassanid and the
like did not follow this moderate, constructive policy whose slogan the
Imams, peace

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Luhuf, p. 33.

be on them raised. For they hoisted the flag of the revolution against
the Umayyad and the Abbasid governments. Their revolution was
unsuccessful because they did not carry it out according to some sound
plans, so their revolution failed and brought about to them many
problems and difficulties and made them lead a life full of immortal
pain and misfortunes.

The ruling authorities were fully aware of this negative resistance on
which the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, depended. For this
reason they spread detectives among all the circles and they in detail
informed them about what happened in they country. They reported to
Harun al-Rashid the story of Saffwan al-Jammal when he intended to sell
his camels he hired out to him during the season of the hajj responding
to the advice of Imam Musa, peace be on him. So Harun sent for him and
wanted to killed him, but he changed up his mind; any way, the then
standing governments used all their organs to work against Ahl al-Bayt
and used against them all the following ways:

1. They met them with increasingly violence and persecution. They went
too far in abasing and wronging them to the extent we cannot describe
because of its atrocity and bitterness. Concerning this Abu al-Ferajj
al-Asfahani has singled out a book called Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, in
which he has mentioned all kind of the hard ordeals and heavy
punishments that included all the Alawids.

2. They laid an economic siege to the Alawids to undermine their power.
For example, Harun al-Rashid intended to practice this policy against
Imam Musa. When he traveled to Yethrib (Medina), he generously gave to
the children of the Prophets companions except Imam Musa. He did not
give him any thing suitable to his rank. So (his son) al-Mamun asked him
about that and he answered: Surely, his poverty is more loveable to me
than his riches; if I gave him something of which he is worthy, he would
mutiny against me. He appointed observers and spies over the people who
gave money to the Imam. This measure brought to him severe financial
straits and troubles. Such was the policy of those rulers toward the
infallible Imams. It was marked by imposing poverty on them; all the
Alawids suffered from abject poverty during the days of al-Mutawakil,
who subjected to displeasure and vengeance all those who gave money to
them; the Imams were so poor that they had nothing in their houses
except one cloak. When one of them wanted to go out, he put on the cloak
as a garment.[1] Al-Mutawakil intended to stop all their economic
incomes.

3.They veiled them from the Islamic world, imposed severe observation
and fearful pursuit on all those who cooperated with them. Of course,
this led to the appearance of different tendencies among the Shia, and
the Imam of guidance had no room to unite the ranks of the Shiites and
to remove the ideological tendencies

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin.

that took place among them.[1]

4. They went too far in practicing severity against the Shia and poured
upon them severe kind of painful torture. Imam al-Baqir spoke of the
hard ordeals the Shia faced during the days of the Umayyad government.
He said: Our Shiites (followers) are killed everywhere. Their hands and
their legs are cut off due to suspicion and accusation. Those who show
love toward us and devote themselves to us are imprisoned; their money
is plundered and their houses are demolished.[2]

All the Umayyad and the Abbasid governments employed their propaganda
organs against the Shia to the extent that the love for Ahl al-Bayt
became shame and defect. The Shiite was regarded as unsuccessful and
loser. Some Umayyads and Abbasids decided that love for Ahl al-Bayt was
an apostasy from the religion and rebellion against Islam. To all of
this, the poet of the faith and struggle, al-Kumayt, refers:

They indicate with their hands to me and their statement is: verily this
is unsuccessful, while the indicters are more unsuccessful (than me).

A sect has accused me of unbelief and a sect says that I am an evil-doer
and guilty.

They criticize me for (my) love for you out of their deception and
deviation; rather they mock (at me), while I wonder at them.

They say: His inclination and opinion are Turabi; (such was) I called
and nicknamed by them.[3]

Any way, the authorities opposed the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, when they took severe measures against the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be on them. For the Prophet ordered the community to show
love toward his family, to take care of them, and to honor them in all
things.

The ruling authorities of those times thought that the Imams had no
objectives in government except that they aimed at spreading justice and
equality, applying the precepts of the Quran on the general, real life
of the Muslims. However, this did not agree with their policies aiming
at selfishness, enslavement, and spending the money in the public
treasury on the dissolute and the mischievous. They harbored malice
against all those who demanding social reform and justice.

In addition to all of that, many of those rulers harbored malice against
the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt because the Muslims unanimously agreed on
honoring, magnifying, and praising them and their merits. Al-Mansur was
fully aware that Imam al-Sadiq

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] 'Aqa'id al-Zaydiya. [2] Sharh al-Nahjj, vol. 3, p. 15. [3]
Al-Hashimiyat.

was away from the political movements of his time, that he did not
intend to assume a government or an authority, and that he prevented the
Alawids from declaring a revolution against him. Besides he came to know
that the Imam had given him good news of his assuming the Caliphate.
Nevertheless, he did not leave him to lead a life of tranquility and
security that he might spread the knowledge of his grandfather among the
Muslims. He brought him more than one time to his capital trying to
assassinate him. There was no reason for that except having malice
against him due to his great personality and rank among the Muslims. Yet
another example of that is Harun al-Rashid. He knew that Imam Musa did
not intend to dispute with him for his authority or to transgress
against him. That is because the Imam had no forces on whom he depended
to dispute with him and to revolt against him. Nevertheless, he severely
punished him, threw him into dark prisons, put poison in food and gave
it to him to eat in order to put an end to him. The reason for that is
that he envied the Imam and had grudge against him because of his high
rank among the Muslims.

(4)
---

The time of Imam Musa was full of heavy crises and events of which were
the revolts marked by violence and shedding blood. The most important
revolt was that which overthrew the Umayyad government, for the Muslim
people enthusiastically hurried to declare a revolt against that
government that spared no effort to debase them and to deprive them of
all the life requirements.

The slogan of the revolt was the summons to al-Rida from among Mohammeds
family; the people responded to him, for their hearts were thirsty for
him, and for Mohammeds family were the first base of great objectives
the Muslim society wanted, such as justice, freedom, and equality.

The masses supported this revolution to protect and preserve it, and to
offer for it much more sacrifices. For they believed that there was no
way for their dignity and protection from selfishness and persecutions
except assuming government by the Alawids, the rulers of justice,
protectors of truth, the refuge for the oppressed and the persecuted.

None thought that the revolt implied the summons to the Abbasids, for
this family had no positive deed for serving the masses. They met no
oppression or persecution from the Ummayad family. They were happy and
tranquil because the authorities spent too much money on them, secured
for them livelihood and wealth as well as they had no brilliant past;
rather the history of some of them was full of perfidy and treason
toward the community.

Any way the revolt deviated from its original plan and headed for
conveying the government to the Abbasids, who appointed Abu Muslim
al-Khuresani as a general leader of the revolt and trusted him, but he
went too far in shedding blood

for no reason. So the historians have unanimously agreed that he was a
sinful blood-shedder. They have maintained that he paid no attention to
any crime he committed, regarded as easy destroying selves and souls,
punished the innocent because of the guilty, punished those who came to
him due to those who turned away from him, killed out of suspicion and
accusation. They have said that he killed thousands of people. This
indicates that he had no faith in Allah and the hereafter; nevertheless,
the Abbasids adopted all his terrorist plans; some sources show that it
was the Abbasid who entrusted him with that.

Any way, the Abbasids undertook the government through shedding seas of
blood and heaping up mountains of the bodies of the innocent. When they
took the reins of government, they massacred the ummayyads and their
followers, spread among them murder and severe punishment. As for Imam
al-Sadiq, peace be on him, he did not confirm that; he asked the
authorities to pardon and forgive them. This shows us the unique
humanity of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them. For they did not incline to
quenching their thirsty for revenge upon their enemies whatever their
offences toward them were, for their custom was pardon, gentleness, and
kindness to those who showed enmity toward them and wronged them.

Abu Salama, a head in the Abbasid government and an active member in
leading their revolution, tried to entrust the caliphate to the Alawids.
Whether this was as a deception and a trick of him or out of seriousness
and loyalty, he sent messages to Yethrib (Medina) and his messenger
handed one of his messages to Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, who
ordered the message to be burnt in a fire was in front of him. The
messenger demanded him of a reply and he said to him: The answer is just
as you have seen. Then the messenger went to Dhu al-Nafs al-Zakiya and
his brother handed to them the letters of Abu Salama; he found in them
an urgent response to his request. Imam al-Sadiq advised them not to be
deceived by that, for they would not assume the affair, but they did not
take his advice and thought that it was as sign of envy of him toward
them, as the narrators say. Shortly after that, the Alawids declared
their revolt against al-Mansur; the masses surrounded them; the jurists
and the eminent Muslim thinkers confirmed their revolt, but it failed
because the Abbasid forces were able to suppress it and put an end to
it-this has fully been explained in this book.

When the Alawids lost their revolt, their heads were carried on the tops
of the spears and were displayed in all countries and cities just as was
the condition during the days of the Umayyad government. Al-Mansur paid
no attention to the bonds of the womb relationship between him and the
Alawids. For, after that, he spared no effort to kill and pursue them.
In this respect, he excluded neither old men nor children; rather he
included them all in a torture which cannot be described because it was
very severe to the extent that the Alawids wished that the Umayyad
government would return though it was severe and torturing.

These severe measures taken be al-Mansur against the Alawids left deep
sadness

in Imam al-Sadiqs and his son, Imam Musas souls, for they saw al-Mansur
severely punishing their cousins, while they had no way to support and
save them from that in which they were.

Among the problems of which the time of Imam Musa was full of was the
destructive intellectual movements such as unbelief and the like that
aimed at putting an end to Islam and to demolish its supports. These
movements extended to many Islamic countries and did their best to play
with the philosophy of the Islamic ethics, to deny all the religions, to
urge the people to perform the forbidden, to play with the general
manners, and to corrupt the rest of the social regulations.

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and his son Imam Musa faced and resisted
those beliefs and to refute them with scientific proofs.

In addition to these destructive beliefs there were other beliefs
attacked the Islamic world in those times. The beliefs summoned their
followers to disunite the social ties, to divide the Muslims, and to
mislead the public opinion in many sides of their ideological life, so
Imam Musa and his father Imam al-Sadiq undertook enlightening the
Muslims and warning them against them. The book has objectively contains
a speech about all of that.

(5)
---

In the fields of the social service, there is nothing more important
than spreading the merits of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be of them, display
their behavior and affairs, for they supply the society with the
requirements of renaissance and progress. The Muslims are in need of a
brilliant guidance arising from the message of Ahl al-Bayt aiming at
self-denial, sacrifice in the way of Allah, and the movement toward the
fruitful, constructive deeds.

Surely, the Muslims live in bitter conditions; they lead a life of
discords and disorders. For the colonial forces have played with their
own constituents, deprived them of their fates, strengthened among them
all factors of weakness and corruption to the extent that they have led
a life of abasement and disgrace. We believe that the Muslims cannot
make any progress unless they follow the behavior and teachings of Ahl
al-Bayt, for in every side of them there is a meeting of original, free
awareness, ideals, and perfect belief in the rights of the community.
Perhaps, we participate in the field of the social service through our
research on the life of Imam Musa, peace be on him.

This book was published in 1378 A. H. and was out of print. Those who
are concerned in such researches asked me to reprint it; I (the author)
put their request before the great beneficent, al-Hajj Muhammed Jewad
Ajeena, the son of the notable Hajj, Muhammed Jewad Ajeena, and he
responded to me, may Allah protect him. We thank him and may he be
successful in printing the book. I ask

Allah to grant him a success that he may give life to the remarkable
deeds of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, and to give him much more
reward. Surely He, the Exalted, is the Guardian of that and has power
over it.

My brother, His Eminence, great Shaykh, Hadi al-Qarashi did me a favor
through revising the chapters of the book; His Eminence also did me a
favor through revising many books and benefited me in finding some
information relating to the life of Imam Musa, peace be on him. After
the serious research, I have found that some chapters of the book I have
written are in need of re-writing and analyzing; also I have changed my
mind concerning some researches of the book. The reader will find that
this edition is different from the previous one because it contains an
addition; moreover it is distinguished by the good printing of which
al-Adab Press is famous.

In the end of the introduction, I hope that those who are concerned in
these researches will do me a favor through criticizing and re-writing
this work, that we may all be able to serve this community; surely He,
the Exalted, has power over rightness and success.

Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi Holy Najaf Dhu al-Hijja 1st, 1389 A. H.
