Chapter Ii
==========

His Genius and Superiority
--------------------------

Before we talk about the immoderate cleverness by which Imam Musa, peace
be on him, was distinguished in his early childhood, we have to talk
about the educational factors that form a unique personality; Imam Musa
attained the most wonderful means and results of such education.

The educationists and others have mentioned the factors leading to an
educational entity and behavioral results of a person; they are as
follows:

### 1. Heredity

The scientists of heredity and psycho think that heredity is among the
effective reasons for the psychological formation and mental growth.
They say that cleverness and all kinds of intellectual maturity of a
person directly depend on heredity. The branch not only resembles its
origin in its formal aspects but also it resembles it in its qualities.
Concerning its smallest attributes, Heksely says: "All signs and
characteristics of an organic being belong to heredity or environment.
The hereditary formation puts the limits of that which is possible;
environment decides that this possibility will be a fact; therefore,
hereditary formation is the ability to react with any environment
through a special way."

This means that all signs and qualities in man's living systems belong
to heredity or environment or society where man lives. Mendil has
confirmed this hereditary aspect called conjugation heredity. He says:
"Surly many hereditary attributes pass without division or change from
one of the origins or from both of them to the branch."

Janjaz has established that in his statement: "Surely every man has
hidden hereditary abilities, but the appearance of each ability depends
on the conditions encompassing these abilities when they grow."

Islam had discovered this phenomenon before it had been discovered by
the scientists of heredity and psycho. It has been reported from the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, that a man belonged to the
Ansars came to him and said to him: "O Allah's Apostle, this is my
cousin. I am so-and-so, son of so-and-so (counting ten forefathers). She
is the daughter of so-and-so (counting ten forefathers); there is no
Abyssinian in her lineage nor in mine, but she has given birth to this
Abyssinian." Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, bowed
his head and then he raise it and said: "Surely you have ninety-nine
races, and she has ninety-nine races. When the races come together, they
move, and each race of them asks Allah, the Great and Almighty, to let
its like to go to it. Stand up! He is your son; he has not come to you
except through a race of yours or of hers."

The man left taking his wife and his son by the hand. In another
tradition, (the Prophet) said: "Choose (good women) for your sperms, for
ethics pass from fathers to children (al-'iriq dassas)."

The Holy Qur'an refers to the smallest attributes carried by heredity.
Narrating from His Prophet Noah, Allah the most High, says: "And Noah
said: My Lord, leave not upon the land any dweller from among the
unbelievers, for surely if you leave them, they will lead astray your
servants and will not beget any but immoral, ungrateful (children)."[1]
The verse clearly indicates that the beliefs of unbelievers and atheists
pass through heredity from fathers to children. The encyclopedias of
hadith are full of hadiths reported on the authority of Ahl al-Bayt,
peace be on them. The hadiths indicate the reality of heredity, its
laws, and its great importance in man's life.[2]

In the light of the hereditary rule, we decide that Imam Musa, peace be
on him, inherited from his forefathers, peace be on them, all the
attributes that distinguished them from all people, such as generosity,
clemency, love for good, kindness to men, and full dedication to
general, good deeds.

### 2. The Family

Surely the family is one of the basic factors in building the
educational entity and finding the social acquirement of someone's
manners. It has a perfect effect on forming the child's character and on
making him acquire habits staying constantly with him throughout his
lifetime. For the child imitates the others in habits and behavior.
Mander says: "Surely, the child-in the smallest habits staying
constantly with him, in the most important qualities, in the general
attitude toward people, in the general viewpoint through which he thinks
of life or work, in all these things-is an imitator to a great extent.
Perhaps imitation is sometimes conscious and intentional, but in most
cases it is unconscious. If the child imitates well-mannered people, he
will be impressed by their morals and their sentiments. In the first
place this impression is regarded as an imitation, but quickly it
becomes a habit, and the habit is a second nature; imitation is one of
the two ways through which the individual attributes are acquired and
personal ethics are formed."[3]

According to this viewpoint, Imam Musa was unique in his attributes and
essentials. For he grew up among a family who was the origin of piety,
guardian of wisdom and knowledge, visited frequently by the angels,
place of descent of inspiration and revelation, and to whom belonged all
noble qualities and virtues in Islam.

Imam Musa was brought under the care of his father, Imam al-Sadiq, the
like of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surat Nuh, verse 26. [2] Al-Nizam al-Terbewi fi al-Islam. [3] 'Ilm
al-Nefs fi al-Heyat.

whom human history has ever known in faith, piety, and all tendencies
except his forefathers, the pure Imams. Concerning him, his student
Malik b. Anas said: "No eye has seen, no ear has heard, and (none) come
to someone's mind more meritorious than Ja'far b. Muhammed al-Sadiq in
knowledge, worship and piety." 'Amru b. al-Muqdam said: "When I looked
at Ja'far b. Muhammed (al-Sadiq), I came to know that he belonged to the
descendents of the prophets."[1] The martyr, Zayd b. 'Ali, peace be on
him, said: "In every time there is a man from among us, Ahl al-Bayt,
whom Allah advances as a proof over His creatures. The proof of our time
is my nephew, Ja'far; he who follows him does not go astray; he who
opposes him is not rightly guided."[2] This great Imam planted in the
soul of his son Musa all his ideals and tendencies to the extent that he
became, according to his early life and education, one of the unique
Muslim thinkers and of the most prominent Muslim Imams.

### 3. The Environment

Those who are concerned in educational researches have unanimously
agreed that environment is one of the most important factors on which
education depends. It is it that forms instincts and habits in the
child's self; so if it was good, its effects would also be good; if it
was polluted with mal factions and deviation, the young would certainly
suffer from the defects and blights wherein.

Surely man, in his behavior, is not subject to his inward formation
only, but also he is subject to outward factors that react with him and
affect him. In this manner, environment imprints its effects in the
inward thoughts and the depth of soul; through it a high degree of
social perfection is achieved when it is good.

Surely if the social environment is stable and the family is not
disordered, they will make the behavior of the young righteous, gentle,
and void of deviation. The UNISCO has made a research on the non-natural
effects on the child's self. After the specialists had made an elaborate
research (in this respect), they stated the following: "Without doubt,
the environment that is psychologically stable and the united family
whose members live in an atmosphere of mutual sympathy is the first
foundation on which the adoption of the child from sentimental viewpoint
is based. The child later depends on this foundation in fixing his
social relationship hypothetically; if the child's personality is
distorted by the parent's bad treatment, he is unable to associate with
society."[3]

As for the environment where the Imam lived, it was religious and
prevailed by human values and ideals. As for the house in which he
lived, it was one of the institutes of virtue, and of the schools of
faith and piety; it was flooded by love,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tehdhib al-Tehdhib, vol. 2, p. 104. [2] Al-Menaqib, vol. 2, p. 147.
[3] UNISCO, the Effects of Family and Society on the Young under 13, p.
35.

avoiding formality, leaving bitter, and obscene language; in this manner
all the elements of high education were secured for the Imam.

### Cleverness and Genius

The psychologists have divided cleverness into two kinds: social
cleverness, and abstract one. Concerning the difference between them,
they have said: "Surely social cleverness means understanding people in
a right manner and associating with them with wisdom and reflection. As
for the abstract cleverness, it means understanding concepts and symbols
of which is understanding scientific schools and making distinction
between the correct and the incorrect from among them."[1]

In his early age Imam Musa attained both kinds of cleverness; that was
through his understanding the people, his behavior toward them with
wisdom and reflection, his understanding the facts of affairs, his
knowledge of hidden things the great religious scholars had not
understood.

Yet another aspect that fills hearts with admiration and astonishment is
that Imam Musa, peace be on him, in his early age, was able to encompass
different kinds of sciences and knowledge, though the early age does not
help man do that. This matter cannot be justified except in what the
Shi'ites believe and are unanimous on it. That is that the Imam should
throughout the stages of his lifetime be the most knowledgeable of the
people of his time. He should be the greatest of them in reflection, and
encompassing all the things the community needs in all fields. Moreover,
his knowledge should be divine and not acquisitive just as that of the
prophets.

Not only the Imam had such an aspect, but also all the Imams of Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be on them, shared him with it. For example, his grandson
al-Jewad was the youngest of all the Imams; nevertheless, the Shi'a
resorted to him and believed in his Imamate after the death of his
father Imam al-Rida, peace be on him. He was then about seven years old,
but al-Ma'mun held a meeting and summoned the greatest religious
scholars in order to examine him in the most important, ambiguous, and
difficult questions. They asked him about them and about various kinds
of sciences and knowledge, and he answered them successfully. They
admired him, and some of them believed in his Imamate. The biographers
of Imam al-Jewad have unanimously agreed on writing that on his
authority.

We will mention some of Imam Musa's attitudes during his early age to
indicate his great scientific abilities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mejelet Heyatek, vol. 6, p. 157, an Essay by Professor Thorindik.

### With Abu Hanifa

Abu Hanifa was among those who believed in the (doctrine) of compulsion
and summoned (the people) to believe in it. This belief maintains that
the act that issues from man is not created by him and does not issue
from him through his choice. Rather it is created by Allah and issues
through Allah's will, and that man's will and power has no relationship
in finding any deed whether it issues from him through his choice or he
is forced to perform it. The Shi'ites have unanimously agreed that such
a belief is invalid and incorrect. Besides the jurists have established
that it is false; they have conscientiously decided that any optional
act should be preceded by some voluntary prerequisites which are as
follows:

1. One must imagine the thing in mind.

2. His soul must incline to it.

3. He should perfectly be sure of its advantage.

When these prerequisites are perfect in the horizon of soul, the will
clings to deed, and man strives to find it or orders it to be performed,
whether it is good or ugly, and there is no coercion or compulsion on
man to perform it.[1]

Any way, Abu Hanifa was on top of those who believed in compulsion; he
traveled to Yethrib (Medina) to debate with Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on
him, on this belief, while he was famous for his being the opponent of
it. When he arrived in it, he headed for the Imam's house. He sat in the
corridor waiting for a permission to enter. While he was sitting there,
a boy came out walking slowly. He asked the boy: "Where does the
stranger relieve nature?"

The boy turned to him and said to him: "Slowly!" Then he sat down
politely, leaned against the wall, and began to give him an answer to
his question, saying: "Avoid the banks of rivers, the places where fruit
fall, the courtyards of mosques, and the middle of a road. Hide yourself
behind a wall; you should not face the qibla (direction to the Kaaba)
nor have your back towards it; and relieve nature where you wish." He
explained to him the places where it is detested or forbidden to relieve
nature, so Abu Hanifa was dazzled and astonished because he had not
thought that there was a boy who had such a scientific ability.

"What is your name?" asked Abu Hanifa.

"Musa b. Ja'far b. Muhammed b. 'Ali b. al-Husayn b. 'Ali b. Abi Talib,"
was the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Professor Ayat Allah al-'Uzma al-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Khu'I has
explained these affairs and given more proofs of them. That is in his
researches in Science of Islamic Fundamentals ('Ilm al-Usool). He has
given decisive proofs of that compulsion and authorization are invalid.
He has established the affair between two affairs in which the Imams of
Ahl al-Bayt believed. I (the author) have mentioned that in my book
Teqrirat Ayat Allah al-Khu'I in Science of Islamic Fundamentals ('Ilm
al-Usool).

answer.

When Abu Hanifa came to know that the boy was a branch of the Tree of
the Prophecy and the Imamate, he became tranquil, and then he asked him
about the question he had prepared for Imam al-Sadiq, saying: " Boy,
from whom does disobedience (issue)? Does it issue from Allah or from
the servant?"

The Imam answered him, saying: "Either it issues from Allah and not from
the servant at all, so Allah does not punish the servant for what he
does not do; or it issues from the servant and Allah, and Allah is a
stronger partner. Therefore, the stronger partner has no right to punish
the weak for a sin in which they are equal; or it issues form the
servant and not from Allah. So If He wills to pardon (him), (He will
pardon him), and If He wills to punish (him), (He will punish him); and
Allah is He whose help is sought." According to the rational
restriction, this conclusion is full of all the elements of the firm
scientific proofs man cannot invalidate or refute.

Abu Hanifa became dazzled and astonished, so he raised his voice,
saying: "I am satisfied with what I have heard!"

He went out defeated; inability appeared on his face. He did not met
with Imam al-Sadiq; the Imam's answer to him and his inability to replay
him became famous among the scientific circles; accordingly, a poet
composed a poem on the answer of the Imam, peace be on him, to Abu
Hanifa, saying:

Our deeds through which we are dispraised have three meanings when we
perform them: either our Lord create them by Himself, so we are not
blameworthy when we perform them,

Or He shares them with us, so the sin that befalls us will befall Him,

Or my Lord has no sin in performing them, so the sin belongs to him who
performs them.[1]

This attitude indicates that Imam Musa had abundant sciences and
knowledge during his early age. For he understood what the intellects of
the great religious scholars did not understand. For example, Abu Hanifa
was unable to stand before his flowing thinking. He found no way to safe
and preserve his position except withdrawing from him and avoiding
discussing with him any subject matter; this attitude shows that the
Imam had abundant knowledge and cleverness none had in such an age
except his forefathers, who were singled out with the Imamate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Murteda, Amali, vol. 1, pp. 105-106. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 4, p.
1049.

### His Decision against Abu al-Khattab

Muhammed b. Maqlas al-Asadi, better known as Abu al-Khattab, was among
the Imams of the atheists in the Arab and Islamic world. He spoiled the
religion of the young Muslims. That was through his originating a belief
through which he launched a war against all the Islamic regulations; the
principles of his thought has been mentioned by al-Qadi, Abu Hanifa
al-Maghribi, who said: "He (Abu al-Khattab) claimed that Ja'far b.
Muhammed was Allah, be He raised far above his statement. When his
companions were overburdened by performing the religious duties, they
came to him and said: 'Abu al-Khattab, make light for us (the religious
duties).' So he ordered them to leave them to the extent that they left
all the religious duties and performed the prohibited. He permitted them
to bear witness to each other through falseness. He said: "He who
recognizes the Imam is permitted to perform all the forbidden
things."[1]

Abu al-Khattab's destructive beliefs appeared in Kufa at the time when
the political disorders reached the zenith and the summons to the
'Abbasids was opening its way firmly and successfully. The conditions
helped him gather around him some Kufan men to teach them his beliefs
and to show them the plans of the summons, meeting, and appearance.[2]
When Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, heard of his heresy and unbelief,
he disavowed him and openly cursed him, for he was among his companions
and followers, then he renounced (his doctrine) after that. 'Isa
al-Shalqani hurried to Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, to ask him about
his opinion of this dangerous atheist, and he, peace be on him,
answered: "Isa, what has prevented you from meeting with my son (Imam
Musa) to ask him about all what you desire? Thus, 'Isa went to Imam
Musa, who was then a young boy studying in his room. When the Imam,
peace be on him, saw 'Isa, he had answered him before he asked him. He
said to him: "Isa, surely Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, made a
covenant through the prophets for the prophethood and they never turned
away from it. He made a covenant through the testamentary trustees for
religious obligations and they never turned away from it; He gave faith
to a people for a time and then He deprived them of it; as for Abu
al-Khattab, he is among those who were given faith and deprived of it."

'Isa admired the Imam's answer, so he rose for him embraced him and
kissed his forehead and said: "May my father and mother be your ransom,
offspring, one of the other; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing."

Then he turned to Imam Abu 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq) and told him about the
wonderful talents of his son Imam Musa, peace be on him. So Abu 'Abd
Allah (al-Sadiq) said to him: "Isa, If you ask this son of mine about
what is between the two covers of the Qur'an, he will give you an answer
to it with knowledge."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] De'a'im al-Islam, p. 64. [2] Herekat al-Shi'a, p. 73.

Then he ordered his son to be brought out of the study. At that time
'Isa believed that Musa, peace be on him, was an Imam, that he was the
heir apparent and successor of his father over all the people.[1] Yet
another example of Imam Musa's immoderate cleverness is that he came to
his father carrying a tablet (lawh) with him. His father made him sit in
his lap and said to him: "My little son, write: Abandon ugly things and
do not perform them!" When he wrote that, his father said to him: "My
little son, complete it." He completed it saying: "If you perform good
deeds to someone, then increase them." Then the Imam gave another
statement to his son and ordered him to complete it, saying: "You will
meet from your enemy all tricks." He completed it saying: "If the enemy
schemes against you, do not scheme against him." The Imam became happy
with his son' talents and genius; he embraced him, showed his admiration
toward him, and said: "Offspring, one of the other!"[2] Another example
of the sings of his genius in his childhood is that which has been
reported by Saffwan al-Jammal, who said: "I (Saffwan al-Jammal) asked
Abu 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq), peace be on him, about the leader of this
affair (after him). He said: 'The leader of this affair is one who does
not fool and play.'"

Saffwan said: "While he was relating to me about that, Abu al-Hasan
Musa, who was then a young boy, came towards us along with a young
sheep. He addressed the young sheep, saying: 'Prostrate to your Lord!'
So Abu 'Abd Allah, peace be on him, took and embraced him, and then he
said to him: 'May my father and mother be ransom to you, O you who do
not fool and play!'"

We have mentioned these attitudes that show a great part of his
cleverness and genius as if he, through this wonderful cleverness, did
not passed any of the stages of childhood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 11, p. 237. [2] Al-Menaqib, vol. 2, p. 380.
