Chapter Iii
===========

School of Imam al-Sadiq
-----------------------

Among the most important things of which Islam has taken care in its
brilliant message is spreading cultural awareness and making public
knowledge among people, for this reason it has made seeking knowledge as
a religious obligation. It is incumbent on all Muslims to undertake it
in order to develop their life in the economic and political fields, and
to make them as a righteous community having a wise leadership for the
peoples and nations of the world.

Surely Islam believes in knowledge and its creative ability in making a
human civilization. It shows that man cannot reach his sound objectives
in building his society except through the foundation of scientific
awareness standing on understanding and reflecting on the facts of
affairs. Besides it has regarded armament with knowledge as an
individual and a social necessity.

The Imams of Ahl al-Bayt played a positive role in giving life to the
scientific life and to develop it in the world of Arabs and Islam, in
spite of the harassment they met from the ruler of their times. Among
the most prominent activities they rendered in this way was founding a
science school aiming at spreading all kinds of knowledge, freeing the
opinions of the Muslims from ignorance and dullness. We will mention
some affairs of this school as follows:

### The First Founder

The first founder of this great school was Imam 'Ali, the Commander of
the faithful, the first pioneer of knowledge and development in Islam.
He spared no effort to spread sciences and educate the Muslims; he used
the Kufa Mosque as a school where he delivered from his pulpit his
golden sermons full of economics, politics, administration, philosophy,
ethics, enlightening awareness aiming at establishing good behavior and
morals. He singled his companions and disciples with his brilliant
knowledge taken from that of the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, so they learned from him theology, monotheism,
jurisprudence, Islamic legislation, eloquence, and the like. Then they
supplied the Islamic world with their books and their legacy. Some of
them were 'Abd Allah b. 'Abbas, the great scholar of the community and
great authority of the Qur'anic sciences. Abu al-Aswad al-Du'ali, the
first teacher of Arabic grammar. Abu Rafi' was the first to write on the
science of military expeditions and biographies in Islam[1]; he wrote
the book al-Sunan wa al-Ahkam wa al-Qada'[2]; the Companions (of the
Prophet)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Te'sees al-Shi'a li 'Uloom al-Islam, p. 232. [2] A'yan al-Shi'a,
vol., part 2, pp. 34-35.

admired and magnified this book.[1] There are many writers like these
scholars who have lighted the intellectual life in Islam. After his
father, Imam al-Hasan, the sweet basil and first grandson of the
Prophet, developed those science foundations and took care of them, but
these foundations were moved from Kufa to Yethrib (Medina) after the
Iraqis had deserted him. He, peace be on him, used the Mosque of the
Prophet as an institute for giving his scientific lectures. The
narrators of traditions have mentioned some of his eminent students and
the narrators of his sayings. They are al-Hasan al-Muthanna, al-Musayyab
b. Nujba, Swayd b. Ghafla, al-Ala' b. 'Abd al-Rahman, al-Sha'bi, Hubayra
b. Barkam, al-Asbagh b. Nabbata, Jabir b. Khuld, Abu al-Jauwaz, Isa b.
Ma'mun b. Zarara, Naffala b. al-Ma'mum, Abu Yehya Umayr b. Saeed
al-Nakha'i, Abu Maryam b. Qays al-Thaqafi, Tuhrub al-Ajali, Ishaq b.
Yasar (the father of Muhammed b. Ishaq), 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Awf, Sufayn
b. al-Layl, and 'Umar b. Qays al-Qufun.[2]

Yethrib flourished during that time and became the richest of all the
Islamic cities in science, literature, and culture.

After the death of his brother, Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him,
undertook taking care of that institute and supplying its students with
different kinds of science. However, he did not last for a long time
because he met a difficult affliction and trial from the tyrant of his
time, Yazid b. Mu'awiya, who made public unbelief and atheism. So Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him, thought that the religious duty made it
incumbent on him to sacrifice his valuable blood for the religion of his
grandfather. He also felt that he had to sacrifice his star children and
his household for the sake of the word of monotheism and to save the
Muslims from the tyranny and violence of the Umayyads. Through that he
could record for the truth and the thought the most wonderful, noblest,
and highest sacrifice in human history.

After the martyrdom of the one who refused injustice (i.e., Imam
al-Husayn)[3], his son Imam 'Ali b. al-Husayn devoted himself to
worship. He fasted by day and spent night in worship. So he became like
an old small-sized water-bag out of too much worship. Moreover he
suffered from the painful sorrows that attacked him during all the
periods of his lifetime due to the calamities and misfortunes had
befallen his father. The tragedy of Kerbela was standing in front of
him. He was drowned in a current of pain and sadness. So he is regarded
as one of the five tearful persons who represented sorrow and agony in
the world of existence. In spite of these strong sorrows that did not
leave him, he, peace be on him, played an important role in supplying
the religious scholars and the narrators with his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Nejashi, Rijal, p. 5. [2] Heyat al-Imam al-Hasan, vol. 2, p. 280.
It has been quoted from Ibn 'Asakir's History. [3] Al-Zuhri has said: "I
have never seen a Qereshi better than 'Ali b. al-Husayn." He has also
said: "I have never seen anyone greater in jurisprudence than him." Ibn
Weheb has said on the authority of Malik: "There was none among the
household of the Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, like 'Ali
b. al-Husayn."

traditions on different kinds of sciences and arts. Many traditions have
been reported on his authority by his sons: Muhammed, Zayd, and 'Abd
Allah. Many traditions have also been narrated on his authority by Abu
Salam b. 'Abd al-Rahman, Tawus b. Kasan, Abu al-Zanad, 'Asim b. 'Amr b.
Qattada, Asim b. 'Ubayd Allah, al-Qa'qa' b. Hakeem, Zayd b. Aslam,
al-Hakam b. 'Utayba, Habeeb b. Abu Thabit, Abu al-Aswad Muhammed b. 'Abd
al-Rahman b. Nawfal, Muslim al-Butayn, Yehya b. Saeed al-Ansari, Hisham
b. Urwa, 'Ali b. Zayd b. Jadd'an, and the like.[1]

These narrators have reported on his authority different kinds of
sciences. They have also reported on his authority al-Saheefa
al-Sajjadiya, which is regarded as the Gospel of Mohammed's household;
that is because it contains intellectual wealth distinguished by
deciding the rules of morals, the principles of virtues, the sciences of
monotheism, and the like.

They have narrated on his authority the Treatise on Rights (Risalat
al-Huquq), which is the most wonderful treatise written in Islam. For it
has shown the creative rules for the rights of the state against the
people, the rights of the people against the state, and the rights of
the Muslims against each other. It has also decided the general programs
for the principles of education, the types of behavior, the precepts of
teaching, the rights of the teacher against the learners, and the like
from among the rights that are necessary to men in their individual and
social life

They have reported on his authority the authentic wise sayings, valuable
opinions, and proverbs; through all these things Imam 'Ali b. al-Husayn
contributed in building the scientific life, and developing the
intellectual life on the earth.

After the death of his father, Imam Muhammed al-Baqir[2], peace be on
him, took care of that religious foundation and supplied its scientists
and students with the Islamic sciences and morals. During his time
science institutes flourished; some scientists surrounded him to learn
his brilliant sciences; he was the only authority in the Islamic world
in his time for the religious sciences; concerning him Malik al-Juhni
says:

When the people seek for the knowledge of the Qur'an, Quraysh rely on
him.

If someone asked where is the son of the daughter of the Prophet, you
would gain through him the wide branches (of knowledge).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tehdhib al-Tehdhib, vol. 7, p. 305. [2] He was given the nickname of
al-Baqir because he was well-versed in knowledge. It was the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, who had given him this nickname
before he, peace be on him, was born. Jabir b. 'Abd Allah al-Ansari
narrated on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, who has said: "It will happen that you will live until you meet
one of my children descended from al-Husayn, called Muhammed, who will
spilt wide open knowledge. When you meet him, recite my greeting to
him." A narration similar to this in meaning has been mentioned in Ibn
Qutayba' 'Uyoon al-Akhbar, vol., p. 212.

You are like stars shine for night-travelers, (you are) like mountains
which have inherited vast knowledge.[1]

The scholars of his time lowered themselves before him[2] in recognition
of his high scientific position the like of which none had.

The reliable narrators have reported on his authority great abilities of
the jurisprudence of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on him. Some of these
narrators are: Zarara b. A'yun about whom Imam al-Sadiq has said: "Were
it not for Zarara, I would think that the traditions of my father would
get lost.[3] Muhammed b. Muslim heard from him thirty thousand
traditions[4]. Abu Basir and his brothers concerning whom Imam al-Sadiq
has said: "Were it not for these, the traditions of the Prophet would be
cut off and be effaced.[5] 'Abd al-Malik b. A'yun, for whom Imam
al-Sadiq invoked Allah, saying: "O Allah, surely Abu al-Daris was with
Your choice from among Your creatures, then place him among the
household of Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his family, till the Day
of Judgement."[6] His traditions have also been reported by 'Amr b.
Dinar, who is one of the authors of the tradition books called "the Six
Authentic Books", (al-Sihaah al-Sitta). Yet other examples of the
narrators of his traditions are: al-A'rajj, al-Zuhri, Abu Jahdam, Musa
b. Salim, al-Qasim b. al-Fedl, al-Awzaa'i, Ibn Jurayh, al-A'mash, Shayba
b. Nassaah, 'Abd Allah b. Abi Bakr, 'Amr b. Hazm, 'Abd Allah b. Ata',
Bassam al-Sayrafi, Harb b. Surayh, Hajjajj b. Artara, Muhammed b. Sawqa,
Makhul b. Rashid, Mu'ammar b. Bassam,[7] and other than them. The
scientific life flourished and grew in the period of the School of Ahl
al-Bayt, which supplied the Islamic world with all the essentials of the
intellectual renaissance.

### At the Time of Imam al-Sadiq

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, caused the springs of knowledge and
wisdom to gush out on the earth. He opened to the people doors to
knowledge they had not known before; he filled the world with his
knowledge, as al-Jahiz said.[8] The people transmitted from him
knowledge. The knowledge was circulated by the riders and its fame
spread in all the countries, as Ibn Hajar stated.[9]

Among the most prominent activities Imam al-Sadiq made to spread and
make

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraaf, p. 52. [2] Mir'at al-Jinan, vol., p.
248. [3] Al-Keshi, Rijal, p. 88. [4] Ibid., p. 112. [5] Ibid., p. 113.
[6] Ibid., p. 117. [7] Tehdhib al-Tehdhib, vol.9, p. 350. [8]
Al-Sendubi, Resaa'il al-Jaahiz, p. 106. [9] Al-Sewa'iq al-Muhriqa, p.
120.

public knowledge among the people was his developing the School of Ahl
al-Bayt and supplying it with the elements of life and survival. This
school has been ascribed and added to him because of his positive role
in widening and promoting it from a special level to a high level
through which it became the highest of all the scientific institutes and
schools in all the times. Imam al-Sadiq's school enlightened human
thinking, made the Islamic reason appear, developed human society,
produced a choice of scholars, leaders, and inspired thinkers who spared
no effort to spread all kinds of knowledge and to ripen the intellectual
life at that time. So they were worthy of taking the medal of the golden
time in Islam.

Those who made some researches on Imam al-Sadiq's school said: "Some
great thinkers, philosophers, and scholars graduated from Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq's intellectual school. The Islamic civilization and the Arab
though are indebted to this intellectual school for development,
progress, and everlastingness, (and they are indebted) to its den Imam
al-Sadiq for scientific glory and valuable inheritance."

Imam al-Sadiq's school released thinking and spread scientific awareness
through employing a great group of scholars who educated and set right
the Muslims and made them progressive in the scientific fields. The
following is a brief review on the affairs of this great institute
during the time of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him.

### The factors of Development and Prosperity

As for the factors that led to developing and progressing the School of
Imam al-Sadiq, they are as follows:

1. The Islamic world in the time of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, was
sinking under discords and disorders, swinging in corrupt inclinations
and private tendencies, prevailed by the parties that led to the
disunion of the society and the disagreement of its sectors, and
witnessed the outbreak of the war in all cities and regions. That is
because the Umayyad Empire collapsed, the 'Abbasid state was
established, the Muslims turned away from knowledge and sciences and
headed for those terrible events. Some of them supported the previous
regime and some of them supported the new one; they were busy defending
their political beliefs and this distracted them from seeking knowledge
and religious guidance.

Imam al-Sadiq seized this appropriate opportunity and began spreading
the Islamic culture that was part of the Islamic message. The Muslims
again found the opportunity to return to the Islamic regime that had
made it incumbent on them to seek knowledge as one of the religious
duties. They found in the grandson of the great Prophet the leader who
would direct them to build their civilization and scientific entity, so
they intended to attend his school to supply themselves with its
brilliant knowledge.

2. Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, was apart from intervening in any of
the affairs of the Umayyad and 'Abbasid governments. He did not practice
any positive act

against the political objectives of the two states. He was isolated from
all the people who loved him and intended to please him. The local
authority did not observe him nor did it harass him and prevent him from
spreading his sciences. He found a vast opportunity before him to open
the gates of his school and to supply his students with all kinds of
knowledge and sciences. The great scholars, narrators, and traditionists
hurried to join his institute. He, peace be on him, found them as good
helpers to achieve his reformative, immortal message, that enlightened
the intellects of the Islamic society and saved it from the sediment of
ignorance and dullness.

3. Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, himself undertook the affairs of this
institute and took care of it. The Muslims of all different tribes and
tendencies have unanimously agreed that he was the most brilliant of all
the Muslim Imams in knowledge, jurisprudence, and talents. It is natural
that the personality of a den has an effect on making the school
successful and prosperous.

### The Public Center

Imam al-Sadiq chose Yethrib, the land of emigration and place of descent
of inspiration, as a place for his great school and institute; thanks to
his efforts, Yethrib became one of the cities of science in Islam and
one of the institutes of sciences.

As for the place of giving lectures, it was, of course, the Mosque of
the Prophet where the Imam gave his lectures and lessons on all arts.
The Imam sometimes gave his lessons in the courtyard of his house.
Through his students Yethrib became prosperous, regained its activity
and position in guiding the Islamic society.

### The Science Delegations

When Imam al-Sadiq opened the gate of his school, all the pioneers of
virtue and knowledge from different Islamic countries hurried to join
it. That is because they intended to learn the sciences of the Imam and
educate themselves with the precepts and teachings of the religion.
Besides joining the school of Ahl al-Bayt was regarded as one of the
requirements of honor and pride with the Muslims. Professor Sayyid 'Abd
al-'Aziz al-Ahl has talked about the science delegations who joined the
school of the Imam, peace be on him, saying: "Kufa, Basrah, Wasit, and
al-Hijaz sent to Ja'far b. Muhammed their children who belonged to all
tribes such as Banu Asad, Ghani, Mukhariq, Tay, Saleem, Ghatfan,
Ghaffar, al-Azd, Khuza'a, Khath'am, Makhzum, Banu Dabba, and Quraysh,
especially Banu al-Harith b. 'Abd al-Muttalib and Banu al-Hasan b. 'Ali.
A crowd of the free and the children of the retainers from among the
notables of this community from among the Arabs and the Persians,
especially the City of Qum[1], traveled (to Yethrib to join

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ja'far Bin Muhammed, p. 59.

the school of the Imam).

The Muslim country took part in sending its children to the school of
the Imam, the grandson of the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, to learn his pure sciences and to study the religious precepts
under him. Through that the Islamic society won a wonderful victory in
supporting the scientific movement and taking part in building its
entity.

### The Number of its Students

When the School of Imam al-Sadiq opened its doors for all the children
of the Muslims, a great number of the pioneers of science hurried to
join it. The narrators mentioned that their number was four thousand
students.[1] This number is great in comparison with the other science
institutes of that time. Among them were great scholars and
traditionists some of whom became the Imams and heads of some Islamic
schools, and who transmitted from the Imam vast knowledge the riders
circulated and whose fame spread throughout the countries.[2]

Al-Hafiz Abu 'Abbas b. 'Uqda al-Hamadani al-Kufi wrote a book on the
name of the traditionists who reported traditions on the authority of
Imam al-Sadiq; he has mentioned the biographies of four hundred thousand
narrators of them.[3] In his book called al-Mu'tabar, al-Muhaqiq
(al-Hili) has said: "In his time, vast sciences spread from him (Imam
al-Sadiq) through which he dazzled the intellects; a group of the
traditionists reported on his authority; their number is about four
hundred thousand traditionists." Sayyid Muhammed Sadiq Nasha'at has
said: "Ja'far al-Sadiq's house was like a university and was always
embellished by the great scholars (specialists) in hadith, explanation
(of the Qur'an), wisdom, and theology. The session of his lessons was
most times attended by two thousand and some times by four thousand
famous religious scholars; his students who attended his session and
lectures collected his traditions in a group of books regarded as an
encyclopedia for the Shi'ite of Ja'fari doctrine."[4] Accordingly, the
scientific movement widened at that time, and its waves included the
following times and spread light, guidance, and righteousness among all
the Muslims.

### Its Branches

Most of those who graduated from the school of Imam al-Sadiq returned
home while they had vast scientific wealth. When they settled in their
homelands, they played an important role in spreading the Islamic
culture, establishing science institutes and religious clubs that
educated souls and raised the level of morals. The religious institute
established in the Mosque of Kufa was the greatest of all those

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Irshad. A'lam al-Wara. Al-Mu'tabar. Al-Anwar. Al-Dhikra. [2]
Al-Sewa'iq al-Muhriqa, p. 120. [3] Tarikh al-Kufa, p. 40. [4] Imam
al-Sadiq wa al-Medhahib al-Arba'a, vol. 1, p. 62.

institutes. For it was attended by the nine hundred religious scholars
from among whose who were graduated from the school of Imam al-Sadiq.
Likewise, al-Hasan b. 'Ali al-Washsha'[1] has been related to us,
saying: "I (al-Hasan b. 'Ali al-Washsha') found in this mosque (i.e.,
the Mosque of Kufa) nine hundred old men (traditionists); they all said:
'Ja'far b. Muhammed related to me.'"[2] For this reason, the scientific
movement vastly widened to the extent that it included all the Islamic
regions. This has been mentioned by professor Sayyid Meer 'Ali al-Hindi:
"It goes without saying that the publication of science at that time
released intellect. So the philosophical discussions became public in
all the cities of the Islamic world. It is worth mentioning that this
movement was headed by the grandson of 'Ali b. Abi Talib whose name is
Ja'far and whose nickname is al-Sadiq. He was a man with a wide horizon
of reflection and unfathomable reason. He was well-versed in the
sciences of his time. In fact, he is regarded as the first to found the
philosophical schools famous in Islam. Not only those who became the
heads of the Islamic schools attended his scientific seminar, but also
the seekers of philosophy and the philosophers from the remote regions
attended it."[3]

Many knowledgeable families in Kufa studied sciences under Imam
al-Sadiq, and then they became famous for jurisprudence and hadith such
as the family of Hayyan al-Taghlubi, the family of A'yun, Banu 'Attiya,
the family of Banu Darrajj, and other than them.[4] These families
honored Imam al-Sadiq when he resided in Kufa for two years during the
days of al-Saffah. His house was among the Banu of 'Abd al-Qays. The
Shi'a crowded before him to ask him about religious edicts and the
precepts of their religion. Concerning this crowd and their too much
going to him, Muhammed b. Ma'ruf b. al-Hilali has related to us, saying:
"I went to al-Hira to (visit Ja'far b. Muhammed al-Sadiq), but I had no
ability to reach him because there were many people. On the fourth day
the people left him; he saw me and brought me near to him; then he went
to visit the grave of (Imam 'Ali) the Commander of the faithful; I
followed him; while I was walking with him, I heard his speech."

Any way the school of the Imam and all the science foundations that
branched from it established the edifices of knowledge and virtue in the
Islamic world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Hasan b. 'Ali b. Ziyad al-Washsha' was Bejeli and Kufi. He was
among the great figures of this sect. He devoted himself to Imam
al-Rida, peace be on him. He is regarded as among his loyal companions.
He wrote many books of which were: Thawab al-Hajj, al-Manasik,
al-Nawadir, Masa'il al-Rida, and others. This has been mentioned in the
book al-Ta'liqat, p. 103. [2] Al-Mejalis al-Seniya, vol. 5, p. 28. [3]
Ja'far Bin Muhammed, p. 59. [4] Tarikh al-Kufa, p. 408.

### His Professional Students

Many students of Imam al-Sadiq specialized in a group of sciences and
arts. Among those who were specialists in philosophy, theology, and the
researches on the Imamate were Hisham b. al-Hakam, Hisham b. Salim,
Mu'min al-Taq, Muhammed b. 'Abd Allah al-Tayyar, Qays al-Masir, and the
like. Those who specialized in the science of Islamic jurisprudence and
its principles, exegesis, and the rest of the religious sciences were
Zarara b. A'yun, Muhammed b. Salim, Jameel b. Darrajj, Burayd b.
Mu'awiya, Ishaq b. Ammar, Ubayd Allah al-Halabi, Abu Basir, Aban b.
Taghlub, al-Fudayl b. Yasar, Abu Hanifa, Malik b. Anas, Muhammed b.
al-Hasan al-Shaybani, Sufyan b. 'Uyayina, Yehya b. Sa'eed, Sufyan
al-Thawri, and the like. The specialist in chemistry was Jabir b. Hayyan
al-Kufi, the most famous chemist in the world, as Fandik has said. The
specialist in the Philosophy of Existence and Secrets of Creation was
al-Mufaddal b. 'Amr, who has also mentioned in his book which was
dictated to him by Imam al-Sadiq most chapters of medicine such as
physiology, blood circulation, germs, anatomy, and others.

Surely, the School of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, had proudly
preceded science institutes in founding specialization in scientific
studies.

### Recording Sciences

Imam al-Sadiq urged his students to write down his lessons and lectures
on most sciences and arts lest they should be disordered and lost; he
emphasized this summons in other places.

Abu Basir has narrated, saying: "I visited 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq) and he
asked: 'What prevents you from writing? You do not keep (your
information) unless you write them down. A group of people from Basrah
asked me about something; they had recorded it before they left me.'"

Abu Basir has narrated, saying: "I have Heard Abu 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq)
say: 'Write down (your information), for you do not keep (them) unless
you write (them) down.'"

'Asim has said: "I have heard Abu Basir say: 'Abu 'Abd Allah al-Sadiq,
peace be on him, said: 'Write down (your information), for you do not
keep (them) unless through writing (them) down.'"[1]

His students responded to this brilliant summons that deeply aimed at
enlightening human reason and spreading knowledge among the people; his
companions recorded sciences. For example, Aban b. Taghlub has written
the following books:

1. Kitab Ma'ani al-Qur'an (a book on the Meanings of the Qur'an).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Wasa'il al-Shi'a. Kitab al-Shehadat, Chapter 8.

2. Kitab al-Qira'at (a book on the recitations of the Qur'an).[1]

3. Kitab al-Fada'il (a book on the outstanding qualities).

4. Al-Usool fi al-Ruwaiya (Principles of Narration).

5. Aghareeb al-Qur'an

Muhammed b. 'Ali al-Bajali al-Kufi, better known as Mu'min al-Taq, has
written the following books:

1. Kitab al-Imama (a book of the Imamate).

2. Kitab al-Ma'rifa (a book on knowledge).

3. Kitab Ithbat al-Wasiya (a book on proving the will).

4. Kitab al-Radd 'alaa al-Mu'tazila fi Imamat al-Mafdul (a book on
refuting the beliefs of the Mu'tazilites in the Imamate of the less
excellent).

5. Kitab fi amar Talha wa al-Zubayr wa 'Aa'isha (a book on the affair of
Talha, al-Zubayr, and 'Aa'isha).

6. Kitab If'al, La Taf'al (a book on do, do not do).

7. Al-Munazara ma'a Abu Hanifa (a book on the debate with Abu
Hanifa).[2]

Hisham b. al-Hakam, Abu Muhammed al-Baghdadi, has written books on
various sciences and arts; his seventeen books has been mentioned by Ibn
al-Nadeem; we will mention it in his biography when we deal with the
companions of Imam Musa, peace be on him.

Al-Mufaddal b. 'Amr has written a book on Monotheism (al-Tawheed). The
book is one of the greatest of the Islamic books; in it he has dealt
with the creation and formation of man, the secrets and wonders in his
organs; he has also dealt with some medical researches.[3]

Jabir b. Hayyan has written a book on chemistry. The book consists of
one thousand pages including the Imam's treatises, which are five
hundred treatises; these treatises are rich sources to scientists.[4]
The scientists of this science have taken a great a advantage from it.
All men of knowledge from among the Muslims and the orientalists have
lauded Jabir and admired his efforts. The following is a wonderful
statement of professor 'Abd al-Rahman Bedawi, who has shown his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn al-Nedim, Fihrast, p. 308. [2] Ibid., p. 250. Shaykh al-Tusi,
Fihrast, p. 121. [3] Our friend, late, Shaykh Muhammed al-Khalili has
commented on it and fully explained it. He has shown the sciences and
the secrets and the medical researches that agree with modern science.
He has entitled it Amali Imam al-Sadiq. It is in two volumes. [4]
Al-A'lam, vol. 1, p. 186, first edition. Mir'at al-Jinan, vol. 1, p.
304.

admiration toward Jabir's personality, one of the candles of that
school: "The researcher in the history of the Islamic thought cannot
find a personality more wonderful and fertile than that of Jabir b.
Hayyan. He had a personality that went too far in vagueness. Mystery
surrounded it to the extent that it was about to be a legend. It was
high in thinking to the extent that man stands today astonished before
the scientific, philosophical viewpoints full of depth and life it gives
to us. (Man stands astonished) before this general soul prevailed by the
spirit of enlightenment and human tendency that inclined to fathom all
the secrets, and to feel the creative divine powers that spread in it.
So it raises man to the divine station, and hope incited it to make a
continuous progress that keeps pace with mankind in its development. The
personality whose spiritual portion is this will be alive forever, for
it is among the living, always examples for man who progressively walks
on his way to achieve the ideal (model) on earth. Scientific,
philological, and civilization research cannot finish it completely
whatever effort it makes in this way. Rather it will continue in
remoteness whenever it goes deeply into the way to it, and its extent
will increase whenever man touches its dimensions; today we are farther
away from perceiving it generally other than encompassing its main lines
and its guiding trends."[1]

Jabir b. Hayyan was among the leading personalities of the School of
Imam al-Sadiq and was one of its brilliant, eminent men who are really
regarded among those who established the cultural movement in the
Islamic world and other than it.

Yet there are a great number of the genius students of the Imam who
wrote books on various sciences. They are Zarara, Abi Basir, Isma'il b.
Khalid, and the like. In his book called al-Dhari'a,[2] the late of
Islam, Shaykh Aaghaa Buzurg, may Allah make shine his grave, has written
the biographies of a hundred traditionists who have classified the
students of Imam al-Sadiq. These big books are regarded as vast
encyclopedias; they have become as sources for the Shi'ite doctrine and
a proof of its scientific and intellectual wealth.

### Pride and Glory

The students of Imam al-Sadiq took a pride in their attending the
session of his lectures. They were very proud on that and regarded
joining his school as among the achievements that qualified them to the
high positions in the Islamic society. Among those who prided themselves
on that is Abu Hanifa, who has said: "Were it not for the two years,
al-Nu'man would be perished."[3]

Abu Hanifa took a pride in the days when he attended the lessons of Imam
al-Sadiq and regarded them as the best of the stages of his scientific
life. Malik b. Anas has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Ilhad fi al-Islam, p. 189. [2] Al-Thari'a, vol. 6, pp. 301-374.
[3] Al-A'lam, vol. 1, p. 186. Al-Tuhfa al-Ithna 'Ashariya, p. 8.

talked about his teacher Imam al-Sadiq, saying: "No eye has seen, no ear
has heard, and (none) came to someone's mind more meritorious than
Ja'far b. Muhammed al-Sadiq in knowledge, worship and piety."[1]

In another place he has talked about him, saying: (I saw Ja'far b.
Muhammed. He used to smile very much. When the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, was mentioned in his presence, his face became
yellow. I did not see him talk about Allah's Messenger, may Allah bless
him and his family, except he performed an ablution. I visited him
frequently for a time. I saw him except in three qualities: he prayed or
kept silent or recited the Qur'an. He did not talk about the things that
did not concern him; he was among the (religious) scholars and
worshipers who feared Allah."[2]

Surely, it is an act of the truth that Abu Hanifa and Malik b. Anas were
proud on their joining the school of the Imam and attending his
researches. For he, peace be on him, was the original source of the
sciences he inherited from his forefathers and from his grandfather, the
great Prophet, who had caused the sources of knowledge and wisdom to
gush out on earth.

### Its special Nature

Surely the School of Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, had a special
nature by which it was distinguished from the rest of the other
foundations. It was the self-independence which was marked by that it
was not affiliated to any official organ of government, so the authority
had no chance to employ it in any of its political purposes, for it has
no power over it. It enjoyed great freedom whether in its teaching
programs or in its intellectual fields. It did not receive from the
ruling authority any economic or material help. Rather it was separate
from it and was away in its behavior from all the external effects; it
was run according to the Islamic brilliant teachings; it followed a
clear way far from crookedness and deviation; its aim was to serve the
community, and its pioneer was the truth.

Al-Mansur tried to bring the Imam near to him and to earn his affection.
In the meantime he tried to attain the trust of his students and his
followers; he wrote to him: "Why do you not fear us just as the people
do?"

The Imam answered him about his plan and his behavior, saying: "We have
nothing of the world for which we fear you; you have nothing of the
hereafter for which we hope you."

Imam al-Sadiq had nothing of the vanities of the world, so he had no
fear of the authority of al-Mansur; meanwhile al-Mansur had nothing of
the pleasures of the hereafter in order that the Imam might hope him and
communicate with him. Then al-Mansur followed another way; he wrote to
the Imam: "Surely (we want you) to

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tawassil wa al-Wasila, p. 52. [2] Ibid.

make friends with us in order to advise us."

The Imam answered him: "Whoever desires the hereafter should not make
friends with you; whoever desires the life in this world should not
advise you."

Through these words full of all the elements of truth, the Imam
expressed his behavior concerning turning away from authority and
refraining from cooperating with it. Mr. Asad Hayder has talked about
this brilliant nature by which the school of the Imam was distinguished.
He has said: "The nature and program by which the school of Imam
al-Sadiq was distinguished from the rest of the Islamic schools was that
it was spiritually independence. It did not yield to the regime of the
authority. It did not give an opportunity to the rulers to intervene in
its affairs or to have a hand in guiding it or applying its regulations.
For this reason it was not possible for those in charge of authority to
employ it for their personal interests or to make it cooperate with them
in the affairs of the state. It was impossible even though they spared
no effort to achieve it. The school warred against the wrongdoers from
the beginning and did not incline to them. Likewise, there was no
relationship between them and it, no harmony between it and them. That
is because of this program it followed and the nature by which it was
distinguished. The School was liable to danger, so the dispute between
it and the state became strong. The enmity between them magnified. For
neither the state was ready to yield to the program of the school to
earn its affection and be happy with its help nor the school was ready
to yield to the will of the state in order to support it, serve it, and
cooperate with it. How would that be so? (Certainly, that would not be
so), for since its beginning the school had related to the two important
things (al-Thaqalayn): the Book of Allah, and the family of His
Messenger. They were connected to each other and helped one another.
They did not separate from each other in performing their duties that
aimed to direct and guide the community. That is because the Qur'an
prevents (Muslims) from helping the oppressive and inclining to them:
And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest fire touch you, and you
have no guardians besides Allah, then you shall not be helped (11,
113).[1]

All the science foundations followed this brilliant program. They
followed the program and behavior of the school of Imam al-Sadiq, peace
be on him. An example of them is the Holy Najaf and Qum Theological
Schools, for they both followed the original objectives declared by Imam
al-Sadiq and used by him as a slogan and program for his school, such as
refraining from making relationship with the ruling authorities and
cooperating with them.

### The Authority fears the Imam's School

The ruling authorities were afraid of the Imam's school, for it became
larger; many people attended it, studied the Imam's science, told the
others about it, spread the merits and outstanding qualities of Ahl
al-Bayt. These things made al-Mansur

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Imam al-Sadiq wa al-Medhahib al-Arba'a, vol. 3, p. 13.

sleepless and he had fear for his political interests. He was fearful
because he thought that the people would admire Imam al-Sadiq, so he
entrusted Abu Hanifa with testing the Imam through the most difficult
and ambiguous questions. Now, we will let Abu Hanifa tell us of that: "I
have never seen anyone more knowledgeable than Ja'far b. Muhammed. When
al-Mansur brought him, he sent for me and said: 'Abu Hanifa, the people
have admired Ja'far b. Muhammed. So prepare for him difficult
questions.' I prepared for him forty questions. Then he sent for Ja'far
when he was in al-Hira. He brought him and I came in to him. Ja'far b.
Muhammed was on his right hand. When I looked at him, I venerated him
more than I venerated Abu Ja'far al-Mansur. I greeted al-Mansur and he
asked me to sit down. He turned to him (Imam al-Sadiq) and said to him:
'Abu 'Abd Allah, this is Abu Hanifa!' 'Yes, I know him', he, peace be on
him, replied.

"Then al-Mansur turned to me and said: 'Abu Hanifa, ask Abu 'Abd Allah
about your questions.' I asked him about them and he answered me,
saying: 'You say so-and-so; the people of Medina say so-and-so; we say
so-and-so. Perhaps we follow (you and them) and perhaps we oppose (you
and them). I asked him about the forty questions and he showed no defect
in any of them.'"[1]

This attitude indicates that the authority had harbored malice and rage
against the Imam and that it was cautious of him; likewise it indicates
that the Imam had great scientific abilities.

Al-Mansur intended to battle against the Imam's school, to disparage it
and to isolate the Imam from the community. So he turned his eyes
towards Malik b. Anas, dignified and honored him in order to put him
face to face with the Imam and to make him an authority for the
community. He entrusted him with writing a book in order to force the
people to put the book into practice. However, Malik refused to respond
to him, but he forced him to do that and said to him: "Write it, for
there is no one more knowledgeable than you at the present time."[2] So
Malik wrote his book called al-Muwatta'. Al-Rashid ordered his governor
over Medina not to decide any affair without consulting Malik. He sat on
the ground in order to listen to his speech.[3]

The state supported Malik and employed all its propaganda organs to
spread his doctrine and to force the people to follow it. It did all
these things to turn the people from the doctrine of Ahl al-Bayt whose
position became high due to Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him.

Meanwhile al-Rashid went too far in magnifying and honoring Abu Yousif,
for the latter was the student of Abu Hanifa and publisher of his
doctrine, to the extent that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Dhahabi, Tadhkirat al-Hafiz. [2] Al-Zarqani, Sharh al-Muwatta',
vol. 1, p. 8. [3] Al-Zawi, Manaqib Malik.

he appointed him over the judicial power. No judge was appointed over
Iraq, Iran, and Syria except through the advice and order of Abu
Yousif.[1] Al-Rashid said to him: "Abu Ya'qub, if I had permission to
include you in my lineage and to make you take part in the caliphate
with which I am entrusted, then you are entitled to it."[2]

In this manner, the 'Abbasid authority spared no effort to found some
Islamic doctrines, to honor their founders and take care of them. It
forced the community to follow their beliefs and to put into practice
their religious decisions. Through this procedure, al-Mansur opened the
doors to the mental persecution; then the 'Abbasid kings followed him in
repressing the religious awareness taken from the message of Ahl
al-Bayt.

### The Teaching Programs

The Imam's valuable lectures and researches dealt with all kinds of
traditional and rational sciences, theology, morals. They also dealt
with high culture such as the science of Islamic jurisprudence, hadith,
the sciences of the Holy Qur'an, medicine, chemistry, botany and other
sciences that have perfect effects on the social progress. The most
prominent science the Imam analyzed and fully explained is
jurisprudence; he dealt with all its chapters such as the acts of
worship ('Ibadat), dealings, contracts, and iqaa'aat.

The Imam did not limit his researches to the scientific side only;
rather he elaborated on spreading social manners, noble moral traits,
the rules of behavior, and the like. The following is a brief review on
some of them:

### Noble Moral Traits

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, urged his companions and his followers
to endow themselves with noble moral traits and good deeds in order that
they might be a righteous model of the society. In this respect some
commandments have issued from him; among them are his commandments to
his son Imam Musa; in them he has mentioned: "O my little son, surely
whoever is satisfied with that which is apportioned to him is rich.
Whoever extends his hand to that which is in the hands of other than him
dies poor; whoever is not satisfied with what Allah apportions to him
accuses Allah of His decree; whoever deems his own slip small regards as
great the slip of the other than him.

"O my little son, whoever unveils (the defects) of other than him, the
defects of his own house are unveiled. Whoever pulls out the sword of
wrong is killed by it; whoever digs a well for his brother falls into
it; whoever associates with the foolish is degraded; whoever mixes with
the scholars is respected; whoever enters the entrances of evil is
accused.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Maqrizi, Khutat, vol. 4, p. 144. [2] Ibn al-Qaya, al-Mukafa'a, p.
63.

"O my little son, take care not to despise men lest you should be
despised; be careful not to enter that which does not concerns you lest
you should be debased because of that.

"O my little son, say the truth whether it is for you or against you.

"O my little son, recite the Book of Allah; spread Salam (greetings).
Enjoin the good; forbid the evil. Communicate with him who cuts you off.
Start (conversation with) him who keeps silent toward you. Give him who
begs you. Beware of slander, for it plants enmity in the hearts of men;
be wary of mentioning the defects of men, for the position of him who
mentions the defects of men is like the position of a target.

"O my little son, if you seek generosity, then stick to its origins. For
surely generosity has origins; the origins have an origin; the origins
have branches; the branches have fruit; the fruit is not good except
through a branch; no branch except through an origin; and no firm origin
except through a good origin.

"O my little son, if you visit, then visit the good; do not visit the
wicked, for they are like the stone whose water does not gush out, like
the tree whose leaves do not get green, and like the land whose grass
does not become good...."[1]

These commandments are full of good deeds. They include noble moral
traits, the foundations of virtues and the standards of behavior. Imam
al-Sadiq, peace be on him, continuously supplied his children and his
companions with such valuable commandments and useful lessons, that they
might summon the people to righteousness and guidance. He, peace be on
him, sent to his companions a letter in which he urged them to cling to
noble moral traits and good deeds. In the letter he has mentioned the
following: "You should show love for the Muslim poor people, for he who
disparages them and shows haughtiness toward them deviates from the
religion of Allah. Know that he who abases a Muslim, Allah detests him.
Therefore, fear Allah in respect with your brothers, for their right
against you is that you should love them, for surely Allah commanded his
Prophet to love them. So he who does not love those to whom Allah has
made love a must disobeys Allah and His Apostle. He who disobeys Allah
and His Apostle and dies in this state dies as one of the deviators.

"Be careful not to wrong each other, for surely it is not of the
qualities of the righteous, for surely he who wrongs (people), Allah
turns his wrongdoing against himself, and the help of Allah is for him
who is wronged and he gains success from Allah.

"Be careful not to envy each other, for envy is the origin of unbelief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, pp. 79-80. An account similar to it has been
mentioned in Hulyat al-Awliya', vol. 3, p. 135.

"Be careful not to help (someone) against a wronged Muslim who invokes
Allah against you and He responds to him, for surely our father Allah's
Apostle has said: Surely the supplication of the wronged is granted.'

"Be careful not to let yourselves be greedy for something from which
Allah has prohibited you, for if someone violates something from which
Allah has prohibited him, Allah prevents him from entering the
Garden."[1]

Through these commandments Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, summoned his
companions to perform good deeds and to follow high values that send man
far from evil and direct him at perfection. He has mentioned numerous
commandments similar to these in which he urged his companions to endow
themselves with noble moral traits and good deeds.

### Justice

Without doubt justice is the vein which beats in the body of society. On
it is based the life, security, and stability on earth. The Imam gave a
lecture on it; he has described it with the most wonderful meaning and
briefest statements, saying: "Justice is sweeter than the water a
thirsty person finds; how wide justice is even if it is little! Fear
Allah and be just, for you find fault with the people who do not
establish justice."

The free peoples have struggled for a long time to establish justice,
for they have regarded it as their highest aim. Justice was among the
main aims the Imam's school supported and spread among the Islamic
society.

### Preferring the Truth

Imam al-Sadiq always lauded the truth and regarded it as the Shadow of
Allah on earth. He described it to his companions as the essence of
faith, saying: "Surely it is an act of faith is that you prefer the
truth even if it harms you to falsehood even if it benefits you."

Surely following the truth and its followers and preferring it to
personal interests is the most important of all realities Islam has
underlined and the Imam's school had supported.

### Bringing together the People of Separation

The best and most loveable works to Allah is bringing together the
people of separation to the extent that the Greatest Legislator (Allah)
has permitted lying, which is the greatest of all the ruinous sins, for
correcting discord, raising disputes, spreading love and peace among the
people. Imam al-Sadiq urged his companions to put into practice this
noble deed, saying: "The alms Allah loves is setting the people right
when they are hostile to one another and bringing them together when
they separate from each other."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhaf al-'Uqul, p. 76.

Surely the reconciliation in the full sense was the highest objective of
Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, who dedicated themselves to it and for it
they met too much persecution and injustice.

### Oppression

The intellects of mankind throughout generations and times have admitted
that oppression is ugly and abominable. That is because it is the source
of corruption and crimes. All kinds of oppression have been prohibited
by Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, who has said: "He who puts oppression
into practice, he who helps him, and he who is satisfied with oppression
are three partners."[1] He, peace be on him, prohibited the Muslims from
cooperating with the oppressive or to share with them any positive work
that led to spread their influence or to strengthen their authority. He
was asked by a companion of his about whether it was permissible for him
to build houses for them or to dig a river for them, and he answered: "I
dislike to make a contract with them.Surely the helpers of the
oppressive will enter the hellfire on the Day of Resurrection."

"He, peace be on him, talked to his companions about the greatness of
the crime of oppression with Allah, saying: "Guard against oppression,
for surely the supplication of the oppressed ascends to the heaven." He
talked to them about the ugliest kind of oppression, saying to them: "No
oppression is greater than that against which one can find no helper
except Allah." There are other sayings similar to these reported on his
authority concerning warning against oppression and forbidding all its
kinds. Likewise, in his valuable, numerous lectures, he, peace be on
him, explained to his companions the dangerous harms resulting from
oppression. This indicates that he took great care of establishing
security and peace among the people.

### Cooperation

Imam al-Sadiq urged his companions to cooperate firmly with each other,
for this bring about to them love and friendship. In this respect
Saffwan al-Jammal has narrated, saying: "I was with Abu 'Abd Allah
(al-Sadiq) when a Mecca man called Maymun visited him and complained to
him of (his inability) to rent (a house). He turned to me and said:
'Rise and help your brother.' I rose with him and Allah made easy his
rent; I returned to my session and Abu 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq) asked me:
'What have you done in respect with your brother's need?' 'Allah has
granted it to him, may my father and mother be your ransom,' I replied.
'Your help to your Muslim brother is more loveable to me than your
circumambulating the Kaaba for one week,' he said.'"

He, peace be on him, said to Jameel b. Darrajj: "Among the good deeds is
kindness to brothers and striving for accomplishing their needs, for
such deeds silence Satan,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Kafi, Chapter on Oppression.

remove (the doer) far away from the fires, and make (him) enter the
gardens. Jameel, tell your noble companions about this tradition."

"May I be your ransom, who are my noble companions," asked Jameel

"Those who are kind to brothers in difficulty and ease," replied the
Imam.[1]

### His Words about Allah

Surely to know Allah is the most important of all the Islamic duties.
The Imam urged his companions to cling to it. He discovered to them its
great results, saying: "If the people knew the virtue of having
knowledge of Allah, may He be magnified and exalted, they would not
stretch out their eyes to the pleasures Allah gives to the enemies such
as the splendor and luxury of the life in this world, their life in this
world be less than that on which they tread, would take pleasure in
having knowledge of Allah, may He be magnified and exalted, would enjoy
it with the enjoyment of him who is in the gardens along with the
friends of Allah. Surely to have knowledge of Allah, may He be magnified
and exalted, is comfort against any loneliness, a companion against any
isolation, light against any darkness, strength against any weakness,
and a cure against any malady."

Then he, peace be on him, explained to his companions the sufferings and
terrible chastisement the friends of Allah, the Exalted, met from His
enemies, saying: "A people before you were killed, burnt, sawed. They
felt that the earth was narrow thought it was wide; nevertheless,
nothing turned them away from their beliefs...And they did not take
vengeance on them for aught except that they believed in Allah, the
Mighty, the Praised (85:8). Therefore, ask (Allah to give you) degrees
like theirs; be patient toward the misfortunes of your time and you will
reach their efforts."[2]

This wonderful description has encompassed the true nature of the
Allah-fearing and included their real life, their struggle, and their
firm belief in Allah.

### The Qualities of the Believers

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, explained to his companions and the
students of his school the qualities of the believers and of
Allah-fearing, that they might follow them and their model. He has said:
"The believer has strength in religion, determination with mildness,
faith with certainty, devotion with knowledge, activity through
guidance, piety along with straightness, knowledge along with clemency,
politeness along with gentleness, generosity in a right way, moderation
during riches, patience during poverty, pardon in time of ability,
obedience to Allah through giving advice, an expiration during an
appetite, piety through a desire, sticking to struggle, prayer along
with devotion (to Allah), steadfastness

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Saduq, al-Khisal. [2] Al-Kafi, al-Rouda.

during a hardship. He is venerable during adversities, grateful during
ease. He does not backbite nor does he show haughtiness, nor does he cut
off womb relatives. He is neither feeble nor rude nor rough. His eye
does not precede him, nor does his stomach disgrace him, nor does his
private part overcome him. He does not envy the people. He does not
revile nor is he reviled nor does he steal. He helps the oppressed and
has mercy on the miserable. He is tired of himself while the people find
themselves in comfortable position with regard to him. He does not
beseech the exaltedness in the world nor is he impatient toward the
abasement therein. The people are with their own concern while he is
busy with his own concern. None finds a defect in his decision,
feebleness in his opinion, waste in his religion. He guides him who
seeks advice from him, helps him who helps him, withdraws from obscene
language and ignorance."[1]

He, peace be on him, has described the believer saying: "The believer is
not believing unless he has perfect reason. He has no perfect reason
unless he has ten qualities: good from him is hoped: Evil from him is
safe. He regards his own too much good as little and regards the little
good of other than him as much. He regards his own little evil as much
and regards too much evil of other than him as little. He is not fed up
when he is asked to accomplish needs nor is he bored with seeking
knowledge throughout his lifetime. Humbleness is more loveable to him
than exaltedness and poverty is more loveable to him than riches; he is
satisfied with a simple food in this world. When he meets some one, he
says: 'He is better and more pious than me.' When he meets someone who
is better than him, he shows humbleness toward him in order to follow
him. When he meets him who is more wicked and lower than him, he says:
'Perhaps, the evil of this is manifest and his good is hidden.' When he
does that, he becomes high and a master over the people of his time."[2]

### Piety

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, advised his companions to refrain from
the things prohibited by Allah. Among his statements to them are the
following: "Cling to piety, for that which is with Allah is not attained
except through piety." [3]

He, peace be on him, has said: "Cleave to fear of Allah, piety,
diligence, truthful talk, returning the things deposited, good moral
traits, good-neighborhood. Be summoners to yourselves without your
tongues; be ornaments and not be disgrace."[4]

We are content with this small group of his high teachings with which he
has

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Kafi, Usool, vol. 2, p. 209. [2] Al-Shaykh al-Tusi, al-Majalis.
[3] Al-Kafi, Usool, vol. 2, p 76. [4] Ibid.

supplied the Islamic society and through which he has decided the rules
of manners and the rules of conduct.

### In the Time of Imam Musa

Imam Musa, peace be on him, made good progress during his lifetime at
the great school of his father. He was the most prominent of all the
brilliant scholars; likewise, he shared his father in giving scientific
lectures, supported him in strengthening the school and making it
progressive in the cultural fields. When his father passed away, he
undertook the affairs of this great school and spread virtues. For this
reason the scholars and the narrators surrounded him. They did not
separate themselves from him nor did they leave him. They recorded his
traditions, his researches, and his religious verdicts; for example,
Sayyid b. Tawus[1] narrated that the companions of the Imam and his
special associates attended his sessions and there were in their sleeves
thin ebony boards and pencils. When he said a word or gave a religious
edict on a certain event, they hurried to write it down. These scholars
have narrated on his authority all kinds of science; thanks to his and
his father's efforts, the scientific movement included all the Islamic
and Arab cities and its scientific inheritance has been transmitted by
generations one by one.[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Sayyid b. Tawus is a great Sayyid, knowledgeable, worshipper. His
name is Rady al-Deen Abu al-Qasim 'Ali b. Sa'd al-Deen b. Ibrahim
al-Husayni. He lived in al-Hilla. He was given the nickname of al-Tawus
due to the beauty of his face and the coarseness of his legs. He was
among the great and notable Sayyids. He was their head. He had many
books indicating his abundant knowledge. His good qualities and his
knowledge have been mentioned by al-Sayyid Muhammed Baqir al-Khunsari in
his book Roudat al-Jinan, vol. 3, pp. 43-47. In the book al-Kuna wa
al-Alqab, vol. 1, p. 338, it has been mentioned: "Sayyid Ibn Tawus
undertook the affairs of the union of the Talibiyyin. He sat in a green
dome and the people visited him. He died on Monday, Dhi al-Qi'da 5th, in
the year 664. [2] Al-Anwar al-Behiyya, p. 19.
