Chapter Vi
==========

Some of His Intellectual Legacy
-------------------------------

As for the Imam's intellectual legacy with which he supplied his
companions and the students of his school, it is part of the most
wonderful, intellectual wealth the Imams of the Muslims left behind them
and of the most precious, scientific heritage the Muslim scholars left
behind them. That is because it contains many sciences such as the
science of wisdom, theology, the science of Islamic jurisprudence, of
exegesis, of hadith, and other sciences. Besides it includes his wise
sayings, his valuable opinions that deal with the rules of conduct,
ethics, and the rules of friendship. It is full of all excellent kinds
of eloquence. The following is a brief account of it:

### His Treatise on Reason

Reason is the creative force Allah has given to man, with which He has
ennobled him, by which He has distinguished him from the rest of beings,
and through which He has made him His vicegerent on earth. Through his
reason and thinking, man is able to employ beings, to discover their
secrets, to uncover their mysteries, to invade space, to reach planets,
and to discover what is on their surfaces. Thank to his reason, man has
reached all these things and he will reach things deeper and more
inclusive than they.

By virtue of his reason, his reflection, and his knowledge, man has
reached these astonishing discoveries. Imam Musa has talked about the
effects of reason and given some Qur'anic verses as proofs of its
excellence; that was during his gold talk with which he supplied his
student Hisham b. al-Hakam. This tradition is regarded as part of the
intellectual wealth has been reported from the Imam. Sadr
al-Mute'liheen, al-Akhwend Mulla Sadra, has philosophically explained
the tradition.[1] He has said: "This tradition contains the explanation
of the reality of reason in the mentioned meaning. I mean the fourth
rank of the four reasons mentioned in psychology. It contains most
attributes characteristics, and praise of reason. It contains great
Qur'anic sciences and noble Devin purposes the like of which is not
available in the knowers' many books and is not known in the results of
the thoughtful scholars with authentic ideas except those one of the
pure Imams reported or narrated on their authority or on the authority
of one of the general populace ('amma) on the authority of the chosen
Prophet, may Allah bless him and

his family. The tradition includes some titles on sciences such as
theology, cosmology, astronomy, topology, psychology, setting right
morals, purifying souls from vices, civil policies, sermons,
commandments, asceticism, dispraising the world, the hereafter, the
return to Allah, dispraising the unbelievers, the ignorant, their evil
final result, the change of their growth into that of beasts, their
being deaf, dumb, and blind, for they do not understand, and other
knowledge and sciences...."

We will present the text of the tradition of the Imam, peace be on him,
along with a brief explanation some of which we have quoted from what
the philosopher of Islam, Shaykh Mullah Sadra, has mentioned in respect
with his explanation to this tradition. Imam Musa, peace be on him, has
said:

"O Hisham, surely Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has given good news to
the men of reason and understanding in His Book, saying: Therefore give
good news to My servants, those who listen to the word, then they follow
the best of it; those are they whom Allah has guided, and those it is
who are the men of understanding."[1]

The Imam, peace be on him, has given this verse as a proof of giving
precedence to the men of the sound intellects over other than them, for
Allah has given good news to them of guidance and success. The verse the
Imam has quoted has a group of the scientific advantages; we will
mention two of them:

### 1. Deduction is obligatory

When man faces some correct and incorrect affairs, when his guidance
depends of the correct and his misguidance depends on the incorrect,
then it is incumbent on him to distinguish between them, that he may
know the correct from among them and he follow it, and that he may know
the corrupt from among them and he keeps far from it. It is natural that
such a distinction do not happen except through establishing proof and
argument. This indicates that thinking and deduction in such an affair
is obligatory.

### 2. Guidance is Occurrence

The verse demonstrates that guidance is new and incidental; it is
well-known that every incidental must have a founder also it must have
and acceptor. As for him who finds guidance, He is Allah, the Most High;
for this reason He has ascribed it to Himself, saying: Those are they
whom Allah has guided. As for those who accept it, they are the men of
straight intellects, and to this meaning He, the Exalted, has referred
in His words: and those it is who are the men of understanding. It is
well-known that man accepts guidance through his reason and not through
his body and limbs. If he had incomplete reason, it is impossible for
him to acquire knowledge and understanding. Shaykh Mulla Sadr al-Deen,
may Allah have mercy on him, has established a proof of the incidence of
guidance and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Shaykh Mullah Sadra's name is Muhammed b. Ibrahim al-Shirazi. He was
wise, famous and had knowledge of Allah. He was the most knowledgeable
of the people of his time in wisdom. The author of the book al-Salafa
has said: "He (Mullah Sadra) mastered all arts of wisdom." Mullah Sadra
has the four books. He explained the book Usool al-Kafi and some
Qur'anic verses. He died in Basrah in the year 1050 A. H. This has been
mentioned in the book al-Kuna wa al-Alqab.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, Surat al-Zumer, verses 17-18.

of its Doer, Who is Allah, the Exalted. He has elaborated on that.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, surely Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, completed for men the proofs through reason, and
helped the prophets with the explanation, and guided them to His
Lordship through demonstrations, when He has said: And your Lord is one
God! There is no god but He; He is the Beneficent, the Merciful. Most
surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the alternation
of the night and the day, and the ships that run in the sea with that
which profits men, and the water that Allah sends down from the cloud,
then gives life with it to the earth after its death and spreads in it
all (kinds of) animals, and the changing of the winds and the clouds
made subservient between the haven and the earth, there are signs for a
people who understand."[1]

In his tradition, the Imam has mentioned that Allah completed the souls
of His prophets through virtuous reason, that they might be proofs over
His servants and guides for them to the way of good and salvation. If
Allah had not given them sound reason, they would not have been
appropriate for leading and guiding the nations, for the incomplete one
cannot complete other than him.

Indeed Allah helped his prophets through explaining the truth and the
truthful verses. He guided them to His Lordship and showed them the way
to know Him and to profess His Unity through decisive proofs bearing
witness to His Existence and indicating His Oneness; the verses He has
given as proofs are from among the traces of his creation. It is
well-known, as the logicians say, that the effect indicates the cause;
the creature indicates the Creator. The verse the Imam's tradition has
included contains a group of the great creatures that can be given as
evidence for the Existence of Allah, the Most High, they are as follows:

### 1. The Creation of the Heaven and the Earth

Surely among the great, illustrious signs of Allah is His creating the
heavens He has decorated with the stars that swim in the space and move
in their orbits and are far from each other according to the laws of
gravity. They move and attract each other according to the Command of
Allah, the Most High. The size of a star is tens of thousands as much as
the size of the earth; some stars are many millions larger than the
earth; they move in their orbits and curves and do not collide with each
other; they indicate the Existence of Allah, may His power be great. His
Eminence, the Imam, late Shaykh Muhammed 'Abda has said: "These heavenly
bodies are composed of constellations. Each constellation has a firm,
perfect system; their systems do not invalid each other, for they all
have a general system that indicates that it has issued from One God,
Who has no associate in His creation, His arrangement, His wisdom, and
His regulation. The nearest constellation to us is that which they call
the solar system they ascribe to our sun that gives light to our earth
and it is the reason for giving life to plants and animals. The
satellites of the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surat al-Baqara, verses 163-164.

sun are different in sizes and dimensions; each of them has become
stable in its orbits; the ratio among them has been kept by a Divine
ratio. Were it not for this system, these stars moving in their orbits
would go in different directions and collided with each other, and the
worlds would be perished out of that. So this system is a sign of the
Divine mercy as well as it is a sign of Allah's Oneness...."[1]

Surely the modern science has discovered many stars, to the extent that
if we counted 1500 stars at a minute, it would take us 700 hundred years
to count them. As for the earth in comparison with them, it is less than
a dot over a letter in a library containing a half million books of
medium size.[2]

Without doubt, the stars have not come into existence by chance. Are
they the regulator and creator of these worlds? How are these organized,
complicated operations are explained with an explanation depends on
chance and random? "How can we explain this regularity in the phenomena
of the cosmos, the causal relationships, integration, purpose, harmony,
and balance that in harmony with all the phenomena, and their effects
pass from an age to another? How does this cosmos function without the
regulating Creator, Who has created and originated it, and regulated the
rest of its affairs?"

John William Kotsu has said: "Surely this world where we live is so
perfect and complicated that it is impossible for it to arise from the
pure chance. It is full of wonderful things and complicated affairs that
are in need of a regulator and which cannot be ascribed to a blind fate.
Without doubt the sciences have helped us increase, understand, and
estimate the phenomena of this cosmos; they, thereby, have increased our
knowledge of Allah and our faith in His Existence."[3]

### 2. The Earth

Among the wonderful signs of Allah is His creating this planet where we
live; He, the Most High, has made it turn on its axis one time every 24
hours. The earth moves at a speed of 1000 miles per hour. If this planet
turned on its axis at the speed of 100 miles per hour, then night and
day would be ten times as many as they are now, the sun would burn all
plants in summer; in cold nights the plants and animals on it would
become frozen. Likewise if the sun came close to the earth more than it
is now, the rays would be so much that the life on it would be
impossible. Similarly if the sun became far from the earth more than it
is now, the vice versa would happen, the rays wold be few, the severity
of cold would be too much that the life on it would be impossible. If
the earth was as small as the moon or its diameter was quarter of its
present diameter, it would fall short of keeping atmosphere and water
that encompasses it; the heat would be too much that it brought about
death. If its diameter was twice as much as its present one, then its

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tafseer al-Manar, vol. 2, p. 60. [2] Allah Yatajalla fi 'Asr
al-'Ilm, p. 48. [3] Ibid., p. 48.

gravity to bodies would be twice as much as it is now. Accordingly the
height of the atmosphere would decrease and the atmospheric pressure
would increase, and it would have a strong effect on life. For the
distance of the cold regions would be very wide, and the distance of the
residential areas would quickly decrease. Accordingly human societies
would separately live or they would live in distant regions; therefore
isolation among them would increase; travels and communications would be
impossible; rather it would be a kind of imagination.[1]

If the earth was as big as the sun, then its gravity to the bodies on it
would be 150 folds, and accordingly the height of the atmosphere would
decrease; the weight of an animal would be 150 folds and mental life
would be impossible in general.[2]

Allah has singled out the earth with another quality. He has made for it
a thick atmosphere. The atmosphere is estimated at 800 k.m. It is
composed of elements necessary for life. It prevents deadly meteors from
reaching the earth and lets heat moderately reach it, that plants and
animals may live on its surface; besides it plays an effective role in
carrying waters and water vapor from the oceans to the continents. Were
it not for it, the continents would be arid lands. As some planets do
not have such an atmosphere, life did not appear on them. For example,
Mars has such an atmosphere, but it is very thin and inappropriate for
life, for it is void of oxygen. Venus has an atmosphere, but it contains
carbon dioxide and this makes it inappropriate for life; similarly the
moon has an atmosphere, but it is thin and void of elements necessary
for life such as oxygen.[3]

Yet another distinction Allah has given to the earth. He has made it
roan, that it may be illuminatable and lightable. He has made it middle
in solidity, that walking on it may be possible and that it may accept
plants and plowing; moreover, there are signs and wonders in the waters,
the rivers, and the mountains on it, and the minerals in it.

His Eminence late Imam Kashif al-Ghitaa' has said: "Indeed among the
signs by which we pass every time and in all conditions is the earth
where we live, from which we live and with which we live, from which is
our beginning, and to which is our return. From it We created you and
into it We shall send you back. We still walk on the earth. We plow and
plant it. We lead a life of ease and comfort on it. We employ it in all
the affairs of life. The earth still copiously give us its boons and its
blessings, while we are inattentive and heedless and turn away from the
signs on it. We are unmindful of the great power, illustrious creation,
the proofs of greatness and power on it. The earth contains uncounted
elements and endless characteristics. You sow into it the grains of
wheat, and they give you many folds of its kind. You sow into it broad
beans, lentils, and other seeds different in taste and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Takamul fi al-Islam, vol. 4, p. 66. [2] Allah Yatajalla fi 'Asr
al-'Ilm, pp. 10-11. [3] Al-Takamul fi al-Islam, vol. 6, p.128.

characteristics, and they return them to you doubled substitutes. You
sow in the same earth the stone of a date-palm, the seeds of grapevine,
fig and apple cuttings and other kinds of fruit, and they produce
delicious fruit different in tastes and qualities."

The Shaykh, may Allah have mercy on him, has said: "The earth is the
mother of three born things: inanimate beings, plants, and animals; it
takes care of them with the three supporters: water, air, and the sun.
Therefore, it is the life and death; therein is illness, and from it
comes the medicine. The stars of the heaven may be counted. As for the
stars of the earth, they cannot be counted."

Yes, neither the stars of the earth, nor its minerals, nor its elements
can be counted. The Qur'an and the hadith always magnify the affair of
the earth and refer to it directly or indirectly: Have We not made the
earth to draw together to itself, the living and the dead. And the
earth, He expended it after that. He brought forth from it its water and
its pasturage. Then let man look to his food, that We pour down the
water, pouring down (it) down in abundance, then We cleave the earth,
cleaving it asunder, then We cause to grow therein the grain, and grapes
and clover, and the olive and the palm, and thick gardens, and fruits
and herbage.[1]

Surely the keen thoughts and the great intellects that have employed all
the means of modern science have not reached analyzing all the elements
of the earth and bringing forth all its treasures, while it is among the
creatures of Allah, rather it is the simplest of them all. Therefore
glory belongs to Him! How great His power and creation are!

### 3. The Difference between the Night and the Day

Another example of the signs of Allah, the Most High, is the difference
between night and day. The scholars of exegesis have mentioned two
meanings of the alternation. The first meaning of the difference is that
it is creation (ifti'aal) taken from khalqahu, yakhliqahu (He created
it; He creates it); when the first goes and the second comes, so the
meaning of the difference between the night and the day is their
alternation in going and coming. The second meaning is that they are
different in length and shortness, light and dark, increase and
decrease. As they differ in time, they also differ in place. For
example, a certain hour that is morning in a certain place of the earth
is noon in another place, afternoon in a third place, evening in a
fourth place, etc. That is due to the sphericity of the earth. This
difference arises from the solar system that indicates the Unity and
Existence of Allah. There are uncounted interests result from this
difference such as regulating the affairs of mankind of which are
seeking earning and livelihood during the day, seeking rest and sleep
during the night[2]. Yet there are other vital interests the scholars
have mentioned concerning the secret of this difference that shows the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Ard wa al-Turba al-Husayniya, pp. 10-13. [2] Tafseer al-Razi,
vol. 2, pp. 65-66.

Existence of Allah, the Most High, His beautiful creation, and His great
power.

### 4. The Running of Ships

Another example of His signs is the running of ships on water. Were it
not for that water is middle in thinness and lightness, ships were
unable to run on it; likewise, were it not for the winds that help them
run in different directions according to the purposes of men, they would
be not useful. Allah has made the winds middle in calmness, for if they
were stormy, ships would be destroyed, as well as the materials of ships
such as wood and iron are among the creation and finding of Allah, the
Exalted, though men make them.[1] All these affairs we have mentioned
are among Allah's deeds and signs.

### 5. The Coming down of Rain from Clouds

Another example of the signs of Allah, the Most High, is His sending
down rain from clouds; rain is among His wonderful creatures and His
illustrious power. He has created it composed of oxygen and hydrogen;
its elements differ from each other. He has made rain a reason for
giving life to growing bodies. He has said: And We have made of water
everything living. He has also made it a reason for the life, daily
bread, and livelihood of man; and in the haven is your sustenance and
you are not promised of it.

The Scared Verse has declared that rain gives life to the earth, for it
has the force of the animal and the plant life, though the force is far
in comparison with the animal force. So when rain comes down to the
earth, grass and other plants on which man and animals live appear. Or
the coming down of rain gives rise to the appearance of plants, flowers,
and basil that clothes the earth in a beautiful garment that pleases and
delights those who look at it. This is the meaning of giving life to the
earth; all these things are sings and proofs of the Existence of the
Maker and His illustrious power.

If man carefully considers plants and corps and the wonders wherein, he
will believe in Allah's power, His beautiful making and designing, for
plants come forth as equal as the needs of mankind in certain times. The
plants that grow in spring are not available in autumn; those that grow
in summer are not available in winter. Besides trees and fruits are
different in color, taste, and scent though they are given the same
water and come forth from one land; if man carefully considers all these
things, he will believe in His Lord, and his heart will not deviate from
the way of faith.

### 6. The Spreading of Animals on the Earth

Among Allah's great signs is the spreading of animals on the earth
different in kind, category, appearance, honor, meanness, manners,
natures, and life. Man belongs to animals, but he is the most honorable
and highest of them. He is the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 68.

vicegerent of Allah on His earth, for he is an example to all that which
is in the earth and the heaven. That is because he is aware, perceptive,
and acquainted with many total and partial facts and information, for he
himself is a world; rather he is a larger than a world as Imam 'Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, says:

"Do you thing that you are a small body while the larger world is hidden
in you?"

According to his structure, man is among Allah's great signs; he has
small, uncounted systems of which is the eye that has telescopic and
microscopic systems, 130 million light receivers that are the tips of
the optic nerves. The lid with lashes moves involuntary, protects the
eye by day and night, and keeps it from dust and the sun. The eye has a
liquid called tears that is the strongest purifier and sterilizer; it
has other systems that are strong proofs of the Existence of Allah. Man
has the ear that is the most astonishing of man's systems. For it has
the ladyrinth, concerning which the scientist Korthy has said: "The
ladyrinth contains the Eustachian Tubes that are between its two spiral,
and semicircular tubes; the spiral part has 4000 small bows connected to
the auditory nerve in the head."

How long are these bows?

What size are they?

How have they been made?

They are so accurate that they perplex intellects, so glory belongs to
Allah, the Maker, the Former!

Man has a nose; the nose is among Allah's great signs. The center of
this sense is a limited area of the mucous membrane that covers the
inside of the nose. It is called the area of smell; it is void of
lashes; it has some thin, long olfactory cells that covey effects to the
brain; that is in a part of the nose and it is the main entrance of the
respiratory system on which man's life depends.

Man has a skeleton composed of 206 bones connected to each other through
the joints moved by the muscles. These bones are regarded as a factory
in the body, for they form red and white blood cells that are the
foundation of life. About 180,000,000 of these cells die every one
minute, for they defend the body against the microbes entering it. As
well as the bones are regarded as a store for keeping the additional
food whether that is in the bones themselves such as fatty and
albuminous materials or on the bones themselves such as lime materials.

The bones are astonishing, for they are appropriate to the purpose for
which they have been created. For example, the bones of the skull that
protect the brain are solider than other than them, and are thicker than
them, for they protect small, thin thissuses.

Yet there are other astonishing systems such as the nervous system, the
reproductive system, the lymph system, and the muscular system.[1] They
clearly indicate Allah, the Former, the Creator, for they cannot be
formed by chance, for the talk about chance has become a fable in which
none believes even those who have little thinking and feeling.

### 7. The Changing of the Winds

Another example of the signs of Allah is His changing the wind, for it
blows in south and north, comes and goes; this is how it is changed.[2]

The wind is the movement of the air available in the low layers of the
atmosphere when it blows parallel to the surface of the earth; the wind
blows at different speeds; it sometimes blows at a speed of one hundred
km per hour, and it is called storm. When it is over this speed, it is
called hurricane. Perhaps, it blows at a speed of two hundred km per
hour; the wind is the important factor for conveying and distributing
water vapor. Likewise, it is the most important means for pollinating
plants; it has been established that a great part of plants is not
pollinated except through the wind. Allah, the Most High, has said: And
We send the wind fertilizing, then send down water from the cloud so We
give it to you to drink of, nor is it you who store it up.[3]

### 8. Clouds made subservient

Among the signs of Allah, the Exalted, is His making clouds subservient;
He makes them subservient in certain times that He may give life to
mankind and earth. If clouds continue for a long time, they will be
harmful, for they veil the rays of the sun and spoil all compound things
that depend on dryness. When they stop, drought happens, so man and
animals perish. They come in certain times and seasons for general
interests.

Clouds are formed due to the condensation of water vapor in the air. The
height of clouds is different according to their kinds; some of them are
close to the surface of the earth such as fog; some of them are about 12
km high such as the thin cirrostratus.

When the speed of the ascending wind is more than 30 km per hour, the
drops of the formed rain do not come down, for the wind resist them.
When the drops scatter, they are charged with positive electricity and
are isolated from negative electricity carried by the wind. After a
short time, they are fully charged with electricity. When the two
charges approach each other by means of the wind, the electric discharge
takes place through a spark passes between them. The lightning

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Allah wa al-'Ilm al-Hadith. Al-Saduq, Amali. Allah Yatajalla fi 'Asr
al-'Ilm. Al-'Ilm yad'u ila al-Iman. [2] Al-Tabari, Tafseer, vol. 2, p.
65. [3] Qur'an, Surat al-Hajer, verses 22.

lasts for a short time and is a broken line. Then the thunder is heard;
it is the sound waves caused by the air. Then clouds spread through the
sky and rain comes down from it, so the earth takes the water Allah
decrees for it.

Therefore, think about how the wind generates two kinds of electricity
in clouds and makes rain come down.[1] This happens through the
arrangement of Allah, the Great, the Omniscient.

In his Tafseer, al-Tantawi has talked about clouds and their advantages,
saying: "Do you wonder why clouds do not rise more than 16,000 cubits in
the air? The nearest cloud is that which touches the surface of the
earth and such a cloud is rare in some countries. If clouds touch the
surface of the earth, they will harm animals, plants, and men's
possessions. If they were very high in the sky and could not be seen,
rain and snow would suddenly come down while men were heedless of them
and did not guard against them, so the harm would be inclusive."[2]

These are some proofs in the verse on the Existence of Allah, the Most
High, Who is the Origin of the worlds. Imam Musa has given these verses
as evidence for supporting the reality of faith in Allah, and for
freeing reason from the fables of polytheism.

The following is another part of the speech of Imam Musa, peace be on
him, who has said: "O Hisham, surely Allah has given that as evidence
for knowledge of Him that they have a Regulator. So He has said: And He
has made subservient for you the night and the day and the sun and the
moon, and the starts are made subservient by His commandment; most
surely there are signs in this for a people who ponder.[3] And He has
said: He it is Who created you from dust, then from a small life-germ,
then from a clot, then He brings you forth as a child, then that you may
attain your maturity, then that you may be old-and of you there are some
who are caused to die before-and that you may reach an appointed term,
and that you may understand.[4] And He has said: And (in) the variation
of the night and the day, and (in) what Allah sends down of sustenance
from the cloud, then gives life thereby to the earth after its death,
and (in) the changing of the winds, (and the clouds made subservient
between the heaven and the earth) there are signs for a people who
understand.[5] And He has said: He gives life to the earth after its
death; indeed, We have made the communications clear to you that you may
understand.[6] And He has said: And gardens of grape and corn and palm
trees having one root

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Allah wa al-'Ilm al-Hadith, pp. 174-175. [2] Tafseer al-Jawahir,
vol. 1, p. 155. [3] Qur'an, Surat al-Nahl, verse 12. [4] Surat
al-Mu'min, verse 67. [5] He has derived this from the meaning of the
verse 4, Surat al-Jathiya. [6] Qur'an, Surat al-Hadeed, verse 17.

and (others) having distinct root-they are watered with one water, and
We make some of them excel others in fruit; most surely there are signs
for a people who understand.[1] And He has said: And one of His signs is
that He shows you the lightning for fear and for hope, and sends down
water from the clouds, then gives life therewith to the earth after its
death; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
understand.[2] And He has said: Say: Come I will recite to you what your
Lord has forbidden to you-(remember) that you do not associate anything
with Him and show kindness to your parents, and do not slay your
children for (fear of) poverty-We provide for you and for them-and do
not draw nigh to indecencies, those of them which are apparent and those
which are concealed, and do not kill the soul which Allah has forbidden
except for the requirements of justice; this He has enjoined you with
that you may understand.[3] And He has said: Have you among those whom
your right hands possess partners in what We have given you for
sustenance, so that with respect to it you are alike; you fear them as
you fear each other? Thus do We make the communications distinct for a
people who understand."[4]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has given these verses as proofs of the
Existence and Oneness of Allah, the Most High. We have elaborated the
speech on some of them. The Imam, peace be on him, has repeated them to
draw attention to that the proofs are reliable. If a wise man carefully
considers them, he will believe in that and have no doubt about that.
For this reason Allah, the Exalted, has repeated them in His wise Book.
Then Imam Musa, peace be on him, has mentioned some ruinous sins and
crimes the Qur'an has made forbidden and that are as follows:

1. Polytheism.

2. Disobeying the parents.

3. Slaying children for fear of poverty.

4 Apparent and concealed indecencies.

5. Killing the respected soul.

Were it not for that the book would be unduly long, we would elaborate
on explaining the rest of the verses the Imam has quoted in his speech.
Now, we will move to another part of his speech. He, peace be on him,
has said: "O Hisham, then He (Allah) has preached to the men of reason
and made them desire for the hereafter, saying: And this world's life is
naught but a play and idle sport, and certainly the abode of the
hereafter is better for those who guard (against) evil; do

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surat al-Ra'd, verse 4. [2] Ibid, Surat al-Rum, verse 24. [3] Surat
al-An'am, verse 151. [4] Surat al-Rum, verse 28.

you not then understand?"[1]

Imam Musa has given this verse as evidence for that Allah, the Most
High, makes His wise servants desire for the abode of everlastingness
and ease, and that He has dispraised this world's life for it is
confined to amusement and play.

Accordingly, the wise should renounce the life in this world, avoid the
evil and the forbidden wherein, and perform good deeds for the
everlasting abode has been prepared for the Allah-fearing and the
righteous. Now, we will go to another part of his speech; he, peace be
on him, has said: "O Hisham, then He has frightened those who do not
understand His punishment, saying: Then We destroyed the others. And
most surely you pass by them in the morning, and at night; do you not
then understand?[2] And He has said: Surely We will cause to come down
upon the people of this town a punishment from heaven, because they
transgressed. And certainly We have left a clear sign for a people who
understand."[3]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has quoted these sacred verses as proofs of
His, the Exalted, destroying those who did not understand from among the
bygone communities. The verses were revealed concerning the people of
Loot when they denied Allah and disbelieved in his communications. So
He, the Most High, caused His punishment to come down upon them and
placed their homeland in a bad-smelling, ugly lacke and placed it by a
permanent road by which passers-by passed in the morning and at night.
For this reason He, the Exalted, has said: And most surely you pass by
them in the morning, and at night.[4] He, the Most High, made them a
lesson and an admonition to those who understand. He warned them against
opposing and disobeying the Apostles and the righteous, for the final
result of opposition and disobedience is destruction and ruin.[5]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, surely reason is with
knowledge. Allah, the Exalted, has said: And (as for) these examples, We
set them forth for men, and none understands them but the learned."[6]

He, peace be on him, has cited this sacred verse as evidence for that
reason accompanies knowledge, for all kinds of reason do not leave
knowledge, nor do they separate themselves from it. Concerning the
reason for the revelation of this verse, the explainers of the Qur'an
have said: "Why do Allah set forth examples of beasts and insects such
misquotes, flies, and spiders while the examples must be set forth of
something important?" This thinking is poor, for comparison is eloquent

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surat al-Rum, verse 32. [2] Surat al-Saffat, verses 136, 137, 138.
[3] Surat al-'Anqabut, verses 33-34. [4] Ibn Kuthayr, Tafseer, vol. 4,
p. 20. [5] Rooh al-Ma'ani, vol. 7, p. 313. [6] Qur'an, Surat
al-'Anqabut, verse, 43.

when it has a strong effect on soul. For example, when a wise man says
to someone who backbites others: "You backbite them as if that you ate
the flesh of a dead animal!" This statement of his is more effective in
deterring him than his saying: "Most surely backbiting is forbidden or
it brings about admonition and enmity among people."

In His statement and none understands them but the learned, Allah, the
Most High, has referred to that none can understand the reality of
things and distinguish between the correct and incorrect from among them
except those who have science and knowledge; none understands that
except the learned.[1] Now, will move to another part of the speech of
Imam Musa.

He, peace be on, him has said: "Then He (Allah) has dispraised those who
do not understand, saying: And when it is said to them: Follow what
Allah has revealed, they say: Nay! We follow what we found our fathers
upon. What! and though their fathers had no sense at all, nor do they
follow the right way.[2] And He has said: And the parable of those who
disbelieve is as the parable of one who calls out to that which hears no
more than a call and a cry; deaf, dumb (and) blind, so they do not
understand.[3] And He has said: And there are those of them who hear
you, but can you make the deaf to hear though they will not
understand?[4] And He has said: Or do you think that most of them do
hear or understand? They are nothing but as cattle; nay, they are
straying farther off the path.[5] And he has said: They will not fight
against you in a body save in fortified towns or from behind walls;
their fighting between them is severe; you may think them as one body,
and their hearts are disunited; that is because they are a people who
have no sense.[6] And He has said: What! do you enjoin men to be good
and neglect your own souls while you read the Book; have you then no
sense?"[7]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has quoted the sacred verses as proofs of
dispraising those who have no sense. We will explain some of their
meanings that the Imam's quotation may be clear:

The first verse has dispraised those who follow their ancestors and
their Shaykhs in the religious affairs without sense and evidence, for
they are urged to follow them by ignorance, stupidity, and fanaticism.
The verse was revealed concerning the Jews when Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, summoned them

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Razi, Tafseer. [2] Qur'an, Surat al-Baqara, verse 169. [3] Surat
al-Baqara, verse 171. [4] Surat Yunus, verse 42. [5] Surat al-Furqan,
verse 44. [6] Surat al-Hashr, verse 14. [7] Surat al-Baqara, verse 44.

to follow Islam, but they refused it and said that they would follow
what they found their fathers upon, for they were better than them.[1]
If the Jews had sound intellects and mental maturity, they would
understand that sound reason did not confirm imitation in the beliefs
should be followed according to sound scientific proofs, for they are
the foundations of man's life and behavior. In his Tafseer, Shaykh
Muhammed 'Abda has said: "If the imitators had intellects through which
they understood, then this narration along with its style would be
sufficient to make them disgust imitation. For in every creed and
generation they turn away from that which Allah has revealed as a sign
of liking that which they find their fathers upon. This ugliness is
enough for them, for the wise do not prefer imitating any of men
whatever great his reason is and whatever good his behavior is to that
which Allah has revealed. For all the opinions of those sane are liable
to mistake. And the behavior of those rightly-guided may be errant.
Therefore, there is no trust in any religion save that which Allah has
revealed, and there is none preserved except him whom Allah preserves,
so why do the sane turn away from what Allah has revealed and follow
their fathers while they claim that they believe in the Revelation. If
they had no faith in the inspiration, then they must turn away from
imitation due to these words of Him, the Exalted: What! and though their
fathers had no sense at all, nor do they follow the right way.[2]

The second verse is related to the first one and completes it, for
Allah, the Most High, has given an account of the state of the
unbelievers who insisted on the blind imitation when they were summoned
to follow Islam; then He has given to the listeners an example of their
state lest they should be deceived by them; He has described them as
cattle or as beasts that do not understand the call of a shepherd to
them; in other words, they only hear his voice but do not understand its
meaning; similarly those who follow the religion of their fathers do not
reflect on the summons of the truth and do not understand it; therefore,
they are in the same position with respect to those who do not
understand; this is the worst criticism and dispraise to those who do
not understand.

In the third verse Allah, the Exalted, has given an account of the state
of some unbelievers who were very rude, dull, and stupid. That is
because they heard the verses and the proofs were recited to them
concerning the authenticity of the mission of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. However they were deaf in respect with that
they did not realize and understand the meaning, that it was useless to
summon them to follow this religion, for they were mentally and
psychologically very sick, to the extent that the cure and advice did
not profit them.

In the fourth verse Allah has addressed His Prophet in order not to hope
for the faith of some unbelievers because they were as cattle in respect
with that they did

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tibyan, vol. 1, p. 188, Iran edition. [2] Al-Manar, vol. 1, p.
100.

not make use of the illustrious verses they had heard. Rather they were
worse than cattle, for the cattle obey their owner who takes care of
them, find their pastures and drinking places, and return to their
folds. As for the unbelievers, they do not obey their Lord and Creator
and Provider nor do they thank Him for His favors and boons. As well as
animals do not paralyze any of their forces deposited in them. Rather
they spend each power on that for which it has been created. As for the
unbelievers, they have paralyzed their mental forces, so they lose the
original nature in which men have been made, and that is the knowledge
of Allah and faith in him, so they are worse than beasts.

The fifth verse has dispraised the unbelievers, for they have three
dispraised qualities:

1.They are cowardly during war.

2. Their fighting between them is sever.

3. Their hearts are disunited.

Allah, the Most High, has given a reason for these three qualities, and
the reason is that they are not sane, for the sane cannot be cowardly.
No fighting takes place between him and other than him, for this arises
from ignorance and stupidity by which the believers are not
distinguished. To this meaning Imam Musa, peace be on him, has referred
in his statement: "The believers are as one hand against those other
than them." That is because they have united opinions and one trend, so
disunity and division among them is impossible.

The sixth verse was revealed concerning the Jewish scholars who said to
their Muslim relatives: "Cling to that which you follow!" They did not
believe in Islam.[1] They had better believe in Islam, and then they had
to order other than them to cling to it. With this verse we will end our
talk about explaining the verses Imam Musa, peace be on him, has cited
as evidence for dispraising those men who has no sense. Now, we will
mention another part of Imam Musa's speech; he, peace be on him, has
said: "O Hisham, then Allah, has dispraised the majority, saying: And if
you ask them who created the heavens and the earth, they will certainly
say: Allah. Say:(All) praise is due to Allah; nay! most of them do not
know.[2] And He, the Exalted, has said: "And if you ask them Who is it
that sends down water from the clouds, then gives life to the earth with
it after its death, they will certainly say: Allah. Say:(All) praise is
due to Allah. Nay, most of them do not understand."[3]

The Imam, peace be on him, has quoted the three verses as proofs of
dispraising most men, for they veil from their selves the truth, go
deeply into falsehood, and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Majjma' al-Bayan, vol. 1, p. 98. [2] Qur'an, Surat Luqman, verse 25.
[3] Surat al-'Anqabut, verse 63.

drown into pleasures except those upon whom Allah have mercy and whom He
brings forth from utter darkness into light. We will briefly explain the
verses as follows:

In the first verse Allah, the Most High, has addressed His Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, but He meant someone other than him; or
the address is for him and for other than him. If the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, obeyed the majority of the people and followed
their desires and inclinations, they would lead him astray from the
religion and turned him away from the truth.

According to its meaning, the second verse indicates that the majority
of the people say what they do not know, that they do not believe in
Allah in their hearts; rather faith runs on their tongues and does not
enter their hearts.

In the third verse Allah, the Most High, has addressed His Prophet,
saying: "If you ask the polytheists: Who sends down from heaven water
that is the reason for their livelihood and their life, they would
answered him that it was Allah, the Exalted, Who created all the
possible things." Nevertheless, they associate others with Allah and
serve some of His creatures that can create nothing; therefore, we thank
Allah for that they have showed the proof and confessed that the Creator
of the origins and branches of boons is Allah, the Most High. So the
praise Allah, the Most High, has mentioned is like the praise on seeing
someone afflicted.[1] Now, we will present another part of the speech of
Imam Musa, peace be on him. He has said: "O Hisham, then He has praised
the minority. He has said: And very few of my servants are grateful.[2]
And He has said: And very few are they.[3] And He has said: And a
believing man of Firon's people who hid his faith: What! Will you slay a
man because he says: My Lord is Allah.[4] And He has said: And those who
believe, and there believed not with him but a few.[5] And He has said:
but most of them do not know. And He has said: And most of them do not
understand. And He has said: And most of them do not perceive."[6]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has quoted the scared verses as proofs of
that Allah has praised the believers who are few in number. The
traditions reported from Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, have mentioned
that. For example, Abu 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq), peace be on him, has said:
"The believing female is rarer than the believing male, and the
believing male is rarer than the red sulfur." The reason for this rarity
is that the real faith in Allah is the greatest rank in perfection man
can attain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Rooh al-Ma'ani, vol. 6, p. 423. [2] Qur'an, Surat Saba', verse, 13.
[3] Surat Saad, verse 24. [4] Surat Ghafir, verse 28. [5] Surat
al-An'am, verse 37. [6] Surat al-Ma'ida, verse 103.

Where are many hindrances that prevent man from reaching such a kind of
faith such as bad education and environment and other hindrances that
veil man from his Creator and make him go too far in committing sins.

These words of Him, the Exalted, and very few of my servants are
grateful, does not mean that man must say: praise belongs to Allah;
rather they mean that he must spend all that which Allah has bestowed
upon him on His creatures in His way. This is a great rank that does not
issue from anyone except from him who knows Allah and believes that all
boons and blessings issue from Him. Accordingly, man should perform good
deeds and purify his own soul, and then he is among the grateful to
Allah; the gratefulness in this meaning is among the highest ranks by
which none is marked except very few. Now, we will present another part
of the Imam's speech; he, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, then He
has mentioned the men of understanding with the best mentioning and
adorned them with the best ornaments. He has said: He grants wisdom to
whom He pleases, and whoever is granted wisdom, he indeed is given a
great good and none but men of understanding mind.[1] And He has said:
And those who are firmly rooted in knowledge say: We believe in it, it
is all from our Lord; and none do mind except those having
understanding.[2] And He, the Exalted, has said: Most surely in the
creation of heavens and the earth and the alternation of the night and
the day there are signs for men who understand.[3] And He, the Exalted,
has said: Is he then who knows that what has been revealed to you from
your Lord is the truth like him who is blind? Only those possessed of
understanding will mind.[4] And He, the Exalted, has said: What! he who
is obedient during hours of the night, prostrating himself and standing,
takes care of the hereafter and hops for the mercy of his Lord! Say: Are
those who know and those who do not know alike? Only the men of
understanding are mindful.[5] And He, the Exalted, has said: (It is) a
Book We have revealed to you abounding in good, that they may ponder
over its verses, and that those endowed with understanding may be
mindful.[6] And He, the Exalted, has said: And certainly We gave Musa
the guidance, and We made the children of Israel inherit the Book, a
guidance and a reminder to the men of understanding.[7] And he, the
Exalted, has said: And continue to remind, for surely the reminder
profits the believers."[8]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surat al-Baqara, verse 269. [2] Surat Aal 'Umran, verse 7. [3] Surat
Aal 'Umran, verse 190. [4] Surat al-Ra'd, verse 19. [5] Surat al-Zumer,
verse 9. [6] Surat Saad, verse 29. [7] Surat Ghafir, verse 53. [8] Surat
al-Dhariyat, verse 55.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has quoted the sacred verses as evidence for
praising the perfect wise and their surpassing over those other than
them. Allah, the Exalted, has praised them with the best attributes and
given them the highest qualities. We will present a brief explanation of
the meaning of the verses, that the quotation of the Imam may be clear.

The first verse indicates that Allah, the Most High, has given to some
of His servants wisdom that is the greatest gift and the most magnified
quality. Concerning its definition it has been said: "It is the
knowledge whose use is great and whose advantage is magnificent."

Allah, the Most High, has described those who are gifted with wisdom as
ones who are given great good; He has also mentioned that none knows the
meaning of wisdom or the Qur'an except the men of understanding.

In the second verse Allah, the Exalted, has described His servants with
perfect reason with three attributes:

1. They are firmly rooted in knowledge.

2. They have faith in Allah.

3. They acknowledge that all things are from Allah.[1]

Allah, the Most High, has decided that those who have these noble
attributes are the perfect sane, who are the men of understanding.

As for the third verse, we have previously explained and clarified it.

The fourth verse has criticized those who equalize those who have
knowledge of the precepts of the Qur'an and those other than them,
though the difference between them is as the difference between the
blind and the endowed with eyesight, between the living and the dead.

The fifth verse displays the difference between him who spends the night
in obeying Allah and other than him who spends his times in amusement
centers and pleasures, and turns away from mentioning the Name of Allah;
therefore, how are they equal?

The sixth verse says that the wise Qur'an has great secrets, magnificent
knowledge, and illustrious verses, so Allah has revealed it to His
servants, that they may ponder over it and understand it, but the verse
has shown that only those with sound reason carefully consider it.

The seven verse indicates that Allah, the Most High, made the children
of Israel inherit the Book and know it by heart; He granted that to
them, that it might be guidance and reminder for the possessors of
intellects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] It means that both clear and ambiguous verses issued from Allah.

In the eighth verse Allah has addressed His Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, to continue reminding men and not to pay attention to
the ignorant who do not understand and ponder over his summons. The
verse indicates that the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family,
had to elaborate on spreading teaching and spiritual forces, and that
none would make use of that except the believers.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, most surely Allah, the
exalted, says in His Book: Most surely there is a reminder in this for
him who has a heart-i.e. reason.[1] And He, the Most High, has said: And
certainly We gave wisdom to Luqman-i.e. understanding and reason."[2]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has mentioned that the word heart has been
mentioned in the first verse does not mean the special organ available
in man and all animals. Rather it means the reason that perceives total
and partial meanings and knows the realities of things; indeed it is
man's spiritual entity. The second verse refers to the boon Allah, the
Exalted, bestowed upon Luqman, for Allah had given him wisdom, which was
the greatest and most magnificent boon.

Then Imam Musa, peace be on him, began reciting to Hisham Luqman's wise
sayings and commandments, saying: "O Hisham, most surly Luqman has said
to his son: 'Be humble to the truth and you be the sanest of all the
people; the sane during (saying) the truth are few. O my little son,
most surely, the world is a deep sea in which many people have drowned.
Therefor, your ship therein should be fear of Allah, its loading should
be faith (in Allah), its sail should be reliance (on Him), its guardian
should be reason, its guide should be knowledge, and its helm should be
patience.'" In his speech, Imam Musa, peace be on him, has mentioned the
commandments of Luqman, who advised his son to be humble to the truth,
which is that man should see that he has no existence except through the
truth, that he or other than him has no force except through Allah.
Humbleness is the best deed; it has been narrated on the authority of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, that he has said:
"Whoever is proud, Allah lowers him; and whoever is humble for Allah,
Allah raises him."

Most surely when man gets rid of selfishness and haughtiness, Allah
increases him in honor and excellence.

Luqman has compared the world to a sea; the point of resemblance is that
the world changes, its appearance and conditions change every moment, so
the beings on it are like the waves of a see, liable to vanishing and
annihilation. Perhaps the point of resemblance is that the world is like
the sea over which men pass. Similarly is the world through which men
pass and go to the hereafter; souls wherein are like travelers; the
bodies are like ships; the ships carry them from the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an., Surat Qaaf, verse 37. [2] Surat Luqman, verse 12..

world to the Abode of Everlastingness; certainly a large number of men
drown into the world; they drown into it because they rush upon
pleasures; the world is like the sea that brings about drowning and
perishing, so there is no salvation and safety from it except through
the ship of fear of Allah and righteousness whose sail should be
reliance on Allah and dependence on Him in all affairs; likewise there
should be reason that is the guardian and captain of this ship; the
guidance of reason is knowledge; therefore, the relationship between
them is like the relationship between the light and the lamp, the sight
and the eye. In spite of these qualities, man must be patient, for he
cannot be close to his Lord except through a strong struggle against his
own soul.

Now, let us move to another part of the speech of the Imam, peace be on
him, who has said: "Most surely, there is a guide for every thing: the
guide of reason is reflection; the guide of reflection is silence. There
is a mount for every thing: the mount of reason is humbleness; enough
for your ignorance is that you mount that from which you are prohibited.

"O Hisham, Allah has sent His prophets and apostles to His servants for
nothing but to reflect on Him. Therefore the best of them in answer is
the best of them in knowledge (of Him). The most knowledgeable of them
in the affair of Allah is the best of them in reason; and the most
perfect of them in reason is the highest of them in rank in this world
and the next."

In his last statement, Imam Musa, peace be on him, has concluded that
the prophets are noble and virtuous due to their perfect intellects. The
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said to Imam 'Ali, the
Commander of the faithful: "O 'Ali, if men seek nearness to Allah
through different kinds of good deeds, then you seek nearness to Him
through reason, that you may precede them." Surely, abundant reason is
the best thing with which man endowed, for he through it reaches the
happiness in this world and wins the hereafter.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, most surely, Allah has
two proofs over men: outward proof and inward one. As for the outward
proof, it is the messengers, the prophets, and the Imams. As for the
inward proof, it is reason."

"O Hisham, most surely, the sane is he whose gratitude is not occupied
by the lawful nor does his steadfastness is overcome by the unlawful."

In the last paragraphs of his speech, Imam Musa, peace be on him, has
dealt with some states of the wise who are grateful to Allah, the Most
High, in spite of the many favors He bestow upon them, and who are
steadfast regardless of misfortunes and disasters.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, whoever empowers three
(things) over three (things) is as if that he helped (them) demolish his
reason. Whoever makes dark the light of his reflection through his drawn
out expectations, erases his original wisdom with his surplus speech,
and puts out the light of his

learning a lesson with his own pleasures as if that he helped his desire
demolish his reason. Whoever demolishes his reason spoils his religion
and his life in this world."

In his speech, the Imam has mentioned that man has two different forces;
they are reason and low desire; each of them has three qualities that
contradict the other ones. As for the qualities of reason, they are:
reflection, wisdom, and learning a lesson (from experiences); as for the
qualities of the low desire, they are: drawn out expectations, surplus
speech, and indulgence in pleasures.

As for the drawn out expectations in the world, they prevent man from
reflecting on the affairs of the hereafter and make him desirous of the
affairs of this world; this is the meaning of Imam Musa's speech: "Makes
dark the light of his reflection through his drawn out expectations."
Most surely, drawn out expectations make darkness replace the light of
reflection and veil reason from moving about in the good field.

As for the surplus speech, it erases the original wisdom from soul.

As for the indulgence in pleasures and devotion to desires, they blind
the heart, take away the light of faith, remove the light of the insight
and of learning lessons (from experiences). Therefore, whoever empowers
these three evil qualities over his own soul, certainly help them
demolish his own reason; whoever demolishes his reason, certainly spoils
his religion and his life in this world.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, how do your deeds grow
with Allah while you have diverted your heart from the Command of your
Lord and obeyed your low desire due to your overcome reason?

"O Hisham, steadfastness during loneliness is a sign of strong reason.
So whoever has knowledge of Allah, isolates himself from the people of
this world and those who crave after it, desires that which is with
Allah. Allah is his bosom friend during loneliness, enriches him during
poverty, and exalts him without a clan.

"O Hisham, the truth has been found for the obedience to Allah; no
salvation except with obedience; obedience is through knowledge;
knowledge is through learning; learning becomes firm and strong through
reason; no knowledge except from a divine scholar; the knowledge of
science is through reason.

" O Hisham, little work from a scholar is doubly accepted; much work
from the men of low desire and ignorance is refused."

Imam Musa, peace be on him, means that little work performed by a
scholar is accepted; the reason for that is that knowledge clarifies
hearts, purifies souls and makes man know Allah, the Exalted.

And the excellence of every deed is equal to its effect on clarifying
the heart, removing veils and darkness from the soul; it is different
according to persons. Perhaps little work is enough for clarifying a
person's soul due to his gentle nature

and his thin veils. Perhaps the good deeds that issue from a person has
no effect on clearing the soul of the person himself due to his rude
nature and the thick veils covering his soul.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, most surely, the sane
is satisfied with the small thing of the world along with wisdom and is
not satisfied with a little thing of wisdom along with the world, so his
bargain brings gain.

"O Hisham, most surely, the sane leave the surplus of the world; just
imagine how much more sins are! Renouncing the world is of excellence;
giving up sins is of (the religious) duty."

He, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, most surely, the sane
carefully consider the world and its inhabitants and come to know that
it cannot be attained except through hardship. They carefully consider
the hereafter and come to know that it cannot be obtained except through
hardship, so they seek through hardship the more permanent one.

"O Hisham, most surely, the sane turn away from the world and desire for
the hereafter, for they know that the world is a requester and in
request; the hereafter is a requester and in request. So whoever
requests the hereafter, the world requests him till he takes his
livelihood in full from it; whoever requests the world, the hereafter
requests him and death comes to him and spoils his life in this world
and in the next."

As for explaining the statement of the Imam, peace be on him: "The world
is a requester and in request," it is that the world delivers the
apportioned livelihood to those who are in it; in this meaning it is a
requester. As for that it is in request, it is that its inhabitants
strive to attain the boons wherein. As for that the hereafter is a
requester, it is that death comes and the inevitable fixed term happens
to all those who are in the world, so it requests them in order to carry
them from the world to it. As for that the hereafter is in request, it
is that its righteous inhabitants strive to perform good deeds, that
they may be safe from the punishment and the censure.

The Imam, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, whoever wants riches
with out money, the rest of the heart of envy, and safety in religion,
then he should implore Allah, the Great and Almighty, and ask Him to
perfect his reason. So whoever becomes sane is content with that which
suffices him. Whoever is content with that which suffices him becomes
rich; and whoever is not content with that which suffices him never
attains riches.

"O Hisham, most surely, Allah has given an account of the people of
Salih, who have said: Our Lord, make not our hearts to deviate after You
have guided us aright, and grant us from You mercy; surely You are the
most liberal Giver. That was when they came to know that their hearts
deviated and returned to their blindness and badness. Surely whoever has
no knowledge of Allah does not fear Allah. Whoever has no knowledge of
Allah does not fasten his heart to the firm

knowledge he sees and whose reality he finds in his heart. None is so
except him whose deeds are in agreement with his words and his inward
confirms his outward; that is because Allah, may His Name be Great, has
not shown the hidden, inward part of reason except through a manifest
part of it and a speaker on its behalf."

In his last statements, the Imam, peace be on him, has referred to that
if a believer's heart is not illuminated by the Light of Allah and his
reason is not rightly-guided by the guidance of Allah, he is not safe
from deviation and apostasy after his adopting Islam. The Holy Qur'an
has referred to this phenomenon; Allah, the Most High, has said: That is
because they believe, then disbelieve, so a seal is set upon their
hearts. And He, the Exalted, has said: And whoever of you turns back
from his religion, then he dies while unbeliever. For this reason the
righteous always ask Allah not to deviate their hearts and not to go
astray from His religion, for, according to its formation and structure,
human soul is not safe from Satan's whisperings and delusions, and
especially when it is not granted success to avoid them.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, has said: 'Allah is not served through a
thing better than reason. Man's reason is not perfect unless it has
various qualities: unbelief and evil from him are safe. Reason and good
from him are hoped. The surplus of his money is spent. The surplus of
his speech is prevented. His share of the world is only daily bread. He
is not full of knowledge throughout his lifetime. Abasement along with
Allah is more beloved to him than exaltedness along with other than Him.
Humbleness is more beloved to him than high rank. He regards as much the
little good from other than him and as little his own good. He sees that
all men better than him, and that he is the most wicked of them in his
soul. This is the perfect affair."

Giving as proof of the meaning of his speech, Imam Musa, peace be on
him, has quoted the speech of his grandfather, Imam 'Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, in which he has mentioned the
qualities of the sane and the characteristics of their deeds.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, the rational do not
tell lies even if their interests are in them.

"O Hisham, he who has no reason has no manhood; and that the greatest of
men in importance is he who does not see that the world is important for
himself. As for that your bodies have no value except the Garden;
therefore do not sell them for other than it."

The explanation of what the Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned in his
speech, "As for that your bodies have no value except the Garden;
therefore do not sell them for other than it," is that it is
inappropriate to sell the bodies for something other than the garden.
The author of the book al-Wafee has narrated from his

teacher an explanation to the statement of the Imam; the text of the
explanation is as follows: "Surely, bodies decrease day by day; and that
is because the souls from them head for another world, so if the soul is
happy, then the purpose of one's effort in this world and the devotion
of his bodily life are for Allah, glory belongs to Him, and for the
comfort of the Gardens. That is because he follows the way of guidance
and righteousness as if that he sold his body for the Garden as a
bargain with Allah, the Most High, and for this reason Allah has created
him. If it (the soul) is unhappy, then the purpose of his effort and the
devotion of his fixed term and his life span is for associating with
Satan and the chastisement of the fires. That is because he follows the
way of error as if that he sold his body for the perishing lusts and
animal pleasures that will become burning fires, that are today hidden
and concealed from the senses of the inhabitants of the world, and that
will appear on the Day of Judgment, And the hell shall be made manifest
to him who sees, as a bargain with Satan; and those who treated (it) as
a lie were lost."[1]

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "O Hisham, surely the Commander of
the faithful, peace be on him, has said: 'Surely, among the qualities of
the sane is that he must have three qualities: He answers when he is
questioned. He utters when the people fall short of speaking. And he
suggests an opinion that sets right his people. So whoever has nothing
of these three qualities, then he is foolish.

"Surely, the Commander of the faithful (Imam 'Ali), peace be on him, has
said: 'None sits in front of the assembly except the one who has these
three qualities or one of them. If he has nothing of them and sits (in
front of the assembly), then he is foolish.'

"Al-Hasan b. 'Ali, peace be on him, has said: 'If you request the needs,
then request them from those qualified to them.' He was asked: 'Who are
those qualified to them?' 'Those of whom Allah has given an account in
His Book and mentioned them: Only those possessed of understanding will
mind.' He has said: 'They are the possessors of intellects.'

"And 'Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him, has said: 'Sitting with the
righteous brings about righteousness; the morals of (religious) scholars
increase reason; obeying the just rulers perfects exaltedness; investing
money perfects generosity; guiding the seeker of advice fulfilling
boons; refraining from harm completes reason and relieves the body
sooner or later.

"O Hisham, surely the sane do not talk with him who accuses them of
lying. They do not ask him who prevents them. They do not promise that
which they do not fulfill. They do not hope for that through which they
are scolded. And they do not undertake that which they miss because they
have no ability (to undertake it)."

In the last paragraphs Imam Musa, peace be on him, has referred to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Waafi.

determination and caution in respect with their words, their honor and
position, and their undertaking that which they do not attain.

This excellent message has come to an end according to the narration of
Thiqat al-Islam Shaykh al-Kulayni.[1] In his book Tuhaf al-Uqool
al-Hasan b. 'Ali al-Harrani has mentioned an addition to the
above-mentioned message; whereas al-Kulayni has neglected the addition.
We have decided to quote some paragraphs of it without any commentary
preferring brevity and completing advantage; and that is up to readers.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has said: "Whoever prevents himself from the
honors of men, Allah will release him from his stumble on the Day of
Judgment; he who suppresses his fury toward men, Allah will suppress His
fury toward him on the Day of Judgment.

"O Hisham, it has been found in the sword of Allah's Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family: 'The most insolent in Allah's sight is he who
hits other than him who hits him, and kills other than him who kills
him. Whoever follows other than his follower, then he disbelieves in
that which Allah has revealed to Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his
family. Whoever originates a heresy or lodges a heretic, Allah will
accept from him neither a favor nor a compensation on the Day of
Judgment.'

"O Hisham, the best thing through which the servant seek nearness to
Allah after knowledge of Him is (performing) prayers, obedience to the
parents, giving up envy, vainglory, and pride.

"O Hisham, set right your day that is before you; think which a day it
will be and prepare an answer for it, for most surely you will be stood
and questioned. Learn a lesson from the time and its people. Ponder over
the changes and states of time, for most surely the future part of the
life in this world is just like the part of it that has passed;
therefore, take an example from it. 'Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him,
has said: 'Surely all that over which the sun rises in the east of the
earth, its west, its sea, its land, its plain, and its mountains is like
a shade in the sight of a friend of Allah's and of men of knowledge of
Allah's right.' Then he has said: 'Is there a free man who leaves the
world for its inhabitants, for there is no value for your souls except
the Garden; therefore, do not sell them for other than it. For whoever
is satisfied with the world in stead of Allah, then he is satisfied with
the mean.'

"O Hisham, most surely all men see the stars, but none follows them but
those who know their movements and stages; and similarly you study
wisdom, but none of you follow it except those who put it into practice.

"O Hisham, it is written in the Bible: 'Blessed are those who have mercy
upon each

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, pp. 13-20. It has also been mentioned in the
book al-Waafi, vol. 1, p. 26-28.

other; these are upon whom Allah will have mercy on the Day of Judgment.
Blessed are those whose hearts are purified; these are who fear the Day
of Judgment. Blessed are the humble in the world; these are who will
ascend the pulpits of the Kingdom on the Day of Judgment.

"O Hisham, little speech is great wisdom; therefore, stick to silence,
for leaving it is a good deed; the little of it is a burden; the light
of it is among the sins. Therefore, fortify the door of clemency, for
surely the door to it is patience. Allah, the Great and Almighty detests
the one who laughs without a reason and the one who walks for no need.
The ruler should be like a shepherd; he should not be heedless of his
subjects nor should he show haughtiness toward them. Therefore, feel
shame of Allah in secret just as you feel shame of men in public. Know
that a wise word is the believer's object; therefore, stick to knowledge
before it is raised; its raising is that your scholar is absent from
among you.

"O Hisham, learn of knowledge that which you do not know; teach the
ignorant of what you learn; magnify the scholar due to his knowledge and
leave disputing with him. Make friends with the ignorant; do not dismiss
them, but bring them near (to you) and teach them.

"O Hisham, most surely if you fall short of showing gratitude for a
boon, you are in the same position with respect to him who performs an
evil deed and you will be punished for that. The commander of the
faithful (Imam 'Ali), the blessings of Allah be on him, has said: 'Most
surely, Allah has servants whose hearts have been broken by fear of Him
and silenced them from utterance. They are eloquent and sane; they
compete with each other for Allah through pure deeds. They do not regard
as many the many (deeds they perform) for Him, nor are they satisfied
with the few (deeds they perform) for Him; they think that they are
wicked while they are sane and pious.

"O Hisham, shamefulness is of faith; faith is in the Garden. Obscenity
is of estrangement; estrangement is in the fire.

"O Hisham, speakers are three: winner, safe, and perishable. As for the
winner, it is he who praises Allah; as for the safe, it is he who keeps
silent; and as for the perishable, it is he who enters into falsehood.
Most surely Allah has made the Garden forbidden to every one ill-deed
doer, obscene, shameless, paying no attention to what he says and to
what is said about him. Abu Dharr, may Allah be pleased with him has
said: 'O you who seek knowledge, surely this tongue is a key to good and
evil; therefore, set a seal on your mouth just as you set a seal on your
gold and bills.

"O Hisham, bad is the servant who is double-faced and tongued, praises
his brother when he sees him, backbites him when he is absent from him,
envies him when he is given, and deserts him when he is afflicted with a
misfortune. Surely the quickest of good in reward is kindness; the
quickest of evil in punishment is aggression; the

most wicked of Allah's servants is he with whom you dislike to sit down
due to his obscenity. Men shall be thrown on their faces into the fire
because of their obscene words; part of one's good Islam is that he
should leave that which does not concern him.

"O Hisham, man is not a believer unless he is fearful and hopeful; he is
not fearful and hopeful unless he performs (good) deeds for Him Whom he
fears and hopes.

"O Hisham, Allah, the Great and Almighty, has said: 'I swear by My
might, My exaltedness, My greatness, My power, My radiance, and My
highness in My place, if a servant prefers My desire to his desire, I
will place riches in his soul, make him take care of his life in the
hereafter, stretch out My hand to him during his loss, the heavens and
the earth will guarantee his provision, and I will be for him from
behind the trade of every trader.

"O Hisham, stick to gentleness, for, most surely, gentleness is a
blessing, and foolishness is ill-omen. Most surely, gentleness, piety,
and good manners make houses flourishing and increase daily bread.

"O Hisham, these words of Him, the Exalted: Is the reward of goodness is
aught but goodness? concern the pious and the wicked; whoever is done a
favor, he should reward for it. The reward is not that you do a favor as
he does a favor, that you may see your favor. If you do a favor as he
does, then the favor belongs to him due to the beginning.

"O Hisham, the world is just like a snake-a soft thing to touch but a
deadly poison is in its head; men with understanding guard against it
but boys swoop down on it with their hands.

"O Hisham, be patient to obedience to Allah, and be patient to acts of
disobedience to Allah, for the life in the world is an hour. You find
neither delight nor sadness in the part of it that passes, and you do
not know that part of it that will come. Therefore, be patient to that
hour and you will be delighted.

"O Hisham, the world is just like the water of a sea; the more the
thirsty drinks of it, the more thirsty he is until it kills him.

"O Hisham, be ware of pride, for whoever has in his heart a little bit
of pride does not enter the Garden; pride is the garment of Allah, so
whoever disputes with Him over His garment, He will throw him down on
his face into the fire

"O Hisham, whoever does not reckon himself every day does not belong to
us; if he performs good deed, he must increase it; if he performs evil
deeds, he must ask Allah to forgive him of it and turn in repentance to
Him.

"O Hisham, the world appeared before al-Maseeh, peace be on him, in the
image of a blue woman, and he asked her: 'How many husband have you
married?' 'Many,' she answered. 'Have they all divorced you?' he asked
her. 'Rather, I have killed them all,' she replied. 'So, woe unto the
rest of your husbands! Why do they not

learn a lesson from the past?' he asked her.

"O Hisham, surely the eye is the light of the body; if the eye is
luminous, the whole of the body seeks light (from it); the light of soul
is reason; if the servant is sane, he has knowledge of his Lord; if he
has knowledge of his Lord, he knows his religion; if he has no knowledge
of his Lord, he does not establish His religion; the body does not last
except through a living soul, similarly the religion does not last
except through a true intention; the true intention is not firm except
through reason.

"O Hisham, surely plants grow in a plain and do not grow in solid rocks;
similarly, wisdom grow in the heart of the humble and do not grow in the
heart of the proud and tyrannical. That is because Allah has regarded
humbleness as the tool of reason and regarded pride as the tool of
ignorance. Do you not know that whoever raises his head high towards a
ceiling, he breaks it; and that whoever lowers his head, he shades
himself under it, and it covers him? Likewise whoever does not behave
humbly before Allah, Allah lowers him; and whoever behaves humbly before
Allah; he raises him.

"O Hisham, how a ugly poverty after riches is! How ugly offence after
piety is! The uglier than that is the servant who serves Allah and then
he leaves serving Him!

"O Hisham, life is not good except for two men: an aware listener, and a
speaking scholar.

"O Hisham, nothing better than reason has been apportioned among
mankind; the sleep of the sane is better than the staying up at night of
the ignorant.

"O Hisham, Allah's Apostle has said: 'When you see a believer keep very
silent, seek nearness to him, for he delivers wisdom; a believer speaks
a little bit and works very much; a hypocrite speaks a lot and works a
little bit.

"O Hisham, Allah revealed to Dawud, peace be on him, to say to His
servants: 'They should not place between Me and them a (religious)
scholar fascinated by the world. For he turns them away from My
reminder, the way of love for Me and of performing whispered prayers to
Me. They are the highway men from among My servants; the least thing I
will do toward them is that I will take away from their hearts the sweet
love for Me and performing whispered prayers to Me.

"O Hisham, whoever feels haughtiness in himself, the angels of the
heaven and the earth curse him; whoever shows pride and impudence toward
his brothers, he opposes Allah; whoever claims that which he does not
have, he yields (to something) other than his reason.

"O Hisham, Allah, the Most High, revealed to Dawud: 'O Dawud, warn your
companions against loving desires, for those who have clung to the
desires in the world, their hearts have been veiled from Me.

"O Hisham, be ware of showing pride toward My friends and of being
insolent

through your knowledge. Therefore, Allah detests you, so your life in
this world and the next will not benefit you after His showing
detestation toward you; be in this world like him who lives in a house
that does not belong to him; rather he waits for a departure.

"O Hisham, sitting with the men of religion is an honor in this world
and the next. Consulting a loyal, sane (person) is a good fortune,
blessing, right guidance, and success from Allah; therefore, when a
loyal, wise person gives you a piece of advice, then be ware of opposing
(him), for in that is the ruin.

"O Hisham, beware of associating with men and of being intimate with
them, but when you find sane and trustworthy from among them, then
associate with them, and escape from the rest of them just as you escape
from predatory animals. When the sane performs a deed, he should feel
shame of Allah. When He (Allah) singles him for boons, he must let
someone other than him take part in them. When you faces two affairs and
you do not know which one is good and correct, then think of which one
is nearer to your desire and oppose it, for many correct things result
from your opposing your desires; beware of seeking wisdom and placing it
among the ignorant."

Hisham asked the Imam: "If I find a man seeking wisdom but his reason
have no capacity for it?"

"Then gently advise him. If his heart becomes narrow, then do not
subject yourself to an affection."

Then the Imam elaborated on his speech, saying: "Beware of the response
of the haughty, for knowledge is abased when it is dictated to him who
does not understand."

"If I do not find him who questions me of it?" asked Hisham.

"Then make use of his being ignorant of questioning (you) of it, that
you may be safe from the affection of the statement and the great
affection of the answer. Know that Allah do not raise the humble
according to their humbleness, but He raises them according to His
Greatness and Glory. He does not make the fearful safe according to
their fear (of Him), but He makes them safe according to his generosity
and munificence. He does not gladden the sad according to their sadness,
but according to His compassion and mercy. Therefore, what is then your
idea about the Most Forgiving, the Merciful, Who forgives him who shows
enmity toward Him; just imagine how much more is (the reward of) him who
seeks His good pleasure and chooses the enmity of the creation for Him.

"O Hisham, whoever loves the world, the fear of the hereafter goes from
his heart. When a servant is given knowledge and he increases his love
for the world, he increases his farness from Allah, and Allah increases
his anger against him.

"O Hisham, surely the wise, sane man is he who leaves that which he
cannot do;

much correctness is in opposing mean desires; whoever draws out his
expectations performs evil deeds.

"O Hisham, if you saw the course of the fixed term (death), you would
forget (your) expectations.

"O Hisham, beware of greed; you must be hopeless of that which in the
hands of men; deaden greed from the creatures. For surely greed is the
key to humiliation; it embezzles reason, wears out manhood, defiles
honor, and takes away knowledge. You must resort to your Lord and rely
on Him. Struggle against your own soul, that you may repel it from its
mean desires, for (such a struggle) is an obligation on you just as the
struggle against your enemy."

Hisham asked him, which enemy is the most obligatory in struggle (jihad)

(The Imam answered): "The nearest of them to you and the greatest of
them in showing hostility to you, the most harmful of them to you, the
greatest of them in showing enmity toward you, the most hidden of them
in person to you in spite of his nearness to you. He who provokes your
enemies against you is Iblis (Satan) who is entrusted with whispering
into the hearts (of men). Therefore, your enmity toward him should be
intense. He must not be more patient in struggling against you to
destroy you than you in struggling against him, for he is weaker than
you in his strength, and less in harm through his much evil. If you
resort to Allah, then you will follow the right path.

"O Hisham, he whom Allah ennobles with three (things), then He is gentle
to him: Reason suffices him the burden of his mean desires, knowledge
suffices him the burden of his ignorance, and riches suffices him the
fear of poverty.

"O Hisham, guard against this world and guard against its inhabitants.
For the men wherein are of four kinds: a bad man embracing his mean
desires; a learner and reciter (of the Qur'an), the more he increases in
knowledge the more he increases in haughtiness; He shows superiority
through his recitation and knowledge toward those who are inferior to
him; and an ignorant worshipper who makes little of those who are
inferior to him in his worship, he wants them to respect and magnify
him; and the possessor of insight who is learned and knowledgeable of
the way of the truth he loves to undertake, but he is incapable or
overcome; so he cannot undertake that which he knows; therefore he is
sad and grieved out of that, while he is the most outstanding of the
people of his time and the most notable of them in reason."[1] This is
the end of these valuable commandments containing the fundamentals of
the virtues, morals, the rules of conduct, and ethics. The Imam has
placed in them general programs that set right individual and social
life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhaf al-'Uqool, pp. 390-400.

### His Treatise on the Oneness of Allah

Yet another example of Imam Musa's valuable legacy is his treatise of
the Oneness of Allah; it is, though brief, supported with some
theological proofs of the existence of Allah, the Most High, and of
explaining His positive and negative attributes. This treatise is, as
the historians have reported, an answer to a letter sent to him by
al-Fath b. 'Abd Allah, asking him about that, so he, peace be on him,
has answered him as follows:

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

Praise belongs to Allah, Who has inspired His praise to His servants,
made them know His Lordship by nature, proven His existence through His
creatures, given his signs as proof of His power, whose Selfness
abstains from attributes, whose figure eyes cannot see, Whom
imaginations cannot encompass. There is no period for His existence and
there is no limit for his staying. Feelings do not include him and veils
do not veil him. The veil between Him and them is His creation for them;
that is because it is impossible to that which in their selfness. His
(selfness) abstains from possible (attributes); there is a difference
between the Creator and the created, Limiter and the limited, Lord and a
vassal. (He is) the One without interpreting counting. He is the Creator
not in the sense of movement, the All-seeing not through an instrument
the All-hearing not in need of an instrument, the Witness not through
touching, the Hidden not through covering (Himself with a veil), the
Manifest and the Clear not through the wideness of a distance. It is
impossible for intellects to ponder over His eternity. His staying
deters ambitious reason (from understanding Him); sharp eyes fail before
his core; His existence overcomes occupying imaginations. The beginning
of religion is to know Him; the perfection of knowledge of Him lies in
(the acknowledgement of) His Unity, the perfection of His Unity is the
denial of attributes from Him. (This is) because of the testimony (of
the reason) that the description is other than the described, that the
described is other than the description; (this is) because they both
bear witness that this is a comparison that is impossible to the
Eternal. So whoever describes Allah certainly limits Him; whoever limits
Him certainly accounts him; whoever accounts him invalidates His
eternity. Whoever says 'how' asks Him to be described. Whoever says 'in
what' includes Him. Whoever says 'on what' has no knowledge of Him.
Whoever says 'where' (regards all places as) void of Him. Whoever says
'what is He' depicts Him. Whoever says 'how long' gives Him a period (of
time). He is knowledgeable when was nothing known; Creator when was
nothing created; Lord when was nothing a vassal. Such is described our
Lord; and (He is) far above that through which the describers describe
Him.[1]

This letter full of the fundamentals and rules of the Oneness of Allah
has come to an end. Many of its words has been narrated on the authority
of Imam 'Ali, the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 1, pp. 139-140.

Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Any way, the words of the
Imams of Ahl al-Bayt resembles each other in theology, for they
established its rules, its fundamentals, its evidence, and its proofs.
This science has been known through them; its fundamentals and rules
have been taken from them.

Al-Bida'

Al-Bida' is a vague, complicated, theological subject matter. The
Muslims have differed over it. The Shi'a have unanimously agreed that it
is correct, and that they have to adopt it. The Sunnis have denied it
and criticized the Shi'a for it and regarded it as among the criticisms
facing their ideological entity. Perhaps, the reason for this, as we
think, is that they have not objectively understood the meaning and
reality of al-Bida' the Shi'a maintain. So they have criticized them for
it. It is necessary for us to pause to deal with it before we present
the Imam's opinion concerning it.

The Meaning of al-Bida'

In the language al-Bida'-an extended noun (isim mamdud)-has been derived
from al-budu meaning manifestation; and it is a name of a fresh, new
opinion which its owner approves and prefers to his first opinion. [1]
In the tradition: "It seems to Allah, the Great and Almighty, that He is
going to try them." That is to say that He has decreed that; and that is
the meaning of al-Bida'.[2]

The Reality of al-Bida' in the Sight of the Shi'a

The Shi'a have maintained al-Bida', and the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace
be on them, have declared it; it has been reported that they have said:
"Allah has not been served through a thing like al-Bida'." The great
scholars have established through sufficient proofs the possibility and
necessity of conforming to it, but not in a general meaning, just as we
will explain it. Among those who have objectively and inclusively
discussed it is Ayat Allah al-'Uzma al-Sayyid Abu al-Qasim al-Khu'i; he
has decided it in his research and written it in his Bayan. We will
mention the text of what he has written in his al-Bayan. He has said:
"Al-Bida' in which the Imami Shi'a believe lies in the evitable decree.
As for the inevitable (decree), it does not stay behind. It is necessary
that the will associates with that which the decree associates. The
explanation to that is in three parts:

"The first is Allah's decree of which He informs none of His creatures,
and the stored knowledge He has possessed alone. Without doubt al-Bida'
does not lie in this part; rather it has been mentioned in many
traditions reported on the authority of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them,
that al-Bida' arises from this knowledge.

"In his al-'Uyyun, al-Shaykh al-Saduq has narrated on the authority of
al-Hasan b. Muhammed al-Nawfali that al-Rida, peace be on him, said to
Sulayman al-

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Sihah. Al-Qamoos. Asas al-Balagha. [2] Al-Bidaya, vol. 1, p. 109.

Merwazi: 'I have reported on the authority of Abi 'Abd Allah (al-Sadiq),
peace be on him, that he said: 'Surely Allah, the Great and Almighty,
has two kinds of knowledge: stored and hidden knowledge none knows
except He; al-Bida' is of that. The knowledge He taught to His angels
and His apostles, so the scholars from among the House of your Prophet
know it.

"In Basa'ir al-Darajat al-Shaykh Muhammed b. al-Hasan al-Saffar has
narrated on the authority of Abi Baseer on the authority of Abi 'Abd
Allah, who said: ''Surely Allah has two kinds of knowledge: stored and
hidden knowledge none knows except He; al-Bida' is of that. The
knowledge he taught to His angels and His apostles and His prophets; and
we know it.[1]

"The second is Allah's decree of which He told His Prophet and His
angels that it would certainly happen; without doubt al-Bida' is also
not of this part, though it is different from the first part that
al-Bida' does not arise from it.

Al-Rida, peace be on him, said to Sulayman al-Merwazi in the
above-mentioned tradition reported by al-Saduq: "'Ali said: 'Knowledge
is of two kinds: a kind of knowledge Allah taught to His angels and
apostles, so what He taught to His angels and apostle would be; He
neither deceives Himself nor His angels nor His apostles; and there is
with Him a kind of knowledge stored of which He informs none of His
creatures; He advances what He pleases and delays what He pleases; He
makes to pass away and establishes what He pleases.'"[2]

Al-'Ayyashi reported on the authority of al-Fudayl, who said: 'I heard
Abu Ja'far (al-Sadiq) say: 'Among the affairs are the affairs that
certainly happens. Among the affairs are the affairs that concerns
Allah, of which He advances, makes to pass away, and establishes what He
pleases; He informs none of that. As for that which the apostles
brought, it would be. He neither deceives Himself nor His Prophet nor
His angels.

The third is the decree about whose occurrence in outside Allah told His
Prophet and His angels, but it depends on that Allah's will does not
associate with something contrary to it; al-bida' happens in this part
(according to His words): Allah makes to pass away and establishes what
He pleases, and with Him is the basis of the Book. Allah's is the
command before and after."

His Eminence (al-Sayyid al-Khu'i) has concluded that al-Bida' in which
the Shi'a believe is the third part of the decree according to a group
of traditions reported on the authority of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on
them. After that he has added a full explanation to the reality of
al-Bida', saying: "Al-Bida' is in the dependent decree

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Shaykh al-Kulayni has narrated it on the authority of Abu Basir.
Al-Waafi, Chapter on al-Bida', vol. 1, p. 113. [2] Shaykh al-Kulayni has
narrated it on the authority of al-Fudayl b. Yasar on the authority of
Abu Ja'far. Ibid.

called the tablet of making to pass away and establishing. Conforming to
the possibility of al-Bida' does not require ascribing ignorance to
Allah, the Most Glorious. In this conforming to al-Bida' there is
nothing opposing His Greatness and Majesty.

Maintaining al-Bida' is the frank confession that the world is under the
sovereignty of Allah and His power over creating and preserving it, and
that the will is valid in things eternally and always. Rather through
maintaining al-Bida' the difference between the Divine knowledge and
that of the creatures is clear, for the knowledge of the creatures,
though they are prophets or testamentary trustees, does not encompass
that which the knowledge of Allah, the Most High, encompasses, for
surely some of them- though they are knowledgeable, through Allah's
teaching them, of all the worlds of the possible things-do not encompass
that which Allah's stored knowledge, which He alone possesses,
encompasses, for they do not know the will of Allah. For there is a
thing-or His non-will except when Allah, the Exalted, tell them in a
certain manner.

Maintaining al-Bida' requires that the servant devotes himself to Allah,
asks Him to grant his supplication, to suffices his concerns, to give
him success to the acts of obedience, and to send him away from
disobeying him. Therefore, denying al-Bida' and conforming to that what
the pen of decree writes certainly, without any exception, requires the
believer's despair in this belief of granting his supplication. For most
surely what the servant requests from his Lord, though the pen of decree
writes putting it into effect, certainly is, and there is no need of
supplication and imploring; and if the pen writes something contrary to
it, it will never occur, and supplication and imploring will never
benefit him. When the servant is hopeless of granting his supplication,
he will leave imploring his Creator, for it is useless; similarly are
the acts of worship and alms concerning which it has been reported on
the authority of the infallible (Imams), peace be on them, that they
increase lifetime, livelihood, and other things the servant demands.[1]

After this (explanation), Sayyid al-Khu'i has confirmed his opinions
through (some Qur'anic) verses and traditions reported by both sides
(i.e. the Sunnis and the Shi'ites) in respect with the necessity of
al-Bida' and the requirement of maintaining it.

This is the opinion of the Shi'ites of al-Bida', just as it has been
mentioned by Ayat Allah al-Khu'i. Their opinion is frank and manifest;
evidence and proof require its correctness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Bayan fi Tafseer al-Qur'an, vol. 1, pp. 271-276.

### Criticizing the Shi'ites

Al-Bida' in which the Shi'a believe, just as we have mentioned, does not
deviate from the scientific rules and does not oppose the Islamic rules,
but their opponents criticize them for it; they explain al-Bida' with an
explanation different from what the Shi'a think. The following is a
brief account of some criticizers:

### 1. Sulayman Bin Jareer

Al-Shahristani has narrated the following from Sulayman b. Jareer, who
has said: "Surely the Imams of the Rafidites (the Shi'ites) have put two
beliefs for their followers-the first is the belief in al-Bida'. So when
they say: the affair of its imminence will be for them then the affair
is not according to what they had said, they will say: Allah, the
Exalted, has an opinion of it.

"Concerning it (al-Bida') Zarara b. A'yun has composed poetry:

"These are signs come in their time, and you have no way (other than)
what Allah ordains.

"Were it not for al-Bida', I will call him not past and describe
al-Bida' with a description for him who changes.

"Were it not for al-Bida', He was not and then He acted freely and was
like the fire that always flamed.

"The second is (practicing) the precautionary dissimulation (taqiyya),
so whenever they want a thing, they talk about it; and when it is said
to them: this is a mistake, they say: We had said it out of (practicing)
the precautionary dissimulation (taqiyya)."[1]

### 2. Al-Fakhr al-Razi

Explaining these words of Him, the Exalted: Allah makes to pass away and
establishes what He pleases, and with Him is the basis of the Book,
al-Fakhr al-Razi has said: (The Rafidites have said:) "It is permissible
for Allah (to practice) al-Bida', that means that He believes a thing,
then the affair appears to him in a manner different from that which he
believes."[2]

### 3. Ahmed Ameen

Dr. Ahmed Ameen has said: "We have seen that some Shi'ites maintain
al-Bida' the Jews have denied. The earliest one to maintain it was
al-Mukhtar b. Abi 'Ubayd, who summoned (the people to follow) Muhammed
b. al-Hanafiya. Al-Shahristani has said: 'Al-Mukhtar maintained al-Bida'
because he claimed that he had knowledge of the occurrence of the
circumstances either through an

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Sharh Usool al-Kafi. [2] Al-Razi, Tafseer.

inspiration inspired to him or through a letter from the Imam. If he
promised his companions that something would happen and it happened as
he had predicted, he used it as proof of his truthful claim; and if it
had not happened just as he had predicted, he would have said: 'Your
Lord has an opinion of it.' He did not differentiate between the
abrogation and al-Bida'; so if abrogation was permissible in the
(religious) precepts, then al-Bida' is permissible in the traditions
(akhbar).' Many Shi'ites believe in the doctrine of al-Bida' and used it
in many of their historical subject matters; and one of their Imams has
said: 'Allah is not served (through a belief) better than al-Bida'.' For
it opens the door to repentance in seeking forgiveness from Allah; and
the Jews were the strongest to oppose al-Bida'."[1]

These people have criticized the Shi'a for their maintaining al-Bida',
but they have no opinion near to reality, that is because they do not
understand the reality of al-Bida' in which the Shi'a believe.

### The Jews deny al-Bida'

The Jews were the first to deny and change al-Bida'. They believe that
when the pen of ordinance and decree wrote the things in eternity, it
was impossible for the will to associate with (something) opposite and
contrary to it. For this reason they have said: "Allah's hand is tied up
from expansion and contraction, taking and giving; that is because the
pen of the ordinance wrote it; therefore change and alternation is
impossible in it."

### Imam Musa's Opinion

Imam Musa has talked about al-bida' during his talk with al-Mu'alla b.
Muhammed, who asked him about how Allah knew things, so he answered him
with an answer in which he dealt with the most important phiosophical
and theological subject matters.

He, peace be on him, has said:

"He (Allah) knew and willed, desired and ordained, decreed and carried
out, so He carried out what He decreed, decreed what He ordained, and
ordained what He desired. Therefore through His knowledge was the will,
through His will was the desire, through His desire was the ordainance,
through His ordainance was the decree, through His decree was the
carrying out. Knowledge precedes the will; the will is the second; the
desire is the third. The ordinance is resting on the decree through
carrying out. Therefore, to Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, belongs
al-bida' in what He knows when He wills and in what He desires for
ordaining the things. So when the decree happens though carrying out,
then there is no bida'. Therefore, the knowledge of the known before it
is; the will in the willed

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Fajjr al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 354.

before it becomes material; the desire in the desired before fulfilling
it, the preordainance of these known things before detailing and
connecting them in material and time; and the decree through the
carrying out is the final (one) from among the done (things) with bodies
perceived through the senses from among (the things) endowed with color,
wind, weight, measure; and those that creep and toddle from among
mankind and jinn, birds and animals and other than that from among that
which perceived through the senses. So to Allah, the Exalted, belongs
al-bida' in respect with them from among that which has no material;
therefore when the material, the understood, the perceived happen, then
there will be no bida'; and Allah does what He pleases. Thus, through
knowledge He knows the things before they are. Through the will He knows
their attributes and their limits; and He creates them before showing
them. Through the desire He distinguishes their beings in their colors
and attributes. Through the ordainment He ordains their nourishment and
knows their first and their last. Through the decree He explains to men
their places and lead them to them. Through the carrying out He
describes them and clarifies their affairs; and that is the ordinace of
the Mighty, the Knowing."

This speech full of the most wonderful and ambiguous, theological topics
has come to an end; therein the Imam has explained the stage of Allah's
knowledge where al-bida' happen. We have previously explained that.

Faith in Allah

When souls are full of faith in Allah, they are clear from sins and are
safe from deviation; through faith justice and love prevail (society),
virtue and affection spread, all kinds of social vices such as
oppression, deception, and aggression come to an end.

Allah sent the prophets and the apostles to His servants to plant in
their souls this noble quality. Imam Musa has spoken of faith and
preferred it to all kinds of deeds; that was when a person asked him and
he answered him, saying:

-O Scholar, tell me: Which deed is the best in Allah's sight?

-That which his deed is not accepted except through it.

-And what is that?

-Faith in Allah, which is the highest of deeds in degree, the fullest of
them in share, and the noblest of them in rank.

-Tell me of faith: Is it words and deeds or words without deeds?

-The whole of faith is deed; and words are of that deed according to an
obligation from Allah; it is manifest in His Book; its light is clear;
the proof of it is firm; the Book bears witness for it and summons (men)
to it.

-Describe that to me that I may understand it.

-Surely faith has states, degrees, layers, and positions: of it is fully
complete, of it is manifestly incomplete, and of it is outweighingly
additional.

-Is faith complete, incomplete, and additional?

-Yes.

-How is that?

-Surely Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has made faith obligatory on
man's limbs, divided it on them, and distributed it on them. Each of his
(man's) limbs is entrusted with part of faith other than that with which
its sister has been entrusted. Of them is his reason, through which he
realizes, grasps, and understands, and which is a commander over his
body through which limbs bring and send (nothing) except through its
opinion and command. Of them are his two hands through which he strikes
sharply, his two legs with which he walks, his pudenda which incites
him, his two eyes through which he sees, and his two ears through which
he hears. He (Allah) has imposed (a kind of faith) on heart other than
that which He has imposed on the tongue, imposed on the tongue other
than that He has imposed on the two eyes, imposed on the two eyes other
than that He has imposed on the ears, imposed on the ears other than
that He has imposed on the two hands, imposed on the hands other than
that He has imposed on the legs, imposed on the legs other than that He
has imposed on the pudenda, and imposed on the pudenda other than that
He has imposed on the face. As for the faith He has imposed on the heart
is acknowledgment, knowledge, acceptance, submission, contract, consent
that there is no god but Allah, Who is unique and without partner,
Single, on Whom all depend, has not taken a consort nor a son, and that
Muhammed, may Allah, bless him and his family, is His servant and His
Prophet.[1]

### Science

The Imams of Ahl al-Bayt carried the torch of the scientific renaissance
in the Islamic world. They established in its cities the principal
features of the intellectual life; they seriously summoned the Muslims
to build their life on the foundation of scientific awareness; hadith
and fiqh encyclopedias are full of the traditions reported from them and
that make (Muslims) desirous of knowledge.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, took care of this creative summons; he
ordered the Muslims to be serious in acquiring knowledge and
understanding the religion; he warned them against acquiring some
science of which they took no advantage in developing their life. The
historians have narrated that Imam Musa entered the Mesjid of the
Prophet, peace be on them, and saw some people surrounding a man,
magnifying him and going too far in honoring him. So he, peace be on
him, said to one of his companions:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 2, pp. 38-39.

-What is that (man)?

-'Allama (a scholar).

-(In which science) is he 'allama?

-He is the most knowledgeable in the lineage and battles of the Arabs.

-Such a science does not harm him who has no knowledge of it and does
not benefit him who has knowledge of him.

Then Imam Musa turned to his companions and explained to them the
beneficial science for whose acquiring they had to spend their life. He
said to them:

"Science is of three kinds: a clear verse or a just (religious) duty or
a standing sunna, other than them is surplus."

Genealogy or having knowledge of events of a war do not grow intellect
nor it makes a human civilization nor it creates a progress and
development in the life of the Muslims. For it is a science that does
not harm him who has no knowledge of it and does not benefit him who has
knowledge of him. For this reason the Imam regarded it as unimportant
and urged the Muslims to spend their time on science other than it.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, talked to his companions of that which they
had to know. He, peace be on, has said to them: "I have found the
knowledge of all the people (encompassed) by four things:

1. You should know your Lord;

2. You should know what He has done for you;

3. You should know what He wants from you;

4. You should know what would make you abandon your religion.

These four points has been explained by His Eminence, late, Sayyid
Muhsin al-Ameen, who has said: "The first (point means that it is)
obligatory (on you) to have knowledge of Allah, which is a favor. The
second (point) is that you should know the boons He bestows upon you and
you should thank and serve Him for them. The third (point) you should
know what He wants from you in what He has made obligatory on you and
commanded you to perform it, that you may perform it according to the
limit He wants from you, so through that you are worthy of reward. The
fourth (point) is that you should know the thing that makes you disobey
Allah in order to avoid it."[1]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] A'yan al-Shi'a, vol. 4, p. 57.

### Obtaining Understanding in Religion

Imam Musa urged the Muslims to obtain understanding in religion and to
have knowledge of the religious precepts. He has said to them: "Obtain
understanding in the religion of Allah, for obtaining understanding is a
key to the inner self, a perfect act of worship, a means for high
positions and great rank in religion and the world. The superiority of a
learned man over mere worshippers is like the superiority of the sun
over the stars. Whoever does not obtain understanding in his religion,
none of his deeds pleases Allah."

A Companion of his asked him about the religious precepts he needed,
saying: "Can men leave the question about what they need?"

He, peace be on him, said: "Men cannot leave what they need in the
respect of the affairs of their religion."

### Sitting with (religious) Scholars

Imam Musa, peace be on him, ordered his companions to accompany
(religious) scholars and to sit with them, that they might make use of
their sciences and their morals and to follow their behavior. He, peace
be on him, has said to them: "Talking with a (religious) scholar on
dunghills is better that talking with an ignorant (person) on cushions."

### The Excellence of Jurists

Imam Musa, peace be on him, lauded the excellence of jurists who are the
signposts of religion and have memorized Allah's Book. Reporting
traditions on the authority of his grandfather, Allah's Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family, on the excellence of jurists, he, peace
be on him, has said: "Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, has said: 'Jurists are entrusted by the apostles except when
they enter the world."

A Companion of his asked him, saying:

-O Allah's Apostle, what is their entering in the world?

-Following the supreme ruler (sultan); when they do that, then beware of
them for your religion.

### Work

Islam has declared its certain summons to work and earn; Allah, the Most
High, has said: But when the prayer is ended, then disperse abroad in
the land and seek of Allah's grace, and remember Allah much, that you
may be successful.[1]

Islam has summoned men to work and urged them to continue it, that they
may be positive in their lifetimes enjoying earnestness and activity,
that they may benefit others and make use (of their work). It has made
them hate negative life and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an, Surat al-Jumm'a, verse 10.

neglecting work that results in hindering economy, spreading poverty and
neediness in the country.

Hadith books are full of traditions reported on the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, and his testamentary trustees concerning
urging (Muslims) to work and giving work good qualities, so it (work) is
jihad, honor, worship, and of the behavior of the prophets.

The Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, themselves practiced work,
that the Muslims might follow their example. For example, Imam Ja'far
al-Sadiq, peace be on him, worked on one of his farms. In this respect
Abu 'Umar al-Shaybani has related, saying: "I saw Abi 'Abd Allah (Ja'far
al-Sadiq), peace be on him, carrying a spade in his hand, wearing thick
loincloth and oozing sweat. Thus, I said to him: 'May I be your ransom,
let me help you!' He, peace be on him, said: 'I like to see man be
harmed by the heat of the sun for seeking his livelihood."[1]

Imam al-Kazim worked for earning the daily bread of his family. Al-Hasan
b. 'Ali b. Hamza has narrated, saying: "I saw Abi al-Hasan Musa working
on a land of his. His feet were soaked with sweat, so I asked him: 'May
I be your ransom, where are the men?'

-'Ali, the one who is better than I and my father worked with his hand?

Al-Hasan was dazzled and asked him:

-Who is he?

-Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, the Commander of
the faithful (Imam 'Ali), and all my forefathers worked with their
hands; work is of the behaviors of the prophets, the apostles, and the
righteous.[2]

Through that Imam Musa, peace be on him, has given (men) a wonderful
lesson on Islam, which is the religion of work and activity, and which
says that whatever high is the position of a person is he is ordered to
work to prevent himself and his family from that which is in the hand of
the people.

### Warning against Laziness

Islam has warned (Muslims) against laziness, for it paralyzes the
economic movement, freezes man's abilities, and spoils society. It has
been mentioned in the traditions reported from the Imams of guidance
that they have sought refuge in Allah from laziness; it has been
mentioned on the authority of one of them, saying: "O Allah, I seek
refuge in you from laziness, boredom, and flagging." Imam al-Sadiq,
peace be on him, said to a companions of his: "Beware of laziness and
weariness, for they are a key to all evil things; most surely he who
becomes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-'Amal wa Huqooq al-'Amil fi al-Islam, p. 135. [2] Men Laa
Yahdarahu al-Fadeeh, vol. 3, p. 53.

lazy performs no right (against him); and he who becomes weary is not
patient toward any true (thing)."[1]

Imam Musa b. Ja'far, peace be on him, has advised a son of his to be
earnest in his affairs and to be cautious of laziness. He, peace be on
him, has said: "Beware of laziness and boredom, for they prevent you
from your share in this world and the next."

Imam Musa, peace be on him, hated laziness, unemployment and the one who
had such qualities, for they lead to poverty, lowness, and losing
manhood. Whoever has them is regarded as among the dead, who have
neither thinking nor contemplation.

### Moderation

Imam Musa has advised his companions to be moderate and refrain from
wastefulness and extravagance, for they bring about the removal of
boons. He, peace be on him, has said: "Whoever is moderate and content
enjoys his boons; whoever wastes and goes too far (in spending) loses
his boons."

He, peace be on him, has said: "Whoever is moderate never becomes poor."

Surely, among the features of Islamic economy is the prevention from
extravagance, for it brings about the loss of possessions, corruption of
morals, spread of lax morals and negative traits of character,
excitement of malice and hatred in the souls of the poor who find no
plenty of money. We have subjectively and inclusively talked about this
aspect in our book "Work and Worker's Rights in Islam."

### Noble Moral Traits

Islam has brought noble moral traits and regarded them as a basic rule
in its brilliant message. The Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
family, has said: "I have been appointed as a prophet to complete noble
moral traits." Through his morals, he, may Allah bless him and his
family, was a model for noble humanity; after him, the Imams of guidance
followed him in spreading noble moral traits and good deeds; that was
through their behavior, their commandments and teachings to their
companions.

Imam Musa took care of this aspect; he always advised his companions to
have noble qualities, that they might be a good model for society
through their behavior, and that they might spread the concepts of good
and righteousness among men. We will deal with what has been narrated on
his authority in this respect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-'Amal wa Huqooq al-'Aamil fi al-Islam, p. 140.

### Generosity and good Manners

Imam Musa, peace be on him, urged his companions to be generous and to
have good manners. He has said: "The generous and polite is under the
protection of Allah; He does not leave him until He makes him enter the
Garden. Allah sends out none as a prophet except the generous. My father
recommended generosity and good manners."

### Piety

Imam Musa, peace be on him, always advised his companions and his
followers to refrain from things made forbidden by Allah. He has said:
"I always heard my father say: 'He about whose piety the women kept in
seclusion do not talk does not belong to our followers."

### Patience

He, peace be on him, advised his companions to cling to patience when
they faced a disaster or a misfortune, for impatience takes away the
reward Allah has prepared for the patient. He, peace be on him, has
said: "One is not worthy of the reward of a misfortune except through
patience and (saying) we belong to Allah and to Him is our return."

He, peace be on him, has said: "Surely patience during affliction is
better than well-being during ease."

He, peace be on him, has said: "Misfortune is one for the patient and
two for the impatient."

### Silence

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has advised his companions to cling to
silence. He explained to them its advantages, saying: "Silence is among
the doors to wisdom; it brings about love and is a proof of all good
things."

### Pardon and Restoration

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has urged his companions to pardon those who
wrong them and treat them kindly. He has also encouraged them to make
peace among people. He has explained to them the result of the
good-doers and peace-makers and their reward with Allah, saying: "On the
Day of Resurrection a caller will call out: 'Let those who have reward
with Allah stand,' none will stand except those who pardon (men) and
make peace (among them)."

### Saying good Words

He, peace be on him, has ordered his companions to say good words and to
do men good favors. He said to al-Fedl b. Younis: "Inform in a good
manner and say good (words) and do not be imma'a!"

-What is the imma'a?

-Do not say: I am with men and among them. Most surely, Allah's Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, has said: "O People, they are two
ways: the way

of good and the way of evil; therefore, the way of evil must not be more
lovable to you than the way of good."

### Saying the Truth

He has ordered his companions to say the truth and to show it and to
refrain from falsehood, saying: "Fear Allah and say the truth though
therein is your destruction, for therein is your salvation; O So-and-so,
fear Allah and leave falsehood though therein is your salvation, for
therein is your destruction."

### Good Neighborhood

He, peace be on him, has advised his companions to do good to their
neighbors and to be patient toward bearing harm and detested things
issue from them, saying: "Good neighbor is not refraining from harm, but
good neighbor is showing patience toward harm."

### Relieving Sanctuary-seekers

He, peace be on him, has urged his companions to relieve the
sanctuary-seekers and to grant their needs, saying: "If a
sanctuary-seeker go to his brothers to relieve him and they do not do,
then they cut off their relationship with Allah, the Great and
Almighty."[1] He has ordered them to grant the needs of men, saying: "If
a believer comes to his brother (in religion) for a need, then he is a
mercy Allah, the Blessed and High, drives to him. If he accepts him,
then he makes him follow Allah through us; if he refuses to grant his
need and he can grant it, Allah empowers over him a snake created from
fire to bite him in his grave until the Day of Resurrection." And he,
peace be on him, has said concerning him who does not refuse to grant
the need of his believing brother: "Surely, Allah has on earth servants
who strive to grant the needs of men; they are safe of the Day of
Resurrection. Whoever delights a believer, Allah will delight his heart
on the Day of Resurrection."[360]

### Paying Visit to Brothers

Imam Musa has ordered his companions to show affection to each other, to
harmonize with one another and to visit each other, for such deeds bring
about love, spreading affection, as well as they lead to a great reward
from Allah. He has said: "Whoever visits his believing brother for
Allah, not for other than Him, seeking through him a reward from Allah,
Allah entrusts with him seventy thousand angels from the time when he
leaves his house to his return to it calling him out: 'You are happy,
and the garden is happy with you. You will abide a house in the
Garden!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Wasaa'il, Chapter on al-Amr fi al-Ma'ruf wa al-Nahy 'an
al-Munker. [2] Ibid.

### Consent with Allahs Decree

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has urged his companions to be consent with
Allahs decree and to be submissive to His will and command, saying:
Whoever has knowledge of Allah should not regard the provision from Him
as slow and should not accuse Him of (injustice) in His decree.

### Gratitude for Bounties

He, peace be on him, has advised his companions to show the bounties
given by Allah and to be grateful to Him for them. He has said: Talking
about the bounties given by Allah is gratitude, and leaving that is
ingratitude. Therefore connect the bounties given by your Lord to
gratitude, fortify your possessions through paying zakat, repel
tribulation with supplication, for supplication is a shield that repels
tribulation even if it is adopted with an adoption.

### Reckoning Soul

He, peace be on him, has urged his companions to reckon their selves and
to ponder over their deeds; if they are good, they must increase them;
if they are evil, they must ask Allah to forgive them and to be pleased
with them. He has said: He who does not reckon himself every day does
not belong to us. If he performs good deeds, he must increase them; and
if he performs evil deeds, he must repent of them and ask Allah to
forgive him.

### Consultation

He, peace be on him, has advised his followers to consult each other in
respect with their affairs and not to be obstinate. He has said: Whoever
consults (others) is praised during correctness and excused during
committing a mistake.

### Evil Deeds

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has prohibited his followers from having
dispraised deeds and performing evil deeds. That is as follows:

### Following Mean Desires

He, peace be on him, has said: Guard against the easy ascent when its
slope is rugged; surely my father has said: Do not leave the soul alone
with its mean desire, for its mean desire destroys it; leaving the soul
alone with what it desires harms it; preventing the soul from what it
desires cures it.

### Disobedience of Parents

He, peace be on him, has said: [Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, has said:] Be obedient (to your parents) and restrict
yourself to the Garden; be disobedient and rude and restrict yourself to
the Fire.

### Regarding Sins as Small

He, peace be on him, has said: Do not regard as much good and do not
regard as little few sins, for few sins come together and become many;
fear (Allah) in private, that you may be just.

### Joking

He, peace be on him, has said to a son of his: Beware of joking, for it
takes away the light of your faith and makes (men) disparage your
manhood.

### His Supplications

Imam Musa devoted himself to Allah; he mentioned Him, the Most High. He
supplicated Him with the supplication of those who turn to Allah in
repentance. Supplication books have many of his supplications. As for
the advantage of supplication, he has talked about it through his
statement: Adhere to supplication, for most surely supplication and
request from Allah repel tribulation even if it is ordained and decreed
and nothing has remained but carrying it out. When Allah, the Great and
Almighty, is supplicated and asked, He turns away tribulation.

He, peace be on him, has again talked about the advantages result from
supplication, saying: When a tribulation befalls a believing servant and
Allah, the Great and Almighty, inspires him with supplication, the
tribulation is about to be removed. When a tribulation befalls a
believing servant and he refrains from supplicating (Allah), the
tribulation lasts for a long (time); therefore when tribulation comes
down, adhere to supplication and imploring Allah, the Great and
Almighty.[361] We will briefly present some of his supplications:

### His Supplication against Someone who wronged him

He, peace be on him, supplicated with this holy supplication during his
qunut against the Abbasid Caliph who was a contemporary of him and made
him suffer from various kinds of pang and pain. We will present the full
text of the supplication, that, through it, what the Imam met from the
tyrants of his time may be clear:

O Allah, surely I and so-and-so son of so-and-so are two of your
servants! Our forelocks are in Your hand. You know our resting place,
our depository, our return, our abode, our secret and open deeds. You
know our intentions and encompass our minds. Your knowledge of what we
show is just as Your knowledge of what we hide. Your knowledge of what
we conceal is just as Your knowledge of what we make public. None of our
affairs is hidden from You; none of our conditions is covered from You.
No fortress protects us from You; no sanctuary guards us from You and no
place to flee from You. The fortresses do not preserve the unjust from
You. His fighters do not struggle for him against You. No overcomer
attempts to overcome You through his standing by him; You catch up with
him wherever he walks and have power over him wherever he goes.
Therefore the wronged from among us seeks refuge in You. The vanquished
from among us relies on You, resorts to You, seeks help from You when
deserted by the aider, cries to You for help when neglected by the
helper, seeks shelter in You

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 553.

when banished by the courtyards, knocks on Your gate when doors with
bolts are closed before him, reaches You when the heedless kings are
veiled from him. You know what happens to him before he complains of it
to You; You know what sets him right before he supplicates You for it;
therefore praise belongs to You, O Aware, Knowing, Most Kind!

O Allah, and that it certainly was in Your previous knowledge, Your firm
decree, Your going on determination, and Your valid command. Your will
is in process among all Your servants, happy and unhappy, pious and
sinful. You have given so-and-so power over me, and he has wronged me
with it, aggressed against me through his position, showed audaciousness
and mighty through his authority with which You have invested him,
showed tyranny and pride through his high state which You have given to
him. Your giving respite to him has deluded him and Your clemency toward
him has made him tyrannical, so he has aimed at me with detested things
toward which I am impatient, intentionally performed to me evil (things)
before which I am feeble. I cannot seek justice from him because of my
frailty nor can I gain a victory over him because of the paucity (of my
supporters); therefore I have entrusted his affair to You and I have
relied on You in respect with his affair. You have threatened him with
Your punishment, warned him through Your power, and frightened him with
Your vengeance, but he has thought that Your clemency toward him is out
of weakness, and Your giving respite to him is out of feebleness. None
has prevented him from (doing) another, nor has he been prevented from a
second by a first. However, he has gone too far in his error, continued
doing wrong, persevered in his enmity, and increased his tyranny, out of
audaciousness toward You. O my Master and Protector! Undertake Your
wrath You do not withhold from the oppressors. So here I am, O my
Master, wronged under his authority, abased in his courtyard,
transgressed, apprehensive, fearful, terrified, and vanquished. My
patience has become little; my strength has become narrow. The ways have
been closed before me except (the one leading) to You; the directions
have been blocked up all around me except a direction to Your. My
affairs have become ambiguous in repelling his detested things. The
opinions have become dubious to me in removing his oppression; the one
from among Your creatures I have asked for help has deserted me; the one
from among Your servants to whom I have clung has handed me over. So I
had consulted my adviser and he advised me to beseech You. I had asked
my guide to show me the right way and he showed me none except You.
Therefore I have come back to You, O my Protector, lowly, willingly,
miserable, knowing that there is no relief for me except from You, and
there is no salvation for me except through You. Fulfill Your promise in
helping me and grant my supplication; that is because Your words are
true and are not refuted and changed. Certainly You, Blessed and Most
High You are, have said: and he who has been oppressed, Allah will most
certainly aid him; and You, Majestic is Your eulogy and Holy are Your
names, have said: Supplicate Me and I will respond to you. So I am going
to do what You have commanded me not by

making You feel obliged. How can I make you feel obliged and You have
guided me to it; therefore, respond to me just as You had promised me, O
You Who do not fail to perform the promise. I certainly know, my Master,
that You will some day take vengeance on the oppressors for the
oppressed; I am sure that some time You will punish the usurper for the
usurped. That is because no obstinate precedes You; no opponent comes
out of Your grasp. You do not fear the escape of a escaper, but my
impatience and dismay do not reach the patience toward Your
deliberateness and waiting for Your clemency. So Your power, my Master,
is over all powers; Your force overcomes all forces. Every body will
return to You even if You give them time; all oppressor will come back
to You even if You respite them. O My Master, certainly Your clemency
toward so-and-so, Your long deliberateness toward him, and Your giving
him time have harmed me. Despair is about to dominate me were it not for
trust in You and certainty in Your promise. So if it is in Your valid
decree and Your going on power that he will turn to You in repentance or
repent or withhold from wronging me or refrain from the things I detest
and leave the great (sins) he commits (through wronging) me, then bless
Muhammed and his family and let that fall into his heart before You
remove Your blessing You have bestowed upon him and before You muddy
Your good You have done to him. If Your knowledge of him is other than
that of his station through which he has wronged me, then I ask You, O
Helper of the wronged and transgressed, grant my supplication. Bless
Muhammed and his family and overtake him in his place of safety with the
overtaking of a Mighty, Powerful One. Surprise him during his
inattention with the surprise of a Victorious King. Deprive him of his
blessing and his authority, disband his troops and his helpers.
Completely tear apart his kingdom, thoroughly scatter his supporters,
isolate him from Your blessing for which he has showed neither gratitude
nor kindness. Strip him of the shirt of Your Exaltation toward which he
has showed no good turn. Snap him, O Snapper of the tyrants. Destroy
him, O Destroyer of the bygone generations. Ruin him, O Ruiner of the
oppressive nations. Abandon him, O Abandoner of the rebellious groups.
Cut off his lifetime; take his properties; efface his trace; cut off his
news; put out his fire; make dark his house; ball his sun; make him give
up the ghost; smash his legs; cut off his head; rub his nose in the
ground; hasten his death. Leave neither shield for him unless you
destroy it, nor support for him unless You snap it, nor a union unless
You scatter it, nor a post of loftiness unless You lower it, nor a
pillar unless You undermine it, nor a tie unless You cut it off. Show us
his helpers and troops as slaves after the exaltation; make them
disunited after their unity, bow their heads after their show-off before
the community. Relieve, through the removal of his affair, the fearful
souls, the grieved hearts, the perplexed community, and the lost
mankind. Show, through his removal, the suspended, prescribed
punishments, the effaced laws (sunan), the neglected precepts, the
changed, principal features (of religion), the distorted verses, the
deserted schools, the abandoned places of worship, and the demolished
shrines. Through it (his removal) satisfy the hungry, hollow stomachs.

Water, through it, the exhausted palates and the thirsty livers. Through
it give rest to the tired feet. Strike him with an affliction that has
no sister (lit. no like), with an hour when there is no abode, with a
misfortune with which there is no refreshment, and with a stumble from
which there is no release. Make lawful his forbidden things; muddy his
ease. Show him Your most violent seizing, Your ideal vengeance, Your
power that is over all powers, Your force that is mightier than his.
Overcome him for me through Your strong strength and Your severe
punishment. Protect me from him through Your protection. Afflict him
with poverty he cannot redress and with evil he cannot cover. Entrust
him to himself in what You desire. Surely You do what You desire!
Release him from Your force and power and entrust him to his force and
power. Remove his scheming through Your scheming; repel his will through
Your will. Sicken his body; orphan his children; decrease his fixed
term; disappoint his hope; remove his state; prolong his wailing; make
him busy with his own body. Do not set him free from his sadness. Turn
his trickery into error, his affair into disappearance, his comfort into
removal, his earnestness into lowness, his authority into vanishing, and
his final result into the most wicked result. Make him die of his fury
if You intended to make him die; let him remain in grief if You intended
to let him remain. Protect me from his evil, his backbite, his slander,
his influence, and his enmity. Glance at him with a glance through which
You destroy him; for most surely You are strongest in prowess and
strongest to give an exemplary punishment.[1]

From this holy supplication we conclude that Imam Musa met heavy
misfortunes and exhausting pain from his opponent, for he did not
supplicate against him with this supplication unless he filled his heart
with severe sadness and bitter pain.

### His Supplication in Seeking Needs

He, peace be on him, supplicated with this supplication when he was
poverty or lack-stricken:

O Allah, I ask You through him whose right against You is great to bless
Muhammed and his family, to provide me with putting into practice the
knowledge of Your right You have taught me, and to make easy to me Your
provision of which You have deprived me.[363]

### His Supplication for Help in Repaying Debts

A Companion of the Imams complained to him of his accumulated debts
against him, and he, peace be on him, wrote him the following
supplication and ordered him to supplicate (Allah) with it:

O Allah, repay to all Your creatures their complaints against me, small
and great, through ease and well-being from You, and that which my
strength cannot reach,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Muhajj al-Da'wat, pp. 67-72. [2] Usool al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 553.

my own hand cannot embrace, my body, my certainty, and my soul cannot
endure. So repay it on my behalf from the plentiful You have from Your
favor. Then do not let anything of it remain behind me to settle it of
my good deeds. O Most Merciful of the merciful! I testify that there is
no god apart from Allah, Who is unique and without partners, that
Muhammed is His servant and His Prophet, that the religion is just as He
Has legislate, that Islam is just as He has described, that the Book is
just as He has revealed, that the speech is just as He has related, and
that Allah is the Clear Truth. Allah has mentioned Muhammed and his
Household in a good way, and He has greeted Muhammed and his Household
with (the greeting) salam. [1]

### His Supplication for Seeking Veil

Imam Musa, peace be on him, sought veil through the following
supplication and sought protection with it:

I have trusted in the Living, Who does not die; I have fortified myself
in the Possessor of the might and invincibility; I have sought help from
the Possessor of the magnificence and kingdom. O My Protector! I have
submitted to You, so do not hand me over. I have trusted in You, so do
not desert me. I have sought refuge in Your easy protection, so do not
dismiss me. You are the Object of requests and to You is the flight. You
know what I conceal and make public; You know the stealthy looks and
that which the breasts conceal; therefore withhold from me, O Allah, the
hands of the oppressive from among all the jinn and the men; heal me and
make me well, O Most Merciful of the merciful![1]

It is enough for us to mention this number of his holy supplication that
indicates that he devoted himself to Allah and clang to Him. Many of his
supplications have been mentioned in the books al-Iqbal, Muhajj
al-Daawat, and other than them have been written on this subject.

### Sermons and Commandments

He gave high advice and valuable teachings to his companions and his
followers; he, peace be on him, always warned them against the
chastisement and punishment of Allah and made them fear the hereafter;
the following are some of his commandments:

### His commandments to a Son of his.

He, peace be upon him, has said to him: O my little son, beware that
Allah sees you (commit) an act of disobedience from which He has
prohibited you. Beware that Allah misses you during an act of obedience
He has commended you (to perform). Adhere to diligence. Do not take out
of yourself falling short of worshipping Allah, for surely they do not
assign to Allah, the Great and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 373. [2] Muhajj al-Da'awat, p. 373.

Almighty, the worship due to Him. Beware of joking, for it takes away
the light of your faith and makes (men) disparage your manhood. Beware
of laziness and boredom, for they deprive you of your share in this
world and the next.[1]

### Directions and Guidance

He, peace be on him, has given to all Muslims general directions in
which he has mentioned:

Experiences are sufficient education; the passage of time is a
(sufficient) lesson; the morals of him with whom you associate are
(sufficient) knowledge; the remembrance of death is a (sufficient)
barrier against sins and offences. The wonder of wonders is those who
are on diet and drink lest they should be infected by a malady, but they
do not guard against sins out of fear of the fire when it burns their
bodies.[2]

### General Advice

He, peace be on him, advised his companions to organize their time and
to educate their souls, saying: Try hard, that your time may be four
hours: one hour is for supplicating Allah, one hour for the affairs of
the livelihood, one hour for associating with the brothers (friends) and
the reliable ones who let you know your defects and who are inwardly
loyal to you, and one hour for that you are alone with yourselves (and)
for non-forbidden things. Through this hour you have power over the
three hours. Tell yourselves of neither poverty nor a long lifetime, for
whoever tells himself of poverty becomes miserly. Whoever tells himself
of a long lifetime becomes greedy. Appoint for yourselves a share of the
world through giving them something lawful they desire, that does not
defile manhood, and in which there is no immoderation. Seek help from
that for the affairs of your religion, for it has been reported: Whoever
leaves his life in the world for his religion or leaves his religion for
his life in the world does not belong to us.[3]

### Urging for Doing Good

He, peace be on him, has said: He whose two days are equal is cheated.
He whose end of his two days is more wicked than them is cursed; whoever
does not know the increase to his own soul is in a decrease; whoever is
in a greater decrease, it is better to him die than to remain alive.[4]

With this brief presentation we will end our talk about his sermons and
teachings and we will deal with another apart of his heritage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Waafi, vol. 3, p. 78. [2] Al-Durr al-Nazim. [3] Tuhaf al-'Uqool,
p. 409. [4] Al-Ithaf Bihub al-Ashraf, p. 55.

### His Debates and Discussions

Imam Musa, peace be on him, entered eloquent debates and discussions
with his opponents; likewise he debated with some Jews and Christian
scholars. He, peace be on him, confuted all of them through sufficient
proofs he gave to them concerning the correctness of his beliefs and the
falsehood of theirs. They have acknowledged their incapability and their
failure, the Imams abundant knowledge and his superiority over them. The
following are some of his debates:

#### 1. With Nafee al-Ansari

Imam Musa, peace be on him, visited Harun (al-Rashids) palace. When the
chamberlain of the palace saw him, he received him with honoring and
welcome, gave him precedence over other then him to meet Harun. In the
waiting-room was Nafee al-Ansari. When he saw that honoring and welcome,
he burnt with anger, turned to Abd al-Aziz, who was with him, and said
to him:

-Who is this Shaykh?

-Do you not know him? This is the Shaykh (Chief) of the family of Abi
Talib; this is Musa b. Jafar

Nafee criticized the Abbasids for their honoring Imam Musa, saying: I
have never seen someone more incapable than this group of people who
welcomes and honors a man who is able to remove them from their throne;
when he comes out, I will treat him badly!

Abd al-Aziz scolded, saying: Do not do that! For they are the Household
(of the Prophet). When someone addresses them in a bad manner, they
brand him through an answer for life.

When the Imam ended his meeting with Harun and came out of him, Nafee
angrily walked towards him, caught the reins of his mount, and asked
him:

-Who are you?

-Fellow, if you want (to know) the lineage, then I am the (grand) son of
Muhammed, the one loved by Allah, the (grand) son of Ismail, the one
whom Allah ransomed with a great sacrifice, and the (grand) son of
Ibraheem, the bosom friend of Allah. If you want (to know) the city, it
is that to which Allah, the Great and Almighty, has made the hajj
obligatory on Muslims and on you, if you belonged to them! If you want
to vie in glory (with me), by Allah, the polytheists from among my
people did not regard the Muslims from among your people as their equals
when they said: Muhammed, let our equals from Quraysh meet us (in
battle)! Leave the reins of my mount!

Nafee went away while he was unable to see his way out of shame and
disgrace

with which the Imam branded him.[1]

#### 2. With al-Fedl b. al-Rabi

Harun al-Rashid paid a visitation to the tomb of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family. So Imam Musa, peace be on him, met him. When
the meeting was over, the Imam came out and passed by Muhammed al-Ameen,
son of (Harun) al-Rashid, who turned to al-Fedl b. al-Rabi and commanded
him: Admonish this! So al-Rabi arose and asked the Imam:

-What! Is this the animal on which you meet the Commander of the
faithful? If you were seeking (something) on it, you would not obtain it
and if you were being sought (while you were on it), you would not
escape.

-It is beneath the vanity of horses and above the lowliness of asses and
the best of matters are those that are moderate.[2]

The Imam left him and went away. Confusion, tiredness, and incapability
appeared on al-Fedls face.

#### 3. With Abu Yousif

Harun al-Rashid ordered Abu Yousif[3] to ask Imam Musa in his presence,
that incapability might appear on him and he would use it as a means to
degrade his dignity. When the Imam, peace be on him, met them, Abu
Yousif asked him:

- What do you say about making shade (from the sun) for the person
consecrated as (muhrim)?

- It is not permitted.

- Shall he pitch a tent and enter it?

- Yes.

- What is the difference between the two places?

- What do you say about a menstruating woman-does she compensate the
prayer?

- No.

- Does she compensate the fasting?

- Yes.

- Why?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Nizhat al-Nazir fi Tenbeeh al-Khatir, p. 45. [2] Zahr al-Adab, vol.
1, p. 132. [3] Abu Yousif's name is Ya'qub b. Ibrahim al-Ansari. He was
born in the year 113 A. H. He died in Baghdad in the year 282 A. H. He
was a traditionist, and then he followed opinion. He studied
jurisprudence under 'Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Layla and Abu Hanifa. He was
appointed as a judge by Harun al-Rashid. This has been mentioned in
Tabaqat al-Fuqaha', p. 113.

- In this manner it has been mentioned, and in this manner this has been
mentioned.

Abu Yousif kept silent and gave no answer. Shame and incapability
appeared on his face, so Harun said to him:

- I think you have done nothing!

- He has given me an irrefutable answer![1]

Imam Musa left them and went away while sadness and unhappiness
dominated them.

#### 4. With Abu Hanifa

Abu Hanifa visited Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, and said to him: I
have seen your son, Musa, pray while the people were passing before him.
He did not prevent them from that.

Abu Abd Allah (al-Sadiq), peace be on him, ordered his son to be brought
before him. When he stood before him, he asked him: O My little son, Abu
Hanifa says that you pray and the people pass before you.

Yes, father, replied Imam Musa, the One to Whom I pray is nearer to me
than them; Allah, the Great and Almighty, says: We are nearer to him
than the jugular vein.

Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, was very delighted and glad when he
heard these wonderful words of his son, so he rose for him, embraced
him, and said to him: May my father and mother be your ransom, O he in
whom secrets have been deposited![2]

### 5. With Harun al-Rashid

Harun al-Rashid ordered Imam Musa, peace be on him, to be arrested, and
he stayed in prison for many years. Then he ordered him to be brought in
his palace. When he was brought and sat down, Harun al-Rashid turned to
him and angrily asked him:

- Musa b. Jafar, are land taxes collected for two caliphs?

- Commander of the faithful, I seek refuge for you with Allah that you
should bear the sin committed against me and your own sin, and that you
accept falsehood from our opponents against us. You have come to know
that lies have been fabricated against us since the death of Allahs
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family; you have knowledge of that.
I ask you through your kinship to Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, to permit me to relate to you

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Manaqib, vol. 3, p. 429. [2] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12, p. 283.

a tradition related to me by my father on the authority of his
forefathers on the authority of my grandfather, Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family.

- I have given you permission.

- My father has told me on the authority of his forefathers on the
authority of my grandfather, Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, that he has said: Surely when kinship touches kinship, it moves
and shakes. Therefore, give me your hand!

Accordingly, Harun felt pity (for him) and his anger disappeared. He
stretched out his hand to him, drew him towards him, and embraced him
for a long time; then he brought him nearer to him while his eyes were
bathed in tears; he turned to him and said to him some words full of
sympathy:

- You and your grandfather are truthful. My blood has moved and my veins
have shaken to the extent that compassion has dominated me and my eyes
has flowed with tears. I want to ask you about something that has been
on my mind for a time; I have asked none about it. If you answer me
about it, I will release you and do not accept the words of anybody
against you. I have been informed that you never tell lies; therefore,
tell me the truth about what I ask you.

- If I had knowledge of it and you gave me security, I would tell you
about it.

- I would give you security if you told me the truth and left the
precautionary dissimulation for which you had been known, O Fatimas
sons.

- Ask me about whatever you wish.

- Why have you been given preference over us while you and us belong to
one tree, the Banu Abd al-Muttalib, we, and you are one (tree), so the
Banu al-Abbas and you are the children of Abi Talib. They are two uncles
of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and they have the
same kinship to him?

- We are nearer to him.

- Why is that?

- That is because Abd Allah and Abi Talib belong to one father and
mother; your father al-Abbas does not belong to the mother of Abd Allah
and Abi Talib.

- Why have you claimed that you have inherited the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family, and (that) the uncle veils the cousin, and
Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, has died, and Abu
Talib had died before him, and al-Abbas, his uncle, was alive?

- I ask the commander of the faithful to exempt me from it and to
question me about all chapters other than it.

- No, you should answer (it)!

- Give me security.

- I had given you security before the speech.

- It has been mentioned in the speech of (Imam) Ali, peace be on him:
None, male or female, has (the right) to share (the inheritance) with
the child of the backbone (sons, daughters, and grandsons) except the
parents, the husband, and the wife. It has not been established that the
uncle shares the inheritance with the child of the backbone. However,
Taym, Adi, and the Umayyads have said that the uncle is a father; that
is their (personal) opinion without a reality and no tradition
(reported) on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family.

Then Imam Musa, peace be on him, mentioned to him a group of the jurists
of the time who gave a religious decision on this matter similar to that
his grandfather, (Imam Ali) the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, had given. He, peace be on him, has added his speech to that: The
earlier general populace have narrated on the authority of the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, that he has said: Ali is the most
capable of you in giving legal decisions. Similarly, Umar b. al-Khattab
has said: Ali is the most capable of us in giving legal decisions. And
it (judgement) is a comprehensive noun, for it includes all things such
as recitation (of the Quran), religious duties, and knowledge through
which the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, praised his
companions.

After Imam Musa, peace be on him, had given this irrefutable proof,
Harun al-Rashid asked him to give him more explanations, so he, peace be
on him, said: Surely the Prophet did not bequeathed those who did not
emigrate and did not establish their pledge of allegiance until they
emigrated.

Harun asked: What is your proof?

He, peace be on him, said: These words of Him: and (as for) those who
believed and did not fly, not yours is their guardianship until they
fly.[1] And my uncle al-Abbas did not emigrate.

Harun turned yellow and burst with anger, so he said to the Imam:

-Have you told any of our enemies or our jurists about that?

- No, and none had told me about it except you.

He calmed down and asked:

-Why have you permitted the non-Shiites (amma) and the Shiites (khassa)
to ascribe you to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and
to call you: O Sons of Allahs Apostle, and you are the sons of Ali, and
one is ascribed to his father, and Fatima was a container, and the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Qur'an Surat al-Anfal, vol. 72.

family, is your grandfather on the side of your mother?

- If the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, was raised from
the dead and proposed to your daughter, would you respond to him?

- Glory belongs to Allah! And why do I not respond to him? Rather I
would through that pride myself on the Arabs, the non-Arabs, and Quraysh

- But he would not propose (to my daughter) and I would not marry (her)
to him.

- Why?

- Because he begot me and did not beget you.

- Well-done, Musa!

- Why have you said that you are the Prophets progeny, while the Prophet
had no progeny, the progeny belongs to the male and not to the female,
and you are his daughters children?

- I ask you, by the right of the kinship, to exempt me (from that)

- No, you should tell me about your proof, O Alis sons, and you are,
Musa, their chief and the Imam of their time; I do not exempt you (from
that).

- Will you give me permission to answer?

- Give (me the answer).

- Allah has said in his book: and of his descendants, Dawud and Sulayman
and Ayyub and Yousif and Harun; and thus do We reward those who do good
(to others). And Zakariya and Yehya and Isa and Ilyas; every one was of
the good.[1] Who is Isas father, O Commander of the faithful?

- Isa had no father.

- Allah has ascribed him to the descendants of the prophets through
Maryam; similarly, we have been ascribed to the descendants of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, through our mother Fatima,
peace be on her.

Nevertheless, Harun asked Imam Musa to give him more evidence and
proofs. So he, peace be on him, responded to him, saying: Allah, the
Great and Almighty, has said: But whoever disputes with you in this
matter after what has come to you of knowledge, then say: Come, let us
call our sons and your sons and our women and your women and our near
people and your near people, then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray
for the curse of Allah on the liars.[2] None claims that the Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, made someone enter under the cloak
(kisa) when he challenged the Christians to a contest of prayer to Allah

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Surat al-An'am, verses 84-85. [2] Surat Aal 'Umran, verse 60.

(mubahala) except Ali b. Abi Talib, Fatima, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn.
Therefore the explanation of the words of Him, the Exalted, is: Our sons
are al-Hasan and al-Husayn; our women is Fatima; our near people is Ali
b. Abi Talib, peace be on him. He has added another proof to this proof:
Surly the (religious) scholars have unanimously agreed that Gabriel said
on the Day of Uhad: O Muhammed, surely this is the help from Ali. So he
(the Prophet), may Allah bless him and his family, has said: Surely he
(Ali) is of me and I of him. So he (Gabriel) has said: And I am of
you.[1]

Harun stopped his argument and found no way to follow, for the Imam gave
undoutable, conclusive arguments.

Then Harun asked the Imam to write him a brief, comprehensive letter on
the affairs of the religion, and he, peace be on him, wrote him the
letter that reads as follows:

### In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful

All the affairs of the religion are four: the affair over which there is
no difference; it is the unanimous resolution of the community on the
necessity to which they are forced. The traditions on which there is
unanimous resolution; they are the utmost degree before which all doubts
are brought, from which all events are derived. The affair in which
doubt and denial are possible, so the way to it is to consult its men,
the argument of it is of that which has been established to those who
embrace it from the Book on whose explanation there is unanimous
resolution or a sunna from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, over which there is no difference. Or analogy whose justice
intellects know and which the special group and the general populace of
the community cannot doubt and deny. These two affairs of monotheism and
those inferior to them to the wound money and those inferior to it.
These are the presented (things) before which the affairs of the
religion are brought. Therefore you can choose the thing established
through a proof and refuse the one whose correctness is vague to you. So
whoever mentions one of these three (matters), then it is the conclusive
argument Allah has explained to His Prophet in the words of Him: Say:
Then Allahs is the conclusive argument; so if He pleased, He would
certainly guide you all.[2]

The ignorant knows the conclusive argument; he comes to know it through
his ignorance just as the learned knows it through his knowledge; that
is because Allah is just and does not wrong (anyone). He advances the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12, pp. 274-275. [2] Qur'an, Surat al-An'am,
vol. 149.

knowledge of His creatures as an argument against them. He summons them
to know what they do not know and deny.

Imam Musa had gone away after Harun rewarded and honored.[1] He guided
his opponent-the so-called the Caliph of the Muslims and Commander of
the faithful-to the affairs of the religion and explained to him the
position of Ahl al-Bayt and the correctness of their sayings and
confirmed his beliefs with the most reliable evidence and proofs.

The traditionists have mentioned his other debate with Harun. I (the
author) think that is debate is one of the fabricated narrations, and
that it is nearer to imagination than to reality; it reads as follows:

Harun al-Rashid made the pilgrimage to the Sacred House of Allah
(Mecca), so the police prevented the pilgrims from entering the House
while circumambulating it. While he was busy circumambulating and
surrounded by royal guards, a Bedouin hurried to the House and began
circumambulating it along with him, so the chamberlain walked towards
him and commanded him, saying:

-Fellow, go away from the face of the Caliph!

-Surely Allah has regarded men as equal in this place when He said: The
Sacred Mosque which We have made equally for men, (for) the dweller
therein and (for) the visitor.

The chamberlain left him and went away. Whenever Harun al-Rashid
circumambulating the Kaaba, the Bedouin was before him. When he arose to
kiss the Black Stone, the Bedouin preceded him and kissed it. When he
went to the Standing Place to perform a prayer wherein, the Bedouin
preceded him and prayed before him. So he became angry and ordered his
chamberlain to bring the Bedouin before him, and he ordered him:

-Respond to the Commander of the faithful!

-I do not go to him, for I am in no need of him! He must come to me, for
he is in need of me!

The chamberlain went to al-Rashid (and told him of the Bedouins words),
and he said: He is truthful!

Then he went to him. When he approached him, he greeted him and asked
him:

-O Bedouin, shall I sit down?

-Do not ask permission from me, for the place does not belong to him; it
is the House of Allah; He has installed it for His servants. If you like
to sit down, then sit down; if you like to go away, then go away!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tuhaf al-'Uqool, pp. 407-408.

Harun al-Rashid sat down while he was furious and angry and scolded the
Bedouin, saying:

-Woe unto you! Are you the one who vies with the kings?

-Yes; and I have knowledge to which you must listen!

-Therefore, I am going to ask you. If you cannot (answer my questions),
I will harm you!

-Does your question belong to a learned one or to an obstinate one?

-Rather a question belongs to a learned one!

-Sit down and question.

-Tell me: What is your (religious) duty?

-Surely the (religious) duty is one, five, seventeen, forty-three,
forty-nine, one hundred and fifty-three, one out of twelve, one out of
forty, five out of two hundreds, one throughout the (life) time, and one
for one.

So Harun al-Rashid laughed and sneeringly said:

-Woe unto you! I ask you about your (religious) duty while you answer in
an arithmetical way!

-Do you not know that the whole of the religion is arithmetic; if the
religion was not arithmetic, Allah would not prepare reckoning from
creatures. Then he recited (these words of Him ): and though there be
the weight of a grain of mustard seed, (yet) will We bring it, and
sufficient are We to take account.

-Explain to me what you have said; otherwise I will ordered you to be
killed between al-Safa and al-Marwa!

So the chamberlain begged Harun, saying:

-Pardon him for Allah and this Standing Place!

So the Bedouin laughed at his words, and Harun was angry with him and
asked him:

-What has made you laugh?

-I wonder at you, for I do not know who is the more ignorant than you,
who makes slow the death that has come or who makes haste the death that
has not come yet.

Al-Rashid commanded:

-Explain what you have said!

-As for my words: the (religious) duty is one, they are that the whole
of Islam is one and it has five ritual prayers that are seventeen
rakkas: forty-three sajjdas, forty-nine takkbirs, and a hundred and
fifty-three tasbihs. As for my statement: one

out of twelve, it is that fasting during the Month of Ramadan is one out
of twelve months. As for my statement: one out of forty, it is that
whoever has forty dinars, Allah has made it incumbent on him (to pay) a
dinar. As for my statement: five out of two hundreds, it is that whoever
has two hundred dirhams, Allah has made it incumbent on him (to pay)
five dirhams. As for my statement, one throughout (life) time, is the
hajj of Islam. As for my statement: one for one, it is that whoever
sheds blood unjustly, then it is obligatory to shed his own blood.
Allah, the Most High, has said: life is for life.

So Harun (al-Rashid) admired the Bedouins abundant knowledge, saying:
What a generous man! Then he ordered him to be given a purse of money.
So the Bedouin asked:

-What made me deserve this purse of money? Through speech or through
your questioning me?

-Rather through speech.

-I am going to question you about a certain matter. If you answered it,
the purse of money would be yours in order to give it as alms in this
Holy Place. If you did not answer it, you had to add another purse of
money to it, that I might give it as alms to the poor of the district
from among my people.

Accordingly, Harun ordered another purse of money to be brought and said
to him:

-Ask about whatever you like!

-Tell me about the beetle: Does it feed or suckle its young?

So Harun turned yellow and was dominated by anger, and he said:

-Woe unto you! Is it I whom is asked about such a question?

-I have heard from him who had heard from Allahs Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, that he said: Whoever is appointed as a ruler
over some peoples is granted an intellect like those of theirs. You are
the Imam of this community; when you are questioned about any of the
affairs of your religion and of the (religious) duties, you must answer
it. Have you any answer to it?

-Explain to me what you have said and take the two purses of money.

-Surly when Allah created the earth, he created the insects of the earth
without feces and blood. He created them from earth and made them feed
on it. When the young insect leaves its mother, it does not feed it nor
does it nurse it, and it lives on earth. So Harun said: By Allah, none
has been tried with such a question.

The Bedouin took the two purses of money and went away. A person
followed him and asked him about his name, and suddenly he was Imam Musa
al-Kazim, peace be on him. The person came back to Harun and told him
about that, and he said:

This leaf must be of that tree![1]

We have doubt about this narration for the following reasons:

1. Imam Musa vied with Harun al-Rashid for performing the hajj and
prayers; this rivalry is far from the guidance and behavior of the Imam,
and no religious deed resulted from it.

2. Harun did not recognize the Imam throughout this debate that took a
long time, while he fully knew him.

3. The Imam took two purses of money from Harun, whereas he was very far
above such a deed, for he was famous for that he refused Harun and did
not submit to him or those kings of his time.

4. The story, which is questions and answers, is weak and illogical;
therefore it is nearer to imagination than to reality. It was created by
the excessive and the Mufawada; it has no share of correctness, as I
(the author) think.

### With some Jewish Scholars

A delegation of Jewish scholars visited Imam al-Sadiq to debate with him
on Islam. When they had the honor of standing before him, they asked him
about the evidence and proof of the prophecy of Allahs Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family:

-Which miracle is a proof of the prophethood of Muhammed, may Allah
bless him and his family?

His (Allahs) dominating Book that dazzles the intellects of beholders
along with the lawful and the unlawful He has given, and other than
them; if we mentioned it, it would take us along time to explain it.

-How can we come to know that this (miracle) is just as you have
mentioned?

Imam Musa, though young, asked them:

-How can we come to know the verses Allah (revealed) to Musa (Moses)
according to what you describe?

-We have known that through the narration reported by the truthful.

-Therefore, know the truthfulness of what I have told you through the
answer of the boy (Imam Musa) Allah has taught without teaching and
knowledge from narrators.

Imam Musa dazzled the Jews, and they believed in his words, which were
really a miracle, and became Muslims, saying: We bear witness that there
is no god but Allah, that Muhammed is the Apostle of Allah, that you are
the guiding Imams and the proofs of Allah over his creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Manaqib, vol. 3, pp. 427-429.

When Imam Musa mentioned this proof and the people became Muslims at his
hand, Abu Abd Allah (al-Sadiq) arose and kissed him on the forehead and
said to him: You are the one who will undertake the office of the
Imamate (qaim), after me. Then he (al-Sadiq) ordered clothes and gifts
to be given to them. They thanked him for that and went away.[1]

### With Burayha

Burayha was among the leading personalities of the Christians and among
their brilliant scholars. He looked for the truth and sought guidance,
so he associated with all the Muslim sects; he debated with them but did
not reach the objective he wanted. The Shiites and Hisham b. al-Hakam
were described to him, and he along with a hundred Christian scholars.
When they sat down, Burayha questioned Hisham about the most important
ideological and theological matters. Hisham answered them, and then they
all went to have the honor of meeting with Imam Abi Abd Allah
(al-Sadiq), peace be on him. Before they met him, they had met with Imam
Musa, so Hisham told him about his debates and speech with Burayha.
Thus, the Imam turned to Burayha and asked him:

-O Burayha, what about your knowledge of your Book?

-I am knowledgeable of it.

-What about your trust in the explanation on it?

-Just as I have knowledge of it.

Then, he, peace be on him, recited to him the Bible and read to him its
chapters. When Burayha heard of that, he believed that the religion of
Islam was true, that the Imam was of the Prophets Tree, and he said to
him: I have sought you or the like of you for fifty years.

Then he and his wife became Muslims; they went to Abi Abd Allah
(al-Sadiq), peace be on him, and Hisham told him that they became
Muslims at the hand of his son Musa, peace be on him. Imam al-Sadiq,
peace be on him, became pleased, turned to Hisham and said to him:
Offspring, one of the other.

Burayha asked Abi Abd Allah (al-Sadiq): From where have you brought the
Torah, the Bible, and the Books of the prophets?

We have them, replied the Imam, we have inherited them from them; we
read them just as they had read them; we say them just as they had said
them; surely Allah does not appoint over the earth a proof who says that
he does not know when he is asked.

Burayha associated with Imam Abi Abd Allah (al-Sadiq) and was among his
most loyal companions. When the Imam moved to the Abode of
Everlastingness (lit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 4, p. 148.

passed away), Burayha associated with Imam Musa till he died during his
lifetime.[1]

### With a Monk

There was a monk in Syria (Sham). The Christians glorified and magnified
the monk. The monk preached to them once a year. Imam Musa met him on
that day when he was surrounded by monks and people. When the Imam sat
down, the monk turned to him and asked him:

-Fellow, are you a stranger?

-Yes.

-Are you from us or against us?

-I am not from you.

-Are you from the community upon which (Allah) has mercy?

-Yes.

-Are you from among its scholars or from among its ignorant?

-I am not from among its ignorant.

The monk became confused and began to ask the Imam about the most
difficult questions he had, saying:

-How is that the origin of the Tree of Tuba is with us, in the Abode of
Isa (Jesus), with you, in the Abode of Muhammed, may Allah bless him and
his family, and its branches are in every house?

-It is just like the sun whose light reaches every place and situation
while it is in the heaven.

-Why does the food in the Garden not run out and not decrease even
though they eat of it?

-It is just like the lamp in the world from which (men) take fire while
it does not decrease.

-What is the extended shade in the Garden?

-The time before the sunrise is the extended shade. Then he recited
these words of Him the Exalted: Have you not considered (the work of)
your Lord, how He extends the shade?

-Why do the inhabitants of the Garden not relieve the nature while they
eat and drink?

-They are just like the embero in its mothers womb.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid, vol. 4, p. 147.

-How do the servants in the Garden serve its inhabitants without being
ordered?

-When man is in need of a thing, his limbs know that, so the servants
know that and carry it out without being ordered.

-Are the keys of the Garden (made) of gold or silver?

-The keys of the Garden are the servants words: There is no god but
Allah!

-You are right!

Then the monk and his people became Muslims.[1]

These are some of the Imams arguments and debates; we will mention
another part of them in a chapter of the book.

### His Composing Poetry

As for his composing poetry, it is very little. Al-Shaykh al-Mufeed has
mentioned a poem of his recited by his son Imam al-Rida to al-Mamun and
ascribed it to his father:

Repel detested things through comfort; you may someday do not see what
you dislike.

Perhaps one conceals himself and the eyes compete for him though he is
concealed.

Perhaps the polite withholds his tongue for fear of answering though he
is eloquent.

Perhaps the venerable similes out of harm while his mind moans du to its
severity.[2]

Dhu al-Nun al-Mesri has mentioned that he passed by a village called
Betidsar during his tourism and saw a wall on which the following poetry
lines have been written:

I am the son of Mina, al-Misharayn, Zamzam, Mecca, and the Magnified
Kaaba.

My grandfather is the chosen Prophet; my father is he whose authority is
incumbent on all Muslims.

My mother is the chaste (one) from whom (men) seek light if we do not
number her as equal to Maryam (Mary).

The grandsons of Allahs Apostle are my uncles and (fore)fathers; his
pure (grand)sons are nine stars.

If you cling to the cord of their authority, you will be successful on
the day when the successful will be rewarded and you will lead a life of
ease and comfort.

The Imams of this creation are after their Prophet; if you do not know
that, then

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Manaqib, vol. 3, p. 427. [2] Al-Amali, p. 150.

know (it).

I am the Alawid, the Fatimid who is full of fear; days fill man with
(fear).

Thus, I feel that the earth is narrow through it is wide; I cannot
obtain the sky through a ladder.

So I have stopped at the house in which I have written my poetry;
therefore, read and acquaint yourself with whatever you like.

Dhu al-Nun said that he came to know that the writer of the
above-mentioned was an Alawid who escaped from the authorities during
the Caliphate of Harun (al-Rashid).

Al-Mejjlisi assumed that the poetry lines were composed by Imam
al-Kazim, peace be on him, who went to that place and wrote them in
order to complete the proofs against his opponents. These opinions are
impossible because Imam Musa did not escape from the authorities and did
not hide himself from them; rather he was in Yethrib (Medina)
criticizing Harun (al-Rashid) and the other kings of his time; he did
not escape from the authorities and was not afraid of their oppression.
We will in detail mention that.

### Comprehensive Sayings:

Imam Musa, peace be on him, has wise sayings in which he has mentioned
some moral and social affairs; this is an addition to what we have
mentioned. We have preferred to mention them without any explanation or
commentary. He, peace be on him, has said:

Do not remove the modesty between you and your brother; keep some of it,
for removing it is removing shame.

Your helping the weak is the best kind of alms.

Whoever suffers injustice knows its severity.

The ignorant wonder at the wise more than that the wise wonder at the
ignorant.

Begging is incorrect except in three (situations): the blood money one
cannot pay, heavy loss, and object poverty.

The believer is stronger than the mountain; (one) can take something of
the mountain with a pickaxe, but (none) can take anything of the
believers religion.

Making over trusts to their owners and truthfulness win provision;
treason and lying win poverty and hypocrisy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 11, p. 286.

Ubayd Allah b. Ishaq al-Madaini asked Imam Musa: Surely the man sees me
and swears by Allah that he loves me; shall I swear by Allah that he
loves me?

And he answered him: Try your heart. If you love him, then swear (by
Allah); otherwise do not (swear by Him).

Whoever undertakes that which is not his work, his work is lost and he
is disappointed.

There is no good in life except for an aware listener and a speaking
scholar.

Surely your righteousness results from the righteousness of the supreme
ruler (sultan); the supreme ruler (sultan) is just like a merciful
father; therefore love for him what you love for yourselves, and hate
for him what you hate for yourselves.

He, peace be on him, has said to Muhammed b. al-Fedl: O Muhammed, belie
your ear and your eye in respect with your brother (lit. friend) even if
fifty persons bear witness for you (against him). If he says something
to you, then believe him and belie them and do not spread anything that
disgraces him.

Whoever supplicates before lauding Allah and calling down blessings upon
Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his family, is like him who shoots an
arrow without a bowstring.

The best kind of worship after knowledge is waiting for relief.

Showing affection to men is a half intellect.

Many worries bring about old age.

Hastiness is foolishness.

A small family is one of the two easy things.

Whoever saddens his parents disobeys them.

A favor is not a favor but for those who have a religion and a lineage.

And Allah sends down help according to a burden and patience according
to a misfortune.

If oppression is more than truth, then one has no right to have a good
opinion of another until he comes to know that he has it.

A believer is just like the scales of a balance; the more his faith is
the more his tribulation is.

Imam Musa attended a dead person who was lowered into his grave and
said: Surely the thing whose end is this is worthy of abstaining; and
surely the thing whose beginning is this is entitled to be feared.

The burden of the religion and the world has become intense. As for the
burden of the world, it is that when you stretch out your hand to
(attain) it, you will find a

wicked person who precedes you to (attain) it. As for the burden of the
hereafter (the religion), it is that you find no helper to help you
against it.

Do not give to your brothers (something) of yourself that harms you more
than it benefits them.

He, peace be on him, has said: My father took me by the hand and said: O
My little son, surely my father Muhammed b. Ali took me by the hand and
said: Surely my father Ali b. al-Husayn took me by the hand and said: My
little son, do good to all those who ask you for it. If they deserve it,
then you hit its place. If they do not deserve it, then you deserve it.
If a person curses you on your right (hand) and then he moves to your
left (hand) and apologizes, then accept his apology.

When men completely despise the world, Allah makes them enjoy it and
blesses them wherein; when men completely love it, Allah makes them hate
it.

He, peace be on him, mentioned a tyrant in his gathering, saying: By
Allah, if he has become exalted through injustice in the world, he will
become low through justice in the hereafter.

Whoever brings a detested thing to his brother begins it with himself.

Whomever is born by poverty, riches spoils him.

When two (persons) curse each other, the higher of the (in rank)
degrades to a lower rank.

The believer is the brother of a believer on the side of his mother and
father though he is not born by his parents. Cursed is he who accuses
his brother; cursed is he who does not advise his brother; cursed is he
who submits himself as a captive to his brother; cursed is he who veils
himself from his brother; and cursed is he who backbites his brother.

The paucity of loyalty is a defect in manhood.

A good deed by a good deed is a shackle nothing can open except a reward
or gratitude.

If fixed terms appear, expectations are disclosed.

The paucity of gratitude makes (one) abstain from performing good deeds.

The head of generosity is making over trusts to their owners.

Whoever has no admonisher of his own soul, his enemy (Satan) has power
over him.

The cheated is he who of whose lifetime an hour is decreased.

He whose morals are many is not famous for evil.

Whoever leaves requesting high ranks due to that his hope is cut off
from them attains no important (thing).

The more appropriate knowledge to you is that which is not righteous to
you to work except with it. The most incumbent knowledge on you is that
which you are responsible for working with it. The most required
knowledge is that which leads you to the righteousness of your heart and
shows you its corruption. The most praiseworthy knowledge in the final
result is that which increases the reason of the wise. Therefore do not
busy (yourself) with the knowledge that does not harm you if you are
ignorant of it; and do not be heedless of the knowledge that increases
your ignorance when you leave it.

Beware of withholding from (spending money) on the acts of obedience to
Allah lest you should spend twice as much as it on the acts of
disobedience to Allah.

Whoever speaks of Allah perishes; whoever seeks presidency perishes;
whoever is vainglorious perishes.

A man asked Imam Musa about a generous person, and he, peace be on him,
replied: Surely your speech has two meanings: If you are asking about
the creatures, then the generous person is he who performs that which
Allah has made obligatory on him. The miser is he who refrains from that
which Allah has made obligatory on him. If you mean the Creator, then He
is generous when He gives and He is generous when he withholds, for if
He gives you, He gives you that which does not belong to you; and if he
withholds you, He withholds you from that which does belong to you.

Surely if some people accompany the supreme ruler (sultan) that the
believers may use them as caves, they will be safe on the Day of
Resurrection.

One jurist who saves one of our orphans who can not see us through
teaching him that which he is in need of is more violent to Iblis than a
thousand worshippers. For the worshipper takes care of himself only; and
this (jurist) takes care of himself along with the servants of
Allah-male and female-in order to save them from the hand and
disobedience of Iblis; for this reason he is better in Allahs sight than
a million worshippers.

Abd Allah b. Yehya said: I wrote to Imam Musa in a supplication: Praise
belongs to Allah (to) the end of His knowledge. And he, peace be on him,
wrote back: Do not say (to) the end of His knowledge, for there is no
end to His knowledge, but say to the end of His good pleasure.

If men commit sins they have not to do, Allah subjects them to
tribulations they do not expect.

Ali b. Swayd al-Sai said: I questioned Abu al-Hasan al-Awual about the
words of Him, the Exalted and Great: And whoever trusts in Allah, he is
sufficient for him. And he, peace be on him, has said: The trust in
Allah is degrees: of them is that

you trust in Him in all your affairs, so you should be satisfied with
what He does to you. You should know that He gives you nothing but good
and favors; you should know that the decision regarding that belongs to
Him; and you should trust in Him in respect with it and other than it.

Allah has mercy on the inhabitants of the earth as long as they love
each other, make over trusts to their owners, and work with the truth.

Do not neglect the right of your brother depending on that which is
between you and him, for he whose right you neglect is not your brother;
let not your brother be stronger in (establishing) relationship than
your abandoning him.

Surely the prophets, their children, and their followers were singled
out with three qualities: maladies in the bodies, fear of the supreme
ruler (sultan), and poverty.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, said to a son of his: Do not take out
yourself of the limit of curtailment in respect with the acts of worship
and obedience to Allah, for surely none worships Allah with the worship
due to Him.

He, peace be on him, said: Surely Allah, the Great and Almighty, has
said: Most surely I do not enrich the rich due to his dignity with Me
nor do I impoverish the poor due to his abasement with Me; I try the
rich with the poor through that. Were it not for the poor, the rich
would not deserve the Garden.

If you do not feel shame, then do what you like.

Al-Abbas b. Hilal al-Shami said: I said to Abi al-Hasan Musa: May I be
your ransom, men admire him who eats the most simple food, wears coarse
clothes, and shows reverence. So he, peace be on him, said: Did you not
know that Yousif (Joseph) was a prophet, son of a prophet? (However) he
used to wear silk mantles brocaded with gold. He sat on the thrones of
the Pharaohs and ruled. The people were in no need of his clothes, but
they were in need of his justice. An Imam is required to be just and
fair; when he says something, he says the truth; when he promises
something, he fulfills his promise; when he passes a judgement, he
judges equitably. Allah has not forbidden wearing a particular type of
clothes or eating a particular type of food earned through a lawful way;
rather He has forbidden the unlawful, little or much. And most certainly
Allah has said: Say: Who has forbidden the beautiful (gifts) of Allah
which He has produced for His servants, and the agreeable things of the
sustenance.

Musa b. Bukayr has said: I asked Abu al-Hasan (Musa), peace be on him:
Which is older, unbelief or polytheism? And he answered me: As far as I
know that you do not debate. I said: Hisham b. Salim ordered me to
question you. So he answered me: Unbelief is older and is denial. Allah,
the Great and Almighty, has said: But Iblis (did it not). He refused and
was proud.

Ali b. Suwayyid said: I asked Aba al-Hasan Musa, peace be on him, about
the weak (at faith), and he wrote back to me: The weak (at faith) are
those whose

proofs are not raised and they do not know the difference. If they know
the difference, then they are not weak.

Ali b. Suwayyid said: I asked Aba al-Hasan Musa about the
self-admiration that spoils deeds, and he, peace be on him, replied:
Self-admiration is degrees: Of them is that the evil-deed of a servant
is made fair-seeing to him so much so that he considers it good. So he
admires it and thinks that he does well; of them is that the servant
believes in his Lord and lays Allah under obligation, while it is Allah
Who lays him under obligation in respect with it.

Whoever seeks this livelihood through a lawful way to profit through it
himself and his family is just like the one who struggles in the way of
Allah. If he becomes helpless, he must borrow a loan on the account of
Allah and His Apostle in order to maintain his family. If he dies and
had not repaid the loan, then it is incumbent on the Imam to repay it.
If he (the Imam) does not repay it, then its burden is on him. Surely
Allah, the Great and Almighty, has said: Alms are only for the poor and
the needy, and the officials (appointed) over them...and those in debts.
And this (person) is poor, needy, and indebts.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, said: Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, has said: Whoever gives religious decisions to men
without knowledge, the angels of the heaven and the earth curse him.

The truthful is better than the truth, and the good-doer is better than
good-deeds.

Ali b. Jafar said:

-I asked my brother Musa b. Jafar: Is a believer a miser?

-Yes.

-Is he a traitor?

-No, nor is he a liar.

Then he said: Surely my father related to me on the authority of his
forefathers on the authority of Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, who has said: A believer may have all qualities except lying
and treason.

Imam Musa, peace be on him, said: A man asked Allahs Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family: What is a fathers right against his child? He,
may Allah bless him and his family, replied: He should not call him by
his name, nor should he walk before him, nor should he sit in front of
him, nor should he make men curse him.

He, peace be on him, said: Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: Whoever enters upon morning and does not intend to wrong
anybody, Allah forgives him what he has committed.

He, peace be on him, said: A man came to Allahs Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, and asked him: O Allahs Apostle, what is the right
of my child against me? And he, may Allah bless him and his family,
replied: You must give

him a good name and educate him.

The best property is the date-palms growing in mud and giving fruit
during drought.

I (the author) have confined myself to this number of Imam Musas
comprehensive sayings. He has another legacy on refuting the unbelievers
and other than them. I shall present it when I deal with the problems of
his time. The following are some books from which I have quoted the
valuable sayings:

1. Muhammed b. al-Hasan al-Hir al-Amili, al-Wasail.

2. Al-Saduq Muhammed b. Ali al-Qummi, Men La Yahdarahu al-Faqih.

3. Abi Jafar Ahmed b. Muhammed al-Barqi, al-Mehasin.

4. Abi Jafar Muhammed b. Yaqub al-Kulayni al-Razi, Usool al-Kafi.

5. Al-Saduq Muhammed b. Ali al-Qummi, Uyun Akhbar al-Rida.

6. Al-Sayyid Muhsin al-Ameen al-Amili, Ayan al-Shia.

7. Muhammed b. Ahmed al-Dhahaby, Mizan al-Itidal.

8. Al-Shibrawi, al-Ithaf fi Hub al-Ashraf.

9. Al-Shiblenji, Noor al-Abbsar.

10. Al-Tabrasi, al-Ihtijajj.

11. Abd Allah b. Jafar al-Humayri, Qurb al-Isnad.

12. Muhsin al-Qashani, al-Wafi.

13. Ahmed b. Abi Yaqub, better known as b. Wadih, Tarikh al-Yaqubi.

14. Waram b. Abi Firas, Majjmuat Waram.

15. Al-Hasan b. Ali, Tuhaf al-Uqul.

16. Al-Husayn b. Muhammed al-Halawani, Nazhat al-Nazir fi Tanbeeh
al-Khatir.
