Chapter Vii
===========

The Collapse of the Umayyad Government
--------------------------------------

Imam Musa, peace be on him, was in an early age during the violent
revolution against the Umayyad government. His holy age, as the
narrators say, was over four years. This period of time allows its owner
to carry into his inner self many of the views and pictures that pass by
him, especially when they are of the heavy events. For they, without
doubt, affect his inner self and react with it and leave in it many
impressions, just as the psychologists say.

In his early age, Imam Musa saw or heard the violent revolution against
the Umayyad government that included all the Islamic regions. Many
terrible events accompanied that revolution; for example, there were
mountains of the corpses of the victims, and sees of blood were
generously given to get rid of that black government standing on
injustice, exploitation, and turning away from human's rights.

We are not busy with writing a research on the foundation of the Umayyad
government and explaining the reasons for establishing it, for that is
something hurts one's feelings and leaves the flames of sadness in
hearts. Surely this government was established to isolate Ahl al-Bayt,
peace be on them, and remove them from leading the community, according
to the results concluded from the Consultative Council designed for this
purpose. Throughout its stages, this government was accompanied by many
social problems that had an effect on the Islamic general life and
losing the original objectives Islam seeks under its rule such as
spreading justice, equality, welfare, and ease among men.

All Islamic, constructive concepts were completely freezed; the
expectations of Islam in finding a society free from ignorance,
dullness, miserly, and poverty were lost.

The noble life for which Islam strove was changed into a dark life
prevailed by pre-Islamic tendencies, dominated by oppression, tyranny,
and deviation from humanitarian values.

It is necessary for us to pause to look for the reasons that folded that
black government and removed its detested existence from the Islamic
world. Surely the speech of that has a close relationship, as we think,
with the research on the Life of Imam Musa. For it shows us that Ahl
al-Bayt, peace be on them, during those terrible times, faced ordeals,
suffered from bitter oppression and severe tyranny, that their followers
suffered from massacres, prisons, pursuit, severe punishments, that all
the Muslims met mass persecutions distinguished by depriving from

freedom, paralyzing economy, spreading, misery, poverty, chaos in their
regions. It is natural that all these things had a great effect on
forming Imam Musa's life and made it full of deep sadness and intense
sorrow. The following is a brief presentation on some of those events:

### Ahl al-Bayt meet Severe Punishments

The prominent thing in the Umayyads' policy is that they directed all
their administrative, economic, and political organs of government to
persecute Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on him, and to punish them severely; the
following are some aspects of their policy:

1. They made it incumbent on all Muslims to curse and disparage Ahl
al-Bayt; they made it a religious duty on Muslims; they asked and
punished them if they did not curse them. So the orator began and ended
his sermon with cursing the pure family (of the Prophet), who were equal
to the Holy Qur'an. Those ruling authorities were so mentally and
socially low that the opportunists and those who sold their conscience
sought nearness to them through disparaging and cursing the family of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. The historians have
mentioned that an ugly person hurried to al-Hajjajj and raised his
voice, saying: "O Emir, my family has wronged me when they have named me
'Ali. I am poor and miserable. I am in need of the gifts of the Emir!"

Al-Hajjajj forced a laugh and said to him: "That is an act of gentleness
through which you have gained access (to us). I have appointed you over
the office so-and-so!"[1]

Surely the offices and the properties of the state were given to the
bastards and the stupid without reckoning because they cursed Ahl
al-Bayt, from whom Allah took away defilement and whom He fully
purified.

That moved the hidden malice and fury in the souls of the believers and
those committed by their religion, and they hurried to declare their
displeasure with the Umayyads; among them was the inspired poet, Kathir
b. Kathir, who has said:

May Allah curse him who curse 'Ali and Husayn, whether they are common
or leaders.

Are those whose grandfathers pure and their uncles noble cursed?

The birds and doves are safe whereas the Messenger's family is not safe
at the Standing Place (of Ibrahim).

O House, you are good and your owners are good! Welcome to the Household
of the Prophet and Islam!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn b. 'Ali, vol. 2, p. 336.

The mercy and peace of Allah be on them whenever one safely rises.[1]

These lines describe the general displeasure and deep sadness that
resulted from disparaging Ahl al-Bayt; similarly they show the most
truthful and purest affection toward them.

2. The authorities employed education as means to war against Ahl
al-Bayt, and it was the most dangerous means on which they depended to
support their purposes. They entrusted the school teachers with feeding
the children on the spirit of hatred and enmity to the family of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and with going too far in
planting this wicked tendency in their souls, that an offspring
harboring malice against the family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, might grow. That was the most destructive and dangerous
means to Islam, for it separated the Muslims from the family of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, to whom affection Allah has
made obligatory in the firm text of His Book. The results of this bad
policy are still standing until this day of ours.

3. The Umayyads formed committees to fabricate and embellish traditions
on the defects of Ahl al-Bayt and to fabricate traditions on praising
and lauding the companions (of the Prophet) and the Umayyads. Among the
fabricated traditions are: The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: "Surely the family of Abi Talib are not my friends; my
friend is Allah!" Abu Hurayra, the head of these committees, narrated
that the Messenger said: "Surely Abu Talib is in a shallow (place) of
fire!" It was Abu Hurayra who narrated many traditions on the unbelief
of Abi Talib, the believer of Quraysh, protector of Islam, and defender
of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, during the most
critical and difficult attitudes; the reason for that he wanted to
decrease his importance and to degrade his achievements and outstanding
qualities.

Any way, the Umayyad authorities took care of the committees of
fabrication and spared no effort to spread their fabricated traditions
against Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, that they might mislead the
public opinion and turn it away from the family and progeny of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

4. The Umayyads went too far in killing the pure family (of the
Prophet), for they stretched out their sinful hands to those pure souls
to whom Allah has made affection incumbent on all Muslims. They had a
role in assassinating Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, as I (the author) have established. Mu'awiya assassinated the
first grandson and plant of sweet basil of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, Imam al-Hasan, peace be on him. That was when he
ordered his (al-Hasan's) wife, Ju'da daughter of al-Ash'ath,[2] to put
poison into his food. After him, (his son) Yazid committed the most
horrible crime shook

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 336. [2]
Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn.

human conscience through his annihilating the pure family of (the
Prophet) on the hills of Kerbela'. This horrible tragedy, with which the
Islamic world was afflicted, brought about a general feeling of
displeasure toward the Umayyads and gave rise to many violent revolts
against that government that had the qualities of the pre-Islamic
period.

The tyrant of the Banu Merwan, Hisham b. 'Abd al-Malik, killed Zayd b.
'Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him. This dirty, wicked person ordered
the head of Zayd to be put in his gathering and ordered those who came
in to him to tread on the face of Zayd with their shoes, while Zayd was
a piece of the liver of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family.

Hisham wrote to the governor of Kufa to let Zayd crucified and not to
bring him down the gallows, that he might abase the 'Alawids and quench
his thirst for revenge. The pure body of Zayd remained crucified on the
gibbet; the sun melted it and the winds scattered dust over it. They put
guards around it lest it should be taken and buried. Then the
authorities ordered the great body to be burnt and scattered in the
air.[1]

The Umayyads intentionally killed Yehya b. Zayd, the great
revolutionary. The family of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, met in the way of Allah murder, severe punishment,
injustice, humiliation from the Umayyads, who, through that, violated
the sacredness of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, in
respect with his family, who was worthy of care and sympathy.

Any way, the various kinds of disasters and misfortunes the pure family
(of the Prophet) faced throughout the Umayyad reign brought about the
displeasure of the good and the religious. Likewise, they gave rise to
the unity of the forces and moved the Islamic peoples to declare their
great revolt that overthrew the Umayyad government.

### The Shi'a are persecuted

During the Umayyad reign the Shi'a faced increasingly tyranny and
persecution; the authorities wreaked their wrath upon them and met them
with all kind of violence, for they were the aware force that urged the
peoples to oppose injustice and to battle against oppression.

All the bloody revolt that frightened the Umayyad authorities depended
on the Shi'a, who led the struggle, summoned to social justice and
inspired the peoples with the spirit of sacrifice for faith and thought.

During the most critical and intense of all conditions in crisis and
complication, the Shi's resisted injustice and combated tyranny and
freed the society from abasement and enslavement; they, for the sake of
that, faced the most violent problems and the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] 'Aqaa'id al-Zaydiya.

most of them in anguish and bitterness. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him,
talked about them, saying: "Our followers (Shi'a) in all cities were
killed; their hands and legs were cut off due to suspicion; whoever
loves us and devotes himself to us is imprisoned, his property is
plundered, and his house is demolished."[1]

After the Year of the Peace Treaty (with Imam al-Hasan), Mu'awiya wrote
letters to all his governors in which he mentioned: "Look for him who
loves 'Ali and his family; erase him from the Divan; cancel his salary
and provision." Then he sent them another letter: "Whomever you accuse
of following these people (i.e., the Shi'a), then punish him severely
and demolish his house."[2]

The Shi'a faced tiredness and exhaustion to the extent that none can
imagine it. The greatest of them in ordeal were the Shi'a of Kufa during
the days of Mu'awiya, who appointed over them Ziyad Bin Abeeh, who had
knowledge of them, so he spread among them killing and execution. He
killed them everywhere, cut off their hands and their legs, knocked out
their eyes, crucified them on the trunks of the date-palms, made them
homeless, and dismissed them.[3]

This abominable policy spread displeasure and complaints among all the
Muslims, for they had not been familiar with this policy and had not
known it before, and for they had not met from the previous governments
such persecutions and severe punishments.

As the Shi'a faced such persecutions and tyranny, they spared no effort
to overthrow the Umayyad government and to destroy its throne. They
organized their ranks, formed secret organizations that did their best
to enlighten the public opinion and send it to the fields of struggle
and sacrifice, that they might get rid of the Umayyad government.

### The Battle of al-Hurra

The most important tragedies with which the Islamic world was afflicted
was the Battle of al-Hurrah, at which the dignity of Islam and the
sacredness of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, were
violated. For the military leadership made lawful shedding blood and
violating the honors after occupying Yethrib (Medina). The Umayyad arm
went too far in that in a way which none had known in respect with using
severity and rudeness. It made lawful killing women, innocent children,
and violating honors. The people of Medina resort to the tomb of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and sought refuge in it,
for they thought that its sacredness would protect them from the
aggression. However those wild people paid no attention to its
sacredness and did not fear its greatness. They intentionally killed
them and violated their honors in the Mesjid of the Prophet. A

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 3, p. 15. [2] Ibid.
[3] Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn b. 'Ali, vol. 2, p. 348.

European historian has commented on this sad event, saying: "Surely the
effect of this event on the whole of the Islamic world was immense and
terrible as if that the Umayyads wanted to settle their debts when the
Messenger, while his army treated them with mercy and sympathy. They
made homeless and killed the best youths of Medina and its blessed men.
They forced the rest of them to pledge allegiance to Yazid b. Mu'awiya
on that they were slaves and on that he would rule over their blood,
their properties, and their families. He (Yazid) ordered those prevented
from that to be branded in the neck.

"During the reign of the Umayyads, the City of the Messenger became like
an oasis in a desert; gloomy depression and deep-black darkness surround
it all around its four sides. Medina never regained its past times to
the extent that it became during the time of the Umayyads the city of
the ancient times."[1]

The Muslims were terrified by this abominable event at which none paid
attention to the sacredness of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, in respect with his neighbors, who lodged him, supported him,
and protected him during the ordeal and loneliness of Islam.
Nevertheless, their shedding blood was made lawful, their honors were
violated, their properties were plundered, and they were forced to
pledge allegiance to Yazid and to regard themselves as slaves to him.
This painful disaster ended with waves of displeasure and complaints.
The people talked about it during their gatherings. It was among the
firmest reasons that led to unifying the forces and mobilizing the
public opinion for the great revolution that overthrew the Umayyad
government.

The Policy of Unbelief and Oppression

The certain thing over which the historians have not differed is that
the Umayyads had no Islamic tendency; rather they had those tendencies
in the pre-Islamic period. Islam did not penetrate their inner selves,
rather it flowed on their tongues out of fear of the edge of the sword
and the heads of the spears. When they embraced this religion, they
began scheming against it and waiting for opportunities to vengeance on
it. When Uthman b. 'Affan, the chief of the Umayyads, undertook the
affairs of the Muslims according to the terrible plan which was designed
by the Consultative Council, Abu Sufyan, the leaders of the Umayyads
hurried to the tomb of Hamza, the master of martyrs, and kicked, saying:
"O Aba 'Ammara, the affair for which we yesterday engaged in a sword
fight is in the hands of our boys, and they are playing with it."

Then he went happily; he came in to 'Uthman and said: "O Allah, make the
power similar to that in the pre-Islamic period, make the kingdom belong
to those who have usurped it, and make the projections of the earth
belong to the Umayyads!"[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Mukhtasar Tarikh al-'Arab, p. 75. [2] Ibn 'Asakir, Tarikh, vol. 6,
p. 407.

Certainly, Abu Sufyan said the words of unbelief before Uthman, who was
the Caliph of the Muslims, but he did not blame him nor did he punish
him.

This atheistic tendency was standing in Mu'awiya, and he believed in it
throughout his lifetime. He expressed this belief during his dangerous
talk with al-Mughira b. Shu'ba; through it he revealed his pre-Islamic
beliefs and his unbelief in Islam. The following is the text of his talk
as it was narrated by Mattraf b. al-Mughira, who said: "My father,
al-Mughira, and I visited Mu'awiya. My father went to him frequently and
talked with him. Then he came to me and told me about Mu'awiya and his
reason and admired what he saw from him. One night he came and did not
have dinner; he was very grieved. I waited him for an hour and I thought
that (he was grieved) for something happened to us or to our work. So I
asked him:

"-Why can I see you grieved this night?

"-O My little son, I have come from the most wicked of all the 'people.'

"- And what is that?

"I was alone with Mu'awiya and said to him: 'Surely you have attained
your wishes, O Commander of the faithful; therefore, if you show justice
and spread good, for you have become an old man, and if you take care of
your brothers from among the Banu Hashim and their womb relatives. By
Allah, today, they have nothing of which you are afraid. And he said to
me: 'How far! How far! The brother of Taym ruled and acted justly, and
he did what he did, by Allah, but when he perished, his name perished
except that a sayer says: 'Abu Bakr!' Then the brother of 'Adi ruled, so
he strove and applied himself (to the office of the caliphate) for ten
year, by Allah, but when he perished, his name perished except that a
sayer says: 'Umar!' Then our brother Uthman ruled, so he ruled as a man
and none was like him in lineage. He did what he did and (the people)
did what they did to him, by Allah, but when he perished, his name
perished and what had been done toward him is mentioned. And the brother
of the Banu Hashim is mentioned five times a day: 'I bear witness that
Muhammed is the Apostle of Allah!' So all deeds after this (call), may
your mother lose you, will completely be buried!'"[1]

This speech clearly indicates Mu'awiya's unbelief and his harboring
malice against the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. For he
was terrified and disturbed by mentioning his name five times a day
during the adhan. If he had found a way, he would erase his name and
efface the principle features of his religion. Because of his strong
hatred to the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, he did not
call down blessings upon him for forty Fridays. He was asked about that
and he answered: "Nothing prevents me from mentioning his name except
that some men turn up their noses (at me)!"[2]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn Abi al-Haddeed, Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 2, p. 357. [2]
Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn b. 'Ali, vol. 2, p. 149.

This atheistic phenomenon in all its dimensions was present in his son
Yazid; that is because he declared unbelief and apostasy from the
religion after he had taken the reins of government. He has declared the
word of atheism when he said:

Hashim played with the dominion so indeed,

No news came, nor there was a revelation revealed.

And in this manner if we deal with the behavior of most Umayyad kings,
we will find it full of unbelief and malice against Islam. They all
tried to efface its lines and to put out its light. Were it not for that
there is abundant knowledge in its principles and the care of Allah, its
standard would be folded and it would have neither a name nor a trace.

The Umayyads ruled the Islamic community with the atheistic policy
having no faith in Islam as a basic rule in the fields of government,
administrations, economy, and policy. They changed all the vital
programs Islam had established to set right the society. They stopped
the criminal punishments, regarded as lawful what Allah had made
unlawful; they built their laws on judicial errors, killed (many people)
due to doubt and accusation, plundered the properties and wealth of the
Muslims. Sadeef b. Maymun, a creative poet, has referred to that through
his supplication against the oppression and tyranny of the Umayyads,
saying: "O Allah, our fayya' has become alternation after the division!
Our authority has become dominance after the consultation! Our covenant
has become legacy after the choice of the community! Amusement centers
and stringed instruments have been bought for the portion of the orphan
and the widow. The Zimmis have ruled the Muslims; the sinners from among
the districts have undertaken their affairs. Therefore, no defender
defends those oppressed. No compassionate one looks at them through the
eye of mercy. No deterrent deters him who wrongs them; no possessor of
compassion satisfies their very thirsty livers; so they are the men of
weakness and loss, the allies of depression and abasement; the plants of
falsehood has ripened, reached its end, contained grains, become
well-arranged, firm and stable.

"O Allah, enable a hand of the truth to reap them, cut off their spikes,
smash their stems, scatter their unity, and disunite them; that the
truth may appear in the best manner, in the most perfect light, and in
the greatest blessing!

"O Allah, we have known some qualities of ourselves that do not hold us
back from responding to the summons! It is You Who do favors for all the
creatures and undertake doing good to all those who ask from you!
Therefore, give to us of our affair according to Your generosity, Your
munificence, and Your boons! For surely You decree what You please and
do what You wish!"[1]

Sadeef's supplication contains a wonderful description of the Umayyad
policy that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tabaqat al-Shu'ara', pp. 37-38.

violated the Muslims' rights and denied all the high values Islam
brought, warred against all its principles and teachings.

Any way, the Umayyads ruled the Islamic countries with a policy based on
unbelief and deviation from the will of the community. The Muslims
thought that the anti-Islamic won a victory when the Umayyads won the
government. This meaning has been mentioned in what Fikelson has
written: "The Muslims regarded the victory of the Umayyads, headed by
Mu'awiya, as a victory of the pagan aristocracy that declared itself as
the enemy of the Apostle and his companions, and against which Allah's
Apostle struggled until he put an end to it. The Muslims were patient
along with him for struggling against it and resisting it till Allah
granted them a victory over it, and they put an end to it, and they
built on its ruins the pillars of the Islamic religion, the tolerant
religion that has regarded men as equal in sorrow and in joy and removed
the control of a group of people who disparaged the poor, abased the
weak, usurped the properties. For this reason we are not amazed when the
Muslims hated the Umayyads, their haughtiness, their pride, their moving
the past spites, and their inclination to the spirit of the pre-Islamic
period."[1]

The Muslims have no doubt that the Umayyads were the enemies and
opponents of Islam, that they did their best to die down its voice and
to put out its light, and that they embraced it to undertake the
authority and to achieve their private interests. This has been
emphasized by Allama Dozy, who has said: "Surely the general Muslim
populace think that some Umayyads embraced Islam to achieve their own
interests, and that they had no right (to undertake) the Caliphate nor
other than it, for certainly the policy of the Umayyads aimed at making
the Caliphate as a kingdom like that of Kasra (in Iran). There is
nothing indicative of that more than the words of Mu'awiya: 'I remove
the kings from office!'"[2]

Surely whoever runs over the Umayyad policy concludes that it aimed at
spread atheism, make public unbelief, destroy the pillars of Islam, and
remove its entity. That is because the Umayyads performed destructive
operations against it such as annihilating its great figures: Hajar b.
'Adi, 'Amru b. al-Hamaq al-Khaza'i, Maythem al-Tammar, Rasheed
al-Hajjri, and the like of them from among the leaders of the Islamic
thought.

This anti-Islam policy required the uprising of the masses and their
unanimous agreement on warring against the Umayyads and removing their
state and authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh al-Islam al-Siyasi, vol. 1, p. 398. [2] Muluk al-Tawa'if wa
Nazarat fi Tarikh al-Islam, p. 381.

### Fiscal Policy

Islam has a creative economy that refreshes peoples, increases their
individual income, and removes from them poverty and deprivation. It has
made it incumbent on the state to observe the general economy, to
increase production, and to spend the public treasury on the vital
interests. It has made it unlawful to spend little or much of the money
of the community on other than its economic and industrial development,
according to the well-known plans of the fiscal policy in Islam.

The Umayyads turned away from this brilliant policy and went far away
from it. 'Uthman b. Affan was the first to deviate from it, for he spent
the money in the public treasury on the Umayyads and the family of Abi
Mi'yat. He singled the notables, the nobility, and the influential men
with great gifts and immense wealth; meanwhile he deprived the general
populace of spending on them. Accordingly, this crooked policy led to
his failure, and the good and those religious were displeased with him.
They demanded him to refrain from it, but he paid no attention to them
and insisted on carrying out his policy, so the Muslims revolted against
him. The knocked him down and he weltered in his blood. 'Uthman
exhausted the Muslims and made them face intense tiredness throughout
the days of his government; similarly, he strained them after his death,
according to the unanimous agreement of the historians!

Throughout their reign, the Umayyads followed 'Uthman's policy; they
singled themselves and their followers with properties and wealth, but
they deprived the community of enjoying welfare; they chose all its
wealth and economic sources and left the image of poverty standing in
all the houses of the Muslims. An example of that is that the Egyptian
governor resorted to the Umayyad King, Sulayman b. 'Abd al-Malik and
complained to him of the sufferings of the Egyptians such as persecution
and the heavy taxes imposed on them, saying to him: "O Commander of the
faithful, I have come to you because the subjects have become exhausted
and overstrained. I see that you have to treat them with kindness and to
reduce the land taxes due on them, that they may be able to build their
own country and to improve their livelihood. Therefore, do that because
you will attain it in the next year."

This is the right and just thinking, but the tyrant (i.e. Sulayman b.
'Abd al-Malik) did not understand that and answered him through his
wicked tendencies, saying: "May your mother lose you! Take the milk! If
it stops, then take the blood and the skin!"[1]

Is there oppression more excessive and severer than this one?

Is there disdain in human's rights and dignity like this one?

Sulayman b. 'Abd al-Malik intended to destroy the society and deprived
it of life and elements. When this excessive oppression spread, the
governors sought

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Jahshyari, pp. 51-52.

nearness to the Umayyad kings through exposing the subjects to
oppression and tyranny. The historians have reported that 'Ubayd Allah
b. al-Hajib, the collector of the land taxes in Egypt, wanted to seek
nearness to Hisham b. 'Abd al-Malik. He wrote to him that it was likely
to increase the land tax on the Egyptian land, and he commanded him to
add a qirat to a dinar! [1]

In this manner the Islamic lands sank under heavy poverty and
deprivation; they were deprived of all their elements and were owned by
such rouges, who spend the land taxes on dissoluteness, prostitution,
and despoiling morals, and who did not spend such properties on the
general interests.

### Additional Taxes

The Umayyad authorities went too far in exhausting and straining the
subjects; they deprived them of their fates and their economic
abilities, that was through their imposing on them taxes the Muslims had
never known nor their religion had decided. The historians have
mentioned different kinds of those severe taxes of which are the
following:

1. Taxes on industries and crafts. [2]

2. Taxes on marriage and on writing a proposal.[3]

3. Taxes on the rents of houses.[4]

4. A tax on Nawruz; Mu'awiya was the first to legislate it and it
reached ten million dirhams. [5]

5. The tax on those who became Muslims.[6] The reason for that is that
the Umayyad kings wanted to paralyze the Islamic movement and to prevent
it from spreading.

The important thing in these additional taxes is that they were not
limited, rather their affair was in the hands of the governors and the
collectors; it was they who estimated it according to their wishes and
inclinations. Bendili Jawza has talked about those heavy and intense
additional taxes, saying: "They (the additional taxes) were greater in
pressure than land and poll taxes, for they were not fixed nor were they
based on an acceptable rule; rather their amount depended on the
governors' wish."[7] Sahib Akhna, who was in Egypt, asked 'Amru b.
al-'Ass to tell him about the amount of the toll tax due on him, and he
answered him: "If you gave me (a toll

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh al-Harakat al-Fikriya fi al-Islam, p. 42. [2] Ibid. [3]
Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 8, p. 129. Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 23.
[4] Al-Wizara' wa al-Kittaab, p. 24. [5] Tarikh al-Harakat al-Fikriya fi
al-Islam, p. 42. Tarikh al-Tamaddin al-Islami, vol. 2, p. 22. [6] Tarikh
al-Tamaddin al-Islami, vol. 2, p. 21. [7] Tarikh al-Harakat al-Fikriya
fi al-Islam, p. 42.

tax extending) from the ground to the ceiling, I would not tell you
about what is due on you. You are a treasury for us. If he (the king)
increases (the tax) due on us, we will increase it on you; and if he
reduces it for us, we will reduce it for you."[1]

In the concepts of social oppression there is no concept greater in
pressure than this oppression on the human society, for the peoples were
treasury or a garden of these rulers, as 'Amru b. al-'Ass said. Mu'awiya
has said: "The earth belongs to Allah, and I am the vicegerent of Allah;
therefore, if I take of the property of Allah, then it belongs to me;
and what I leave, it will be permissible to me!"

Surely this abominable policy moved the displeasure of the society and
inflamed the sentiments and feelings with the essence of revolt and
struggle for overthrowing that government and removing its existence and
traces.

### The Choice of the Properties

The Umayyad government spared no effort to make the Muslims poor and
hungry, so it followed all ways leading to spreading neediness and
poverty among them; among the ways the Umayyads followed to make the
Muslims poor is choosing properties. An example of that is that Mu'awiya
wrote to Ziyad b. Abeeh, his governor over Iraq, to choose him the
yellow and the white (lit. gold and silver).[2] Accordingly, Ziyad
commanded his governors not to divide among the Muslims neither gold nor
silver.

Mu'awiya wrote to Wardan, his governor over Egypt: "Add a qirat (to the
tax due on) each Egyptian." So Wardan wrote him back: "How can I add
(it) on them while they are in a time when it is impossible to add it on
them?"

The rest of the Islamic countries faced the same condition. An example
of that is that a brother of al-Hajjajj's confiscated the properties of
the people in the Yemen.[3]

The Umayyads circulated the property of Allah and enslaved His servants,
just as the Truthful One and the Trusted One (the Prophet), may Allah
bless him and his family, had predicted in respect with that which his
community would be afflicted under the Umayyad, tyrannical government.
This policy moved the displeasure of the general populace and they
decided to declare the revolution against the Umayyads and to overthrow
their oppressive, tyrannical government.

### The People refuse their own Possessions

As the taxes were heavy, the weak farmers refused and abandoned their
own farms; some of them registered them in the name of an Arab
personality or in the name of a statesman, that they might protect them.
They gave them a portion of their

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Tarikh al-Tamaddin al-Islami, vol. 4, pp. 79-80. [2] Ibid., p. 79.
[3] Tarikh al-Islam, vol. 1, p. 474.

agricultural crops.[1] During the reign of al-Hajjajj, a great number of
them registered their lands in the name of Muslima b. 'Abd al-Malik.

During those dark times the Muslim peoples met the most difficult wrong
and persecution. They toiled and gave the fruit of their efforts to
those tyrants who spent them on impudence, prostitution, and pleasures.

This bitter condition continued until the reign of the noble one, 'Umar
b. 'Abd al-'Aziz, who ordered those additional taxes to be canceled,[2]
and the society felt in his time a kind of ease and welfare. When his
reign came to an end, unhappiness returned to the people. For Yazid b.
'Abd al-Malik ordered those taxes to be returned. He wrote to his
governor a letter in which he has mentioned: "Now then, for surely 'Umar
was vainglorious; so leave what you came to know during his reign and
return the people to their first class whether they are fertile or
infertile, like or dislike, live or die!"[3]

When this royal decree reached the governors, they oppressed the people
and harassed them through returning the taxes to their first
condition.[4]

The Umayyads deviated from the right path, turned aside from justice,
and separated themselves from the straight way; this is the reason for
that the Muslims unanimously agreed on hating them throughout the
periods of the Islamic life.

### The Governors and the Tax collectors

The Umayyads chose governors and collectors from among the foreigners
such as Ziyad b. Abeeh, al-Mughira b. Shu'ba, Bisr b. Abi Artat, Samra
b. Jundub, Khalid al-Qasri, al-Hajjajj b. Yousif al-Thaqafi, and the
like from among the tyrannical oppressors. Through their political and
administrative activities they established that they were the enemies of
mankind and that they knew neither mercy nor compassion nor any noble
quality by which man is distinguished from grazing livestock.

The Umayyads empowered those rude rouges over the necks of the Muslims,
and they went too far in wronging them, violating their sacred things,
and taking their properties. Al-Nimri explained to 'Abd al-Malik b.
Merwan the tyranny of his governors and their persecuting his people to
the extent that they became poor and escaped in the desert, and that
there was nothing with them except weak camels, saying:

O Vicegerent of the Most Merciful One, surely we are true people who
prostrate in the early morning and the late afternoon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Wizara' wa al-Kittaab, p. 118. [2] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 8, p.
129. [3] Al-Idara al-Islamiya, p. 114. [4] Al-Ya'qubi, Tarikh, vol. 2,
p. 55.

Surely the governors disobeyed you on the day when you commanded them,
and brought, if you knew, low misfortunes.

They took the noble master standing and shackled, and cut off the middle
of his chest with the whip.

When they left nothing of his flesh on his bones and nothing reasonable
in his heart, they brought their title deed to a plump one whom the
whips made cowardly and fearful.

They took his camels, and he became sitting and cannot leave the houses.

He calls the Commander of the faithful and in front of him is a wide
desert through which the winds draw tails.

He is like the hoopoes whose wings the shooters have broken and that coo
in the middle of the road.

O Vicegerent of the Most Merciful One, surely the livestock of my clan
have become defeated groups.

They (my clan) have taken care of Islam; they have not left their paying
Zakat, nor have they lost saying: There is no god but Allah.

They covered al-Yamama; they were driven away as if that they were
people who hit oppressors with something.

For two spring months their milk ewes have tasted nothing but bitter,
salty, bad, and withered trees.

Yehya have come to them and made firm a contract the Muslims regard as
heavy.

Letters have left their rich poor after the riches and their poor
emaciated.

I have left my people. Shall they entrust their affairs to you or shall
they wait for a short time?[1]

In these poetry lines al-Nimri has described the frightful tyranny and
the horrible persecutions the governors poured upon his people. This
oppression also lasted to the time of 'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz, who was
the most just of the Umayyad kings, as they say. That is because his
governors spared no effort to take unjustly the properties of the
people. Addressing him, Ka'ab al-Ash'ari said:

If you protect what follows you, then the governors of your land are
wolves in the country.

They do not respond to that to which you summon unless you cut off heads
with the sword.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Hayat al-Imam al-Hasan, vol. 2, p. 202.

In the hands of brave ones endowed with insight; in their striking there
are restraints and punishment.[1]

While 'Umar (b. 'Abd al-'Aziz) delivering a sermon on the pulpit, a man
interrupted him, saying:

Surely those whom you have sent in its countries have left your letter
and regarded as lawful the unlawful.

Those whose clothes are dirty (are sitting) on the pulpits of our land;
all of them tyrannize (the people) and all of (the people) complain (of
them).

You want a just one from among them to undertake the trust. How far is
the trustworthy Muslim![2]

The governors and the collectors went too far in persecuting the Islamic
society and depriving it of its economic elements. They did not do that
willingly; rather the Umayyad kings commanded them to do it; it was they
who urged them to plunder and shared them with that which they took from
they people. This meaning has frankly been mentioned in what Fanflotin
has said: "And in stead of that the Caliphs-the Umayyad Caliphs-took
measures to punish the governors and to prevent them from oppression, we
find them shared with them in their interests of the properties which
they collected through those exposed ways. This means that the Caliphs
were consent with the bad behavior of the governors toward the people of
the country, as well it is a proof of that some of them was at first
interested in the interests of the central treasury."[3]

Certainly the Umayyad kings did not punish their governors and their
collectors for what they committed such as excessive oppression, and
plundering the properties of the community in a horrible way. It was
they who urged them to do that; the more oppressive and tyrannical the
governor was, the more close to them he was. For example, Ziyad b. Abeeh
was the closest of all the people to Mu'awiya, to the extent that he
made him belong to him in lineage. That was due to his violence,
tyranny, quick assassinating the Muslims. Yet another example of that is
al-Hajjajj b. Yousif al-Thaqafi. He was the nearest of all the governors
to 'Abd al-Malik (b. Merwan) and the most preferred of them to him, to
the extent that he entrusted the affair of Iraq to him and he acted
freely wherein and in whatever a way he wished. That is due to his
violence and his going too far in shedding blood.

Any way, the tyranny and oppression of the governors toward the Muslims
was among the reasons for the great revolt that overthrew the regime of
the Umayyad government and folded its authorities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Jahiz, al-Bayyan wa al-Tabiyyin, vol. 3, p. 358. [2] Ibid., 359.
[3] Al-Siyada al-'Arabiya, p. 28.

### Showing Despise toward the Peoples

The prominent thing in the Umayyad policy is showing disdain toward the
Islamic peoples, for the Umayyad kings went too far in disparaging the
rights of their peoples. For example, al-Walid b. Yazid has said:

Leave your mentioning the family of Sa'd, for we are greater (than them)
in number and properties.

We rule the people by force, humiliate them, and punish them severely.

We take them to the pools of humiliation to abase them; we do not fall
short of inflicting loss upon them.

This poet has described the excessive disdain in the right of the
community and making light of its will and values.

In his speech he gave before the children of the Emigrants and the Ansar
in Yethrib (Medina), 'Abd al-Malik b. Merwan said: "I cure the affair of
this community with nothing except with the sword, that your spear may
be straight. You retain the early emigrants' deeds but you do not
perform anything like them; you order us to fear Allah but your forget
that in respect with yourselves. By Allah, after this station of mine,
if someone orders me to fear Allah, I will cut off his head!"[1]

This severe, terrible thinking is full of sinful tyranny toward the
community, for he thought that he had to look after it through spreading
killing, fear, terrorism, and not through spreading justice and welfare
among it.

Ibn al-'Ass has said: "Al-Sawad (Iraq) is a garden belongs to Quraysh!"
This means that al-Sawad was owned by the Umayyads and not by its
inhabitants, for they were as their slaves who had neither freedom nor
choice. This was the thinking of the Umayyad policy in all its periods;
it paid no attention to the existence of the community; and this was
among the most important reasons for overthrowing and collapse of the
Umayyad government.

### Their Persecuting the Non-Muslims Subjects

In its wonderful, genuine legislation, Islam has required showing
respect toward all the religions and securing the dignity of their
followers and granting them full freedom, for they have the right to
enjoy the same rights of the Muslims as long as they are under the
protection of Islam.

Surely it is not an act of Islam to persecute any person whatever his or
her inclinations and beliefs are unless he or she makes a discord or
mischief in the land. Imam 'Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, the pioneer of the great justice during his international time,
has said: "People are of two kinds: They are either your brother in
religion or your like in creation."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Nizam al-Hukum wa al-Idara fi al-Islam, p. 285.

Islam has positively adopted the slogan of justice and equality among
men within its Islamic frame, but the Umayyad policy through all its
plans carried the pickaxe to destroy what Islam adopted in the fields of
the social reform. So it treated the non-Muslim subjects (Zimmis) with a
severe treatment that did not agree with the essence and guidance of
Islam. The historians have narrated that Usama b. Zayd al-Tenwakhi, who
was appointed by Yazid b. 'Abd al-Malik over collecting land taxes,
attacked the Zimmis and exhausted them; he took their properties and
branded them in the hand. [1] 'Abd al-'Aziz b. Merwan made poll tax
obligatory on the monks; and it was the first poll tax to be taken from
them.[2]

Surely the tyranny and oppression of the Umayyads included all the
citizens and not the Muslims only. This affair required all the people
to harbor malice and hatred against their government.

### Their Oppressing Non-Arab Muslims

The Umayyad policy decided to deprive the non-Arab Muslims of all the
natural rights of man. So it treated them as grazing animals and met
them with increasingly violence and persecution, though they embraced
Islam, which has declared human rights and just equality among all
classes. As well as there was among them a great class of Muslim great
figures and thinkers, and that a great part of the Islamic conquests
were achieved through their efforts and struggles. Unfortunately, the
Umayyads did not fall short of abasing and exhausting them. The
historians have narrated detested kinds of that tyranny. Mu'awiya, the
Kasra of the Arabs, opened a door to oppression and tyranny towards
them. He violated their sacred things and unjustly shed their blood. He
summoned both al-Ahnaf b. Qays al-Temimi and Samra b. Jundub al-Hilali
and said to them: "I think that these red ones (Persian Muslims) have
become greater in number, and that they have turned away from the
ancestors. I see as if that they would revolt against the Arabs and
their supreme authority. So I have decided to kill part of them to build
a market and a road; what do you think?" Samra confirmed him; al-Ahnaf
opposed him and convinced him not to do that.[3] The Umayyad kings after
him followed this wicked plan; they abased the non-Arab subjects and
deprived them of salaries and provision. A person from Khuresan came to
'Umar b. 'Abd al-'Aziz and asked him for justice and equality, saying:
"O Commander of the faithful, twenty thousand non-Arab subjects made
military campaigns but they take neither salaries nor livelihood. A
similar number of them from among the Zimmis has become Muslim but they
still pay toll taxes."[4]

The Umayyad authorities met them with deprivation and injustice. They
deprived

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Maqreezi, Khutat, vol. 1, p. 395. [2] Ibid. [3] Al-'Aqd al-Farid,
vol. 2, p. 270. [4] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 8, p. 134. Ibn al-Athir,
Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 19.

them of salaries and daily bread, though they were like the rest of the
fighters in making military campaigns and conquering countries. This
(treatment) made them displeased (with the Umayyads), showed wide enmity
toward them, and joined all the revolts against them. In his book
al-Arab wa al-Mawali, al-Jahiz has said: "'Abd al-Rahman b. al-Ash'ath
revolted against al-Hajjajj b. Yousif. He warred against him. Al-Hajjajj
b. Yousif met what he met from the reciters (of the Qur'an) from among
the people of Iraq. Most those who fought against him were from among
the people of Basrah, so he gathered them together after his suppressing
that revolt and said to them: 'You are unbelievers and non-Arabs; your
reciters (of the Qur'an) are more entitled to you!' Then he scattered
them wherever he wished in the remote countries and engraved in the hand
of each man of them the name of the city to which he was sent."[1]

The Umayyads were so blindly fanatic that they did not regard the
no-Arab subjects as equal to them. So they called them by their names
and surnames. They did not call them by kunyas, for the kunyas had the
sense of equality. They did not let them walk in front of them or with
them in the same line except behind them. They did not appoint any of
them as a commander over an Arab army; and they did not permit any of
them to be an Imam and to pray over the corpse of an Arab. When they
invited a non-Arab subject due to his knowledge or excellence, they made
him sit down at the dinning table in the way to the baker, that whoever
saw him came to know that he was a non-Arab. When an Arab returned from
market carrying something, he gave it to a non-Arab to carry it, and he
had not to refuse it. When he saw him riding (an animal) and wanted him
to dismount, he did.[2]

The historians have mentioned may examples of this collective
persecution toward the non-Arab subjects, so this treatment of the
Umayyads opposed Islam, which ordered its follower to spread justice and
equality among men whether they are Arabs or non-Arabs, white or black.

This racial discrimination divided the word of the Muslims, spread
spites and differences among them; likewise, it urged the non-Arab
subjects to be in the vanguard of those who revolted against the
Umayyads and destroyed their government and kingdom.

### The Dissoluteness of the Umayyad Kings

The Umayyad kings indulged in prostitution and impudence. They threw
themselves into pleasures, desires, and disdaining moral values.
Accordingly, neglect and weakness spread throughout their days; drinking
wine and gambling became public. The government spent much money on the
singers, the dissolute, and the mischievous; it brought all the
instruments of amusement and singing. The

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-'Aqd al-Farid, vol. 2, p. 271. [2] Duha al-Islam, vol. 1, pp.
18-34.

following are some of their dissolute kings:

### Yazid Bin 'Abd al-Malik

Yazid b. 'Abd al-Malik devoted himself to wine and songstresses; he was
called the dissolute of the Umayyads; he fell in love with two of his
female slaves: one was called Habbaba and the other was called Sallama.
He spent the days of his lifetime with them. One day Habbaba sang him:

There is heat between the throat and the palate!

It does not become calm nor it goes down, that it may be cold!

He was so delighted that he lost his mind. He began flying in the air
and she sneeringly said to him: "O Commander of the faithful, I have a
need with you."

He unconsciously said: "By Allah, I will fly!" She began making fun of
him and sneering at the community that empowered him over it, saying to
him: "To whom will you entrust this community?"

"To you," he replied.

Then he turned to her and began kissing her hand, while she was playing
with him and making fun of him.

One day he went for a walk in one of the Jordanian districts. His female
slave Habbaba was with him. He and her drank wine. When he became drunk,
he threw a grape at her. The grape entered her mouth. She choked to
death on it. He lost his mind due to the death of this songstress. He
left her for three days. He did not bury her to the extent that she
became bad-smelling. He smelt her, kissed her corpse, and wept over her,
while she was a motionless corpse. One of his special group talked to
him concerning her and he permitted her to be buried. He sadly returned
to his palace and heard one of his female slaves say:

Enough for sadness that the lover who is madly in love sees the houses
of his lover left and deserted!

He wept bitter tears; sadness and sorrow controlled him. He stayed for
seven days in his palace; he did not met the people as a sign of
mourning and sadness for this sinful female slave. Then his brother
Muslima advised him to go out to meet the people lest he should be
famous for this evil deed, and they would turn away from him. He
responded to his advice and went out to meet the people.[1] This deed is
a proof of the immorality of this sinful person. Islam was indeed
afflicted with this person and the like of him from among the sinful who
took the reins of government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 5, p. 57.

### Al-Walid Bin Yazid

An authentic tradition has been narrated on the authority of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, that he said: "A man called
al-Walid will be among this community. He will be more wicked toward
this community than Pharaoh toward his people." Al-Awzaa'i confirmed
that he was al-Walid b. Yazid.[1] This dissolute tyrant (al-Walid) went
too far in prostitution; he was the first to bring singers from other
countries; he sat with the amusers; he spread wine, amusement centers,
and playing on musical instruments; corruption spread and the people
drank wine during his time. He was fond of wine, so he described it with
an exact description, saying:

May a (wine) as yellow as saffron the traders bring to us from 'Asqalan

It shows you fine dust; and the width of the vessel is a veil for it
without the touching of the fingertips.

It has bubbles; whenever it decanted, you see it like the flash of
Yemeni lightning.[2]

Al-Walid b. Yazid was so dissolute that he wanted to build on the Kaaba
a dome where he intended to drink wine and to look down upon the
circumambulation of the Kaaba.[3] But Allah came between him and that;
He broke his back and punished him with the punishment of One Almighty.
That was when Yazid b. al-Walid along with a group of his household
overcame; they killed him, cut off his head and installed it in
Damascus.[4]

Another example of this dissolute, reckless person is that Bin 'Aisha
al-Qarashi[5] sang him through his words:

In the morning of immolation I saw some Houris negating the resolution
of patience.

They looked like the stars in their rising places going round the full
moon in the evening.

I went out and expected seeking reward, but I came back heavily loaded
with sin.[6]

Al-Walid became so delighted that he went crazy. He turned to Bin 'Aisha
and said to him: "You have done the Commander of the faithful a favor!
Repeat it by the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Murtada, Amali, vol. 1, p. 79. [2] Al-Mas'udi, Murujj al-Dhahab,
vol. 1, p. 147. [3] Al-Murtada, Amali, vol. 1, p. 89. [4] Al-Ya'qubi,
Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 73. [5] Bin 'Aisha is 'Abd al-Rahman b. 'Ubayd Allah.
His mother 'Aisha is the mother of Muhammed b. 'Abd Allah b. 'Ubayd
Allah. He was a Temimi belonged to Quraysh. His kunya was Abu Sa'eed.
Sumayya, the mother of Ziyad b. Abeeh was among his grandmothers. [6]
Al-Mas'udi, Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 148.

right of 'Abd Shams! Repeat!"

He repeated it to him and he said to him: "By Allah, you have done well!
Repeat it by the right of Umayya!"

He mentioned his forefathers one by one saying by the right of
so-and-so, that he might repeat it to him. He repeated it to him several
times while he was drunk and did not understand anything. The wine
spoiled his reason and he occupied himself with kissing Bin 'Aisha's
limbs and organs one by one, to the extent that he reached his private
part. After a conflict lasted for a long time between them, this
dissolute person, so-called the Commander of the faithful and Caliph of
the Muslims, was able to kiss Bin 'Aisha's private part in a disgraceful
way. Then he took off his clothes and put them on him. He was naked and
his private part was apparent. They brought him clothes and he put them
on. Then he gave him a thousand dinars, gave him his mule, and ordered
him to ride it on his carpet. Then he said good-bye to him saying to
him: "You have left me on tenterhooks!"

This is a brief outline on the prostitution and dissoluteness of the
Umayyad kings and their going too far in amusement and corruption. This
matter brought about spreading malice against them and hatred toward
their government.

### The Fanaticism between the Yemenis and the Nazaris

Among the most important factors that led to the vanish of the Umayyad
government is that a conflict broke out between the Yemenis and the
Nazaris and an enmity among them increased. This matter brought about
the weakness of the state. That is because the Yemenis joined the
'Abbasid State. This conflict was found by the 'Alawids. That was when
al-Kumayt, the great poet of Islam composed his poem called al-Hashimiya
and praised Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, through it. Then he went to
'Abd Allah b. al-Hasan, and he asked him to write poetry to move spites
among the Arabs, that a discord might happen and be a reason for
removing the Umayyad government. Al-Kumayt responded to him and composed
wonderful, enthusiastic poetry in which he mentioned the outstanding
qualities of his people, the Yemenis, and prepared them to the Qahtanis.
The following is part of what he has written:

To us belong the moon of the heaven and all the stars to which the
rightly-guided indicate with their hands.

I have found Allah when He has made the Nazaris exalted and made them
live in Mecca.

He has appointed the noble qualities only for us, the back for the
people, and the forehead for us.

His poetry had a great impression on the hearts, to the extent that
spites arose among the two tribes; hatred and enmity spread between
them. Meanwhile, Di'bil al-Khaza'i, the poet of Ahl al-Bayt, supported
the Qahtanis. I (the author) think that

there was an agreement between the two poets on that, for they were both
among the poets of Ahl al-Bayt, and they both set a record in the
deepest affection and friendship toward them. Among what Di'bil said in
response to al-Kumayt is the following:

Recover from your blame, O Da'ina! The passage of the forty (days) is
enough for you (to stop your) blame.

Have you not been grieved by the events of the nights that cause to turn
white the forelocks and the tufts.

I greet the distinguished from among the leading members of my people;
you have greeted (them) on our behalf, O Medina.

Israel's family belongs to you, and you boast of the non-Arabs.

The demand of al-Kumayt is not a demand of vengeance, but we have been
satirized due to our supporting (the Prophet).

Nazar knows that my people boast of their supporting the Prophet.

The two tribes vied with each other for their outstanding qualities and
their noble deeds, to the extent that the hostility between them became
wide and included the inhabitants of the villages and the deserts; it
spoiled their hearts.

These two families disunited, while they had been regarded as the
greatest of the inhabitants of the Arab Peninsula in number and
influence. As a result, Merwan b. Muhammed al-Ju'di, the last Umayyad
Caliph, sided with the Nazaris; and this urged the Yemenis to deviate
from them and joined the summons to the 'Abbasids. Accordingly, the
entity of the Umayyad government became very weak.[1]

### The Results of the Events

The Islamic world was afflicted with the terrible events resulted from
the tyrannical Umayyad policy in economy and administration. They are as
follows:

#### 1. The Local Revolts

Many local revolts broke out in most Islamic countries as a sign of
vengeance on the authorities and of hatred toward them, such as the
revolts of the 'Alawids and of the Kharijites. Those revolts were
connected, stunned the authorities, and undermined their economic and
military entity. Of course these revolts resulted from spreading social
oppression, losing justice and equality among the Muslims. If the
Umayyad governments had followed, in their internal policies, the high
object Islam sought under its government, they would not have been
afflicted with disasters and disorders.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., pp. 159-163.

#### 2. The Summons to the 'Alawids

Secret parties were formed in Kufa and Medina (Yethrib), and they,
through their organs, summoned the people to al-Rida from among the
family of Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his family, and intended to
return the Islamic Caliphate to Aal al-Bayt, peace be on them.

The program of the summons was full of the following:

A. They spread among the Muslims the verses and the traditions that
talked about the excellence of the pure family of the Prophet. It is
worth mentioning that these verses and traditions made it incumbent on
Muslims to take care of the family of the Prophet, to show love to them,
and to resort to them. Among the ways the summoners followed is the
following:

-Is there anyone among you who doubts that Allah, the Great and
Almighty, had not appointed Muhammed as a prophet and had not chosen
him?

-No.

-Do you doubt that Allah had not revealed to him His Book in which are
the things made lawful and unlawful by Him and His laws?

-Do you think that his successor is not from among his family and his
household?

-Do you doubt that Ahl al-Bayt are not the origin of knowledge and
owners of the legacy of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, which Allah taught to him?

-No.[1]

This way made the people follow Ahl al-Bayt and yearn for the days of
their government.

Al-Mansur al-Dewaniqi traveled through the countryside and sought
praising Ahl al-Bayt. I (the author) think that he was entrusted with
task.

B. They propagated the disasters and misfortunes the family of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, met. Such disasters and
misfortunes were so painful that they made the people harbor malice
against the Umayyads and revolt against the then regime.

C. They gave good news of the genuine objectives and ideals the
Prophet's pure family sought such as spreading security, ease, welfare
among the people, putting an end to all kinds of social deception and
oppression. They also propagated that there was no government could
guarantee the dignity of the Muslims, kept their rights, and achieved
their hopes except that of Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, that followed
the government of Islam and put into practice its justice and equality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 5, p. 17.

D. They made the people understand that they met ordeals and disasters
during the Umayyad government because the Caliphate was separated from
Ahl al-Bayt, the guardians over the revelation and equals to the Holy
Qur'an. They showed them that the first Companions of the Prophet gave
an opportunity through their shelter (saqifa) to the anti-Islam forces
to take the reins of authority and to go too far in abasing the Muslims
and forcing them to follow what they disliked.

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, took precautionary
measures: He entrusted the caliphate to the great figures from among his
family, that he might protect the community from deviation and mischief,
and that he might make it socially developed. If the early Muslims had
followed him in this respect, those ordeals and misfortunes would not
have happened in the Islamic world, and that it would not have been
afflicted with the Umayyad government, that enslaved the servants of
Allah and usurped His property.

This creative summons made progress in the atmospheres of the Islamic
world, invaded sentiments and feelings, for the Muslims believed in it
as a basic rule for their social development and for saving them from
the tyranny, oppression, and dictatorship of the Umayyads.

The summons to the 'Alawids was based on religious and social awareness.
This was affirmed by al-Qasim b. Mujashi', a leading member of the
'Abbasid state, when he sent a letter of witness to al-Mahdi, saying:
"Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the angels
and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining his creation with justice;
there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise. Surely the (true) religion
with Allah is Islam. I bear witness for that; I bear witness that
Muhammed is His servant and His Messenger; I bear witness that 'Ali b.
Abi Talib, peace be on him, is the testamentary trustee of Allah's
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and inheritor of the
Imamate after him."

When al-Mahdi read the last statement in the letter, he threw it away
and angrily looked at him. So al-Qasim asked him: "We revolted against
the Umayyads according these conditions, didn't we?" Al-Mahdi answered
him that they departed from that when the affair went well with them and
only they ruled the kingdom.

This clearly indicates that they summoned the people to that 'Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, was the testamentary trustee
of Allah's Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, his successor
after him over his community, and that he was among the progeny of those
who inherited the knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and were the lifeboats of this community. Therefore, there was
no escape from their being the leaders of the community and from
returning the Islamic, supreme authority to them.

#### 3. The General Disorder

The general disorder and discords spread all over the Islamic world, for
terror and fear of the standing government prevailed it. Al-Harith b.
'Abd Allah al-Ju'di, a famous poet, has described the existing state of
affairs throughout the country, saying:

I stay overnight standing to observe the stars when the first of them go
higher and run.

That is because of the discord that has included all those who pray.

Those who are in Khuresan, Iraq, and Syria are sad because it has
occupied them.

Because of it (the faces of) the people look like a deep-dark night.

The foolish scold both the ignorant and the sane.

The people are in an anguish because of which the pregnant are about to
miscarry their babies.[1]

The poet wonderfully and exactly described the conditions of the people,
for he has mentioned all the discords and the disorders that befell
them. Al-'Abbas b. al-Walid, a poet, has described the conditions of the
society, saying:

Surely I seek refuge for you with Allah from discords that become high
and then rush.

Surely the people have become tired of your policy; therefore hold fast
to the pillar of the religion and be deterred.

Do not offer yourselves as meat to whose people who are like wolves, for
surely when wolves are given meat, they enjoy it.

Do not split your own bellies with your own hands, and then neither
regret nor impatience benefit (you).[2]

Al-Walid has said: "The discords were as big as the mountains. They were
poured down upon the people due to the Umayyad policy based on
oppression and severe punishment. Accordingly, those discords brought
about a general revolt before which no force in the Islamic world could
stand.

### The Great Revolt

All Muslim peoples violently revolted, destroyed all the shackles and
the barriers on whom they were laid, called out to the overthrowing of
the Umayyad government, and summoned (each other) to follow al-Rida from
among the family of Muhammed, may Allah bless him and his family. Thus,
the local authorities

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 9, p. 38. [2] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 5,
p. 105.

were unable to suppress the revolt that widened and increased.

### The Founder of the Revolt

The certain thing is that the 'Alawids were the first to plan the revolt
and to design its programs and ways. That is because they suffered from
the tyranny and oppression of the Umayyads. So they spared no effort to
overthrow the Umayyad government, while, in the first place, the
'Abbasids took no part in it. They were apart from taking in any
political act; rather they were submissive to the state and supported
its policies. Meanwhile the Umayyads granted them gifts and secured for
them more salaries, that they might win their affection and undermine
the entity of the 'Alawids and the Muslims might look at them with a
normal look. That is because they performed no positive deed for the
interests of the Islamic society.

The 'Abbasids adopted the revolt when weakness and collapse appeared in
the Umayyad government and when they were sure of the successful of the
revolt. So they joined the 'Alawids. The historians have differed over
how they joined the revolt. A party of them has maintained that when
Sulayman b. 'Abd al-Malik was afraid of Abu Hashim b. Muhammed b.
al-Hanafiya- an 'Alawid, prominent leader- he attracted him through the
summons to him, and he responded to him. When he went to him, he showed
him affection and met him with more magnifying and honoring. But he
managed his killing. He put some poison into (his food) on his way to
al-Hamimiya where the 'Abbasids lived. When he felt the nearness of his
fixed term, he entrusted his affairs to his brother Muhammed b. 'Ali,
revealed his secrets to him, and made him know the names of the
summoners in the countries. Some historians have maintained that Abu
Hashim did not entrust his affairs to Muhammed b. 'Ali. But when he
stopped at him, and he saw his critical condition, he asked him
gradually until he told him about that which was with him. When Abu
Hisham died, Muhammed b. 'Ali found the files in which were the secrets
of the summons and the names of the summoners.[1]

Any way, the 'Abbasids adopted the affairs from that moment and began
harmonizing and organizing the revolt.

### The Center of the Revolt

The summons to the revolt against the Umayyad government was hold in
Yethrib (Medina). When Abu Hashim was assassinated, the center of the
revolt was transferred to al-Hamimiya, in the Balqa' of al-Sham; it
became the center of the revolt. In it the plans were drawn, the
revolutionary programs were designed and sent to the summoners in Kufa,
the homeland of the 'Alawid summons; it was also sent to the summoners
in Khuresan, which was famous for showing enmity toward the Umayyads,
who persecuted the Persians who inclined to Shi'ism.

The summoners were sent to Khuresan as traders, and they propagated the
evil

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Imama wa al-Siyasa, vol. 2, pp. 140-141.

deeds of the Umayyads and mentioned the misfortunes and disasters that
befell Ahl al-Bayt. The people of Khuresan responded to the summons and
joined it. [1] Muhammed b. 'Ali described the Khuresanis and asked them
to be more active wherein, saying to them: "Stick to Khuresan, for there
is a great number (of people) in it, and apparent steadfastness. There
are sound chests and empty hearts have not been divided by low desires
and not distributed by creeds. They are fighters who have bodies,
shoulders, upper parts of the back, and frightful voices. Now then,
surely I can see a good omen in the East and the rising place of the
lamp of the world and the creatures."[2]

The summoners gave much more activity in Khuresan until the summons
appeared and became strong in it, for the people of Khuresan spared no
effort to protect and keep it. They firmly believed that it would
protect them from the tyranny and exploitation of the Umayyads.

### Al-Abwa' Conference

The Hashimites held a conference at al-Abwa'; at the conference they
discussed the affairs of the summons and appointing the candidate from
among them to the caliphate. The conference was attended by Ibrahim, the
Imam, al-Saffah, al-Mansur, Salih b. 'Abd Allah, 'Abd Allah b. al-Hasan,
his two sons Muhammed and Ibrahim, Muhammed b. 'Abd Allah, and others.
Salih b. 'Ali delivered a sermon among them, saying: "You are the people
to whom the eyes of the people stretch out. Allah has brought you
together at this place; therefore, have an unanimous agreement on one of
you; and then scatter in the cities and supplicate Allah, may Allah
grant you a victory and help you..."

Abu Ja'far al-Mansur retorted: "Why do you deceive yourselves? By Allah,
you know that the people incline and quickly respond to this young
man-he indicated with his hand to Muhammed b. 'Abd Allah b. al-Hasan."

"You are right; surely we know that!" they all answered.

They rose and pledged allegiance to Muhammed; then he was given a pledge
of allegiance by Ibrahim the Imam, al-Mansur, al-Saffah, and the rest of
those who attended that meeting.[3]

However, the 'Abbasids were not loyal to this pledge of allegiance; they
broke their promise and violated their covenant. They secretly worked
for their own interests. They made the summoners understand that and
asked them to keep that secret lest the 'Alawids should revolt against
them and the people should not respond to them, for they had no social
base and no clear history. For this reason they advised the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Fekhri, pp. 122-123. [2] Ahsan al-Taqaseem fi Ma'rifat
al-Aqaleem, pp. 293-294. [3] Maqatil al-Talibiyyin, p. 256.

summoners to work secretly and ordered them to summon the people to
al-Rida from among the family of Muhammed.

Anyhow, the 'Abbasids used the summons to the 'Alawids as a slogan to
attain the trust of the community and to win the affection and sympathy
of Ahl al-Bayt.

### Abu Muslim is elected

Ibrahim al-Imam, the chief of the 'Abbasid family, elected his retainer
Abu Muslim al-Khuresani as a general leader for the revolutionary
movement and made it incumbent on the summoners and the Shi'ites to obey
him. He has mentioned the following in his letter he sent to the
Shi'ites in Kufa and Khuresan: "Surely I have appointed Abu Muslim (as a
commander over you); therefore listen to him and obey him. I have
appointed him as a commander over Khuresan and what it has overcome."[1]

The historians have unanimously agreed on that Abu Muslim was then 19
years old, that he was alert, sensitive, iron-willed, murderous,
treacherous, and merciless, and that he was the most skillful of the
politicians in weaving conspiracies and plots.

All the people were astonished when Ibrahim al-Imam nominated him to
this important office, for he was still young and had few experiences.
Accordingly, some of the summoners refused to obey him or to yield to
his commands.[2] But Ibrahim made it obligatory on them to listen to him
and obey him. After that, they had no escape from following him.[3]

### Ibrahim's Teachings to Abu Muslim

Ibrahim al-Imam required his retainer Abu Muslim to follow the following
instructions full of sins, detested things, and violating the religion:
"O 'Abd al-Rahman, you belong to us Ahl al-Bayt. So follow my teachings:
Look at this district of the Yemen; honor them, be among them, for
surely Allah will not complete this affair except through them. Look at
this district of Rebi'a and accuse them of their affairs. Look at this
district of Mudar; they are the enemy near in house; therefore kill him
about whose affair you doubt or of whom you have something in yourself.
If you are able not to let an Arab-speaking person, then do. Kill those
children who are five spans of the hand."[4]

If these teachings were correct, then they would indicate that Ibrahim
al-Imam had no knowledge of the humanitarian ideals and had no
relationship with Islam that has forbidden shedding blood unjustly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-Tabari, the Events of the Year 128 A. H. [2] Ibn al-Athir,
Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 295. [3] The historians have said: "Abu Muslim killed
all those who opposed him." [4] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 295.

Abu Muslim put Ibrahim's instructions into practice and went too far in
shedding blood and violating the sacred things. He unjustly killed six
hundred Arabs apart from those who were killed at the war, according to
the texts of the historians. So he spread sadness, mourning, and losing
children in the country of the Muslims. These deeds are not performed by
those who have religious or humanitarian tendency.

### In Khuresan

When Abu Muslim was appointed as a military commander by the 'Abbasids,
he immediately headed for Khuresan to lead the combatants to the field
of the war to put an end to the Umayyad government. When he arrived
there, he met with the summoners and the leaders and delivered a speech,
saying: "Let your hearts feel bravery, for it is of the reasons for
victory. Mention spites very much, for they urge (you to stick to)
boldness; stick to obedience, for it is the fortress of a warrior."[1]

He skillfully and wonderfully organized the movement. He described to
the people the corruption of the Umayyad government that ruled them
through oppression and exhaustion. He told them that he would spread
justice, ease, and welfare among them. So the hearts responded to him,
the masses of Khuresan welcomed him, and surrounded him. Through that
the first core of the 'Abbasid army was formed.

The only thing through which Abu Muslim could win a victory and overcame
the events was tribalism in Khuresan. For the Yemenis disagreed with the
Mudaris. Abu Muslim fed and kindled this enemy phenomenon. He aroused
anger in their hearts when they were about to unite to war against him.
He urged them to take vengeance on each other. In this manner he was
able to distract them from warring against him.

### With Nasar Bin Sayyar

When Nasar b. Sayyar came to know that Abu Muslim became strong and his
influence became firm, he sent a letter to Merwan, the Umayyad king,
asking him to help him before his government would be burnt with the
fire of the revolt. In his letter he wrote the following poetry lines:

I can see the remains of the ash look like the gleam of a fire that is
about to have a flame.

For surely a fire is kindled with some sticks, and the beginning of a
war is a speech.

So, if the wise of a people do not put it out, then its wood would be
bodies and heads.

I say out of amazement: I wish I knew whether the Umayyads were awake or
asleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Al-'Aqd al-Fareed, vol. 1, p. 158.

If they have been sleeping up till now, then say to them: Wake up! It is
time (for you) to wake up!

Merwan was unable to answer him; he wrote to him and told him about his
weakness and incapability of putting out that fire, saying to: "The
witness can see what the absent cannot see!"

When Nasr was hopeless of his help, he sought help from the ruler of
Iraq, Yazid b. 'Amru b. Hubayra. He wrote him a letter and ended the
letter with these poetry lines:

Inform Yazid and the best saying is the most truthful; I have come to
know that there is no good in lying.

I have seen some eggs in the land of Khuresan. If they are hatched, they
will bring about something wonderful.

They are two -year-old young birds; they have grown up and grown
features, but they do not fly.

If they fly and none wangles toward them during this period, they will
kindle the fires of a terrible war.

Yazid said to the carrier of the letter: "Say to your leader: There is
no victory but through a large number (of fighters); and I have no man
with me."[1]

Nasr thought of a way to get rid of the crisis, so he sent to al-Kirmani
and Shayban al-Khariji the following poetry lines:

Inform Rabi'a in Maru and those in the Yemen to be angry before that
anger will not profit (them).

And to declare war, for the people has declared a war in whose edges
wood is burnt.

What is the matter with you that you fight one another as if that the
men with intelligence were absent from your opinion?

And you leave an enemy who has encompassed you and who has neither
religion nor lineage?

We do not know Arabs similar to you among the people, nor (do we know)
pure non-Arabs if their ancestry is traced back.

They are the people who narrate from the Prophet sayings of which I have
never heard, and which the Books have never mentioned.

Whoever asks me about the origin of their religion, surely their
religion is that the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 305.

Arabs should be killed.[1]

Nasr's attempts for overcoming the events were useless, for the revolt
widely spread, the cities of Khuresan surrendered one by one, Abu Muslim
was delighted at the victory he won and recited the following:

Through firmness and secrecy I have attained that before which the
Umayyad kings are feeble when they mobilize (their fighters).

With my efforts I still striving (to shed) their blood, while the people
have heedlessly slept in Sham (Syria).

Until I stroke them with the sword, and they woke up of a sleep which
none before them had slept.

Whoever grazes sheep in a land with lions and neglects them, a lion will
undertake grazing them.[2]

The troops of Abu Muslim occupied the cities and the fortresses and
inflicted heavy damages on the enemy in souls and properties. As for
Nasr, he was unable to stand before those immense forces. So he rode his
horse and ran away; he passed through the desert between al-Ray and
Hamadan and died of sadness in its unknown regions.[3]

Abu Muslim occupied Khuresan and the neighboring towns and villages.
Then headed for Iraq to occupy it; his troops walked like waves; over
them waved black standards that were the symbol of the 'Abbasids. They
occupied Iraq without any resistance. In this manner the government of
the 'Abbasids appeared at the hands of Abu Muslim.

We will talk about the end of the Umayyad government, the murder of its
king Merwan, the different kinds of exhaustion and severe punishment the
Umayyads met from the 'Abbasids when we talk about the time of (Abu
al-'Abbas) al-Saffah.

Surely the talk about the factors that led to the overthrowing of the
Umayyad government is necessary to the research on the life of Imam
Musa, peace be on him, for he spent part of his life hearing of those
social crises that changed the course of the general life. He was
twenty-one years old when the Umayyad government was overthrown. This
period allowed him to convey to his inner self many views and pictures
that passed by him. He saw that the revolt deviated from its course, for
it was returning the government to Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, that
the community might enjoy justice, welfare, ease, and tranquility.
Unfortunately, it conveyed the caliphate to the 'Abbasids, who went too
far in

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[1] Ibid., p. 304. [2] Wafayat al-A'yan, vol. 1, p. 282. [3] Al-Mas'udi,
Murujj al-Dhahab, vol. 204.

killing the 'Abbasids, pursing them, punishing them severely, filling
their houses with sorrow, losing children and mourning. Of course, these
things had strong effects on the soul of Imam Musa, peace be on him, to
the extent that it was full of intense sorrow and deep sadness.
