Part 7: The Meaning of Prayer
=============================

...In Islamic traditions we understand the real meaning of *'takbir'* as
'*Allahu Akbar min an yusaf*' (God is greater than what is described of
Him) ...His ownership is real and ontological *(haqiqi* and *takwini):*
He has total control over all His creation, and can lay any kind of
effect on any one of them.

Therefore, every sort of knowledge, wisdom, wealth and treasure is His,
and totally under His control... we should engrave in our minds the fact
that we are placing the most honored part of our body (our face) on the
most insignificant of things (earth).

The scope of this short appendix is too limited, and hence we shall only
explain some parts of prayer here below:

Niyya (Intention)
-----------------

It is not necessary for one to pronounce the *niyya* verbally, for the
its reality is "the intention of doing an action". The *musalli* (the
one who prays) has it in his mind and knows what prayer he is going to
recite. The *fuqaha* in their books of jurisprudence mention the
necessity of the intention of *qurb* (attaining nearness of Allah). They
say that we must pray with the intention of attaining nearness of Allah.

The worshipper is advised to be extremely watchful lest his intention
mixes with any of his worldly interests, for that will destroy the
edifice of his prayer. Ethicians or the *\`ulama-u1-akhlaq* have
underscored with convincing proofs the fundamental importance of *niyya*
or intention.

Another very important necessity is to maintain one's *niyya* till the
end of his *Salat;* for at times, the *musalli* may begin with a purely
Divine intention, but when he senses an onlooker around him, he changes
his attitude due to the latter's presence.

Takbiratul Ihram
----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الله أكبر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah is Greater
----------------

This is when the *musalli* pronounces the words '*Allahu Akbar*'
translated as \`God is the Greatest' or \`God is greater (than every
other being)'. When uttering these words he must inculcate in himself
the fact that no being in the world of creation is greater than Allah.

He should visualize the reality that every element of his body and soul
is totally dependent upon Allah's Will. Hence he has no reason to think
for himself as possessing any degree of greatness whatsoever. Instead he
should express his lowliness in front of his Great Lord in a way that he
tangibly senses his total dependence to Him.

In Islamic traditions we understand the real meaning of '*takbir*' as
'*Allahu Akbar min an yusaf*' (God is greater than what is described of
Him).

Qiyam (Standing Upright with no movements)
------------------------------------------

The Islamic jurists are of the opinion that whoever is indifferent of
this pillar of *Salat,* his *Salat* becomes null and void (*batil*). The
secret of *qiyam is* very interesting: the *Ahlul Ma'rifa* (the learned
scholars) know *qiyam* as referring to *al-tawhidul af'ali* (unity of
actions). This means that every action that any being performs entirely
stands by the Power of Allah. (This however should not be taken to mean
that God does the action for man and man has no role in his action; man
has been given a will and can choose the path that he desires.)
Therefore, as we stand in *qiyam,* we must place this exalted meaning in
our hearts too.

Qira'a (Qur'an-Recitation)
--------------------------

The *musalli* then recites Suratu'l Hamd and another chapter from the
Holy Qur'an. Before reciting it, however, he should, in accordance with
the teachings of the Qur'an, seek refuge in Allah from the accursed
Satan. Then he must recite distinctly *(tartil)* the *Fatihatul Kitab*
and inculcate in his mind the meaning of every sentence that he recites.
Following is a simple translation of Suratul *Fatiha:*

### Suratu' l Fatihah

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim***

1. I begin with Allah's Name, the All-merciful *(al-Rahman),* Whose
Grace and Mercy cover every created being, the Ever-Merciful
*(al-Rahim),* whose specific Mercy is enjoyed by the believers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ للّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Alhamdu lillahi Rabbil alamin***

2. All praises belong only to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. (The Name
Allah is a proper noun that refers to the Exalted Being and is believed
to manifest all His Perfect qualities and attributes. And the word
*'rabb'* which we translated as 'Lord' has a much comprehensive meaning.
It means \`the Absolute Owner, Provider, Sustainer and Trainer'. This
means God provided, and continues providing existence to us; He owns
every element of our being; He provides us, out of His Mercy any
perfection that He wants, and guides us at every step on our way to His
nearness.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرَّحْمـنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Al Rahmanir Rahim***

3. The All-merciful *(al-Rahman),* Whose Grace and Mercy covers every
created being, the Ever-Merciful *(al-Rahim),* whose specific Mercy is
enjoyed by the believers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Maliki yawmiddin***

4. Owner of the Day of Judgment (and every existing being). (We must
understand the fact that Allah's ownership is not relative or
superficial, as is man's. His ownership is real and ontological
*(haqiqi* and *takwini)*: He has total control over all His creation,
and can lay any kind of effect on any one of them. Therefore, every sort
of knowledge, wisdom, wealth, treasure is His, and totally under His
control. )

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَّاكَ نَعْبُدُ وإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in***

5. You alone we worship, and from You alone we seek help.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهدِنَــــا الصِّرَاطَ المُستَقِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Ihdinas siratal mustaqim***

6. (O Allah) Guide us on the straight path.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنعَمتَ عَلَيهِمْ غَيرِ المَغضُوبِ عَلَيهِمْ وَلاَ
الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Siratal ladhina an'amta \`alayhim ghayril maghdubi \`alayhim walad
dallin***

7. The path of those on whom You have blessed; not of those who have
earned Your wrath, nor of those who have gone astray.

Having recited Suratu'1 Hamd the *musalli* is allowed to recite any
other Sura of the Holy Qur'an apart from those that contain verses, that
if read or heard, oblige him to prostrate (or do *sajda)* according to
the Islamic law.

Since many of us recite Surat *al-Tawhid* as our second Sara, I shall
give a simple meaning of the same in the following pages.

### Surat at-Tawhid

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Bismillahir Bahmanir Rahim***

1. I begin with Allah's Name, the All-merciful *(al-Rahman),* Whose
Mercy covers every dependent being, the Ever-Merciful *(al-­Rahim),*
whose specific Mercy is enjoyed by the believers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Qul Huwallahu Ahad***

2. Say (O Muhammad) He Allah is One (meaning Non-composite He cannot be
divided like the divisible one. He possesses Infinite existence)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allahus Samad***

3. Allah, the Everlasting Refuge [^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Lam yalid wa lam yulad***

4. He begets not (i.e. nothing has been separated from his Exalted
Nature), nor is he begotten (i.e. he did not separate or come out from
another being)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُواً أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Wa lam yakun lahu kufuwan Ahad***

5. And there is none like Him (because every other being has been
created, and is dependent, save Him the Independent).

Ruku' (Bending In Utter Humility)
---------------------------------

Then the musalli bends in humbleness to his Lord, and expresses Allah's
Immaculate Nature, as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان ربي العظيم وبحمده
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Subhana Rabbiyal \`aDhimi wa bihamdih***

***Free from all imperfections is my Exalted Lord,***

***And I praise Him.***

Sujud (Prostration)
-------------------

*Sujud* is known to be the **Highest Degree** of submission *(istikana)*
to God. Therefore, as we recite the *dhikr* of *sujud*, we should
inculcate in our minds the fact that we are placing the most honored
part of our body (our face) on the most insignificant of things (earth).

The *dhikr* of *sujud* is as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان ربي الأعلى وبحمده
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Subhana Rabbiyal a\`alaa wa bihamdih***

***Free from defects is my Lord, the Most High,***

***And I praise Him.***

[^1]: This is Arthur J. Arberry's translation which is known in some
circles to be one of the best available today. Nevertheless, it would
not be unbeneficial to understand the word "as-Samad" better. Its means
الذي يقصد اليه في الحوائج' the One Intended to accomplish one's needs.'
This meaning is also narrated from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (\`a) as
quoted in the sacred text of al-Kafi. \`Allamah Tabataba'i in his
al-Mizan believes that the other variant meanings given for "al-Samad"
in some holy narratives of the Imams (\`a) are the said meaning's
inseparable attributes (lawazim) - see al-Mizan, v.20, p.391. There is
another translation from \`Izzuddin al-Hayek which reads: 'Allah is the
Eternally Besought of all.' vide p.954, An approximate Translation of
the meanings of the Honorable Qur'an in the English Language, Dar
al-Fikr, Lebanon.


