Part 8: Heavenly Stars Memoirs & Anecdotes of the God-Wary
==========================================================

...'How much time is left for midday?,' because he had no watch with
him, and had no strength to look at the watch; after every 15 minutes he
would ask us (the time), not because his prayer should not be prayed
outside its time, but because of performing prayer at the beginning of
its time ...

... Once again, he said with disappointment: 'Why do you deal with me in
such a way. Take back the food, so that I perform my prayer.'

... I only have hope of God's Grace and have no (action) at my credit to
be hopeful .

... so that his eyes does not even fall once at a *ghayr mahram* woman.
I observed this from him as an established habit...

1) Spiritual Ablutions
----------------------

Allah (swt) says in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ التَّوَّابِينَ وَيُحِبُّ الْمُتَطَهِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely Allah Loves those who turn unto Him constantly and Loves those
who continually purify themselves.*** [^1]

The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان استطعت ان تكون ابدا علئ وضوء فافعل: فان ملك الموت اذا قبض روح العبد
وهو علئ وضوء كتب له شهادة
  </p>
</blockquote>

If you can always be in the state of *wudu'*, than do so; for verily if
the Angel of death were to take the soul of a servant of God while the
latter is in the state of *wudu,* martyrdom is written for him.[^2]

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (\`a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الوضوء علئ الوضوء نور علي نور
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Wudu* upon *wudu* is light upon light. [^3]

### A) Imam Khumayni Regularly Renews his Wudu'

(In one of her memoirs, Ms. Dabbagh says:) "...One of these points was
the orderliness & discipline of the personal life of that great man
(i.e. Imam Khumayni): discipline in reading the papers, discipline in
(his) meetings, discipline in reading letters, and discipline (even) in
renewing his *wudu'*. Definitely it was not such that you suddenly ask
for him, and are told that he has gone to renew his *wudu'*.

He rather had a specific time for that. I remember one day in the
building that was opposite the house of the Imam in Paris, I together
with other brothers was busy listening to an audio cassette.

Suddenly I remembered that I must leave, for it was the time of the
renewal of Imam's *wudu'.* I thought that I must inspect the basin so
that it is clean and orderly. I did not like the house for which I was
responsible, to look disorderly. The brothers said, 'Come on, does it
mean that he has a specific time for that?' However, I went and cleaned,
and incidentally, the Imam came at that very moment.[^4]

Ms. Marziye Hadidechee

Famously known as Dabbagh: a member of the team sent to Moscow for
conveying the late Imam Khumayni's message to Gorbachev.

### B) Imam Khumayni closes the water tap between the acts of wudu'

"On several occasions I have seen Imam Khumayni performing *wudu',* and
noticed that he closes the water tap between the acts of *wudu',* and
re-opens it (only) when it is necessary, to avoid any extra water to
flow from the tap. This is while most of us do not have the smallest
degree of attention toward the matter of *israf* (wastage).

For example, from the time we intend to perform *wudu',* the tap is open
until when our ablution is completed. Whenever Imam (Khumayni) wanted to
perform *wudu',* he was very careful in using less water. This vigilance
was witnessed in the most minor of his movements. He always performed
*ghusl* (the Friday major ablution) before the call of prayers at Friday
noon, and his Friday *ghusl* was never left.

Whenever the Imam performed *wudu',* he would perform all the parts of
it facing the *qibla.* Even if the basin was not in the direction of the
*qibla,* at every instance, after taking a handful of water, he closed
the tap, and facing the *qibla,* washed his face or hand. Imam Khumayni,
in accordance with his self-commitment and Islamic belief, tried to
practice whatever he preached.

For example, if during *wudu'* he reminded one of his family members not
to use water more than necessary, he too carefully followed the same..."
[^5]

Dr. Mahmud Burujardi

*Imam Khumayni's son-in-law*

### C) 'It is not the time for an interview now.'

"One day in Paris a person came and said: 'The Americans have come to
take an interview with Imam Khumayni, and this program shall be
broadcasted live. If such an action transpires than naturally other
European countries would follow suit, and this can be effective in
revealing the stances and movement of the revolution.'

Incidentally it was a Friday. I came to Imam Khumayni and informed him
of the matter. He said: 'Now is the time of doing the recommended
acts-the Friday *ghusl*, not the time for an interview.' When he had
performed the recommended acts of Friday, he said: 'I am ready for the
interview.'" [^6]

Ms. Marziyeh Hadidechi

2) On Prayer
------------

Allah (SWT) says in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَافِظُوا عَلَى الصَّلَوَاتِ وَالصَّلاةِ الْوُسْطَى وَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ
قَانِتِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Be you watchful over the prayers,***

***And the middle prayer;***

***And stand obedient to God. (2:238)***

The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
افضل الاعمال عند الله الصلاة في اول وقتها
  </p>
</blockquote>

“The best of deeds to Allah is prayer in the beginning of its time”

What follows are thought provoking memoirs of people who got the
advantage to observe great Muslim scholars at prayer time:

### A) A youth extremely observant of prayer time

"Of the important distinguishing characteristics of Imam Khumayni was
that he always performed the prayer at the beginning of its time, and
would give importance to the recommended prayers (*nawafil*) . This
characteristic was present in him since the beginning of his youth age,
when he hadn't exceeded twenty years.

Some friends used to say: "We thought in the beginning that God forbid,
he performs his prayers at the beginning of its time, out of show off.
For this very reason, we tried to do something that if this action was
out of showiness, we stop the same. For a long time we thought of it,
and tried him several times in various ways.

For example, exactly at the beginning of the prayer time, we would
spread the table cloth (for having our meals); or arrange to set out on
a journey. However, he would say, 'You go on with your food, and I shall
perform my prayers. I shall eat whatever remains.'

Or while leaving for a journey (at the beginning of the prayer time) he
would say: 'You go ahead. I shall follow and reach you.' A long time had
passed since this matter took place, and not only was his timely prayer
not left, he (also) compelled us to perform our prayers at the beginning
of its time."

Muhammad \`Abai

### B) What imam al-Sadiq (\`a) actually meant

"The other issue was prayer at the beginning of its time, that he lay
great importance to. He would narrate a tradition from Imam Ja’far
al-Sadiq that said: 'If a person takes his prayer lightly, he shall be
deprived of our intercession.'

Once I said to him: 'Taking prayers lightly may mean that a person
sometimes performs his prayers, while sometimes he does not.' He said:
'No. This, rather, is against the religion. Imam al-Sadiq meant that
when *zuhr* (noon) comes to transpire (for example), and the person does
not perform his prayers at the beginning of the prayer time, he has in
reality given preference to something else."

Mahmud Burujardi

### C) Prayers in Times of Great Difficulty

(This refers to the time Imam Khumayni was captured by the forces of the
Shah.): "Imam (Khumayni) narrated the following to me: I had said on the
way that I haven't performed my prayers. 'Stop at a place, so that I
perform *wudu*'. They said: 'We do not have the permission to do so.' I
said, 'But you are armed, while I do not have any weapon. Besides, you
are all together, while I am alone; I cannot do anything.'

They said, 'We don't have the permission to do so.' I understood that
there is no use (to go on explaining), and they shall not stop. I said,
'All right, at least stop so that I may do *tayammum*.' They listened to
this and stopped the car. However, they did not give me the permission
to come out. Whilst in the car, I bent myself and hit my hand on the
ground and performed *tayammum.*

The prayer I offered was in the state of facing opposite the *qiblah.*
This was because we were heading to Tehran from Qum, and the *qiblah*
was at the South. It was a prayer recited with a *tayyammum,* opposite
the *qiblah* and whilst the car was moving. This is how I prayed my
*subh* (dawn) prayers. Maybe these two units of my prayers pleases God."

Farideh Mustafawi

### D) Indeed Such Are Moments When the True Believers Are Clearly Deciphered

"In one of the gatherings where, Hadhrat Ayatullah Khamenei, as the
President of the time was also present. Also among those present were
Agha Rafsanjani (the president of the parliament), the Commanders of the
Revolutionary guards, other forces, and I, who was there as the
commander of the land forces.

The gathering took place in the small room of the Imam. He was seated on
a chair and we sat on the ground in front of him in a circle. I do not
remember whose turn it was to deliver a report, that suddenly the Imam
left the room.

Imam's confrontation was extremely shocking to us. The reporter could
not finish what he was saying, for he was astounded and astonished as to
what should he say and to whom should he address. (Thereafter) the first
one to speak was Agha Rafsanjani, who said: 'Agha, are you feeling
unwell?'

Imam Khumayni returned quickly and cleanly said, 'No; It is the time for
prayer.' I looked at my watch unconsciously. I knew the prayer time of
Tehran beforehand, and can (confidently) say that the time of Imams
leave for the purpose of prayer had no difference of even a minute with
it ...In reality, the Imam's state of worship was such that he could not
pay attention to what the reporter said moments before the beginning of
prayer time."

The Martyr 'Ali Sayyad Shirazi

### E) In Front Of All the Reporters Love Of The Beloved Gives Him No Respite

"The Day when Shah escaped, we were in Neauphle-le-Chateau in Paris. The
French police had closed the main highway of Neauphle-le-Chateau; all
the news-reporters of different countries of the world were present. The
foreign news-reporters from Africa, Asia, Europe and America, and
probably 150 cameras just broadcasted the Imam's speech.

Believe it that the news-reporters numbered as such, because they were
reporting about the greatest event of the year.

The Shah had gone, and they wanted to know Imam Khumayni's decision.
Khumayni stood on a chair near the highway, and all the cameras were
focused at him. He spoke for a few minutes and said what he wanted to
say. I was standing beside the Imam. Suddenly, he faced me and said:
'Ahmad, has the midday come to transpire?'

I said: 'Yes, it is midday now.' Imam Khumayni, without any fear, bade
them off as follows: 'Wassalamu...' Look at what moment did he leave his
speech to perform his prayer at the beginning of its time.

That is, at such a sensitive moment when International Television
Broadcasting Stations, which have millions of viewers, such as the
C.N.N., the B.B.C. London, all the television channels of London and
America, all the news-reporters such as the Associated Press, the United
Press, Reuters, and all the reporters of (the different) news-papers,
magazines and radio-television stations were present, Imam cut his
conversation and went after his prayer."

Sayyid Ahmad Khumayni *Late son of Imam Khumayni*

### F) Imam is Informed of Martyr Rajai's Decision

"That which Imam Khumayni highly emphasized, and showed great
sensitivity towards was prayer at the beginning of its time. My father
would say also, that ever since his adolescence and youth age he (Imam
Khumayni) used to pray at the beginning of prayer time. If you remember,
during the beginning of the victory of the revolution,

Martyr Raja’i, introduced a law that the ministries and governmental
organizations should remain closed for half an hour for prayer. This
issue was very interesting and lesson-giving. When it was asked from
Imam Khumayni concerning his opinion on this matter, he said: 'If it
does not cause harm to the time and work of anybody, do it (as
suggested)."

Dr. Mahmud Burujardi *Son-in-law of Imam Khumayni*

### G) What Kind Of Lover Was This Who Even In That State Never Forgot The Only Beloved

"The time was ten minutes to eight when they brought Agha to the C.C.U.
I whispered near the Imam's ears: 'Agha, it is the time for prayer;
should Mr. Ansari come, so that you (can) perform *wudu*?' Imam Khumayni
made a sign with his eye-brows. Dr. Ilyasi said: 'Agha is listening to
everything, but cannot reply.' That is when I saw the Imam pointing with
the fore-finger of his right hand, and we thought that he is performing
his prayers."

Mustafa Kaff-ashzadeh

### H) 'It should not happen that the sun rises and I have to pray qada'.'

"One night before his demise, I was near him (Imam Khumayni) in the
hospital from 10.00 p.m. to 5.00 a.m. in the morning. He woke up several
times from his sleep and asked for water. When I brought juice for him,
he said: 'Give me natural water.' He did not take fruit juice. He also
asked about the time a number of times; and continually said: 'It should
not happen that the sun rises and I have to pray *qada*."'

Husayn Sulaymani

### I) Who is this angelic figure who is so particular of the time of meeting his only beloved?

"The very same day he (Imam Khumayni) prayed his *zuhr* and *asr*
prayers with *wudu'*. From an hour before noon, he asked whoever came to
him: 'How much time is left for mid-day?' And his aim (behind this) was
that he should not delay in praying at the beginning of its time. From
3.30 afternoon an overwhelming anxiety overcame all (of us).

The treatment had reached at a point when, following utmost efforts by
the physicians and the Hospital personnel, everyone was in wait for a
miracle to transpire. During Maghrib, the doctors, considering their
awareness of his sensitivity toward prayers, called him and said: 'Agha,
it is time for prayer.'

Imam Khumayni, who was unconscious from 1.30 afternoon, attended to this
voice. All of us witnessed that he prayed his Maghrib prayer in that
state of restlessness by moving his hands and eyebrows."

Firishte I'rabi

### J) Regaining Consciousness by The Mention Of Prayer

"He (Imam Khumayni) loved performing his prayer at the beginning of its
time. Even in his last day, he prayed the prayer of Maghrib and 'Isha'
by means of signs at 10.00 p.m. He was in the state of unconsciousness
when one of the doctors came besides him and, with the likelihood that
probably by means of (mentioning) prayer Agha could be brought into
consciousness, he said: 'Agha, it is time for prayer.'

The moment he said this, Imam regained his consciousness and performed
his prayer with signs of his hand. In the morning of that day too, he
would always ask us: 'How much time is left for midday?', because he had
no watch with him, and had no strength to look at the watch; after every
15 minutes he would ask us (the time), not because his prayer should not
be prayed outside its time, but because of performing prayer at the
beginning of its time."

Na'ime Ishraqi

### K) How can you snatch the cup of divine love from the intoxicated?

"He (Imam Khumayni) always prayed at the beginning of the prayer time,
and advised his children the same. I remember that in the beginning of
the war (Iraq-Iran imposed war), a gathering was held with some
presidents and officials, both local and foreign.

When there was a call for prayer, Imam Khumayni without paying attention
to the others, stood up and performed his prayer at the beginning of its
time, and those present (also) prayed behind him. And in that very
period, not only did he recite the 8 units of *nafila* prayers of
*zuhr*, but also prayed the 8 units of *nafila* prayers of *\`asr*.

During the days when he was in the hospital, prior to the call of midday
prayer, he would ask: 'How much time is left for the call of *zuhr*
prayer?' And in the middle of the night too he would ask: 'How much time
is left for the call of *subh* prayer?' so that he may recite his
*nafilah* prayers. The time he left this mortal world too, the last
moments of his life was together with the word of prayer. Even when he
regained consciousness, the first sentence he pronounced was *Allahu
Akbar* (Allah is great than what is attributed to Him)."

Ayatullah Muhammad Rida Tawassuli

### L) 'Take back the food, so that I perform prayer.'

"The day when he (Imam Khumayni) was transferred to the hospital, he
requested that he should be informed about the time for midday and
afternoon prayer; and he would pray at the beginning of the prayer time
and then take his meal. One day he suddenly noticed that the plate of
food was brought inside the room.

He asked: 'Do you mean that it is time for prayer?' Those present said:
'Yes, it is prayer time.' Imam, facing them said in an angry tone: 'Why
then didn't you wake me up?' They said: 'Due to your particular
unfavorable state, we did not want to wake you up.' Once again, he said
with disappointment: 'Why do you deal with me in such a way? Take back
the food, so that I perform my prayer! "'

Mahdi Imam Jamarani

### M) Great Stations Attained By Praying at the Beginning of Prayer Time

(This narrative is from a contemporary scholar and a student of the
contemporary master of philosophy- Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah
Yazdi): "I asked him (my teacher- Ayatullah Misbah Yazdi) :

What is the correct and balanced program of worship for a seeker of
knowledge in your opinion?' He said with his ever humble attitude: 'I
feel ashamed to talk about this, for I myself am greatly deprived of the
same.

However, I have heard things from great people, of which I shall
narrate: ...The late \`Allamah Tabatabai and Ayatullah Behjat (a
contemporary Shi'ah Gnostic presently residing in Qum-Iran) quoted
Ayatullah Qadi (the teacher of \`Allamah Tabatabai in *\`irfan*), as
saying: If a person prays the obligatory prayers at the beginning of its
time and does not attain lofty stations, he should curse me! (or, he
said: he should spit at my face!)" [^7]

The beginning of prayer time is a great secret! Safeguard your
prayers[^8]

**حَافِظُوا عَلَى الصَّلَوَاتِ**  
 (*Hafizu 'ala salawatikum*) is itself a point other than[^9]

**واقيموا الصلاة’**

Establish the prayer' fact that man gives importance and binds himself
to perform prayer at the beginning of its time in itself has many
effects, even if the prayer is not performed with the presence of heart
(and concentration). [^10]

Shaykh Muhsin Gharawiyyan

3) The Hereafter
----------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والله مااخاف عليكم الا البرزخ
  </p>
</blockquote>

I swear by Allah, I do not fear for you except in *barzakh*

Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) [^11]

If great authorities of gnosis (*\`irfan*), who had already purified
their inner selves and entirely sacrificed their lives for the sake of
human salvation, believed that migration to the next world- the
intermediate realm *(barzakh)* is difficult, what should those like the
author, who have drowned themselves in the mundane pleasures of the
world, express?

Following are some narratives worthy of reflection.

### a) I Have No Action to My Credit

(The night before he left for the hospital where he was to pass the last
moments of his life, the late Imam Khumayni was in the company of Fatima
Tabatabai - his daughter-in-law - among other relatives. The latter
narrates the following conversation, which took place after Imam
Khumayni had eaten very little of his dinner:)

"Imam said: 'Now I have one or two advices for you: I shall not return.
However, I don't want you to express grief and anxiety on my demise. I
am asking God to give you patience. Be careful not to weep and lament.
This is what I had to say.' I and Khanum (the wife of Imam Khumayni)
were present; I do not recollect exactly; I think Zahra Khanum Ishraqi
was (also) present. I don't know whether someone else was present or
not.

It was difficult for us to listen to this issue; all of us had turned
sad. Khanum said: 'No, Agha, God Willing, you will recover...' He (Imam
Khumayni) said: 'No, I will not return. However, let me tell you this:
to go (to the next world) is very difficult; to go (to the next world)
is very difficult.' I (Fatimah Tabatabai) said: 'Agha, If you say all
this, then we shall greatly lose our hopes. This is because, as far as I
know, although I am young, those who have been with you narrate that not
only have you performed all the obligatory deeds, and abstained from the
forbidden ones, you have also observed the recommended acts and even
abstained from most of the unpleasant deeds *(makruhat).*

If it is really difficult for you also, then what should we say? We get
greatly despondent'. He said: 'No, you must not despair from God's
Mercy; [^12] this itself is the greatest sin ... [^13]

However, bear this in mind that to go (to the next world) is very
difficult; I do not have any (good) deed, so that I should want to be
happy thereby.' I said: 'But Agha, these words that you utter are very
difficult for us to bear, for if it is as such, we are extremely
frightened, worried and upset.' He said: 'It is really as such. If
Hadrat Sajjad (\`a) wept and said: "O Lord it is likely that my good
deeds are bad" [^14], do I possess a deed to get happy and confident
thereby?

I only have hope of God's Graces and have no (action) at my credit to be
hopeful...; and to go (to the next world) is very difficult; to go (to
the next world) is very difficult.[^15]' The doctors then came, and Imam
(Khumayni) said: 'It is time to leave.' [^16]

Fatima Tabataba'I, *The daughter-in-law of Imam Khumayni*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الصراط ادق من الشعرة واحد من السيف
  </p>
</blockquote>

'The path (*sirat*) is finer than the hair and sharper than the sword.'

Imam al-Sadiq (\`a) [^17]

B) The Task is Very Difficult
-----------------------------

(Not very long before his demise, the late son of Imam Khumayni, Hujjatu
'l Islam Haj Sayyid Ahmad Khumayni, dreamt of his father. He narrates:
"I saw Imam Khumayni in my dream. He said to me: 'Tell your friends that
I (have already) crossed the straight path *(sirat).* However, the task
is very difficult.'" [^18]

The Late Hujjatu'l Islam Sayyid Ahmad Khumayni *The late son of Imam
Khumayni*

4) Extreme Chastity
-------------------

Allah (swt) says in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَى لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say to the believers,***

***That they cast down their eyes***

***And guard their private parts;***

***That is purer for them.***

***Allah is aware of the things they work.*** [^19]

### The Late Ayatollah Mar'ashi's Extreme Chastity

(This narration is from a student of the late Ayatollah Shahab al­ Din
Mar'ashi, who at present ranks among the esteemed tutors of the Islamic
Seminary in Qum.). "During his (Late Ayatollah Mar'ashi's) old age, I
had observed several times that on entering the holy shrine of Hadrat
Ma'suma (\`a) for teaching or praying, and noticing the apparition of a
woman from far, he would raise his cloak above his face, so that his
eyes do not even fall once at a *ghayr mahram* woman. I observed this
from him as an established habit".[^20]

Hujjatu'1 Islam al-Sayyid \`Adil al-\`Alawi: *A contemporary scholar in
Qum*

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, 2:222

[^2]: Muhammad al-Ray Shahri, Mizan al-Hikma, New ed., vol. 4, pg. 3563,
tr. 21920

[^3]: Ibid, tr. no. 21924

[^4]: Imam Dar Sangar-e Namaz, pp. 12-13

[^5]: Ibid, pp. 11-12

[^6]: Ibid, pg. 14

[^7]: This decision is mentioned in the book. It is not by the
translator

[^8]: Holy Qur'an, 2:238

[^9]: Holy Qur'an, 2:43

[^10]: Muhsin Gharawiyyan, Dar Mahzare Buzurgan, (A Persian treatise on
the Memoirs of saints contemporary to the author), p. 99

[^11]: Muhammad al-Ray Shahri, Mizan al-Hikma, new ed., vol. 1, pg. 252,
tr. 1681

[^12]: The Holy Qur'an (39:54) says: Say: O My servants who have been
extravagant against yourselves, do not despair of Allah's Mercy; surely
Allah forgives sins altogether. Surely, He is the All-forgiving, the
All-compassionate. The Holy Quran (15:56) also says: He said, 'And who
despairs of the Mercy of his Lord, excepting those that are astray?'

[^13]: Iman 'Ali ('a) is reported to have once told a person, whom fear
had made to despair, due to the ampleness of his sins: \`O you! Your
despondency of Allah's Merry is worse than your sins.' (Jami al Sa'adat,
Mawla Muhammad Mahdi al-Naraqi, vol. 1, pg. 247)

[^14]: This also refers to what Imam al-Husayn (\`a) says in his famous
supplication of \`Arafah. He says: 'O God, one whose good deeds are bad,
how can his bad deeds not be bad?' (Mafatih al Jinan, Du'a al-'Arafah,
Imam al-Husayn (A), compiler- Marhum Shaykh Abbas Qummi).

[^15]: The Holy Prophet (s) is reported to have said: 'Know that no one
of you will be saved by his action, including me; except if Allah's
Merry and Grace were to cover me.' (Mizan al-Hikmah, Muhammad al-Ray
Shahri, new ed., vol.3, pg. 2131)

[^16]: Fasl-e Sabr, Memoirs of the days of Imam's illness and demise by
the team of physicians and those affiliated to Imam Khumayni, pp. 83-84.

[^17]: Mizan al-Hikmah, Muhammad al-Ray Shahri, new ed., vol. 2, pg.
1610, tr. 10481

[^18]: Dalil-e Aftab, Memoirs of the Reminder of Imam Khumayni, pg. 169.

[^19]: Holy Qur'an, Surat an-Nur (24), verse 30

[^20]: Sayyid \`Adil \`Alawi, Qabasat min Hayati Sayyidinal Ustadh, p.
95


