Preface
=======

***In the Name of Allah, the All Merciful, the Ever Merciful***

The Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَى رَبِّكَ كَدْحاً
فَمُلَاقِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O Human being,***

***Surely you are striving***

***Towards your Lord***

***Laboriously,***

***And you shall meet Him***[^1]

Addressed to the Human being.

The Human Being is struggling on a path

The path leads to His Lord

The struggle is laborious

He would meet His Lord

Rumi in his celebrated masterpiece, *Mathnawi* metaphorically and in a
beautiful style begins by narrating the speech of the human soul who is
at pain and yearns to return back to his dwelling of peace:

Hearken to the reed-flute[^2], how it complains,

Lamenting its banishment from its home:

"Ever since they tore me from my osier bed,

My plaintive notes have moved men and women to tears.

I burst my breast, striving to give vent to sighs,

And to express the pangs of my yearning for my home.

He who abides far away from his home Is ever longing for the day he
shall return.

The abode of the human being and his true home is somewhere else. He is
a stranger in this world in the true sense of the word and his place is
the proximity and nearness of the only Beloved. So long as he resides in
the straits of this realm, the pain of separation has always to remain.
It is by the wings of knowledge and action that the bird of his spirit
can leave the cage of material attachment and fly to the realm of the
Beloved. But he needs to know the way and style to soar to the abode of
peace to which the Beloved himself invites him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَدْعُو إِلَى دَارِ السَّلَامِ وَيَهْدِي مَنْ يَشَاءُ إِلَى
صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah continually Invites***

***To the abode of peace***

***And continually Guides whosoever***

***He wants***

***To the straight path***[^3]

As long as he has not deciphered the true path, which the Holy Qur'an
calls "*sirat al-mustaqim*" (the straight path), he should never dream
to migrate to his hometown. The Beloved, who yearned that his lovers
return to His neighborhood where their homes lay, sent His messengers so
that they may guide the birds of perplexity to their destination.

Among the fundamental methods that these guides of the human being
taught was prayer. *Salat* - a Divinely inspired mode of prayer taught
by the Holy Prophet (s)- is a method and an opportunity to fly and soar
to one's destination. If the human being utilizes this opportunity that
comes 5 times a day, his journey would undoubtedly commence.

Why should he allow several opportunities during his life time to go to
waste? Doesn't he yearn deep in his heart for the company of the
Beloved? Doesn't he realize that it is high time he should go back home
and enjoy the neighborhood of the only Beloved who intensely loves his
company?

Those who have tried to seek help by this vehicle of spiritual ascent
may complain about its ineffectiveness, since it has not yet made them
reach their destination. To them must be said that '*No imaginary
vehicle can transport you to your destination.*' If the human being
prays observing the outer as well as inner etiquette of prayer he surely
will attain success in comprehending his much longed abode. It is the
negligence of the heart in prayer that makes the prayer devoid of its
spirit and destroys the opportunity of the human being.

As we shall see in this small treatise, the presence of heart (*huduru'l
qalb*) is one of the most fundamental conditions of prayer, without
which the prayer lays a negative or no effect on the supplicant.
Appreciating its importance, one should try to observe the same and
always struggle in this noble venture. Obviously the task is challenging
and difficult in the beginning, but with continual struggle and
steadfastness in bridling the faculty of imagination of the human being
and detaching the human soul from temporal inclinations, one can slowly
and gradually attain the state of complete absorption in prayer.

This concise treatise is a humble attempt aimed at making us realize the
necessity, possibility, and methodology of attaining this vital spirit
of prayer. May Almighty Allah enable us achieve the same, so that we can
join the flocks who are busy soaring to the realm of their Beloved and
are very anxious to meet Him. If we show laxity in this sublime
aspiration, 'the state of perpetual regret' in the Hereafter would be of
no use to us.

All praises solely belong to Allah-the Absolute Perfect Being,

The Lord of the World of Dependent Existence.

*Utterly destitute to Almighty Allah,*

*Abu Muhammad Zaynu' l \`Abidin*

*Holy Proximity of Bibi Ma'suma (\`a) - Qum-al-Mugaddasa*

[^1]: Holy Qur'an, 84:6

[^2]: Reed Flute is a metaphor for the Human soul- See commentary of
Mathnawi by H'aj Mulla Hadi Sabzawari- the great Shi'ite
mystic-philosopher, vol. 1, p.17

[^3]: Holy Qur'an, 10:25


