Part 3: Levels of Attention in Prayer
=====================================

...the level of the heart's conviction is extremely different from
intellectual comprehension. There are many things man has grasped
intellectually, but has not attained the heart's conviction, and his
heart does not confirm what his intellect says...

- Imam Ruhullah Khumayni

The Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَن لَّيْسَ لِلإنسَانِ إلاَّ مَا سَعَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And that a man shall have to his account only as he has
labored.***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِكُلٍّ دَرَجَاتٌ مِّمَّا عَمِلُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***All have degrees***

***According to what they have done.*** [^2]

In order to determine the steps one must pursue to achieve attention in
prayer, we must try to define the kind of attention we aspire. According
to scholars of ethics and gnosis attention is of different levels and
degrees. Clearly, not all who aspire to realize attention in prayer
immediately possess the ability to ascend to the most recommended of all
the levels of attention.

To define all the levels of attention is beyond the scope of this
limited treatise. We shall only briefly look at some of the recommended
levels of attention in prayer, so that we may know where we stand and
what our target should be. Discussing the higher levels would require an
introduction, which is beyond the scope of this treatise. Those
interested, however, in having information beyond what is covered over
here, may refer to the advanced texts available on this subject.

Attention in prayer is sometimes divided into two kinds:

1. Attention to the act of worship.

2. Attention to the Worshipped One.

'Attention to the act of worship' in turn is of various levels, some of
which can be attained with practice by a majority of people, whereas
others can only be realized by those who have thoroughly purified
themselves from the taints of sins and attained the proximity of
Almighty Allah.

'Attention to the Creator', however, can be experienced by only those
who enjoy the higher levels of the previous kind of attention. This
should, however, not make us believe that we cannot attain such levels.
Rather, they are attainable, but need continual spiritual struggle and
steadfastness.

The late Imam al-Khumayni in his *Sirr al-Salat* (the Kernel of Prayer)
enumerates the levels of 'attention to the act of worship' as follows:
[^3]

• **Attention to Worship in General**: In this rudimentary level, which
is attainable for all (the believers), the worshipper must inculcate in
his heart that worship is the act of praising the Creator. And from the
beginning of the act of worship up to its end he should make the heart
understand that he is extolling the Creator, even though he does not
understand the meaning of what he expresses.

• **Attention to Worship in Detail:** In this level the worshipper's
heart is present at every moment of the worship he is engaged in.
Besides, he also knows how he praises and whispers to his Lord. This
level itself is subdivided into several different levels depending on
the stations of the hearts of the worshippers and their gnosis.

Levels of Detailed Attention
----------------------------

• **Level 1**: A group of people do not comprehend save the outer and
overt facet of prayer. However, they do understand the general import of
the recitations, laudations, and invocations they pronounce in prayer.
The presence of their heart, however, is limited to inculcating the
meaning of whatever they recite in prayer. It is highly important for
this group not to limit the meaning of what they recite in what *they
understand* there-from; (in other words,) they should not think that
there isn't any (other) meaning of what they recite save that which they
apparently comprehend. "For," says Imam al-Khumayni, "this belief
besides being contrary to the intellect and tradition, is very
detrimental to the human being too." And one of the great masterpiece
ruses of Satan is to occupy and please man with what he (already)
possesses, and make him cynical towards the rest of the unknown
realities and sciences, thereby deriving astonishing results.

• **Level 2:** Another group consists of those who intellectually
understand the realities of the acts of prayer. For example they
understand by intellectual proof how all praises (solely) return to God;
or they know the reality of *Sirat al Mustaqim* and the meaning of Surat
*al-Tawhid* that represents the fundamental facets of the ideological
realities. All this is known, however, through rational proofs and the
intellect. The *huduru 'l qalb* of this group in prayer is such that
their hearts are attentive and comprehend in detail the realities and
the laudations they recite, and understand what they express and how
they praise their Lord.

• **Level 3**: Another group, after having comprehended the realities of
the acts of worship through their intellect, inculcate the same into
their hearts, and attain belief and conviction in the same. This is
because the level of the heart's conviction is extremely different from
intellectual comprehension. There are many things that man may have
grasped intellectually, but not yet have attained the heart's
conviction; hence, his heart does not confirm what his intellect says.

Having briefly observed the levels of the presence of heart in prayer,
we may now look at how one can achieve some of these levels. But first,
in order to treat the continual process of flitting that our minds
always experience during prayer, it would be better to diagnose and
search for the root cause of the malady, so that we are able to decipher
its remedy and the correct method of its treatment.

[^1]: Ibid

[^2]: Ibid., 6:132

[^3]: Imam al-Khumayni, Sirr al-Salat, pp. 17-20


