Part 4: Hurdles on the Way To Attention in Prayer And their Removal
===================================================================

The to-and-fro movement that we undertake to drive off the distractions
of our minds all our life will never make us progress. It rather
manifests stagnation and stillness. On the contrary, if we were to
uproot the causes of distraction, we would easily be able to soar
towards the proximity of Allah.

Causes of Distraction
---------------------

Scholars of ethics and gnosis mention in their books two fundamental
categories of elements that can distract one's attention in prayer:

- The External Elements

- The Internal Elements

### The External Elements

These are external elements that divert the attention of the worshipper-
*(musalli).* They mainly concern his sight and hearing perceptions.
Places where a conversation is going on, or the television happens to be
switched on, for example, would quickly distract the attention of one
who is easily vulnerable to such stimuli.

Praying on a beautifully decorated velvet prayer mat or an open place
where people tend to pass by can also serve as a source of diversion of
attention for some. For this very reason some scholars of ethics advise
people whose attention is easily diverted by auditories and visibilities
to seek seclusion in a dark place when praying.

In his commentary to *al-Kafi*, Sadru'l Muta'allihin informs us of what
the wayfarers to Allah's proximity practiced after having sought
forgiveness from Allah. One of these, he says, is *al-khalwa*
(seclusion), which of course does not imply, as some may tend to
surmise, the total abandonment of the society for the sake of worship.
He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفائدتها دفع الشواغل وضبط السمع والبصر, فانهما دهليزا القلب يدخل منهما
اليه من الشواغل و المفاسد والوساوس ما يزعجه ويغيره عما هو عليه من
قصده, فلا بد من ضبطها, وليس يمكن ذلك الا بالخلوة في مكان مظلم...
  </p>
</blockquote>

The benefit of seclusion is that it frees oneself from preoccupations
and enables one to control his hearing and sight. For verily these two
are the vestibules of the heart; it is through them that things like
distractions, evil thoughts and Satanic insinuations that disturb the
human being and divert him from his intention, enter the heart. Hence
they must be bridled; and that cannot be realized save by means of
seclusion in a dark place...[^1]

Seclusion is recommended in supererogatory prayers. Otherwise,
congregational prayer has ample benefits and one should strive to always
attend the congregation so that he may be spiritually uplifted.

### The Internal Elements

The internal elements act as the closest and most dangerous of the above
two categories to the *musalli.* Resembling a magnetic force, they
attract innumerable kinds of imaginations related to them. So long as
they subsist, *man should never dream of attaining even some of the
rudimentary kinds of concentration in prayer,* let alone attaining the
higher levels.

It is useless to suppose that continual forceful repulsion of stray
thoughts can easily enable one to achieve the state of concentration he
aspires. In his expurgation *(tahdhib)* of the voluminous ethical work
of *Ihya*, Mawla Fayd Kashani quotes a beautiful example Abu Hamid
al-Ghazzali mentions to illustrate the reality of the matter. He says:

**  
**

ومثاله: رجل تحت شجرة اراد ان يصفو له فكره وكانت اصوات العصافير تشوش
عليه, فلم يزل يطيرها بخشبة في يده ويعود الي فكره فتعود الي التتفير
بالخشبة, فقيل له ان هذا سير السواني ولا ينقطع فان اردت الخلاص فاقطع
الشجرة, فكذلك شجرة الشهوات اذا تشعبت و تفرعت اغصانها انجذبت اليها
الافكار الجذاب العصافير الي الاشجار الذباب الي الاقذار و الشغل يطول في
دفعها فان الذباب كلما ذب اب ولاجله سمي ذبابا. فكذللك الخواطر وهذه
الشهوات كثيرة وقلما بخلو العبد عنها. ويجمعها اصل واحد وهو حب الدنيا وذلك
راس كل خطيئة

**  
**
...

Its example is that of a man under a tree who wanted his thoughts to be
clear (from distractions), while the noise of the sparrows on the tree
(above) disturbed him. Whenever he chased them off by a stick in his
hand to resume his state of contemplation, he found them return again.
The following, thus, was said to him: 'Surely this kind of movement is
like that of *sawani* (the camel that is used to draw water from the
well and carry the same (**سير السوائي**); and (such circular movement)
shall not change. [^2]  
 Therefore if you would like to free yourself (from this state of
continual distraction) chop off the tree altogether. Likewise is the
tree of material desires: when its branches multiply it attracts various
thoughts the way the sparrows were attracted to the branches of the tree
and the way a fly is attracted to dirt; it would take a long time to
chase it off, for indeed whenever the fly is chased away it returns back
(*kullama dhabba aba*)*.*

That is why it was called *dhubab* (that which returns whenever it is
chased). Similar is the case with imagination. And these material
passions are numerous and hardly does the supplicant lack in having
them. *And one origin unites them: love for the world, which is the root
cause of every misdeed*'. [^3]

Hence the solution to eliminate the magnetic force within, is to
demagnetize it through the process of continual struggle against one's
vain inclinations and the process of detachment *(zuhd)* from the
pleasures of the material world.

This should not be mistaken for 'abstinence', since Islam does not teach
us to abandon the 'material means' that Almighty Allah has provided us
with. The real meaning of *zuhd is* 'detachment' *(qat'ul \`al'aiq)* and
not 'abandonment of the material means' as conjectured by some.

Only when the human being understands that the material needs of the
world are 'the means' and not 'the goal', and practices accordingly can
the process of demagnetization transpire.

[^1]: Sadru'1 Muta'allihin al-Shirazi, Sharhu Usul al-Kafi, v.l, p. 449.

[^2]: Abu Hamid al-Ghazzali here likens the situation with the 'sayr
al-sawani' the movement of the camel that is normally used to draw water
from the well. The circular movement it undertakes is an allusion to
'stagnation' and 'no progress'. The to-and-fro movement that we
undertake to drive off the distractions of our minds all our life will
never make us progress. It rather manifests stagnation and stillness. On
the contrary, if we were to uproot the causes of distraction, we would
easily be able to soar towards the proximity of Allah.

[^3]: Mawla Fayd Kashani , al-Mahajjatu'l Bayda', v.l, p.376


