Part 5: Suggested Methods of Achieving Attention In Prayer
==========================================================

Imam 'Ali ('a) is reported to have said: "*Beware that every deed of
yours is performed according to your prayer*." This means that there is
a real link between our prayers and the deeds we perform.

This tradition informs us that the deeds of the human being are shaped
according to his prayer. If the prayer infuses the spirit of monotheism
in the heart and mind of the worshipper (musalli) and orients him
accordingly, the deeds that would follow would sparkle with the light of
monotheism and the human being would undergo spiritual progress.

Realization of The Importance of Prayers
----------------------------------------

Praying in the state of indifference and laxity should not be considered
as an astonishing phenomenon in the life of one who has not realized the
importance of prayer and its vital role in a believer's life. This
contention needs no intellectual evidence, as it is crystal clear to
every impartial observer.

The emphasis Islam lays on prayer is enough to drive one to appreciate
its fundamental role in a person's life and character. Imam 'Ali (\`a)
is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعلم ان كل شيء من عملك تبع لصلاتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

"Beware that every deed of yours is performed According to your
prayer."[^1]

This means that there is a real link between our prayers and the deeds
we perform. This tradition informs us that the deeds of the human being
are shaped according to his prayer. If the prayer infuses the spirit of
monotheism in the heart and mind of the worshipper (*musalli*) and
orients him accordingly, the deeds that would follow would sparkle with
the light of monotheism and the human being would undergo spiritual
progress.

However, if it lays a negative effect, the actions that would follow
would assume the color of polytheism and remoteness from Divine
proximity. Consequently our good deeds would carry no weight at all.
Almighty Allah informs us about a people who conjecture that they have
done good and are on the straight path, but in reality they have nothing
but loss:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ نُنَبِّئُكُمْ بِالْأَخْسَرِينَ أَعْمَالًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ ضَلَّ سَعْيُهُمْ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ
يَحْسَبُونَ أَنَّهُمْ يُحْسِنُونَ صُنْعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say (O Our Apostle Muhammad) Shall we tell you who will be the
greatest losers in their works? Those whose striving goes astray in the
present life, while they think that they are working good deeds.*** [^2]

One who always verbally declares that all praises belong to Allah
*(al-Hamdu lilLah),* whether in his *qira'a* or elsewhere in prayer, but
is oblivious of the true meaning of what he utters may, for example,
give away a lot of wealth as alms *(sadaqa),* but always experience a
sense of self-esteem *(\`ujb),* thinking that he has done a favor on
Allah.

This is while the core of praise restricts it for the real doer of good
or possessor of an attribute of perfection, which in the language of
Qur'an is none other than Allah. The Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***All praises belong to Allah.*** [^3]

Whenever anyone does any good 'the doer and the deed' both are the
creation of Allah, since their existence as well as subsistence entirely
depends on His power. And since He is the sole Creator and whatever He
creates is beautiful, every beautiful deed is His:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الذي أحسن كلَّ شئ خلقه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***'One who made beautiful all that He created'*** [^4]

Furthermore, since He is the sole possessor of all perfect & beautiful
attributes, all praises belong to Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ لا إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ لَهُ الأَسْمَاء الْحُسْنَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Allah, excepting Him, there is no God;***

***His are the beautiful Names.*** [^5]

Therefore how can one ever think highly of himself for having given
something that he really and ontologically does not possess? How can one
ever extol himself for a good deed that the Almighty enabled him to
perform?

One, however, who understands and always pays attention to the fact that
all praises solely belong to Allah and appreciates its true meaning
would always thank Allah for the blessing of enabling him to give his
wealth for His sake.

To express *takbir* in prayers and be ignorant of its meaning or
inattentive of the same, would not make one God-wary in many of his
acts. *Allahu Akbar* means that Allah is greater than whatever is
described of Him. In simpler words, He transcends the bounds of finitude
and is free from every kind of shortcoming or imperfection. He is
Infinite and present everywhere:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***' ... Whithersoever you turn, there is the face of Allah ...'*** [^6]

One, therefore, who does not inculcate this truth in his mind and heart
in prayer would always blemish his soul with the taints of 'sin'. Sin,
which is disobedience to the Creator, is a *practical expression of
polytheism,* whereas the worshipper declares the Non-­composite and
Infinite reality of His Creator which is equal to the impossibility of
even the assumption of a second.

In simpler terms: The Holy Quran informs us of a people who worship
their vain desires and consider them as their God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَهَهُ هَوَاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Have you seen him who has taken his vain desire to be his God?***
[^7]

Therefore "obeying" one's vain desires is to worship them, which is
tantamount to polytheism. In other words whosoever prefers his vain
desires to some of the commands of Allah is practically declaring
polytheism.

If the *musulli* were to understand the above, and realized the meaning
of *takbir,* and mold the heart accordingly, he would always be deterred
from sin. Small wonder it is that the Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمْ الصَّلاةَ إِنَّ الصَّلاةَ تَنْهَى عَنْ الْفَحْشَاءِ
وَالْمُنْكَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***...And keep up prayer;***

***Surely prayer restrains one from***

***indecency and the forbidden...*** [^8]

Finding Unoccupied Time And Unoccupied Heart
--------------------------------------------

A very important method of attaining *huduru'l qalb* suggested by some
scholars of ethics is to apportion a specific time for prayer, a time in
which you have no preoccupations to busy your mind and heart with.
Habituating oneself in praying with a free mind would really help the
novice in the path of Allah to attain concentration and maintain the
same throughout his worship. It is only by means of proper discipline
and organization that such a practice can be achieved.

*It is impossible for the contemplative who has realized the close link
between his prayer and his deeds to be slothful and give less importance
to prayer.*

[^1]: Imam 'Ali (\`a), Nahju'l Balagha, letter no. 27

[^2]: Holy Qur'an, 18:103-104

[^3]: Ibid, 1:2

[^4]: Ibid, 32:7

[^5]: Ibid, 20:8

[^6]: Ibid, 2:115

[^7]: Ibid, 25:43

[^8]: Ibid, 29:43


