Writing an Islamic Will
=======================

1. Is it necessary?
-------------------

Although the law (Canadian as well as Islamic) does not say that making
of the will is a must, but by looking at the consequences of not having
a will, it is necessary - both from legal aspect as well from the
shari’ah aspect.

Firstly, if a person dies without a will, the government appoints an
executor who will divide the estate among the heirs as he/she seems fit.
The pay of the executor for this job will come out of your estate, and
the government system takes it time in getting jobs done!

Secondly, from the shari’ah point of view, your heirs may get more or
less than the shares specified for them in Islam. By not writing a will,
you are leaving the door open for a non-Islamic authority to distribute
your estate according to its own views.

So not having a will is costly as well as problematic from both Canadian
and Islamic points of view. Considering the consequences, I think it is
wâjib for a Muslim in Canada to have an Islamic will; more so when you
realize that the law of the land allows you to do so.

2. The One-Third Option
-----------------------

After a person dies, what is the relationship between him and his
estate? There are three possibilities:

• He has full control over it through a will.

• He has partial control over it through a will.

• He has absolutely no control over it.

Islam has taken the middle position. It says that when a person dies, he
still retains the right to decide about up to one-third of his entire
estate. But as far as the two-third is concerned, the deceased person
loses the right to dispose according to his wish.  
 The two-third must be divided according to the shares specified by the
shari'ah. (Most of these shares have been specified in the Quran
itself.) This law is part of the over-all system which Islam has
introduced for the distribution of wealth in society.

This right of disposing the one-third according to your own wish can be
exercised only by making a will. You can do whatever you like with the
one-third: give to a family-member, a relative, a friend, a charitable
cause or organization, etc.

For example, you can use the 1/3 or a part of it to make -if you like-
the shares of your wife or your daughter equal to those of your other
children.

When the Qur'an talks about *wasiyyat* which is normally translated as
“will”, it refers to the will covering the one-third only. For example,
it says, 

***O you who believe! It is prescribed upon you that when death
approaches one you – if he leaves behind plenty – then he should make a
will (wasiyyah) for his parents and near relatives in the one-third.
This is a duty upon the pious people.***** (2:177)**

Writing more than one-third to a person or a cause means depriving the
potential heirs of their rightful share in the estate; and, therefore,
it is considered unjust and wrong. The Qurân says, 

***If a person fears that the testator is [wrongfully] inclined [to one
party] or is sinning [by depriving the rightful heir in the will, and so
that person intervenes between the testator and the potential heirs] and
makes peace between them – then there is no sin on him. Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.***** (2:182)**

What has been described in this verse as wrongfully “inclining to one
party” and “sinning by depriving the rightful heir” is related to the
two-third of the estate.

3. What is the "estate"?
------------------------

An "estate" is the collective name for everything that you own. The
estate consists of the followings:

• all properties, goods and investments that are in your name.

• half of the specified portion of the goods and investments in which
you are a co-owner.

The first type of property is very straight-forward. But there are
certain cases in the second type which need explanation:

***Joint Account*****:** According to Canadian laws, with death of one
spouse, the money becomes the property of the surviving spouse. Such a
transfer of money is not valid in Islam: Islamically, half of the money
in that account becomes part of the surviving spouse and the other half
will become part of the deceased estate.

***House*****:** Houses are normally in the name of the couple. Such
ownership can be of two types: common ownership and tenants in common.
“Tenants in common” is also without any problem because when one spouse
dies, his/her share becomes part of the estate.

But in "common ownership", there is a problem because with the death of
one spouse, according to Canadian laws, the entire property becomes that
of the surviving spouse. This is contrary to Islamic laws, which says
that the surviving spouse gets his or her 50% and the remaining 50%
becomes part of the estate of the deceased.  
 We will talk more about this below.

4. Wife's Share
---------------

Firstly, as the definition of the “estate” shows, a house jointly-owned
by a couple is divided - according to the shari'ah - into two: half
becomes part of the estate of the deceased, and the other half was from
before the property of the surviving spouse.

Secondly, according to the shari'ah, the wife is not entitled to land of
her husband (whether an agriculture land or a residential lot): she only
inherits the house on the land according to her proportional shares in
inheritance.

In common ownership case, the wife is the owner of 50% of the house and
the land; the other 50% becomes part of her husband's estate from which
she will inherit 6.25% of the house. So in the end, the wife becomes the
owner of 56.25% of the house and 50% of the land.

Both the above rules (\# 3 & 4) create practical problems in this part
of the world; therefore, I suggest the following:

• Either give the house to your wife during your life-time

• Or, if the value of the 50% of the land is within the one-third of
your entire estate, then you can write that land to your wife in your
will. In this way, half of the land is her property from before and the
other half will go to her on strength of the 1/3 option in your will.
Actually you can do this for the entire 50% of your residential property
(house and land together) if it falls within the 1/3 of your estate. In
theory it will work out like this:

    • 50% of the land and house belongs to your wife

    • 6.25% of the house is your wife's share of inheritance

    • 50% of the land + 43.75% of the house goes to her by using the 1/3
option

   
 • Or, if the value of the 50% of the land is more than the one-third of
your estate and your children are mature (bâligh), then discuss it with
them and ask for their consent to write the entire house for your wife
in the will. If they give the consent (which is irrevocable), then you
can write the house to your wife in the will even if it is more than her
proportional share of inheritance.

5. Executor or Executrix
------------------------

(A) It is a normal practice to appoint your spouse or another family
member as the executor of your will. There is nothing wrong with this.
The only conditions which are necessary for an executor/executrix is he
or she should be bâligh, sane, and Muslim. It is not necessary for
him/her to be \`âdil; trustworthiness would be a sufficient quality for
an executor.

(B) I am told that by making your children the heirs of their shares,
your children will end up paying tax on that; whereas if your wife
becomes the heir of everything than no tax is applied. If this is true,
than you can do the following:

You can make your wife the executrix of your will and also leave
everything to her – BUT she must know (through a supplementary private
will or a letter) that she owns only her specified share according to
the shari'ah and she has to hand over the shares of her children when
they become mature enough (not just bâligh) to handle their own
finances.

(C) If you accept to be an executor for someone's will, then it becomes
wâjib for you to fulfill your duty. You can only reject this
responsibility while the testator is alive; you cannot reject this role
after his/her death.

6. Guardian of Children
-----------------------

In this part of the world, it is very important to write in your will
about the guardian and custodian of your children. Under normal
circumstances, the surviving spouse is made the guardian, and this is
indeed the best decision.

Here, for the sake of record, I would like to mention the conditions
which must be found in the guardian of your children. The guardian must
be a Muslim, sane, and trustworthy. Those who have the right of custody
of children (in order of preference) are: father, mother; paternal
grandfather; and then anyone specifically appointed as the guardian of
the children.

However, the duty of maintenance for the children falls upon the
following (in order of preference): father; paternal grandfather;
mother; other grandparents collectively.

The last person in this list can be from outside the family, but one
must be very careful in selecting such a person. The most important
condition is that he/she besides being trustworthy must also be a Muslim
who will raise the children according to the teachings of Islam.


