Sample of an Islamic Will
=========================

***In the name of God, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

This is the Last Will and Testament of me \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ made the \_\_\_ day of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1993.  
 1.      I  **REVOKE** all former Wills, Codicils, and Testamentary
Dispositions previously made by me.

2.      I **APPOINT** \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ and \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to be the joint Executors and Trustees
of this my last Will and Testament. BUT IF anyone or more of the above
named persons should refuse to act, predecease me, or die before the
trusts hereof have been fully performed, THEN I APPOINT
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to be
the Executor and Trustee of my Will and Testament in the place and stead
of anyone or more of the above named persons, and the expression, \`my
Trustee, used throughout include the Trustee for the time being, whether
original or substitution.

3.      I **GIVE**, DEVISE AND BEQUEATH all my real and personal
property of every nature and kind, wheresoever situated, including any
property over which I may have a general power of appointment, to my
Trustees upon the following trusts, namely:

a) subject to my express direction to the contrary, to use their
discretion in the realization of my estate with the power to my Trustees
to sell, call in or convert into cash at such time or times and in such
manner and upon such terms, either for cash or credit or part cast and
part credit as my Trustees may in their absolute discretion decide upon
or to postpone such conversion of my estate or any part or parts thereof
for such length of time as they may think best and I hereby declare that
my said Trustees may retain any portion of my estate in the form in
which it may be at the time of my death, notwithstanding that it may not
be in the form of an investment in which Trustees are authorized to
invest trust funds and whether or not there is liability attached to any
such portion of my estate for such length of time as my Trustees in
their absolute discretion deem advisable and my Trustees shall not be
held responsible for any loss that may happen to my estate by reason of
their so doing;

b) to pay my just debts, funeral and other testamentary expenses, all
succession duties, inheritance and death taxes, and all expenses
necessarily incidental thereto, to be paid and satisfied by my Trustees
as soon as conveniently may be after my death;  
          
 c) to pay such religious taxes (like khums and kaffarah) and other
expenses for hiring people to do qaza prayers and fasts;

d) to divide and pay or transfer the balance of my estate as soon as is
reasonably practicable after my death as follows:

(i) to my eldest son, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, my dress in which I die, my
ring and my personal Qur'an;  
 (ii) to my wife / husband....  
 (iii) to my father....  
 (iv) to my mother.......  
 (v) to my son, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, .......  
 (vi) to my daughter, \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, .......

4.      The share of each child of mine as determined above shall be
paid or transferred to such child of mine, if he or she is over the age
of twenty-one at the time of my death, for his or her own use
absolutely.

If however, any child of mine, whether male or female, is under the age
of twenty-one at the time of my death, my Trustees shall hold and keep
invested the share of such child of mine and the income from and capital
of such share or so much thereof as my Trustees in their discretion
consider advisable shall be paid to or applied for maintenance,
education and benefit of such child of mine until he or she reaches the
age of twenty-one, at which time my Trustees shall pay or transfer the
amount remaining of the share of such child, if any, to such child for
his or her own use absolutely.

5.      I **NOMINATE** CONSTITUTE AND APPOINT \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ of
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ to be the Guardian of my infant children. I
direct the Guardian of my infant children to raise them as Muslims
according to the rules, customs and teachings of the Shi'ah Ithna
\`Ashari sect of Islam.

6.      In the event that my said wife should predecease me, then I
direct my Trustees to distribute the share that my wife would have
received had she survived me amongst my parents and my children alive at
my death in the same proportion and in the same manner as provided for
in paragraph 3 (d) (i, iii to vi) of this my Will and the provisions of
paragraph 4 of this my Will shall apply mutatis mutandis.

7.      In the event that my mother or my father or both my mother and
my father should predecease me, then I direct my Trustees to distribute
the share that my mother or my father or both my mother and my father
would have received had they survived me amongst my wife and my children
alive at my death in the same proportion and in the same manner as
provided for in paragraph 3 (d) (i, ii, v to vi) of this my Will and the
provisions of paragraph 4 of this my Will shall apply mutatis mutandis.

            IN **WITNESS** WHEREOF I have to this my Last Will and
Testament set my hand this \_\_\_\_\_ day of \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,
1993.  
             SIGNED by the Testator and published and declared as and
for his last Will and Testament, in the presence of us both present
together at the same time who at his request and in his presence and in
the presence of each other have hereunto subscribed our names as
witnesses.

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left">_____________________<br /> Signature of Witness
<p>Name: ________________  <br /> Address: ______________<br />               ______________<br /> Occupation: ___________</p></td>
<td align="left">_____________________<br /> Signature of Witness
<p>Name: _________________<br /> Address: _______________<br />               _______________<br /> Occupation: ____________</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>


