Benevolence Towards Parents
===========================

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***“And your lord has commanded that you shall not worship (any) but Him
and (show) goodness to your parents. If either or both of them reach old
age with you, say not to them (so much as) 'Ah' nor chide them, but
speak to them a generous word. And make yourself submissively gently to
them with compassion, and say: O my Lord! Have compassion on them, as
they brought me up*** ***(when I was) small.” Holy Qur'an (17:23-24)***

If your friends give you a nice present, you will certainly thank them
and your love will grow towards them.

If someone offers you help and assistance in your life, surely you will
respect them and recognize their favour and kind attitude.

No one does more for you than your parents and it is they of all people
who deserve great love, thanks, and respect. They are the ones who bear
tiredness and difficulty for the sake of us, their children.

A mother first carries her child as an embryo (foetus) in her womb and
it is fed by her blood. Then when she has given birth, she spends nights
on attendance, taking care of and watching over her baby with love and
affection.

Fathers also take part in caring and giving affection, and go to work
and strive to provide food, shelter and other material necessities. In
addition, both parents spend time educating their children and rearing
them towards adulthood.

In the verses quoted above, Allah commands us to worship and obey none
but Him. And at the same time He commands us to love our parents and
acknowledge their favour and benevolence to us.

Allah also enjoins us not to speak unkindly or harm them, not to give
even as much as a sigh against them, especially when they grow old or
are in need, or unable to do things for themselves.


