Hospitality Towards Guests
==========================

The Messenger of Allah (s) further guides us by saying:

“Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day should be hospitable with
his or her guests.”[^1]

Our great Prophet (s) teaches us to be generous and how to entertain
guests. He wants a Muslim to show gratitude and be kind and happy when
receiving guests. One should respect and welcome his guests, in
particular when they are strangers, or have no family or friends in that
country.

It may even happen that a guest comes while relatives or friends are
being entertained, or other travellers are staying and there is lack of
space; or you are unprepared and have few provisions or are even short
of money. In any eventuality, guests who come to your home should be
made welcome, shown respect and be provided with whatever food and drink
are available. One should sit with them in order to make them feel
comfortable and happy, and take care to pay great attention to them.

Surely, our glorious Prophet (s) guides us towards respecting guests and
being generous towards them. In this respect, he says: “Indeed whoever
believes that Allah is All-Generous, Who provides for His creation and
rewards those who are hospitable towards their guests, should look after
his guest.”

Surely, Allah will increase our provision if we welcome our guests and
give them food and drink, and will reward us on the Resurrection Day.

Allah is All-Generous, who loves the generous ones and dislikes those
who are mean.

[^1]: Shaikh Abbas Qummi, Safinat al-Bihar, Bab Dhaif, Sunan ibn Maja,
vol. 2, Haq al Jiwar (The rights of neighbours), Ikram al-Dhaif
(Respecting the Guest).


