Faithful To A Promise
=====================

Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) quoted the Messenger of Allah (s) as saying:

“Whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day should keep their promise
when they make it.”[^1]

Our Holy Prophet Muhammad (s) teaches us the best morals and the most
useful customs, and also how to fulfil a promise and be punctual.

Imagine that one day you have an appointment with your friend and have
agreed to meet him half-an-hour before noon prayer in the mosque to
recite the Holy Qur'an together. You arrived on time and waited until
the prayer caller (Mu'adhin) called for the noon prayer. You performed
the prayer but your friend still had not come. Certainly, you will blame
your friend for not keeping his promise and making you wait. Hopefully
your friend will feel responsible and apologise to you.

But how happy and glad you are if someone promises to do something for
you and keeps his promise. Keeping a promise is among the morals of the
true believer. And whoever does not fulfil their promise, no one will
respect their word nor trust them.

It is obligatory for us to be honest in making a promise and keeping an
appointment we have made. It is also obligatory upon us to be punctual
about time and not to waste it. We should be exactly on time in school,
at work, or at an agreed meeting place.

A Promise Fulfilled by our Prophet Muhammad (s)
-----------------------------------------------

Prophet Muhammad (s) promised a man that he would remain sitting in a
certain place until the man returned. That man went away and the sun
rose. Soon it became very hot but the Prophet never changed his place.
One his companions said: “O Prophet of Allah! What difference does it
make if you come and sit in the shade?” The Prophet replied: “I promised
to meet him here and not to change a place till he comes, in order to
fulfil my promise to him. If he does not come, then it will be he who is
breaking the promise.”

*And Most Surely You Conform (Yourself) To Sublime Morality.*

[^1]: Bihbodi, Sahih al Kafi, vol.1, p.117.


