Giving Thanks To Allah
======================

The Messenger of Allah (s) said:

“Surely the faithful who is satisfied with food and drink; and then
thanks Allah, is given the same reward as a fasting man. Allah is
Gracious and appreciates gratitude.”[^1]

One of the companions of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a) [^2] reported the
following incident, when he was travelling with the Imam on the road
towards Madina. On the way, he saw the Imam get down and began
prostrating to Allah, which greatly surprised him. After completing his
prostration the Imam said to his companion:

“It seems that you are astonished to see me prostrating”

His companion answered: “Yes,” and the Imam said:

“Remembering one of Allah's blessings to me, I could not continue until
I had given thanks to Him.”[^3]

Thus the infallible Imams of Ahlul-Bait (a) instruct us to thank
Almighty Allah for each of His blessings.

As we see, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a), remembering one of Allah's
blessings on his way, stopped and prostrated to Allah to give thanks for
His blessings.

Surely Allah gives us so many favours (blessings) that we are not able
to count them all, He provides us with good health, and intellect with
which to think; eyes with which to see; ears with which to hear. He also
supplies us with food and drink. It is through His favour that we may be
healed when we are ill. We should always feel thankful for the blessings
of Allah and praise and thank Him.

Certainly we thank Allah when He gives us food and drink.

And how grateful we are when He saves us from danger or harm!

And how we thank Him if He delivers us from drowning, or a car accident!

And how we thank Him when we see a disabled man or a blind man while we
are in a good health!

We are aware of Allah's blessings upon us when we see all these
happenings.

Indeed, from the hadith of the Prophet of Allah (s) we know that our
Prophet said: “Whoever is satisfied with food and drink and praises
Allah for His blessings, Allah will certainly reward him for his thanks
as surely as He gives the fasting man a reward for his fasting, because
Allah appreciates the good deeds of His servants and He loves them to
show their gratitude.”

*My Lord, Sustain me that I may be thankful for the favours that You
have conferred upon me and my parents, and to do what is righteous that
I may receive Your satisfaction.*

[^1]: Tabrasi, Mashkat al-Anwar, p.28, 2nd Edition.

[^2]: Imam Muhammad al-Baqir is the son of Ali al-Sajjad, son of Imam
Husayn, son of Imam Ali (a). He is considered as the Imam for all
Muslims and the leader for all believers and from him other Imams and
scholars (ulama) quoted Prophetic narrations and religious science.

[^3]: Tabrasi, Mashkat al-Anwar, p. 29.


