The Best Things about Being Muslim
==================================

The Messenger of Allah (s) says:

“Among the best things about a man being Muslim is that he does not
interfere in things with he is not concerned, so beware of this as you
will not be excused it.”[^1]

In this hadith, the Holy Prophet (s) forbids us from interfering in the
affairs of people which have nothing to do with us and with which we
have no connection.

For example, if you see two persons holding a private conversation, do
not eavesdrop or try to join in. It maybe that they have certain
confidences between them which they do not want others to be aware of or
involved in.

If someone says something which has nothing to do with you, do not try
to involve yourself in such a conversation, or speak as a representative
for one who has not asked you. And if you find out something which does
not concern you, do not use it to intervene.

For example, do not lend your friend's book to another person. It is not
yours to do so, and if you do indeed you have interfered in another
person's business.

For sure, the faithful with strong beliefs and good morals is not
arrogant and never interferes in other's affairs.

If you do involve yourself, indeed you have committed a grave mistake
against people and must correct yourself by apologizing because you have
done harm to others in affairs that do not concern you. Among the best
characteristics of the believer is not doing harm to anyone and in case
of erring, one should repent and confess their fault.

A faithful differs from a hypocrite, who never admits his/her mistake
nor apologizes for the harm he/she continually does against people.

Although it is among the believer's characteristics not to become
involved in others' affairs and not to be officious, it is necessary to
distinguish between interfering and intervening in the case of bidding
what is right and forbidding what is wrong.

For instance, it we see a person committing a crime, or lying, stealing,
or oppressing others, or deceiving or behaving in a vulgar manner, it is
obligatory upon us to advise them of their wrong doing in order that
they abstain from such misdeeds. Such intervention is not interfering
but only doing one's moral duty as a true believer.

Summary
-------

1. Surely, among the faithful's characteristics is not to interfere in
the affairs of others.

2. The faithful neither hurts others nor causes them harm, and if he
commits a mistake he apologizes.

3. The hypocrite only harms and hurts others and never apologizes to
them.

*There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.*

[^1]: Yaqoobi, Tarikh al-Yaqoobi, vol.2 p.95; Al-Hurr Amili, Wasa'il
al-Shi'ah, vol. 6, Book on Bidding to do good.


