Cheating And Deceit
===================

The Messenger of Allah (s) says:

“Whoever deceives another Muslim or harms him or even dislikes him is
not one of us.”[^1]

Deceiving is strictly forbidden
-------------------------------

Like other acts it harms others as well as the deceiver.

How cheated you feel and how you complain if you buy food and then
discover that it is bad and the seller has deceived you and has
benefited himself at your expense!

How cheated you feel and how you complain if your watch is broken and
you take it to a watch-maker to repair, but he deceives you about fixing
it and after a few days it breaks down again with the same fault!

Indeed, you feel that these people are mischievous and troublesome and
have misled you by taking your money in an unlawful (haram) way and by
deceiving you and causing annoyance to you. You have the right to return
the bad food to the one who cheated you and get your money back; and you
have the right to return the watch to the watch-maker to repair it again
because both tried to deceive you.

Surely, deceiving is unlawful and an immoral deed, so believers never do
it.

Among our Islamic morals is to advise others both in speech and action
on what is correct. Thus if one of us does something or carries out a
task, it is obligatory for him to do it with sincerity and without
deceiving people. If someone asks for advice, a believer should advise
him truly without deceiving him.

Surely, the Holy Messenger (s) says: He who deceives Muslims is
incomplete in belief and is not one of us!

Causing Harm is Forbidden
-------------------------

As the Messenger of Allah (s) warned us against deceiving people through
this hadith, he also warned us against any deed which causes harm and
hurts others. Whoever causes harm to others intentionally is not a
believer, so it is obligatory for a believer to indemnify people for any
harm caused by him to them.

For example, the farmer who prevents water from reaching other farmers
in order to destroy their crops is surely a destructive man who
deliberately wants to cause harm. Whoever deliberately damages a
footpath indeed causes harm to other people. These acts and others like
them are intentionally damaging and cause destruction to society. A
faithful should avoid doing anything which harms others. A Muslim is a
useful man, who does good actions, tries to benefit others and never
thinks of just himself.

Cunning is Forbidden
--------------------

Indeed, the Islamic religion wants a Muslim to deal with people in a
straight manner - not to deceive or cheat them. Indeed, neither the
cheater nor the deceiver are believers.

Among the examples of deceiving is the way some traders behave in order
to cheat each other, such as one who goes to another trader and tells
him: Surely, this product is no good, so do not buy it. He says this so
that no one competes with him in buying that product, and if others
listen to him, he can buy it in order to obtain maximum profits for
himself.

Verily, this act of cunning and the like are forbidden, as it is a form
of deceiving, which a Muslim with true belief never does.

Indeed, a Muslim does not cheat another Muslim nor does any act which
causes harm to him.Indeed, a Muslim does not cheat another Muslim nor
does any act which causes harm to him.

[^1]: Harrani; Tuhaf al-Uqul an aal al-Rasul, Prophet's Sermons.


