Practising Good Manners
=======================

The human soul is in need of developing educationally in order to become
characterised by the best of morals and refrain from evil doings. This
can be achieved by teaching ourselves the following points:

1. Following in the footsteps and copying the examples of the Messenger
of Allah, Muhammad (s), his infallible household (Ahlul Bayt) and the
most righteous among his companions. Studying their biographies and
considering all aspects of their virtuous behaviour are essential ways
of being led on the right path.

2. Practice makes perfect and we should practise conducting ourselves
with the best of morals, like truth, courage, generosity, mercy,
benevolence and forgiveness. Whoever repeatedly does good deeds and
behaves in a principled manner, such conduct will undoubtedly become
habitual, whereas whoever commits misdeeds and ill-natured vices like
hypocrisy, lying, deceiving ...etc. will accept them to such an extent
that they will not feel their abomination and the damage they cause.

3. Avoiding people characterised by bad manners and not making them
friends, because not mixing with such people removes the danger of being
misled and should also discourage their unprincipled behaviour.

4. We should also ask the forgiveness of Allah in case of committing
sins or doing evil deeds and should regret and repent for such actions.
This can be done through reprimanding ourselves and feeling that such
action is bad and should not be repeated.

To Summarise
------------

1. Good manners surely indicate the goodness of the upright human soul
while bad manners indicates that the soul of that man is evil and
wicked. A good human soul is like a sweet flower from which fragrant
perfume is emitted. Conversely one which is wicked can be likened to a
poisonous smell that harms people.

2. Allah bids us towards the best morals and will reward us accordingly
on the Resurrection Day and also forbids us against bad morals for which
He will duly punish us.

3. Bad morals cause the destruction of society and the spread of
corruption; he who has vices, his personality will be disliked and he
will be liable to punishment, and people will avoid and humiliate him.

4. The man with good morals is considered the foundation on which the
structure of a sound Islamic society is built, and is among the causes
of giving strength to Muslims.

5. But if Muslim communities lose their good morals of justice, mercy
and benevolence, they will be destroyed, and all the scientific progress
and abundance of wealth can not prevent it. When moral principles are
abandoned, the quality of life is disrupted and led astray.

Thus we see war, gross injustice and rising crime spreading in immoral
societies.

Vices like lying, selfishness, greed, deceit and hypocrisy fester in the
same way as germs destroy the human body.

6. The onus is on all Muslims to ensure good morals which are preserved
by way of self-education and practising exemplary behaviour.


