The Truthful Belief
===================

Imam Ja'far bin Muhammad al-Sadiq[^1] (a) reportedly quotes his
forefathers from the Messenger of Allah (a) as saying:

“Whoever recites sincerely that there is no god but Allah enters
paradise, and his sincerity should forbid him what Allah has
forbidden.”[^2]

It is well established that everything has a foundation and the
foundation stone of Islam is confirming the Oneness of Almighty Allah.
Whoever truthfully says, “There is no god but Allah”, indeed fixes the
foundation of Islam in his heart as a builder digs the foundation for a
building.

Whoever believes in the Oneness of Allah, and that Allah alone is the
Creator and Provider in whose hand is death and life that He is Able
over everything and He alone should be worshipped ...is a truthful
believer, who is sincerely committed to Islam.

Whoever believes that there is no god other than Allah Who is
All-Powerful over all things and Who punishes man for his misdeeds and
sayings...does not disobey Him but avoids what is forbidden (haram)
because he believes that Allah is All-Knowing of what we do and will
judge us on the Resurrection Day for our actions.

This truthful belief restrains man from doing forbidden acts; he neither
wrongs nor deceives anyone, nor does he steal or drink alcohol; he is
neither undutiful towards his parents nor does harm others.

The Messenger of Allah (s) teaches us that Islam is a confession from
the heart spoken by the tongue, that a true Muslim is one who applies
Islamic methods in organising his personal and social life as well as in
his public life. So, a true Muslim has truthful belief that deserves
paradise and Allah's pleasure.

But whoever utters “There is no god but Allah” only with his tongue
while his heart does not confess it and does not refrain from what Allah
has forbidden, is not a true faithful. If he were truthful, he would not
commit forbidden acts and would not disobey Allah; hence ultimately his
end will be in hell.

In Summary
----------

1. Islam is a belief in the heart and doing righteous deeds in this
life.

2. A true belief in Allah is belief that causes man to abstain from what
He has forbidden.

3. A true belief is the base to reform society and spread the goodness
and virtues of life.

4. The consequence for those who believe in the Oneness of Allah and
obey Him is paradise and blissful eternal life.

*Say: There is no god but Allah, and you will succeed.*

[^1]: Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a), is the son of Muhammad al-Baqir (a). son
of Ali al-Sajjad (a), son of al-Hussain al-Sibt (a), son of Fatimah (a),
the daughter at the Messenger of Allah (s), and Imam Ali (a). He was
born in Madina in the year 83 A.H. (after hijra). He narrated Prophetic
traditions through his forefathers from the Messenger of Allah (s). It
is from Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a) that all the scholars and Imams after
him took the Prophetic traditions, the interpretation of the Qur'an and
the Islamic laws concerning what is lawful and what is unlawful.

[^2]: Hurr al-Amili, Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol.6, chapter on Jihad al-Nafs,
no. 20440.


