A Believers Attributes
======================

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent the Merciful.

***“Successful indeed are the believers, who are humble in their
prayers, and who keep aloof from, what is vain, who are givers of
poor-rate and who guard their private parts, except before their***
***mates or those whom their right hands possess, for they surely are
not to blame.***

***But whoever seeks to go beyond that, these an they that exceed the
limits. And those who are keepers of their trusts and their covenant,
and those who keep a guard on their prayers, these are they who are the
heirs, who shall inherit paradise; therein they shall dwell forever.”
Holy Qur'an (23:1-11)***

This narration from the Holy Qur'an is about the believer's attributes.

1. It describes believers as humble in their prayer; so the believer is
he who stands before Allah in absolute sincerity and without any feeling
of vanity. He calls upon Allah, worships Him and approaches Him; he asks
His forgiveness and remission; his heart, mind and bodily limbs are
focussed together as a mere being in front of the Almighty, the Most
High.

2. When believers hear untrue profanity spoken by disbelievers such as
curses, they avoid such people because their characters are aloof from
such matters and never indulge in meaningless or debasing conversations.

3. Believers pay poor-rates (zakat), which is an obligatory amount of
money paid by the rich to the poor. They help in funding charitable
projects such as schools, hospitals, dwellings, mosques, libraries
...etc. so that no one in an Islamic society has to remain poor, or in
need of education, or a place to live or medical care. Indeed, Islam
wants to protect people from poverty, ignorance, illness and need.

4. Male and female believers are able to guard themselves from
committing forbidden acts through Allah's constituting marriage as the
lawful way for people to live together and be near families.

5. Believers keep the covenants which they have made, pay back trusts
and never betray. If a believer agrees to do something, he does it; if
someone entrusts him with property, with a secret, with a will, he
guards them for their owners, or if people choose him to be a judge for
them, he returns their confidence in him by acting fairly.

6. Another obvious signs of a true believer is prayer, which
distinguishes him or her from a disbeliever. Whoever stops praying or
despises it as a burden is disliked by Allah, the Almighty, and His
Messenger, and even believers dislike them and cut their relations with
them. They do not talk, greet, visit nor help the one who does not pray.

7. Wherever we find the above mentioned attributes in the individuals of
any community, that society will be an Islamic one, happy and
progressive; far from corruption and vice, in which people live
contentedly in security.

The reward of such believers will be paradise and happiness in the
hereafter as well as benefits in the life of this world as long as
Islamic laws and principles are applied to behaviour and manners.


