Section 17: The Physical Eyes Can Never See Allah
=================================================

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 142
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَاعَدْنَا مُوسَى ثَلاَثِينَ لَيْلَةً وَأَتْمَمْنَاهَا بِعَشْرٍ
فَتَمَّ مِيقَاتُ رَبِّهِ أَرْبَعِينَ لَيْلَةً وَقَالَ مُوسَى لاَخِيهِ
هَارُونَ اخْلُفْنِي فِي قَوْمِي وَأَصْلِحْ وَلاتَتَّبِعْ سَبِيلَ
الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**142*****. “And We made an appointment with Moses for thirty nights,
and completed them with ten (more),so the appointed time of his Lord was
completed forty nights. And (before going there) Moses said to his
brother Aaron: ‘Be my successor among people, and set the (people’s)
affairs right and do not follow the way of mischief-makers’.”***

In Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 50, the statement denotes that Allah
(s.w.t.) appointed forty nights for Moses (as): ***“And (remember) when
We appointed forty nights for Moses…”,*** but here, in this verse, the
appointment is thirty nights added with ten more nights.

 As Imam Bāqir (as) said*:*

*“The philosophy of that manner was to try the Children of Israel”.*[^1]

The length of this time has been forty nights and days, yet the reason
that the verse says ‘forty nights’, maybe, is that supplications are
often performed at night. Or, perhaps, its reason is that in old times
the formation of calendar was based on the appearance of the moon at
night. The number of nights has also been used in counting days. The
verse says:

***“And We made an appointment with Moses for thirty nights, and
completed them with ten (more), so the appointed time of his Lord was
completed forty nights…”***

There are some secrets hidden in this figure, i.e. ‘forty’. This figure
has a special position in the cultures of different religions. The
Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (S), was appointed to prophethood when he
was forty years old. He kept aloof from Khadijah for forty nights in
order that the heavenly food to be sent down and the preparation of the
birth of Hazrat Zahrā (as) to be supplied.

The descent of Divine revelation unto the Holy Prophet (S) was ceased
for forty days.

The people of Moses (as) were wandering bewildered in the deserts for
forty years.

At the time of Noah, it rained for forty days.

To learn forty Islamic traditions by heart causes this person to be
raised among the experts of Muslim law in Hereafter.

The preparation of spiritual perfection of man develops until the person
becomes forty years old. After that the affairs are more difficult and
the accounts are more delicate.

The recitation of Surah Al-Hamd done for forty times unto a sick person
can be effective in his healing.

Whoever drinks wine, his prayers will not be accepted for forty days,
though the one must establish those prayers.

Allah may forgive a person upon whose dead body forty believers testify
that he has been a good person.[^2]

However, the explanation of forty nights of the appointed tryst of Moses
is referred to in the Turah, Exedus.

Some Islamic literature denotes that thirty nights out of this forty
nights were the whole nights of Zilqa‘dah, and the added ten nights
happened at the beginning nights of Zil-Hajjah.[^3]

In any case, the event of the tryst of Moses (as) was as follows:

***“…And (before going there) Moses said to his brother Aaron: ‘Be my
successor among people, and set the (people’s) affairs right and do not
follow the way of mischief-makers’.”***

### The Tradition of Rank

 A large number of commentators from both great Islamic sects have
referred to the known ‘Tradition of Rank’ when explaining the verse
under discussion. There is a difference, of course, that Shi‘ite
commentators have taken it as one of the reputable proofs for the
immediate vicegerency of Ali (as).

The text of the tradition denotes that many of the companions of the
Prophet (S) have detailed the process of the Battle of Tabūk as follows:

The Prophet (S) set out towards Tabūk when he appointed Ali-ibn-Abitālib
(as) in his place. Ali (as) said to the Porphet (S) whether he left him
among children and women (and did not let him go with him (S) to the
battle-field to struggle).

The Messenger of Allah (S) answered him whether he was not content to be
in the same rank to him (S) as Aaron was to Moses except that there
would be no prophet after him.

It was not only in the Battle of Tabūk that the Prophet (S) expressed
this meaning, but also in several occasions, other than that, this
statement was heard from him, (S) including the followings:

1- One day, the Prophet (S) told ’Umm-us-Salamah:

*“O’ ’Umm-us-Salamah! Ali’s tissue is the same as my tissue and, his
blood is the same as my blood. The example of him unto me is like the
example of Aaron unto Moses.”*

2- Ibn-‘Abbas says that one day ‘Umar-ibn-Khattāb said that once he was
in the presence of the Prophet (S) accompanied with Abū-Bakr and some of
the companions of the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) was leaning on Ali
(as) when he touched Ali’s shoulder and said:

*“O” Ali! you are the first man who believed (in Allah) and you are the
first person who accepted Islam.”*

Then he (S) said:

*“The example of you unto me is like the example of Aaron unto Moses ”.*

However, if we impartially examine the above-mentioned tradition, it can
be understood from it that Ali (as) had been given all the positions
that Aaron had unto Moses (as) and among the Children of Israel, except
prophethood.

This meaning mentioned about the Tradition of Rank has been cited in the
Sunnite sources such as: Sahih-i-Bukhāri, vol. 6, p. 3; Sahih-i-Muslim,
vol. 4, p. 187; Sunan-i-Ibn-i-Mājid, vol. 1, p. 42;
Musnad-i-Ahmad-ibn-Hanbal, vol. 1, pp. 173, 175, 177, 179, 182.

But the very tradition, ‘the Tradition of Rank’, is widely transmitted
with Shi‘ites and it is available in the authentic books of traditions,
including:

1) ‘Abaqāt, in book of Muhammad and Ali’.  
 2) The tradition of Thaqalayn, by Najmiddin ‘Askary, pp. 105-127;  
 3) Safinat-ul-Bihār, vol. 21, p. 209;  
 4) Bihār-ul-’Anwār, vol. 37, p. 254;  
 5) Kanz-ul-Kirāchi, pp. 282,283;  
 6) An-Nihāyah, vol. 2, p. 172;  
 7) Kashf-ul-Qummah, p. 44;  
 8) Manāqib, Ibn-Abi-Tālib;  
 9) Al-Yaghin;  
 10) Al-Kharā’ij-wal-Jarāyih;  
 11) Kāmil-ut-Tawārikh, by Ibn-’Athir;  
 12) At-Tarā’if.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 143
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمَّا جَآءَ مُوسَى لِمِيقَاتِنَا وَكَلَّمَهُ رَبُّهُ قَالَ رَبِّ
أَرِنِي أَنْظُرْ إِلَيْكَ قَالَ لَنْ تَرَانِي وَلَكِنِ انْظُرْ إِلَى
الْجَبَلِ فإِنِ اسْتَقَرَّ مَكَانَهُ فَسَوْفَ تَرَانِي فَلَمّا تَجَلّى
رَبُّهُ لِلْجَبَلِ جَعَلَهُ دَكّاً وَخَرَّ مُوسَى صَعِقاً فَلَمّآ
اَفَاقَ قَالَ سُبْحَانَكَ تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَاَنَاْ اَوَّلُ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**143*****. “And when Moses came to Our appointed tryst and his Lord
spoke with him, he said: ‘My Lord, show me (Yourself), that I may look
towards You!’ He (Allah) said: ‘Never shall you see Me, but look towards
the mountain: if it remains firm in its place, then you will see Me.’ So
when his Lord manifested (His) glory to the mountain, He sent it
crashing down, and Moses fell down senseless. Then when he recovered, he
said: ‘Glory be to You! I turn to You (repentant), and I am the first of
the believers’.”***

The Qur’ānic word /dakkah/ means ‘a level land’, and, therefore, in this
verse the text means that the mountain was turned into dust so that it
became level as the land.

That Divine Power, whatever it was, pounded the mountain into dust. Was
it the great atomic power, or the power of waves, or some other mystic
power? It is unknown.

There were two times that observing Allah was asked for. One time Moses
(as) himself asked Allah to see His True Essense. Then, in answer to him
(as), this very current verse was revealed and manifested that Moses
(as) had not its capacity. The verse says:

***“And when Moses came to Our appointed tryst and his Lord spoke with
him, he said: ‘My Lord, show me (Yourself), that I may look towards
You!’ He (Allah) said: ‘Never shall you see Me, but look towards the
mountain: if it remains firm in its place, then you will see Me.’ So
when his Lord manifested (His) glory to the mountain, He sent it
crashing down, and Moses fell down senseless. Then when he recovered, he
said: ‘Glory be to You! I turn to You (repentant), and I am the first of
the believers’.”***

Another time was when the Children of Israel were seeking the pretext,
and ignorantly asked Moses to see Allah by the eyes of head. This
meaning has been referred to in verse No. 155 of the current Surah,
which will be explained later.

This fact should be noted that Allah can never be seen by the outword
eyes, neither in this world nor in the Hereafter. As the verse says:

***“…‘Never shall you see Me,’…”***

But He must be known by means of His effects, where His manifestations
can be looked at. The verse says:

***“…so when his Lord manifested (His) glory to the mountain, He sent it
crashing down…”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 144
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ يَا مُوسَى إِنِّي اصْطَفَيْتُكَ عَلَى الْنَّاسِ بِرِسَالاَتِي
وَبِكَلاَمِي فَخُذْ مَآءَاتَيْتُكَ وَكُنْ مِنَ الشَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**144*****. “He said: ‘O’ Moses! verily I have chosen you above the
people by My Messages and by My speaking (unto you). So take what I have
given you, and be of the grateful ones’.”***

Moses is Allah’s chosen servant. So, different demands, to become
senseless, repentence and the like of them do not hinder him to be
chosen. The verse says:

***“He said: ‘O’ Moses! verily I have chosen you above the people by My
Messages and by My speaking (unto you)…”***

Imam Sādiq (as) says:

*“Allah told Moses (as): ‘Do you know why did I choose you? It was
because your humbleness and submission was matchless. Whenever you
established prayer, you put your cheeks on the soil’.”*[^4]

After the removal of Tāqūt (deity) and formation of a godly society, the
turn is for the execution of law and divine ordinances. Allah commands
Moses:

***“…So take what I have given you…”***

The bounties of Allah must be thanked for. The godly leading and
religious responsibilities are amongst the bounties of Allah, for which
we must thank. The verse says:

***“…and be of the grateful ones’.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 145
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَتَبْنَا لَهُ فِي الاَلْوَاحِ مِنْ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مَوْعِظَةً
وَتَفْصِيلاً لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ فَخُذْهَا بِقُوَّةٍ وَأْمُرْ قَوْمَكَ
يَأْخُذُوا بِاَحْسَنِهَا سَأُوْرِيكُمْ دَارَ الْفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**145*****. “And We wrote for him in the Tablets of everything an
admonition, and the explanation of all things;*** ***so, (O’ Moses!)
take hold of them with firmness and bid your people to take hold of the
best of them.*** ***Soon I will show you the abode of the
transgressors.”***

The verse indicates that, in the Tablets, Allah explained of everything
some advices and admonitions sufficiently for Moses (as), and He
detailed the necessary affairs of the life and religion needed for
individuals and the society of his time. The verse says:

***“And We wrote for him in the Tablets of everything an admonition, and
the explanation of all things...”***

Then, He commanded Moses to take those commandments with utmost effort
and with a strong and earnest will. The verse says:

***“…so, (O’ Moses!) take hold of them with firmness…”***

 Moses (as) was also ordered to bid his people to act according to the
best of them. The verse continues saying:

***“…and bid your people to take hold of the best of them…”***

Alongside this subject, Moses (as) was commanded to warn his people that
opposing those commandments, and escaping from responsibilities and
fulfilling the duties, would bring a dreadful result and, finally, Hell
for them. Therefore, at the end of the verse, Allah says:

***“…Soon I will show you the abode of the transgressors.”***

It is understood from the holy phrase: ***“…of every thing an
admonition…”*** that there were not mentioned all the admonitions,
advices, and necessary subjects in the Tablets of Moses. At that time,
the divine ordinances were revealed according to the capacity and
talents of those people.

But, when the people of the world reached the last stage of the
prophets’ training, the last command, which enveloped the whole material
and spiritual necessities of human beings, was revealed unto the Prophet
of Islam (S).

The apparent meaning of the phrase: ***“…Soon I will show you the abode
of the transgressors.”*** is that the abode of those who have gone out
from the obedience of Allah in doing their duties is Hell.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 146
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَاَصْرِفُ عَنْ ءَايَاتِيَ الَّذِينَ يَتَكَبَّرُونَ فِي الاَرْضِ
بِغَيْرِ الْحَقِّ وإِن يَرَوْا كُلَّ ءَايَةٍ لاَيُؤْمِنُوا بِهَا وَإِن
يَرَوْا سَبِيلَ الرُّشْدِلاَ يَتَّخِذُوهُ سَبِيلاً وإِن يَرَوْا
سَبِيلَ الْغَيِّ يَتَّخِذُوهُ سَبِيلاً ذَلِكَ بِاَنَّهُمْ كَذَّبُوا
بِاَيَاتِنَا وَكَانُوا عَنْهَا غَافِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**146*****. “Soon I will (allow to) turn away from My signs those who
are arrogant in the earth unjustly; while (even) if they see any sign,
they will not believe in it, and if they see the way of rectitude they
do not take it for a way, and if they see the way of perverseness they
take it for a way. This is because they belied Our signs and were
heedless of them.”***

The statements, which have formed this verse and the verse after it, are
indeed a conclusion drawn from the previous verses upon the fate of
Pharaoh and his people, and also the arrogant persons of the Children of
Israel. At first, the verse says:

***“Soon I will (allow to) turn away from My signs those who are
arrogant in the earth unjustly...”***

Then the Qur’ān points to three parts of the qualities of these proud
and arrogant people and that how they were dispossessed of the success
of the truth. It says:

***“…while (even) if they see any sign, they will not believe in it…”***

And, also, if they see the straight path and the right way, they do not
choose it as their own way. The verse says:

***“…and if they see the way of rectitude they do not take it for a
way…”***

After mentioning these three qualities, all of which denote to their
arrogance against the truth, the Qur’ān points to the reason of them and
says:

***“…This is because they belied Our signs and were heedless of
them.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 147
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا بِاَيَاتِنَا وَلِقَآءِ الاَخِرَةِ حَبِطَتْ
أَعْمَالُهُمْ هَلْ يُجْزَوْنَ إِلاَّ مَاكَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**147*****. “And those who belie Our signs and the meeting of the
Hereafter, their (good) deeds are null.*** ***Shall they be recompensed
except for*** ***what they used to do?”***

This verse refers to the punishment of such arrogant people. It says:

***“And those who belie Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter,
their (good) deeds are null…”***

And at the end of the verse, the Qur’ān implies that this fate is not as
a vengeance for them. It is the fruit of their own deeds, or it is the
embodiment of their exact deeds that has been encarnated before them.
Thus, the verse says:

***“…Shall they be recompensed except for what they used to do?”***

This holy verse is one of the verses which are taken as the evidence for
proving the embodiment of actions, and the presence of the deeds
themselves, good and evil, in the Hereafter.

[^1]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, the commentary, vol. 2, p. 61.

[^2]: Safinat-ul-Bihār, vol. 1, p. 505

[^3]: Nūr-uth-Thaqalayn, the commentary

[^4]: Tafsir-us-Sāfi, and’Usūl-i-Kāfi


