Section 21: Punishment For Transgressing the Limits
===================================================

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 163
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسْاَلْهُمْ عَنِ الْقَرْيَةِ الَّتِي كَانَتْ حَاضِرَةَ الْبَحْرِ إِذْ
يَعْدُونَ فِي السَّبْتِ إِذْ تَأْتِيهِمْ حِيتَانُهُمْ يَوْمَ
سَبْتِهِمْ شُرَّعاً وَيَوْمَ لاَيَسْبِتُونَ لاَتَأْتِيهِمْ كَذَلِكَ
نَبْلُوهُم بِمَا كَانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**163*****. “And (O Muhammad) ask them about the town that was by the
sea, when they exceeded (the limits) of the Sabbath when their fish came
to them on the day of their Sabbath,***  
***appearing on the surface of the water; but on the day they did not
keep Sabbath, they (the fish) did not come unto them. Thus did We try
them for the transgressions they used to commit.”***

By the command of Allah, hunting fish on the Sabbath was forbidden for
this group of the Children of Israel who were living on the bank of the
sea. (Maybe, it was the Red Sea, beside the land of Palestine, which is
known’Ilāf Harbour today).

 But, on that very day, fish were seen with a more tremendous amount, so
that people’s mouths watered. This circumstance was a divine trial for
them.

Those people exceeded the law of Allah deceitfully, and, by making pools
on the bank of the sea and banning the way of the fish therein, they
captured them in those pools on Saturdays, the which were easily hunted
on Sundays. Then, they claimed that, according to the commandment, they
had not hunted them on the Sabbath.

The verse says:

***“And (O Muhammad) ask them about the town that was by the sea, when
they exceeded (the limits) of the Sabbath when their fish came to them
on the day of their Sabbath, appearing on the surface of the water; but
on the day they did not keep Sabbath, they (the fish) did not come unto
them. Thus did We try them for the transgressions they used to
commit.”***

Therefore, by legal tricks and deceit, the real feature of sins may not
be changed, (like making pools on the seaside for hunting fish on the
following day).

In one of his sermons, Hadrat Ali (as) has intensively criticized the
justification of sins, and the justification of ‘wine’ with ‘date
liquor’ (nabith), ‘bribery’ with present, and ‘usury’ with
‘transaction’.[^1]

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 164
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَتْ اُمَّةٌ مِنْهُمْ لِمَ تَعِظُونَ قَوْماً اللّهُ
مُهْلِكُهُمْ أَوْ مُعَذِّبُهُمْ عَذَاباً شَدِيداً قَالُوا مَعْذِرَةً
إِلَى رَبِّكُمْ وَلَعَلَّهُمْ يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**164*****. “And (remember) when a group of them said: ‘Why do you
admonish a people whom Allah will destroy or punish with a severe
punishment?’ They said: ‘In order to have an excuse before your Lord,
and that they may keep from evil’.”***

It seems that, from the point of behaviour, the Children of Israel were
divided into three groups. One group, who formed the majority, were the
violators of Divine Law. The second group were the sympathetic
admonishers.

 The third group were those who were inattentive to the social evil
affairs. The latter ones told the sympathetic admonishers not to make
themselves tired, for their preach would not affect the mischief makers
and, in any case, the corruptors should be the dwellers of Hell.

 But those who enjoined right and forbade wrong said that their action
was not useless. They said the least thing was that they were excused
with Allah.

Yes, the members of societies are usually found in the category of these
three groups.

In Surah Al-Mursalāt, No. 77, verses 5 and 6, we recite:

***“And by those who reveal the (Divine) Reminder,” “to justify or to
warn.”***

It should be noted that ***‘forbidding wrong’*** is necessary for
completing the statement and having excuse with Allah. The verse says:

***“…They said: ‘In order to have an excuse before your Lord…”***

 We must not justify our faults with ***‘Divine will’***. The verse
says:

***“And (remember) when a group of them said: ‘Why do you admonish a
people whom Allah will destroy or punish with a severe punishment?’…”***

Unfortunately, those who are inattentive to the evil affairs, instead of
protesting against the corruptors, protest against those who enjoin the
right. But, even if we do not probable a good effect, we must forbid the
wrong in order to complete the statement and to have excuse before
Allah.

However, godly people are not hopeless of improving the society. The
verse concludes:

***“…and that they may keep from evil.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verses 165-166
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا نَسُوا مَاذُكِّرُوا بِهِ أَنْجَيْنَا الَّذِينَ يَنْهَوْنَ
عَنِ السُّوءِ وَأَخَذْنَا الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا بِعَذَابٍ بَئِيسٍ بِمَا
كَانُوا يَفْسُقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا عَتَوْا عَن مَا نُهُوا عَنْهُ قُلْنَا لَهُمْ كُونُوا قِرَدَةً
خَاسِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**165*****. “So when they forgot what they were reminded of, We
delivered those who forbade evil and seized those who were unjust with a
dreadful punishment for the transgressions they used to commit.”***  
**166*****. “So when they defied what they had been forbidden from, We
said to them: ‘Be you apes scouted’.”***

In this verse, the Qur’ān implies that finally mammonism overwhelmed
them and they forgot the command of Allah (s.w.t.), therefore they
confronted the bitter moment of punishment.

The verse says:

***“So when they forgot what they were reminded of, We delivered those
who forbade evil and seized those who were unjust with a dreadful
punishment for the transgressions they used to commit.”***

### Who Were Delivered?

From those three groups of people: (the sinners, the inattentive ones,
and the admonishers), only the third group were secured from the
punishment of Allah. As the Islamic traditions indicate, when this
group, the third group, saw that their admonishments were not effective
in the wrong doers, they became worried and said that they would go out
of the city.

They left the city at night and went into the desert. Accidentally, by
that very night, the retribution of Allah befell upon the couple of the
abovementioned groups who were inside the city.

The sort of their retribution is explained in the second verse of the
above verses as follows:

***“So when they defied what they had been forbidden from, We said to
them: ‘Be you apes scouted’.”***

It is clear that the commandment saying ***‘Be you’***, here, is a
genetic command, which means they changed immediately in the shape of
‘apes’.

According to some Islamic literature, of course, those who were
transformed continued to live only for a few days, and then they died,
so that there could appear no generation from them later.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 167
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذْ تَاَذَّنَ رَبُّكَ لَيَبْعَثَنَّ عَلَيْهِمْ إِلَى يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ مَن يَسُومُهُمْ سُوءَ الْعَذَابِ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ لَسَرِيعُ
الْعِقَابِ وإِنَّهُ لَغَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**167*****. “And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed that He would
surely send against them, until the Day of Resurrection, those who would
inflict on them a grievous punishment. Verily your Lord is certainly
quick to requite (evil), and verily He is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

This verse and the verse after it point to a part of the worldly
retributions of those Jewish people who stood against the commandments
of Allah and trod on the truth, justice, and honesty.

At first, the verse says:

***“And (remember) when your Lord proclaimed that He would surely send
against them, until the Day of Resurrection, those who would inflict on
them a grievous punishment…”***

It is understood from this verse that this rebellious group will never
meet a complete calmness, although they establish a government for
themselves.

Then, at the end of the verse, it adds that Allah is both quick in
punishing those who deserve punishment, and forgiving, Merciful unto
those wrong doers who repent. The verse says:

***“…Verily your Lord is certainly quick to requite (evil), and verily
He is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

This Qur’ānic phrase indicates that Allah has left the way wide open for
them to return in order that no one imagines that a compulsory fate with
adversity, retribution, and chastisement has been assigned for them.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 168
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَطَّعْنَاهُمْ فِي الاَرْضِ اُمَماً مِنْهُمُ الصَّالِحُونَ
وَمِنْهُمْ دُونَ ذَلِكَ وَبَلَوْنَاهُم بِالْحَسَنَاتِ وَالسَّيِّئَاتِ
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**168*****. “And We dispersed them into communities on the earth, some
of them being righteous, and some of them otherwise, and We tried them
with good things and bad things that they might return.”***

It was ordained that for a length of time the Children of Israel visited
honour and power, in order that maybe they might become thankful. And,
for another length of time, they were involved in calamities that might
the sense of repentance and humiliation be renewed in them.

 Some of them were virtuous and believed in Islam, while some others
pursued corruption, and insisted on their own mammonism and
stubbornness.

The verse says:

***“And We dispersed them into communities on the earth, some of them
being righteous, and some of them otherwise, and We tried them with good
things and bad things that they might return.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 169
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَخَلَفَ مِن بَعْدِهِمْ خَلْفٌ وَرِثُوا الْكِتَابَ يَأْخُذُونَ عَرَضَ
هَذَا الاَدْنَى وَيَقُولُونَ سَيُغْفَرُ لَنَا وَإِن يَأْتِهِمْ عَرَضٌ
مِثْلُهُ يَأْخُذُوهُ اَلَمْ يُؤْخَذْ عَلَيْهِمْ مِيثَاقُ الْكِتَابِ
اَن لاَيَقُولُوا عَلَى اللّهِ إِلاَّ الْحَقَّ وَدَرَسُوا مَا فِيهِ
وَالدَّارُ الاَخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِلَّذِينَ يَتَّقُونَ أَفَلا تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**169*****. “Then there succeeded after them (an evil) posterity (who)
inherited the Book (Turah), taking the transitory goods of this lower
world, and saying: ‘It will be forgiven us’. And if similar transitory
goods were to come to them (again), they would take them, too. Was not
the covenant of the Book taken with them that they should not attribute
anything to Allah except the truth? And they have studied what is in it,
while the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who keep from evil.
Have you then no sense?”***

In former verses, the words were about the ancestors of the Jews, but in
this verse, the statement is upon the children and descendants of them.

At first, the Qur’ān remarks that their descendants inherited the Turah,
but they used to prefer the material of this low world to the obedience
of Allah. [^2] The verse says:

***“Then there succeeded after them (an evil) posterity (who) inherited
the Book (Turah), taking the transitory goods of this lower world…”***

Then, the verse implies that when they are hesitating between the
struggle of conscience, on one side, and their worldly interests, on the
other side, they appeal to some false hopes and say that they do obtain
this existing interest, which is in cash, whether it is lawful or
unlawful, and since the Lord is Merciful, Forgiving, He will forgive
them.

***“…and saying: ‘It will be forgiven us’…”***

 This phrase shows that after committing such an action, they assumed a
kind of fleeting regret and a state of extrinsic repentance. But, as the
Qur’ān says, this regret and remorse of theirs had no root in them. And
that was why if they found another material benefit like that, they
would take it, too. [^3] The verse says:

***“…And if similar transitory goods were to come to them (again), they
would take them, too…”***

However, this part of the verse points to the bribery of some of the
Jews and perverting the heavenly verses of the Turah thereby, and also
forsaking the ordinances of Allah because of the contrast of those laws
with their benefits.

Therefore, next to that, the verse says:

***“…Was not the covenant of the Book taken with them that they should
not attribute anything to Allah except the truth?…”***

If they were not acquainted with the divine verses (of the Turah) and
committed such wrong actions, they might have an excuse for themselves.
But, the difficulty of the event is in this fact that they had
frequently seen the verses of the Turah and had understood them, yet
they spoilt them and defied the command of Allah by setting them aside.
The verse says:

***“…And they have studied what is in it…”***

At the end of the verse, the Qur’ān implies that they make mistake, and
such actions and these goods will not be useful for them. The fact is
that the abode of Hereafter is better for the pious. The verse says:

***“…while the abode of the Hereafter is better for those who keep from
evil…”***

Then the Qur’ān questions them whether they have not any sense to
perceive those facts that are so clear. Here is the words of the Qur’ān:

***“…Have you then no sense?”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 170
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يُمَسِّكُونَ بِالْكِتَابِ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلاَةَ إِنَّا
لانُضِيعُ اَجْرَ الْمُصْلِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**170*****. “And those who hold fast to the Book and establish the
prayer, verily We do not waste the reward of the reformers.”***

This verse points to another group, opposite to the above-mentioned
perverted group, who not only avoid any perversion and concealing the
Divine verses, but also take hold of them and practice them minutely.
The Qur’ān has called this group ‘the reformers’ of the world, and
maintains an important reward for them. Concerning them, it says that
surely Allah does not waste the great reward that they will have with
Him. The verse says:

***“And those who hold fast to the Book and establish the prayer, verily
We do not waste the reward of the reformers.”***

The above-mentioned verse clearly indicates that, without taking hold of
the Heavenly Books and Divine commandments, the fulfilment of the true
reforms in the world is impossible. This meaning emphasizes this fact,
once more, that religion is not something only related to the world of
super nature or to the next world.

 Religion is effective in the spirit of life for all human beings. It
protects the interests of all humankind and it is alongside the
execution of the principles of justice, peace, tranquility and any
concepts which are gathered in the vast meaning of the term ‘reform’.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 171
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ نَتَقْنَا الْجَبَلَ فَوْقَهُمْ كَأَنَّهُ ظُلَّةٌ وَظَنُّوا
أَنَّهُ وَاقِعٌ بِهِمْ خُذُوا مَا آتَيْنَاكُم بِقُوَّةٍ وَاذْكُرُوا
مَا فِيهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**171*****. “And (remember) when We plucked the mountain (and held it)
above them as if it were a canopy, and they supposed it was about to
fall on them (when We told them: ) ‘Hold you firmly what We gave you and
remember what is in it, that you may keep from evil’.”***

This is the last verse in this Surah which is upon the life of the
Children of Israel. In this verse, the Qur’ān reminds the community of
the Jews another happening. The event is both a lesson of admonition and
an evidence of giving a covenant. It says:

***“And (remember) when We plucked the mountain (and held it) above them
as if it were a canopy…”***

It was so that they imagined the mountain was nigh to fall down over
them. Therefore, a shaking horror and anxiety encompassed them,
thoroughly their entity, and they began weeping with supplication. The
verse says:

***“…and they supposed it was about to fall on them…”***

It was at the same time that they were in that condition and they were
told to hold firm what Allah gave them. The verse continues saying:

***“…(when we told them: ) ‘Hold you firmly what We gave you…”***

They ought to be in awe of Allah’s punishment and fulfil their duty
according to the covenants He has taken from them in it. The verse says:

***“…and remember what is in it, that you may keep from evil’.”***

This means that the entire messengership of Moses (as) and other
prophets, and their constant struggles and hard conflicts, as well as
the grievous anxieties and laborious hardships that they tolerated, all
were for the sake that the command of Allah and the principles of the
truth, justice, purity, and piety be executed rather perfectly among all
human beings.

[^1]: Nahjul-Balāghah, Sermon No. 156

[^2]: The Arabic word /xalf/ is applied for an ‘impious child ’, while
the Arabic word /xalaf/ is applied for a ‘ pious child ’. (Narrated from
Majma‘-ul-Bayān)

[^3]: The Arabic term /‘arad/ means any capital or property, but the
term /‘ard/ means only the money which is in cush.


