Section 1: The Battle of Badr
=============================

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 1
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْأَنفَالِ ۖ قُلِ الْأَنفَالُ لِلَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ
ۖ فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَصْلِحُوا ذَاتَ بَيْنِكُمْ ۖ وَأَطِيعُوا
اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ إِن كُنتُم مُّؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

**1*****. “They ask you about ‘Anfal’. Say: ‘Anfal’, belong to Allah and
the Messenger; so be in awe of Allah, and set aright the relations
between yourselves, and obey Allah and His Messenger if you do
believe’.”***

 The Arabic word /su’ al (question) and its derivations have been
mentioned about 130 times in the Qur'an, where the Arabic phrase /yas'
alunaka/ (they ask you) is found in its 15 occurrences.

 The Arabic term /' anfal/ is the plural form of /nafl/ with the sense
of ‘excessive’ and ‘remission’. A gracious man who remits very much is
called in Arabic /nufil/.The progeny which was remitted to Abraham (as)
has been counted as a superervogation. The Qur'an says:

***“And We gave him Isac, and Jacob, as a further gift…”*** ***(Surah
Al-‘Anbiya, No. 21, verse 72).***

 In technical terminology of the Islamic jurisprudence, the meaning of
the Arabic word ‘anfal’ encompasses: natural resources’ public wealth,
the spoils of war, the wealth whose owner is unknown, like a land whose
owner has left it out, the properties of the heirless dead, forests,
valleys, reed-beds, unprofitable lands, mines, and so on.

 According to what the history denotes, when the Battle of Badr was
ended, there remained some spoils of war for the Muslims. The opinions
were divided that what should be done with the spoils, to whom they
belonged, and who were the first that had precedence.

 Then, the Prophet of Allah (S) himself began dividing the spoils of the
war. He gave them to all concerning persons justly and equally in order
to remove the undue discriminations of the Age of Ignorance, and to
support the oppressed, though some individuals were annoyed of that
equality.

 Since the Surah is wholly about the Battle of Badr, this verse refers
to the spoils of war, too, but it does not exclusively belong to it.[^1]

### Explanations

1- Public wealth should be in the authority of the most sacred and the
most beloved persons.

***“They ask you about ‘Anfal’. Say: ‘Anfal’ belong to Allah and the
Messenger...”***

2- An Islamic system, or an Islamic government, needs an economical
support, and ‘Anfal’ are considered as this support.

3- In an Islamic Community, the source of answering and stating all the
public questions and economical affairs is the divine leader. In the
societies before Islam, the method of dividing spoils of war was
arranged upon the basis of some undue discrimination.

 Therefore, in the Battle of Badr, which was the first occasion where
the Muslims obtained some spoils of war, they asked this question from
the Messenger of Allah (S).

4- In Islam, there are laws for everything, even for the unprofitable
deserts.

5- Whatever the Messenger of Allah (S) spends is around the pivot of the
divine aims:

***“...the ‘Anfal’ belong to Allah and the Messenger...”***

 Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“The share of Allah is spent under the control of the Messenger of
Allah (S).”*

6- The protection of public wealth needs Purity and piety. The verse
continues saying:

***“...so be in awe of Allah...”***

7- To observe the unity and to make peace between people are obligatory
for all believers. The Qur'an says:

***“...and set aright the relations between yourselves...”***

8- Belief not only exists in the heart, but also has an outward
manifestation and practical obedience. The verse says:

***“...and obey Allah and His Messenger if you do believe’.”***

9- Only taking part in fight is not the sign of Faith. It’s necessary
conditions are also to give up hope unto the spoils of war, and
observing brotherhood and submission before the divine leader.

***“...if you do believe.”***

10. Some persons may pass the examination of giving soul by attending
the Holy Struggle, but sometimes they fail in the trial of spending
wealth and in the trial of division of the spoils of war as well. For,
the main principal in the Holy Struggle is the triumph of the Truth
against the falsehood. Then, the question of ‘the spoils of war’ is of
the secondary importance.

11- The person who wishes and intends to improve his society must
himself be of the pious ones:

***“...So be in awe of Allah and set aright...”***

 Basically, among the most important actions in Islam are
reconciliation, creation of good relation, wiping out the annoyances and
enmities and changing them into sincerity and friendship.

 This subject has been taken so important in the Islamic teachings that
it has been introduced as one of the most exalted practices.

 When Amir-ul-Mu'mineen Ali (as) was in the bed of martyrdom, as his
last testaments to his children, he said:

*“Verily I heard from your ancestor, the Prophet (S) who said:
‘Reconciliation is better than the kinds of recommended prayer and
fasting’.”*[^2]

 Some Islamic traditions indicate that the reward of reconciliation
between people is much more than that of the recommended prayer and
fasting. Imam Sadiq (as) told Mufaddal*:*

*“If there happens a conflict between two persons of our followers,
spend out of my wealth and produce reconciliation between them.”*[^3]

Surah Al-Anfal – Verses 2-3
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ إِذَا ذُكِرَ اللَّهُ وَجِلَتْ
قُلُوبُهُمْ وَإِذَا تُلِيَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتُهُ زَادَتْهُمْ إِيمَانًا
وَعَلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنْفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**2*****. “Verily believers are only those who, when Allah is mentioned,
their hearts quake, and when His Signs are recited to them, it increases
them in faith, and in their Lord (alone) do they trust.”***  
**3*****. “Those who keep up prayer, and spend (benevolently) out of
what We have provided them.”***

 The true believers are those who are in owe of Allah (s.w.t) because of
His glorification and veneration. That is, when the speech is delivered
upon Allah's justice, retribution, and power, they dread, and when the
speech is about His bounties, kindnesses, graces, and rewards, they feel
peace in themselves; as the Qur'an says:

***“... now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at
rest.”*** ***(Surah Ar-Ra'd, No. 13, verse 28).***

 Thus, there is no contrast between these two verses, because fear
relates to the remembrance of Allah's retribution and peace, but peace
and rest relates to the remembrance of Allah's forgiveness and kindness.

 Moreover, whenever a believer remembers the Divine bounties and
forgiveness of Allah, he obtains a favorable opinion and he rests, but
when he remembers his own sins, he becomes inconvenient and anxious. The
verse says:

***“Verily believers are only those who, when Allah is mention, their
hearts quake...”***

 The Arabic term /wajila/ means ‘to fear, apprehend’ which is
accompanied with sadness.

 Then the verse continues saying:

***“...and when His Signs are recited to them, it increases them in
faith...”***

 In that circumstance, their faith and their certainty will be
increased.

***“...and in their Lord (alone) do they trust.”***

 Such people trust in Allah in any conditions and they rely on Him for
the affairs of their lives.

 Again, believers are those who establish prayer (which is the
manifestation of the relation with Allah) and spend in charity and
benevolently out of what Allah has given them as their sustenance.

 The phrase ***‘they keep up prayer’*** mentioned in the verse, instead
of saying ‘they recite prayer’, points to this fact that not only they
themselves keep up prayer but also they behave so that this firm
relation with Allah will be kept always and everywhere. Here is the
verse:

***“Those who keep up prayer, and spend (benevolently) out of what We
have provided them.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 4
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ حَقًّا ۚ لَهُمْ دَرَجَاتٌ عِنْدَ
رَبِّهِمْ وَمَغْفِرَةٌ وَرِزْقٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**4*****. “These are the believers in truth; they have ranks with their
Lord, and forgiveness, and a noble sustenance.”***

 Allah, the Exalted, implies that those who have such qualities are
indeed eligible to be called ‘believers’. The verse says:

***“These are the believers in truth; they have ranks with their Lord,
and forgiveness, and a noble sustenance.”***

 That is, these persons have some high ranks and degrees of honor in
Heaven, and the Lord will provide them with His forgiveness and a great
and permanent sustenance. That is why some commentators have said that
***‘a noble sustenance’*** means a permanent sustenance which is vast
and pure, and is given them without any reproach. In Hereafter, this
noble sustenance will be the eternal Heaven.

 By the way, it should be said that these qualities belong to some
distinguished and notable believers, not to the totality of the
believers. As if it wants to say that the distinguished and chosen
believers are those who have these qualities.

 Thus, there is no problem that believing persons be equal from the
point of Faith, but different from the point of worship. The evidence of
this meaning is that the heartily fear is not enjoined, but it is
recommended.

 The prayer and spending out of sustenance, mentioned in the previous
holy verse, are irrespective of the obligatory and recommended ones.
Then, it is clear that the verses refer to some distinguished and chosen
believers, not to all of the believers.

 However, Faith should be accompanied with love and piety; and a humble
heart is the source of virtues. It is the heart which trembles and
quakes first, and, thereafter, the increase of Faith, keeping up prayer
and trusting in Allah come forth.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 5
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَا أَخْرَجَكَ رَبُّكَ مِنْ بَيْتِكَ بِالْحَقِّ وَإِنَّ فَرِيقًا
مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ لَكَارِهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**5*****. “Just as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with
the truth, through a party of the believers were certainly averse (to
it).”***

 As the scarcity of forces and possibilities caused some early Muslims
to feel difficult and heavy to go to Holy War against the enemy,
dividing the spoils of the Battle of Badr was heavy, too. These
annoyances pass away, of course, The Messenger of Allah. However, must
think of the real interests and the fulfillment of Allah’s command,
else, the dislike of this and that always exists.

 The verse says:

***“Just as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with the
truth, through a party of the believers were certainly averse (to
it).”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 6
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُجَادِلُونَكَ فِي الْحَقِّ بَعْدَمَا تَبَيَّنَ كَأَنَّمَا يُسَاقُونَ
إِلَى الْمَوْتِ وَهُمْ يَنْظُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**6.** ***“They dispute with you about the truth after it became clear,
as if they see they are being driven unto death.*** **“**

 The dispute of a group of Muslims with the Prophet (S) was alongside
the Battle of Badr. They said that since they had not enough
possibilities and troops, they could go out for taking possession of the
properties of the merchants of Quraysh, not for fighting against the
forces of Quraysh.

 Some of them delivered some reasons for the lack of conflict, while
some others, like Miqdad, said that they would not treat like the people
of Moses (as), sitting and saying that you go for fighting, but they
themselves were fighters and whatever the Prophet (S) commanded they
would accept.

 But, in this course, the coward persons, who were not ready to fight,
disputed with the Prophet (S).

 However, not the whole companions of the Prophet (S) were just and
obedient to the command of the Prophet (S) as the verse says:

***“They dispute with you about the truth after it became clear...”***

 In order to flee from taking part in fight, always the coward and
self-indulgent persons attack to dispute and justification, and they
seek for excuses.

 Therefore, if the spirits end motives are not safe and sound, the march
of such soldiers towards fight is not more than carrying corpse. The
verse says:

***“...as if they see they are being driven unto death.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 7
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ يَعِدُكُمُ اللَّهُ إِحْدَى الطَّائِفَتَيْنِ أَنَّهَا لَكُمْ
وَتَوَدُّونَ أَنَّ غَيْرَ ذَاتِ الشَّوْكَةِ تَكُونُ لَكُمْ وَيُرِيدُ
اللَّهُ أَنْ يُحِقَّ الْحَقَّ بِكَلِمَاتِهِ وَيَقْطَعَ دَابِرَ
الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**7.** ***“And (remember) when Allah promised you one of the two parties
should be yours, and you loved that the one unarmed should be yours; but
Allah desires to verify the truth by His words and to cut off the roots
of infidels.”***

 The Arabic term /saukat/ means ‘thorn and bayonet’, and it is the
symbol of an armed group. The objective of the Qur'anic phrase /qayra
oati-sh-saukat/ is the very unarmed merchants. The verse says:

***“And (remember) when Allah promised you one of the two parties should
be yours, and you loved that the one unarmed should be yours...”***

 It happened that once Abu Sufyan, as the chief of a commercial caravan,
set out to travel. Before that, tile pagans of Mecca had confiscated the
properties of the immigrant Muslims. So in order to weaken the power of
the pagans and to recompense that transgression, the Prophet (S) made
some Muslims prepared to attack the commercial caravan.

 Abu Sufyan was informed of the matter and immediately made the people
of Mecca aware of it. There were gathered about one thousand equipped
fighters to defend that commercial group which consisted of forty
people.

 In the desert, at a place located between Mecca and Medina, three
groups met face to face, (Muslims, the pagan troops, and the merchants).
In spite of the fact that Muslims had not come out with the aim of
fighting and they had not any martial equipment with them, but Allah
assisted them with some unseen helps and, finally, the Muslims won the
battle.

 In the Battle of Badr, which occurred on seventeenth of Ramadhan in the
second year of Hijrat, the numbers of Muslims were 313 strivers while
the number of pagans was thrice as much they were, where Abujahl and
seventy other pagans were killed, and, also, seventy pagans, together
with him, were taken as captives.

 Thus, sometimes the Divine Will may be fulfilled by the (hands of the
believers, and the fact is that the remembrance of the divine helps can
be a factor in strengthening the Faith.

 We must also know that the victory of the truth over falsehood is more
magnificent than the economical income, and triumph is not only that
which comes forth with some fighters and war equipments, the main factor
is Allah's Will.

 So, the aim of Holy Struggle in Islam is the manifestation of the truth
and destruction of falsehood. And, it also should be known that the
manifestation of the truth can be done by means of the Divine
Statements, the Divine saints, and Allah's laws, agents and ways of
treatment.

 Therefore, victory and honor may be obtained under the shade of Holy
Struggle and (self -sacrifice, not with political discussions and
collusions; which are performed by the help of deceits and trickeries.
The verse says:

***“...but Allah desires to verify the truth by His words and to cut off
the roots of infidels.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 8
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيُحِقَّ الْحَقَّ وَيُبْطِلَ الْبَاطِلَ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُجْرِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**8.** ***“That He might verify the truth and bring vanity to naught,
though the guilty were averse (to it).”***

 This verse works as the most important encouragement for Muslims. The
Divine promises are not for the sake of personal material interests of
the individuals, but they have been decreed for the verification of the
truth and the destruction of falsehood. The verse says:

***“That He might verify the truth and bring vanity to naught...”***

 You should not think of the hate and the wrath of the disbelieving
enemy. Allah will verify His Will, although the sinners do not like it.
The verse says:

***“...though the guilty were averse (to it).”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 9
------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ تَسْتَغِيثُونَ رَبَّكُمْ فَاسْتَجَابَ لَكُمْ أَنِّي مُمِدُّكُمْ
بِأَلْفٍ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ مُرْدِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**9.** ***“(Remember) when you were calling upon your Lord for succor,
and He answered you (saying): ‘I shall assist you with a thousand of the
angels following one another’.”***

 The Qur'anic term /murdif/, mentioned at the end of the verse, is
derived from the Arabic term /'irdaf/ in the sense of ‘row’, and
‘following one after another’. Here in this verse, it means that these
helps are continued. These very helps are also referred to in Surah
Al-i-‘Imran, verse 124 as ***‘three thousand of angels’*** and in its
following verse, the words about the Divine help are said:

***“with five thousand of angels distinguished”.***

 Perhaps, these divine helps had been bestowed upon them because of
their perseverance. That is, the more Muslims persevered in that Battle,
the more unseen helps were added for them.

 As it was said before, *(verse 7 of the current Surah)*, the number of
Muslim strivers in the Battle of Badr was one third of that of pagans.
Moreover, their war-equipments as well as their spiritual preparation
were very little. Therefore, the Messenger of Allah (S) invoked, saying:

*“O’ Allah! do manifest whatever You promised me. O’ Allah! If this
group (of Muslims) be killed, You will not be worshipped in the earth.”*

### Explanations

 This holy verse attracts our attention to several points as follows:

1- Allah (s.w.t) is the key of answering supplications. The verse says:

***“(Remember) when you were calling upon your Lord for succor, and He
answered you…”***

2- Allah may remit without any invocation, but invocation is one
training way out of divine ways.

3- The supplications and invocations which are offered by strivers in
the midst of battlefields are effective, because their invocations will
be answered.

4- Do not forget the days of affliction and the helps of Allah (s.w.t),
since; the remembrance of Allah's bounties elevates the spirit of
thanksgiving in man. The verse concludes:

***“… (saying): ‘I shall assist you with a thousand of the angels
following one another’.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 10
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلَهُ اللَّهُ إِلَّا بُشْرَىٰ وَلِتَطْمَئِنَّ بِهِ
قُلُوبُكُمْ ۚ وَمَا النَّصْرُ إِلَّا مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**10*****. “And Allah did not appoint it, save as good tidings and that
your hearts thereby might be at rest; and no victory is there save from
Allah, surely Allah is the Mighty the Wise.”***

 The descent of the assisting angels for helping the believers has been
repeatedly mentioned in the Qur’an. Even at the time of death and giving
soul, Allah sends an angel to protect the believers from the satanic
temptations by inspiring the Truth to them.

 There are two kinds of inspiration in the creation of Allah. One of
them is from the side of Allah's angels, which inspires calmness, like
the current Surah, verse 12, which says:

***“(And remember) when your Lord revealed unto the angels, (saying):
‘Verily I am with you, so confirm those who believe. I will cast fear
into the hearts of those who disbelieve...’”.***

 Another kind is the inspiration of dread which is done by Satan. For
example, the Quran says:

***“It is only Satan that causes his friends to fear...”*** ***(Surah’
Al-i- Imran, No. 3, verse 175).***

### Explanations

 The assisting angels came down to increase spiritualities of the
believers, not to destroy the pagans. The verse says:

***“And Allah did not appoint it, save as good tidings...”***

 (Historically, it is clear who was killed and who was the killer of the
slaughtered, but, in the Battle of Badr, the majority of the slaughtered
among the pagans were killed by the sword of Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) ).

 The victory of the believers in the Battle of Badr was obtained neither
as a result of their originative faculty and martial design, nor for
their arms, nor because of the angels, but it was only from the side of
Allah. The verse says:

***“and that your hearts thereby might be at rest; and no victory is
there save from Allah, surely Allah is the Mighty the Wise.”***

[^1]: Al-Mizan, the commentary.

[^2]: Nahj-ul-Balaghah

[^3]: Usul-I-Kafi, Chapter ‘Reconciliation’, tradition No.2


