Section 3: Obedience to Allah and His Messenger
===============================================

Surah Al-Anfal – Verses 20-21
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَلَا
تَوَلَّوْا عَنْهُ وَأَنْتُمْ تَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ قَالُوا سَمِعْنَا وَهُمْ لَا يَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**20*****. “O' you who have Faith! Obey Allah and His Messenger, and do
not turn away from him while you hear (him).”***  
**21*****. “And be not like those who say: ‘We heard’, but they do not
hear (indeed).”***

 In the Qur’an thoroughly, the commandment of the obedience from the
Messenger of Allah (S) has occurred next to the obedience from Allah. In
eleven occurrences the term /’ati‘un/ (do obey) has been mentioned after
the Qur’anic phrase:

***“Be in awe of Allah”.***

 In this verse, although both the obedience from Allah and the obedience
from the Messenger are referred to, the objective is the disobedience
from the Messenger, (not from Allah), especially in the Battle of Badr
and his commands concerning the military affairs.

 Therefore, for the continuation of the order of the truth, people
should always be recommended to be obedient unto the Divine leader. The
verse says:

***“O’ you who have Faith! Obey Allah and His Messenger…”***

 It should also be known that leaving the obedience from the Prophet (S)
is the disobedience from Allah. The verse continues saying:

***“…and do not turn away from him while you hear (him).”***

 In this obedience, the obedience from the Divine leader, truthfulness
is the necessary condition, and only the act of ‘hearing’ is not enough.
The verse says:

***“And be not like those who say: ‘We heard’, but they do not hear
(indeed).”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 22
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ الَّذِينَ
لَا يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**22*****. “Verily the worst of animals in the sight of Allah are the
deaf, the dumb, who do not understand.”***

 The Arabic term /summ/, mentioned in the verse, is the plural form of
/asamm/ which means ‘deaf’ ; and the Qur’anic term /bukm/ is the plural
form of /’abkam/ which philologically means ‘dumb’.

 Those who do not accept the teachings of divine prophets are
differently defined in the Qur'an.

 Sometimes they are resembled to the dead, as it is recited in its two
occurrences:

***“Surely you do not make the dead to hear...”*** ***(Surah Ar-Room,
No. 30, verse 52); and (Surah An- Naml, No. 27, verse 80)***

 Sometimes they are resembled to beasts:

***“...and eat as the beasts eat...”.*** ***(Surah Muhammad, No. 47,
verse 12)***

 Sometimes they are introduced worse than the beasts, as the Qur'an
says:

***“...they are as cattle, rather they are more astray...”*** ***(Surah
Al-‘A’raf, No. 7, verse 179)***

 Sometimes they are considered as the worst creatures, as the verse
under discussion says:

***“Verily the worst of animals in the sight of Allah...”***

 Since ‘the statements’ which are not fulfilled accordingly and ‘the
hearings’ which are uneffective in action are counted one of the
greatest afflictions of the human societies, which can be the origin of
kinds of misfortunes, again the Qur’an emphasizes on this subject once
more in this very verse, and in a delicate and nice statement, it
follows that meaning by saying:

***“Verily the worst of animals in the sight of Allah are the deaf, the
dumb, who do not understand.”***

 Also, in view of the fact that the Qur’an is the Book of practice, and
not merely a ceremonial book, thoroughly it lays emphasis on the
consequences of deeds. In this verse, too, those who have safe ears but
they do not pave the way of hearkening to the revelations of Allah, and
do not follow the words of truth and the programs which lead to
happiness, are considered as earless persons.

 And, those who have a sound tongue but keep silence when they should
defend the truth are considered as some deaf and dumb persons.

 Such people neither struggle against injustice and mischief, nor do
they lead the ignorant, nor do they enjoin what is right and forbid what
is wrong, nor do they invite others to the way of truth, but they apply
this great bounty of Allah in the way of idle talks, backbiting,
flatteries before the possessors of wealth and power, or they often make
use of it for perverting the right and strengthening the falsehood.

 The Qur’an counts those who have the bounties of intellect, talent, and
capability, but do not contemplate properly, as some mad ones.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 23
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ عَلِمَ اللَّهُ فِيهِمْ خَيْرًا لَأَسْمَعَهُمْ ۖ وَلَوْ
أَسْمَعَهُمْ لَتَوَلَّوْا وَهُمْ مُعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**23*****. “And if Allah had known any good in them, He would have made
them hear; and (even) if He had made them hear, they would have turned
away, swerving aside.”***

 Obstinate persons are divided into several groups. Some of them are not
ready even to listen to the truth. The revelation about them is recited:

***“And those who disbelieved said: Do not listen to this Qur’an...”
(Surah Fussilat, No. 41, verse 26)***

 Some of these obstinate persons listen and understand it, but they
distort it.

 Some others have not the ability of discrimination because of their
innate extra attachments, envies, enmities and callous nesses. The verse
says:

***“And if Allah had known any good in them He would have made them
hear; and (even) if He had made them hear, they would have turned away,
swerving aside.”***

 Therefore, we must seek for the facilities of enjoying of Allah's grace
in ourselves.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 24
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَجِيبُوا لِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ
إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ لِمَا يُحْيِيكُمْ ۖ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَحُولُ
بَيْنَ الْمَرْءِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَأَنَّهُ إِلَيْهِ تُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**24*****. “O you who have Faith! Answer Allah and the Messenger when he
invites you to that which gives you life, and know that Allah intervenes
between a man and his heart, and that unto Him you shall be
gathered.”***

 There are different kinds of life:

1- Vegetal life:

***“...Allah gives life to the earth after its death...”*** ***(Surah
Al-Hadid, No. 57, verse 17)***

2- Animal life:

***“...the giver of life to the dead...”*** ***(Surah Fussilat, No. 41,
verse 39)***

3- Mental life:

***“...who was dead then We raised him to life...”*** ***(Surah Al-
An’am, No. 6, verse 122)***

4- Eternal life:

***“...O! would that I had sent before for (this) my life!”*** ***(Surah
Al-Fajr, No. 89, verse 24)***

 The purpose of the life, which comes into being by the acceptance of
the invitation of prophets, is not the animal life, since without the
effects and affluence of prophets this sort of life exists, too. Then,
the objective of this life is the mental, intellectual, and spiritual
life.

 The phrase: ‘***Allah intervenes between a man and his heart***’
indicates that Allah is aware and present everywhere, and He encompasses
everything so that He is closer to us than our jugular vein is. All
bounties and successes belong to Him, and the activities of intellect
and soul are under His authority, too.

 However, the acceptance of the Prophet's invitation is the same as the
acceptance of Allah's invitation; and the real life of man lies in Faith
and righteous deed, to which prophets have invited, too.

 The verse says:

***“O you have Faith! Answer Allah and the Messenger when he invites you
to that which gives you life...”***

 The ordinances of Islam gives spiritual life to the believers, the same
as some medicine or surgery can be life-giving to a sick person.

 Going alongside the way of Allah (s.w.t) and divine prophets (as) is
the real life, while abandoning it is the death of humanity.

 According to the Islamic literatures, one of the aspects of goodly life
is the acceptance of the call of the Prophet of Islam (S) to the subject
of mastership of Ali-ibn-Abitalib (as) and his Ahl-ul-Bayt (as).[^1]

 He who believes in Allah's omnipresence and omnipotence does not
disobey the invitation of prophets. Therefore, as long as you are alive
and you have respite, embrace the Truth. (According to this
interpretation, the phrase ***‘...Allah intervenes between a man and his
heart’*****,** metaphorically, means death.)

***“...and know that Allah intervenes between a man and his heart...”***

 Among the aspects of the phrase: ***‘Allah intervenes between a man and
his heart’*** there are: the effacement of infidelity and confirming
Faith, the effacement of negligence and doubt and confirming
recollection and certainty.[^2]

 All of you will be gathered on the Resurrection Day, then do respond to
the invitation of prophets positively. The verse ends as follows:

***“...and that unto Him you shall be gathered.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 25
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا فِتْنَةً لَا تُصِيبَنَّ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا مِنْكُمْ
خَاصَّةً ۖ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**25*****. “And keep from the evil of an affliction which shall not
smite in particular those of you who committed injustice (but all of
you); and know that Allah is severe in retribution.”***

 The content of the previous verse was upon the acceptance of the
Prophet's invitation to ‘the goodly life’. Here, in this, verse, the
Qur’an says if you do not accept his invitation you will be involved
with an affliction whose fire encompasses everyone. The verse says:

***“And keep from the evil of an affliction which shall not smite in
particular those of you who committed injustice (but all of you)...”***

 The Arabic term /fitnah/ has been applied in the sense of idolatry,
infidelity, trial, torture, and so on.

 The former verse ordained to the obedience from the Prophet (S) while
here, in this verse, the command is unto ‘***being in awe of an
affliction***’. It is understood that the lack of obedience from the
Prophet (S) is '***affliction***'. Thus the concept of the verse is the
same concept as the Surah, Al-i-‘Imran, No. 3, verse 103, which is
recited[^3]:

***“And hold fast by the cord of Allah all together, and do not
separate…”***

 Mischief and indecency destroys the entity of a system, and its damage
reaches everybody. One of the examples of this meaning was the mischief
of the rulers of Umayyads. They put aside the mastership of ‘the leader
of the truth’ and, consequently, they set the Muslims into abasement for
centuries. When this verse was revealed, the Prophet (S) said:

*“Whoever transgresses in Ali's vicegerency after my death, it is as if
he has denied my messengership and the prophethood of the prophets
before me.”*[^4]

 Thus, the members of a society, besides their own duties, should feel
responsibility for the deeds of others, since the reflections of
everybody's evil actions may afflict the surrounding people, too. It is
similar to the person who is inside a ship and makes a hole in it. By
his action, he causes that all the people in the ship to be-drowned.

 Therefore, neither you yourself make a mischief, nor adhere with the
mischief makers, nor be silent when they make mischief: ***“And keep
from the evil of an affliction”***; and do know that being in awe of the
evil of affliction is ‘awareness’, not ‘resignation’.

 We must be aware not to be involved with the evil afflictions and
disturbances when they come forth. Ali (as) says:

*“During evil disturbances be like an adolescent camel that has neither
a back strong enough for riding nor udders for milking.”*[^5]

 The Prophet (S) in a tradition has said:

 *“When seditions appear among the community, be with Ali, although he
is alone.”* [^6]

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 26
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرُوا إِذْ أَنْتُمْ قَلِيلٌ مُسْتَضْعَفُونَ فِي الْأَرْضِ
تَخَافُونَ أَنْ يَتَخَطَّفَكُمُ النَّاسُ فَآوَاكُمْ وَأَيَّدَكُمْ
بِنَصْرِهِ وَرَزَقَكُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**26*****. “And remember when you were few, deemed weak in the land, and
were fearful that people would snatch you away, but He gave you refuge
(in Medina), and strengthened you with His help, and provided you with
the good things (of sustenance) in order that you might be thankful.”***

 Once again the Quran assists Muslims to review their past history, and
makes them understand both their former state and their present stage
which they enjoy, so that they may catch well the concept of the lesson
taught through the previous holy verses.

 This verse implies that they should remember the time that they were
few in number and could do nothing. They were captured in the grips of
their enemies who had drawn them into weakness and incapability. It
says:

***“And remember when you were few, deemed weak in the land...”***

 They were in a state that they feared that both pagans and those who
were their opponents might despoil them away. The verse says:

***“...and were fearful that people would snatch you away...”***

 This meaning makes manifest the utmost weakness and fewness of the
members of Muslims in front of pagans in Mecca before migration of the
Prophet (S) to Medina, or after migration in front of the great powers
of that time, like the forces of Iran and Rom.

 Then, the verse continues saying:

***“...but He gave you refuge (in Medina)...”***

 Then it adds:

***“...and strengthened you with His help...”***

***“...and provided you with the good things (of sustenance)...”***

***“...in order that you might be thankful.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 27
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَخُونُوا اللَّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ
وَتَخُونُوا أَمَانَاتِكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**27*****. “O you who have Faith! Do not betray Allah and the Messenger,
and do not betray your trusts knowingly.”***

### Occasion of Revelation

 In the commentary books recorded by both great sects of Islam upon the
occasion of revelation of this verse, it has been cited as follows:

 When the Jewish tribe named Bani-Qurayzah were surrounded by the Muslim
strivers under the command of the Prophet (S) the Jews suggested peace
and started moving toward Syria.

 But the Prophet (S) did not accept it, and he ordered Sa'd-ibn-Ma'ath
to judge over their circumstance. The Jews consulted with ‘Abul-Babah,
one of the Muslims who had had the background of friendship with them,
about that judgment.

 When, ‘Abul-Babah, by pointing to his throat, signed them that they
would be killed totally if they accepted the arbitration of
Sa'd-ibn-Ma'ath, Gabriel informed this signal to the Prophet (S).
‘Abul-Babah, who was ashamed of this treachery, roped himself to the
pillar of the mosque and avoided eating anything for seven days and
nights.

 Finally, Allah accepted his repentance.[^7]

 There has also been cited another occasion of revelation upon this
verse as follows in the Battle of Badr, one of the Muslims wrote a
letter to Abu-Sufyan and informed him of the Prophet's plan Then,
Abu-Sufyan asked for help from the pagans of Mecca, and they sent one
thousand fighters to fight in the Battle of Badr.[^8]

 Now Allah commands the believers not to approach treachery. The holy
verse, addressing the believing people, implies that they should not
betray Allah (s.w.t) by means of abandoning His ordinances and His
Messenger (S) by leaving his rules, because whoever leaves or spoils
anything of the religion, he has betrayed Allah (s.w.t) and His
Messenger (S). The verse says

***“O you who have Faith! Do not betray Allah and the Messenger...”***

 Also, the believers should not be treacherous to the affairs upon which
Allah has trusted them, and has given them the fulfillment of them that
they accomplish them without any deficiency Thus, he who is treacherous
to Allah and the Messenger of Islam (S), has been treacherous to his own
deposits.

 And you know that treachery is an ugly action which incurs punishment.

 The verse says:

***“...and do not betray your trusts knowingly.”***

 Therefore, treachery is basically ugly and condemned, especially those
treacheries which are performed knowingly, and the manifestation of
military secrets are uglier and more dangerous, for which, and of course
the sinful person must repent very soon.

 However, the spoils of war, alms, Khoms (one fifth levy), and all
properties of others, which are with you, are deposits. Similarly, other
bounties, such as: the school of religion, leadership, the Qur’an,
children, and territorial of the country are the deposits of Allah.

 And according to the tradition which Shawahid-ut-Tanzil, by Hakim
Huskani, vol. 1, p. 205 has narrated from Ihqaq-ul-Haqq, vol. 14, p. 564
the progeny of the Prophet (S) are also the Divine deposits.

 By obeying them and following them, we must protect these deposits.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 28
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَأَوْلَادُكُمْ فِتْنَةٌ وَأَنَّ
اللَّهَ عِنْدَهُ أَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**28*****. “And know that your wealth and your children are a (means of)
trial, and that Allah - with Him is a great reward.”***

 Intensive love for wealth and children is the pivot of a lot of evil
actions. It is the origin of many unlawful transactions, lies,
monopolies, short weights, lack of payment of the alms- tax, to avoid
giving Khoms (one fifth levy) and poor-rates, greeds, hindering others’
affairs, false oaths, wasting the people’s rights, and the like of them.

 The love of children may cause a person to escape from the battle-field
and not to tolerate a short separation from the family.

 Then, these are the factors of trial, as explained in the previous
verse. This kind of love drew ‘Abul-Babah into committing wrong and, in
order to protect his wealth and children, he assisted the enemy of
Islam.

 Therefore, regarding the occasion of revelation of the previous verse,
excessive love to wealth and children causes man to fall into sin and
treachery. The verse under discussion says:

***“And know that your wealth and your children are a (means of)
trial...”***

 Also, wealth and children can be two fascinating traps on the way of
human beings to which the Qur’an has repeatedly warned in different
ways. For example, Surah Al-Munafiqun, No. 63, verse 9 says:

***“...let not your wealth, or your children, divert you from the
remembrance of Allah...”***

 Being attentive to the great reward of Allah causes us to leave the
love of the world and also to abandon treachery. The verse says:

***“...and that Allah - with Him is a great reward.”***

[^1]: Recorded in Tafsir-i-Furqan, by Manaqib Tarmathy

[^2]: This meaning is recorded in Tafsir-i-Furqan, narrated from Imam
Sadiq (as)

[^3]: Al-Mizan.

[^4]: Furqan, narrated from Shawahid- ut- Tanzil, by Huskani, vol. 1, p.
206.

[^5]: Nahj-ul-Balaqah, saying No. 1, p. 530, English version.

[^6]: Majma'-ul-Bayan, vol. 4, p. 534 (Arabic version) and
Tafsir-ul-Burhan

[^7]: Majma’-ul-Bayan, and Tafsir-us-Safi

[^8]: Al-Mizan, and Majma'-ul-Bayan


