Section 6: Steadfastness and Unity Enjoined
===========================================

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 45
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا لَقِيتُمْ فِئَةً فَاثْبُتُوا
وَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**45*****. “O you who have Faith! when you encounter a host (in battle),
then stand firm, and remember Allah much, that you may be
prosperous.”***

 Now that Allah (s.w.t,) has commanded the Muslims to be steadfast in
the battlefield, He says:

***“O you who have Faith! when you encounter a host (in battle), then
stand firm...”***

 That is, whenever you face with a group of infidels in war, stand firm
for fighting against them, and do not escape. And, it is evident that
believers generally do not fight save against hostile infidels.

 Then the holy verse implies that, at the time of war, Muslims should
seek help from Allah, the Mighty, so that not only they become
victorious and successful in the present world but also they become
prosperous in the coming world. The verse continues saying:

***“...and remember Allah much, that you may be prosperous.”***

 Some commentators say that this part of the verse means that you should
remember the promises of Allah, which He has given you about triumph, in
order that your steadfastness might he increased.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 46
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَلَا تَنَازَعُوا فَتَفْشَلُوا
وَتَذْهَبَ رِيحُكُمْ ۖ وَاصْبِرُوا ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**46*****. “And obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not dispute, for
you will become dishearted and your power will depart; and be patient,
verily Allah is with the patient.”***

 Believers should obey Allah and His Messenger, and when they encounter
their enemy, they should be united and avoid disputing. Otherwise, they
may fear and lose their hearts, and begin fighting while their courage
and power vanish.

 The verse says:

***“And obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not dispute, for you will
become dishearted and your power will depart...”***

 Some commentators have said that they may lose victory and government
as a result of it.

 The Arabic term /rih/, mentioned here, is a hint to progression,
influence, and reaching the aim.

 Some other commentators have said that if Muslims show discord with
each other, they will not find the breeze of triumph upon their lives.

 Thus, they should be patient in the war against the enemy, since Allah
is with the patient ones. The verse says:

***“...and be patient, verily Allah is with the patient.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 47
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَكُونُوا كَالَّذِينَ خَرَجُوا مِنْ دِيَارِهِمْ بَطَرًا
وَرِئَاءَ النَّاسِ وَيَصُدُّونَ عَنْ سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ ۚ وَاللَّهُ بِمَا
يَعْمَلُونَ مُحِيطٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**47*****. “And do not be like those who got out from their homes
boastfully and to show off to men and barring from Allah's way, and
verily Allah encompasses what they do.”***

 The verse addresses the believers, telling them not to be like the
Quraysh who made up a group of mischievous drunkard persons to go out in
order to protect their caravan. Intending ostentation and prohibiting
others from the religion of Allah, i.e. Islam, they started from Mecca
toward the land of Badr.

 Their hypocritical act was that they wanted to pretend that they did
not count Muslims so considerable and important that they would be
fearful of them. But they should know that Allah is aware of their deeds
and none of their acts is concealed to Him, the One Who gives them the
retribution of their hypocritical deeds.

 The verse says:

***“And do not be like those who got out from their homes boastfully and
to show off to men and barring from Allah’s way, and verily Allah
encompasses what they do.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 48
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ زَيَّنَ لَهُمُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَعْمَالَهُمْ وَقَالَ لَا غَالِبَ
لَكُمُ الْيَوْمَ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَإِنِّي جَارٌ لَكُمْ ۖ فَلَمَّا
تَرَاءَتِ الْفِئَتَانِ نَكَصَ عَلَىٰ عَقِبَيْهِ وَقَالَ إِنِّي بَرِيءٌ
مِنْكُمْ إِنِّي أَرَىٰ مَا لَا تَرَوْنَ إِنِّي أَخَافُ اللَّهَ ۚ
وَاللَّهُ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**48*****. “And (remember) when Satan made their deeds fair seeming to
them and said: ‘Today none of people shall overcome you, and I will be a
protector for you.’ But when the two hosts sighted each other, he turned
upon his heels, and said: ‘Indeed I am quit of you. Verily I see what
you do not see. Surely I fear Allah, and Allah is severe in
retribution’.”***

 Here, in this verse, another scene of the Battle of Badr, which
happened on the day of war, has been illustrated.

 At first, it implies that on that day, Satan made their deeds Seem
decorous to them, so that they would think of their actions
optimistically and became encouraged by them. The verse says:

***“And (remember) when Satan made their deeds fair seeming to
them...”***

 Satan's decoration is such that, by the way of stimulating lusts,
desires, and indecent qualities in him, he makes the feature of man's
actions so fair seeming to his eyes that he will terribly be attracted
to it. Satan tempts them that today they have so many fighters with a
lot of arms, so much so that none of people can overcome them, and they
are an undefeating army. The verse says:

***“...and said: ‘Today none of people shall overcome you...”***

 Then Satan adds that besides that, he is also their neighbor and so
near to them that, at the necessary time, like a faithful sympathetic
neighbor, he will withhold no support from them. The verse continues
saying:,

***“...and I will be a protector for you.'...”***

 But when the two armies encountered each other and the angels came to
help the army of Unity, the infidels observed the power and
steadfastness of the Muslims. Then, Satan turned back and shouted at
them, saying that he hated them (the infidels). The verse says:

***“...But when the two hosts sighted each other, he turned upon his
heels, and said:, Indeed I am quit of you...”***

 Satan brought forth two reasons for his awful turning, back. The first
reason was that he said:

***“...Verily I see what you do not see...”***

 By this phrase, Satan meant that he saw the signs of triumph in the
features of the believing Muslims, as well as the effects of Allah’s
support and angels' helps among them.

 Satan added another thing, saying that he was afraid of the painful
punishment of Allah in the scene which he saw very near. The verse says:

***“...surely I fear Allah...”***

 Allah's punishment is not such a simple thing that anybody can resist
before it, but it is certain that His retribution is sharp and severe.
The verse says:

***“...and Allah is severe in retribution '.”***


