Section 7: Enemy Weakened by Allah
==================================

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 49
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ يَقُولُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ غَرَّ
هَٰؤُلَاءِ دِينُهُمْ ۗ وَمَنْ يَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ فَإِنَّ
اللَّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**49*****. “(Remember) when the hypocrites said, and those in whose
hearts were a disease: ‘Their religion has deluded them, But whoever
puts his trust in Allah, then Allah is indeed the Mighty, the Wise.”***

 The persons who apparently express that they have believed in Islam but
inwardly they hesitate about it are those who carry a disease in their
hearts. The verse says:

***“(Remember) when the hypocrites said, and those in whose hearts was a
disease:...”***

 Some commentators have said that there were several young men from
Quraysh in Mecca who embraced Islam, and then, their fathers put them in
prison. They were: Qays-ibn- Walid-ibn-Muqayrah,
Ali-ibn-'Ummayit-ibn-Khalf, -ibn- Munbih, Harith-ibn-Zam'ah, and
Abu-Qays-ibn-Fakihat-ibn- Muqayrah.

 As soon as they saw the small number of the Muslims in war, they said
that those people were proud of their religion and, disregard the large
crowd of pagans there, they had been deceived by the Prophet (S) and
they came to fight.

***“...‘Their religion has deluded them.’...”***

 Then Allah states the following phrase, meaning that they themselves
were deluded. The verse says:

***“...But whoever puts his trust in Allah, then Allah is indeed the
Mighty, the Wise.”***

 That is, whoever delivers his affairs to Allah (s.w.t) and, trusts in
Him while he tries to please Him by his good behaviour, Allah (s.w.t)
helps him and prepares the means of victory for him. The reason is that
Allah is Mighty and Wise, and the one who refuges to Him will be secured
by His mightness and wisdom.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verses 50-51
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذْ يَتَوَفَّى الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا ۙ الْمَلَائِكَةُ
يَضْرِبُونَ وُجُوهَهُمْ وَأَدْبَارَهُمْ وَذُوقُوا عَذَابَ الْحَرِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ لَيْسَ بِظَلَّامٍ
لِلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**50*****. “And had you seen when the angles take away the souls of
those who disbelieve, smiting their faces and their backs (and saying):
‘Taste the punishment of the burning’.***

**51*****. “This is for what your hands have sent ahead, and that Allah
is not unjust unto the servants.”***

 The verse indicates that were you to see when the angles take away the
infidels, striking their faces and their backs, you would surprise. The
objective meaning is the dead bodies of those who were killed in the
Battle of Badr. The verse says:

***“And had you seen when the angles take away the souls of those who
disbelieve, smiting their faces and their backs (and saying): ‘Taste the
punishment of the burning’.”***

 It has been said that a man came to the Prophet of Islam (S) and said
that he had seen a trace on the back of Abu Jahl which was like the
trace of a horseshoe. The Prophet (S) said that it had been the trace of
the smiting of the angles.

 Mujahid had narrated that once a man told the Prophet (S) that as soon
as he decided to smite one of the polytheists, he fell dead The Prophet
(S) said that the angels had attacked the pagan before he started.

 The angels tell the infidels that after this punishment there is
another chastisement waiting them which is more burning and more
blazing.

 Some commentators have said that, on the day of the Battle of Badr, the
angels had some arms made of iron when they struck them on the
polytheists, a fire burned their wounds, and the purpose of the phrase
***‘taste the punishment of the burning’*** is this very meaning.

 This retribution they are involved with is for the evil manner they
showed from themselves in this life.

 The reason why the verse says ***‘This is for what your, hands have
sent ahead’***, is that most of actions are done by the hands. The
purpose here is their crimes, faithlessness, and sins. The verse says

***“This is for what your hands have sent ahead, and that Allah is not
unjust unto the servants.”***

 Allah (s.w.t) punishes the servants as much as they are deserving to,
not more than that.

 However, it is clearly understood from this verse that Allah does not
punish anyone without having any sin, or for the sin another person has
committed, because it is unjust So, Allah seriously negates cruelty and
injustice from Himself, when He, says

***“...and that Allah is not unjust unto the servants.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 52
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَدَأْبِ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ ۙ وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ ۚ كَفَرُوا
بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ فَأَخَذَهُمُ اللَّهُ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
قَوِيٌّ شَدِيدُ الْعِقَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**52*****. “(O' Prophet! the manner of pagans of your time is also) like
the manner of Pharaoh's clan and those before them, they disbelieved in
Allah's Signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. Verily Allah is
strong, severe in retribution.”***

 In this verse and it’s following couple of verses, the Quran points to
a constant Divine way of manner about clans and nations.

 At first it addresses the Prophet (S) and implies that the style and
the state of the pagans of Quraysh are like that of Pharaoh’s clan and
the people who were before them. Those people rejected the Signs of
Allah, therefore He punished them for their sins. The verse says:

***“(O' Prophet! the manner of pagans of your time is also) like the
manner of Pharaoh's clan and those before them, they disbelieved in
Allah's Signs, so Allah seized them for their sins...”***

 It is certain that Allah (s.w.t) is Mighty, Omnipotent, and His
retribution is severe. The verse says:

***“...Verily Allah is strong, severe in retribution.”***

 Thus, there were not only the Quraysh and polytheists and idolaters of
Mecca who rejected the signs of Allah and showed obstinacy before the
Truth and disputed with the true leaders of humanity, and then they were
involved with the retribution of their sins, but also this is a
permanent Divine Law.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 53
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّ اللَّهَ لَمْ يَكُ مُغَيِّرًا نِعْمَةً أَنْعَمَهَا
عَلَىٰ قَوْمٍ حَتَّىٰ يُغَيِّرُوا مَا بِأَنْفُسِهِمْ ۙ وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ
سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**53*****. “That is because Allah does not change a blessing He has
bestowed on a people unless they change what is in their own selves, and
Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”***

 Then, by mentioning the basic root of the subject, the, Qur'an makes
this matter more clear. It implies that all of these are for that Allah
does not alter whatever blessing He bestows on a people unless those
people themselves alter their own conditions, and, of course Allah is
aware of everything. The verse says:

***“That is because Allah does not change a blessing He has bestowed on
a people unless they change what is in their own selves, and Allah is
All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”***

 In other words, the graces and blessings of Allah (s.w.t) are infinite,
common, and general, but they reach people due to their eligibilities,
suitability and competencies.

 When people utilize the blessings of Allah (s.w.t) as a means for
reaching unto their perfection, and show gratitude for them, which is
the correct usage of them, Allah makes His blessings fixed and
increased.

 But, when these blessings are used as a means for disobedience,
injustice, mischief, and ingratitude, He may take them back or changes
them into some afflictions and calamities.

 Thus, alteration of the bounties and blessings always depend on our own
selves, else the blessings and merits of Allah are ceaseless.

 An Islamic tradition indicates that nothing can change the Divine
blessings like what injustice does, since Allah hears the complaints of
the oppressed.[^1]

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 54
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَدَأْبِ آلِ فِرْعَوْنَ ۙ وَالَّذِينَ مِنْ قَبْلِهِمْ ۚ كَذَّبُوا
بِآيَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ فَأَهْلَكْنَاهُمْ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَأَغْرَقْنَا آلَ
فِرْعَوْنَ ۚ وَكُلٌّ كَانُوا ظَالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**54*****. “Like the manner of Pharaoh's clan and those before them,
they denied the Signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them for their
sins, and We drowned pharaoh's 'clan, and all of them were unjust.”***

 Following this aim, the Qur'an refers again to the state of some rich
persons like the clan of Pharaoh and some groups of people from among
former nations. It implies that the manner and worship of idolaters,
concerning the change of blessings and facing with the severe
retributions, is like the manner and circumstances of the people of
Pharaoh and the people before them. The verse says:

***“Like the manner of Pharaoh's clan and those before them...”***

 They also rejected the Signs of their Lord which were sent down with
the aim of their guidance, reinforcement, and felicity

***“...they denied the Signs of their Lord...”.***

 Therefore, the Lord destroyed them, too, for their own sins. The verse
continues saying:

***“...so We destroyed them for their sins...”***

 And Allah drowned Pharaoh's clan in the waves of the sea. The verse
remarks:

***“...and We drowned Pharaoh's clan...”***

 All of those people were unjust and cruel, both to themselves and to
others. The verse concludes:

***“...and all of them were unjust.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 55
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَهُمْ لَا
يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**55*****. “Verily the worst of animals in Allah's sight are those who
disbelieve, so they will not have faith.”***

 In verse No. 22 from the current Surah, the meaning of the Qur'anic
phrase /sarr-ad-dawabb/ (the worst of animals) was introduced as
***‘those who do not contemplate’***, while here, in this verse, they
are defined as ***‘those who disbelieve’***. The verse says:

***“Verily the worst of animals in Allah's sight are those who
disbelieve, so they will not have faith.”***

 So, the origin of infidelity is the absence of right intellect. The
Qur’an considers the feature of humanity of man in wisdom and belief, so
that if he does not contemplate or paves the way of infidelity, he will
be out of the circle of humanity. Thus, a true human, indeed, is the one
who is wise and has Faith.

 It is possible that a disbeliever has a title and rank with the people
of his society, but he is ‘the worst of animals’ in the sight of Allah.

 It is cited in some commentary books that the referent of a concept of
this verse is the Jews, but this idea does not harm the generality of
the concept of the verse.

 However, those who hear the call and invitation of prophets, and do not
show any positive reflection to it, are ***‘the worst of animals’.***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 56
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتَ مِنْهُمْ ثُمَّ يَنْقُضُونَ عَهْدَهُمْ فِي كُلِّ
مَرَّةٍ وَهُمْ لَا يَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**56*****. “Those with whom you made a covenant, then they break their
covenant every time, and they are not pious.”***

 The agreement of the Jews with the Prophet (S) was that they should not
help pagans and not try to hurt the Muslims. But those groups of the
Jews broke their promise and for the Battle of Khandaq they helped
pagans by selling them arms.

 Therefore, breach of promise is not consistent with humanity.

 But breach of promise is the style of infidels. Faithfulness and
chivalry are necessary to piety. The verse says:

***“Those with whom you made a covenant, then they break their covenant
every time, and they are not pious.”***

 Some Islamic traditions indicate that he who breaks promise is a
hypocrite, although he establishes prayers and observes the fast.[^2]

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 57
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِمَّا تَثْقَفَنَّهُمْ فِي الْحَرْبِ فَشَرِّدْ بِهِمْ مَنْ
خَلْفَهُمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَذَّكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**57*****. “So, when you confront them in war, (by punishing them)
scatter the ones behind them so that they might be admonished.”***

 The Qur’anic term /taθqafannahum/ is derived from the Arabic word
/θaqifa/ which means ‘to understand something quickly and carefully’.
Then the word mentioned in the above-mentioned verse means that ‘when
you encounter infidels in war, you should face them very vigilantly in
order not to be seized unawares’.

 The Arabic word /tasrid/ means ‘to cause insecurity, anxiety’ and ‘to
disperse’. Thus, the phrase means that you should attack the enemy in a
manner and with a martial plan that their supporters out of the scene,
and the forces behind them, become so terrified that they do not think
of invasion and continuation of supporting them anymore.

 The verse says:

***“So, when you confront them in war, (by punishing them) scatter the
ones behind them so that they might be admonished.”***

 Islam is a religion of kindness and mercy, yet it does not tolerate
treachery, breach of promise, and disturbance of the regularity and
security. Then, infidels should be punished so violently that they
relinquish attacking you again.

[^1]: At- Tafsir-ul-Furqan

[^2]: At- Tafsir-ul-Burhan


