Section 8: Muslims Should be Prepared to Meet the Enemy in Any Number
=====================================================================

Surah Al-Anfal – Verses 58-59
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِمَّا تَخَافَنَّ مِنْ قَوْمٍ خِيَانَةً فَانْبِذْ إِلَيْهِمْ عَلَىٰ
سَوَاءٍ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُحِبُّ الْخَائِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا سَبَقُوا ۚ إِنَّهُمْ لَا
يُعْجِزُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**58*****. “And if you fear treachery from a people, break off (the
covenant) with them in like manner. Verily Allah does not like the
treacherous.”***  
**59*****. “And let not those who disbelieve suppose that they have
excelled (the Muslims): verily they shall not weaken (you).”***

 The Qur'anic term /’anbio/is derived from /nabaoa/ which means ‘to
throw’, here it means: ‘then throw their covenant back to them’. That
is, from before they should announce and cancel the covenant so that
they would not be seized unawares and you, too, would not have acted
cowardly.

 The holy phrase /’ala sawa’ /either means ‘behaving correspondingly’,
viz. in the same manner that they think of plotting and breaching
promise, you may cancel the covenant, too. Or, it means the clear
canceling of the -covenant, or having a just behaviour toward the
enemy.[^1]

 The verse is about the situation where there are some evidences upon
the enemy's plot for invasion. So, in order to avoid it, precedence in
canceling the covenant should be performed.

 The performance of canceling the covenant is just when behaving
correspondingly. The verse says:

***“And if you fear treachery from a people, break off (the covenant)
with them in like manner. Verily Allah does not like the
treacherous.”***

 And take the control of everything so vigorously that infidels do not
think that they have preceded you. The verse; says:

***“And let not those who disbelieve suppose that they, have excelled
(the Muslims):...”***

 But, infidels cannot gain anything through treachery. The verse
continues saying:

***“...verily they shall not weaken (you).”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 60
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَعِدُّوا لَهُمْ مَا اسْتَطَعْتُمْ مِنْ قُوَّةٍ وَمِنْ رِبَاطِ
الْخَيْلِ تُرْهِبُونَ بِهِ عَدُوَّ اللَّهِ وَعَدُوَّكُمْ وَآخَرِينَ
مِنْ دُونِهِمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَهُمُ اللَّهُ يَعْلَمُهُمْ ۚ وَمَا
تُنْفِقُوا مِنْ شَيْءٍ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ يُوَفَّ إِلَيْكُمْ
وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**60*****. “And prepare against them whatever you can of (military)
power and of war-horses, to frighten thereby the enemy of Allah, and
your enemy, and others besides them, whom you do not know (but) Allah
knows them. And whatever things you spend in the way of Allah shall be
repaid to you in full, and you will not be dealt with unjustly.”***

### Increase of War Power and Its Aim!

 Adapting to the former instruction upon Islamic Struggle, in this verse
the Qur'an points to an important principal which must be observed by
Muslims in different ages. This principal is the necessity of enough war
preparation against the enemy.

 At first, it says:

***“And prepare against them whatever you can of (military) power and of
war-horses...”***

 That is, do not wait until the enemy attacks you and then make
yourselves prepare to fight. You should be prepared enough from before
to stand against the probable attacks of the enemy. The concept of the
verse is so vast that it quitely adapts to any time and any place.

 If this great Islamic instruction which says: ***“And prepare against
them whatever you can of (military) power...”*** is preached as a common
motto everywhere and all Muslims apply it in their own lives, whether
they are young or old, educated or uneducated, writer, or speaker,
soldier or officer, farmer or merchant, it will be enough to make amends
their retardation.

 Practical life of the Prophet of Allah (S) as well as the great leaders
of Islam, also shows that they never neglected any opportunity of
fighting against their enemies.

 They would not disregard any matter, small and great, about supplying
arms and personals, encouraging their soldiers, choosing a suitable
camping-place, deciding on a proper time for attacking the enemy, and
utilizing all kinds of military methods.

 Next to the statement of this instruction, the Qur'an points to the
logical and manly aim of this subject. It implies that the aim is not
that you mow the nations of the world, and even the people of your own
community, by kinds of distinctive arms.

 You should not spoil the towns and lands, or take in possession the
properties and lands of others, or expand the principals of slavery and
colonialism in the world. But, the aim is that by these means you
frighten the enemy of Allah (s.w.t) and those who are the enemy of
yours. The verse continues saying:

***“...to frighten thereby the enemy of Allah, and your enemy,...”***

 The reason of it is that usually most of the enemies of the truth do
not pay attention to the logical statements and human principals. They
do not understand anything but the logic of force.

 Then, the Qur’an adds that in addition to these enemies, whom you know,
you have some other enemies whom you do not know, but Allah knows them,
and with the increase of the military preparation in yourselves they may
fear and return back. The verse says:

***“...and others besides them, whom you do not know (but) Allah knows
them...”***

 This statement contains an instruction for the Muslims of today, too.
It implies that Muslims should not lay emphasis only on their known
enemies and confine their preparation to the limit of struggling before
them. They should also consider their probable enemies who are in
potency, and prepare the utmost power and necessary forces they can.

 Finally, the Qur’an points to another important matter. It implies that
preparing power, forces, enough military; instruments and different
means of defense need a financial source. Therefore, it commands Muslims
to supply this capital through a general cooperation.

 They must know that whatever they spend in this way they have spent it
in the way of Allah, and it will not be decreased. The verse says:

***“...And whatever things you spend in the way of Allah shall be repaid
to you in full...”***

 Equal to all that they give and, even more than that, will be repaid to
them so that no injustice will be dealt with them. The verse ends as
follows:

***“...and you will not be dealt with unjustly.”***

### Explanations

 This verse is an instruction upon the Muslims to be prepared before the
enemy from all points of view. They are commanded to supply any kind of
arms and possibilities, to utilize all means and methods of propagation,
even mottoes and poems that may cause the fright of infidels from the
military power of Muslims.

 When the Prophet (S) was informed that a new weapon had been made in
Yemen, he sent someone to Yemen to supply it.

 It is narrated from the Prophet (S) that by means of an ‘arrow’ three
persons will be sent into Paradise: its constructor, the one who
prepares it, and the person who, throws (it toward the enemy of
Allah).[^2]

 In Islam, financial winning and losing in the races of shooting, and
horsemanship, have been counted permissible in order that military
preparation might be supplied.

 It is not such that everywhere logic and discussion are enough and
effective, but sometimes enforcement and power should come in the scene,
too.

 That is why Muslims should always supply the most advanced military
possibilities for the defense in such a manner that nothing may be
neglected, whether they are of the kinds of political and material
power, or the possibilities of propaganda and precautions.

 In Islam, all people are soldiers and general mobilization is
necessary. It is also necessary to cast terror into the hearts of; the
enemies. A tradition indicates that even by tinging the beard do
frighten the enemy, so that they do not say the Islamic troop is
old.[^3]

 However, the war-horses are those horses which are kept ready and fed
sufficiently in stables, not those which are left free.

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 61
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ جَنَحُوا لِلسَّلْمِ فَاجْنَحْ لَهَا وَتَوَكَّلْ عَلَى اللَّهِ ۚ
إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***61. “And if they incline to peace, then you (too) incline to it and
put your trust in Allah; verily He is the All-Hearing, the
All-Knowing.”***

 This verse discusses about peace with the enemy and it makes this fact
more clear. It says:

***“And if they incline to peace, then you (too) incline to it…”***

 And, since, at the time of signing the treaty of peace, men often
involve with doubts and hesitations, it commands the Prophet (S) that he
does not hesitate in accepting the suggestion of peace when its
conditions are logical, wisely, and justly. He is ordered to trust in
Allah, because He both hears their debates and is aware of their
intentions.

 The verse continues saying:

***“...and put your trust in Allah; verily He is the All- Hearing, the
All-Knowing.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 62
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ يُرِيدُوا أَنْ يَخْدَعُوكَ فَإِنَّ حَسْبَكَ اللَّهُ ۚ هُوَ
الَّذِي أَيَّدَكَ بِنَصْرِهِ وَبِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “And if they intend to deceive you, Allah is indeed sufficient
for you. It is He Who strengthened you with His help and with (the
support of) the believers.”***

 If the leader of Muslims is certain of the enemy's trickery around the
peace, the situation changes. But, in the case of the existence of
probable of good intention, it should be vigilantly accepted.

 Some Islamic traditions indicate that ‘the Prophet's support performed
by the believers’ has been rendered into his support performed by Hadrat
Ali (as)

 Also Ibn-i- ‘Asakir narrates from ‘Abu-Hurayrah that, it is written on
the ‘Arsh:

*“There is no good but I, (and) there is no partner for Me. Muhammad (S)
is My servant and My Messenger. I supported him by Ali”.*

 This is the same thing that Allah says in this verse.[^4]

 The verse says:

***“And if they intend to deceive you, Allah is indeed sufficient for
you. It is He who strengthened you with His help and with (the support
of) the believers.”***

 It is understood from this verse that Muslims should accept the
suggestion of peace in order that they would not be introduced as ‘the
seekers of war’, but they must be vigilant not to be deceived.

 If we do our duties accordingly, we must not be afraid of difficulties,
since Allah solves the difficulties.

***“...It is He Who strengthened you with His help and with (the support
of) the believers.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 63
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِهِمْ ۚ لَوْ أَنْفَقْتَ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ
جَمِيعًا مَا أَلَّفْتَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِهِمْ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ أَلَّفَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**63*****. “And He caused affection between their hearts. Had you spent
all that is in the earth, you could not have caused affection between
their hearts, but Allah caused affection between them; verily He is the
Mighty, the Wise.”***

 The verse, addressing the Prophet (S) implies that these sincere
believers who have gathered around you, and refrain no sacrifice to
offer you, formerly were some scattered people, enemy with each other.

 Then Allah showered the light of guidance upon them and created love
and affection between them so intensively that if you spent the whole
wealth from over the earth you could not wipe out the grudges of the Age
of Ignorance from their hearts.

 But, through the way of good device and by Islam, Allah created love
and affection between them. The deeds of Allah are all done wisely and
for common good.

 This very thing is one of the great miracles that the Prophet of Allah
(S) was sent to a people that, before Islam, if one of them was given a
slap in the face, for its sake the fire of some fights would be lit and
so much blood would be shed.

 But, through the way of Faith, all those enmities and deeds done
contumaciously disappeared and love and understanding substituted them.
They became so faithful that they would not refuse killing father, son
and brother for the sake of their Faith. Allah announces that He has
done this work Himself.

 The holy verse says:

***“And He caused affection between their hearts. Had you spent all that
is in the earth, you could not have caused affection between their
hearts, but Allah caused affection between them; verily He is the
Mighty, the Wise.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 64
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ حَسْبُكَ اللَّهُ وَمَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ مِنَ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**64*****. “O Prophet! Allah suffices you, and the believers who follow
you.”***

 A group of the Jews of Bani-Qurayzah and Bani-Nadir falsely suggested
to help the Prophet (S). The above holy verse was revealed saying that
the believers were sufficient for him.

 In ‘Fada'il-us-Sahabah’, a book written by Hafiz-‘Abu- Na’im, a famous
Muslim scholar, it is cited that the objective meaning of ‘the
believers’, mentioned in this verse, is Ali- ibn-Abl-Talib (as)[^5]

 Allah, the Prophet (S) and the believers are wholly the basis of the
Islamic system. In an Islamic society, the leader is appointed with the
Divine criterions. His law is originated from revelation, and people are
obedient to the leader and the law.

 Obedience accompanied with Faith is a value, while obeying the leader
without having Faith, or having Faith without following the leader is
useless. The verse says:

***“O Prophet! Allah suffices you, and the believers who follow you.”***

[^1]: Al-Mizan

[^2]: Tafsir-i-Furqan, narrated from Ad-Dur-ul-Manthur.

[^3]: At- Tafsir-ul-Furqan, narrated from Man-la- Yahduruhul-Faqih

[^4]: Tafsir-ul-Furqan, taken from Durr-ul-Manthur, vol. 3, p. 199

[^5]: Al-Qadir, vol. 3, p. 51


