Section 9: Muslims Should be Prepared For All Eventualities
===========================================================

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 65
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ حَرِّضِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ عَلَى الْقِتَالِ ۚ إِنْ
يَكُنْ مِنْكُمْ عِشْرُونَ صَابِرُونَ يَغْلِبُوا مِائَتَيْنِ ۚ وَإِنْ
يَكُنْ مِنْكُمْ مِائَةٌ يَغْلِبُوا أَلْفًا مِنَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَا يَفْقَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**65*****. “O Prophet! Urge on the believers to fight. If there be of
you twenty patient (steadfast men), they shall overcome two hundred, and
if there be of you a hundred (steadfast ones), they shall overcome a
thousand of those who disbelieve, for they are a people who do not
understand.”***

 This verse negates the equilibrium of forces in figure. It emphasizes
on the spirit, Faith and perseverance with patience, so, in order that
no one supposes that the triumph of twenty fighters before two hundred
ones is an exaggeration, it repeats that one hundred strivers may win
one thousand fighters, if they are believers.

 In the early battles of Islam, there has never been any statistic
equilibrium. In the Battle of Badr, there were three hundred and
thirteen believers in front of one thousand infidels. In Uhud, seven
hundred Muslims fought against three thousand fighters.

 In the Battle of Khandaq, three thousand strivers struggled before ten
thousand enemies. In Mutah, there were ten thousand Muslims in front of
one hundred thousand pagans.

 One of the duties of an Islamic leader is to encourage people to Holy
Struggle. The function of the statement of the commander before military
activities is very effective.

 Therefore, in wars and Holy Struggles, propagation is necessary. The
verse says:

***“O prophet! Urge on the believers to fight...”***

 The definite factor in the battlefields of Muslims is Faith and
perseverance with patience, not the number of strivers alone.

 That was why, at the beginning, under the command of Holy Struggle, the
army of Islam, which was one tenth of that of the enemy, won the battle.
The verse says:

***“...If there be of you twenty patient (steadfast men), they shall
overcome two hundred, and if there be of you a hundred (steadfast ones),
they shall overcome a thousand of those who disbelieve...”***

 The soldier of Islam should have these three qualities: Faith,
patience, and vigilance. The Qur'an qualifies ‘the believers’ with
patience, while about the disbelievers, the verse says:

***“...for they are a people who do not understand.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 66
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْآنَ خَفَّفَ اللَّهُ عَنْكُمْ وَعَلِمَ أَنَّ فِيكُمْ ضَعْفًا ۚ
فَإِنْ يَكُنْ مِنْكُمْ مِائَةٌ صَابِرَةٌ يَغْلِبُوا مِائَتَيْنِ ۚ
وَإِنْ يَكُنْ مِنْكُمْ أَلْفٌ يَغْلِبُوا أَلْفَيْنِ بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ ۗ
وَاللَّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**66*****. “Now Allah has lightened it for you, and He knows that there
is weakness in you. So, if there be of you a hundred patient (steadfast
men), they will overcome two hundred; and if there be of you a thousand,
they will overcome two thousand by the leave of Allah; and Allah is with
the patient (steadfast ones).”***

 The purpose of ‘weakness’, mentioned in the verse, is weakness in Faith
and spiritualities, because the troops of Islam had not become decreased
from the point of physical strength and number when they defeated.

 In this verse, and the verse before it, the Qur'an points to three
spiritual aspects which are the factors of victory, the absence of which
is a preparation for defeat; they are: patience, Faith, and vigilance.

 Thus, the main function in victory is by the leave and Will of Allah,
else, in the Battle of Hunayn, where there were so many fighters Muslims
defeated and ran away.

 The verse says:

***“Now Allah has lightened it for you, and He knows that there is
weakness in you. So, If there be of you a hundred patient (steadfast
men), they will overcome two hundred; and if there be of you a thousand,
they will overcome two thousand by the leave of Allah...”***

 However, the patients are loved by Allah and they are in His refuge.
The verse ends as follows:

***“...and Allah is with the patient (steadfast ones).”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verse 67
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ لِنَبِيٍّ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُ أَسْرَىٰ حَتَّىٰ يُثْخِنَ فِي
الْأَرْضِ ۚ تُرِيدُونَ عَرَضَ الدُّنْيَا وَاللَّهُ يُرِيدُ الْآخِرَةَ
ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**67*****. “It is not (fit) for any prophet to have captives unless he
has thoroughly triumphed in the land. You desire the transitory world,
while Allah desires (for you) the Hereafter; and Allah is the Mighty the
Wise.”***

 Allah has allowed no prophet to take the members of the enemy as
captives and to keep them as pledge in order to take money from them, or
hold them under obligation and let them go; unless that he exaggerates
in killing the heathens an destroying them so that it becomes as a
warning to others and that he gains authority. The verse says:

***“It is not (fit) for any prophet to have captives unless he has
thoroughly triumphed in the land...”***

 The next phrase of the verse addresses the Muslims, not the Prophet (S)
because their desire was that they could take money from the captives
and let them go. The purpose is that, in the first battle, i.e. the
Battle of Badr, before gaining authority on the earth, they took ransom.

 The Arabic phrase: /’arad-ad-dunya/ means the property of the world
which is something vanishable. The verse continues saying:

***“...you desire the transitory world...”***

 You pursue the wealth of the world while Allah desires the rewards of
the Hereafter for you. The verse says:

***“...while Allah desires (for you) the Hereafter...”***

 The helpers of Allah will never be defeated, and verily Allah acts
wisely; then, do perform whatever He commands you, so that you enjoy the
help of Allah. The verse ends:

***“...and Allah is the Mighty the Wise.”***

Surah Al-Anfal – Verses 68-69
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْلَا كِتَابٌ مِنَ اللَّهِ سَبَقَ لَمَسَّكُمْ فِيمَا أَخَذْتُمْ
عَذَابٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلُوا مِمَّا غَنِمْتُمْ حَلَالًا طَيِّبًا ۚ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۚ
إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**68*****. “Had it not been for a prior ordinance from Allah, there
would have fallen you a great chastisement for what you had taken to
(improperly).”***

**69*****. “Eat then of what you have acquired in war as booty, (which
is) lawful and good; and be in awe of Allah; verily Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.”***

 Once more in this verse the Qur’an reprimands and scorns those who put
into danger the important social interests for their own fleeting
financial gains. It says:

***“Had it not been for a prior ordinance from Allah, there would have
fallen you a great chastisement for what you had taken to
(improperly).”***

 But, as it was mentioned in some other verses of the Qur’an before,
Allah’s way of treatment is that, at first He explains the ordinances,
then there will be His punishment for the disobedient of them.

 In the second verse, the Qur’an refers to another ordinance of the
ordinances concerning captives of war, and points to the question of
ransom.

 After the time when the Battle of Badr was ended and some captives were
taken, a group of Ansar (the Helpers) told the Prophet (S) that they had
killed seventy pagans and had kept seventy of them in captive, all of
whom were from his tribe and, in fact, they were his captives.

 They asked the Prophet (S) to remit those captives to them so that they
could take ransom from them for their emancipation. When the Prophet (S)
was waiting for the descent of revelation in this regard, the verse was
revealed and the permission of taking ‘ransom’ for their emancipation
was issued.

 However, the verse lets Muslims use this spoil of the war, (i.e. the
amount they used to take for emancipating captives). It says:

***“Eat then of what you have acquired in war as booty, (which is)
lawful and good...”***

 This sentence may have a vast meaning, and, besides the subject of
‘ransom’, it encompasses other booties, too.

 Then, it commands them to be Godwary and to avoid disobeying Allah. The
verse continues saying:

***“...and be in awe of Allah;”***

 This meaning refers to the fact that these kinds of booties being
lawful should not cause that the aim of strugglers in battlefields to be
gathering spoils of war or taking some captives for ransom, and if
formerly they had such disgraceful intentions in mind, they must leave
them out now.

 At the end of the verse, the Qur'an promises remition and forgiveness
about the past when it says:

***“...verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***


