Surah At-Tawbah, Chapter 9
==========================

**Surah At-Tawbah or Surah Barā’at,**

**No. 9 (129 verses)**

The Feature of Surah At-Tawbah
------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful***

 This Surah, which is the ninth Surah of the Qur’ān, contains 129 verses
and has been revealed in the ninth year A.H. (anno Hejira). Some parts
of the Surah were revealed before the Battle of Tabūk, some parts during
the Battle, and other parts were revealed after it.

 Regarding the Islamic literature, the most recorded known names of this
Surah are ‘At-Tawbah’ and ‘Al-Barā’at’. Since the subject of repentance
of man and the return of the grace of Allah has repeatedly been referred
to in this Surah, it has been called ‘At-Tawbah’, and for the fact that
the Surah begins with the declaration of immunity towards idolaters, it
has been named ‘Al-Barā’at’.

 The subject matters of this Surah are mostly related to the subject
matters of Surah Al-’Anfāl. For this matter, some commentators,
considering this Surah the continuation of that one, have said that,
because of this circumstance, Surah At-Tawbah has not needed to have the
holy phrase Bismillāh-ir-Rahmān-ir-Rahim.

 But, according to Sh‘iah’s belief, the traditions which have been
received from Ahlul-Bayt (as) denote that this Surah is independent and
the absence of Bismillāh at its beginning is for its wrathful tone due
to the idolaters. The holy phrase Bismillāh is an indication of mercy
and security, while this Surah has been commenced with the declaration
of immunity towards perjured idolaters.

 For the importance of this Surah, the word of the Messenger of Allah
(S) is sufficient when he said:

*“The Suras Al-Barā’t and Tauhid were revealed accompanied with seventy
thousand rows of the angels.”*


