Section 1: Immunity Declared
============================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 1
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَرَآءَةٌ مِنَ اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُم مِنَ
الْمُشْرِكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***1. “(This is a declaration of) immunity from Allah and His Messenger
towards those of the polytheists with whom you made covenant.”***

### Some Points Necessary to Be Noted

1- In the Islamic traditions, the name of this Surah has been introduced
as ‘Barā’at’ and ‘Tawbah’. This fact makes it clear that this Surah is
not a part of Surah Al-’Anfāl, but it is an independent one.

2- The content of this Surah has a tone of indignation. For this reason
it has begun without the holy phrase Bismillāh. By this sign we
understand that the holy phrase Bismillāh-ir-Rahmān-ir-Rahim at the
beginning of every Surah belongs to that very Surah and is a part of it.
Thus, this holy phrase has not been located as a ceremonial phrase at
the beginning of every Surah.

3- The declaration of Barā’at (immunity) was for the infidels’ perjury
which has been referred to in verses 7 and 8 of the current Surah. In
Islam, the general law is that promises should be fulfilled, and as long
as the opposite party is faithful to the treaty, it should be kept, too.

 Moreover, in that circumstance, it was for the reason of their weakness
that the Muslims had to accept that treaty, else, the desire of the
Muslims was the destruction of idolism as rapidly as possible.

### Some Details Upon These Verses

 In the eighth year A.H., Mecca was conquered, but the pagans still
continued coming into Meccan to perform their worshipping rites which
was, of course, a mixture of superstitions and aberrations.

 Among their customs it was seen that they used to give in charity the
clothing with which they had circumambulated. Once it happened that a
woman desired to perform some more circumambulations after finishing her
first circumambulation, but, since she had no more clothes with her, she
had to circumambulate nakedly while people were watching her.

 That circumstance was not tolerable for the Prophet (S) and the
Muslims, who were in a very high degree of power. The Prophet (S) was
waiting for the command of Allah until when this Surah was revealed in
Medina.

 The Messenger of Allah (S) commissioned Abū-Bakr to convey some verses
of it unto the people of Mecca. The Prophet (S) chose him, maybe, for
the reason that he was an old man and people were not sensitive to him.

 But, after Abū-Bakr had left Medina towards Mecca, Angel Gobriel
appeared to the Holy Prophet (S) and brought a Message from Allah
denoting that the recital of those verses of the Qur’ān should be
conveyed either by the Holy Prophet himself or by the one who is of him.
As soon as the divine command was received, the Prophet (S) called
Hadrat Ali (as) and instructed him to do it. He said:

*“I am his and he is mine.”*

 It was so that, in the midst of the way, Ali (as) took away the verses
from him and went into Mecca where he recited them unto the pagans.

 The details of the recitation of the verses of this Surah by Ali (as)
are recorded in the books of the Sunnites, too. Some Prophet’s
companions such as: Abū-Bakr himself, Ali (as), Ibn-‘Abbās,
‘Anas-ibn-Mālik and Jābir-ibn-‘Abdillah’Ansāri have narrated them and
quoted them inside a lot of Islamic sources.[^1]

 Some of the Sunnite writers have tried to pretend this fact as an
ordindary matter so that it would not be counted as a kind of privilege
for Hadrat Ali (as).

 They have considered the mission of recitation of the verses given to
Ali (as) as a manner of complying with his request, not as a privilege
for him; while for complying with any one’s request, a safe mission
might be given to him, not the recitation of the verses of declaration
of Barā’at (immunity) from pagans, in the region of infidelity and by a
person who had killed many of the idolaters in different wars and where
a lot of the people were carrying his hatred in their hearts.

 When Allah commanded Moses (as) to go toward Pharaoh in order to invite
him to Unity, he (as) said:

***“My Lord! Verily I killed one of them, so I fear lest they should
slay me;”***.[^2]

 Then he asked Him to send his brother Aaron with him as an aider. But,
Ali (as), who had killed a large number of the chiefs of pagans, went
alone towards them and recited the verses of immunity unto them with the
utmost calmness. This event happened in a sensitive place, i.e. Muna,
where the site of the last lapidation was located near-by.

 The subjects which were revealed and were announced unto pagans by Ali
(as) were as follows:

1- Acquittal declared, and treaties cancelled.

2- The prohibition of pagans participating in Hajj from the following
year.

3- The prohibition of circumambulation around the Ka‘bah in the state of
nakedness.

4- The prohibition of pagans entering the Sacred Mosque.

 The holy phrase: ***“(This is a declaration of) immunity from Allah
”*** indicates that this acquittal is from the side of Allah.

 And the, phrase: ***“and His Messenger ”***, mentioned immediately
after it, means that the strings of promises and treaties were cut off,
respites were ended, and agreements were cancelled.

 The addressee ‘you’ in the sentence: ***“towards those of the
polytheists with whom you made covenant ”*** is both the Messenger of
Allah (S) and the Muslims. Thus, it means that they should declare
immunity unto the polytheists between whom and them there was an
agreement, because Allah (s.w.t.) and His Messenger (S) are quit of
them.

 The objective meaning here is that Allah (s.w.t.) and His Messenger (S)
are quit of giving a promise to them and, after that, fulfilling it,
because the polytheists who made covenants with them broke their
promises.

 If someone asks how it is permissible for the Prophet (S) to break his
promise, the answer is that it is permissible for the Prophet (S) to
break his promise by one of the following ways:

1) The fulfilment of the promise was conditioned that there would not
come any other command from Allah, the Exalted, upon it, and since there
came down a revelation instructing that there would remain no covenant
thereafter, the Messenger of Allah (S) broke the covenant.

2) Since treachery and perjury was made manifest from the side of
idolaters, Allah, the Exalted, instructed His Prophet (S) to break their
covenant, too.

3) That covenant was not a permanent (and an absolute) treaty, but it
was bound over a definite point of time and for a certain length of
time, so that when its term was ended that covenant would be broken,
either.

 It has also been pointed out in some traditions that the Messenger of
Allah (S) had conditioned the above mentioned matters with them in the
treaty. It has also been narrated that the idolaters broke their promise
or decided to break it.

 Then, Allah, the Glorified, commanded His Prophet to break their
covenant, too Next to that, through the following verse, Allah, the
Glorified, addressing the idolaters, says:

***“So go about in the earth…”.***

### Explanations

1- Fulfilment the promise, yes; but surrending to plots, never. The
verse says:

***“(This is a declaration of) immunity from Allah and His Messenger
towards those of the polytheists with whom you made covenant.”***

2- The legislator is Allah,[^3] of course, but in conduct and action,
Allah and the Messenger of Allah are mentioned beside each other:

***“…from Allah and His Messenger…”***

3- It is true that legally we have to be faithful to our treaties, but
heartily immunity from polytheists and those who deviated from the
straight path is a religious principle in Islam.[^4]

4- If a treaty is cancelled because of fear from a plot and a treachery,
it should be announced to the opposite party, in order that they might
not be seized unawares.

5- Immunity is a sign of sharp conclusiveness and authority; while being
silent before plots and breach of covenants is a sign of weakness and
abasement.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 2
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسِيحُوا فِي الاَرْضِ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ وَاعْلَمُوا اَنَّكُمْ
غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللّهِ وَاَنَّ اللّهَ مُخْزِي الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**2*****. “So go about in the earth freely for four months, and know
that you can not make futile Allah, and that Allah degrades the
infidels.”***

 The Qur’ānic phrase: ***“So go about in the earth freely…”*** addresses
the pagans of Mecca meaning that they could go about freely, and with
peace of mind, in the land of Mecca and, being in easy circumstances.
They were allowed to supply their necessities during that time when they
were in security from the swords of the Muslims.

 Then, it continues saying**:** ***“…for four months…”*** which means
when this time was ended and the pagans did not embrace Islam, the
string of their covenant would be broken and the security of life and
wealth would be removed from them.

***“…and know that you can not make futile Allah…”***

 That is, they should know that they could not escape from Allah, since
wherever they might be they were under the Power and Command of Allah.

***“…and that Allah degrades the infidels.”***

 This part of the verse means that they should also know that Allah will
bring disgrace to the unbelievers.

 Regarding the question that which months were the four months that
Allah respited the pagans, most commentators have said that this time
had been from the beginning of Shawwāl until the end of Muharram,
because these verses were revealed in Shawwāl.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 3
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَذَانٌ مِنَ اللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى النَّاسِ يَوْمَ الْحَجِّ
الاَكْبَرِ أَنَّ اللّهَ بَرِيءٌ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ وَرَسُولُهُ فَإِن
تُبْتُمْ فَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ وإِن تَوَلَّيْتُمْ فَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّكُمْ
غَيْرُ مُعْجِزِي اللّهِ وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا بِعَذَابٍ أَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**3*****. “And (this) is proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to
the people on the day of the great pilgrimage that Allah and His
Messenger are quit of the polytheists. Yet if you repent, that***
***will be better for you, and if you turn back, then know that you can
not make futile Allah; and inform those who disbelieve of a painful
punishment.”***

 Once more the Qur’ān announces the cancellation of the treaties of
pagans with a stronger emphasis. It even assigns the date of its
proclamation when the verse says:

***“And this is proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to the people
on the day of the great pilgrimage that Allah and His Messenger are quit
of the polytheists…”***

 In fact, by this public proclamation in the land of Mecca and on that
great day, Allah has shut the enemies’ ways of seeking pretext, and cut
off the tongue of slanderers so that they might not say that they were
seized unawares and were attacked unduely.

 Then the verse addresses the pagans themselves and, through a kind of
encouragement and warning, uses effort to guide them. At first, it
implies that if they repent and return to Allah, with desisting from
idolatry, it will be better for them. The verse says:

***“…Yet if you repent, that will be better for you…”***

 That is, if they embrace Islam, the religion of Unity, it is good for
their own selves both in this world and the next one. And, if they
contemplate properly, they will understand that, under its ray, all
disturbances will turn to peace and arrangement, and it is not so that
their right belief brings any benefit for Allah (s.w.t.) and the Prophet
(S).

 After that statement, the Qur’ān warns the zealous and stubborn
opponents, saying that if they disobey this command, which supplies
their own happiness, they should know that they can never weaken Allah,
nor are they able to go outside of His Might. The verse continues
saying:

***“…and if you turn back, then know that you can not make futile
Allah...”***

 Finally, the verse alarms those who resist obstinately not to believe,
and says:

***“…and inform those who disbelieve of a painful punishment.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 4
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلاَّ الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُّمْ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ ثُمَّ لَمْ
يَنقُصُوكُمْ شَيْئاً وَلَمْ يُظَاهِرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَحَداً فَاَتِمُّوا
إِلَيْهِمْ عَهْدَهُمْ إِلَى مُدَّتِهِمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ
الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**4*****. “Except those of the polytheists with whom you made covenant,
and who have not failed you in anything nor have supported anyone
against you. Then fulfil their treaty with them until (the end of) their
term; surely Allah loves the pious ones.”***

 This unilateral cancellation of pagans’ covenants related only to those
pagans from whom some signs of perjury, or preparation of perjury, had
been appeared. Therefore, in this holy verse, one group of the
polytheists have been excepted. The Qur’ān says:

***“Except those of the polytheists with whom you made covenant, and who
have not failed you in anything nor have supported anyone against
you…”***

 Thus, the command of Allah about conducting with this group is as
follows:

***“…Then fulfil their treaty with them until (the end of) their
term...”***

 The reason of this exception is stated that Allah loves the pious ones,
those who avoid any perjury and transgression.

 It says:

***“…surely Allah loves the pious ones.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 5
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا انسَلَخَ الاَشْهُرُ الْحُرُمُ فَاقْتُلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ
حَيْثُ وَجَدتُّمُوهُمْ وَخُذُوهُمْ وَاحْصُرُوهُمْ وَاقْعُدُوا لَهُمْ
كُلَّ مَرْصَدٍ فَإِن تَابُوا وَأَقَامُوا الْصَّلاَةَ وَءَاتَوُا
الزَّكَاةَ فَخَلُّوا سَبِيلَهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**5*****. “Then when the sacred months are drawn away, slay the
polytheists wherever you find them, and seize them and besiege them and
lie in wait for them in every ambush. But if they repent and perform the
prayer and pay the poor-rate, (zakāt) then leave their way free to them;
verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

 In this verse, the duty of Muslims towards pagans after their respite,
which was four months, has been stated, where the most intensive
instruction has been issued upon them. It says:

***“Then when the sacred months are drawn away, slay the polytheists
wherever you find them…”***

 Next to that, it continues saying:

***“…and seize them…”*** in order to take them captives.

 The verse, then adds that they must be put in the circle of besiege. It
says:

***“…and besiege them…”***

 After that, the verse extends the statement against them, and says:

***“…and lie in wait for them in every ambush…”***

 This harshness of action is for the sake that Islam’s plan is to root
out idolatry from the whole points of the earth, since idolatry is not a
creed or religion which could be respected.

 But, this harshness and severity is not in the sense that the way of
return is shut to them, but whenever and wherever they decide they can
change their direction. That is why, immediately next to that, the
Qur’ān adds:

***“…But if they repent and perform the prayer and pay the poor-rate,
(zakāt) then leave their way free to them...”***

 As for the reason of this opportunity, it is said that Allah is
Forgiving and Merciful, and He does not repel from Himself the one who
returns to Him. The verse ends with the following phrase:

***“…verily Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 6
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِنْ أَحَدٌ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ اسْتَجَارَكَ فَاَجِرْهُ حَتَّى
يَسْمَعَ كَلاَمَ اللّهِ ثُمَّ أَبْلِغْهُ مَأْمَنَهُ ذَلِكَ بِاَنَّهُمْ
قَوْمٌ لاَ يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**6*****. “And if any of the polytheists seeks protection from you,
grant him protection till he hears the Word of Allah; then do convey him
to his place of security; that is because they are a people who do not
know.”***

 This verse means that if after passing four months of respite one of
the idolaters, against whom you were commanded to fight, comes to you
and asks for security to hearken to your invitation and to the reasoning
of the Qur’ān, do respite him and explain your aim to him. Then do
respite him to listen to the Word of Allah and to contemplate over it.
The verse says:

***“And if any of the polytheists seeks protection from you, grant him
protection till he hears the Word of Allah...”***

 The manner in which the Qur’ān has appointed only the Word of Allah and
has said: ***“…till he hears the word of Allah...”*** is for the reason
that the most important proofs lie in the very Word of Allah.

 Then the verse continues saying:

***“…then do convey him to his place of security...”***

 This part of the verse means that if the one embraced Islam, he would
obtain the goodness and prosperity of two worlds; and if the one did not
embrace Islam, you should not kill him in order to avoid deceiving him,
but you should send him to his own home where he has security of life
and wealth.

 The concluding phrase of the holy verse is as follows:

***“…that is because they are a people who do not know.”***

 This phrase means that this respite is for the sake that such people
are some ones who do not know the Faith and the reasons of Islam. Then,
you should respite them so that they hear, contemplate well and become
cognizant.

[^1]: Musnad Ahmad-I-Hanbal, vol. 3, pp. 213 and 283; and vol. 1 pp. 151
and 330 – Mustadrak Sahihayn, vol. 3, p. 51 – Tafsir-i-Al-Manār, vol.
10, p. 57 – Tafsir-i-Tabari, vol. 10, p. 46 – Tafsir-i-Ibn-I-Kathir,
vol. 2, pp. 322 and 333 – Ihghāgh-ul-Haghgh, vol. 5, p. 368 –
Fadā’il-ul-Khamsah, vol. 2, p. 342 – The names of 73 authors who have
recorded this event in their commentary books, like Fakhr-i-Rāzi and
‘Ālūsi, are mentioned in Al-Qadir, vol. 6, p. 338

[^2]: Surah Al-Qasas, No. 28, verse 33

[^3]: Surah Al-Kahf, No. 18, verse 26 says: “…and He does not make any
one His associate in His Judgement.”

[^4]: This fact is current whether it is in the favour and grace, as in
this Surah, verse No. 74 says: “… Allah and His Messenger enriched them
out of His grace…”; or in allegiance the Qur’ān says: “ Verily those who
swear their fealty unto you do but swear fealty unto Allah…” (Surah
Al-Fath, No. 48, verse 10); or in obedience: “Whoever obeys the
Messenger has obeyed Allah…” (Surah An-Nisā’, No. 4, verse 80); or in
immunity, like this verse. (Tafsir-I-Atyab-ul-Bayān)


