Section 2: The Immunity – Its Reason Explained
==============================================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 7
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ يَكُونُ لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ عَهْدٌ عِندَ اللّهِ وَعِندَ رَسُولِهِ
إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُّمْ عِندَ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ فَمَا
اسْتَقَامُوا لَكُمْ فَاسْتَقِيمُوا لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ يُحِبُّ
الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**7*****. “How can there be a covenant for the polytheists with Allah
and with His Messenger? Except those with whom you made covenant at the
Holy Mosque; so long as they stand faithful to you, then be you (too)
faithful to them; verily Allah loves the pious ones.”***

 Through the previous verses, Allah (s.w.t.) commanded the covenants of
the pagans to be cancelled. Here, in this verse, it explains that the
reason of that commandment was the very perjury which appeared from
them. But, concerning those pagans who were faithful to their covenants,
the Qur’ān instructs to having perseverance with them. So, it says:

***“How can there be a covenant for the polytheists with Allah and with
His Messenger?…”***

 This phrase of the verse means how they may have the covenant of
friendship while they have decided in their hearts to breach the
covenant. This statement (of interrogation) is said either because of
wonder, or as a positive interrogation with a negative sense.

 Some commentators have said that this verse means how may Allah
instruct that you desist from shedding the blood of pagans? Then, He has
exceptioned the following group of pagans, and said:

***“…Except those with whom you made covenant at the Holy Mosque...”***

 This part of the verse means that they have covenant with Allah,
because they do not intend in their hearts to perform any perjury or
treachery against you.

 Then the verse continues saying:

***“…so long as they stand faithful to you, then be you (too) faithful
to them...”***

 That is, so long as they are faithful to their covenant and remain in
the straight way with you upon their promise, you should act with the
same manner, too.

 And, the last phrase of the verse indicates that Allah loves the pious,
the ones who avoid perjury. The verse says:

***“…verily Allah loves the pious ones.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 8
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ وإِن يَظْهَرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ لايَرْقُبُوا فِيكُمْ إِلاًّ وَلا
ذِمَّةً يُرْضُونَكُم بِاَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتَأْبَى قُلُوبُهُمْ
وَأَكْثَرُهُمْ فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**8*****. “How (can it be?) For if they prevail against you, they will
observe towards you neither ties of relationship nor treaty. They please
you with their mouths while their hearts do not conscent, and most of
them are ungodly.”***

 The repetition of the word ‘How’ in this verse is for the reason that
it seems improbable and rare that pagans stand faithful to their
covenant.

 Then, it’s meaning (the verb of which has been omitted) is: how there
may remain a covenant for them while if they acquire mastery and prevail
upon you, knowing the background of your Faith and your covenants, they
will observe neither any ties of relationship nor any promise and
treaty. The verse says:

***“How (can it be?) For if they prevail against you, they will observe
towards you neither ties of relationship nor treaty…”***

 The Arabic word: /’ill/ means ‘relationship’ and it has also been used
in the sense of ‘oath’.

 By the usage of the word / yardūnakum / (they please you) in the verse,
Allah has qualified the state of pagans meaning that their inwards are
opposite from their outwards. The verse says:

***“…They please you with their mouths…”***

 Then, the verse has been continued implying that the grudges and
enmities they have in their hearts are different from the nice words
they utter through their mouths.

***“…while their hearts do not conscent…”***

 Finally, in the continuation of qualifications of pagans, the verse
denotes that most of them excess in infidelity and idolatry and do not
have any virtue and manliness to prevent them from these affairs, while
there are some pagans who usually show chastity in committing what is
disgrace, and refrain from breaching promise and perjury. The verse ends
as follows:

***“…and most of them are ungodly.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 9
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اشْتَرَوْا بِاَيَاتِ اللّهِ ثَمَناً قَلِيلاً فَصَدُّوا عَن سَبِيلِهِ
إِنَّهُمْ سَآءَ مَاكَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**9*****. “They have sold the signs of Allah for a small price, and have
hindered (people) from His way. Surely evil was what they used to
do.”***

 In exchange for losing the signs of Allah, whatever they gain is
naught. The verse says:

***“They have sold the signs of Allah for a small price…”***

 Human beings are free in action and choosing the way, and all the
Divine verses which refer to the bargains of human beings are the signs
indicating to his freedom. The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and have hindered (people) from His way…”***

 Therefore, selling the pleasure of Allah and the eternal Paradise for
the corruptive fleeting world is the worst work, because the whole
world, and whatever is found in it, in the face of favours of Allah
bestowed to the believers, is a small thing. That is why the verse says:

***“…Surely evil was what they used to do.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 10
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لايَرْقُبُونَ فِي مُؤْمِنٍ إِلاًّ وَلاَ ذِمَّةً وَاُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُعْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**10*****. “They observe towards a believer neither ties of relationship
nor treaty, and these are they who are the transgressors.”***

 This verse is again upon the statement of Allah’s Wisdom due to His
severe command instructing to quitting pagans.

 In the previous couple of verses, the meaning was about the lack of
observing treaty towards the Muslims; ***“…they will not observe towards
you any ties of relationship or treaty…”,*** while, here, the meaning
of: ***“They observe towards a believer neither ties of relationship nor
Treaty…”*** has been pointed out, which is a statement of their
quarrelsomeness towards any believer.

 Thus, pagans have enmity against the believers, then, never be in any
doubt that you should struggle severely against them. In the opinion of
infidels, the greatest fault of Muslims is the very Faith they have in
Allah, and the same thing is the pretext of their hostility towards
them. The verse says:

***“They observe towards a believer neither ties of relationship nor
treaty…”***

 However, perjury is the same as transgression. So the verse says:

***“…and these are they who are the transgressors.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 11
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِن تَابُوا وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلاَةَ وَءَاتَوُا الزَّكَاةَ
فَإِخْوَانُكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ وَنُفَصِّلُ الاَيَاتِ لِقَوْمٍ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**11*****. “But if they repent and perform the prayer and pay the alms
(zakāt), then they are your brethren in faith; and We explain the signs
for the people who know.”***

 In the former verses of this Surah, Allah’s commandment was: ***“…But
if they repent and perform the prayer and pay the alms, then leave their
way free to them...”*** (verse 5), while in this verse, He instructs
that not only you should not bother them, but also do forget the past
and treat them as if they are your brothers. The verse says:

***“But if they repent and perform the prayer and pay the alms (zakāt),
then they are your brethren in faith; and We explain the signs for the
people who know.”***

### Explanations

1. In confronting them, observe the style of graduality and proceed step
by step. At first, there is the lack of opposition: ***“…then leave
their way free to them…”*** and then:

***“…they are your brethren in faith…”.***

2. A true repentance is accompanied with action:

***“…they repent and perform the prayer…”***

3. Those who do not perform the prayer and do not pay the alms are not
our brethren in faith, as the verse says:

***“…if… perform… and pay… then they are your brethren in faith...”***

4. The basis of a Muslim’s relations, and love and enmity, is the
religion, as in the verse next to the above mentioned verse, it is said:

***“…if they break their oaths… then fight…”***

5. The condition of entering into the circle of ‘brethren in faith’ is
prayer and alms.

6. You should have a brotherly treatment with a repenter.

***“…if they repent… then they are your brethren…”***

**7.** Those who were deserving death formerly, now, under the light of
repentance, prayer, and alms are equal in rights with Muslims.

***“…then they are your brethren in faith...”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 12
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن نَكَثُوا أَيْمَانَهُم مِن بَعْدِ عَهْدِهِمْ وَطَعَنُوا فِي
دِينِكُمْ فَقَاتِلُوا أَئِمَّةَ الْكُفْرِ إِنَّهُمْ لآ أَيْمَانَ
لَهُمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ يَنتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**12*****. “But if they break their oaths after their covenant and
revile your religion, then fight the leaders of infidelity. Verily there
is no oath for them, so that they may desist.”***

 Once Ali-ibn-Abi Tālib (as) was asked why the fugitives of the Battle
of Seffin were persued, but in the Battle of Camel the fugitives were
left free.

 He (as) said that in Seffin the leader of infidelity was alive and the
fugitives would gather around him. And, after being formed, they might
attack. But in the Battle of Camel, where their leader was killed, there
was not any pivot around which they could be formed and organized again.

 Imam Sadiq (as) said:

*“Whoever makes sarcastic remarks to your religion, he will surely
become infidel.”* Then he (as) recited this verse.[^1]

### Explanations

1. Since the origin of perjury and deriding the religion is often from
the side of the chiefs of infidelity, then struggle hard against them.
The verse says:

***“But if they break their oaths after their covenant and revile your
religion, then fight the leaders of infidelity…”***

2. The Islamic Holy Struggle is for the defend of the religion. The
verse says:

***“…they break their oath… and revile your religion, then fight…”***

3. Apostasy is one of the kinds of perjury and deriding the religion.

4. Oppose seriously against those who blaspheme.

5. When striving for the religion, make inquires of the chiefs of
plotters, the central office of commanders, and organization, and
destroy them.

***“…the leaders of infidelity…”***

6. Not any oath should beguile you; the oaths of the breachers of
covenant are invalid. The verse says:

***“…Verily there is no oath for them…”***

7. The aim of the Islamic Holy Struggle is to prevent the enemy’s plot.
The verse says:

***“…so that they may desist.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 13
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ تُقَاتِلُونَ قَوْماً نَكَثُوا أَيْمَانَهُمْ وَهَمُّوا
بِاِخْرَاجِ الرَّسُولِ وَهُم بَدَءُوكُمْ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ
أَتَخْشَوْنَهُمْ فَاللّهُ أَحَقُّ أَن تَخْشَوْهُ إِن كُنتُم
مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**13*****. “Will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and aimed
at the expulsion of the Messenger, and they did attack you first? Do you
fear them? But Allah is most deserving that you should fear Him, if you
are believers.”***

 In order to encourage Muslims and to banish any kind of listlessness,
fear, and hesitation concerning this vital affair from their minds and
their selves, the Qur’ān says:

***“Will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and aimed at the
expulsion of the Messenger…”***

 You were not the beginners of attack and perjury to be worried and
anxious about it, but the fight and perjury was started form their own
side. The verse says:

***“…and they did attack you first?…”***

 So, if some of you hesitate fighting against them because of fear, this
fright is quietly improper. The verse continues saying:

***“…Do you fear them? But Allah is most deserving that you should fear
Him, if you are believers.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 14
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَاتِلُوهُمْ يُعَذِّبْهُمُ اللّهُ بِاَيْدِيكُمْ وَيُخْزِهِمْ
وَيَنصُرْكُمْ عَلَيْهِمْ وَيَشْفِ صُدُورَ قَوْمٍ مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**14*****. “Fight them, (and) Allah will punish them at your hands and
degrade them, and He will help you (to victory) over them and heal the
(injured) breasts of a people (who) believe.”***

 There may be asked how it is that here, in this holy verse, the
statement is upon the chastisement of people while in Surah Al-‘Anfāl,
No. 8, verse 32 the Qur’ān, addressing the Prophet (S) says:

***“But Allah is not to punish them while you are among them…”.***

 The answer of this question is that the objective meaning of that verse
is the heavenly chastisements which are destructive, like the
chastisements of the People of ‘Ād and Thamūd. In this verse, the words
are about the hardship and punishment of fight. The verse says:

***“Fight them, (and) Allah will punish them at your hands and degrade
them, and He will help you (to victory) over them and heal the
(injured)breasts of a people (who) believe.”***

### Explanations

1- Presence in the scene and Holy Struggle should be shown from your
side, and then help and assistance come from Allah.

***“Fight them, (and) Allah will punish them at your hands and degrade
them, and He will help you…”***

2- Strivers of Holy Struggles are Allah’s arms and His executive
factors.

***“…And Allah will punish them at your hands…”***

3- The normatic customs of Allah are executed through the natural ways,
causes and means.

***“…at your hands…”***

4- Next to the martial defeat of the enemy, there comes the turn of a
spiritual and political knock.

***“…will punish them and degrade them…”***

5- The aim of an Islamic war is to efface infidelity, to disgrace
infidels, and to bring peace for the believers.

***“… He will punish them and degrade them… and heal the (injured)
hearts of a people (who) believe.”***

6**-** It is necessary to have encouragement and preaching before war.

7- It is true that in war there will some people be martyred and some
others become remorseful, but the Islamic community will continue to
live in peace and honour.

8- In social affairs, the fate of the believers relates to each other.
Thus, your victory is the remedy of the injured hearts of other
believers.

***“…He will help you (to victory) over them and heal the (injured)
hearts of a people (who) believe.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 15
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُذْهِبْ غَيْظَ قُلُوبِهِمْ وَيَتُوبُ اللّهُ عَلَى مَن يَشَآءُ
وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**15*****. “And He removes the rage of their hearts, and Allah turns
(mercifully) to whomever He pleases, and Allah is All-Knowing,
All-Wise.”***

 Finally, in the conflict between right and wrong, after bearing the
bitterness of troubles, the sweetness of triumph is for the believers.
The verse says:

***“And He removes the rage of their hearts…”***

 After gaining victory, you ought to receive those who come to you to
join you, and you should not tell them where they were until then. The
abovementioned verse, in this regard, says:

***“…and Allah turns (mercifully) to whomever He pleases…”***

 You must never repel those who come to you because of the fear of their
plot. Allah is aware of the true repentance or a hypocritic one but,
according to the Divine Wisdom, with keeping the principles of security,
whoever expresses Islam it should be accepted from him.

***“…and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 16
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ حَسِبْتُمْ أَن تُتْرَكُوا وَلَمَّا يَعْلَمِ اللّهُ الَّذِينَ
جَاهَدُوا مِنكُمْ وَلَمْ يَتَّخِذُوا مِن دُونِ اللّهِ وَلا رَسُولِهِ
وَلا الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَلِيجَةً وَاللّهُ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**16*****. “Or did you think (only with claim of Faith) you would be
left (in peace) while Allah has not yet known those of you who have
struggled hard and have not taken any one as an intimate friend besides
Allah and His Messenger and the believers? And Allah is aware of what
you do.”***

 In this verse, the Muslims are encouraged to the Holy Struggle in
another way. It attracts their attention to their heavy responsibility
that they have in this regard.

 It implies that they must not consider that only by claiming Faith
everything will be arranged all right, but the truthfulness of their
intention and the uprightness of their speech, and the reality of their
belief will be made manifest when they confront the enemies, confronting
them sincerely and free from any hypocrisy.

 At first, the Qur’ān inquires whether they imagine that they will be
left in peace and they will not be put in the course of examination. It
is in this case that their strivers, and those of them who have not
taken any one as confidant except Allah and the Prophet (S) and the
believers, have not yet been known. The verse says:

***“Or did you think (only with claim of Faith) you would be left (in
peace) while Allah has not yet known those of you who have struggled
hard and have not taken any one as an intimate friend besides Allah and
His Messenger and the believers?…”***

 In fact, the abovementioned part of the verse reminds Muslims two
subjects. These subjects are as that only with the bare claim of Faith
the work is not completed, and the personality of people will not be
made clear, but they will be examined by two means:

 The first is Holly Struggle in the way of Allah with the purpose of
effacing the effects of paganism and idolatry. And the second is the
abandonment of any relation and cooporation with hypocrites. The former
dismisses the foreign enemies, and the latter expels the internal
enemies.

 Then, as a warning and emphasis, at the end of the verse, it says:

***“…And Allah is aware of what you do.”***

[^1]: Tafsir-Nr-uth-Thaqalayn


