Section 6: The Tabuk Expedition
===============================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 38
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا مَا لَكُمْ إِذَا قِيلَ لَكُمُ
انْفِرُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ اثَّاقَلْتُمْ إِلَى الاَرْضِ أَرَضِيتُمْ
بِالْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا مِنَ الاَخِرَةِ فَمَا مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا فِي الأَخِرَةِ إِلاَّ قَلِيلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**38*****. “O’ you who have Faith! What (excuse) have you that when it
is said to you: ‘Go forth in Allah’s way’, you should incline heavily to
the ground? Are you contented with the life of this world instead of the
Hereafter? But the enjoyment of the life of this world, compared with
the Hereafter, is but little.”***

### Occasion of Revelation

It has been narrated by Ibn-‘Abbās, as well as some others, that this
verse and the verse after it have been sent down about the ‘Battle of
Tabūk’.

Some Islamic narrations indicate that the Prophet of Islam (S) usually
did not make manifest the war decisions and his final aims concerning
them for Muslims before the beginning of war in order that the Islamic
martial secrets would not be handed to the enemy.

But, the situation was different about ‘the Battle of Tabūk, where in
advance he announced clearly that they were going to fight against the
Romans. That fight against the Emperor of Eastern Byzantine, of course
was not a simple matter, and Muslims should be completely prepared for
that great war.

In addition to that, the distance between Medina and the country of the
Romans was very long and, all things apart, it was summer, the hot
season, and the time of harvest for both corns and fruits.

All these affairs with together made the problem of going toward the
battlefield extraordinary difficult for the Muslims, so much so that
some of them showed hesitation in accepting the Prophet’s invitation.

It was in those circumstances that these couple of verses were sent down
and, with a very sharp and decisive tone, warned Muslims to be aware of
danger, and made them ready to participate in that great war.

As it was cited in the occasions of revelation, the abovementioned verse
is about the circumstance of the Battle of Tabūk.

Tabuk is a region between Medina and Syria where the bound of Sa‘ūdi
Arabia is located now, and, at that time, it was close to the lands of
the Emperor of Eastern Byzantine, which was dominated over Syria. This
event happened in the ninth A.H. viz. about one year after the
occurrence of Mecca Conquest.

With the most intensive manner, the Qur’ān invites people unto Holy
Struggle. Sometimes it applies some encouraging words, and sometimes
some scorning words, and sometimes it threatens them. It addresses
people differently and through various ways in order to make them ready.
Here, in this verse, at first it says:

***“O’ you who have Faith! What (excuse) have you that when it is said
to you. ‘Go forth in Allah’s way’, you should incline heavily to the
ground?…”***

Then, with a reproaching tone, and, referring to the life of this
fleeting world and also the vast eternal life in the coming world, it
says:

***“…Are you contented with the life of this world instead of the
Hereafter?…”***

Did you do it while the advantages and the amount of the life of this
world in comparison with the life in Hereafter is very little? The verse
says:

***“…But the enjoyment of the life of this world, compared with the
Hereafter, is but little.”***

How might a wise person submit such a detrimental exchange? And how does
he lose an extraordinary worthy thing for reaching to a worthless little
thing?

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 39
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ تَنْفِرُوا يُعَذِّبْكُمْ عَذَاباً أَلِيماً وَيَسْتَبْدِلْ
قَوْماً غَيْرَكُمْ وَلا تَضُرُّوهُ شَيْئاً وَاللّهُ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**39*****. “If you do not go forth, He will chastise you with a painful
chastisement, and He will substitute in your place a people other than
you, and you will not harm Him anything, for Allah is All-Powerful over
everything.”***

Then, the Qur’ān promotes the reproaching tone higher into an earnest
form of threat and implies that if Muslims do not move towards the
battlefields of Holy Struggle, Allah will punish them with a painful
punishment. The verse says:

***“If you do not go forth, He will chastise you with a painful
chastisement…”***

 So, if they think that by their going aside and turning their backs to
the battlefields the wheels of the development of Islam may stop and the
light of the religion of Allah will tend to be extinguished, they are in
a tremendous error, because Allah can substitute a group of people other
than them who will be faithful, decided, and obedient to the command of
Allah. The verse says:

***“…and He will substitute in your place a people other than you…”***

 These people will be a group of persons who are different from them
from any point of view. They will be different from them not only from
the view point of personality, but also from the view points of faith,
decision, courage, and obedience.

Some commentators believe that this holy phrase is an indication to
Iranians or people of Yemen.[^1]

Then the verse adds that, by this way, they can not harm anything unto
Allah and His pure religion. The verse continues saying:

***“…and you will not harm Him anything, for Allah is All-Powerful over
everything.”***

 This is a reality, not an imaginary utterance, nor an afar hope,
because Allah (s.w.t.) is powerful over everything and whenever He will
upon the triumph of His pure religion, no doubt, it will happen. The
verse ends:

***“…for Allah is All-Powerful over everything.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 40
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ تَنصُرُوهُ فَقَدْ نَصَرَهُ اللّهُ إِذْ أَخْرَجَهُ الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا ثَانِيَ اثْنَيْنِ إِذْ هُمَا فِي الْغَارِ إِذْ يَقُولُ
لِصَاحِبِهِ لاتَحْزَنْ إِنَّ اللّهَ مَعَنَا فَاَنْزَلَ اللّهُ
سَكِينَتَهُ عَلَيْهِ وَأَيَّدَهُ بِجُنُودٍ لَمْ تَرَوْهَا وَجَعَلَ
كَلِمَةَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا السُّفْلى وَكَلِمَةُ اللّهِ هِيَ
الْعُلْيَا وَاللّهُ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**40*****. “If you do not help him, yet Allah has helped him already,
when those who disbelieved expelled him, he was the second of the two,
when they both were in the cave, when he said unto his companion: ‘Do
not grieve, surely Allah is with us’. Then Allah sent down on him His
tranquillity and strengthened him with hosts which you did not see, and
He made the word of those who disbelieved the lowest; and the word of
Allah is the highest, and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

This verse contains a hint to the dangerous plan of polytheists for
slaying the Prophet (S). In the event of the Night fixed for the
execution of the Conspiracy, every tribe sent a vigorous person ready to
stab at him.

They decided to attack at night and slay the Prophet (S). He put
Ali-ibn-Abi Tālib (as) in bed instead of himself and, by night, he went
towards the Cave of Thūr accompanied with Abū-Bakr.

The pagans chased the Prophet (S) as far as the threshould of the Cave,
but, seeing the spider’s webs at the gate of the Cave, they changed
their mind and returned.

Thus, after three days staying there, the Prophet (S) left for Medina.
During that time, Abū-Bakr’s slave, ‘Āmir-ibn-Fahrah, brought food for
them. At the same time, Ali (as) was preparing the necessities of
traveling to Medina.

After three days, three camels were supplied ready at the Cave and the
Prophet (S), Abū-Bakr, and a guide started for Medina.[^2]

Therefore, Allah’s helps in the past are some admonitions for today; and
if they do not help the religion of Allah, He helps His Messenger even
by sending spider’s webs. The verse says:

***“If you do not help him, yet Allah has helped him already, when those
who disbelieved expelled him, he was the second of the two, when they
both were in the cave, when he said unto his companion: ‘Do not grieve,
surely Allah is with us’. Then Allah sent down on him His tranquillity
and strengthened him with hosts which you did not see…”***

 Of course, the Will of Allah is superior to and higher than any
decisions and desires. The verse says:

***“…and the word of Allah is the highest…”***

 And, the transgressive forces, with all their specializations and
possibilities, will be impotent before the true believers who have
tranquillity and certainty. The holy verse says:

***“…and He made the word of those who disbelieved the lowest; and the
word of Allah is the highest, and Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 41
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انفِرُوا خِفَافاً وَثِقَالاً وَجَاهِدُوا بِاَمْوَالِكُمْ
وَأَنْفُسِكُمْ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ ذَلِكُمْ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ إِن كُنتُمْ
تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**41*****. “Go forth light and heavy! and strive in Allah’s way with
your possessions and your selves, this is better for you if you
know.”***

The objective meaning of the Arabic couple of words: /xifāf/ and /θiqāl
/, mentioned in the verse, is either of the following opposite terms:
‘light and heavy’, ‘bachelor and married’, ‘poor and rich’, ‘on
horseback and on foot’, ‘young and old’, ‘to have a large family and to
have a small family’, ‘of ease and of discomfort’ and ‘trade and
farming’.

It is cited in Fi-Zilāl, a commentary of the Qur’ān, that when some old
persons such as: ‘Abū-’Ayyūb’Ansāri, Miqdād, and Abū-Talhah, who became
ready to go towards the battle-fields, were told that they were too old
to go to fight, they often recited the abovementioned verse.

However, when the command of general mobilization for battlefield is
issued, do not pretext any barrier. The verse says:

***“Go forth light and heavy!…”***

And do know that everything should be devoted to the religion, including
wealth and life, not only either of them. The verse continues saying:

***“…And strive in Allah’s way with your possessions and your selves,
this is better for you if you know.”***

Therefore, striving with life for the poor and striving with both wealth
and life for the rich is obligatory.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 42
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كَانَ عَرَضاً قَرِيباً وَسَفَراً قَاصِداً لاَتّبَعُوكَ وَلَكِن
بَعُدَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الشُّقَّةُ وَسَيَحْلِفُونَ بِاللّهِ لَوِ
اسْتَطَعْنَا لَخَرَجْنَا مَعَكُمْ يُهْلِكُونَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَاللّهُ
يَعْلَمُ إِنَّهُمْ لَكَاذِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**42*****. “Had there been a near gain, and an easy journey, certainly
they would have followed you, but the distance was too far to them; yet
they will swear by Allah: ‘Had we been able, we would certainly have
gone out with you’, they destroy themselves. And Allah knows that verily
they are liars.”***

The Qur’ān refers this meaning to the lazy persons who are weak in faith
and resort to kinds of pretext in order to refrain from attending in
this great course.

The Qur’ān says to the Prophet (S) that if there was an available booty
and the journey was short they would accept his invitation and hasten to
sit at that prepared table, so that they could reach the worldly
material. It says:

***“Had there been a near gain, and an easy journey, certainly they
would have followed you…”***

But, now that the way is very far and difficult for them, they act
listlessly and seek pretexts. The verse continues saying:

***“…but the distance was too far to them...”***

 It is surprising that they did not suffice to pretexts, but they would
come to the Prophet (S) and swear by Allah that if they could they would
certainly had gone out with the Prophet (S). Therefore, they expressed
that the reason that they did not come forth was their incapability and
lack of power. The holy verse continues saying:

***“…yet they will swear by Allah: ‘Had we been able, we would certainly
have gone out with you’…”***

In fact, by means of these deeds and telling those lies, they destroyed
themselves. The verse says:

***“…they destroy themselves…”***

But Allah knows well that they are not truthful. The verse says:

***“…And Allah knows that verily they are liars.”***

 They are completely capable to act but since the table is not so rich
and there is a difficult program in front of them, they resort to false
oaths.

This circumstance was not confined to the Battle of Tabūk and the age of
the Prophet (S). In any society, there are often some lazy, or
‘hypocritic and greedy’ persons who are always waiting for the moments
of victory and efficacious opportunities to come.

At that time, they often substitute themselves deceitfully in the first
line and shout to introduce themselves to others that they are the first
strivers, the best strugglers, and the most sympathetic people, in order
that they enjoy the consequences of the existing triumph without
incurring any trouble.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayān.

[^2]: Narrated from Durr-ul-Manthūr


