Section 8: The Hypocrites
=========================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 60
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا الصَّدَقَاتُ لِلْفُقَرَآءِ وَالْمَسَاكِينِ وَالْعَامِلِينَ
عَلَيْهَا وَالْمُؤَلَّفَةِ قُلُوبُهُمْ وَفِي الرِّقَابِ
وَالْغَارِمِينَ وَفِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَابْنِ السَّبِيلِ فَرِيضَةً مِنَ
اللّهِ وَاللّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**60*****. “Verily alms are for the poor and the needy, and the
officials (appointed) over them, and those whose hearts are to be
reconciled, and to free the captives, and the debtors, and for the cause
of Allah, and (for) the wayfarer. (This is) a duty ordained by Allah;
and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.”***

The words /sadaqah/ (alms) and /sidāq/ (dowry) are derived from the
words /sidq/ (truthfulness). Giving alms is a sign of truthfulness in
the Faith to Allah, and dowry (or nuptial gift) is a sign of love to the
wife.

The Arabic term /faqir/ is derived from /faqr/ (poverty). It is rendered
to a person whose indigence is going to crash his bones. The Qur’ānic
term /miskin/ (indigent) refers to a person who, because of indigency,
sits at home, and is called ‘a stay-at-home one’.

According to some Islamic narrations, /faqir/ (a poor person) is a needy
person who usually does not ask people for help; but a /miskin/ (an
indigent one) is a person who, because of intensity of indigency, in
general, asks others to give him money.

Some Islamic traditions indicate that if the rich paid their alms tax to
the deserving needy persons of the society, there would not exist any
poor person.

A tradition cited in Wasā’il-ush-Shi‘ah says:

*“Verily Allah has fixed, in the wealth of the rich, some amount for the
poor to solve their difficulties. And if He knew it was not sufficient
for them, He would increase it.… And if people paid the poor’s rights to
them, they could live very well.”*

### The Purpose of ‘Alms’ Is ‘Poor-rates’

Poor-tax is one of the certain necessary duties of the religion of
Islam. That is why the Qur’ān in the above verse says that it is ‘a duty
ordained by Allah’. This phrase means that poor-tax is a certain
obligatory commandment of Allah.

So, according to this holy verse, this poor-tax must be spent in the
same eight positions which are said in the verse, and in other sites it
is not permissible. Full majority of Islamic jurisprudents, of course,
believe that poor-rates can be spent for all the eight mentioned
instances, and it is not obligatory to divide it among them.

But, from one point of view, spending it in these eight instances
depends on the social necessities, and from another point of view, it
depends on the attitude of the Islamic government. These eight sites are
as follows:

1. The poor;  
 2. The indigent (the needy);  
 3. The officials appointed over them;  
 4. Those whose hearts are to be reconciled;  
 5. To free the captives;  
 6. The debtors,  
 7. For the cause of Allah;  
 8. and the wayfarer.

The explanation of the first and the second group (the poor and the
indigent) has been referred to before. The third group, the officials
appointed over them, are all those persons who take trouble for:
collecting alms, protecting them, distributing and accounting them.
Therefore, their rage is paid from alms-tax itself.

The fourth group are those people who are not eager to embrace Islam.
Then, by spending a portion of alm-tax, their hearts can be absorbed.

The payment of alms-tax for absorbing the hearts is not in the sense of
their embracing Islam for money, but it is for creating a preparation in
them that they obtain some understanding, and then they may have Faith.

The fifth aspect is to spend it in the way of freeing the captives and
striving against the act of enslavement.

The sixth aspect of spending alms-tax is for the debtors. There are some
debtors who have innocently contracted some debts, like those who have
last all their properties in a fire accident, in a flood, and in other
natural events. Such persons are counted in this item.

Imam Sādiq (as) said:

*“Any believer or Muslim who dies and leaves a debt, which is not based
on corruption and immoderation, it is upon Imam to pay that debt.”*

The seventh site is for the cause of Allah which encompasses any godly
efforts of the faithful, such as: religious preachings, Holy Struggle,
services of comfort of life, and solving the difficulties of the
Muslims.

The eighth aspect is the wayfarer. A wayfarer is a person who is rich in
his own town but, in the course of travel, accidentally, he has no money
and is helpless.

### The Effects of Poor-tax in the Society

1. Poor-tax is a factor of wealth adjustment.

2. Poor-tax is a practical thank for the things that Allah has given to
that person.

3. Poor-tax decreases the class divisions of the society, and wipes out
the rancour between the poor and the rich.

4. Poor-tax survives the spirit of generosity and grace in man, and
decreases mammonism and material dependence in him.

5. Poor-tax is a support for social securing of the deprive. It tells
the poor not to be worried, and advises the bankrupt to try again. It
says to the traveler not to be afraid of the lack of money in the way.
It tells the employed that his share is preserved. It gives promise of
freedom to the captives. It furnishes the field of godly services, and
attracts the hearts of others to Islam.

6. But, multiplication of wealth causes some ungodly things, such as:
negligence from the remembrance of Allah, exploitation from people,
hard-heartedness, disobedience, and revelry, the remedy of which is
poor-tax.

7. Besides wiping deprivation, poor-tax has some more merits. It
increases attraction to Islam, or, at least, it causes persons not to
cooperate with the enemies of Islam.

8. Some ordinary people believe that Islam has limited the increase of
wealth and income for Muslims, while from the point of Islam’s view,
human beings must be relatively free so that they enjoy the nature by
effort and originative faculty and they develop. But paying tax is also
necessary.

9. From the arrangement and order of the sites of spending alms tax, and
that the poor and indigents are mentioned prior to other aspects;
perhaps, it can be said that wiping poverty from the society is in
precedence.

10. The existence of the law of alms tax in Islam does not mean that
Islam wishes to have always some poor Muslims who take poor-tax and some
rich ones to pay it; but it is a way by which an outward real problem of
the society can be solved.

Sometimes, the rich also face with some afflicting events such as: theft
of property, fire accident, traffic accident, war, and captivity.
Therefore, in an Islamic system, there should exist a financial source
for social security.

11. The ordinance of alms-tax was revealed in Mecca, but because of
scarcity of the Muslims and the money of alms-tax, people paid it
themselves.

But, later, after the formation of an Islamic government in Medina, the
idea of taking alms-tax from people with the purpose of paying to the
treasury of the Muslims, and its centrality by the Islamic ruler, came
into being. One of its evidences in the Qur’ān is recited:

***“Take alms out of their property…”*** ***(Surah At-Tawbah, No. 9,
verse 103)***

12. It is not necessary that the alms-tax be divided equally among all
the eight aspects, but it can be divided under the control of the
Islamic judge and as much as it is needed and according to the necessity
of the circumstances.

13. The person who does not pay alms-tax and is in the opposition of the
Islamic government thereby, can be fought against.

14. It is unlawful (harām) for a sayyid (a descendant of the Prophet) to
take alms-tax, save that the giver and the taker of it are both sayyed.

15. The condition of consuming alms-tax in the way of Allah is not only
being in the state of poverty, but wherever it helps the sovereignty of
Islam it can be spent.

16. Alms-tax can be spent for the rescue of the society from the vice of
the vicious persons. This meaning concerns to the phrase: ***“…and those
whose hearts are to be reconciled…”*** mentioned in the verse.

17. If a blood-money is proved upon a person and he is not able to pay
it, the case is included in the phrase:

***“and the debtors…”***

18. Maybe, the phrase: ***“…and to free the captives…”*** encompasses
the usage of alms-tax for emancipation of prisoners or supplying their
expenses.

19. In the Qur’ān, the concept of ‘alms-tax’ has often accompanied with
‘prayer’; and according to the Islamic literature, the condition of
prayer to be accepted is the payment of alms-tax. This status denotes to
the relation of the connection with Allah and the connection with
people.

However, none of the obligations of the religion has occurred in the
Qur’ān so close to ‘prayer’ that alms-tax has. As for the evidence, some
verses are mentioned in the following:

A) ***“And keep up the prayer, and pay the poor-rates (zakāt), and bow
down in prayer with those who bow down (in congragation),”*** ***(Surah
Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 43).***

B) ***“And keep up the prayer, and pay the poor-rates…”(Surah
Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 110).***

C) ***“Verily, verily your guardian (waliyy) is only Allah and His
Messenger and those who believe, those who establish the prayer and pay
the poor-rate while bowing down (in prayer).”*** ***(Surah Al-Mā’idah,
No. 5, verse 55).***

The consensus of the commentators of both great sects of Islam have
cited that the objective meaning of this verse is Ali-ibn-Abitālib, Ali
(as) as its occasion of revelation denotes, too. [^1]

D) ***“…and Allah said: ‘Verily I am with you, if you keep up prayer and
pay the poor-rate and believe in My messengers and assist them…”***
***(Surah Al-Mā’idah, No. 5, verse 12).***

E) ***“…But if they repent and perform the prayer and pay the poor-rate,
then leave their way free to them...”(Surah At-Tawbah, No. 9, verse
5).***

F) ***“…Therefore, keep up the prayer and pay the poor-rate and hold
fast by Allah...”*** ***(Surah Al-Hajj, No. 22, verse 78).***

G) ***“…and We revealed to them the doing of good and the keeping up of
prayer and the giving of the alms, and Us (alone) did they serve.”***
***(Surah Al-’Anbiyā, No. 21, verse 73)***

H) ***“…and the keeping up of the prayer and the giving of the
poor-rate…”*** ***(Surah An-Nūr, No. 24, verse 37.***

I) ***“…and He has enjoined on me the prayer and the poor-rate so long
as I live.”*** ***(Surah Maryam, No. 19, verse 32)***

J) ***“And he enjoined on his family the prayer and the alms giving…”***
***(Surah Maryam, No. 9,verse 55).***

In addition to the above evidences, there are some more verses in this
regard recited in the Qur’ān.

It should also be noted that alms giving has not been enjoined only in
Islam, but as it was pointed out in the explanations of the previous
verses, it has been ordained in the former religions, too.

The law of poor-rate, which illustrates an outline from the Islamic
system, provides the following traces:

Social justice, effacing poverty, providing personels and employees,
international popularity, the emancipation of slaves and prisoners,
string the powers and faculties, preserving the creed and honour of the
Muslims, expansion of social services.

### Poor-rate and Traditions

1. The Prophet (S) said:

*“No group of people restrain(ed) the poor-rate but Allah restrains the
rain from them.”*[^2]

2. The Prophet (S) said:

*“Whoever spends in charity (the poor-rate), there will be (appointed)
for him from the bliss of the Heaven as much as the Mount of’Uhud for
every coin (he has given).”*[^3]

3. Amir-ul-Mu’mineen Ali (as) said:

*“Protect your properties by almsgiving.”*[^4]

4. Imam Sādiq (as) narrating from his ancestors, said that the Holy
Prophet (S) had said:

*“The most generous (person among people) is the one who pays the
poor-rate of his wealth; and the most niggardly (person among people) is
the one who is stingy to what Allah has enjoyed on him.”*[^5]

5. Imam Sādiq (as) said:

*“If people pay the poor-rate of their properties, there will remain no
poor, needy Muslim.”*[^6]

6. The Holy Prophet (S) said:

*“If you desire that Allah increases your wealth, then do pay its
poor-rate.”*[^7]

7. Imam Bāqir (as) said:

*“The poor-rate increases in the sustenance.”*[^8]

8. Imam Sādiq (as) said:

*“When the poor-rate is restrained, the earth withholds its
bounties.”*[^9]

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 61
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُمُ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ النَّبِيَّ وَيَقُولُونَ هُوَ اُذُنٌ
قُلْ اُذُنُ خَيْرٍ لَكُمْ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللّهِ وَيُؤْمِنُ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ
وَرَحْمَةٌ لِلَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ رَسُولَ
اللّهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**61*****. “And there are among them those who hurt the Prophet and say:
‘He is an ear!’ Say: ‘An ear that is good for you; he believes in Allah,
and believes the believers, and he is a mercy to those of you who
believe. And those who hurt the messenger of Allah, there is a painful
punishment for them’.”***

Some of the hypocrites said that the Prophet (S) was a simple and
whimsical person, and he accepts whatever everybody says. Then, the
Messenger of Allah (S) became inconvenient of them. At that time this
verse was revealed and answered them. It says:

***“And there are among them those who hurt the Prophet and say: ‘He is
an ear!’…”***

 In fact, they demonstrated one of the advantages of the Prophet (S) in
the form of his disadvantage, the existence of which is necessary in a
leader.

That is why the Qur’ān, immediately after that, adds this idea in the
verse implying that if the Prophet, as you imagine, is an ear and
listens to your statements and accepts your excuse; it is useful for
you. It says:

***“…say: ‘An ear that is good for you...”***

It is benefitable for you because, in this way, he protects your credit,
and he does not waste your personality, and he does not hurt your
feelings. Through this way, he employs his effort so that he preserves
your affection, concord, and unity. But, if he uncovered the curtains
and publicly disgraced the liars, there would arise a lot of troubles
for you.

Then, in order that the criticizers do not misuse this statement and do
not take it as a document, the verse continues implying that the Prophet
(S) believes in Allah and his commandments, hearkens to the words of the
true believers, and accepts them, and observes them. The verse adds:

***“…he believes in Allah and believes the believers…”***

That is, the Prophet (S), in fact, has two stages of treatment. One
stage is conservation of the outward and hindering from betraying
secrets, and the other is the stage of action. In the first stage, he
listens to the statements of people, and, apparently, he does not reject
them.

But, when the time of action comes forth, his attention is only to the
commandments of Allah and to the suggestions which are uttered by the
true believers. Thus, a leader, who tries to find the truth, should
treat like that; and supplying the interests of a society is not
possible save through this way. Hence, the Qur’ān, immediately after
that, states:

***“…and he is a mercy to those of you who believe…”***

 The only thing that should be added here is that those who hurt the
Prophet (S) with such words, and find faults from him, should not think
that they will be left without punishment. So, at the end of the verse,
it says:

***“…And those who hurt the messenger of Allah, there is a painful
punishment for them’.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 62
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحْلِفُونَ بِاللّهِ لَكُمْ لِيُرْضُوكُمْ وَاللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ أَحَقُّ
أَن يُرْضُوهُ إِن كَانُوا مُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***62. “They swear to you by Allah, to please you; but Allah and His
Messenger have a greater right that they should please Him if they are
believers.”***

A hypocrite always lives in fear and terror. He tries to attract the
attention of others by oaths and affectation. For this reason, not every
oath should be accepted, since sometimes the holy things are misused by
some impious persons. The verse says:

***“They swear to you by Allah, to please you...”***

Allah’s pleasure is the main principal for a believer, not the consent
of common people. The pleasure of the Messenger (S) is the same as the
pleasure of Allah. The verse continues saying:

***“…but Allah and His Messenger have a greater right that they should
please Him if they are believers.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 63
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا اَنَّهُ مَن يُحَادِدِ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ فَاَنَّ
لَهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِداً فِيهَا ذَلِكَ الْخِزْيُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**63*****. “Do they not know that whoever opposes Allah and His
Messenger verily for him is the fire of Hell to abide therein? That is
the great abasement.”***

The Qur’ānic phrase /yuhādidillāh/ (whoever opposes Allah) / means the
limitation of the Power of Allah, as if Allah is limited in His deed of
wrath unto them, though they considered that Allah’s hands are closed.
The verse says:

***“Do they not know that whoever opposes Allah…”***

Fakhr-i-Rāzi believes that this word is derived from the Arabic term
/hadid/ with the sense of ‘obstinacy’. He has cited that the Arabic term
/muhaddah/ means either ‘to violate the law of Allah’, or ‘to think
oneself on one side and Allah on another side’.

Therefore, opposing the Islamic leader is an opposition against Allah;
and the fruit of obstinacy before Allah is the eternal Hell. The verse
says:

***“…whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger verily for him is the fire
of Hell to abide therein? That is the great abasement.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 64
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَحْذَرُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ اَن تُنَزَّلَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُورَةٌ تُنَبِّئُهُم
بِمَا فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ قُلِ اسْتَهْزِءُوا إِنَّ اللّهَ مُخْرِجٌ
مَاتَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**64*****. “The hypocrites fear lest a ‘Surah’ should be sent down
against them apprising them of what is in their hearts. Say: ‘Mock on!
Verily Allah will expose what you fear of ”***

It has been said in the occasion of the revelation of this verse that a
group of hypocrites made decision to startle the Prophet’s camel in a
neck of land when he was returning from the Battle of Tabūk, in a way
that the Prophet (S) would be killed.

The Messenger of Allah was informed of their evil decision by means of
revelation. ‘Ammār and Khuthayfah were guarding from forward and
backward. When they (the Prophet (S) and the strivers) reached the neck
of land, the hypocrites attacked them.

The Prophet (S) recognized them and told their names to Khuthayfah. He
asked the Prophet (S) why he did not order that they should be killed,
and the Messenger of Allah answered:

*“I do not want that others say when Muhammad became powerful he killed
the Muslims.”*

At the absence of the Prophet (S), the hypocrite mockingly said that he
wanted to occupy the castles of Syria. The revelation was sent down
denoting that they might mock whatever much they desired, and Allah
would make manifest their plans. The verse says:

***“The hypocrites fear lest a ‘Surah’ should be sent down against them
apprising them of what is in their hearts…”***

The Qur’ānic term /sūrah/ means the totality of the Divine verses. In
technical terminology, this term has been applied for the whole 114
Suras of the Qur’ān.

The hypocrites were constantly in scare because of manifestation of
their own real feature and their deviations. They had understood that
the Messenger of Allah (S) was aware of their affairs by means of
revelation, yet they mocked him.

But the way of treatment of Allah, and His promise upon the hypocrites,
is that He divulges their secrets. So, you should not be worried of
their stings. The help of Allah is always with you. The verse continues
saying:

***“…Say: ‘Mock on! Verily Allah will expose what you fear of ”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 65
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَاَلْتَهُمْ لَيَقُولُنَّ إِنَّمَا كُنَّا نَخُوضُ وَنَلْعَبُ
قُلْ أَبِاللّهِ وءَايَاتِهِ وَرَسُولِهِ كُنتُمْ تَسْتَهْزِءُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**65*****. “And if you question them (regarding their mockery), they
will certainly say: ‘We were only discoursing and sporting.’ Say: “Were
you mocking Allah, His signs, and His Messenger?”***

The Arabic term /xaud/ means ‘to step in mud’, but it is used in the
Qur’ān with the meaning of ‘starting some indecent actions.’

This verse, again, concerns the Battle of Tabūk when the hypocrites
intended to kill the Prophet (S) in his return from that battle. One of
those hypocrites had said what they would do if their plot was divulged.
Another of them said that they could pretend it was a jesting. Their
statement was a clamsy excuse.[^10]

Now, the question is whether it is possible to joke anything, even
Allah, the Prophet, and the verses of the Qur’ān.

Was the subject of startling the Prophet’s camel and his fall from that
dangerous neck of land something that could be covered under the mask of
jesting?

The verse says:

***“And if you question them (regarding their mockery), they will
certainly say: ‘We were only discoursing and sporting.’ Say: ‘Were you
mocking Allah, His signs, and His Messenger?’***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 66
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاتَعْتَذِرُوا قَدْ كَفَرْتُم بَعْدَ إِيمَانِكُمْ إِن نَعْفُ عَن
طَآئِفَةٍ مِنكُمْ نُعَذِّبْ طَآئِفَةً بِاَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا مُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**66*****. “Do not make excuses. You have disbelieved after your
believing. If We forgive a party of you (because of repentance), We will
chastise (another) party for that they have been sinners.”***

Every time that the plot of the hypocrites was divulged and their
secrets were manifested for the Muslims, they offered some excuses,
including the very excuse mentioned in this verse. They said they did
not intend seriously, but it was only an amusement and a play. The
Qur’ān does not accept their excuse, and says:

***“Do not make excuses. You have disbelieved after your believing…”***

That is, after the expression of Faith, which was not true of course,
they did some actions by which their apparent belief became invalid and
their infidelity was made manifest to the Muslims.

In the continuation of the verse, the Qur’ān says:

***“…If We forgive a party of you (because of repentance), We will
chastise (another) party for that they have been sinners.”***

 The purpose of the verse is that those members of the hypocrites who
repent and really return toward Islam, will be forgiven; but those
hypocrites who remain in their own disbelief and hypocrisy will be
punished.

Besides the chastisement of the Hereafter, this punishment occurred in
this very life upon them. The Prophet (S) disgraced that party of the
hypocrites who resisted on their hypocrisy. The example of it was the
Mosque of Dirār, the chargers of which were openly criticized.

[^1]: Tafsir-ul-Bahr-ul-Muhit, vol. 3, p. 513; Tafsir-i-Fath-ul-Qadir,
vol. 2, p. 53; Ehqāq-ul-Haqq, vol. 2, p. 400; and Kanz-ul-‘Ummāl, vol.
6, p. 391.

[^2]: Al-Mustatraf, vol. 1, p.9

[^3]: Roudat-ul-Wā‘izin, p.418

[^4]: Tuhaf-ul-‘Uqūl, p.113; and Bihār-ul-Anwār, vol.93, p. 13

[^5]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, vol.93, p.11

[^6]: Al-Imam-as-Sādiq (as), Asad Heydar, vol.4, p.360

[^7]: Bihār-ul-’Anwār, vol.93, p.23

[^8]: Bihār-ul-Anwār, vol.75, p.83

[^9]: Al-Muhajjat-ul-Baydā’, vol.2, p.66

[^10]: Majma‘-ul-Bayān, the commentary.


