Section 9: Allah’s Curse for the Hypocrites
===========================================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 67
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتُ بَعْضُهُم مِن بَعْضٍ يَأْمُرُونَ
بِالْمُنْكَرِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَقْبِضُونَ
أَيْدِيَهُمْ نَسُوا اللّهَ فَنَسِيَهُمْ إِنَّ الْمُنَافِقِينَ هُمُ
الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**67*****. “The hypocrite men and the hypocrite women are as one
another; they enjoin evil and forbid good, and they keep their hands
shut. They have forsaken Allah, so He has forsaken them, (too). The
hypocrites are indeed the transgressors.”***

### The Signs of the Hypocrites

In this verse, the Qur’ān points to a general matter. It implies that
the spirit of hypocrisy may appear in different shapes, and the form of
ostentation in particular. The spirit of hypocrisy may be different in a
man and in a woman, but the variety of the features of hypocrisy among
hypocrites should not deceive us.

Therefore, the verse says:

***“The hypocrite men and the hypocrite women are as one another…”***

After mentioning that meaning, the verse refers to five epithets out of
the hypocrite’s qualities as follows:

The first and the second epithets of the hypocrites are that they
usually encourage people to evil and restrain them from good.

That is, contrast to the program of the true believers who ceaselessly,
through enjoining good and forbidding evil, try to improve the society
and to purify it from pollution and corruption, the hypocrites always
try to expand corruption everywhere and to dismiss goodness from the
society. The verse says:

***“…they enjoin evil and forbid good…”***

 Their third epithet is that they neither spend in the way of Allah, nor
do they help the deprive, nor do they financially assist their relatives
and those who are familiar with them. The verse says:

***“…and they keep their hands shut…”***

 The fourth quality of the hypocrites is that all their deeds,
statements, and behaviours denote that they have forgotten the Lord, and
also the situation of their lives indicates that the Lord has deprived
them from some of His bounties, successes, and merits, too. The signs of
these two abandonments are vividly reflected in their lives. The verse
continues saying:

***“…They have forsaken Allah, so He has forsaken them, (too)…”***

 The fifth quality of theirs is that they are impious and they live
outside the circle of the obedience of Allah, i.e. not only they are
mischievous, but also they are disobedient. The verse concludes as
follows:

***“…The hypocrites are indeed the transgressors.”***

 Whatever was said in this verse about the qualifications of the
hypocrites is seen in such people in any age.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 68
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللّهُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَالْمُنَافِقَاتِ وَالْكُفَّارَ نَارَ
جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا هِيَ حَسْبُهُمْ وَلَعَنَهُمُ اللّهُ
وَلَهُمْ عَذَابٌ مُقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**68*****. “Allah has promised the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women
and the infidels, the Fire of Hell, to abide in it forever. That is
enough for them, Allah has cursed them, and for them is a lasting
chastisement.”***

The promise of Hell, stated in the abovementioned holy verse, is decreed
at first for the hypocrites and secondly for the disbelievers.

Whatever more apparently fitting the hypocrites settle themselves in the
row of the believers in this world, it is of no vail and they will be in
the row of disbelievers in Hereafter.

The verse says:

***“Allah has promised the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women and the
infidels, the Fire of Hell, to abide in it forever…”***

And since Hell is the collection of any pain, affliction and tribution,
then it is enough for the hypocrites and infidels both. The verse
continues saying:

***“…That is enough for them, Allah has cursed them, and for them is a
lasting chastisement.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 69
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ كَانُوا أَشَدَّ مِنكُمْ قُوَّةً وَأَكْثَرَ
أَمْوَالاً وَأَوْلاَداً فَاسْتَمْتَعُوا بِخَلاقِهِمْ فَاسْتَمْتَعْتُمْ
بِخَلاَقِكُمْ كَمَا اسْتَمْتَعَ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُم بِخَلاَقِهِمْ
وَخُضْتُمْ كَالَّذِي خَاضُوا اُوْلَئِكَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالاَخِرَةِ وَاُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**69*****. “(O’ hypocrites! You are) like those who were before you,
they were stronger than you I power and more abundant in wealth and
children; so they enjoyed their portion; thus do you enjoy your portion
as those before you did enjoy their portion; and you indulge in vain
discourses as they indulged. These are those whose works are null in
this world and the Hereafter, and those are the losers.”***

### An Admonition and a Warning

In order to awaken this group of the hypocrites, the abovementioned holy
verse puts the mirror of the history before them and, comparing them
with the former stubborn hypocrites, it teaches them the most
instructive lessons.

It implies that they are like the former hypocrites and they follow the
same path, the same program, and the same evil fate of theirs. The verse
says:

***“(O’ hypocrites! You are) like those who were before you…”***

Those very hypocrites of old were stronger and more abundant both from
the point of strength and from the point of properties and children than
these ones. The verse says:

***“…they were stronger than you in power and more abundant in wealth
and children…”***

They enjoyed their share of the bounties of this world in the way of
lusts, pollutions, sins, mischief, and corruption. These hypocrites of
this community also enjoyed their own share in the same way that the
former hypocrites had enjoyed.

***“…so they enjoyed their portion…”***

 Then, the Qur’ān adds in the verse:

***“…thus do you enjoy your portion as those before you did enjoy their
portion; and you indulge in vain discourses as they indulged…”***

 For an admonition and a warning to the group of hypocrites contemporary
with the Prophet (S) and all the hypocrites of the world, the Qur’ān,
through two phrases, remarks the end of the former hypocrites.

The first phrase is recited:

***“…These are those whose works are null in this world and the
Hereafter…”***

And the second phrase says:

***“…and those are the losers.”***

 Such hypocrites may enjoy some temporary and limited benefits from
their hypocritical deeds in this life, but if the circumstance be
observed carefully, it can be made manifest that, they enjoy of real
benefits neither in this world nor in the next world.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 70
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ يَأْتِهِمْ نَبَأُ الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِهِمْ قَوْمِ نُوحٍ وَعَادٍ
وَثَمُودَ وَقَوْمِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَأَصْحَابِ مَدْيَنَ
وَالْمُؤْتَفِكَاتِ أَتَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُم بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَمَا كَانَ
اللّهُ لِيَظْلِمَهُمْ وَلَكِن كَانُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**70*****. “Has not the news of those before them came to them, of the
people of Noah and ‘Ād and Thamūd, and the people of Abraham and the
dwellers of Madyan and the subverted cities?*** ***Their Messengers came
to them with clear arguments, so it was not Allah to do injustice unto
them, but they unto themselves used to be unjust.”***

In this holy verse, the Qur’ān addresses the Prophet (S) and, as a
positive interrogation with a negative sense, says:

***“Has not the news of those before them came to them, of the people of
Noah and ‘Ād and Thamūd, and the people of Abraham and the dwellers of
Madyan and the subverted cities?…”***

 These are some shaking events the study and searching of which moves
any person with the least feeling in his heart.

Yet, Allah did not deprive them from His grace, which was His guidance
and, as the verse says:

***“…Their Messengers came to them with clear arguments…”***

 But they did hearken to none of those godly prophets and did not
consider worthy their laborious troubles in the way of guiding the
servants of Allah. Thus, never did Allah injustice unto them, but they
unto themselves did injustice. The verse says:

***“…so it was not Allah to do injustice unto them, but they unto
themselves used to be unjust.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 71
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ أَولِيَآءُ بَعْضٍ
يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَيَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنْكَرِ وَيُقِيمُونَ
الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَيُطِيعُونَ اللّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ
اُوْلَئِكَ سَيَرْحَمُهُمْ اللّهُ إِنَّ اللّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**71*****. “And the believer men and the believer women, they are
guardians to one another; they enjoin good and forbid evil and they
perform the prayer and they pay the alms (zakāt), and they obey Allah
and His Messenger. It is they on whom Allah will bestow His Mercy.
Verily Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

### The Signs of the True Believers

The signs of true believers, men and women, have been mentioned in the
verse under discussion. These signs are also figured five here:

The verse beings as follows:

***“And the believer men and the believer women, they are guardians to
one another;***

After referring to this general principle, the revelation pays to the
explanation of the details of the epithets of the believers.

1- At first, it implies that they invite people to good. The verse
continues saying:

***“…they enjoin good…”***

2- They also restrain people from vices, wickednesses, and unlawful
things:

***“…and forbid evil…”***

3- Contrast to the hypocrites, who usually forget Allah, the believers
always establish prayer; keep the remembrance of Allah, and,
consequently, by this remembrance and the Name of Allah, they cause
their hearts to be light and their minds to be aware. The holy verse
says:

***“…and they perform the prayer…”***

4- Again, contrast to the hypocrites who are some niggardly persons, the
believers pay a part of their wealth as the alms (zakāt) in the way of
Allah and for Allah and for supporting the servants of Allah (s.w.t.),
in order to improve their society. The verse says:

***“…and they pay the alms (zakāt)…”***

5- The hypocrites are mischievous, and disobedient, and they behave
outside of the circle of the commandment of Allah; but believers obey
the command of Allah and His Messenger. The verse says:

***“…and they obey Allah and His Messenger…”***

At the end of this verse, the Qur’ān points to the first privilege of
the believers from the point of their fate and their reward. It says:

***“…It is they on whom Allah will bestow His Mercy…”***

No doubt the promise of mercy to the believers is from the side of
Allah. This promise is conclusive and assured from any point of view,
because:

***“…Verily Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.”***

Neither does He promise without any cause, nor does He fail its
fulfilment when He promises.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 42
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَدَ اللّهُ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن
تَحْتِهَا الاَنْهَارُ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا وَمَسَاكِنَ طَيِّبَةً فِي
جَنَّاتِ عَدْنٍ وَرِضْوَانٌ مِنَ اللّهِ أَكْبَرُ ذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ
الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**72*****. “Allah has promised the believer men and the believer women
gardens beneath which rivers flow wherein shall they abide forever, and
goodly dwellings in garden of perpetual abode, yet Allah’s good pleasure
is greater (than all these); that is the great success.”***

In this holy verse, the very believers whose epithets were pointed out
before, are promised some excellent things, the most important of which
is the bounty of His good pleasure. What state can be greater than the
good pleasure of Allah for a believer? The verse says:

***“Allah has promised the believer men and the believer women gardens
beneath which rivers flow wherein shall they abide forever, and goodly
dwellings in garden of perpetual abode, yet Allah’s good pleasure is
greater (than all these); that is the great success.”***

 The garden which Allah will bestow on the believers has been qualified
differently in the Qur’ān. They are such as: /jannāt-i-‘adnin/ (gardens
of perpetual abode), /jannat-ul-ma’wā/ (the garden, the abode), and
/jannat-ul-xuld/ (garden of eternity).

The purpose of the first qualification, mentioned here, is the statement
of eternity of Paradise. It has been said that this garden is located in
the middle of Paradise, or it is the best place of Paradise. A tradition
narrated from the Prophet (S) denotes that, it is the situation of the
place of prophets, veracious believers, and martyrs.

Of course, entering into Paradise and enjoying its bounties can be a
good goal for the believers, but greater than that is gaining the good
pleasure of Allah. This is the main goal of any believer who has settled
the love of Allah in his heart, and has considerably climbed towards the
climax of the cognition of Allah (s.w.t.).


