Section 11: Connections Severed With the Hypocrites
===================================================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 81
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَرِحَ الْمُـخَلَّفُونَ بِمَقْعَدِهِمْ خِلاَفَ رَسُولِ اللّهِ
وَكَرِهُوا أَن يُجَاهِدُوا بِاَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ فِي سَبِيلِ
اللّهِ وَقَالُوا لاتَنْفِرُوا فِي الْحَرِّ قُلْ نَارُ جَهَنَّمَ
أَشَدُّ حَرّاً لَوْ كَانُوا يَفْقَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**81*****. “Those who were left behind were glad on account of their
sitting behind against (the command of) the Messenger of Allah, and were
averse from striving with their possessions and their selves in the way
of Allah, and said: ‘Do not go forth in the heat’. Say: ‘The Fire of
Hell is much severe in heat, if only they could understand’.”***

The hypocrites were happy that they had not participated in the Holy
Struggle, because they did not like to strive in the way of Allah by
their properties and their lives. They not only did not participate
themselves in the Holy Struggle but also prevented some others to take
part in it. The verse in this regard says:

***“Those who were left behind were glad on account of their sitting
behind against (the command of) the Messenger of Allah, and were averse
from striving with their possessions and their selves in the way of
Allah…”***

 The Battle of Tabūk happened in a season when the weather was very hot
and blazing then the hypocrites prohibited people not to go forth in
that hot weather. Therefore, Allah answers them that the Fire of Hell is
more blazing if they understand. The verse continues saying:

***“…and said: ‘Do not go forth in the heat’. Say: ‘The Fire of Hell is
much severe in heat, if only they could understand.”***

 That is, they were afraid of the heat of the weather while the blazing
Fire of Hell is waiting for them.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 82
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَضْحَكُوا قَلِيلاً وَلْيَبْكُوا كَثِيراً جَزَآءً بِمَا كَانُوا
يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**82*****. “Therefore they shall laugh a little and weep much (as) a
recompense for what they used to earn.”***

If the hypocrites knew what kind of rewards they have lost and how great
opportunities and bounties they have rejected because of abandonment of
the participation in the Holy Struggle, they should make merry little
and weep very much. Yet, comparing the long time weepings in the
Hereafter, that they will have before them, the weeping during their
life-time is naught.

The verse says:

***“Therefore they shall laugh a little and weep much (as) a recompense
for what they used to earn.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 83
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِن رَجَعَكَ اللّهُ إِلَى طَآئِفَةٍ مِنْهُمْ فَاسْتَأْذَنُوكَ
لِلْخُرُوجِ فَقُل لَن تَخْرُجُوا مَعِيَ أَبَداً وَلَن تُقَاتِلُوا
مَعِيَ عَدُوّاً اِنَّكُم رَضِيتُمْ بِالْقُعُودِ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ
فَاقْعُدُوا مَعَ الْخَالِفِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**83*****. “So if Allah brings you back to a party of them and they ask
your permission to go forth, say: ‘You shall never go forth with me and
you shall never fight an enemy with me; surely you were pleased to sit
(idle) the first time, then sit (now also idle) with those who stay
behind’.”***

Whoever repents sincerely and truthfully, it will be accepted by Allah,
but the hypocrites asked permission to go to fight hypocritically and
affectedly.

The Qur’ānic term /xālif/ means both ‘the one who violates going fight’,
and ‘an antagonist’.

Do not trust upon the hypocrites’ request for attending in the Holy
Struggle. The verse says:

***“So if Allah brings you back to a party of them and they ask your
permission to go forth, say…”***

 And do fear from those who escaped from going to fight yesterday but
they are candidates to attend in the battle-field today. The verse
continues saying:

***“...‘You shall never go forth with me and you shall never fight an
enemy with me…”***

 Therefore, hypocrites must be despised and deserted. The holy verse
concludes as follows:

***“…surely you were pleased to sit (idle) the first time, then sit (now
also idle) with those who stay behind.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 84
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا تُصَلِّ عَلَى أَحَدٍ مِنْهُم مَاتَ أَبَداً وَلاتَقُمْ عَلَى
قَبْرِهِ إِنَّهُمْ كَفَرُوا بِاللّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ
فَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**84*****. “And never pray over any one of them who dies, nor stand by
his grave. They indeed disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and died
while they were ungodly.”***

The way of the Prophet’s life (S) was so that he used to attend in the
funeral and burial ceremonies of Muslims’ deads. He prayed for them and
established funeral prayer over their corpses. But Allah has prohibited
His Messenger to attend in the ceremonies of the dead bodies of the
hypocrites. The verse says:

***“And never pray over any one of them who dies, nor stand by his
grave. They indeed disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and died
while they were ungodly.”***

Thus, the dead body of a hypocrite is also despised when Muslims ought
not to attend their funerals nor stand by their graves. Establishing
funeral prayer and visitation of tombs is as a sign of a reverence and
an esteem to the body of a Muslim believer; and since a hypocrite
deserves no reverence, then the verse says:

***“…never pray over any one of them who dies, nor stand by his
grave…”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 85
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تُعْجِبْكَ أَمْوَالُهُمْ وَأَوْلاَدُهُمْ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللّهُ
أَن يُعَذِّبَهُم بِهَا فِي الْدُّنْيَا وَتَزْهَقَ أَنْفُسُهُمْ وَهُمْ
كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**85*****. “And let not their possessions and their children astonish
you; verily Allah only desires thereby to chastise them in this world,
and that their souls depart while they are infidels.”***

A similar statement to this verse, with a little difference in
recitation, was referred to in holy verse No. 55 of the current Surah.

However, sometimes it happens that, instead of welfare and happiness,
wealth and children are the cause of affliction and chastisement for a
group of people. That is why the verse says:

***“And let not their possessions and their children astonish you;
verily Allah only desires thereby to chastise them in this world, and
that their souls depart while they are infidels.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 86
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَآ اُنْزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ أَنْ ءَامِنُوا بِاللّهِ وَجَاهِدُوا مَعَ
رَسُولِهِ اسْتَأْذَنَكَ اُولُوا الطَّوْلِ مِنْهُمْ وَقَالُوا ذَرْنَا
نَكُن مَعَ الْقَاعِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**86*****. “And whenever a Surah is sent down, saying ‘Believe in Allah
and strive hard along with His Messenger’, those with abundant means
among them ask leave of you, and they say: ‘Let us be with those who sit
back.”***

Sometimes it happened that a Surah or a verse of the Qur’ān concerning
the believers was revealed and invited them to be firm in Faith and to
strive in the way of Allah beside the Prophet (S).

Such revelations caused the believers to become spiritually encouraged,
firm, and steadfast; but those Divine revelations caused the hypocrites
to become inconvenient and despondent. So, they (the hypocrites)
sometimes came to the Prophet (S) and uttered some materials which
clearly indicated their hypocrisy.

This verse denotes that when a Surah was revealed wherein people were
enjoined to belief in Allah and Holy Struggle beside the Prophet (S),
some of the rich hypocrites came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and asked
permission not to participate in the Holy Struggle.

They said that they might be allowed to stay at home with those who
could stay at home, and not to take part in the Holy Struggle. The verse
says:

***“And whenever a Surah is sent down, saying ‘Believe in Allah and
strive hard along with His Messenger’, those with abundant means among
them ask leave of you, and they say: ‘Let us be with those who sit
back.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 87
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَضُوا بِاَن يَكُونُوا مَعَ الْخَوَالِفِ وَطُبِعَ عَلَى قُلُوبِهِمْ
فَهُمْ لايَفْقَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**87*****. “They were content that they should be with those who stay
behind, and a seal has been set upon their hearts,*** ***so they do not
understand.”***

The matter discussed in the previous verse is continued in this verse,
saying that the hypocrites became happy to stay with those who stay
behind and, like women, children, and patients, who do not take part in
Holy Struggle, and to remain at home.

It is clear that he who has no Faith in Allah will certainly refuse to
go to fight in His way, because he does not believe in the excellent
rewards that Allah has promised for the godly strivers. Therefore, a
hypocrite considers that participation in such a war is a fall into
danger and it is a kind of self murder.

Then, at the end of the verse, the Qur’ān adds that the hearts of the
hypocrites are sealed. Therefore, they do not conceive the Truth, for
there have been drawn a curtain before their eyes and ears. It is their
infidelity that has caused them to be incapable to understand the facts.

The verse says:

***“They were content that they should be with those who stay behind,
and a seal has been set upon their hearts, so they do not
understand.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 88
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لكِنِ الْرَّسُولُ وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا مَعَهُ جَاهَدُوا
بِاَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنْفُسِهِمْ وَاُوْلَئِكَ لَهُمُ الْخَيْرَاتُ
وَاُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**88*****. “But the Messenger, and those who believe with him, strive
hard with their possessions and their selves, and these it is who shall
have good things and these it is who shall be successful.”***

In the verse before this verse, the Qur’ān denoted that the hypocrites
usually refuse to participate in Holy Struggle in the way of Allah and
they like to stay at home at the time of war like women, little
children, and sick persons.

Now, in this verse, those persons are referred to whose manner is just
opposite to that of the hypocrites. They consist in the Prophet (S) and
the believers who are ever ready to participate in Holy Struggle with
all their possibilities.

The verse says:

***“But the Messenger, and those who believe with him, strive hard with
their possessions and their selves, and these it is who shall have good
things and these it is who shall be successful.”***

This ending part of the verse means that Allah will give them some good
rewards, and they will reach to the happiness of both this world and the
Hereafter.

In this world, they gain happiness by overcoming the enemies and
strengthening the foundation of their own society toward ever-increasing
progression. And in the Hereafter, they will be rewarded by being
enjoyed of the Divine bounties.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 89
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعَدَّ اللّهُ لَهُمْ جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِن تَحْتِهَا الاَنْهَارُ
خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا ذَلِكَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**89*****. “Allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers
flow wherein shall they abide forever. That is the great success.”***

In this verse, the statement is upon the great rewards that Allah will
bestow on the believers. It remarks that, for such believers who strive
in the way of Allah with their wealth and selves, Allah has prepared
gardens that rivers flow under their trees and, more important than that
is that, they will eternally abide therein.

Then the Qur’ān adds that this circumstance is that very great success.
The verse says:

***“Allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow
wherein shall they abide forever. That is the great success.”***

There are also some more rewards promised for the strivers which have
been mentioned in some other verses of the Qur’ān. One of them is that
Allah guides those who strive in His way unto His ways.

That is, He will bestow on them a sort of recognition that they can be
informed of the facts of the world of existence and enjoy the special
and particular guidance of Allah, so that they may not be involved with
misunderstanding. Surah ‘Ankabūt, No. 29, verse 69 says:

***“And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways…”***


