Section 14: The True Believers
==============================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 111
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنْفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُم
بِاَنَّ لَهُمُ الْجَنَّةَ يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ
فَيَقْتُلُونَ وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْداً عَلَيْهِ حَقّاً فِي التَّوْرَاةِ
وَالإِنْجِيلِ وَالْقُرْءانِ وَمَنْ أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ مِنَ اللّهِ
فَاسْتَبْشِرُوا بِبَيْعِكُمُ الَّذِي بَايَعْتُم بِهِ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ
الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**111*****. “Verily Allah has bought from the believers their souls and
their Properties for Paradise to be theirs: they fight in the way of
Allah, so they slay and they are slain, (this is) a promise binding on
Him in the Turah, and the Evangel and the Qur’ān. And who is more
faithful to his promise than Allah? Rejoice then in your bargain that
you have made; and that is the great success.”***

In many occurrences of the Qur’ān, whenever it says something concerning
the infidels, or polytheists, or hypocrites, immediately next to that,
it refers to the believers in order that a comparison between these two
groups be performed.

Here, after delivering some explanations about the hypocrites and their
evil conspiracies, the Qur’ān refers to the believers and their
specialties.

In this verse, by applying a delicate similie, the Qur’ān points to the
intensive love of the believers to Holy Struggle in the way of Allah. It
similizes their deed to a transaction and a bargain. Usually, there are
four essential elements in every bargain.

These four factors are: seller, customer, the ware to be transactioned,
and price. In this splendid spiritual transaction, the seller is a
believer, the customer is Allah, the ware to be transactioned is the
soul and the wealth of the believers, and its price is the etetrnal
Paradise.

These believers fight in the way of Allah where they slay and are slain.
Whether they defeat the enemy or they suffer martyrdom, both are counted
felicity for them, and both of them are sought by a belirver. The verse
says:

***“Verily Allah has bought from the believers their souls and their
properties for Paradise to be theirs: they fight in the way of Allah, so
they slay and they are slain…”***

 Imam Sādiq (as) in a tradition says that there is no price for your
bodies save Pradise. Then you should not sell your selves for less than
Paradise.[^1]

Next to that, the Qur’ān introduces the document of this transaction,
where it says:

***“…(this is) a promise binding on Him in the Turah, and the Evangel
and the Qur’ān…”***

 In all these Heavenly Books, believers have been promised Paradise, and
the texts of these Divine Books are counted as a document for the
believers in this bargain. [^2]

Then, as a further emphasis, the Qur’ān asks:

***“…And who is more faithful to his promise than Allah?…”***

 Therefore, regarding that you have transactioned the best bargain and
with the most faithful One, Who is Allah, you must be very happy with
this transaction, and this is the great felicity. The verse says:

***“…Rejoice then in your bargain that you have made; and that is the
great success.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 112
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّآئِبُونَ الْعَابِدُونَ الْحَامِدُونَ السَّائِحُونَ الرَّاكِعُونَ
السَّاجِدُونَ الأَمِرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَالنَّاهُونَ عَنِ
الْمُنْكَرِ وَالْحَافِظُونَ لِحُدُودِ اللّهِ وَبَشِّرِ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***112. “(The believing strivers are those who) turn repentant (to
Allah), worship (Him), make a journey, bow, prostrate (in prayer), bid
what is right and forbid what is wrong, and keep the limits of Allah,
and give good news to the believers.”***

Besides the aforementioned attribute, i.e. striving in the way of Allah,
the Qur’ān defines nine epithets for such believers, who have bargained
with their Lord. Thus, counting that one, they will be totally ten
attributes. These nine epithets are as follows.

1. ***“(The believing strivers are those who) turn repentant (to
Allah)…”***

Whenever they commit a fault, they immediately regret and turn to Allah
and repent.

2. ***“…worship (Him)…”***

They always worship the Lord and assume worshipping as an obligatory
manner upon themselves. Worshipping Allah is a sign of good Faith in a
high level. It trains the soul of man and furnishes his heart and spirit
with a peculiar serenity and luminosity.

3. ***“…praise (Him)…”***

They always praise Allah for the bounties He has bestowed upon them, and
they do perform His praise and tribute.

4. ***“…make a journey…”***

That is, in the way of Allah and for fulfilling their religions duties,
they are always busy moving and endeavouring. For instance, they pave a
distance to go into a mosque to establish their prayer, or, in order to
settle reconciliation between two Muslims, they go to their houses. Or,
even for taking an example from the traces of the ancient people, they
make a journey.

It must also be noted that some of the commentators have taken the
Qur’ānic word /sā’ihūn/ in the sense of ‘fasting’.

5. ***“…bow…”***

They bow down in the prayer before Allah. It is such as bowing,
humility, and veneration.

6. ***“…Prostrate (in prayer)…”***

They put their foreheads on the ground of abjectness before Allah, and
this is the utmost humiliation in front of Him. The Qur’ān has referred
to only these two acts from the whole acts of prayer, because the most
distinguished actions in prayer are ‘bowing and prostration’.

7. ***“…bid what is right…”***

Besides that they themselves are generally good, they invite others to
goodness, too. They are always the encouragers of others in doing good
deeds.

8. ***“…and forbid what is wrong…”***

They not only themselves do not approach committing sins, but also
dissude others from perpetration of vices and becoming polluted with
wrong actions.

9. ***“…and keep the limits of Allah…”***

They ceaselessly try to protect the limits of the ordinances of Allah
and not to transgress them. This epithet is one of the important
qualities of a believer.

He must be careful of his own deeds and treatment, so that never he
violates the religious laws and that the limits of religion not to be
broken. This subject is of great importance, and it has been referred to
in the Qur’ān, too. For example, Surah At-Talāq, No. 67, verse 1 says:

***“…and whoever goes beyond the limits of Allah, he indeed does
injustice to his own soul…”***

Therefore, in order to protect the limits of Allah, we must both fight
against the outward enemy and struggle for effacing the inward
corruptions.

However, the first six epithets, out of the nine epithets mentioned in
this verse, relate to the personal private life of a believer, which he
ought to individually create in himself. Two epithets concern the social
life of a believer; and the last epithet envelops all the duties of a
believer, whether they are personal and social, including giving the
obligatory rights.

Next to mentioning these nine epithets, in order to make the believers
happy, the Qur’ān implies that such believers are always in goodness and
felicity, and they have a good end. They will enter Paradise in the
Hereafter. The verse continues saying:

***“…and give good news to the believers.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 113
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ لِلنَّبِيِّ وَالَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا أَن يَسْتَغْفِرُوا
لِلْمُشْرِكِينَ وَلَوْ كَانُوا أُوْلِي قُرْبَى مِن بَعْدِ مَاتَبَيَّنَ
لَهُمْ أَنَّهُمْ أَصْحَابُ الْجَحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**113*****. “It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe to
seek forgiveness for the polytheists, after it has become clear to them
that they are the inmates of Hell, even though they be (their)
relatives.”***

At the beginning of the current Surah, the Qur’ān announced the immunity
towards the polytheists. Then, there were some verses revealed upon the
strictness and severity in action towards the polytheists. Now, the
verse remarks that it is the same that the polytheists be alive or dead.

The verse says:

***“It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe to seek
forgiveness for the polytheists, after it has become clear to them that
they are the inmates of Hell, even though they be (their) relatives.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 114
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ اسْتِغْفَارُ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لِأَبِيهِ إِلَّا عَن مَّوْعِدَةٍ
وَعَدَهَا إِيَّاهُ فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ أَنَّهُ عَدُوٌّ لِّلَّهِ
تَبَرَّأَ مِنْهُ ۚ إِنَّ إِبْرَاهِيمَ لَأَوَّاهٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**114*****. “And Abraham’s seeking forgiveness for his father was only
because of a promise he had made to him. So when it became clear to him
that he was an enemy of Allah, he declared himself quit of him. Verily
Abraham was tenderhearted and forbearing.”***

The previous verse denoted that the Prophet (S) and the true believers
have not any pray for the polytheists, even though they are from their
relatives. This verse answers to a doubious thing that why Abraham (as)
gave his uncle a promise of asking for forgiveness, saying

***“…I will pray to my Lord forgive you…”*** ***(Surah Maryam, No. 19,
verse 47)*****.**

The abovementioned verse indicates that Abraham’s promise was with the
hope that he might be guided, but when he saw that his uncle was in the
state of disbelief, Abraham left asking forgiveness for him. The verse
says:

***“And Abraham’s seeking forgiveness for his father was only because of
a promise he had made to him. So when it became clear to him that he was
an enemy of Allah, he declared himself quit of him. Verily Abraham was
tenderhearted and forbearing.”***

Another question is why Abraham prayed for him after his death, and he
said:

***“O’ our Lord! Forgive me and my parents…”*** ***(Surah’Ibrāhim, No.
14, verse 41)*****.**

The answer to this question is that the Arabic word /wālid / is applied
in the sense of the real father, while the term /’ab / is used in the
sense of either father, teacher, father-in-law, and grand father.

This supplication of Abraham was for his real father, not for his uncle
who was a polytheist. So, the Qur’ān in its eleven verses refers to
Abraham’s uncle by using the word /’ab / in order that it makes clear
that Abraham (as) had been under the guardianship of what kind of a
person, but he had not been affected.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 115
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ اللّهُ لِيُضِلَّ قَوْماً بَعْدَ إِذْ هَدَاهُمْ حَتَّى
يُبَيِّنَ لَهُم مَايَتَّقُونَ إِنَّ اللّهَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**115*****. “Nor is it Allah to lead a people astray after He has guided
them, until He makes clear to them what they should beware of; verily
Allah is aware of all thins.”***

This verse is about those persons who embraced Islam. But, before that
all the ordinances of the religion would be sent down, they died. For
instance, they prayed towards the first direction of Qiblah; or they
asked forgiveness for their fathers while they were polytheists, and the
ordinance upon these subjects had not been sent down in the time when
they were living. The verse says:

***“Nor is it Allah to lead a people astray after He has guided them,
until He makes clear to them what they should beware of…”***

 The purpose of the holy phrase: **‘*****to lead astray*****’**, here,
means ‘to chastise’ and to take them into Hell. Therefore, they would
not be chastised for the lack of performing those ordinances as long as
they were not conveyed to them.

The reason of it is that they have believed in Islam and were not
informed of those laws. So, punishing a person for the sake of the
ordinances which were issued after them, is far from Allah’s justice;
and, as ‘theoreticians in law’ say, chastisement without statement is
not permissible.

At the end of the verse, the Qur’ān implies that Allah knows every
thing. That is, He knows that He ought not to take to task a person for
the crime he has not committed. The verse says:

***“…verily Allah is aware of all things…”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 116
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّماوَاتِ وَالاَرْضِ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ
وَمَا لَكُم مِن دُونِ اللّهِ مِن وَلِيٍّ وَلا نَصِيرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**116*****. “Verily to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and
the earth. He gives life and causes to die, and, besides Allah, you have
not any guardian or any helper.***

The words in this verse are upon the sovereignty and Power of Allah. The
Qur’ān implies that the kingdom of the heavens and the earth is Allah’s.
It is He Who gives life and causes to die, and you have not any friend,
or any helper, save Allah.

Therefore, you should not rely on anybody besides Allah, and do not take
the enemies of Allah as your shelter and your guardians, or that you be
interested in them.

The verse says:

***“Verily to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth. He gives life and causes to die, and, besides Allah, you have not
any guardian or any helper.***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 117
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَد تَابَ اللّهُ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ وَالْمُهَاجِرِينَ وَالاَنْصَارِ
الَّذِينَ اتَّبَعُوهُ فِي سَاعَةِ الْعُسْرَةِ مِن بَعْدِمَا كَادَ
يَزِيغُ قُلُوبُ فَرِيقٍ مِنْهُمْ ثُمَّ تَابَ عَلَيْهِمْ إِنَّهُ بِهِمْ
رَؤُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**117*****. “Allah has turned (mercifully) towards the Prophet and the
Emigrants and the Helpers who followed him in the hour of difficulty,
after the hearts of a part of them were about to swerve. Then He turned
towards them (mercifully). Verily He is Full of pity, Merciful to
them.”***

The process of the Battle of Tabūk was very hard and tiresome for the
Prophet (S) and the Muslims. It was a difficult circumstance for them.
On one side, the weather was terribly hot and, on the other side, it was
the season of picking off the fruits.

The Muslims, who had laboured for one year, had to leave off their crops
because they had not opportunity to gather them. And, on the other side,
they were quietly poor, so that they had not enough food to eat.

An Islamic tradition denotes that they had not even enough water, and
sometimes it happened that several of them only tasted a single date. In
such hard and difficult circumstances, the Prophet (S) and the Emigrants
and the Helpers (Ansār) went to Holy Struggle in the way of Allah.

In this verse, the Qur’ān has spoken of the grace, favour, regard and
attentiveness of Allah upon the Muslims who went forth for Holy Struggle
in that difficult situation. It says:

***“Allah has turned (mercifully) towards the Prophet and the Emigrants
and the Helpers who followed him in the hour of difficulty…”***

 The circumstance was so hard that some of the Muslims were incapable to
bear it any longer and intended to return. But Allah promoted their
spirit and they could tolerate and remained.

That is why the Qur’ān implies that this matter happened after that the
hearts of some of them were nearly to swerve; but Allah caused them to
succeed to repent, and He accepted their repentance since He is the
Beneficent, the Merciful.

The verse continues saying:

***“…after the hearts of a part of them were about to swerve. Then He
turned towards them (mercifully). Verily He is Full of pity, Merciful to
them.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 118
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَى الثَّلاَثَةِ الَّذِينَ خُلِّفُوا حَتَّى إِذَا ضَاقَتْ
عَلَيْهِمُ الاَرْضُ بِمَا رَحُبَتْ وَضَاقَتْ عَلَيْهِمْ أَنْفُسُهُمْ
وَظَنُّوا أَن لامَلْجَاَ مِنَ اللّهِ إِلآَّ إِلَيْهِ ثُمَّ تَابَ
عَلَيْهِمْ لِيَتُوبُوا إِنَّ اللّهَ هُوَ التَّوَّابُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**118*****. “And to the three who were left behind, until when the
earth, with all its expanse, became narrow for them, and their own souls
were straitened for them and they knew that there was no refuge from
Allah save toward Him, then He turned towards them (mercifully) that
they might turn (repentant unto Him). Verily Allah is Oft-Pardoning, the
Merciful.”***

As it was said before, in the course of the Battle of Tabūk, there were
some hard and difficult conditions for Muslims, the most considerable of
them was the heat of the weather and the approach of the time of
harvest, specially fruits.

The hypocrites did not take part in this Battle, but the true Muslims,
in any way they could, participated in the expedition of Tabūk, except
those who were really excused. There were three persons among the
Muslims who were absent from the expedition of the battle-field.

They were: ka‘b-ibn-Mālik, Marārat-ibn-Rabi‘, and Hilāl-ibn-’Umayya.
They wanted to take part in the Holy Struggle, but they procrastinated
and acted listlessly until when, at last, the Battle of Tabūk ended and
the Prophet of Allah (S), acceompanied with the Muslims, returned to
Medina.

These three persons immediately presented themselves to the Prophet (S)
and, after greeting, they asked about his health. But the Prophet (S)
turned his face from them and did not speak with them.

When the Prophet (S) behaved like that, all the Muslims ceased
communication with them and did not reply their questions and, as the
Prophet (S) commanded, their wives also got separated from them.

Therefore, they felt themselves completely deserted and alone. This
general strike against those three men caused that they were put in a
tight straitened circumstance. In order to follow the command of the
Prophet (S), they themselves did not speak even with each other either.

It has been said that this news reached the Romans. They secretly sent
someone to those three persons and wanted them to go to Byzantine and
live peacefully under the security of the government of Byzantine.

But those men, who were really Muslims, rejected that suggestion. They
became very inconvenient of that happening by which the disbelievers
expected them like that. So, they left the habitation in the city and
stationed themselves in the wilderness inside the far deserts and
mountains, and used to pray weeping and crying to Allah, asking Him to
accept their repentance.

There passed fifty days in that state and, finally, their repentance was
accepted. Allah announced that those three persons, who had disobeyed,
were forgiven, and their instructive story became eternal in this verse.

A part of difficulties that they tolerated are stated in this
revelation. It says:

***“And to the three who were left behind, until when the earth, with
all its expanse, became narrow for them, and their own souls were
straitened for them and they knew that there was no refuge from Allah
save toward Him, then He turned towards them (mercifully) that they
might turn (repentant unto Him). Verily Allah is Oft-Pardoning, the
Merciful.”***

This event shows that if the people of a society be good, no vicious
persons have any room in that society. They have to improve themselves.
Thus, the action that the Muslims performed was the best style for
improving the polluted minority, and a general strike against the
vicious may make them improved.

[^1]: Majma‘-ul-Bayān, the Commentary

[^2]: Strivers, Holy Struggle, and martyrdom have been counted worthy
not only in Islam but also mentioned in the Turah and the Evangel: “…in
the Turah and Evangel.” Now, if this meaning is not found clearly in
these two present Holy Books, it shows some distortations in them.


