Section 15: To Be Always With the Truthful Ones
===============================================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 119
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللّهَ وَكُونُوا مَعَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**119.** ***“O you who have Faith! Be in awe of Allah and be (always)
with the truthful ones.”***

This verse addresses the believers and commands them to be in awe of
Allah and to be pious. They should be always with the truthful ones,
too.

Thus, the believers are commanded in this verse to do two things. The
first is that they should be in awe of Allah, and it is evident that the
state of being Godwary is very effective in man from the point of
training. When a person is Godwary, he not only avoids committing
disgrace actions, but also performs his duties.

The second is that they ought to be with the truthful ones, and to make
friends with some ones who are generally truthful. They should,
therefore, avoid making friends with the liars.

The verse says:

***“O you who have Faith! Be in awe of Allah and be (always) with the
truthful ones.”***

Accompaniment and agreement with truthful ones has an important function
in the spiritual progression and the elevation of man. It makes him
familiar with spiritual and ethical values, so far that the one himself
will habitually become one of the truthful ones.

Some Islamic narrations denote that the objective meaning of **‘*****the
truthful ones*****’** is Muhammad and his Ahlul-Bayt (S), and the
immaculate Imams (as). It is certain that they were the top of the
truthful ones, and the Islamic community, as a duty, ought to follow
them.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 120
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَاكَانَ لاَهْلِ الْمَدِينَةِ وَمَنْ حَوْلَهُم مِنَ الاَعْرَابِ أَن
يَتَخَلَّفُوا عَن رَسُولِ اللّهِ وَلا يَرْغَبُوا بِاَنْفُسِهِمْ عَن
نَفْسِهِ ذَلِكَ بِاَنَّهُمْ لاَ يُصِيبُهُمْ ظَمَأٌ وَلا نَصَبٌ وَلاَ
مَخْمَصَةٌ فِي سَبِيلِ اللّهِ وَلا يَطَأُونَ مَوْطِئاً يَغِيظُ
الْكُفَّارَ وَلا يَنَالُونَ مِنْ عَدُوٍّ نَيْلاً إِلاَّ كُتِبَ لَهُم
بِهِ عَمَلٌ صَالِحٌ إِنَّ اللّهَ لايُضِيعُ أَجْرَ الْمُـحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**120*****. “It is not for the people of Medina and the Bedouins around
them to offend against the (command of) the Messenger of Allah, and to
prefer their own lives to his life.*** ***That is because there afflicts
them neither thirst, nor fatigue, nor hunger in the way of Allah, nor do
they receive (any thing) from the enemy but a righteous deed is written
for them on its account. Verily Allah does not waste the reward of the
good-doers.”***

The content of this verse is a kind of proclamation of general
mobilization, and encouraging the Muslims toward participation in Holy
Struggle and defending the life of the Prophet (S).

Through this verse, the Qur’ān warns the Muslims habitated in Medina and
around it that they should not offend against the command of going to
Holy Struggle beside the Prophet of Islam (S).

They must not think of their own lives dearer than the life of the
Prophet (S) but they must defend his life before the enemy by their own
lives.

It is evident that in battles the protection of the life of the
commander is an important duty upon the army, since if the commander be
killed the army may be defeated. In the battles that the Prophet (S)
participated, he himself undertook the rank of a commander, and then, it
was necessary for the Muslims to prefer his life to their own lives and
to protect it from any danger.

Participation in Holy Struggle, of course, is a sufficient necessity,
and when sufficient men, who can afford the defense and war, attend in
the scene, it is not necessary for the rest to participate.

But, when the Prophet (S) or the Imam (as) invites a particular person
to Holy Struggle, it will become an individual duty for him to obey, and
its offense is not permissible.

At the advent of Islam, the number of Muslims was small, and when a war
happened, the Holy Prophet (S) invited all those Muslims who had the
ability of fighting to the battle- field and he proclaimed a general
mobilization thereby.

Therefore, all of them should take part in the battle and no offending
was allowed. This verse, which concerns to that very period, warns the
people of Medina and its Bedouins; who were the only power of Islam, not
to offend from the Holy Struggle beside the Prophet (S). The holy verse
says:

***“It is not for the people of Medina and the Bedouins around them to
offend against the (command of) the Messenger of Allah, and to prefer
their own lives to his life…”***

 Next to expressing this meaning, in the continuation of the verse, and
in relation to the troops of Islam, the Qur’ān points out that Allah
gives the strivers in His way some good rewards for the hardships they
tolerate. It says:

***“…That is because there afflicts them neither thirst, nor fatigue,
nor hunger in the way of Allah, nor do they receive (any thing) from the
enemy but a righteous deed is written for them on its account. Verily
Allah does not waste the reward of the good-doers.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 121
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلا يُنفِقُونَ نَفَقَةً صَغِيرَةً وَلا كَبِيرَةً وَلا يَقْطَعُونَ
وَادِياً إِلاَّ كُتِبَ لَهُمْ لِيَجْزِيَهُمُ اللّهُ أَحْسَنَ
مَاكَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**121*****. “And neither do they expend anything (in the way of Holy
Struggle), small or great, nor do they cross any land, but it is
recorded for them,*** ***so that Allah may reward them with better than
what they used to do.”***

There is no expense, whether it be small or large, that the Muslims
spend in charity, nor do they cross any desert, but it is recorded for
them, in order that Allah will recompense them with something better
than that which they have done. The verse says:

***“And neither do they expend anything (in the way of Holy Struggle),
small or great, nor do they cross any land, but it is recorded for them,
so that Allah may reward them with better than what they used to do.”***

When we refer to the history of the Battles of the advent of Islam, we
realize that the Muslims were confronted with a great deal of hardships
and difficulties in many of those Battles. They suffered much pain
because of scarcity of possibilities, martial means and equipments,
provisions, and ammunitions.

They had to tolerate both thirst and hunger. Whatever they had they
spent in the way of Allah. They were surrounded by some insupportable
problems. They became wounded, they were slain, but they bore all of
these hardships in order to protect the life of the Prophet (S) and to
cause Islam victorious.

According to this verse, Allah will reward all of these pains and
hardships, and He will not waste the wage of the righteous.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 122
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لِيَنْفِرُوا كَآفَّةً فَلَوْلا نَفَرَ مِن
كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَآئِفَةٌ لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ
وَلِيُنذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
يَحْذَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**122*****. “And it is not for the believers to go out (to fight)
totally; why should not then a group from every*** ***party of them go
forth to become learned in religion,*** ***and to warn their people when
they return to them. So that they may beware?”***

In the previous verses, the Muslims were emphatically called toward Holy
Struggle, and those who offended that commandment were severely
criticized. Now, this verse attracts the attention of the Muslims toward
another important duty that they have. This matter is not less
significant than Holy Struggle from the point of importance, because the
ordinances of Allah can be learnt.

With the emphasis which was laid on Holy Struggle, the believers
attached importance to Holy Struggle, and whenever a fight came forth,
the Muslims wholly attended in its expedition, even though the Prophet
himself (S) would not take part in that Holy Struggle, and no one
offended from it.

In that circumstance, the Prophet (S) was alone and there was not
anybody of those Muslims to take the ordinances of Islam from him.

This verse indicates that the entire of the believers should not go to
fight, but a group of them ought to remain in Medina in order to learn
the religious teachings and to be learned in religion, so that when the
strivers came back to them, they could teach them what they had learnt,
and could warn them and preach them, perhaps, they would be in awe of
Allah and would observe the limits of the religion.

It is indisputable that the conditions are often different. Sometimes
the enemy is powerful and dangerous and all Muslims must be mobilized
for war, like what happened in the Battle of Tabūk where the Muslims
were against the powerful army of Byzantine.

And, sometimes it happens that the enemy is less powerful and it is not
necessary that the Muslims totally participate in war.

When the Prophet (S) was alive, it was in such circumstances that a
group of the Muslims should go to fight and another group would remain
at the presence of the Prophet (S) busy learning the subjects of the
religion.

For, at any moment, the revelation might be sent down and an ordinance
or a new subject be announced by the Prophet (S). So, there should be
present some believers to receive it and to learn it, and when their
brethren would return from Holy Struggle, they could teach it to them,
too.

In that manner, the strivers could also be in the current of that
revelation which would firm their Faith and might create a higher
standard of piety and God-fearing in them.

The verse says:

***“And it is not for the believers to go out (to fight) totally; why
should not then a group from every party of them go forth to become
learned in religion, and to warn their people when they return to them.
So that they may beware?”***

 This holy verse clearly indicates to the importance of knowledge in
Islam. It is found out that the value of learning and teaching is not
less than the value of Holy Struggle. Then, when a party of faithful
people go to Holy Struggle and fight against the enemy of Islam, another
party should also remain in the intrenchment of knowledge and
acquaintance in order to obtain it.

The verse under discussion can also be rendered into another form. The
content meaning of the verse can be considered as some facts related to
the Muslims who lived in other cities and the tribes who were far from
Medina.

In this case, we may say that the verse indicates that there were some
Muslims who lived in some other places and they should not go to fight
totally, but a party of them ought to travel to Medina and attend the
presence of the Holy Prophet (S) in order to learn the ordinances of the
religion.

After that, they could return to their people and preach them those
ordinances.

There seems another probability denoting that basically the verse is not
related to Holy Struggle, since there is not any word mentioned in the
verse concerning Holy Struggle. It only implies that the whole believers
should not go out, but a group from every party of them would travel and
learn the lessons of religion.

Perhaps, the objective meaning is that, at the time of the Prophet (S)
and after the expansion of Islam among different tribes, whoever
embraced Islam wished to meet the Prophet (S) and to learn Islam
directly from him, which caused a trouble.

So, the verse commands such believers that they did not need to go
totally to Medina to attend the presence of the Prophet (S), but a group
of them were sufficient to come and learn the lessons of the religion
and return to their people in order to teach those lessons to them.


