Section 16: Effects of the Guidance Revealed
============================================

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 123
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قَاتِلُوا الَّذِينَ يَلُونَكُم مِّنَ
الْكُفَّارِ وَلْيَجِدُوا فِيكُمْ غِلْظَةً ۚ وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ
مَعَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**123*****. “O’ you who have Faith! Fight those of the infidels who are
near to you, and let them find severity in you, and know that Allah is
with the pious ones.”***

In the life of the Prophet of Islam, the Muslims had many enemies. Some
of those enemies lived in a long distance from the Muslims, like the
Romans who were in Syria, Palestine, and Tabūk. But, some of other
enemies of the Muslims were not so far from the center of Islam.

For, example, the tribes of Hawāzin and Thaqif were in a little distance
from the Muslims and they were a danger in ambush. It was necessary that
at first the near enemies should be crushed, and then the far distanced
enemies might be dealt with, because their danger was greater and they
could be aware of the secrets and martial abilities of the Muslims.

In this holy verse, the Qur’ān notifies to the Muslims of this very
matter. It says:

***“O’ you who have Faith! Fight those of the infidels who are near to
you, and let them find severity in you, and know that Allah is with the
pious ones.”***

 To show violence of action in front of an enemy the strivers may make
him both frightened and disappointed. He understands that the Muslims
are not penetrable, and they may not be deceived by some mere promises,
nor that they can get the martial secrets from them.

A believer should have the ultimate humility and modesty in front of his
religious brethren, but he must be severe, firm and violent in front of
enemies, as the Qur’ān says:

***“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are firm of
heart against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves…”***
***(Surah Al-Fath, No. 48, verse 29)***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 124
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإِذَا مَآ اُنْزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ فَمِنْهُم مَن يَقُولُ أَيُّكُمْ
زَادَتْهُ هَذِهِ إِيمَاناً فَاَمَّا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا فَزَادَتْهُمْ
إِيمَاناً وَهُمْ يَسْتَبْشِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**124*****. “And whenever a Surah is sent down, there are some of them
(the hypocrites) who say: ‘Which of you did this increase in belief?’.
As for those who have Faith, it increases them in belief and they
rejoice.”***

The hypocrites always and in any opportunity tried to weaken the spirit
of the Muslims. One of their methods was that they used to mock the
verses of the Qur’ān in order to both disturb their sacredness and hurt
the Muslims.

This verse states the indecent reaction of the hypocrites at the time of
the revelation of a Surah of the Qur’ān. Whenever a Surah was revealed,
some of them mockingly asked some others whether that Surah increased in
belief of either of them. By that manner, they wanted to mock the
Muslims among themselves.

After narrating this meaning, the Qur’ān gives them a suitable answer,
which is recited in the next verse.

Whenever a Surah of the Qur’ān was sent down, there were created two
reactions in the believers and two other reactions in the hypocrites.
Every couple of those reactions were just opposite to each other. The
reaction of the believers before the revelation of a Surah of the Qur’ān
was two things:

The first was that it increased in the belief of them and made their
Faith firm.

This statement indicates that belief can be both decreased and
increased, and the revelation of the Qur’ān causes the belief to be
increased in the receptive believing hearts.

The second was that it made them happy. When they heard the verses of
the Qur’ān, and they were aware of the great rewards which were
mentioned in them for the believers, they rejoiced and they became
hopeful that they would be included in the favours of Allah.

The verse says:

***“And whenever a Surah is sent down, there are some of them (the
hypocrites) who say: ‘which of you did this increase in belief?’. As for
those who have Faith, it increases them in belief and they rejoice.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 125
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِم مَرَضٌ فَزَادَتْهُمْ رِجْساً إِلَى
رِجْسِهِمْ وَمَاتُوا وَهُمْ كَافِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**125*****. “And as for those in whose hearts is a sickness, it (only)
adds filth to their filth, and they die while they are infidels.”***

If a corpse falls inside a pool, whatever much rain it rains upon it, it
will become more malodorous. This bad smell is not because of the rain,
but it is because of that corpse.

When there is the mood of obstinacy and haughtiness in a person, it
causes that, by the revelation of the verses of the Qur’ān, those in
whose hearts is disease will become more haughty, and will show a more
amount of obstinacy, bigotry and enmity from themselves.

This status is a kind of sickness in them like the sicknesses of the
body. If we do not think of a remedy for it, it will expand so much so
that may it destroy the person.

The verse says:

***“And as for those in whose hearts is a sickness, it (only) adds filth
to their filth, and they die while they are infidels.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 126
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلا يَرَوْنَ أَنَّهُمْ يُفْتَنُونَ فِي كُلِّ عَامٍ مَرَّةً أَوْ
مَرَّتَيْنِ ثُمَّ لاَ يَتُوبُونَ وَلاَ هُمْ يَذَّكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**126*****. “Do they not see that they are tried once or twice every
year? Yet they neither repent, nor do they take admonition.”***

These blind-hearted hypocrites take no counsel and take an example of
nothing. They are always faced with trials, and some calamities and
disasters fall upon them, but they do not come to themselves and do not
take counsel.

In this holy verse, if fact, the Qur’ān criticizes their inattentiveness
and their unawareness. It says:

***“Do they not see that they are tried once or twice every year? Yet
they neither repent, nor do they take admonition.”***

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 127
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا مَا أُنزِلَتْ سُورَةٌ نَّظَرَ بَعْضُهُمْ إِلَىٰ بَعْضٍ هَلْ
يَرَاكُم مِّنْ أَحَدٍ ثُمَّ انصَرَفُوا ۚ صَرَفَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُم
بِأَنَّهُمْ قَوْمٌ لَّا يَفْقَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**127*****. “And whenever a Surah is sent down, they look at one
another, (saying): ‘Does anyone see you?’ Then they turn away. Allah has
turned away their hearts because they are a people who do not
understand.”***

When the hypocrites were at the presence of the Prophet (S) and the
believers, and, at the same time a Surah was revealed, they looked at
each other and, by their glances and signals, they said to one another
whether anyone saw them.

That is, if the Prophet (S) and the believers did not watch them, and
they were neglectful of them the hypocrites might go out of that meeting
in order not to listen to the recitation of the Surah.

They feared that the Surah would be about them, and it might say
something of their secrets. Therefore, they wanted to leave the meeting
in any way they could, and when they found the opportunity for it, they
would flee. The above holy verse says:

***“And whenever a Surah is sent down, they look at one another,
(saying): ‘Does anyone see you?’…”***

 After mentioning these matters in this verse, the Qur’ān implies that
Allah has turned away their hearts. That is, their hearts have turned
away from the truth. The reason of this status is that they are a group
of people who do not apprehend the reality and do not think correctly.

Thus, it is their own difficulty that as a result of enmity with the
truth, they have brought forth such a situation for themselves, and
Allah (s.w.t.) has turned away their hearts because of their own deeds.
The verse says:

***“…Then they turn away. Allah has turned away their hearts because
they are a people who do not understand.”***

 As if the hypocrites do not take any admonishment from the holy verses
of the Qur’ān. They are, for example, like a consumed lamp that whatever
it be contacted to electricity it does not work.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 128
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ جَآءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ
مَاعَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُم بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَؤُوفٌ رَحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**128*****. “There has indeed come to you a messenger from among
yourselves. Grievous to him is whatever afflicts you; he is full of
concern for you (your guidance), and most kind and merciful to the
believers.”***

These holy verses are very important from the point of sympathy, because
they express several significant specialties concerning the Holy Prophet
of Islam (S).

In the first verse, which addresses all Muslims, the Qur’ān refers to
four attractive epithets of the Prophet of Islam.

1. It says that this Prophet is from among yourselves. He is not of the
kind of angels, but he is of your kind and, like you, he eats, sleeps,
and lives.

He is not a prince or a person born in a wealthy family who can not
perceive your toils and pains. He is from among you and has grown up in
the same lanes and quarters where you have familiar intercourse.

2. Whatever afflicts you is grievous to him, too. That is, the hardships
and afflictions that reach you, he takes them upon him, and he knows
your sadness as his own sadness. Therefore, he becomes offended when you
are annoyed, because he thinks of you as ones from himself and vice
versa.

3. He is found of you and he is compassionate to you. He desires that
you obtain the felicity of both this world and the next, so that
whatever goodness exists becomes yours. He is desirous for your success
and happiness.

4. He is very kind and merciful to the believers, and loves those
believers who have truly embraced his religion.

As it was said in the above, these epithets are all attractive and move
the feelings. They inform of the deep relation and immense attachment of
the Prophet of Islam (S) toward his community, (ummah).

Thus, as the Qur’ān denotes, the Prophet (S) is the best example for
you, then Muslims must have the same relations and attachments among
themselves and think of themselves as the share of the sorrows and
happinesses of each other.

It should be noted that the Prophet (S) has been introduced in this
verse as a ‘kind and merciful’ messenger. These two epithets are among
the attributes of Allah, with a difference that the Prophet (S) is ‘kind
and merciful’ to the believers, while Allah is kind and merciful to all
human beings. The Qur’ān says:

***“…verily Allah is to mankind Most Affectionate, Most Merciful.”***
***(Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 143)***

Allah has based the foundation of creation on kindness and mery, and,
originally, He is kind to all mankind. The evidence of this meaning is
the vast possibilities which He has bestowed upon His servants in order
that they, enjoying the present bounties, pave the path of Allah and
follow the religion of prophets.

But, if a person turns away from Allah and His prophets, in fact he has
turned away himself from the vast mercy of Allah. But, from the very
beginning, the kindness and mercy of the Prophet (S) have been attached
to the believers, and he who is not in the straight way does not accept
it from the very beginning.

Surah At-Tawbah – Verse 129
---------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإِن تَوَلَّوْا فَقُلْ حَسْبِيَ اللّهُ لآ إِلَهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ عَلَيْهِ
تَوَكَّلْتُ وَهُوَ رَبُّ الْعَرْشِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**129*****. “So if they turn away, say: ‘Allah is sufficient for me.
There is no god but He. In Him I have put my trust and He is the Lord of
the great ‘Arsh.”***

The Lord Who controls the great system of existence, can hold man, a
little creature, under His Own compassions, too.

People’s arrogance and desistance must not affect your Faith and
spiritualities, because whoever is with Allah has everything.

It is recited in the supplication of ‘Arafah that Imam Hussayn (as),
addressing Allah, says*:*

*“O’ Lord! He who did find You, what did he miss, and he who is in lack
of You, what does he have?”*

Therefore, the secret of solving problems is confidence in Allah. In
this verse, Allah says to His Prophet (S):

***“So if they turn away, say: ‘Allah is sufficient for me. There is no
god but He. In Him I have put my trust and He is the Lord of the great
‘Arsh.”***

 The Prophet (S) said these phrases from the depth of his heart (soul).
It was by this high spirit that he conquered the highest peaks of
dignity, and possessed the greatest rank that a godly human being can
ever obtain.


