Surah al-‘Araf, Chapter 7, Section 11 cont..
============================================

Surah al-‘Araf , Verse 88
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ الْمَلَأُ الَّذِينَ اسْتَكْبَرُوا مِن قَوْمِهِ لَنُخْرِجَنَّكَ
يَا شُعَيْبُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَكَ مِن قَرْيَتِنَا أَوْ
لَتَعُودُنَّ فِي مِلَّتِنَا ۚ قَالَ أَوَلَوْ كُنَّا كَارِهِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**88.** ***“The chiefs of the arrogant among his people said: ‘We will
surely expel you, O Shu‘ayb,***  
***and those who believe with you from our town, unless you return into
our creed.’ He (Shu‘ayb) said: ‘what, even though we dislike (it)?’”***

All prophets have been threatened to be expelled and banished. This is
the logic of force. Surah ’Ibrāhim, No. 14, verse 14 says:

***“And those who disbelieved said to their apostles: ‘We will most
certainly drive you forth from our land, so else you shall come back
into our religion…”***

 The chiefs of the arrogant have always been the first enemies of
prophets. The verse says:

***“The chiefs of the arrogant among his people said…”***

 The method of prophets is logic and reasoning, but the style of
disbelievers is force and threat.

The preachers of religion should not be afraid of the opponents’
threads, since there have always been threat and banishment in this way.
The disbelievers told their prophet:

***“…’We will surely expel you, O Shu‘ayb…”***

 Yet, be careful to use a kind word, politely and wisely, when you
confront the ignorances of disbelievers. Shu‘ayb answered them:

***“…He (Shu‘ayb) said: ‘what, even though we dislike (it)?’”***

Surah al-‘Araf , Verse 89
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدِ افْتَرَيْنَا عَلَى اللّهِ كَذِباً إِنْ عُدْنَا فِي مِلَّتِكُمْ
بَعْدَ إِذْ نَجَّانَا اللّهُ مِنْهَا وَمَا يَكُونُ لَنَآ أَنْ نَعُودَ
فِيهَآ إِلآَّ أَنْ يَشَآءَ اللّهُ رَبُّنَا وَسِعَ رَبُّنا كُلَّ شَيْءٍ
عِلْماً عَلَى اللّهِ تَوَكَّلْنَا رَبَّنَا افْتَحْ بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ
قَوْمِنَا بِالْحَقِّ وَأَنْتَ خَيْرُ الْفَاتِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**89.** ***“We should have forged a lie against Allah if we returned
into your creed after Allah delivered us from it. It is not for us to
return into it, unless Allah, our Lord, (so) will. Our Lord comprehends
all things in His knowledge. In Allah we have put our trust. Our Lord!
Decide between us and our people with truth, and You are the best of
deciders.”***

The Qur’ānic term /millat/ has sometimes been used with the meaning of
religion and creed.

Since the followers of Shu‘ayb had accepted their religion based upon
reasoning and proof, (not upon desires), then they would not abandon it.
Allah never commands upon returning to infidelity and paganism.

 He who returns from His command, surely the amount of his deed is so
little that the one regrets from his action, while Allah is not like
that and He never reviews the religion. The verse says:

***“We should have forged a lie against Allah if we returned into your
creed after Allah delivered us from it…”***

 The Qur’ānic term /fath/ and /fātih/, in these aspects, mean:
‘judgement and arbitration’.

The final word is said by Allah, in order that they might be delivered
from this blind, and the path be paved.

Therefore, opposite to the evil suggestions of the enemies, we must
trust on Allah and show our conclusiveness.

Never a believer is ready to collude on his beliefs, and he never
returns from the Truth. Turing back and retrogression is forbidden for a
true Muslims. The verse says:

***“…It is not for us to return into it, unless Allah, our Lord, (so)
will…”***

 It is for this reason that we must submit the command of Allah and obey
it.

Do not forget to observe discipline and courtesy in speech. Instead of
curse, invoke Allah the just arbitration.

***“…Our Lord comprehends all things in His knowledge. In Allah we have
put our trust. Our Lord! Decide between us and our people with
truth…”***

 In supplication, the relationship between the demand and the Divine
Names should be considered.

 We are in need of triumph and, therefore, we call Him saying:

***“…and You are the best of deciders.”***

Surah al-‘Araf , Verses 90-91
-----------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الْمَلأُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ قَوْمِهِ لَئِنْ اتَّبَعْتُمْ
شُعَيْباً إِنَّكُمْ إِذاً لَخَاسِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَخَذَتْهُمُ الرَّجْفَةُ فَاَصْبَحُوا فِي دَارِهِمْ جَاثِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**90*****. “And the chiefs of those who disbelied from among his people
said: ‘If you follow Shu‘ayb, you will indeed be losers’.”***  
**91*****. “Then the earthquake seized them, so they became motionless
bodies in their dwellings.”***

In this verse, the term /rajfah/ (earthquake) has been used for the
punishment of those people, while in Surah Hūd, No. 11, verse 94 the
word /sayhah/ (rumbling) has been applied, and in Surah Ash-Shu‘arā, No.
26, verse 189 the phrase ***“…the punishment of the day of cloud…”***,
which is a covering produced by an annihilating cloud, is mentioned as
their torment.

 This shows that the earthquake of their chastisement had been
accompanied with rumbling and an annihilating dark cloud.

The Arabic term /jāθm/is derived from /jaθm/ which means: to sit upon
the knee and to stay in one place. As if, the punishment seized them at
night when they were asleep. They woke up, but they had neither enough
time to save themselves nor any ability to escape. So, they were
destroyed while they were in the state of half-raised.

Most of the opponents of divine prophets were from the kind of rich
notables.

***“And the chiefs of those who disbelied from among his people
said…”***

 One of the methods of disbelievers is threat by means of economical
siege.

***“…’If you follow Shu‘ayb, you will indeed be losers’.”***

When they became like that, they increased their own aberration by
persisting on leading others astray. There was no hope that they might
believe. Therefore, basing on the decree of the law of effacing the
effects of corruption, the divine punishment fell upon them. The verse
says:

***“Then the earthquake seized them, so they became motionless bodies in
their dwellings.”***

Surah al-‘Araf , Verse 92
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُوا شُعَيْباً كَأَن لَمْ يَغْنَوْا فِيهَا الَّذِينَ
كَذَّبُوا شُعَيْباً كَانُوا هُمُ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**92*****. “Those who belied Shu‘ayb became (perished) as if they had
never dwelt therein. Those who belied Shu‘ayb were themselves the
losers.”***

 The Arabic term /yaqnau/, used in this verse, is derived from /ׁqinā /
which means: ‘to dwell in a place’.

The great loss belongs to the idolaters. Instead of belief in one God,
they ascribe partners, and instead of accepting the guidance of the
immaculates, they refer to others supposing to be led.

Therefore, instead of a secured life, they will be destroyed of
everything; and instead of being admitted into Heaven, they will enter
Hell Fire, since, instead of Allah’s pleasure, they have incurred His
Wrath.

Thus, the plots of the people of Shu‘ayb, who were the followers of
falsehood, were of no avail. They wanted to expel Shu‘ayb from their
town, but they themselves were destroyed in their own houses.

That is why that sometimes it happens that the places of refuge change
to places of massacre. (The town of the people of Shu‘ayb, for example,
was a pleasant place for them and also it was used as a means of threat
against Shu‘ayb by them. But that town was ruined upon them and became a
means of their destruction.

It is at the time of incurring the Wrath of Allah that the real losers
are recognized. The above verse is its Qur’ānic evidence. It says:

***“Those who belied Shu‘ayb became (perished) as if they had never
dwelt therein. Those who belied Shu‘ayb were themselves the losers.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 93
-------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّى عَنْهُمْ وَقَالَ يَا قَوْمِ لَقَدْ أَبْلَغْتُكُمْ
رِسَالاَتِ رَبِّي وَنَصَحْتُ لَكُمْ فَكَيْفَ ءَاسَى عَلَى قَوْمٍ
كَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**93*****. “So he turned away from them, and said: ‘O’ my people! I have
delivered to you the messages of my Lord, and advised you sincerely; so
how shall I then grieve for a disbelieving people?’”***

Again, for a more intensive emphasis, it says that those who belied
Shu‘ayb were the losers, not those who believed in him. Thus, such
people are addressed in the holy verse as follows:

***“So he turned away from them, and said: ‘O’ my people! I have
delivered to you the messages of my Lord, and advised you sincerely…”***

 When Shu‘ayb saw them in the threshold of chastisement and destruction,
he hopelessly turned away from them, and told them that he had conveyed
the messages of Allah to them and had advised them, but refusing his
words, they did not hearken to him.

That is, that punishment was very hard and painful, but they were
deserve to incur it as a result of the crimes they had committed.

***“…So how shall I then grieve for a disbelieving people?’”***

Then Suh‘ayb, in a positive interrogation with a negative sense, said
why he should grieve for a people who disbelieved and incurred the
punishment of Allah for themselves. This statement means that he said he
did not grieve for them.

Thus Shu‘ayb consoles himself, because he had made his best and applied
all the necessary efforts to guide aright those people. But, alas, they
disobeyed arrogantly and that torment was their recompense.


