Section 13: The Ministry of Moses
=================================

Surah al-‘Araf , Verse 100
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَ لَمْ يَهْدِ لِلَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الاَرْضَ مِنْ بَعْدِ أَهْلِهَآ
أَنْ لَوْ نَشَآءُ أَصَبْنَاهُمْ بِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَنَطْبَعُ عَلَى
قُلُوبِهِمْ فَهُمْ لايَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**100.** ***“Does He not guide (thereby) those who inherit the earth
after its (former) residents that if We please We will destroy them
(too) for their sins and set a seal on their hearts so that they do not
hear (the truth)?”***

Once more in this verse, in order to awaken the neglectful minds of the
present people, and making them attentive of the instructive lessons
which had existed in the lives of the former nations, the Qur’ān
inquires whether those who inherit the earth next to the possessors of
it did not take admonition from the study of the situation of the former
nations.

They should understand that if Allah pleases, He is able to destroy
them, too, for their faults, and inflicts them with the same evil end
that the former sinners suffered.

The verse says:

***“Does He not guide (thereby) those who inherit the earth after its
(former) residents that if We please We will destroy them (too) for
their sins…”***

Allah is also able to leave them alive, while, because of their
committing sins and corruptions, He seals their hearts and let them not
perceive and recognize the truth, so that they never hear the truth and
do not accept any advice. Such people will be wandering in the life
bewildered. The verse says:

***“…and set a seal on their hearts so that they do not hear (the
truth)?”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 101
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الْقُرَىٰ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ مِنْ أَنبَائِهَا ۚ وَلَقَدْ
جَاءَتْهُمْ رُسُلُهُم بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ فَمَا كَانُوا لِيُؤْمِنُوا بِمَا
كَذَّبُوا مِن قَبْلُ ۚ كَذَٰلِكَ يَطْبَعُ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ قُلُوبِ
الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**101.** ***“These are the towns some of whose tidings We recount unto
you; and certainly their Messengers came to them with manifest proofs,
but they would not believe in what they had belied from before. Thus
does Allah set a seal on the hearts of the infidels.”***

In this verse, as well as the next one, the emphasis is again on the
lessons which can be taken from the explanation of the former people’s
events. But, here, the addressee is the Prophet (S), although the
objective is indeed all human beings.

At first, it says:

***“These are the towns some of whose tidings We recount unto you...”***

Then, the verse implies that it was not such that they became
unnihilated without completing the argument, but surely their divine
prophets went to them with clear evidences and those prophets tried
their utmost effort to guide them. The holy verse continues saying:

***“…and certainly their Messengers came to them with manifest
proofs…”***

But they steadily showed opposition against the continuous preaches and
repeated invitations of their prophets and persisted on their own
saying. They were not ready to accept and believe in that which they had
belied before. Here is what the verse says:

***“…but they would not believe in what they had belied from before…”***

The cause of this obstinacy has been stated in the next sentence of the
holy verse, as follows:

***“…Thus does Allah set a seal on the hearts of the infidels.”***

That is, those who step in the path of wrong, as a result of repetition
and continuation of action, some corruptions such as perversion,
infidelity, and impurity settle in their hearts so deeply that they
remain fixed therein like the curvings upon a coin. This is from the
kind of effect and property of action which has been attributed to
Allah, since it is He Who is the Cause of all causes.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 102
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا وَجَدْنَا لاَكْثَرِهِمْ مِنْ عَهْدٍ وإِنْ وَجَدْنَآ أَكْثَرَهُمْ
لَفَاسِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**102*****. “And, We did not find in most of them any (firm) covenant,
and verily We found most of them to be wrong-doers.”***

The objective meaning of the word ‘‘***ahd***’, (covenant), mentioned in
the verse, is either the relation between Allah and the sound innate
disposition of people, or the invitation and laws of prophets, or the
special covenants which sometimes people made with prophets saying that,
for example, if the prophet performed so and so as a miracle or solved a
particular difficulty of theirs, they would believe.

One of the evidences of this kind in the Qur’ān is Surah’A‘rāf, No. 7,
verses 134 and 135 which say:

***“And when the plague fell upon them, they said: ‘O’ Moses! invoke
your Lord for us by the covenant He has made with you. If you remove the
plague from us, we will certainly believe in you, and we will certainly
send with you the Children of Israel’.”***

***“But when We removed the plague from them until a term which they
should reach, behold, they broke (their promise again).”***

Allah has made manifest some facts for human beings through both innate
disposition and prophets in order that they may have confederation and
submission unto them. But most people neglect the cry of innate
dispostion and prophets, and going out of the path of the truth, they
become wrong-doers. The verse says:

***“And, We did not find in most of them any (firm) covenant…”***

Thus, the secret of the destruction of the former nations was breach of
promise and disobedience.

***“…and verily We found most of them to be wrong-doers.”***

**Allah has praised the faithful and blamed the breachers of promise.**

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 103
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ بَعَثْنَا مِنْ بَعْدِهِمْ مُوسَى بِاَيَاتِنَآ إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ
وَمَلَئِهِ فَظَلَمُوا بِها فَانْظُرْ كَيْفَ كَانَ عَاقِبَةُ
الْمُفْسِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**103*****. “Then, after them, We sent Moses with Our Signs unto Pharaoh
and his chiefs, but they wronged (and disbelieved) in them. Consider
then how the end of the mischief makers was! ”***

The name of Moses (as) has been repeated more than 130 times in the
Qur’ān. No other name has been mentioned therein as numerous as his
name. As it is cited in Al-Mizān, the, the Qur’ān has referred to the
divine miracles concerning no prophet as many as it has mentioned for
Moses (as).

The story of Moses (as), mentioned in the Qur’ān, can be staged into
five steps:

1) The birth and childhood of Moses.  
 2) His escape from the city of Madyan and living with Shuaib
(Jethro).  
 3) His mission and his problems with Pharaoh.  
 4) His own deliverance and that of his people from Pharaoh, and
returning to Palestine.  
 5) His conflicts with the Children of Israel.

This Surah, Al-’A‘rāf, is the first Meccan Surah which has referred to
the story of Moses (as).

One of the philosophies of the mission of prophets is standing against
false deities. For general improvement of a society, the chiefs and
great members of that society should be referred to first, because water
must be purified from its head-source, as the verse says:

***“Then, after them, We sent Moses with Our Signs unto Pharaoh and his
chiefs…”***

People’s faith in the truth usually causes their society to be improved,
while disbelief and heresy draw it towards corruption. The verse
continues saying:

***“…but they wronged (and disbelieved) in them. Consider then how the
end of the mischief makers was! ”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 104
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ مُوسَى يَافِرْعَوْنُ إِنِّي رَسُولٌ مِنْ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**104.** ***"And Moses said: ‘O Pharaoh! Verily I am a Messenger from
the Lord of the worlds’."***

Prophets claimed nothing but their prophecy and invitation to the Truth.
In the way of their invitation, they used to address the false deities
of their time bravely and without any fear and opposed them.

***" And Moses said: ‘O Pharaoh! Verily I am a Messenger from the Lord
of the worlds’."***

To improve the society which has a regular system, it is better to begin
from the chiefs of that society.

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 105
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَقِيقٌ عَلَى اَنْ لآ اَقُولَ عَلَى اللّهِ إِلاَّ الْحَقَّ قَدْ
جِئْتُكُمْ بِبَيِّنَةٍ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ فَاَرْسِلْ مَعِيَ بَنِي
إِسْرآئِيلَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**105*****. “(I am) worthy of saying nothing about Allah except the
truth. Indeed I have come to you with a clear Sign (a miracle) from your
Lord;*** ***so send forth with me the Children of Israel.”***

Prophets are infallible, and they say nothing but the truth. From the
tongue of Moses, the verse says:

***“(I am) worthy of saying nothing about Allah except the truth…”***

Prophets should have miracles to prove their prophecy, as the verse
refers to it and says:

***“…Indeed I have come to you with a clear Sign (a miracle) from your
Lord...”***

To provide the freedom of human beings is among the first aims of
prophets. Except them, whoever takes the rein of the government in a
society, drags those people into servitude of false deities.

As long as people are not delivered from the ties of false deities, it
is not possible to offer them a complete cultural program to guide them.
That was why Moses (as) said to Pharaoh:

***“…so send forth with me the Children of Israel.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verses 106-107
-------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنْ كُنْتَ جِئْتَ بِاَيَةٍ فَأْتِ بِهَآ إِنْ كُنْتَ مِنَ
الصَّادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاَلْقَى عَصَاهُ فَإِذَا هِيَ ثُعْبَانٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**106*****. “He (Pharaoh) said: ‘If you have come with a Sign (a
miracle), then bring it, if you are of the truthful ones’.”***  
**107*****. “So he threw his rod, then behold! it was a clear
serpent.”***

### The Definition of a Miracle

The Arabic term /mu‘jizah/ is derived from the root /‘ajaza/ which means
an action that those who have not the capacity and genius of prophethood
or imamate are unable to do it, such as the act of Moses by his Rod, or
the act of Jesus in raising men from the dead, and so on. The verse
says:

***“He (Pharaoh) said: ‘If you have come with a Sign (a miracle), then
bring it, if you are of the truthful ones’.”***

In *Surah Ash-Shu‘arā, No. 26, verse 45* we recite:

***“Then Moses cast down his staff, and lo! It swallowed that which they
falsely displayed.”***

There were also some more miracles appeared from that Rod. It was struck
the water of the sea when it dried up. *Surah Ash-Shu‘arā, No. 26, verse
63* says:

***“Strike the sea with your staff…”***

Or, it was struck the rock and fountains of water gushed forth from it.
*Surah Al-Baqarah, No. 2, verse 60* says:

***“…Strike the rock with your staff.’…”***

It should be explained that at the presence of Moses (as) the Rod
changed to be a small snake, as *Surah An-Naml, No. 27, verse 10* says:

***“And cast down your staff, so when he saw it in motion as if it was a
serpent…”***

At the presence of people it seemed an ordinary snake. *Surah Tāhā, No.
20, verse 20* says:

***“Then he cast it down, and lo! it was a serpent running.”***

But, at the presence of Pharaoh, it became a great clear snake, as the
verse under discussion says:

***“So he threw his rod, then behold! it was a clear serpent.”***

However, a miracle should be clear for all, so that no doubt remains.
The verse says:

***“…then behold! it was a clear serpent.”***


