Section 15: Persecution of the Israelites
=========================================

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 127
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الْمَلأُ مِنْ قَوْمِ فِرْعَوْنَ أَتَذَرُ مُوسَى وَقَوْمَهُ
لِيُفْسِدُوا فِي الاَرْضِ وَيَذَرَكَ وءَالِهَتَكَ قَالَ سَنُقَتِّلُ
أَبْنَآءَهُمْ وَنَسْتَحْيِي نِسَآءَهُمْ وإِنَّا فَوْقَهُمْ قَاهِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**127*****. “And the chiefs of Pharaoh’s people said: ‘Will you leave
Moses and his people to make mischief in the land, and to desert you and
your gods?’ He said: ‘Soon we will kill their sons and spare their
women, and surely we are in power over them’.”***

After seeing the belief of the sorcerers, in order to move Pharaoh, the
chiefs of his people told him whether he left Moses and his followers
alive to oppose him and make other people oppose and, consequently, to
take the control of government from Pharaoh and to make mischief in the
country. They would also leave out both him and his gods. The verse
says:

***“And the chiefs of Pharaoh’s people said: ‘Will you leave Moses and
his people to make mischief in the land, and to desert you and your
gods?’…”***

Pharaoh answered them that he would kill their sons who were the
encouragement of those people and whom they were making ready for
fighting, while he would leave their daughters alive because they could
do nothing against him. Pharaoh said that he could make of their females
servants so that they became lowing and miserable. The holy verse
continues saying:

***“…He said: ‘Soon we will kill their sons and spare their women…”***

It is understood from this sentence that Pharaoh did not expect to kill
Moses (as) and his followers since he had recognized their power
unfailing. Therefore, he decided to attack the defendless children and
to destroy them. The verse ends thus:

***“…and surely we are in power over them’.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 128
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ مُوسَى لِقَوْمِهِ اسْتَعِينُوا بِاللّهِ وَاصْبِرُوا إِنَّ
الاَرْضَ لِلّهِ يُورِثُهَا مَنْ يَشَآءُ مِنْ عِبَادِهِ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ
لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**128*****. “Moses said to his people: ‘Seek help from Allah and endure.
Verily the earthbelongs to Allah; He grants its inheritance to whomever
He pleases of His servants, and the end is (best) for the pious
ones.”***

There are two commandments accompanied with two glad tidings referred to
in this holy verse. The commandments are:

***‘seeking help from Allah’*** and ***‘endurance’***; and the glad
tidings are ***‘the inheritance of the earth’ and ‘the good end of the
pious’.***

It also indicates that seeking help from Allah and having confidence in
Allah together with perseverance and piety are among the factors of the
final victory and protection against threats. This means that we must
both seek help from Allah and endure ourselves. The verse says:

***“Moses said to his people: ‘Seek help from Allah and endure…”***

Another matter is that, at the sensitive times, a leader must console
the community and make them hopeful, because the hope to a clear future
is the promise of all religions including Islam. Moreover, the pious
people, not only have a good end

in this world, but also are victorious in the next world.

***“…Verily the earth belongs to Allah; He grants its inheritance to
whomever He pleases of His servants, and the end is (best) for the pious
ones.”***

Surah al-‘Araf – Verse 129
--------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا اُوذِينَا مِنْ قَبْلِ أَنْ تَأْتِيَنَا وَمِنْ بَعْدِ مَا
جِئْتَنَا قَالَ عَسَى رَبُّكُمْ أَنْ يُهْلِكَ عَدُوَّكُمْ
وَيَسْتَخْلِفَكُمْ فِي الاَرْضِ فَيَنْظُرَ كَيْفَ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**129*****. “They said: ‘We have been hurt before you came to us and
(also) after you came to us.’ He said: ‘Maybe that your Lord will
destroy your enemy and will make you successors in the earth, then He
observes how you act.”***

The Children of Israel expected all the affairs be promptly corrected in
one night after the raise of Moses (as), and the country of Egypt, with
all its facilities, could be in their authority, and the Pharaonic
people would be annihilated. That was why they claimed that the raise of
Moses (as) did not bring confort for them.  
 The reply of Allah (s.w.t.) is that triumph needs some conditions, such
as patience, struggle, and reliance. When these conditions are supplied,
there is a hope to the help of Allah.

It was thus that the divine leaders were sometimes criticized by some
friends who were of little capacity and of little tolerance. The verse
says:

***“They said: ‘We have been hurt before you came to us and (also) after
you came to us.’…”***

Most of people imagine that happiness and felicity is found in comfort
and tranquility. They suppose that the lack of them is as a failure to
obtain their desires. They are neglectful that the Divine religions have
come to correct the ways of lives, not to efface their difficulties.

A leader should hearken to critics and send some hope-giving messages.
The verse continues saying:

***“…He said: ‘Maybe that your Lord will destroy your enemy and make you
successors in the earth…”***

An Islamic government is a means of trial not a means of seeking
pleasure. Then, the verse concludes as follows:

***“…then He observes how you act.”***


