Chapter Nineteen
================

   
 Raising my palms towards heaven, I prayed vehemently: "O God, the
ordeal seems to have no end. We are being transferred from one cell to
another, each worse than the other. Have mercy upon your servants, O
Allah!" This was Monday, two days after my arrival here. They had
promised my release the next day, but freedom was not in sight. Majid's
words rang in my ears: "Yes, they told me so seven months ago"; and the
prospect of being incarcerated indefinitely in this gloomy environment
frightened me out of my wits.  
    
 I recalled how earnestly I had prayed in the preceding days. Once as I
prostrated before my Creator, beseeching for mercy, I fell into a
momentary trance. How distinct were the words, which were heard from
nowhere: ‘Verily, Allah is ever vigilant over His servants.’  
    
 I raised my head not believing that I heard the words. Alas! My prayers
were answered. The horrors of detention in the Mukhaberat nightmarishly
haunt my mind even today, but I feel profoundly soothed and placid when
I recall how my communion with the Almighty was lovingly answered. A
call of distress it was, which cannot be re-enacted in days of ease and
plenty.  
    
 I had not finished my prayers when a car was seen at the door. It was
from Mukhaberat. I heard the frightened friends warning each other: "It
is from the Devils - It is from Mukhaberat. Heaven knows who is the
victim." Right then my name was announced. I stood up to prepare myself
for the departure, but I could not guess where I was transported. Was it
another cell? Am I going back to the cell No.58? My legs shook as I put
on my shoes. It was all the more difficult to handle my luggage. Majid
helped.  
    
 I saw my wife already seated in the car, and I arranged myself next to
her. The officer politely informed that I was booked for London next
morning, showed me the tickets and then said: "You will be our guest for
tonight-in the cell of course. Keep ready tomorrow at six." As the car
sped through the streets of Baghdad, members of the public regarded it
apprehensively; for the infamous car was well known.  
    
 Back to the cell, we waited for the dreary night to pass, a night which
seemed long and endless.  
   


