Preliminary Discussions
=======================

1)The Definition of ‘Authority’ (walaya)
----------------------------------------

Al-Raghib; the famous Arabic philologist says in his al-Mufradat: “
‘wala’ and ‘tawalli’ is when two or more things occur side by side
without anything external to them being between them. This is used
metaphorically to indicate spatial, familial, religious, personal,
political or ideological proximity. ‘Wilaya’ is aiding or backing, while
‘walaya’ is when one takes charge of an affair.

It has been said that ‘wilaya’ and ‘walaya’ are like ‘dilala’ and
‘dalala’ (i.e. there is no difference between their meanings), but the
correct opinion is that ‘walaya’ indicates taking charge of an affair.
‘Wali’ and ‘mawla’ therefore are used in relation to this meaning”[^1]

According to this, the guardian (wali) of an orphan is the one who has
charge of his affair, and a king may be described as: ‘the guardian of
the affairs’. Thus, the permission to act is part of the meaning of the
word. Therefore the claim of some who interpret ‘*wilaya*’ to mean only
‘love’ is not something that can be supported linguistically.

This is because if the intention was to speak of mere love, which is a
matter of the heart, the expressions ‘love’ or ‘affection’- the antonyms
of ‘hatred’ and ‘dislike’- would have been used. However, guardianship
gives the meaning of taking up another’s affairs, and its antonym is
‘enmity’, which is transgressing against and infringing upon others’
affairs.  
    
 Therefore, acting for the benefit of another is guardianship whilst
acting to harm another is enmity, and both are related to physical
actions (not a mere affection). Allah, the Exalted, has said in the Holy
Qur’an:

***“And (as for) the believing men and the believing women, they are
guardians of each other; they enjoin good and forbid evil”***
**(9:71).**

Here, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, mentioned the mentioning of good
and the forbidding of evil as examples of the guardianship of the
believers over one another. Obviously, enjoining good and forbidding
evil is in most instances physical action. Similarly, in the narration
of Ghadeer: *“whoever I am his guardian, then Ali is his guardian”,* the
Prophet (pbuh) meant to affirm for Ali (as) the same authority to act
and the same precedence that belonged to the Prophet (pbuh) himself.

This precedence is mentioned in the Holy Qur’an:

***“The Prophet has precedence over the believers with regards to
themselves…”.(33:6).***

The meaning of guardianship here is the authority to act and manage the
affairs for the benefit of the Muslim community.

2) The Difference between Guardianship and Representation (or power of attorney)  (al-Wilaya versus al Wikala)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

a-      Guardianship is a right bestowed by Allah while representation
is a right given by the one who is being represented.  
 b-      Unlike guardianship, representation can be widened or narrowed
according to the desire of the one giving representation.  
 c-      Representation becomes void at the death of the one being
represented, whereas guardianship becomes void in the absence of the
conditions (of a guardian).  
  

3)The Meaning of Jurist
-----------------------

What is meant by ‘jurist’ here is one who is a ‘Mujtahid’ (one with the
power of deducing Islamic laws) and who possesses the eight conditions
which will be mentioned in the fifth chapter of this treatise.

4)The Points of Dispute about the Guardianship of the Jurist
------------------------------------------------------------

*Firstly*: does the jurist have any guardianship?  
    
*Secondly*: is the guardianship of the jurist general or limited?  
    
 In order to clarify the meaning of general or limited guardianship of
the jurist, one must first explain the possible positions a qualified
jurist (i.e. one who meets the conditions) may take, and which may be
his task and which he would have authority over. These are many, and
here we discuss the most important ones among them:

1) The authority to give legislative rulings (fatawa) in non-fundamental
issues and deductive issues, which the ordinary person must follow.

2) The authority to judge in litigation.

3) The authority over orphans, the insane and the foolish in the absence
of a father, grandfather or trustee.

4) The authority over the wealth of those who are absent, such as the
one who is absent due to travel, imprisonment or unknown whereabouts. In
this situation, it is permissible for the jurist to rule regarding him
in the presence of sufficient evidence and to sell his wealth and pay
off his debts while he is absent.

5) The authority to use the wealth of the Imam (as) – which is made up
of half of the Khums- as well as a wealth whose owner is unknown and a
wealth which has no heir. Because it is necessary to rule regarding this
wealth and to use it in its correct usage, someone must perform this
task and there is no one more appropriate to do this than the qualified
jurist. In fact, he is the one whose authority in this field is certain,
whilst the authority of others is doubtful.

6) The authority to solemnize or dissolute marriages in general, as
agreed on unanimously by the scholars. An example is his authority to
solemnize a marriage for someone who is not fit to make decisions due to
insanity or similar things and who does not have a guardian. Another
example is his authority to dissolute a marriage in favour of a woman
whose husband is missing despite investigation.

7) The authority of the qualified jurist in these six areas is
unanimously agreed upon. In fact, his authority in these situations is
considered a necessary part of the Shi’a jurisprudence.

The authority to implement punishments and reprimands: there is dispute
about his authority in these matters in the period of occultation.
Sheikh a-Mufeed (al-Muqni’a:810), Sheikh al-Tusi (al-Nihaya: 732),
Shahidul Awwal, Shahidul Thani (al-Lum’a and Sharhul Lum’a), al-Hurr
al-Amili (Wasailul Shia, the chapters on the preliminaries to
punishments, chapter 28) and most of the later scholars such as
al-Fadhil al-Hindi in Kashful Litham (2:149) and al-Fadhil a-Miqdad in
Tanqeehul Rai’ (1:579) are of the opinion that the qualified jurist does
have authority here.

In fact, it is related that this is the famous opinion. Yes, there is
apparent hesitancy in the words of al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli in al-Sharai
because he says: ‘it has been said that it is permissible for the
jurists who are knowledgeable- of the legislative rules- to implement
the punishments in the period of the occultation of the Imam (atfs)’
(Sharai’ul Islam).

However, the author of al-Jawahir found this hesitancy strange and said:
‘the doubt of some scholars regarding this issue is strange. It is as if
he has not tasted anything of the taste of jurisprudence, nor understood
anything from their words or symbols’ (Jawahirul Kalam, 21:397). This
statement gives the impression that the authority of the jurist in these
matters is a self evident fact in our jurisprudence.

8) Authority in all matters established directly for the infallible Imam
(as), including running the Muslim community and its assets. The most
important of these matters are the political affairs of the Muslims and
the leadership of the Islamic government.

According to this, it is the obligation of the jurist to work out every
task that belonged to the infallible Imam (as) as the leader of the
Muslim community, and then to give whatever task was found to be so to
the qualified jurist. Thus, the qualified jurist would be the one with
the authority to rule with regards to the wealth and lives of the people
according to what he sees to be the general benefit.  
    
 Therefore, general guardianship of the jurist is that which includes
the last type of authority, considering that the other seven are
unanimously agreed upon. Thus if one says that the jurist does not have
general guardianship, they mean that his authority does not apply in the
last category- or the last two categories at most.

It has become clear from this that what is meant by the general or
unconditional guardianship is that which is different to the
guardianship limited to the individual non-fundamental issues. General
or unconditional guardianship does not mean that his authority is above
the divine law or that he has authority without any limitation or
condition.

Perhaps the expression of ‘general guardianship’ **(al walaya al
a’mma**) used in the past is better than the term ‘unconditional
guardianship’ **(al walaya al mutlaqa)** which has become famous
recently. This is because the latter expression leaves room for
misunderstanding for the one who does not have sufficient knowledge of
the subject.  
  

The Types of the Power of Authority (i.e. the eighth type of authority listed above)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

a-      Independence of the guardian jurist in his own actions, without
taking into consideration whether the actions of others need his
permission or not.  
 b-      The lack of dependence of others in acting and their actions
needing his permission.  
  

The Types of Permission of the Guardian Jurist for the Action of Others
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

a-      in the form of representation: such as the representative of the
guardian jurist.

b-      in the form of delegation and appointment such as appointment
for bequest on behalf of the guardian jurist.

c-      in the form of agreement such as the permission of the guardian
jurist for another person to pray on a deceased person who has no
guardian.  
    
*Thirdly:* is the designation of the guardian jurist by appointment or
election?

We shall discuss all the above matters in the coming chapters**.**

[^1]: In this translation, ‘wilayat’ will be translated as guardianship
and ‘wali’ will be translated as ‘guardian’


