‘The Guardianship of the Jurist’ in the words of the Shi’a Jurists throughout history
=====================================================================================

1. Sheikh al-Mufeed, (d. 413 AH)
--------------------------------

Who says in al-Muqni’a, while explaining the obligation of the Friday
prayer and the Eid prayers: ‘the jurists of the Shi’a of the Progeny of
Muhammad (pbuh) must gather their brethren for Friday prayer and the Eid
prayers, as well the prayer of invoking rain, and the prayer of the
lunar and solar eclipse if they are able to do this...because the Imams
have left this authority for them in the case that they are able to do
this. This is indicated by as many narrations as you want me to quote,
including narrations which are authentic according to those who have
knowledge of narrations.’[^1]

He also said in his chapter on enjoining good and forbidding evil: ‘one
who is performing this obligation cannot kill or wound anyone except by
the permission of the ruler (i.e. qualified jurist) of the time who is
in charge of running the affairs of the nation’.

He also said in his chapter on wills: ‘...if there is no ruler (i.e. an
infallible Imam) to do what we mentioned in these chapters, it is for
the just, intelligent, virtuous jurists of the Shi’a to take the
authority over that which the ruler took authority over, but if they are
unable to do this then they are not liable’.[^2]

 He also said in his book on judicial punishment: ‘as for carrying out
the judicial punishment, it is the authority of the ruler of Islam, who
is appointed by Allah. These rulers are the Imams of guidance from among
the Progeny of Muhammad (pbuh), and those rulers and judges whom they
have appointed for this purpose. The Imams left the authority of
judgment to the jurists of their Shi’a if they are able to do this and
are not afraid that the tyrant ruler of the time may harm their children
or slaves etc...and the jurists of the Shia of the Imams (pbut) should
gather their brethren for the five daily prayers, the Eid prayers, the
prayer of invoking rain, the prayer of lunar and solar eclipse...and
they must judge between them by truth and bring resolutions in disputes
between them in the claims in the absence of any evidence...’[^3]

2. al-Sayyid al-Murtadha (d. 436 AH)
------------------------------------

He took charge of the affairs of Hajj and the two Sacred Mosques (in
Mecca and Medina), as well as the leadership of the assembly of the
Noble Descendents of the Prophet (P), and the position of supreme judge
for a period of thirty years during the reign of Buveydis dynasty[^4].
The fact that Sayyid al-Muratdha and other scholars like him accepted
these posts indicates that they believed in the guardianship of the
jurist and that these posts were a way of gaining some of the rights
from the tyrant rulers of their time.

3. Abul Salah al-Halabi (d. 447 AH)
-----------------------------------

He was the student of Sayyid al-Murtadha. He said in his chapter on
implementation of the rulings: ‘Implementing the rulings is the task of
the brave, insightful, just jurist who is able to implement the
rulings.’[^5]

4. al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli (d. 676 AH)
-----------------------------------

He says at the end of his chapter on Khums: ‘the one who has the power
to rule by the right of representation should take charge of using the
portion of the Imam for the existing groups (who are eligible recipients
of the Khums).’ [^6]*.*

Also, al-Shahidul Thani says in his book ‘al-Masalik’, in explanation of
the above words of al-Hilli: ‘what is meant by this is that the just,
Imami jurist who meets all the conditions has the authority to issue
rulings (fatawa) because he is the representative of the Imam (as) and
the one appointed by him’ [^7]*.* Muhaqqiq al-Hilli also said in the
chapter on ‘Wills’ in the above-mentioned book: ‘if one has no trustee,
then the ruler (i.e. the jurist ruler) is the guardian over what he
leaves behind’.

5. Ibn Fahd al-Hilli (d. 841 AH)
--------------------------------

He was the student of al-Shahidul Awwal (Muhammad Ibn Makki, martyred in
786 AH). He was one of the most famous believers in the general
guardianship of the jurist among the ancient scholars. He said in his
book ‘al-Lum’a al-Jaliyya fi Ma’rifatil Niyya’ in the chapter on
enjoining good and forbidding evil:

“(Enjoining good and forbidding evil have stages) the lowest of which is
believing that obligatory acts are obligatory, and forbidden acts are
forbidden. The next stage is to express dislike (when a sin is
committed), then to dissociate and turn away from the person committing
the detestable act…one should not move from one stage to the next unless
the lower stage does not have an effect.  
 If one needs to move to the stage of legislative punishment and
execution, this will be subject to the permission of the Imam (peace be
upon him)…and the jurist as his representative. It is also an obligation
on people to assist the jurist (in execution of the law).’

He also said regarding the intention of the jurist in paying the Khums
to those who deserve it that the jurist must intend the following:

‘*I intend to pay this amount to this deserving person because of my
power of attorney on behalf of so-and-so and my representation of the
Owner of the Affair (as)’* or *‘I extract this amount in representation
of the Owner of the Affair (as)…*’ [^8]

This indicates that the jurists take charge of these affairs in
representation of the Present Imam (as), even if apparently they are
appointed by certain rulers such as in the case of al-Sayyid
al-Murtadha.

Ibn Fahd further said: ‘Chapter 8 : On Jihad: Jihad is obligatory upon a
male, mature, free person who is free from blindness or chronic illness,
who has not been forbidden by his parents from participating and not so
poor that he cannot afford to pay for his own weaponry and expenses-
these latter conditions apply in the case where there are already
sufficient soldiers- if the Imam or his general representative; who is
the trustworthy jurist, or his specific representative call for a war
against: a *Harbi* [^9], or those who have broken the conditions of a
treaty, or the rebels, or in self-defense, whether in the presence of
the Imam or during his occultation.’ [^10]

6. Al-Muhaqqiq al-Thani (Nurul Deen al-Karaki, d. 940 AH)
---------------------------------------------------------

This scholar had a great role in the adoption of the general authority
of the jurist. It seems that the establishment of the Safavid dynasty in
Iran- which is considered the first Shiite government to control all of
Iran- helped Sheikh al-Muhaqqiq to make his political rulings public. He
said in his treatise on Friday Prayer: ‘Our scholars, may Allah be
pleased with them, are in agreement that the just, Imami, jurist who
meets all the conditions of issuing rulings, and who is called a
Mujtahid in the legislative rulings, is a representative on behalf of
the Guiding Imams (as) in anything in which such representation may be
involved…therefore it is obligatory to refer to such a jurist in legal
disputes and to abide by his rulings…including any authority that may be
proven for the appointee from the Imam (as)’. [^11]

This treatise can be found at the following web address:  
*[http://www.aqaed.com/shialib/books/all/09-ras-karaki/09-ras-karaki-01.ht...](http://www.aqaed.com/shialib/books/all/09-ras-karaki/09-ras-karaki-01.html#09rk05)*

He also said in another treatise, named ‘Qatiatul Lijaaj fi Tahqiq
Hallil Kharaj’: ‘if you say: is it permissible for the one who has the
power of representation during the state of occultation to take charge
of this (i.e. various types of tax)? I mean: can the qualified jurist
take charge of this affair?

We would say: we do not know of any clear expression of this from the
scholars. However, whoever considers it permissible for the jurists to
take charge of implementing legislative punishments and other tasks of
the post of leadership, must also consider this permissible by
precedence because this is less dangerous than that. This is especially
because the ones deserving (to be paid from these taxes) are present in
every age, and this is not a right that is limited to those fighting in
military battles only, as will come in future discussions.

If one reflectively and fairly analyses the situation of our great
scholars of the past, such as al-Sayyid al-Sharif al-Murtadha, the
guided scholar, and the most knowledgeable of scholars from among the
earlier and latter ones; the supporter of the truth and religion, Sheikh
a-Tusi, as well as the ocean of knowledge, the Mofti of all Muslim
sects, who is the adornment of the religion and community, al-Hassan ibn
al-Mutahhar (al-Hilli), and others, may Allah be pleased with them, he
will have no doubt that they had this view, and made this permissible,
and they would not fill their books except with that which they thought
was true’.[^12]

This treatise can be found at the following web address:  
*<http://www.aqaed.com/shialib/books/all/18-ras-karaki/18-ras-karaki-03.html>*

Muhaqqiq al-Karaki has also said: ‘our scholars have said regarding the
way that tax should be spent: the Imam should allocate it for the
sustenance of soldiers, governors, judges, as well as for other aspects
of governance’.[^13]

 7. al-Muhaddith Faydh al-Kashani (d.1090AH)
--------------------------------------------

He divided governments into legitimate and illegitimate and said that a
legitimate government has three examples:  
 -the first being the guardianship of the Prophet (pbuh)  
 -the second the guardianship of the infallible Imam (as)  
 -the third the guardianship of the jurist  
 He then proved the guardianship of the jurist using intellectual and
textual evidence. Refer to his book: *‘Mafatihul Sharai’*[^14]

 8. al-Wahid al-Bahbahani (d.1206AH)
------------------------------------

He is the first jurist of those we know that dedicated an independent
chapter to a discussion about the guardianship of the jurist. He
specified the thirty third section of his book ‘al-Fawa’id al-Hairiya’
for a discussion on the guardianship of the jurist and said that the
jurist is called a ‘mufti’ because he gives ‘fatwa’ (rulings) and is
called a ‘qadhi’ (judge) because he settles disputes, and is called
‘hakimul shari’ (the legislative ruler) because he has authority over
the political affairs of people.[^15]

9. Mulla Ahmad al-Naraqi (d.1245 AH)
------------------------------------

The teacher of Sheikh Murtadha al-Ansari and the author of ‘al-Jawahir’.
He is perhaps the first who dedicated a chapter to specifically discuss
the general guardianship of the jurist in his book *‘Awaidul
Ayyam’*[^16]

This can be found at the following web address.  
  *<http://www.naraqi.com/ara/g/g03/g03.htm>*

In this section, he says: ‘whatever the Prophet (pbuh) and the Imam
(as)-who were the rulers over the people and the fortresses of Islam-
had authority over and whatever right belong to them also belongs to the
jurist, except that which specific evidence- be it textual, consensual
or otherwise- has excluded’.

10. al-Sheikh Murtadha al-Ansari (d.1281)
-----------------------------------------

In his book ‘al-Makasib’, he limited the guardianship of the jurist to
the functions of giving rulings and settling legal disputes. He objected
to the authority to take charge of the affairs of people and said that
‘it would be easier to prove that pigs fly than to prove the general
guardianship of the jurist!’

11. Akhund Muhammad Kadhim al-Khurasani (d. 1329, after being poisoned).
------------------------------------------------------------------------

He was the author of ‘Kifayatul Usool’. He commented on the ‘Makasib’ of
Sheikh al-Ansari and agreed with him about the insufficiency of the
textual evidence in proving the general guardianship of the jurist.
However, he proved it through intellectual evidence.[^17]

12. Mirza Muhammad Husayn al-Na’ini (d.1355)
--------------------------------------------

He authored a book in the Farsi language regarding Islamic government
and called it ‘Tanbeehul Umma and Tanzeehul Milla’. He completed it in
1327 AH, that is, 28 years before his death. He authored this book at
the time of the ‘uprising of Mashroota’ in Iran and proved in it that
the general guardianship of the jurist is one of the clearest examples
of ‘*hisbi*’[^18] issues.

13. Sayyid Abul Qasim al-Khu’i (d. 1413)
----------------------------------------

His theory on the guardianship of the jurist is similar to Sheikh
al-Ansari’s one. He limited it to the authority to give rulings and to
judge in legal disputes. (Refer to *‘al-Tanqeeh fi Sharhil Makasib,
2:156-176)*

This book can be found at the following web address:  
*<http://www.al-khoei.us/books/index.php?id=5096>*

14. Imam al-Khomeini (d. 1409)
------------------------------

He clarified the theory of the general guardianship of the jurist in
twenty lectures of his ‘Bahthul Kharij’ (higher Islamic studies)
lectures in Najaf in 1348 AH. He said that the general guardianship of
the jurist is among the propositions whose proof lies within themselves.

[^1]: al-Muqni’a: 81

[^2]: al-Muqni’a: 675

[^3]: Ibid. p. 811

[^4]: The Buveyhids (Āle Booye) reigned between 320 to 440 AH. The time
of their rule is known as ‘the Renaissance of Islam

[^5]: al-Kafi fil Fiqh, p.442

[^6]: Sharaiul Islam, 1:213

[^7]: Masalikul Afham, 1:476

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Harbi; is the one who has waged a war on Muslims.

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Rasailul Muhaqqi al-Karaki, p.142

[^12]: Qatiatul Lijaj, p.60-61

[^13]: Ibid

[^14]: Mafatihul Sharai vol.2, p.50

[^15]: Refer to ‘al-Fawa’id al-Hairiya, p.501-502

[^16]: Awaidul Ayyam section 54

[^17]: Commentary on al-Makasib, p.93

[^18]: Any affair in the Muslim community for which there is no specific
guardian. On all such issues a just jurist is the guardian


