Titel
=====

  
  

![](images/besm.jpg)

  

In the Name of God  
 The Merciful, the Compassionate
--------------------------------

  
  
  
  

##### In the Name of God; The Merciful, the Compassionate {style="text-align: center"}

**Translator’s Note**

The Height of Rhetoric or the noble book entitled “Nahj Al-Fasahah” is
an unparalleled treasure of the eloquent wise sayings of the Holy
Prophet of Islam (P.B.U.H.). It was first collected by the late
Abulghasim Payande and published in 1957 A.D. as an Arabic-Persian
edition, containing traditions. It has been widely in use by both the
public and the elite since then for deriving guidance from the Holy
Prophet’s ocean of lore to pave the rocky paths of man’s life.

The motive to reconstruct the book into an English edition rose from the
fact that most of the previously-published English renderings of the
Holy Prophet’s sayings were either extracted from certain specific
sources not endorsed by all Islamic sects, or were incomplete in terms
of the boundless number of traditions coming down to us from the Holy
Prophet of Islam (P.B.U.H). Thus, the translator embarked on the
achievement of the great goal of translating “Nahj Al-Fasaaha” as
documented on many a Shiite and Sunnite source. In so doing, a number of
translation strategies were employed as mentioned below:

· Efforts were made to observe the highest degree of “fidelity” to the
Arabic version of the book in terms of the semantic delicacies of each
saying.

· Wherever possible, the shinning aesthetic elements of the source text
concerning the brevity, eloquence and coherence of the original
discourse, was kept intact.

· In a good number of cases, for the sake of semantic explicitation,
brief lexical or phrasal items were properly incorporated into the
English version.

Finally, it is to be admitted here that since translation is to a great
extent a matter of taste, the present English translation is by no means
claimed to be a perfect flawless rendering of the Holy Prophet’s highly
eloquent and deeply meaningful sayings. It simply mirrors what was
expressed to ordinary human beings through the tongue of the receiver of
Divine revelation, Muhammad (P.B.U.H.) who stood at heavenly heights in
all and every aspects of worldly and otherworldly life.

**Dr. Hossein Vahid Dastjerdi**


