Foreword
========

The discussion regarding the resurrection of man after death is, in
reality, an answer to a general and universal question. In addition, it
is also the answer to an individual and social need, in the meaning
that, with the proving and establishment of the life after death, one of
the most important individual and social needs of man - and that is -
the love for permanence (or love for eternity) shall be fulfilled. Most
important of all, man, in the light of his belief in Resurrection and in
an eternal life, becomes directed, motivated and purposeful in his
worldly life and saves the priceless moments of his life from becoming
aimless and without goal and direction.

From another aspect, with the clarification and understanding of the
issue of Resurrection, an important historical, philosophical,
scientific and social issue, and the summary of a doctrinal and
religious belief, shall find itself the object of discussion and
deliberation. That faith and belief which has been the object of deep
attention of all the Divine religions and amongst them - Islam, and
towards which they have attached a great deal of importance.

So much so that, the Holy Qur’an has always mentioned the belief in
Resurrection and life after death, after mentioning the belief in God.
The importance which the Holy Qur’an associates with this issue is such
that some of the commentators of the Holy Qur’an have said that a third
of the Holy Qur’an - directly or indirectly - deals with the issue of
Resurrection.

However, it must be understood that the scope of the discussion of
Resurrection is very vast and encompasses different and varied
discussions within itself. However, considering the fact that this
present work is only a brief discourse regarding Resurrection, it is
only natural that many of the secondary aspects and some of the
fundamental aspects which are related to the main discussion may not
have been fully dealt with or if dealt with, may not be in an expanded
and detailed manner as it ought to have been.

In spite of this, particularities in the topics under discussion have
been taken into consideration so as to render the reader independent of
the need to refer to any other detailed work. Especially the young
readers, who, by means of a short study, wish to obtain all that is
necessary to know pertaining to Resurrection and gain the necessary
knowledge and belief regarding it.

This book comprises of three parts, which are as follows:

Part 1: Eternity of Man.  
 Part 2: Death or Another Birth.  
 Part 3: The Multilateral Influences of the belief in Resurrection.

In Part 1, the concept of Resurrection and the various theories and
opinions regarding it have been mentioned and critically dealt with.
After that, in a separate chapter, the possibility of Resurrection and
the proofs for it, have been presented. Then, we have dwelt upon the
need and the necessity of the Resurrection of man after death. Because
of its importance, we have deliberated this part, especially the
discussion of the Immateriality of the Soul, in a more detailed manner.
In the last chapter, we have discussed the corporeal resurrection and
have thus brought to conclusion Part 1 of the book.

In Part 2 also, the essence and the reality of death has been the focus
of attention and discussion following which, the view of the Holy Qur’an
and the Islamic traditions regarding it has been the subject of debate
and deliberation. In this chapter, the philosophy of death has also been
focused upon. In the subsequent chapter of this Part, causes and factors
of the fear of death have been propounded and deliberated. In the last
chapter of this Part, we have dwelt upon the type of relation between
this world and the Hereafter, and investigated it according to the
Islamic and Qur’anic outlook.

In Part 3, the concluding part of the book, a summary of some of the
important effects of the belief in Resurrection has been propounded and
has been the focus of investigation and deliberation.

The point to be mentioned is that the topics in this book have been
discussed in a fluent and flowing manner and without any intricacies and
unnecessary jargon and the deep and profound philosophical, scientific
and Gnostic points have been included within other subject matters in a
simple language. In other words, in spite of the fact that the entire
discussion comprises of philosophical, scientific and Gnostic aspects
and is useful for men of learning, at the same time, it is completely
comprehensible for the adolescents and the youths also.

Was-Salaam.


