Part 3: The Multilateral Influences of the belief in Resurrection
=================================================================

If, at a time, it was imagined that mind and intelligence taking the
place of God and armed with knowledge, it is possible to lead the
society to happiness and tranquility today, such an imagination and
misconception, would find no place for itself in the human society. This
is because experience has shown that the advancement of knowledge also
cannot overcome the human problems.

Indeed it cannot be denied that the efforts of the scholars have yielded
great results in the field of inventions and discoveries, which have
changed the lives of humans but in exchange have brought forward new,
complex and bigger problems as presents. Problems such as weapons of
mass destruction, devastating wars on the face of the earth, new and
killing diseases, and spread of psychological sicknesses and suicides
are some of these problems.

On the other hand, the passing of times and experience have shown that
setting up of laws or external pressure for the purpose of training and
controlling man is not very efficient. This is because those people who
possess power and the others, each one trample the laws beneath their
feet or find a way to escape from it. Whereas, if the factor which
controls man is belief and internal to man, the results shall be
definitely better.

Accordingly, Islam has placed the training and controlling factor of man
within himself, and with the faith in Allah and a sincere conviction
regarding Resurrection, it has paved and evened out the way for him to
become a true human and so also for his development and perfection, such
that should a person or a society, really act upon these Islamic
teachings, or at the least, achieve a firm conviction regarding the
Universal Resurrection and the life after death, then he has laid out
the foundation for his and his society's happiness. Here, we shall
mention concisely only a few examples of the influence of this
liberating and constructive belief.

1. Spiritual Tranquility
------------------------

It has been proven by experience that material luxuries, successes and
pleasure seeking on his own, cannot take man to his objective and to
ease and happiness. That which can make life sour for man in spite of
having all the material luxuries is anxiety and mental and psychological
disturbances. These anxieties and disturbances, more than anything,
cause suffering to man and is the reason for an increase in suicide and
drug tragedies, which threaten the present civilization.

Unfortunately, this present century of ours, in spite of the advancement
of knowledge, sophistication of technology, the diminishing of the hours
of work and also the simplification of the various works which
previously were performed with great difficulty, and similarly the
quantitative and qualitative increase in the various types of
amusements, as also their being in the reach and use of the general
public, have not only not reduced the anxiety and the disturbance of the
mind, but according to the sociologists and the psychologists, the
spiritual diseases are on the ascent.

One of the main reasons for this new chaos and the spreading of the
spiritual diseases is the feeling of emptiness in the life and it being
without a purpose. The twentieth century man has, by turning away from
religion and placing aside the necessary and life-constructing beliefs
of it, entangled himself in an empty and purposeless life and has
painted for himself a terrifying face of death and as a result has
become caught in life-taking sufferings which he could never have even
imagined.

Professor Young one of the famous psycho-analyst and one of the
well-known assistants of Freud says: “Two thirds of the people, from all
over the world, who have consulted me are people who are educated and
successful in life, the major trouble of them being the emptiness and
aimlessness in life and this major trouble is causing them suffering,
anxiety and disturbance of mind. The reason for this problem of man in
the twentieth century is haughtiness resulting from sophistication in
technology, shortsightedness and prejudice which resulted in their
losing their religion, and even now, until they do not revert to the
correct religious beliefs, they shall not attain tranquility, because
irreligiousness means emptiness and absence of purpose in life.”[^1]

Not only does lack of belief in life after death, fill the life of man
with anxiety, distress and purposelessness, but also tends to strike out
at the instinct of the love for permanence of man. In other words, man
who is always seeking perfection and eternity will never be satisfied
with this limited material world and in no way shall achieve his
tranquility in this cage. Whereas, the belief in resurrection and an
eternal life fulfils this desire and in its light shall obtain the
spiritual tranquility, and shall attain freedom from the sufferings and
diseases resulting from this anxiety and disturbance of the mind.

2. Justice and Social Security
------------------------------

Great efforts have taken place in various human societies, so that by
some means, justice and social security be established and the
violations and crimes diminish or cease altogether. However, one
fundamental problem which exists in these efforts is that they desire to
compel the individuals to a desired state by setting laws and building
prisons and in short, by using an external control, but this method did
not have any effectiveness, and was tested time and again.

This is because if the control is only by means of laws and other
controlling tools, which work on an individual externally, then the
leaders and chiefs who exercise control over the people shall consider
themselves exceptions to the law or may find means to escape from it and
thus abscond.

In addition, in the courts also, important factors like recommendation,
bribes presentation of forged documents and thousands of other
deceptions, play a pivotal role. In short, that which is not exercised
is the Truth and that which is not heard is the complaints of the
oppressed.

It is because of this lack of effectiveness of the laws and other
methods of control, that the national security and the defense budgets
are always on the increase and the prisons are increasing day by day,
whereas if, alongside these measures and laws, an internal control also
existed, the results would be much better.

That is, if an individual (or a society) believes that after death, he
would have to be present in a court in which he shall witness the
reality of his deeds and their results without the slightest reduction
and should he have any objection, the parts of his body which performed
the deeds would stand witness against him and in addition to this, in
such a court, no bribes, friendship, recommendation and reconsideration
exist.

In such a circumstance, how much would crime, violations and revolts
diminish in the society? It is possible to claim that basically, with
the presence of such a faith and belief, the occurrence of such acts of
crime and violations, is strange and unanticipated and would, in all
totality, become effaced and cease to exist.

Of course, since varied instincts and numerous and at times
contradictory, tendencies exist within man, violations and crime cannot
be totally uprooted from the human society, however at the very least,
the part played by these beliefs and the internal control with regards
to the happenings which usually take place in material, godless and
irreligious societies, is beyond question and denial.

Another point being, it should not be concluded that thus, no offence
and crime exist in the Islamic and religious societies or that the state
of these societies are, according to statistics, cent per cent better
than the other societies (which indeed is), because two fundamental
factors serve as a hindrance for the total up-rootment of offences and
crime in the human and religious societies, and they are as follows:

i) The varied and at times contrasting instincts of men, shall continue
to incline man towards uncleanness.

ii) Weak beliefs of the people with respect to Allah and Resurrection
after death.

Hence, however much the beliefs of the people with respect to Allah and
life after death become stronger and deep-rooted, calmness and security
shall increase in the society and as a result, the quantity of offences,
crimes, treason, criminals and prisoners shall decrease.

3. Stimulus for service and performance of good deeds
-----------------------------------------------------

One who does not have faith in Resurrection and life after death and
seeks the rewards of his deeds in this very world, does not have
sufficient stimulus for fulfilling the needs and wants of other
individuals. Hence if he sees a miserable person, he shall not come
forward to help him out of his misery, except if it has some benefit in
store for him.

For example, by providing this service, he can use that person to his
benefit. On the contrary, one who has faith in life after death and
knows that the rewards for his deeds shall be received by him completely
in the other world, with regards to helping the poor and the helpless
and fulfilling the needs of the needy and for all good deeds in general,
is strongly motivated.

His stimulus is not the worldly benefits, but seeks his rewards from
Allah and knows that Allah shall grant the best of the rewards in this
world and the hereafter (the day when he is most in need of the
rewards).

Regarding this, Hazrat ‘Ali (‘a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أيقن بالخلف جاد بالعطيّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

“One who, with respect to the (rewards of) the day of Resurrection, has
firm belief and conviction, shall behave in a goodly manner while
serving others.”[^2]

This sentence of Hazrat ‘Ali (‘a) very clearly relates the stimulus for
serving others and the performance of good deeds in the light of the
belief in resurrection. On the other hand, some of the Qur’anic verses
mention the lack of stimulus in the unbelievers and the deniers of the
day of Resurrection, for serving others, in this fashion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَأَيْتَ الَّذِي يُكَذِّبُ بِالدِّينِ فَذَلِكَ الَّذِي يَدُعُّ
الْيَتِيمَ وَلاَ يَحُضُّ عَلَى طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you considered him who calls the Final Judgement a lie?***
***That is the one who repels the orphan.*** ***And does not urge the
(others) to feed the poor.”*** [^3]

The belief in the day of resurrection and the day of rewards and
punishments become reason that man on the one hand, reforms his
connection with Allah, while on the other hand, adjusts and makes right
his connection with the creations of Allah. As a result, giving charity
and helping others is not difficult for him, because he is convinced
that the rewards for his deeds and much more than what he anticipated,
shall be given by Allah in this world and the hereafter.

In short, the belief in life after death also breathes a meaning into
the life of this world, and instills a sense of responsibility into the
hearts of the people. It compels them, to the understanding of the
responsibilities, righteousness and truthfulness in serving others and
performance of good deeds and helps them from refraining from the
uncleanness in the same measure as the strength of their conviction in
the rewards and punishment of the day of resurrection.

4. Liberation from baseness and pollution
-----------------------------------------

One, who does not believe in his eternal life, cannot choose for himself
objectives beyond his material and animal needs. As a result, all of his
objectives shall be summarized in the fulfillment of his carnal
instincts and attainment of the base and worldly lusts.

Such individual or individuals cannot have a search for things other
than profits, pleasures or attainment of wealth and power. Once such a
thing happens, man is ready to indulge in every crime and submerge in
every kind of lust and dirtiness, so as to achieve his base and
materialistic objectives. As a result, laws, morals, piety and service
of people and... do not mean anything to him.

On the contrary, one who believes in resurrection, considers the life of
the world to be a preamble to his eternal life and, all his efforts and
struggles are directed towards the selection of high, lofty and eternal
objectives which can help him in the future and which can make him happy
and successful.

Hence, he shall not drown himself in lust and base and transient worldly
objectives. He shall not get entangled in uncleanness and shall not
indulge in crimes and offences and shall not be willing to commit
suicide or inflict injuries to his body and soul. He shall tolerate the
difficulties and the sufferings of life for the purpose of reaching his
lofty objectives. In short, he shall choose a clean life and a goodly
path for himself.

The Holy Qur’an mentions one of the reasons for the pollution of the
polluted ones of the hell, in their own words, to be the lack of belief
in resurrection and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ وَلَمْ نَكُ نُطْعِمُ الْمِسْكِينَ
وَكُنَّا نَخُوضُ مَعَ الْخَائِضِينَ وَكُنَّا نُكَذِّبُ بِيَوْمِ
الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They shall say: We were not of those who offered the regular
prayers.*** ***And we used not to feed the poor.*** ***And we used to
enter into vain discourse with those who entered into vain
discourses.*** ***And we used to belie the Day of Judgement.”*** [^4]

Thus, four basic reasons for facing the punishment and suffering on the
day of resurrection has been mentioned, one of which is the lack of
faith and the denial of the resurrection.

5. Moderation in the acquisition and consumption of Income
----------------------------------------------------------

An individual or a society which does not believe in life after death,
shall, in every economic matter, strive to increase its income by means
of deceit, trickery, fraud and treachery, or by performing less shall
try to achieve a greater benefit. In addition, when he has gathered
wealth, he shall not spend it for the goodness of himself or the
society, but indulge in extravagance and lavishness and in reality drags
the financial resources of the society towards destruction.

On the contrary, the individual or the society which has faith in life
after death, not only takes into consideration the Divine and the human
criteria for acquiring of the wealth and never strives to collect wealth
in every manner possible, but even during consumption of the wealth,
always takes into consideration the rights of the society.

Unfortunately, that which is destroying the material resources of this
world in this era of ours is the lack of consideration of these two
important points.

In other words, in the twentieth century, the western civilization, and
man in general, with the advancement of knowledge and technology, has
extracted the god-given resources in every way possible, without giving
thought to the protection of the environment or the rights of the coming
generations and after that, in its consumption also has not exercised
moderation and consideration to the social rights.

Consequently, it has destroyed the economic resources and the
environment of the world as well as corrupted them.

Here, it is interesting to note that man, after years of destruction of
the economic resources and the environment, and extravagance in the
consumption of the divine bounties, has now sat back to reflect upon the
protection of the environment and more interesting is that the
researches of the scholars have shown that the only serious and
effective way to protect the environment and to give importance to the
economic resources and to safeguard the rights of the future generations
lies in the religious teachings and amongst them the belief in the
continuation of life after death. With this and the other religious
beliefs, it is possible to have an effective check on the pollution of
the water, jungles, the incessant consumption of the underground
resources and.... etc.

In addition, on the basis of this belief, it is possible to establish
the foundations of a correct economic connection in the society and thus
stop the economic trickery, fraud and treachery in check.

Hazrat ‘Ali (‘a) has very sweet and eloquent statements in this regard.
Amongst them, in one of his letters to one of his governors, who had
misused some funds from the public treasury, after reprimanding and
rebuking him, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فسيبحان الله! أما تؤمن بالمعاد؟ أو ما تخاف نقاش الحساب؟""
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Glory be to God! Do you not believe in Resurrection and do you not fear
the accounting and the questioning (of that day?”[^5]

Hence, if one believes in the day of resurrection and does not forget
it, he will never misappropriate the funds from the public treasury. A
prominent example and a practical and perfect model of this reality is
Hazrat ‘Ali (‘a) who has narrated the incident of himself and his
brother Aqil, whereby he states: “ By God, I saw Aqil disturbed and in a
state of abject poverty. He wanted me to give him some of your wheat
(public treasury) and I saw his children whom due to poverty had their
hair disheveled and their skin darkened, as if color had been applied to
their faces. He would keep visiting me and repeat his request. He
imagined that I had given in to his requests.

Then I heated an iron piece and brought it close to him. He wailed out
in a manner as a sick person would in pain. He was near to be scalded by
the heated iron. I told him “May the criers cry over you as a mother
cries over her burnt child. You wail of the iron which man has playfully
made hot and wish to drag me into the fire, which the Powerful God has
heated by His anger? You moan due to the suffering and I should not moan
from the burning due to the anger of the Creator?”[^6]

The Holy Qur’an also, after threatening them with the sentence, “Woe
unto the defrauders in measuring”, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ يَظُنُّ أُولَئِكَ أَنَّهُمْ مَبْعُوثُونَ لِيَوْمٍ عَظِيمٍ يَوْمَ
يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What!*** ***Think they not that they shall be raised.*** ***For a
Mighty Day.*** ***On the day when men shall stand before the Lord of the
worlds?”***[^7]

From these verses, it can be clearly understood that the belief in
Resurrection refrains man from overcharging and other illegal economic
actions. Perhaps the reason that the Holy Qur’an mentions the name of
the overchargers and threatens them, could be that one of the important
economic problems and offences during the time of the revelation of the
Holy Qur’an and also throughout the eras, was and is, overcharging.

Anyway, one of the most important results and effects of the belief of
Resurrection, is moderation in the consumption, and non-performance of
treachery and offence in the way of acquisition of income and also
non-destruction of the economic resources and the environment.

6. Steadfastness in Jihad and the battlefield
---------------------------------------------

One of the other most important effects of the belief in Resurrection is
steadfastness in the battlefield and perseverance on the path of Truth.
This is because, one not having faith in life after death, when
confronted by an adversary, does not have the stimulus for being
steadfast and at times being killed. As a result, he is always in a
state of fear, hesitation and disturbance and at an opportune time shall
readily take to flight.

Such a person shall not only not show steadfastness in the battle-field,
but also, during his entire life, whenever he encounters any obstacle in
the course of a divine or human objective, he shall change his course
and altogether deviate from his path, objective and ideas.

But one who believes in the life after death and considers it to be
better, wider and more perfect, in the battle-field, not only does he
not choose flight, but even fear does not overcome him. He believes in
the Holy Qur’an, which mentions the final outcome of a soldier of a
religious war and knows that eventually, he would either be victorious,
or attain martyrdom and eternal happiness. The Holy Qur’an mentions the
final outcome of a soldier fighting for truth as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هَلْ تَتَربَّصُونَ بِنَا إِلاَ إِحْدَى الْحُسْنَيَيْنِ وَنَحْنُ
نَتَرَبَّصُ بِكُمْ أَنْ يُصِيبَكُمْ اللَّهُ بِعَذَابٍ مِنْ عِنْدِهِ
أَوْ بِأَيْدِينَا فَتَرَبَّصُوا إِنَّا مَعَكُمْ مُتَرَبِّصُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Do you wait for us but one of two most excellent things?***
***And we wait for you that Allah will afflict you with punishment from
Himself or by our hands.*** ***So wait; we too will wait with
you.”***[^8]

In short, the belief in the life after death is the cause for
steadfastness, perseverance and incessant strivations in the battlefield
and also during the entire life of a person and in all occasions which
demand strife and struggle. The Holy Qur’an while mentioning the
incident of a group from the Bani Israel who were under the command of
Hazrat Saul (Talut) when embarking on a war with Goliath (Jalut)
explains beautifully and subtly the mentality and the characteristics of
those accompanying Hazrat Saul and the part played by the belief and the
lack of belief in Resurrection saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا فَصَلَ طَالُوتُ بِالْجُنُودِ قَالَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
مُبْتَلِيكُمْ بِنَهَرٍ فَمَنْ شَرِبَ مِنْهُ فَلَيْسَ مِنِّي وَمَنْ
لَمْ يَطْعَمْهُ فَإِنَّهُ مِنِّي إِلاَ مَنْ اغْتَرَفَ غُرْفَةً
بِيَدِهِ فَشَرِبُوا مِنْهُ إِلاَّ قَلِيلًا مِنْهُمْ فَلَمَّا جَاوَزَهُ
هُوَ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مَعَهُ قَالُوا لاَ طَاقَةَ لَنَا الْيَوْمَ
بِجَالُوتَ وَجُنُودِهِ قَالَ الَّذِينَ يَظُنُّونَ أَنَّهُمْ مُلاَقُو
اللَّهِ كَمْ مِنْ فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ
اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ مَعَ الصَّابِرِينَ وَلَمَّا بَرَزُوا لِجَالُوتَ
وَجُنُودِهِ قَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا وَثَبِّتْ
أَقْدَامَنَا وَانْصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ فَهَزَمُوهُمْ
بِإِذْنِ اللَّهِ وَقَتَلَ دَاوُودُ جَالُوتَ وَآتَاهُ اللَّهُ الْمُلْكَ
وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَعَلَّمَهُ مِمَّا يَشَاءُ وَلَوْلاَ دَفْعُ اللَّهِ
النَّاسَ بَعْضَهُمْ بِبَعْضٍ لَفَسَدَتْ الْأَرْضُ وَلَكِنَّ اللَّهَ
ذُو فَضْلٍ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when Talut departed with the forces, he said: Surely Allah will
try you with a river; Whoever then drinks from it, he is not of me, and
whoever does not taste of it, he is surely of me, except he who takes
with his hand as much of it as fills the hand; but with the exception of
a few of them they drank from it.*** ***So when he had crossed it, he
and those who believed with him, they said: We have today no power
against Jalut and his forces.*** ***Those who were sure that they would
meet their Lord said; How often has a small party vanquished a numerous
host by Allah’s permission and Allah is with the patient.*** ***And when
they went out against Jalut and his forces they said: Our Lord pour down
upon us patience, and make our steps firm and assist us against the
unbelieving people.*** ***So they put them to flight by Allah’s
permission.*** ***And Dawood slew Jalut...***”[^9]

The faith and belief in resurrection and life after death, made the
Muslims and the soldiers at the time of the advent of Islam so much
desirous of martyrdom that they did not in the least fear death and
without any fear, alarm or disturbance of mind, they would bravely rush
into the ranks of their enemies. This unbelievable morale and bravery
was a cause for astonishment and perplexity for the unbelievers. As a
result, the hypocrites, for justifying their fearfulness and the
fearlessness of the real soldiers of Islam, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ يَقُولُ الْمُنَافِقُونَ وَالَّذِينَ فِي قُلُوبِهِمْ مَرَضٌ غَرَّ
هَؤُلَاءِ دِينُهُمْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the hypocrites and those whom in their hearts is a disease
said amongst themselves: Their religion has beguiled them.”***[^10]

The purport of the hypocrites from the above sentence was that the real
soldiers and Muslims have been deceived by the faith in the resurrection
and are warring, with manifest bravery and valor, for the purpose of the
meeting their Lord.

It is interesting to know that during the Revolution and especially in
the 8 years of the Holy Defense, we ourselves were witness to such
morale and bravery that no justification other than the love for
martyrdom, exists for it. And more interesting, the enemies and those
weak in faith also made the same judgement as that made by the
hypocrites of the era of the advent of Islam, that “these adolescents
and youths have been deceived.”

Nevertheless, in spite of the fact that the effects of the belief in the
resurrection are exhaustive, we shall content ourselves with these few
examples, with the hope that we ourselves be among the true believers of
the day of resurrection and also with the hope that Allah, in every
state and circumstance, especially on that Day, be our Helper.

Was-salaam.

[^1]: Muĥammad Taqi Falsafi, Ma'ad az Nazar Rùh wa Jism, Vol. 1, Pg.,
24.

[^2]: Nahjul Balaghah, Short sayings, Wisdom 138

[^3]: Ma'un (107):1-3

[^4]: Muddassir (74):43-46

[^5]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Saleh, Letter No, 41

[^6]: Nahjul Balaghah, Subhi Saleh, Sermon No. 224. Translation by
Doctor Syed Ja’far Shahidi.

[^7]: Mutaffifeen (83):4-6

[^8]: Taubah (9):52

[^9]: Baqarah (2):249-251

[^10]: Anfal (8):49


