Different views regarding the meaning of Resurrection
=====================================================

Before we proceed with the proofs of the possibility of the eternity of
man, it is necessary that we clarify what is our view with respect to
life after death and the eternity of man. Just as one's impression
regarding a matter, differs from person to person, views and opinions
about life after death also differ. Here, four views worthy of attention
exist.

1. We find for ourselves, in the traces or the people that remain after
our deaths, a living presence, and in this way attain eternity. We call
this view, Eternity in Reminiscence. Industrialists, craftsmen, writers
and artists leave behind traces and memories of themselves (such as
their beliefs, hopes, tragedies and ideologies). They hope that whatever
they have created, attain a stable value and position so that their
names attain a life, which is much longer than their own. Others, due to
the traces, which they leave on the pages of history, become eternal.

2. Man prolongs and continues his existence within his offspring and
progeny and in this way becomes eternal. Man has got a yearning for
eternity and non-acceptance of extinction, and the reproduction of
offspring is a means of escape from the feeling of failure resulting
from the realization of the inevitable extinction of man. We seek the
extension of our lives in the lives of our children. Very many people
yearn to have a male child so that their family names continue to
remain. They name their children after themselves or their ancestors and
pressurize their children to accept their beliefs, ideals, objectives,
and to choose their profession.

3. After death, we experience union with the Ultimate Truth, which
ultimately is Unity. That is, we in our worldly lives have forgotten our
fundamental oneness and unity with The One Entity (God) and have erred
in our thinking that we are distinct and separate to The One Entity. One
day we shall realize that our separation from The One Entity was nothing
but a misconception and with the freedom (from this misconception), we
shall, once again, unite with Him.

4. It is possible to call the fourth view as “Individual life, after
death”. According to this view, individuals after the physical death,
either continues their own lives or after a period of time, start their
own lives once again.

For each of these four views, especially the third and the fourth, it is
possible to have different interpretations, such that, some of the
interpretations can portray the Islamic concept of Resurrection to a
certain extent.

However, it should be noted that the first and the second view shall not
be the focus of attention, because:

Firstly: Our view and that of all the other Divine religions regarding
Resurrection cannot be the first two views but a wider, subtler, more
transcendental and more ethical than them.

Secondly: With respect to the first two views, we do not have any
conflict with the materialists and the deniers of resurrection, in the
meaning that even they accept these two views.

Thirdly: The first view does not include all the people, but is
restricted to craftsmen, actors, writers and... Whereas the resurrection
under consideration of Islam and the Divine religions includes all the
people.

On the other hand, the second view lacks the moral and spiritual
aspects, which is anticipated as a result of the belief in Resurrection.
In other words, belief in Resurrection is regarded to be the source of
spirituality and virtues, whereas, according to the second view, this
most fundamental result is conveniently forgotten.

The third view, in spite of the fact that it is, fundamentally, not
incompatible with the beliefs of Islam and the Divine religions
regarding resurrection, and can be accepted in general, but all the same
it is not possible that the Islamic view on Resurrection be summarized
as the third view, especially, considering the problems that this view
is encountering. For example, according to this view, man, after death
gets united with the One Entity and in that state, is unaware of his
individuality or even his distinction, similar to a drop which unites
with the ocean. In this assumption, the drop unites with the One Whole;
however, its identity does not remain protected.

Therefore, it must be said that our discussion is restricted to the 4th
view among the meanings of Resurrection - of course, by taking into
consideration the explanations and particularities that shall be
propounded in the course of the discussion.


