Proofs for the Necessity of Eternity of Man
===========================================

In the previous chapter, the arguments of the deniers of Resurrection
were, to a certain extent, propounded. After that, the verses that
pointed out to the Power of Allah in creating man and the universe and
as a result, proving the Power of Allah for granting life once again to
man, were briefly studied. In short, the reasoning of the previous
chapter revolved around the possibility of Resurrection.

However the proofs for the need and necessity of Resurrection were not
mentioned. Because of this, we shall place this matter under discussion
in the third chapter. Here it is necessary we mention that the Holy
Qur’an has never based any of its religious beliefs on forced devotion
or statements without proofs and evidences, but instead, the subject
matter and their interpretation are always based on sound and rational
reasoning. The proofs and the reasoning, which appear in the Holy Qur’an
for proving the certainty of the occurrence of Resurrection, shall be
mentioned here.

1. The Ultimate aim of Motion of Objects
----------------------------------------

Each and every object in this universe, from the minute atoms to the
gigantic galaxies, are perpetually in a state of motion. Generally, this
motion must be for an aim or objective, because, motion without an aim
does not exist. In other words, the underlying reason for every motion
is to reach perfection and step from potentiality into actuality, and
objects, till such a time that they do not attain their aim and
objective, cannot attain tranquility.

According to this, if an appointed aim itself possesses another aim and
objective, it can be understood that, it was not propounded as an
ultimate aim from the very onset but was just a route and a course,
which we had assumed to be the aim and objective. Because, the
inevitable fall-out of a real and an ultimate aim is that the mover,
upon reaching the ultimate aim attains tranquility and becomes
stationary.

As a result, if we assume infinite aims for the motion of objects, it is
equivalent to considering them aimless and without any objective, since
in any event, it is necessary that the chain of aims and objectives
reach a terminus, just as it is absolutely necessary that the chain of
'efficient causes' reach a cause who is the First Agent and the Inherent
Origin of the entire existence, otherwise it would be as if the universe
is without an Origin and an Agent.[^1]

The Holy Qur’an considers Resurrection to be the terminus of the motion
of objects and believes that reaching Allah is their ultimate aim and
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ إِلَى رَبِّكَ الْمُنْتَهَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that to your Lord is the goal.”***[^2]

An interesting point here is that one of the attributes and names of
Resurrection and the Hereafter is **دَارُ الْقَرَارِ** Dar-ul-Qarar
meaning the 'final halting-place', 'place of rest', 'house of peace and
tranquility'.

The Holy Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَاقَوْمِ إِنَّمَا هَذِهِ الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا مَتَاعٌ وَإِنَّ
الْآخِرَةَ هِيَ دَارُ الْقَرَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“ And verily, the hereafter is the abode to settle.”*** [^3]

So, just as the origin of creation and the start of the motion of
objects is from Allah, the termination of the motion of objects is also
the return towards Allah.[^4]

2. Divine Wisdom
----------------

In order to prove, the Resurrection of man being necessary by means of
the 'Wisdom Proof' certain presumptions are required, which have to be
previously established by other proofs and evidences. Some of these
presumptions are as follows: -

1) Allah, the Wise Creator, has created the Entire Existence.

2) This Creator, according to the exigency of being Wise, does not
indulge in vain and purposeless activities.

In addition to the above mentioned two points, which should be
previously proved and established in their appropriate places, another
matter must also be placed under discussion here, in the form of a
premise. That matter is that there is a marked difference between the
'Aim of the Agent' and the 'Aim of the Act' and that the two are not the
same. According to this, Allah in accordance with the necessity of His
Inherent Needlessness, is not in need of a thing such that by performing
an action He can obtain that thing, however, at the same time, the Acts
of Allah also cannot be without aim and purpose or in other words vain
and purposeless.

So Allah does not have the 'Aim of the Agent'. That is, by creating His
creations, He does not wish to attain a Perfection, which He did not
previously possess. But at the same time He does have the 'Aim of the
Act', in the meaning that creating the creations so that the creations
themselves reach perfection, is the aim and purpose which Allah has
ascertained for them. And because of this, the Holy Qur’an regarding the
'Aim of the Act' of Allah in creating His creations states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنسَ إِلاَّ لِيَعْبُدُونِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And I have not created the jinn and men, but that they worship
me.***”[^5]

This verse, in reality, presents the 'Aim of the Act’ of Allah, in the
meaning that if the creations of Allah did not recognize and worship
Allah, they themselves have suffered losses and have not attained their
Spiritual Perfection - which has been the aim and purpose of their
creation. Not in the meaning that Allah had an aim and has not achieved
it, because this meaning is incompatible with the Inherent Needlessness
of Allah. In addition to this, the Holy Qur’an itself pronounces Allah
as not being in need of worship and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنْ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever disbelieves, then Surely Allah is Self-Sufficiently
independent of the worlds.”*** [^6]

So, if the recognition and the worship is not achieved, the creations
have not reached their aim and purpose, that the Creator is deprived of
his aim and purpose. This is because the Inherent Needlessness and the
Inherent Essentiality will not have an aim and purpose different from
the Infinite Essence and also will not have the ability to accept any
violation, because it itself is the actual aim and purpose.

After this premise and the clarification of the distinction between the
'Aim of the Agent' and the 'Aim of the Act', we shall state that the
creation of the universe is not without aim and purpose because our
assumption was that the Creator of the universe is Wise and does not
indulge in vain acts.

The next point is that, the short life of this world cannot be the aim
and purpose of this creation, because, in the worldly life, there always
exist a chain of troublesome and worrying events like shortages,
deprivations, destruction and inconveniences.

In other words, this present worldly life is intermingled with troubles
and disturbances and as a result cannot be considered to be the aim of
creation, because aim and purpose should be such that, as a result of
it, the act of creation becomes perfect and the benefits of it return
back to the creatures and servants.

Hence, with no other option, there must exist another world which would
be the aim and purpose of man's journey towards attainment of
perfection, such that man, upon reaching it, should consider the aim and
wisdom of the act of creation, to be practical and completed.

For providing more explanation, it is possible to say that the present
world and all that in which we are leading our lives is very large and
wondrous and the Power which causes the growth of a plant and provides
it the strength to slit open the surface of the earth or at times split
open hard rock or even the asphalt of the roads and emerge out, and also
the Power, which has brought forth the gigantic galaxies into motion
with an absolutely accurate calculation, the same Power is the Boundless
Intelligence, who has created man as His most superior creation.

Accordingly, if it is deemed that this most superior creation, is for a
certain period a weak child and then for a certain period a worn out and
tired individual, who, for most of the time, is entangled in procuring
the necessities of his life - which can be summarized into eating and
sleeping, and then after death, is annihilated and ceases to exist, how
tyrannical and far from wisdom it would be, whereas, we, at the very
onset, had considered Allah to be Wise.

In short, if we assume, that the aim of Allah in creating man was that
the results and benefits of it would reach Him, this would not be
correct because He is the Absolute Needless and possesses Inherent
Needlessness. Hence, there must exist an aim whereby its benefits reach
man. Under this assumption we see that the limited and material life of
this world lacks the ability to be proclaimed as the aim and purpose for
the creation of man and it is necessary that another world exist so that
Man can achieve the aim for which he was created.[^7]

The Holy Qur’an, in mentioning this proof, quotes the words of wise and
intelligent people (after reflection upon the creation of the heavens
and the earth) and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا مَا خَلَقْتَ هَذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ
النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O' our Lord!*** ***Thou hast not created (all) this in vain! Glory
be to Thee!*** ***Save us then from the torments of the (Hell)
fire.”***[^8]

Thomas Aquinas explains this very proof saying: “We have been created
for attaining the Ultimate end (i.e. Happiness). However this Happiness
cannot be achieved in the life of this world, because the individual
wealth is not lasting, body and will, weak, and our knowledge,
incomplete. However, God has not created us in vain, and so we must be
able to reach the end and the aim for which we have been created, and
this necessitates that our lives have a continuity even after death.”

But why should anyone think that we are not able to be prosperous in the
life of this world? According to Aristotle, Happiness is not the
transient sensation of pleasure, but Happiness is that a person, in the
span of his entire life, can convert his abilities into actualities: If
we keep ourselves occupied with the activities of the intellect
(thinking), we shall attain Happiness, and the transient troubles shall
not cause us to lose our Happiness.

However, Thomas sees Happiness in a different light. According to him,
the human Happiness is related to the aim and the purpose (that is Union
with God) for which we have been created. The cognition of God, which we
obtain by means of belief and faith, is an Act of the Will and not of
Intellect and hence, it is possible that, the present cognition of God,
which is obtained by means of natural intellect, may be faulty or may
not be an intuitive faith. Hence, the cognition about God, (in which is
secured our Ultimate Happiness) is not attainable in this Worldly life
(except in a fleeting and transient manner). So in order that we
completely experience such a Happiness-creating insight, it is necessary
that we continue our lives even after death.[^9]

3. Manifestation of Reality
---------------------------

One of the distinctions of man over the other creations is thought and
reflection, and this necessitates the possession of different ideas and
these different ideas become cause for the clashing of views and
opinions, encounters between doctrines, starting of wars, even between
different sects of the same religion.

Another point is that while studying the different ideas and views, it
is not possible to classify all of them as being correct and true,
because eventually, some of these ideas run in contrast and
contradiction in meaning to the others and hence are not compatible with
each other and so it is not possible to regard both of them as correct
and true.

On the other hand, it is also not possible to classify both of them as
incorrect and untrue, since if two ideas are contrary to one another,
considering both of them as untrue would be tantamount to 'Elimination
of Contrast', which according to the Science of Logic is incorrect.[^10]
Considering both the contradictory ideas to be untrue would be, in fact,
denying every Reality - a concept, which is particular to the Sophists.

In short, it is not possible to accept all the different ideas and
consider them to be the truth and it is also not possible to consider
all the ideas as untrue. A poet, in this context says:

Do know this reality, neither are true all of these  
 Nor in totality are deviated these flocks.

Hence, some of these ideas or doctrines are correct and true and the
others are incorrect and untrue, so it is necessary that the real face
of Truth become apparent and that in some way or the other manifests
itself and pronounces its sovereignty. On the other hand, we do know
that the present world can never be the place where Truth will manifest
itself such that no falsehood can find a way into it, because such a
situation is in contradiction to the obligations and trials of man in
this world.

In other words, this world is a place for manifestation of the
abilities, performance of obligations and trials of man and it cannot be
the place of manifestation of the results of the trials of man. Hence,
it is necessary that another world exist where the Truth and the results
of the striations and the efforts of man are manifested.[^11]

Nevertheless, it is possible to summarize this Proof and state:

1. In this world, differences and different ideas exist and basically
the life in this world is a scene of clashing and contradiction between
these varied thoughts and ideas.

2. All of these thoughts and ideas cannot be true and correct and
similarly all of them cannot be false and incorrect.

3. There must be a place where Truth eventually manifests itself and
presents its absolute sovereignty.

4. This world cannot be the place for the manifestation and for the
absolute sovereignty of the Truth.

5. Hence, another world must exist, wherein such a manifestation takes
place. In other words, another place should exist for such an
occurrence.

The Holy Qur’an also considers the Resurrection of man in another world
to be necessary for the purpose of total manifestation of Truth and
states one of the names of the Day of Judgement as 'The Day of Truth’
and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمُ الْحَقُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That is the True day.”*** [^12]

The Day of Judgment has been presented as a day in which the hidden
things and the secrets shall become manifest and evident and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تُبْلَى السَّرَائِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when hidden things shall be made manifest.”***[^13]

Since the day of Resurrection is a day of total manifestation of Truth
and Justice, all that which shall occur on that day, shall be nothing
but Truth and Justice. Hence, all that which shall be presented on that
day in the form of the Scales, Weighing of Actions, the Path, the Trial
of the servants or other such things, shall be by the Truth and Justice.
Even the Weighing of Actions is the Truth and Justice and this is the
reason the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَزْنُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the measuring (of the deeds) that day shall be just (I.e. the
Weighing on that day is the Truth)”***[^14]

In other words, the deeds of the people shall be weighed and measured in
such a manner that it would become apparent as to how much of it had
been the truth. As a result, one, in whose deeds, no truth exists, for
the weighing of such deeds, basically no scales exist, because such
deeds are in reality, a non-entity and no scales exist for weighing of
non-entities. For this purpose, the Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ نُقِيمُ لَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَزْنًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And so We will not set up a balance for them on the day of
Resurrection.”*** [^15]

4. The Manifestation of the Absolute Justice
--------------------------------------------

For the mentioning of this Proof also, we are in need of a couple of
premises, which have to be discussed, proved and accepted previously.
One of the premises is that, we consider Allah to be Just and the
Justice of Allah is a reality which has been proved and the reasoning
and proofs have also been presented in its appropriate place and
context. Secondly, the present world is not the place where justice can
be meted out to all the people and the rewards of the Righteous be given
to them in totality and the punishment of the Evil doers and the tyrants
be meted out to them in totality. By accepting these two premises, we
can conclude that hence there must be a day and place wherein the
rewards and the punishments can be afforded to all the individuals in
their totality.

The Holy Qur’an while considering Resurrection to be a necessity for the
purpose of rewarding the Righteous and punishing the Evil doers says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَنَجْعَلُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ كَالْمُجْرِمِينَ مَا لَكُمْ كَيْفَ
تَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! Shall we then treat those who submit as We treat the
guilty.*** ***What has happened to you?*** ***How do you judge?”***
[^16]

No sane and justice-loving person shall accept that the end of a
righteous person and an offender, a just person and a tyrant be the same
and that too in the presence of Allah, all the acts of Whom, are based
on Justice.

5. The Divine Mercy
-------------------

The comprehension of this proof also requires two premises.

1. One of the most important attributes of the Lord of the World is the
attribute of mercy and compassion, in the meaning that, Allah fulfills
the needs of His needy creations and provides all the things, which are
necessary for their existence and perfection.

2. Man or his soul has the ability to live an eternal life and also to
attain great achievements, which is not possible to be achieved in this
world.

Considering these two premises, we can conclude that there must exist
another world in which these potential abilities of man reach their
actuality and perfection and the need of man to have an eternal life be
fulfilled and Allah the Clement and Merciful will never refuse him such
grace and happiness because He is the Source of blessings and mercy.
Hence if Allah does not respond positively to the need of man to attain
eternity or to bring into actuality his immense abilities, this entails
that Allah is either a miser or is powerless, whereas in reality, Allah
is neither a miser, nor powerless. He is the Absolute Powerful and the
Absolute Generous and when there exists a real need, He fulfills it and
also, every place and thing which has the ability to receive His mercy,
He descends His mercy on it.

Regarding this, Allah himself says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَتَبَ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ الرَّحْمَةَ لَيَجْمَعَنَّكُمْ إِلَى يَوْمِ
الْقِيَامَةِ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has ordained mercy on Himself; most certainly He will gather you
on the Resurrection day - there is no doubt about it.”***[^17]

In this verse, He very clearly mentions that the gathering of people on
the day of Resurrection is obligated by His mercy.

However, it is possible that a question be asked that if the Day of
Resurrection is obligated by the Divine Mercy, then how is it that some
people would find themselves in suffering and would be facing torture
and punishment?

In answer to this question, briefly, it can be said that the meaning of
mercy does not mean that it is performed with respect to the people -
individually and separately for each one, but more importantly it is
with regards to all the people and the total existence, and it is very
evident that the existence of the Resurrection with regards to all the
human beings and the entire system of existence is mercy, although a few
people may experience difficulty and suffering. As an example, is it
possible to classify rain and sunshine as not being mercy and blessings,
just because a few people experience trouble and difficulty due to them?

Secondly, the same troubled individuals, after some time shall attain
salvation and bask in the Divine Mercy. Of course, it is possible that a
small group of people shall always remain in punishment and difficulty,
the study of which requires an entirely separate discussion.

6. The Instinct of the 'love for eternity ' of man
--------------------------------------------------

For the establishment of this proof also, attention is to be paid to
certain premises and assumptions, which are as follows:

1. The presence of an instinct in man or in other animals is proof that,
there exists externally, something, which can fulfil this instinct. In
the meaning that, if the presence of an instinct within man is proved,
it can be concluded with certainty, that there also exists, in the
external world, means to satiate this instinct. Thirst is proof of the
existence of water, and hunger and inclination for food is proof of the
existence of food. Similarly, attraction towards the opposite sex is
proof of its existence, because if such was not the case, placing such
instincts and tendencies within man would be vain and futile and hence
would be incompatible with the assumption of the Wisdom of Allah.

2. The second premise is that man, by nature, loves eternity of himself
and endeavors, by every means possible, to make his life eternal. Man
has been so created that all types of decline and annihilation always
pain him. On the contrary, he never experiences pain and vexation with
life and its being eternal.

However, it is possible that some individuals, due to misfortunes,
beyond their ability to withstand, may intend to destroy themselves and
commit suicide, but in reality, these people have become frustrated with
the misfortunes of life, not with life itself. And proof of this is
that, if circumstances undergo a change for the better, and their
misfortunes, at the very least, reduce in magnitude, they once again
experience a love for life.

Hence, the original love for an eternal life is the ultimate love, and
at the same time, a hidden secret, of every man. However matters of
instinct and nature are intuitive and to be experienced and not
deductive, in the meaning that every person should reflect within
oneself and seek it. In spite of all this, some factors do play a role
in better and easier perception of innate matters.

It is due to this that, should a person doubt his love for eternity and
permanence, he should reflect upon his own activities and also that of
the mankind in waging war against diseases and calamities and also
observe the widespread work that is being done to prolong the lives of
human beings. What does all this signify?

Is it anything except the fact that man loves his eternity and
permanence? In addition to these, some people also consider the love of
man towards his children as signs, which point towards this instinct,
because children are regarded to be the continuation of the lives of
men.

Nevertheless, considering these two premises, we can conclude that
another world must exist, wherein man would attain an eternal life and
thus satiate his instinct of ' love for eternity'. Basically, according
to some of the scholars, the thirst of man for an eternal life and his
instinct of 'love for eternity’ is so encompassing that, under no
circumstances is it possible to accept that, this desire shall not be
fulfilled or that this instinct shall not be satiated.[^18]

7. The actual observation of life after death
---------------------------------------------

This proof is based upon the claims of people who have almost died or
have completely died, but have once again returned to life (depending
upon our definition of death and how we comprehend it.) Nevertheless,
these people claim that they have experienced ' Near-death ' or a '
Life-after-life'.

Such people by merely encountering death either find themselves on the
verge of dying or find themselves dead. After that, they feel as if they
have cast their bodies and then view their bodies and the surroundings
and those around them, who are trying to resuscitate their body, from a
different angle (usually from the top).

In these circumstances, they find themselves possessing a new body which
they have described in different ways: cloudy, without any form, or a
spiritual body resembling the material body of an individual. Unlike
their original body, this body of theirs, cannot interact with the
material surroundings.

After this, they experience a traversing in a dark place and upon
crossing that place, they enter into a new domain in which, they
encounter various people, who do not possess a material body, but can be
generally identified, and establish telepathic contact with them.
Similarly, they come across a luminous entity who exhibits sympathy and
affection and helps them to remember their past (like a videocassette,
shows their past to them, in an instant) and make an evaluation.

These people sincerely desire to remain there and derive great pleasure
from the conciliatory and happiness inducing experience. However, at the
same time, they desire (or are requested) to return back to their
material bodies.

These people in addition to observing the luminous entity also report
seeing their relatives. An interesting thing here is that sometimes they
observe people whom they have never seen before (however, later they
recognize them in a photograph - for example) or they observe people who
are unknown to them and are presently dead.

The description that these individuals give for their bodies (after
death and before their renewed life) is that this body is not
perceivable and can penetrate into and traverse material objects. It
also lacks weight (i.e. weightless.) In spite of all this, it possesses
the power to perceive and listen (however much listening is more related
to the form of transfer of thought rather than possessing the experience
of listening). This fact signifies that individuals who are in the other
world are incarnated in a manner such that they can be recognized and
their positions established.[^19]

An interesting point regarding the above proof is that, a lot of these
experiences and personal observations are the same facts which have been
mentioned in the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Infallible
Imams (‘a) regarding the Intermediate World or the Purgatory, that is,
the world which starts after death and continues up to the great and
universal Resurrection. Another thing to be noticed here is that these
experiences are not confined to the followers of any one particular
religion but have been reported by the Christians, Muslims and also by
the followers of other religions and sects. In addition, these reports
and narrations, basically, do not differ a great deal among themselves.

8. Communication with Souls
---------------------------

Another evidence and proof for Resurrection and life after death is,
that many people establish communication with the deceased and with
their souls, either directly or indirectly (through a medium). If we
accept this communication with the deceased and their souls, we can be
assured that people after their death do remain alive.

Many of the people are of the opinion that the utilization of 'means'
and 'mediums' for the purpose of summoning of souls, reduces the
importance and strength of this Proof. This is because firstly, there
exists a possibility of imposture. Secondly, things, which the ‘mediums’
relate from the deceased individual, can be explained in a simple
manner. For example, it could be said that the different aspects of the
personality of the 'medium', could consciously or unconsciously, be
playing a role in the matter or that the ‘medium’ could be establishing
a telepathic contact with the people who are present and wishing to seek
information regarding the deceased. So, in reality that which is
obtained, is the very expectation, which these people had in their minds
which by some means was transferred to the 'medium'.[^20]

Nevertheless, it is possible that these probabilities and objections may
be put forward but it must be understood that, Firstly, these
communications do not always occur by means of another person (or
‘medium’), but there exist numerous people, who, professing different
religions, faiths and sects, are capable of such communication with the
souls and with little investigation, one can be satisfied that all of
them cannot be lying. Also, very many of these people are not inclined
to flaunt this strength of theirs and so the question of imposing also
does not arise.

Secondly, there have been incidences, which can, be illustrated in the
manner as propounded in the two arguments, but with great difficulty. On
occasions, deceased individuals have manifested themselves to the living
and provided them with factual information, which was previously not
known to them and after investigation, it was realized that what they
had come to know, by means of communication with the soul of the
deceased, was the absolutely true.

In addition to this, sometimes, the efforts for establishing
communication, did not take place by a living person, but instead,
communication was established by means of a deceased and his soul, and
the information which was consequently obtained, was found to be in
total conformity with the reality.

9. Immateriality and Eternity of the Soul
-----------------------------------------

Perhaps, the most important proof and one of the best reasonings for the
establishment of the necessity of Resurrection is the “Proof of the
existence of the soul and its immateriality and permanence”. And it is
because of this, that many of the Islamic and religious philosophers, in
the topic of Resurrection, involve themselves on the topic of
immateriality of the soul and set about to prove and establish it,
whereas, it is also possible to prove the Resurrection without indulging
in any discussion regarding the soul.

Nevertheless, without any semblance of doubt, a living man has a
definite distinction over non-living entities, in the meaning that, a
living man possesses some particularities which do not exist in
non-living entities and man himself, when he departs from this world,
tends to lose them. That thing within man, which is the reason for his
life, is called Soul.

Hence no one denies this reality that soul exists. In fact, even the
most zealot materialists do not deny the existence of the soul in this
meaning. In other words, even they do not deny the distinction and
difference between a living man and a non-living one. But the bone of
contention is, whether the soul of man is an entity, devoid of matter
and independent of the body and consequently, after the death of man,
continues to exist or that the soul too, with the death of man, along
with his body becomes annihilated and destroyed.

If the soul of man is independent of the body, it will continue to exist
even after the death of man, and this death would, in reality, mean
transference of his soul from one world to another. As a result, the
Resurrection could be proved in a very simple manner. However, if the
independence and the immateriality of the soul is not proved, this Proof
would not be very useful. It is because of this that the materialists
deny the independence of the soul from the body and claim that the soul
is the elite outcome of the synthesis of the body and, with the disarray
of the organic functioning of the body and its subsequent annihilation,
the soul also ceases to exist, exactly like the movement of a watch,
which is dependant on the watch.

In short, the permanence of the soul after death is secured in its
independence and its primariness. And because of this, above all, it is
necessary to prove, whether the human soul is an independent essence or
something similar to the physical and chemical particularities of the
body and the cerebral cells such that, with the death of the brain or
the organic activities of the body, it too ceases to exist.

Scholars and religious philosophers claim that within man is concealed a
'reality' and an essence which is non-matter, in the meaning that in
addition to the materials which form the human body, there exists a
reality which places the body of man directly under its influence. Hence
the soul is a metaphysical reality, but at the same time has a direct
communication with matter and the body of man and administers it.

Hence, it is necessary that initially, the proofs of the claimants of
the independence and immateriality of the soul are studied and then the
criticisms over it and the objections of the materialists be dwelt upon.

Proofs for the Independence and Immateriality of the Soul
---------------------------------------------------------

### 1. Oneness of personal identity

For the mentioning of this proof, it is appropriate that at the onset,
answer is given to the question “What is the essence of man?”

Answering this question is not an easy task, because we cannot consider
ourselves as a material entity only. The material body and its parts are
constantly in a state of change, however, we are of the belief that we
possess the same identity which we had possessed years ago. Our bodies
are something that “we” own. These bodies are not the “we” itself. Our
movements, states and physical characteristics are illustrative of us,
but are not “us”.

In addition, we also cannot consider ourselves as just a “Mind” (that
is, a collection of individual information, meditative categories,
memories by which we perceive and experience the world) because firstly,
it is possible that the individual information, categories and memories
undergo a change or cease to exist without an individual losing his
identity. Very many incidences, which have occurred five or ten years
ago or even those, that have recently occurred, fail to be brought to
memory by us. Or we consider our present actions to be different from
those, which we had performed years ago. Secondly, claims, which are
based upon memory, are prone to error. It is possible that we may be
claimants to remembering events which have never taken place at all!!

Hence, we can consider ourselves to be a self or a soul - unchanging,
fundamental and indivisible. We do not just claim that we possess a self
or a soul, but go a step further in claiming that we are soul, because
we distinguish the personal identity of others by means of their
behavioral pattern and distinct physical attributes, however we
distinguish our soul either by means of a kind of internal
self-awareness and intuition or by means of experiences which we
achieve. The soul, which is the subject of our experiences, is also the
meditating agent for meditation, recollection sensation and
perception.[^21]

It is possible to mention this proof in a simpler manner. Every
individual, within himself, has knowledge of his existence and has no
doubts whatsoever regarding it. Alternatively, this knowledge is
intuitive and presential. That is, this knowledge is always present
before everyone and the perception of its presence does not require any
learning. Thus “My” knowledge about “Myself” cannot be an “ acquired
knowledge.”

Another point is that, the “I” of everyone, from the beginning of life
to its end, is the same. For example, the “I” of the age of 77 is the
same “I” of the previous years. It is because of this that, when we
recount the past memories, we use the word “I” and say: “From childhood,
I was fond of studies.” In addition to myself, the people also recognize
“I” to signify the one person, from the start of his life up to death.

Now we should investigate whether this “I” or the “Personal Identity”
can be this very body of man? A little reflection upon the matter will
yield an answer in the negative. This is because the body is a
collection of cells, which, in the entire span of life, undergo changes
several times. And, as has been stated, if all the cells of the body
undergo a change every seven years at an approximation, a seventy year
old person would have changed all the parts of his body, for a minimum
of ten times. So, in such a case, how can “I” of the seventy years be
the same “I” of the seven years?

Hence, it is possible to conclude that, in addition to the body and the
material parts, there exists a “Fixed Reality”, in the entire life of an
individual, which, unlike the material parts and the body cells, does
not undergo any change and it is this Fixed Reality which is the agent
of the individuality of our identities, and we know it to be the soul -
non-material and independent of the body.

### 2. The manner of superposition of 'large' over 'small'

For comprehending this proof, it is necessary to recount two premises.

i) One of the laws of the 'material world' and the nature is that never
can a larger matter be superposed upon a smaller matter, and nor can it
be accommodated within it. This rule of non-superposition of large over
small is applicable to all the material things without any exception.
For example, it is just not possible to place a mountain having a height
of a thousand meters within a well, which is just a few meters in depth,
except that we enlarge the well or compress the mountain. Or for that
matter, it is not possible to floor an area of half meter by a stone of
area one-meter.

ii) The perception of man is such that he can perceive vast deserts,
expansive seas and oceans and lofty mountains. In addition, the faculty
of sight and the eyes of man also possess the ability to observe the
infinite space and the small and large stars

Hence, if our perceptive faculty are the very cerebral cells which are
present in our body, how is it that we are able to superpose the lofty
mountains or the expansive oceans over these small cells, and how is it
that, we are able to observe the mountains and the oceans, without
reducing their great magnitude even by the slightest amount?

Of course, it is possible that, one could argue saying, just as computer
diskettes store a very large quantity of information and the
photographic films encompass a large quantity of scenes within them, the
brain and the faculty of vision of ours also work in exactly the same
manner.

In reply, it must be said that between the perception by the brain or
visualization by the faculty of sight, and a computer diskette or a
photographic film, lies a huge difference. This is because, the diskette
miniaturizes the information. The camera too, gathers the photographed
scenes and miniaturizes them, whereas, we perceive the mountains, seas,
galaxies and the infinite space in the same magnitude as we see
them.[^22]  
 Hence, when our perception cannot be 'material' and cannot possess the
attributes of matter, how then can man be considered totally material?

However, we do not deny that, for the perception of a subject or for
observing an external thing, we are in need of a sequence of 'material
preliminaries'. However, the result of these 'material preliminaries'
cannot be material and possess its attributes.

And because of this, the religious philosophers, for the attainment of
sight or the other perceptions, consider the occurrence of a series of
physical and chemical preliminaries to be necessary, but at the same
time are of the opinion that after the occurrence of these
preliminaries, perception and sight take place by means of an entity,
which is devoid of matter, independent of the body and not possessing
the attributes of matter.

In short, perception of the extensive world and the observation of the
huge mountains and the vast and deep oceans take place by means of the
soul, which is not influenced by the laws of matter and among them the
law of non-superposition of large over small.

### 3. Paranormal Powers of man

The third proof starts with the assumption or claim that man possesses
paranormal powers. It has been claimed that, a part of the minds can,
with other minds, with whom communication in a natural manner (by means
of a series of physical causes) is not possible, establish communication
(called telepathy), or can attain knowledge of some physical events
without perceiving such events by sensuous perception (clairvoyance), or
can bring about an object into motion, without the use of any material
means (psychokinesis). For example, experiments have been set up which
have shown that some individuals are able to establish mental contact
with others, from a great distance, even with people who are enclosed in
trunks with leaden or iron walls. These paranormal events do not conform
with the theory of the mind being material, because these events hint
that the mind possesses this power, whereby it can attain the
information about other regions and other minds, or whereby it can
influence the material world without the need to make use, like the
brain, of material means.[^23]

Nevertheless, some of the scholars, by way of sensing and experience and
by research into psychology, psychoanalysis, telepathy,
clear-sightedness and dreams, have set about to prove the existence of
the soul and also its immateriality and its independence from the
body.[^24] For example, one of the general and universal means for
proving the existence of the soul is the visualizing of dreams in the
state of sleep. An individual who dreams while sleeping, after
awakening, accurately remembers that, in his dream, he had traveled to
places of great distance and had performed a great deal of work. That
is, on the one hand, his body was rested and eyes closed, while on the
other, had traveled a great distance, performed a lot of work and
witnessed beautiful and ugly scenes. Hence, if we do not accept the
existence of the soul and its immateriality, then who or what was it
that had traveled places and had witnessed the scenes?

The Theory of ' Immateriality of the Soul ' and the arguments against it
------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have, in a very concise manner, alluded to some of the proofs for the
independence and the immateriality of the soul. However those who do not
accept the independence and the immateriality of the soul, have
presented certain arguments and conjectures, upon which they rest their
claim that the soul is a material entity. Some of these arguments are as
follows:

1. Injury to the brain directly influences the knowledge, intelligence,
memory and the ability to conceptualize. For example, if the
communication between the two hemispheres of the brain of an individual
is severed, upon encountering an object to his left, he would not be
able to discern and recognize the object (because this object can only
be sensed in the right hemisphere of his brain) however much he may be
able to point to the object with his left hand. The right hemisphere
which controls the left side recognizes the object, but the left
hemisphere, which is the actual center for speech and establishing
contact, does not make a recognition because no information flows across
the injured 'Corpus Callosum'.[^25]

2. It appears that some of the mental powers like memory are specific to
certain specific centers of the brain. In addition to this, some of the
intelligence is associated with one of the two hemispheres of the brain
(however much difficult it may be to pinpoint the specific centers for
them). For example, the analytical, conceptual and lingual intelligence
are centered in the left hemisphere of the brain, but the right
hemisphere controls the artistic and the intuitive process of the mind.

3. Authentic indications exist which show that some of the mental
abilities and also the measure of success of individuals in utilizing
these abilities is, to a great extent, hereditary. In addition to this,
some of the diseases, which affect the mind of an individual, such as
the Down's Syndrome[^26] or the diseases which affect the ability of an
individual, such as the Alzheimer's disease[^27] are fundamentally,
genetic. These facts indicate that, the material process of
hereditariness has a distinct influence upon the ability and the working
of the mind.[^28]

4. During the process of thinking or other mental work, the material
changes within the brain increase and the brain takes in more food and
gives out more phosphoric substances.

5. Scientific studies have shown that the brain of thinkers is usually,
more than the average in weight. (The average weight of the brain of men
being around 1400 grams and that of women being slightly lesser.)

All these indications and observations go to show that there exists an
intimate connection between the working of the cerebral cells - which
are material - and those things which we consider to be spiritual
phenomena. In other words, if every man possesses an independent and an
immaterial soul and this soul performs the acts of perception, which are
also immaterial, then what is the need of the cerebral cells, which slip
into working disorder upon facing an injury, or require more food under
conditions of mental activities, or which are influenced by the material
factors and conditions of the father and mother (i.e. hereditariness).

Hence, it is not only possible to prove the immateriality of the soul,
but on the contrary, these observations of ours are more convincing in
proving its materiality.

Answers to the above Arguments
------------------------------

The answers to all of these arguments and objections can be provided by
clarifying just one point. The point under consideration is this that
there exists a clear difference between an 'agent of action' and a 'tool
of action'.

All the above indications, at the utmost, prove that there exists a
relation between the cerebral cells and our perception, but does not
clarify the manner and the type of this relation. Hence, we claim that,
the manner of this relation is similar to the relation between an agent
and the tool of his work, in the meaning that the cerebral cells, food,
hereditariness,.... All of them influence the quality of our perception
in the same way as every tool influences the performance of work. Thus,
in reality, all of these are means of perception and tools of the soul
in the performance of its work and in the event of these means and tools
getting destroyed, the soul does not get destroyed and nor does it
relinquish its work. The only thing, which occurs, is that, the
connection of the soul with these means gets severed. As a result, the
work that was previously being performed through these means, shall
henceforth, not be performed through them.

Exactly like an airplane, whose communication, with the control tower of
the airport, is severed. Here, the plane still exists and continues to
perform its work, but is no longer able to keep the control tower
informed about its state and location. Or like a ship and its captain,
who, in the middle of the sea loses communication contact. Under these
conditions, the ship as well as its captain do exist and as yet have not
suffered any injuries, however their communication has been severed and
the means of communication have gone dead.[^29]

In short, man is an entity, made up of body and soul[^30], and his
reality and essence is formed by the soul, which is an entity,
independent of the body, but at the same time, has a connection with the
body and administers it. By proving this theory, resurrection or life of
man after death can be easily proved, because according to the theory of
the' existence of the soul and its independence and immateriality', man,
due to death, does not get destroyed, but it is only his body which gets
decayed and turns into earth, whereas his soul continues its life
(although under different conditions.)

Immateriality of the Soul according to the Holy Qur’an
------------------------------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an and basically, all the Divine religions believe in the
resurrection of man after death, and consider man to possess an eternal
life, which he shall lead, after death, either enjoying the Divine
bounties, or at times in pain and suffering.

In addition to this general aspect, it is possible to understand from
the subtle allusions and references of the verses of the Holy Qur’an
that, according to it also, man possesses an immaterial soul,
independent of matter and body. In this context, we shall briefly refer
to certain verses of the Holy Qur’an, from which the above mentioned
fact can be deduced.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتًا
بَلْ أَحْيَاءٌ عِنْدَ رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Reckon not those who are slain in the way of Allah to be dead; Nay!
Alive they are with their Lord being sustained.”*** [^31]

Hence, if it is to be that the martyrs be alive after death, it is
necessary that they possess a soul - immaterial and independent - which,
after death, continues to exist, because, their bodies have fallen on
the battlefield and at times have decomposed and disintegrated. In other
words, we observe that the bodies of the martyrs get decomposed and turn
into earth. On the other hand, the Holy Qur’an considers them to be
alive and obtaining sustenance in the presence of Allah. Thus, we
conclude that, they, before their deaths, possessed a 'Reality' which
was separate to their bodies, and after their martyrdom, this 'Reality”
continues to lead its life, and receive sustenance in the presence of
Allah.

Another point is that it is not possible to accept that it is only the
martyrs who live after death, and the others do not possess an
immaterial soul and after death do not continue to lead their lives.
This is because, amongst people, there existed and exist a large number
of Divine Prophets and Divine Saints, for whom, assumption of a status
and position, lower than that of an ordinary martyr is not possible.
Hence, it is possible to question the criterion and the basis by which
only the martyrs possess a soul, which, after their death, continues to
lead its own life, while the others do not, more so, when the Holy
Qur’an itself, in various verses, claims resurrection of man to be
universal and general. Thus this verse does not wish to just mention
that the martyrs continue to live even after their death, because this
life is not confined to them only, but the verse wishes to present the
exalted position of the martyrs in the presence of their Lord, wherein
they shall be drowned in the bounties and pleasures. Now if this soul
was not immaterial, it would not be able to attain a presence in front
of the Lord, Who possesses Total and Perfect Immateriality in all
respects and aspects.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَحَاقَ بِآلِ فِرْعَوْنَ سُوءُ الْعَذَابِ. النَّارُ يُعْرَضُونَ
عَلَيْهَا غُدُوًّا وَعَشِيًّا وَيَوْمَ تَقُومُ السَّاعَةُ أَدْخِلُوا
آلَ فِرْعَوْنَ أَشَدَّ الْعَذَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A dreadful doom encompassed Pharaoh’s people.*** ***The fire, they
are exposed to it (every) morning and evening; and on the day when the
Hour shall come to pass: (the sentence shall be) Cause the Pharaoh's
people to enter the most awful doom.”*** [^32]

This verse is in reference to the punishment of the people of Firoun
after their drowning in the sea. It says: These tyrants after drowning
in the sea, shall be presented, every morning and evening, to the fires
of hell and shall face the punishment, and when the universal
resurrection shall occur, they shall face a severe chastisement.

Hence, if they did not possess an existing soul, what would be facing
the chastisement morning and evening. Their lifeless bodies have drowned
beneath the waves of the sea and are thus oblivious and unfeeling
towards any chastisement or pain. Hence, it is necessary that their
souls exist and these souls possess the perception and intelligence to
experience the Divine chastisement.

Summary of this verse is almost in opposition to the previous verse, in
the meaning that the previous verse was mentioning the Divine bounties
in relation to the martyrs, in the Purgatory and these verses are
mentioning the Divine chastisement with respect to the people of Firoun
and the tyrants in the Purgatory.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَتَوَفَّاكُمْ مَلَكُ الْمَوْتِ الَّذِي وُكِّلَ بِكُمْ ثُمَّ
إِلَى رَبِّكُمْ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: The angel of death who is given charge of you shall cause you
to die, then to your Lord you shall be brought back.”***[^33]

This verse firstly is with respect to the souls of all the men, that at
the time of death, their souls shall be seized by means of commissioned
angels. Secondly, it is also an answer, for those who deny resurrection.
For they used to say that once we are dead and our bodies turn to earth
and are lost, how then can we be brought back to life?

The verse answers that, the 'Reality' of man (which is his soul), shall
never get lost or be destroyed, such that it cannot be brought back to
life. The actuality of death is (**وفات**) and not (**فوت**) which is
taken from (**توفّى**) which means seizing a thing completely.[^34]
Thus, in reality, the verse says: You will not be annihilated, but at
the time of death, your essence and reality, which is your soul shall be
seized completely by delegated angels, after which you shall continue to
lead your lives.

With the help of the previous discussions, the topic of the existence of
the soul and its immateriality can be considered to have been proved and
established. With this premise and assumption, the 'spiritual
resurrection' can be proved, however the 'corporeal resurrection' must
be proved by other rational and narrative Proofs, especially by the
verses of the Holy Qur’an, which shall be dwelt upon in the next
chapter.

By proving the immateriality of the soul, the Purgatory, which is in
itself, a Lesser Resurrection, and placed between the present life and
the Larger and Universal Resurrection, also becomes clear, and as such
does not require any further proofs.

[^1]: Habibullah Tahiri, Sairi dar jahan pas az marg, Pg. 40, and
Payam-e-Quran, Vol. 5, Pg. 260

[^2]: Najm (53):42

[^3]: Mo’min (Ghafir) (40):39

[^4]: For more reading on this proof, refer Ayatollah Jawadi Amoli
“Mabda' wa Ma'ad”

[^5]: Dhariat (51):56

[^6]: Aal-e-Imran (3):97

[^7]: Abdullah Jawadi Amùli, Mabda' wa Ma'ad, Pg. 284, Sairi dar Jahan
Pas az Marg, Pg.44, Payam-e-Qur’an, Vol. 5, Pg., 240

[^8]: Aal-e-Imran (3):191

[^9]: Michael Peterson, and others, ‘Aql wa I'teqad-e-Dini, Translation:
Aĥmad Naraqi and Ibrahim Sultani, Pg., 349

[^10]: “Gathering of antithesis” and “Absence of antithesis” are two
terminologies of formal logic, both of which according to this logic are
incorrect and unacceptable. Their Incorrectness is from the immediate
perceptions, which does not even require any proofs.

[^11]: Abdullah Jawadi ªmoli, Deh Maqalah Piramùn Mabda' wa Ma'ad, Pg.
292

[^12]: Naba' (78):39

[^13]: Tariq (86):9

[^14]: A'araf (7):8

[^15]: Kahf (18)105

[^16]: Qalam (68):35-36

[^17]: An’am (6):12

[^18]: Abdullah Jawadi Amùli, Deh Maqalah Piramùn Ma'id, Pg. 309, Doctor
Habibùllah Tahiri, Sairi dar Jahan Pas Az Marg, Pg. 50, Payam-e-Qur’an,
Pg., 236

[^19]: Michael Peterson and others, ‘Aql wa I'teqad-e-Dini, Translation,
Aĥmad Naraqi and Ibrahim Sultani, Pg., 344 - 346.

[^20]: Michael Peterson and others, ‘Aql wa I'teqad-e-Dini, Translation,
Aĥmad Naraqi and Ibrahim Sultani, Pg., 347

[^21]: Michael,Peterson and others, ‘Aql wa I'teqad-e-Dini, Translation,
Aĥmad Naraqi and Ibrahim Sultani, Pg., 327 - 328

[^22]: Indeed, due to the limitations, which exist in our sensual
perceptions, we are not able to perceive those greatness in the manner
that they exist, but we are able to perceive in only that measure as
permitted by our senses. Indeed, the power and strength has been given
to man that he can overcome these limitations and break the shackles and
thus perceive the things as they actually are, which should be discussed
at an appropriate occasion.

[^23]: Michael, Peterson and others, ‘Aql wa I'teqad-e-Dini,
Translation, Aĥmad Naraqi and Ibrahim Sultani, Pg. 331

[^24]: Zain-ul-ªbidin Qurbani, Be Suey Jahan Abadiyat

[^25]: The largest intermediary between the two hemispheres of the
brain.

[^26]: This disease result from the derangement in the chromosomes of
the cells and the person affected suffers from severe retardation of the
mind.

[^27]: In this disease, a large number of the superficial cells of the
brain get injured and one of its earliest and the most important
symptoms is the derangement of the memory.

[^28]: Michael,Peterson and others, ‘Aql wa I'teqad-e-Dini, Translation,
Aĥmad Naraqi and Ibrahim Sultani, Pg., 332 - 333

[^29]: Habibullah Tahiri, Sairi dar Jahan Pas az Marg, Pg. 53, and
Payam-e-Qur’an, Vol. 5, Pg. 294

[^30]: Another explanation, which is nearer to the Gnostic insight and
also to reality is that we say, basically the soul and the body are not
two independent identities which got compounded together, but they are
one reality which are present in two dimensions. The soul, in the
material dimension, manifests itself in the form of body and its parts
and the body in the higher dimension and in the metaphysical dimension
is in reality the soul itself. The soul and the body are not two
entities, which interact reciprocally but are one entity, which are
placed in two dimensions. Of course, the comprehension of this reality
and its explanation requires deeper reflection.

[^31]: ªle Imran (3):169

[^32]: Ghafir (40):45-46

[^33]: Sajdah (32):11

[^34]: Mufradat Alfa¨ Qur’an, Raghib Isfahani, word (وَفى)


