Resurrection or a Corporeal Return
==================================

Considering the numerous proofs and evidences, some of the scholars and
experts, have accepted the theory of life after death, but have confined
it to the spiritual resurrection. They claim that after death, it is
only the soul of man which shall continue its life, but his material
body and its elements with which he led his worldly life would\` not be
resurrected. Thus they tend to be the 'deniers of corporeal
resurrection'. Whereas, usually, in Islam, whenever resurrection is
discussed, both, the corporeal and the spiritual resurrection is
purported and both of them have been accepted. Hence, we too, shall have
a short discussion on this topic.

Allamah Majlisi (a.r.) in these context states: “The corporeal
resurrection is among the things which are unanimously accepted by all
the sects and is considered as one of the necessities of the religion.
Deniers of it have been regarded as those who deny the necessity of
religion and cannot be considered as Muslims, because the Qur’anic
verses, in this context, are explicit and are not capable of being
allegorically interpreted. In addition to this, there are innumerable
traditions, indicating the corporeal resurrection, which cannot be
denied.”[^1]

Of course, it should be known that, proving the actual resurrection is
possible by means of rational and scientific proofs, and as we had dwelt
upon in the foregoing discussions, it is not only possible but also
necessary, however to prove the details of resurrection, and amongst
them the corporeal resurrection, by means of rational or scientific
proofs is a task extremely difficult or even impossible. And because of
this, the great philosopher Avicenna writes: “The peculiarities and the
details of the topic of resurrection, like the corporeality of it, do
not fit into the scope of rational or intellectual discussion, but for
such kinds of subjects, it is necessary to seek help from the Revelation
and the narrations of the religious leaders”.[^2] Hence, we, so as to
not exceed the limits of this book, shall only refer to the verses of
the holy Qur’an for the purpose of proving the corporeal resurrection.
All the verses, which refer to the corporeal resurrection, can be
categorized into six groups to which we shall refer below.

1. The first group consists of verses in which at the onset, the talks
of the deniers of resurrection are mentioned after which the answer is
provided. Their doubts were that “how could we, after death and
disintegration of the bodies, become alive again”? An interesting point
here is that one of the deniers had pulled up a semi-decayed bone and
while showing it to the Holy Prophet (S) proceeded to ask such a
question. The Holy Qur’an in answer says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَضَرَبَ لَنَا مَثَلًا وَنَسِيَ خَلْقَهُ قَالَ مَنْ يُحْيِ الْعِظَامَ
وَهِيَ رَمِيمٌ . قُلْ يُحْيِيهَا الَّذِي أَنشَأَهَا أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ
وَهُوَ بِكُلِّ خَلْقٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets his own
creation.*** ***Says he: Who will give life to the bones when they are
rotten.*** ***Say:*** ***He will give life to them Who brought them into
existence at first, and He is Cognizant of all creation.***”[^3]

Considering the fact that the question was in reference to decayed bones
and bodies and not in reference to the human soul, it can be very
clearly comprehended that the answer is also in reference to the same
context. Hence, after death, Allah shall make these very bodies alive on
the day of the Universal Resurrection. An interesting point in the above
verse is that the reason for such an occurrence being possible is also
mentioned and that being the Divine Power which had created man and the
body at the first instance.

2. The second group consists of verses that refer to the fact that on
the day of resurrection, people shall rise from their graves and come
out from beneath the earth. Here we shall refer to only two verses from
among them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
)وَأَنَّ السَّاعَةَ آتِيَةٌ لاَ رَيْبَ فِيهَا وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ يَبْعَثُ
مَنْ فِي الْقُبُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that the Hour (of Resurrection) is coming there is no doubt
therein and that Allah will raise up those in the graves.”***[^4]

This verse and those similar to this mention the corporeal resurrection,
because that which rests within the graves are bodies of men. Thus on
the day of resurrection, this very material and elemental body shall be
given life and continue to lead it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْهَا خَلَقْنَاكُمْ وَفِيهَا نُعِيدُكُمْ وَمِنْهَا نُخْرِجُكُمْ
تَارَةً أُخْرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“From it We created you and into it We shall send you back and from
it will We raise you a second time.”***[^5]

That which lies beneath the earth and once again (according to the above
verse) shall come out on the day of resurrection and continue its life
is the very same elemental, worldly body. Hence this verse also
emphasizes on the corporeal resurrection.

3. The third group consists of verses, which liken the coming to life of
man after death to the coming to life of the earth after its death, like
this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رِزْقًا لِلْعِبَادِ وَأَحْيَيْنَا بِهِ بَلْدَةً مَيْتًا كَذَلِكَ
الْخُرُوجُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We give life thereby to a dead land; thus will be
Resurrection.”***[^6]

The expression that has been used in the verse alludes that the Holy
Qur’an does not just have the resurrection of the souls under
consideration and lays emphasis on it but also lays special stress on
corporeal resurrection. This is because, if this very same elemental
body, on the Day of Judgment, is not resurrected, there is no
appropriateness in resembling it to the coming to life of the earth
after its death. In other words, spiritual resurrection is nothing
except the existence of the soul after the disintegration of the body,
and this existence has no similarity with the coming to life of the
earth after its death.

4. The fourth group consists of verses that refer to the act of speaking
by the various parts of the body of man like the hands, legs, eyes, ears
and skin on the Day of Judgment.  
 In addition to it, verses which inform about the happiness, joy and
cheerfulness of some of the faces and alternatively, about other faces
being sorrowful and miserable indicate towards the corporeal
resurrection of men after death. Similarly, it is possible to consider,
as part of this group, those verses which refer to the giving or taking
of the ' book of deeds' of people in the right or the left hand, because
if the corporeal resurrection does not occur, how can the hands, legs,
eyes, ears... bear witness against man on the day of Judgment:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ نَخْتِمُ عَلَى أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلِّمُنَا أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“On that day We will set a seal upon their mouths, and their hands shall
speak to Us, and their feet shall bear witness of what they earned.”[^7]

Or how could some of the faces exhibit cheer and radiance whereas faces
of others exhibit misery and darkness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَشْهَدُ عَلَيْهِمْ أَلْسِنَتُهُمْ وَأَيْدِيهِمْ وَأَرْجُلُهُمْ
بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day when their tongues and their hands and their feet shall
bear witness against them as to what they did.”***[^8]

In all events, perhaps this collection of verses is the best proof for
establishing the corporeal resurrection because basically, in the
spiritual resurrection, the existence of arms, legs, eyes, ears and
other parts of the body just does not arise and as a result talks about
them also cease to exist.

5. This group consists of verses, which describes the material bounties
of Paradise, like eating the heavenly fruits, possessing beautiful,
heavenly, virgin nymphs and also beautiful and decorated beds for the
comfort of the people of Paradise.

This group of the verses have appeared in numerous chapters of the Holy
Qur’an, in a detailed manner and we mention only one example from
amongst them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَى سُرُرٍ مَوْضُونَةٍ. مُتَّكِئِينَ عَلَيْهَا مُتَقَابِلِينَ.
يَطُوفُ عَلَيْهِمْ وِلْدَانٌ مُخَلَّدُونَ. بِأَكْوَابٍ وَأَبَارِيقَ
وَكَأْسٍ مِنْ مَعِينٍ. لاَ يُصَدَّعُونَ عَنْهَا وَلاَ يُنزِفُونَ.
وَفَاكِهَةٍ مِمَّا يَتَخَيَّرُونَ. وَلَحْمِ طَيْرٍ مِمَّا يَشْتَهُونَ
. وَحُورٌ عِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On thrones decorated, Reclining on them face to face.*** ***Around
shall go about them youths never altering in age. With goblets and ewers
and a cup of pure drink.*** ***They shall not be affected by any
headache thereby, nor shall they get exhausted.*** ***And fruits that
they prefer.*** ***And flesh of fowls such as they desire.*** ***And
fair ones with large lovely eyes.”***[^9]

In addition to these, those verses, which mention the physical
chastisement of the people of the hell, can also be included in this
group because if the corporeal resurrection did not exist and this same
body would not be made alive again, then how does it have the pleasures,
sorrows and the physical pains and how then could these verses be
explained?

6. The sixth group consists of verses which mention examples of the
occurrence of corporeal resurrection in this very world, like the verses
which relate the bringing to life of a dead person by the Prophet ‘Isa
(Jesus) (‘a), or those which explain the coming to life of the People of
the Cave. In addition to these, the incidents of Prophet Uzair (Ezra)
(‘a) or Prophet Irmiyah who have been referred to in the Holy Qur’an
without being mentioned by name, and who, after their death, are once
again brought back to life:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ كَالَّذِي مَرَّ عَلَى قَرْيَةٍ وَهِيَ خَاوِيَةٌ عَلَى عُرُوشِهَا
قَالَ أَنَّى يُحْيِي هَذِهِ اللَّهُ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا فَأَمَاتَهُ
اللَّهُ مِائَةَ عَامٍ ثُمَّ بَعَثَهُ قَالَ كَمْ لَبِثْتَ قَالَ
لَبِثْتُ يَوْمًا أَوْ بَعْضَ يَوْمٍ قَالَ بَلْ لَبِثْتَ مِائَةَ عَامٍ
فَانظُرْ إِلَى طَعَامِكَ وَشَرَابِكَ لَمْ يَتَسَنَّهْ وَانظُرْ إِلَى
حِمَارِكَ وَلِنَجْعَلَكَ آيَةً لِلنَّاسِ وَانظُرْ إِلَى الْعِظَامِ
كَيْفَ نُنشِزُهَا ثُمَّ نَكْسُوهَا لَحْمًا فَلَمَّا تَبَيَّنَ لَهُ
قَالَ أَعْلَمُ أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town and it had fallen
down upon its roofs; he said: When will Allah give it life after its
death?*** ***So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised
him to life.*** ***He said: How long have you tarried?*** ***He said: I
have tarried a day or a part of*** ***a day.*** ***Said He: Nay! you
have*** ***tarried a hundred*** ***years;*** ***then look at your food
and drink - years have not passed over it;*** ***and look at your
donkey;*** ***and that We may make you a sign to men, and look at the
bones, how We set them together, then clothed them with flesh; so when
it became clear to him, he said; I know that Allah has power over all
things.”*** [^10]

7. These are the actual and historical examples of the occurrence of
corporeal resurrection in this very world, which have been emphasized in
the verses of this group.

From all the verses of these six groups and also some other verses, it
can be stated that according to the Holy Qur’an, the corporeal
resurrection (in addition to the spiritual resurrection) is a matter,
which is conclusive and certain, and with the abundance of these verses,
there lies no room for any skepticism or presumptive explanation. Of
course, some doubts of rational and philosophical nature have been
propounded, the presentation of which requires a more appropriate
occasion.[^11]

[^1]: Bihar-ul-Anwar, Vol. 7, Pg. 47,

[^2]: Habibullah Tahiri, Sairi dar Jahan Pas az Marg, quoting from
Avicenna's 'Shefa’'

[^3]: Ya Sin (36):78-79

[^4]: Hajj (22):7

[^5]: Taha (20):55

[^6]: Qaf (50):11

[^7]: Ya Sin (36):65

[^8]: Nùr (24):24

[^9]: Waqiyah (56):15-22

[^10]: Baqarah (2):259

[^11]: Among these doubts were two objections. i) The impossibility of
return of that which has been destroyed. Technically this doubt has been
termed as (امتناع اعاده معدوم) ii) The doubt of the eater and the eaten
which is well known by the technical expression (آكل و مأكول) These
doubts and those similar to these along with their numerous answers have
been presented in their appropriate topics and there lies no need to
present it in this short treatise.


