Why Do We Fear Death?
=====================

The fear of death, for most of the people, is not a matter which
requires any evidence because it is totally obvious and we also see that
a lot of people manifest extra-ordinary sensitivity with respect to the
term 'death' and its reality. Thus the actual matter is self-evident.
That which requires proof and an answer is the reason for this fear and
alarm as to why we fear death?

Reasons for the Fear of Death
-----------------------------

In answer to this question, it is possible to mention some reasons,
which have also appeared in our traditions, and which are as follows:

***1. Not having a correct insight***

In the previous discussions, we had mentioned that a lot of people
considered death to be an eternal destruction of themselves.
Consequently, it is but natural that they fear death and visualize it
dark and gloomy, because the love for permanence and eternity is one of
the natural instincts of people and each one in his own way, tries to
protect himself from calamities and diseases and ensure his own
permanence, and death, in his view, is greater and more pain-inflicting
than any disease or calamity, because it is the start of his everlasting
extinction.

Nevertheless, if the alarm and fear of death is as a result of
non-recognition of the reality of death, then for the removal of this
fear, it is vital that its reality, which is found in the Islamic
insight, be understood and with regard to it, a strong conviction be
developed. If a person bases his views regarding death on correct
foundations, many of his fears regarding death will cease to exist
because, once he comprehends that with death, he shall enter into a
world, more extensive and eternal and also that he shall be liberated
from the material, natural and corporeal shackles, how then would he
consider it to be abominable and hateful.

### 2. A new and an unfamiliar path

One of the causes due to which man tends to fear death is that man,
after death, steps onto an entirely new path and embarks upon an
entirely new journey. Man, usually tends to travel on frightful paths,
over which he has traveled a number of times and has not encountered any
trouble, better than paths which are comparatively safer, but which are
totally new. Since, the path being new and unfamiliar, it becomes reason
for hesitation and anxiety, especially since no one, who has traveled
this path, has brought any news about it, for the others.

Anyway, if the fear of death is due to the place and path being
unfamiliar, then it is necessary that the reality of death be completely
comprehended and one's conviction strengthened. In addition to this, it
is necessary to obtain the necessary information by means of the
Revelation and the traditions of the Infallible Imams (a.s.) and the
righteous people, regarding the stages, places of danger and the other
particularities of death and after it, then believe in them and prepare
oneself to encounter them. Just like a person, who during the course of
a journey, finds himself lonely and unaware of his whereabouts, manages
to lessen his perplexity with the help of necessary information, maps
and equipment’s, we too must obtain the map of the way and the necessary
information from authentic and reliable sources.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دخل علىّ بن محمّد (عليهما السلام) على مريض من اصحابه و هو يبكى و يجزع
من الموت. فقال له: يا عبد الله تخاف من الموت لانّك لا تعرفه, أرأيتك
اذا اتّسخت و تقذّرت و تأذّيت من كثرة القذر و الوسخ عليك و اصابك قروح و
جرب و علمت انّ الغسل في حمّام يزيل ذلك كلّه أما تريدان تدخله فتغتسل
ذلك عنك او ما تكره ان تدخله فيبقي ذلك عليك؟ قال: بلى يابن رسول الله.
قال: فذلك الموت هو ذلك الحمّام…
  </p>
</blockquote>

In a tradition from Imam ‘Ali ibn Muhammad (‘a), it is narrated that he
(‘a) approached one of his companions who was sick and in a state of
crying and grieving and complaining due to fear of death. The Imam (‘a)
then addressed him saying: “O servant of Allah, you fear death because
you do not comprehend it”. Then the Imam (‘a) presented an example and
said “If you had become dirty, and due to the excess of dirt and
dirtiness you were in suffering and inconvenience, and you knew that the
cure for all this lay in your taking a shower, would you wish to go to a
bath and clean yourself or would you wish to remain in the same state of
dirtiness and as a result continue to undergo the suffering.” The sick
man said, “ Yes, I would wish to take the shower “. Then the Imam (‘a)
replied “death (for you) is the very same shower...”[^1]

The point to be considered in the above tradition is that, the sick
person was one of the companions of the Imam (‘a) and was aware of the
Islamic insight regarding death, but in spite of this, was intensely
fearful of death. And so, the Imam (‘a) by presenting an example
explained to him the states and circumstances after death and thus
calmed him.

### 3. Lack of preparation

Some of the people have comprehended the reality of death and are also
aware of the Islamic insight regarding death. On the other hand, they
have also obtained some information regarding the stations and the
journey after death, however, in spite of all this, they still fear
death. This fear is not due to the two reasons previously mentioned but
because they have not made available for themselves the tools and things
necessary for this journey of theirs, while, on the contrary they have
been paying more-than-necessary importance to their present lives; like
a person who knows that he would have to spend the rest of his life in
another country, but has not collected any money for his journey.

Instead, all that he has gathered is in the form of house, shop, land or
other things which, presently, are neither capable of being changed, nor
transferred. In other words, he has strived and worked and collected a
capital, but the capital is such that it cannot be transferred and there
is also nobody who will buy it. In short, it is not useful in any way
for the objective, which he had in mind. It was because of this that
Imam Husayn (‘a) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّكم اخربتم آخرتكم و عمرتك دنياكم فأنتم تكرهون النقلة من العمران الى
الخراب
  </p>
</blockquote>

“You have ruined and destroyed your hereafter and instead have made
habitable the present life. So you do not like the transfer from a
inhabited and comfortable place to a ruined and destroyed one.” [^2]

This kind of fear of death, which results from the lack of preparedness
and the absence of the provisions of the journey usually occurs with the
believers, which in reality is not fear of death but instead, fear of
not possessing the sufficient provisions necessary for this journey.

Another point is that such a fear is usually mixed with eagerness.
Because, on the one hand, a believer is eager for the Divine meeting and
also for the companionship of the Righteous people. On the other hand,
due to lack of sufficient piety and the necessary provisions, finds
himself in a state of anxiety and fear, whereas the unbelievers do not
possess such a fear and eagerness. They fear the actual death, because
they consider it to be a complete annihilation. Of course, it could be
said that the fear of the unbelievers could have a universal meaning,
and the causes of it could be those mentioned and also those not
mentioned.

Nevertheless, death or transfer into another world is a universal law,
acceptance of which or fear of which shall create no change in the law
itself, and finally sooner or later, everyone shall taste the nectar or
the poison of death. That, which is more important than death, is the
preparation for it, and Insha-Allah, Allah shall bestow such a success
upon us.

[^1]: Ma'anil Akhbar, Pg. 290

[^2]: Ma'anil Akhbar, Pg. 289


