Introduction
============

The history of mankind overflows with instances of tyrannical acts
perpetrated against the deprived and meek of the earth by oppressors and
men of power. Every so often, it was the oppressed who, heeding the call
of a venerable descendant of the family of the prophets and saints, rose
up in anger against those practicing injustice and by sacrificing their
lives and enduring immense hardships allowed the people of the world to
enjoy a breath of the fresh air of justice and equity.

Before very long, however, the stench from the fetid water of pride and
arrogance, diffused by riches, power and deceit, once again dispersed
the sweet savour of justice, stifling the justice seekers.

Women meanwhile, as half of mankind, have been made to suffer additional
injustice - the description of which calls for a book thicker than that
needed to record the oppression suffered by mankind in general - and in
their role as ‘spouses of men’, invariably shared their husbands’ sorrow
and were their refuge in hard times.

In many instances throughout history when the tyranny of tyrants or the
tribulations of the time have caused the death of their husbands, it was
the women who, single-handed, had to shoulder the burden of
responsibility. In addition to these, women, whether in their role as
daughters in their fathers’ house, spouses at the side of their husbands
or sisters to their brothers, and women compared to men in general, have
never enjoyed their proper station and have usually been regarded as the
weaker sex, inferior, unfortunate, pitiful, her greatness ignored.

Even though throughout the different periods of history and in the
various cultures and societies this discrimination has experienced
varying degrees of severity, still, unfortunately, its perpetuation and
pervasiveness are undeniable, with each period of time demonstrating at
least one of its many hues.

As we know, among the Arabs in pre-Islamic times, burying girls alive
was seen as a way for families to deliver themselves from what was
believed to be the misfortune of having a female child. It was only in a
short period in the earliest age of Islam that through the teachings and
practice of the Prophet and members of his virtuous household, women
recovered, to a certain degree, their true worth and station.

With the revival and restoration of the former system, this time
masquerading as the Islamic caliphate, women’s standing once again
lapsed and gradually with the passage of time fossilised
misinterpretations of Islam imposed crippling restrictions and
limitations on women, such that even in the last few decades veins of
these ossified views expressing disdain for women and belittling their
position could still be clearly seen among the contemporary petrified
religious traditionalists.

It was in such circumstances that the imperialists and their henchmen,
in keeping with their hegemonic tendencies, began to seek suitable ways
and means of infiltrating the cultural and political life of Iran, and
to this end they availed themselves of the position of women in our
society. With the slogans of freedom and equality, they promoted the
culture of nakedness and libertinism, in the process making use of the
most draconian of despotic measures as seen in Riza Khan’s policy of
forcing women to remove their Islamic veils (*kashf-i hijab*).[^1]

This ambition, which at the time of Riza Khan’s son - a son truly worthy
of such a father - took on a more subtle and clever form, was described
in the imperial literature as turning women into beguiling creatures. In
the Shah’s logic, the modern woman, the woman free of religious
restraints, has as her mission beguilement, and all obstacles to the
realisation of this mission must be removed.

Thus it was that not only women, but the other half of society too, i.e.
the men, fell under the spell of beguilement. We ourselves witnessed
how, in addition to the cabarets and dance halls and the formal and
informal gatherings, the streets, city squares, parks, recreational
centres, swimming pools and beaches, as showplaces of this imperial
policy, were in practice changed into something akin to houses of
pleasure in the service of degenerating, corrupting and narcotising the
young generation.

The model of the beguiling woman is one borrowed from Western society.
Unfortunately, in the original model too, woman’s true greatness and
identity have been sacrificed at the altar of the Western materialist
philosophy in worship of the two gods of Western man: the economy and
the pursuit of pleasure.

Consequently, in the Western civilisation too, women are to a great
extent either used to promote and sell goods or to promote and sell
themselves. She is a commodity in the service of the ruling system and
plays her part according to the dictates of the ‘establishment’.

With the help of the above observations, the greatness of Imam
Khomeini’s action in reviving the true identity of Muslim women can be
seen, and the luminosity of his thought demonstrated.

Imam saw for himself how the fossilised ideas of his generation viewed
women as nothing other than the ‘weaker sex’ and wives imprisoned in the
women’s quarters of the home. On the other hand, with his special
perspicacity he realised that the role the Shah and imperialism had in
mind for women as beguilers and playthings would not lead to them
enjoying a better position and would result only in the degeneration and
corruption of Muslim societies, in Muslims becoming estranged from their
own culture and in them losing sight of who they are.

In his position as an enlightened and crusading *marja-i taqlid*[^2]*,*
he drew from the limpid waters of the heavenly fount of the teachings of
the pure Islam of Muhammad and from his reflections as a *mujtahid*[^3]
on the precious heritage of the traditions of the Prophet and the
teachings of the infallible Imams, upon whom be peace, and arrived at
such a correct understanding of women’s responsibilities and true role
in society that we see this manifested in the revival of the Muslim
woman’s identity in the Islamic republic system.

It was acceptance of his view of women that, despite years of endeavours
by imperialism’s propaganda organs on one side and the presence of
fossilised ideas that appeared in the form of devotion to Islam on the
other, brought women onto the scene during the Islamic Revolution in
Iran in such a way that it was nicknamed the revolution of the
chador[^4]-clad by news agencies, observers and analysts.

And it was not only in the demonstrations to overthrow the Shah’s regime
that the opinions of women were taken as sound and helpful, rather this
was the case in all stages of the sanction, endorsement and
establishment of the Islamic republic system. Subsequently, despite the
backwardness which had arisen from old-fashioned policies and views and
which had hampered the legitimate development and blossoming of their
talents and capabilities, women now rapidly made up for the past and
made great strides along the road to securing their proper position in
society.

The composition of the delegation, which presented Imam’s historic
message to Gorbachev, the former leader of the now defunct Soviet Union,
provides a valuable and meaningful example of Imam’s views on the role
women should play in an Islamic society. In a symbolic move, he
appointed a delegation made up of clergymen, academics and a woman to
announce the death of communism to the world.

Indeed, perhaps one can even claim that the composition of the
delegation itself conveyed a message as correct as that old sage’s
miraculous prediction forewarning of the fall of the Eastern bloc: that
the revival of Islam and the world’s future power lay in the capable
hands of these three sections of society, and that it would be through
their correct understanding and implementation of their true mission
that the tree of Islamic revolution would blossom forth and overshadow
the ruins of communism and capitalism.

For the generation that ponders on the true position of women, Imam’s
own attitude towards women, his directives, his unambiguous and
enlightening stances and his ground-breaking edicts in this regard,
which were formed within the framework of indisputable *shari‘a*[^5]
laws and were completely loyal to the principles and incontrovertible
precepts of the religion, can be used as practical guidelines.

There are those to whom the traditional restrictions and denigration to
which, unfortunately, in the name of the *shari‘a,* women in many
countries which claim to be Islamic are subjected, are an anathema. And
yet, at the same time, they also cannot accept the extremist positions
taken by those claiming to defend the rights of women - who with
phantasmal claims of equal rights even reject the natural and innate
differences which exist between men and women, and have in practice set
off down a road towards destroying the family and the moral and
spiritual centres. For such people the desire to find the happy medium
usually ends in frustration.

By referring to this anthology, such people will become acquainted with
the opinions of a man who is a descendant of Fatima Zahra,[^6] and who
views woman as mankind’s educator, as one who helps fulfil mankind’s
aspirations and as one from whose lap man ascends. His view of women is
such that he goes so far as to say: “If nations were deprived of
courageous women, of women to rear true human beings, they would decline
and collapse.”

It was he who with his unique and enlightened way of thinking and
without departing from the traditions (*sunna*) of his forefathers and
the system of Islamic laws (*fiqh*) saw the solution to the problem or
the difficulty of women’s right in the matter of divorce - which had
been the focus of much malicious propaganda by self-interested
elements - to lie in women’s right to execute a divorce.

And now we present to those interested this anthology of the valuable
precepts and messages of that holy man concerning women. It has been
compiled with the help of the centre for cultural study and research of
the Ministry of Culture and Islamic Guidance (Women’s Cultural Affairs
Unit).

The excerpts selected in each section are placed in chronological order
except for those taken from books Imam has authored, the source for
which is given at the end of each excerpt. Regarding his messages and
speeches, only the dates have been given throughout, however complete
references appear at the end of the book to facilitate further research.

**The Institute for Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s
Works**

[^1]: After the Constitutional Revolution from the middle of 1927, some
circles close to Riza Khan began talking about the forced removal of the
women’s Islamic veil (kashf-i hijab) and by the New Year of 1928 (1307
AHS), Riza Khan’s wife and daughters appeared in public without the
Islamic covering. The law calling for the removal of hijab was
implemented after Riza Khan’s return from Turkey (in 1934) on 7 January
1935 (17 Dey 1341 AHS). On this day, Riza Khan, accompanied by his wife
and two daughters, attended the opening ceremonies for a college along
with his ministers and their wives who had removed their Islamic
covering. At this ceremony, Riza Khan addressed the women saying: “We
have broken the prison bars! Now the freed prisoners can make beautiful
homes instead of cages.”

[^2]: Marja’-i taqlid: a scholar of proven learning and piety whose
authoritative rulings one follows in matters of religious practice.

[^3]: Mujtahid: an authority on divine law who is entitled to give an
independent judgement on a point of theology or law.

[^4]: Large cloak and veil which envelops the woman’s entire body, worn
in Iran and elsewhere.

[^5]: - Shari‘a: the all-embracing law of Islam derived from the Qur’an,
the normative practice and authoritative pronouncements of the Prophet,
and a number of secondary sources.

[^6]: - Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet and wife of Imam \`Ali, also
known as Fatima Zahra.


