Great Women of the World
========================

Hazrat Fatima Zahra
-------------------

**Hazrat**[^1] **Fatima Zahra (upon whom be peace)**

The anniversary of Hazrat Fatima’s birthday and Women’s Day
-----------------------------------------------------------

**The anniversary of Hazrat Fatima’s birthday and Women’s Day**

Tomorrow is Women’s Day. It is the day when (the birth of) a woman is
commemorated of whom the world is proud. It is the day commemorating a
woman whose daughter stood against tyrannical governments, who recited
that sermon and uttered those words, of which you are all aware. (1)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

If a day is to be designated ‘Women’s Day’, what day is more deserving,
is prouder, than the day commemorating the joyous birth of Fatima Zahra,
upon whom be peace, a woman who is the pride of the family of divine
revelation, and who, like a sun, shines brightly in the crown of beloved
Islam. (2)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

It is a great day, on which a woman came into the world who compared
with all men. A woman came into the world who was an exemplar for
mankind. A woman came into the world in whom all traits of a (true)
human being were manifest. So today is a great day. It is the day of you
women. (3)

17 May 1980 (7 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

I convey my best wishes and felicitations to the noble nation of Iran,
in particular the respected women, on the immensely happy occasion of
the birthday of Fatima Zahra, the most felicitous day to commemorate
Women’s Day.

This joyous birthday occurred in a place and time when women were not
considered to be human beings and their very existence was seen as a
source of shame for families among the different tribes of the
pre-Islamic times. In such a corrupt and barbaric environment, the great
Prophet of Islam took woman’s hand and delivered her from the slough of
pagan customs. The history of Islam testifies to the limitless respect
the Messenger of God, peace and blessings be upon him and his
descendants, showed this noble infant, so as to demonstrate that woman
has a special greatness in society, and if she is not superior to man,
she is certainly no less than him. So this day is the day of woman’s
revivification, and the day to establish her honour and the great role
she plays in society. (4)

24 April 1981 (4 Urdibihisht 1360 AHS)

Felicitations to the mighty nation of Iran, in particular its great
women, on this blessed day of the woman, this illustrious day
commemorating a lustrous being who lays the foundations on which
mankind’s virtues and the exalted values of God’s representative in this
world are built. And even more blessed and precious is the most
felicitous selection of the 20th day of Jumada II (as Women’s Day), the
proud day of the birth of a woman who is one of history’s miracles and
who is a source of pride for the world of creation. (5)

14 April 1982 (25 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

I congratulate all you ladies and women in all Islamic countries on this
joyous holiday marking the glorious birth of *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon
whom be peace. I ask God, the Blessed and Exalted, to guide all the
respected women along the path that He has laid down, so that they can
achieve lofty Islamic goals. It is a source of great pride for the women
that they have designated *Hazrat* Fatima’s birthday as Women’s Day; it
is a source of pride and responsibility. (6)

2 March 1986 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

In fact, according to the traditions that have been handed down to us,
the Most Noble Messenger (peace be upon him and his descendants) and the
Imams (upon whom be peace) existed before the creation of the world in
the form of lights[^2] situated beneath the divine throne; they were
superior to other men even in the sperm from which they grew and in
their physical composition. Their exalted station is limited only by the
divine will, as indicated by the saying of Gabriel recorded in the
traditions on the *mi‘raj*:[^3] “Were I to draw closer by as much as the
breadth of a finger, surely I would burn.”[^4]

The Prophet himself said: “We have states with God that are beyond the
reach of the cherubim and the prophets.”[^5] It is part of our belief
that the Imams (upon whom be peace) too enjoy similar states, before the
question of government even arises. For example, according to the
traditions, *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace, also possessed
these states, even though she was not a ruler, a judge or a governor.
These states are quite distinct from the function of government. So when
we say that *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace, was neither a
judge nor a ruler, this does not mean that she was like you and me, or
that she has no spiritual superiority over us.

*Islamic Government,* pp. 64-65*.*

What proves our suggested possibility concerning the truth of the ‘Night
of Power’ (or Decree) *Lailat al-qadr*[^6] is the lengthy noble
*hadith*,[^7] which appears in the exegesis of al-Burhan (*Tafsir
al-Burhan*) and is quoted from the book *al-Kafi*, [^8] in which it is
said that when a Christian asked Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far[^9] about the
hidden meaning of the Qur’anic verse: “*Ha Mim. By the book that makes
things clear. We sent it down during a blessed night, for We ever wish
to warn against evil. In that night is made distinct every affair of
wisdom*,” (Qur’an 44:1-4),[^10] he replied, “As to the meaning of Ha
Mim, it is Muhammad, peace be upon him and his descendants. The ‘book
that makes things clear’ is Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali, upon whom be peace,
and the ‘night’ is Fatima, upon whom be peace.”[^11]

*Adab al-Salat,* p. 329

Amongst the supererogatory prayers to be performed after the prescribed
prayer (*salat*) are the *tasbihat*[^12] of Fatima Zahra, upon whom be
peace, which the Messenger of God, peace be upon him and his
descendants, taught her and which are the most preferred of such
prayers.[^13] It is in the *hadith* that had there been anything better,
the Messenger of God, peace be upon him and his descendants, would have
presented Fatima, upon whom be peace, with it.

*Adab al-Salat,* p. 377

The divine personality of Hazrat Fatima Zahra
---------------------------------------------

**The divine personality of** ***Hazrat*** **Fatima Zahra** (upon whom
be peace)

All dimensions that one can imagine exist for a woman and a human being
were personified in Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace. She was not an
ordinary woman; she was a spiritual woman, a heavenly woman, a human
being in the true sense of the word. She was the incarnation of human
goodness; she personified the true nature of woman and the true nature
of the human being. She was not an ordinary woman, she was a heavenly
being who appeared in this world in the form of a human being, she was a
divine, celestial being who appeared in the form of a woman. She
personified all the very best human and female traits that one can
imagine. Tomorrow[^14] then is Women’s Day, tomorrow is the day on which
such a woman was born.

She was a woman who embodied all the virtues of the prophets, a woman
who, had she been a man, would have been a prophet, a woman who, had she
been a man, would have been the Messenger of God. Spiritual qualities,
heavenly qualities, divine qualities, celestial qualities, human and
angelic qualities all came together in this being. She was a human being
in the full sense of the word, a woman in the full sense of the word.
Tomorrow then is Women’s Day. Tomorrow is the day when woman’s dignity
and woman’s character came into being.

Various dimensions exist for the woman just as they do for a man, for
human beings in general. This external, physical side is the lowest
stage of a human being’s development, be it man or woman, but it is from
this inferior stage that the human being moves towards perfection. Man
is a moving being, moving from the physical towards the metaphysical
stage, towards annihilation in God. In Fatima Zahra’s case these stages
have been attained. She began from the physical stage and moved on. She
proceeded through the stages of a spiritual movement assisted by divine
power, by the invisible hand, by the teachings of the Messenger of God
(peace be upon him and his descendants) until she reached the stage that
all others could not reach. Tomorrow then is the day on which all
aspects of woman were materialised, and woman in all her dimensions was
incarnated. Tomorrow is Women’s Day. (7)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

It is a great day; a woman came into the world who compared with all
men. A woman came into the world who exemplified humanity. A woman came
into the world in whom all traits of a (true) human being were manifest.
So today is a great day. It is the day of you women. (8)

17 May 1980 (27 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace, a woman who is the pride of the family
of divine revelation and who like a sun shines brightly in the crown of
beloved Islam; a woman whose virtues were on a par with the endless
virtues of the Most Noble Messenger and the household of infallibility
and purity; a woman for whom everyone, with whatever viewpoint he may
hold, has praises, yet none has been able to offer her adequate praise.
The *hadiths*[^15] that have come down to us from the family of divine
revelation are such that the listener can easily understand, for one
cannot contain a sea in a bottle. And whatever others have said in her
praise was according to their own level of understanding not
commensurate with her standing. So let us leave this vale of wonder . .
. (9)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

And I hope you will accept and perform those duties you are obliged to
carry out, which are to strive both in the area of education, which is
an important matter, and in the defence of Islam. These are among the
important tasks the performance of which is incumbent on every man and
woman, on the young and old alike. (10)

2 March 1986 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

I do not consider myself adequate to the task of speaking about *Hazrat*
Fatima, upon whom be peace, so I will suffice with reciting a sound
tradition[^16] which can be found in *Usul al-Kafi*.[^17] This tradition
quotes *Hazrat* Sadiq,[^18] upon whom be peace, as saying: “After the
death of her father, Fatima, upon whom be peace, lived for seventy-five
days. She was in this world and she was overcome with grief. Gabriel,
the Trusted Spirit, came to her regularly to console her and tell her of
future events.”

So according to this tradition, in these seventy-five days she had
contact with Gabriel, he came and went many times. I do not think that
such a thing has happened for anyone else other than the great prophets
of the highest rank, that in seventy-five days Gabriel, the Trusted
Spirit, came and went and spoke of events that would take place in the
future, spoke of things that would happen to her offspring in the
future.

*Hazrat* Amir[^19] wrote down what Gabriel said, he was the writer of
these revelations just as he had been the writer of the revelations the
Noble Messenger had received - of course with the death of the Noble
Messenger those revelations which brought divine laws ended. He was the
writer of the revelations that were made to *Hazrat* Fatima during these
seventy-five days.

Gabriel’s appearing to someone should not be taken as a trivial affair.
One should not imagine that Gabriel would appear to just anyone. The
necessary relationship has to exist between the spirit of that person to
whom Gabriel would appear and Gabriel’s station as the paramount spirit.
Whether we believe that it is the greatness of the spirit of the saint
or prophet that brings Gabriel down to this lower station, or that it is
God who sends him to make such revelations, whether we side with the
speculatists in their views or those who interpret the literal meaning
in theirs, it still remains that unless the necessary relationship
exists between the spirit of that person to whom Gabriel would appear
and Gabriel, the paramount spirit, then it would be impossible for such
a thing to happen.

The relationship existed between Gabriel, the paramount spirit, and the
prophets of the highest rank such as the Messenger of God, Moses, Jesus
and Abraham. It did not exist with just anyone, and after these prophets
it did not exist with anyone else. Indeed, I have not even heard of
Gabriel descending to the Imams as he did to the prophets. As far as I
know it was only to *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace, that
Gabriel appeared repeatedly during the period of these seventy-five
days, revealing future events which would take place for her offspring
and which *Hazrat* Amir recorded. Perhaps he spoke to her about the time
of her exalted offspring *Hazrat* Sahib,[^20] upon whom be peace, in
which case he may have mentioned events in Iran too; who knows, it is
possible.

Be that as it may, I consider the fact that Gabriel appeared to her when
he had appeared to no one other than the prophets, upon whom be peace -
and even then not all the prophets, only those of the highest rank - and
some of the saints who are of the same rank as them, to demonstrate her
nobility and moral excellence better than any other virtue with which
she is attributed, even though those virtues too are important. The fact
that she had communication with Gabriel in those seventy-five days, and
that he has appeared to no one since then, demonstrates an excellence,
which is, but one of the characteristics of *Hazrat* Fatima, upon whom
be peace. (11)

2 March 1986 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

My pen and words are unable to describe adequately the great and
extensive resistance of millions of Muslims enamoured of service,
self-sacrifice and martyrdom in this country of the Lord of the Age (may
our souls be sacrificed for him). Nor can I do justice to the epic
events which have taken place, the acts of bravery, the good deeds and
the service performed by the spiritual children of Kauthar, *Hazrat*
Fatima, upon whom be peace, all of which spring from the knowledge
gained from Islam and the family of the Prophet and from the blessings
gained by following the path of the Imam of ‘Ashura[^21]. (12)

5 February 1987 (16 Isfand 1365 AHS)

We are honoured that the vivifying prayers, which are called the
‘ascending recitation’ come from our Infallible Imams. We are proud that
the Sha’ban invocations[^22] of the Imams, the Prayer of Husayn ibn ‘Ali
(upon whom be peace) on the Day of ‘Arafa,[^23] the prayers of the
*Sahifa-yi Sajjadiya* [^24] known as the ‘Psalms of the Family of the
Holy Prophet’, and the *Sahifa-yi Fatimiya*, which is a book of God’s
revelations to *Hazrat* Fatima, are from us. (13)

5 June 1990 (15 Khurdad 1368 AHS)

Hazrat Fatima Zahra’s home and its blessings
--------------------------------------------

***Hazrat*** **Fatima Zahra’s home and its blessings**

*Hazrat* Amir (Imam \`Ali), upon whom be peace, was the leader of all
Muslims with a domain perhaps ten times larger than today’s Iran. It
extended from the Hijaz to Egypt and even farther into Africa, reaching
parts of Europe. Yet when this divine leader sat with a group of people,
just as we are sitting here now, even this[^25] was not beneath him. He
possessed one pelisse, which, tradition holds, he and *Hazrat* Fatima
would sleep upon at night and during the day he would scatter grass upon
for his camel to eat. This was also the kind of lifestyle the Prophet
had. This is Islam. (14)

4 July 1979 (13 Tir 1358 AHS)

The ideology was being erased and destroyed by the deviationists
remaining from the Age of Ignorance[^26] and by the calculated plans for
the revival of nationalism and Arabism with the slogan ‘no message
received, no revelation revealed’,[^27] the just Islamic government was
being turned into a monarchical regime and Islam and the revelation
dragged into obscurity, when suddenly a great figure, who had been
nourished by the juice of divine revelation, nurtured in the household
of the lord of the messengers, Muhammad Mustafa, and the lord of the
Imams, \`Ali Murtaza (Imam \`Ali), and raised in the care of Siddiqa
Tahera (*Hazrat* Fatima), rose up and through his unequalled sacrifice
and movement for God created a great inciden Wafat, which brought the
palaces of the oppressors tumbling down and saved the ideology of Islam.
(15)

16 June 1980 (26 Khurdad 1359 AHS)

This small house of Fatima’s, upon whom be peace, and these people
reared there, who numbered four or five, in reality manifested all the
power of God the Exalted. They rendered services at which all of us, all
of mankind, marvel. (16)

9 March 1982 (18 Isfand 1360 AHS)

A woman in a small room of a humble home nurtured human beings whose
light shone from the vast expanse of the earth to the highest heavens,
from this world to the next. May the blessings and peace of God the
Exalted be upon this small room, which was the place where the light of
divine majesty was made manifest and was the nursery of the elite
children of mankind. (17)

14 April 1982 (25 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

We had a humble dwelling in the early days of Islam and that belonged to
Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace. It was even smaller than these rooms
here,[^28] but what blessings it bestowed. The blessings that came from
this small hut were such that they filled the world with enlightenment.
And man would have to traverse a great distance before he could reach
the station of those who bestowed these blessings, for the dwellers of
this humble home occupy such a high station in the spiritual realm that
even the hands of the angels cannot reach them, and their teachings are
such that whatever good one sees in the Muslim lands, especially in our
land, comes from their blessings. (18)

21 March 1983 (1 Farvardin 1362 AHS)

In the exegesis of Al-Burhan (*Tafsir al-Burhan*), there is a narrative
from *Hazrat* Baqir.[^29] Being a noble *hadith* referring to several
pieces of information and disclosing important secrets, we will, owing
to its blessedness, relate it in full: The author of *Tafsir al-Burhan*,
may God have mercy on him, quoting a narrative from \`Abdullah ibn
\`Ajlan as-Sakuni who quoted from the men of Shaykh Abu Ja\`far at-Tusi
who quoted Abu Ja\`far himself who said: I heard Abu Ja\`far (Imam
Baqir), upon whom be peace, say: The house of \`Ali and Fatima was the
room of the Messenger of God, upon whom be peace, and the roof of their
house was the Throne of the Lord of the worlds. At the back of their
house there was an opening to the Throne, the curtain before the stairs
of revelation having been raised. And the angels would bring down
revelation to them in the morning, in the evening and at any hour or any
moment. The comings and goings of groups of angels were endless. Verily
did God, the Blessed and Exalted, draw back the curtain on the heavens
for Abraham till he saw the Throne and He increased his seeing power.
And verily did God increase the seeing power of Muhammad, \`Ali, Fatima,
Hasan and Husayn, upon whom be peace. They would look at the Throne and
they found no roof over their home except the Throne. Their home was
roofed with the Throne of the Beneficent, and “*therein ascend the
angels and the Spirit by God’s permission on every affair, in peace,*”
(Qur’an 97:4-5). I asked: “For every affair?” He replied: “For every
affair.” I asked: “Is this what was revealed?” He replied: “Yes.”

*Adab al-Salat*, p. 448

The way of life of Hazrat Fatima
--------------------------------

**The way of life of** ***Hazrat*** **Fatima** (upon whom be peace)

We must take this family as our role model, our women should try to
emulate their women, and our men their men. All of us should learn from
all of them. They dedicated their lives to the support of the oppressed
and to the revival of the divine traditions. We should follow their
example and dedicate our lives to them. He who knows the history of
Islam, knows that each member of this family was a perfect human being,
even more than that, a divine being, a spiritual person who rose up for
the people and for the oppressed against those who sought to destroy
them. (19)

11 April 1979 (22 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

The exemplar is *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace. The exemplar
is the Prophet of Islam. We can say that our country is Islamic, that we
have an Islamic Republic when all these ideals that are contained in
Islam are realised. (20)

29 May 1979 (8 Khurdad 1358 AHS)

The speech of Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace, decrying the government,
the uprising of the Commander of the Faithful (Imam \`Ali), his
forbearance over twenty odd years while helping the government of the
time, and later his sacrifice in the way of Islam and the sacrifice made
by his two dear sons: Imam Mujtaba,[^30] who discredited the tyrannical
Umayyad government through the great service he rendered; and Imam
Mujtaba’s dear brother, the Lord of the Martyrs (Imam Husayn), with the
great service he rendered, are things about which you are all aware.  
 We know that despite the fact they were few in number and their weapons
were insufficient, the divine spirit and the spirit of belief made them
such that they were able to prevail over all the tyrants of their age,
revive Islam and set an example for us all, dear brothers, which is that
we should stand fast against all the powers that today have risen up in
war against us, even though our numbers be few, our weapons insufficient
and our readiness incomplete.  
 And we shall also follow our Imams, upon whom be peace, in the example
they set by demonstrating that one must stand against the arrogant ones
armed sometimes with words and at others with weapons, and put them in
their place. (21)

9 March 1982 (18 Isfand 1360 AHS)

Strive to purify your character and to make your friends do likewise.
Strive so that you react to the outrages committed against you. In your
attempts to uphold all the qualities that make up the great character of
woman, be as that unique woman, *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be
peace, was. All of us should take our exemplar from Islam by looking at
her and her children, and being as she was. Strive to acquire learning
and godliness, for learning is not the preserve of any one person,
learning is for all, godliness is for all, and striving to acquire
learning and achieve godliness is the duty of us all. (22)

12 March 1985 (21 Isfand 1363 AHS)

Likewise, if you women here, indeed all our women all over the country,
have accepted today as Women’s Day, that is, have accepted the day which
marks the birthday of *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, with all the perfection it
represents and the position it enjoys, as Women’s Day, then you have a
great task to perform, one which includes struggle, just as she
struggled, to the best of her ability, during the short span of her
life, addressing the governments of the time and passing judgement on
them. To truly accept her birthday as Women’s Day, you must imitate her.
To truly accept it you must follow her example in her renunciation of
the things of this world, in her devotion and piety and in all the
virtues she possessed. If you do not do this, then you have not entered
into the true spirit of Women’s Day. Whoever does not accept these
things has not entered into the true spirit of Women’s Day and has not
recognised its true nature. (23)

2 March 1986 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

It is greatly regrettable that yesterday (Saturday 28 January 1989 / 8
Bahman 1368 AHS) the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting organisation
broadcast a derogatory remark about the role model for women, a remark
which one is ashamed to repeat. The person who allowed such a remark to
be broadcast will be punished and removed from office, and the others
involved in this matter will also be punished. If it is proven that the
intention was to insult and disparage, then most certainly the person
guilty will be sentenced to death. If an incident of this kind is
repeated, then the top officials at the Islamic Republic of Iran
Broadcasting will receive a severe reprimand and will be punished. Of
course all stages of the investigation will be in the hands of the
Judiciary. (24)

29 January 1989 (9 Bahman 1367 AHS)

The Philosophy of Imamate as held by Hazrat Fatima Zahra
--------------------------------------------------------

**The Philosophy of Imamate as held by Hazrat Fatima Zahra,** upon whom
be peace

In order to assure the unity of the Islamic *umma*,[^31] in order to
liberate the Islamic homeland from occupation and penetration by the
imperialists and their puppet governments, it is imperative that we
establish a government. In order to attain the unity and freedom of the
Muslim peoples, we must overthrow the oppressive governments installed
by the imperialists and bring into existence an Islamic government of
justice that will be in the service of the people. The formation of such
a government will serve to preserve the order and unity of the Muslims.
Just as Fatima Zahra, upon whom be peace, said in her address: “The
Imamate exists for the sake of preserving order among the Muslims and
replacing their disunity with unity.”

*Islamic Government*, p. 49.

The complete texts of messages and some speeches given on the occasion of Women’s Day Imam Khomeini’s Message on Women’s Day
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The complete texts of messages and some speeches given on the occasion
of Women’s Day Imam Khomeini’s Message on Women’s Day**

16 May 1979
-----------

**I seek refuge in God from the accursed Satan**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

Tomorrow marks the birthday of Siddiqa Tahera Fatima Zahra, upon whom be
peace; it is Women’s Day. All dimensions that one can imagine exist for
a woman and a human being were personified in Fatima Zahra, upon whom be
peace. She was not an ordinary woman; she was a spiritual woman, a
heavenly woman, a human being in the true sense of the word.

She was the incarnation of human goodness; she personified the true
nature of woman and the true nature of the human being. She was not an
ordinary woman, she was a heavenly being who appeared in this world in
the form of a human being, she was a divine, celestial being who
appeared in the form of a woman. She personified all the very best human
and female traits that one can imagine. Tomorrow[^32] then is Women’s
Day, tomorrow is the day on which such a woman was born.

She was a woman who embodied all the virtues of the prophets, a woman
who, had she been a man, would have been a prophet, a woman who, had she
been a man, would have been the Messenger of God. Spiritual qualities,
heavenly qualities, divine qualities, celestial qualities, human and
angelic qualities all came together in this being. She was a human being
in the full sense of the word, a woman in the full sense of the word.
Tomorrow then is Women’s Day. Tomorrow is the day when woman’s dignity
and woman’s character came into being.

Various dimensions exist for the woman just as they do for a man, for
human beings in general. This external, physical side is the lowest
stage of a human being’s development, be it man or woman, but it is from
this inferior stage that the human being moves towards perfection. Man
is a moving being, moving from the physical towards the metaphysical
stage, towards annihilation in God. In Fatima Zahra’s case these stages
have been attained. She began from the physical stage and moved on. She
proceeded through the stages of a spiritual movement assisted by divine
power, by the invisible hand, by the teachings of the Messenger of God
(peace be upon him and his descendants) until she reached the stage that
all others could not reach.

Tomorrow then is the day on which all aspects of woman were
materialised, and woman in all her dimensions was incarnated. Tomorrow
is Women’s Day.

Unfortunately, women have suffered from victimisation in the past,
notably in two periods. The first was during the Age of Ignorance, the
period before the advent of Islam. During this time, women were
oppressed; they were treated like animals, even worse than animals. Then
Islam came and bestowed its blessings on mankind, it dragged women out
of that state of oppression; it pulled her from that slough of
ignorance.

The second period when women have been oppressed occurred in our Iran,
during the reigns of the former Shah (Riza Khan) and his son (Muhammad
Riza). In the name of wanting to liberate women, they oppressed the
women; they committed outrages against them. They dragged them down from
that position of honour and esteem that they occupied, from that
spiritual position that they enjoyed, making them instead mere objects.
In the name of freedom, freedom for women and freedom for men, they
deprived men and women of their freedom.

They corrupted our women and our youth. The Shah (Muhammad Riza)
believed women should be ‘ravishing and beguiling’ as he put it. Of
course it was because he had allowed the animal aspect of his nature,
the base animal aspect with its concern for the physical, for the
material, to overcome him that he viewed women as such. Accordingly, he
pulled women down from their position as human beings to the level of an
animal, and on the plea of wanting to give women status, he dragged her
down from the status she enjoyed to a lower one. He turned women into
dolls, whereas women are human beings, great human beings.

Women are the educators of society. It is from the laps of women that
true human beings originate. The first stage in the development of sound
men and women begins in the lap of a woman. Women are the educators of
human beings. A country’s success or its misfortune depends on women. If
they impart sound teachings, they create (sound) human beings and a
flourishing country. Good fortune originates from the laps of women,
they should be the source of every success and happiness, yet
unfortunately this father and son, in particular this son, turned women
into playthings. The number of crimes they perpetrated against the women
they did not perpetrate against the men.

Women are the source of all blessings. We all saw what role the women
played in this movement. History has witnessed great women in the world
and what it means to be a woman, but history is remote. We ourselves
have witnessed the kind of woman Islam has nurtured. In this recent
period, the women who rose up were the veiled women from the south of
the city, from Qum and other places where Islam enjoys a strong
foothold.

Those who had the type of upbringing that the Aryamehr[^33] decreed did
not participate in this uprising at all. They were given a training that
was depraving and corrupt and were deprived of Islamic teachings,
whereas those who were given an Islamic education shed blood, sacrificed
lives, poured into the streets and brought the movement to victory. Our
movement is indebted to them. The men poured into the streets after the
women; the women encouraged the men; they formed the vanguard.

Women are creatures who can destroy a power that seems everlasting, a
demonic power. During their reigns, Riza Khan and Muhammad Riza Khan
vulgarised women, dragging them down from that status they once enjoyed,
doing the same to the men and youth too. Numerous centres of corruption
were created for our youth. In the name of freedom, in the name of
progress, in the name of civilisation, they dragged our youth into
corruption. In the name of freedom, they deprived us of all freedoms.

Those who lived through the Riza Khan period understand perfectly well
what I am talking about, they witnessed for themselves what we were put
through and what our respected women were put through, just as those who
lived through Muhammad Riza’s era saw what went on then. With deceptive
words and bombastic terms, they set our country on a course for
destruction. And worse than everything else, much worse, was the fact
that they corrupted our youth.

Our human resources were put in a state of backwardness because of them.
Women during the time of Riza Khan and Muhammad Riza Pahlavi were
oppressed creatures and did not know it. It is doubtful that women were
subjected to as much oppression during the Age of Ignorance as they were
during the reigns of these two men, or as much degradation.

In both periods (the Age of Ignorance and under the Pahlavis), women
were oppressed. In the first, Islam came and rescued them from their
bondage, and in this period too I hope that Islam will be able to take
their hands and save them from the maelstrom of abjectness and
oppression.

Oh honourable women, awaken! Be alert; do not let yourselves be deceived
by those devils who wish to pull you into this maelstrom. They are
alluring and deceitful; they are out to cheat you just as the cursed
Shah was. Take refuge in Islam. Islam will bring you happiness. Tomorrow
is Women’s Day; it is the day when (the birth of) a woman is
commemorated of whom the world is proud.

It is the day commemorating a woman whose daughter stood against
tyrannical rulers, who recited that sermon and uttered those words,
words of which you are all aware---a woman who stood up to a tyrant who
would kill anyone who breathed a word against him. She was not afraid;
she held her ground and condemned him, condemned Yazid and his
leadership. She lambasted him saying he was not fit to be called a human
being.

This is what women should be like, and, praise be to God, this is how
the women of our day are. They stood against the tyrant with clenched
fists carrying their infants in their arms and helped the movement.

May God keep us from the evil of devils.  
 May God keep our youth from the evil of these human devils.  
 May God keep our women and our girls from their evil. (25)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

17 May 1979
-----------

**Imam Khomeini’s address to a gathering of women on the occasion of
Women’s Day**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

The day is great, the gathering grand and the place blessed. It is the
day commemorating the birth of Fatima Zahra, Women’s Day. It is a
victorious day for women, the day of the exemplar for women in the
world. Women play a very important role in society. The realisation of
mankind’s hopes lies in her hands. She is the educator of great men and
women. It is from the laps of women that man begins his ascent. It is in
the laps of women that great men and great women are nurtured. It is a
great day; a woman came into the world who compares with all men.

A woman came into the world who is an exemplar for mankind. A woman came
into the world in whom all the traits of a (true) human being were
manifest. So today is a great day. It is the day of you women.

In our era, women have shown that they stand shoulder-to-shoulder with
their menfolk in the struggle; one could even go so far as to say that
they lead the way. Iranian women have undertaken both great human and
financial endeavours. This respected class of women from the south of
Tehran, from Qum and other cities, these veiled ladies, these symbols of
virtuousness, took the lead in the movement and in financial sacrifice,
donating their jewels and gold to the oppressed. And the most important
issue here is that one’s intentions are pure.

For the few loaves of bread that *Hazrat* Amir (Imam \`Ali), upon whom
be peace, and his family gave in charity, God revealed several
(Qur’anic) verses. These verses were revealed not because of the loaves
of bread, but because the intention was pure, it was an act done for
God. The value of an action lies in its spiritual motives.

The actions of those sisters who took part in the movement were more
valuable than those of the men; they came out (into the streets) in
their veils of modesty and shouting in unison with the men brought about
victory. Now, with the purest of intentions, what they had accumulated
during their lives they donated to the needy. This is worth much, were
the affluent to donate millions it would not match this in value.

So Women’s Day is an important day, and today is Women’s Day. Today is
the day of you veiled ladies. This is a great gathering, a gathering of
the different strata of those who (hitherto) could not come together,
whom repression prevented from coming together. Today all have come
together, men and women have come together in a brotherly and sisterly
fashion at a holy place, at Fayziya,[^34] at the place from which
knowledge flows to all regions, the place at which divine laws are
elucidated, the place from which knowledge and the knowledge of *jihad*
is disseminated. The men and women of Qum are exemplary in their
learning and their willingness to act, as are the men and women of Iran
on the whole.

My friends, maintain this community and this unity. The devils seek to
cause dissension among you. Preserve this ideological unity; preserve
this uprising for God. As long as your uprising is for God, you will be
victorious. Those who, using various pretexts, try to create divisions,
are betraying the nation, betraying the country and betraying Islam. Be
vigilant and neutralise their actions and their machinations.

Those who try to create disturbances and discord among the different
segments of the population throughout the country are foreign agents,
they are agents of America; they are American mercenaries. They receive
money from the other side of the border, which they distribute to the
workers to persuade them to down tools. They want them to stop working
so the factories won’t operate. The farmers are prevented from getting
on with their work. Oh honourable workers! Dear farmers!

Continue with your work. Stop indulging in these ideological
differences. Now is the time for everyone to be working for Islam and
for his country. All of you are duty bound to do so. Those who try to
prevent you from working want to open the way for their masters, they
want to return us to that abjectness and suffering we once had to
endure. May God protect you from their malice.

May He render Islam and the Muslims victorious.  
 May He give us the power of discernment.  
 May God grant you health and happiness.  
 Peace be upon you and also the mercy and blessings of God. (26)

17 May 1979 (27 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

5 May 1980
----------

**Imam Khomeini’s message for Women’s Day**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

If a day is to be designated ‘Women’s Day’, what day is more deserving,
is prouder, than the day commemorating the joyous birth of Fatima Zahra,
upon whom be peace, a woman who is the pride of the family of divine
revelation and who like a sun shines brightly in the crown of beloved
Islam; a woman whose virtues were on a par with the endless virtues of
the Most Noble Messenger and the household of infallibility and purity;
a woman for whom everyone, with whatever viewpoint he may hold, has
praises, yet none has been able to offer her adequate praise.

The *hadiths* that have come down to us from the family of divine
revelation are such that the listener can easily understand, for one
cannot contain a sea in a bottle. And whatever others have said in her
praise was according to their own level of understanding, not
commensurate with her standing. So let us leave this vale of wonder and
turn to the virtues of women in general.

During this past half-century of blackness and bondage, this opprobrious
Pahlavi era, the poisonous pens of the misguided and the words of
benighted speakers sought to give women the status of a commodity, and
those women who were vulnerable were drawn to centres that the pen is
ashamed to mention. Anyone wishing to know something of these crimes can
refer to the newspapers and magazines of the Riza Khan era, to the poems
of the blackguards and scoundrels of that period, that corrupt period
from the compulsory unveiling of women onwards. One can find out about
the social gatherings of those days and the centres of corruption that
existed.

Shame on those people. May the pens of such intellectuals be broken. Do
not think that the crimes perpetrated on the plea of freedom for women
and freedom for men had nothing to do with the plans of the
world-plunderers and the international criminals. One of their plans was
to lure the youth into the centres of vice and fornication, and in this
they succeeded. Consequently, our country was deprived of young people
who were active members of society. They robbed the youth of their
ability to think, and brainwashed them into believing that they should
be indifferent to the plundering and pillaging they carried out in this
blighted country of xenomaniacs.[^35]

Today, through the blessings of the Islamic movement, women are
effective members of society, and have to a certain degree regained
their proper standing. There are still a limited number of women in the
upper echelons of society who have inherited the views of the black
period of the former vile regime and consider women’s proper standing to
lie in prinking, in making herself up and participating in bacchanalian
revelry.

They have made themselves into an article of trade, they are the
followers and agents of the previous regime, the executers of the
foreigners’ plans and the helpers of the CIA and SAVAK.

Apart from these, the women of Iran today are committed, lion-hearted
individuals who shoulder-to-shoulder with our dear men are busy
rebuilding their beloved country just as they are busy rebuilding
themselves through learning and education. You will not find a town or
village without cultural or scientific centres composed of dedicated and
honourable Muslim women. Through the blessings of Islam, the Islamic
movement has brought about such a change in the spirit of the men and
women of our society that they have travelled a road in one night that
would have normally taken a hundred years to travel.

You noble people witnessed for yourselves how the respected, committed
women of Iran entered the arena ahead of the men to free the country
from the trammels of imperial rule. We are all indebted to them for
their uprising and their efforts. After defeating the superpowers and
eradicating their corrupt roots, we can truly designate a day as Women’s
Day and tell the world about women and their progress in the Islamic
Republic with pride and honour.

Today, women in the Islamic Republic are striving shoulder-to-shoulder
with the men to rebuild their country and rebuild themselves. This is
the true meaning of free men and free women, not that which was
promulgated during the reign of the deposed Shah, for freedom then meant
prison, repression and torture. I advise the women to forget the habits
of the *taghut*[^36] era and rebuild beloved Iran, which belongs to them
and their children, such that with the help of all segments of the
population it is freed from all aspects of (foreign) dependence.

I offer my best wishes to the committed women on this 20th day of Jumada
II, which is a blessed day, and pray to God the Exalted for their health
and happiness and for the greatness of Islam and the Muslims. (27)

Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359)

24 April 1981
-------------

**Imam Khomeini’s message on the occasion of Women’s Day**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

I convey my best wishes and felicitations to the noble nation of Iran,
in particular the respected women, on the immensely happy occasion of
the birthday of Fatima Zahra, the most felicitous day to commemorate
Women’s Day.

This joyous birthday occurred in a place and time when women were not
considered to be human beings and their very existence was seen as a
source of shame for families among the different tribes of the
pre-Islamic times. In such a corrupt and barbaric environment, the great
Prophet of Islam took woman’s hand and delivered her from the slough of
pagan customs.

The history of Islam testifies to the limitless respect the Messenger of
God, peace and blessings be upon him and his descendants, showed this
noble infant, so as to demonstrate that woman had a special greatness in
society, and if she was not superior to man, she was certainly no less
than him. So this day is the day of woman’s revivification, and the day
to establish her honour and the great role she plays in society.

I am proud of these honourable women of Iran and the change they have
wrought in themselves, a change that has brought to naught the devilish
plans which the foreign strategists and their dishonourable stooges,
from the profligate poets to the venal writers and propaganda
organisations, have spent more than fifty years trying to bring to
maturity.

They have proved that the worthy Muslim women (of Iran) will not be
misled and will not be hurt by the malicious machinations of the West
and of those infatuated with the West. Even with all the propaganda
which was trumpeted over those propaganda loudspeakers throughout the
usurpatory reign of the Pahlavis, apart from a handful of affluent
*taghuti* women, agents of SAVAK and people affiliated to them, millions
of committed women from other segments of the population did not fall
into the trap of those who had surrendered themselves to the West, and
throughout the fifty years of benightment, standing proud before God and
mankind, they bravely resisted the onslaught. Consequently, through this
recent, divinely inspired change which has taken place, the hopes of the
undiscerning, who regard the West as their *qibla*,[^37] have been
dashed forever.

May the Islamic movement of the great women of Iran be victorious and
glorious. Glory be to this exalted segment of the population who with
their valuable and brave contribution to the defence of the Islamic
homeland and the venerable Qur’an brought victory to the revolution, and
who today are actively involved in the war effort, either at the front
or in other areas, and are prepared to make sacrifices.

May God’s mercy be upon those mothers who sent their strong sons to the
battlefront to defend Truth and who take pride in their subsequent
invaluable martyrdom. Shame on those dolls who live a base animal life
in loathsome palaces abroad and at home and who think of nothing save
depravation. May they be severed the tongues and hands of those
criminals who with their words and writings are striving to destroy the
Islamic Republic and drag our dear country into the laps of the Left or
Right!

Endless salutations to the committed women who are currently busy all
over the country rearing children, teaching the illiterate and educating
people in the rich culture of the Qur’an. May God’s blessings be upon
those women who have attained the high station of martyrdom in this
revolution and in defence of their homeland, and upon those who are
helping the sick and invalid in the clinics and hospitals. Greetings to
those mothers who gave their children (for the cause) with pride and
honour. Good wishes to you committed women in Islamic countries on
Women’s Day.

It is hoped that the community of women will cease being indifferent and
will awaken from the unnatural stupor the plunderers have forced them
into, and that together, shoulder-to-shoulder, they will help those who
have been deceived and guide them to the lofty station which is theirs.
It is also hoped that women in the other Islamic countries will take
lessons from the miraculous change that has occurred in the Iranian
women as a result of the great Islamic revolution, and will strive to
reform their society and bring freedom and independence to their
countries.

May God’s mercy and blessings be upon the honourable women of Islam and
beloved Iran. God’s peace be upon His servants amongst the men and women
believers. (28)

Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini

24 April 1981 (4 Urdibihisht 1360 AHS)

14 April 1982
-------------

**Imam Khomeini’s message on Women’s Day**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

Felicitations to the mighty nation of Iran, in particular its great
women, on this blessed day of the woman, this illustrious day
commemorating a lustrous being who lays the foundations on which
mankind’s virtues and the exalted values of God’s representative in this
world are built. And even more blessed and precious is the most
felicitous selection of the 20th day of Jumada II (as Women’s Day), the
proud day of the birth of a woman who is one of history’s miracles and
who is a source of pride for the world of creation.

A woman in a small room of a humble home nurtured human beings whose
light shone from the vast expanse of the earth to the highest heavens,
from this world to the next. May the blessings and peace of God the
Exalted be upon this small room, which was the place where the light of
divine majesty was made manifest and was the nursery of the elite
children of mankind.

The role of women in the world enjoys certain special characteristics.
The rectitude or immorality of a society stems from the rectitude or
immorality of the women in that society. Women are the only creatures
who can bestow upon society individuals raised in their care whose deeds
can be a blessing to communities and can inspire perseverance and lofty
human values, or can have the opposite effect.

Without a doubt, what the dear Iranian nation, in particular its
oppressed women, went through at the hands of that heinous regime during
the past fifty years, which have been the ruin of Iran, was all part of
the premeditated plan of the world’s super criminals. Riza Khan and his
criminal son with their sick notions perpetrated such infernal and
far-reaching crimes as were unparalleled or at least have few parallels
in the history of this country.

The world’s supercriminals believed their continued survival lay in the
capture of other nations, particularly the Islamic nations. In recent
decades, when the way was open for them to infiltrate the rich, Islamic,
oil-producing countries, they realised that it was only the religious
class that could impede their plans to colonise and exploit those
countries.

They saw that a decree only half a line long issued by a popular
*marja’*[^38] was enough to bring the British government and the
powerful Qajar court to their knees. They saw too the key role women
played in that movement and observed how in the Constitutional
Movement[^39] and events subsequent to it, it was the women, in
particular the deprived, middle-class women, who could, through their
uprising, inspire their menfolk to act. They became aware that as long
as these elements retained their powerful influence, their plans would
come to naught.

And so, in order to gain control over these countries and their abundant
resources, they felt it necessary to weaken the pillars of religion, the
religious leadership and the religious segments of the population. They
laid their plans in those early days and began to act upon them. They
had some success, and then they found Riza Khan to perform this service
for them. Subsequently, they brought him to power and he embarked on a
pertinacious crusade against these three obstacles.

Those who can remember those days know only too well what this criminal
traitor did with the aid of his perfidious agents who had no homeland,
and what measures they took to lead the innocent women astray, to turn
them into consumers and drag them into corruption in order to expedite
the success of their plans. It is enough for the present generation, who
did not experience those black days, to look at the books, poems,
writings, plays, songs, newspapers and magazines of that period, and the
centres of corruption, the gambling houses, liquor stores, and cinemas,
which are all vestiges of those times.

Alternatively, they can speak to those who lived through that period and
ask them what acts of oppression and betrayal were carried out against
women, this segment of the population that nurtures human beings, in the
guise of advancing their position. It goes without saying that the
majority of religious women especially society’s deprived resisted this
assault. But among the perfidious imperialists in the affluent and
hedonistic echelons of society, their plans found success, and it was
these people who created a favourable market for their masters.

Even now that through the providence of God Almighty and the actions of
the exalted nation, particularly its lion-hearted ladies, the hands of
the oppressors have been severed, still an insignificant minority
persist in their foolish ways. It is hoped that, God willing, they too
will see the tricks of the devils, both great and small, and will escape
their cunning traps.

Today, which is Women’s Day in our beloved Iran, we must be especially
proud of our women, for what is more deserving of pride than that which
our great women did in standing against the former tyrannical regime,
and, upon its destruction, against the superpowers and their retainers,
in the forefront of the struggle, demonstrating such perseverance,
resistance and bravery the likes of which have not been recorded of men
in any age.

The resistance demonstrated by these great women in the imposed war and
the sacrifices they are making are so astonishing that pens and tongues
cannot adequately describe them, indeed they put them to shame.
Throughout this war, I have seen the mothers, sisters and wives who have
lost their dear ones do things that I don’t think could be witnessed
anywhere else other than here in this revolution. One event in
particular stands out in my mind from all the rest, and that is the
marriage of a young girl to a dear revolutionary guard who had lost both
his hands in the war and had received injuries to both his eyes.

That brave young girl whose magnanimous spirit overflowed with sincerity
and genuineness said: \`Since I cannot go to the war front, let me pay
my debt to the revolution and my religion through this marriage.’ No
writer, poet, speaker, painter, artist, mystic, philosopher or
jurisprudent, indeed anyone you care to name, can adequately convey the
spiritual magnificence of this event or the human worth and the divine
tones contained therein. No one can evaluate this great girl’s
self-sacrifice, her otherworldiness and devotion to God using current
criteria.

This blessed day is the day of women such as her, may God keep them for
Islam and Iran. May I offer you young ladies married to men who have
been reunited with God (been martyred) a word of benevolent, fatherly
advice. Do not refrain from remarrying, and through your marriages, rear
children like yourselves: steadfast and valuable to society.

Do not listen to the devilish insinuations of some people who pay little
attention to what is right, preferring instead the path of corruption. I
also advise the dear revolutionary guards, the soldiers and the youth to
avail themselves of the opportunity to wed these ladies, and, with such
a valuable spouse by their sides, continue along the honourable path of
life they have chosen.

May God the Exalted be your friend and your strength. Endless greetings
to women, these valuable and persevering beings. Blessed for you all be
this most precious day of the woman.  
 May God support this beloved country and be the friend and helper of us
all. (29)

Ruhullah al-Musawi al-Khomeini

14 April 1982 (25 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

12 March 1985
-------------

**Imam Khomeini’s address to a gathering of women on the occasion of the
anniversary of the birth of Hazrat Fatima (upon whom be peace) and
Women’s Day**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

Praise be to God on this blessed day which is the exalted day of the
woman. The ladies of Iran have made great strides along the path of
Islam and have freed themselves from the shackles, which bound them. I
offer my best wishes to all ladies on this blessed day and especially to
those here now.

I hope that just as you ladies were committed in all affairs concerning
the advancement of Islam before, during and after this revolution, in
the same manner, by God’s grace, you will remain committed and will
continue to serve this country which was ruined under the tyrannical
rule of oppressors who trampled upon our rights, wanted to wipe us off
the map, corrupt our youth and pervert the minds of our women, dragging
them into a way of life that was contrary to the way they should have
been living.

God the Blessed and Exalted has bestowed His favour on us all and has
assisted us, so that hitherto we have been successful in our aims, and
we attribute much of that success to the service rendered by you ladies,
and for that we are deeply indebted to you. You are the ones who, in
addition to the activities you yourselves carry out, redouble the
activities of the men. You are the ones who suffered psychological
torture during the *taghut* era.

Praise be to God, with your strength and your commitment you expunged
this devilish force from the pages of history, and stopped the plans
they were brewing up from being realised. God knows that if it were not
for this movement and the efforts of the Iranian people, women and men,
young and old alike, this nation would have lost everything.

God be praised, you worked hard, you suffered and were steadfast in
every stage (of the movement). Iranian women were actively involved in
all affairs, from the cultural to the economic, and today a large number
of them are involved in agriculture, a large number in industry and
still others in the educational arena in the areas of literature,
science and the arts. All of these efforts are commendable in the eyes
of God the Blessed and Exalted, and you are all in God’s care. As long
as you remain committed, God the Blessed and Exalted will assist you.

Strive to purify your character and to make your friends do likewise.
Strive so that you react to the outrages committed against you. In your
attempts to uphold all the qualities that make up the great character of
woman, be as that unique woman, *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be
peace, was. All of us should take our exemplar from Islam by looking at
her and her children, and being as she was. Strive to acquire learning
and godliness, for learning is not the preserve of any one person,
learning is for all, godliness is for all, and striving to acquire
learning and achieve godliness is the duty of us all.

I hope that the state organs will help you and will meet your needs in
all areas, and in your educational activities will adequately provide
you with the things you need. I hope that you will be assisted by God
and will be successful in everything you do.

The Iranian ladies have brought Islam to the stage it is now at by
sacrificing their lives, their youth and their time, and I hope that
from now on it will be advanced even further. You can be sure that as
long as you remain active and committed to Islam, as long as you are
ready to give your young ones for the cause and are willing to train
them properly, then Islam will progress and will sever the hands of the
enemies of religion from this country, and all Islamic countries,
allowing happiness and goodness to follow, God willing.

I hope that Muslim women wherever they may be will imitate you dear ones
who are striving to elevate the status of women and to make up for the
injustices, which were perpetrated against you in that era.

May God grant you all success and help us all to successfully serve
Islam. May He preserve your faith and protect your way of life.

You must remember that the veil, which Islam has prescribed for you is
to protect your status. Whatever God has decreed for man or for woman is
to keep alive the true values they possess, values that may be destroyed
by the devil’s insinuations or at the corrupt hands of imperialism and
its agents. May God grant us all success in serving Islam and the
nation.  
 Peace be upon you and also the mercy and blessings of God. (30)

12 March 1985 (21 Isfand 1363 AHS)

2 March 1985
------------

**Imam Khomeini’s address on the occasion of the anniversary of the
birth of Hazrat Zahra (upon whom be peace) and Women’s Day**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

I congratulate all you ladies and women in all Islamic countries on this
joyous holiday marking the most glorious birth of *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra,
upon whom be peace. I ask God, the Blessed and Exalted, to guide all the
respected women along the path that He has laid down, so that they can
achieve lofty Islamic aims. It is a source of great pride for the women
that they have designated *Hazrat* Fatima’s birthday as Women’s Day; it
is a source of pride and responsibility.

I do not consider myself adequate to the task of speaking about *Hazrat*
Fatima, upon whom be peace, so I will suffice with reciting a sound
tradition[^40] which can be found in *Usul al-Kafi*. This tradition
quotes *Hazrat* Sadiq[^41], upon whom be peace, as saying: “After the
death of her father, Fatima, upon whom be peace, lived for seventy-five
days. She was in this world and she was overcome with grief. Gabriel,
the Trusted Spirit, came to her regularly to console her and tell her of
future events.”

So according to this tradition, in these seventy-five days she had
contact with Gabriel, he came and went many times. I do not think that
such a thing has happened for anyone else other than the great prophets
of the highest rank, that in seventy-five days Gabriel, the Trusted
Spirit, came and went and spoke of events that would take place in the
future, spoke of things that would happen to her offspring in the
future.

*Hazrat* Amir[^42] wrote down what Gabriel said, he was the writer of
these revelations just as he had been the writer of the revelations the
Noble Messenger had received - of course with the death of the Noble
Messenger those revelations which brought divine laws ended. He was the
writer of the revelations that were made to *Hazrat* Fatima during these
seventy-five days.

Gabriel’s appearing to someone should not be taken as a trivial affair.
One should not imagine that Gabriel would appear to just anyone. The
necessary relationship has to exist between the spirit of that person to
whom Gabriel would appear and Gabriel’s station as the paramount spirit.

Whether we believe that it is the greatness of the spirit of the saint
or prophet that brings Gabriel down to this lower station, or that it is
God who sends him to make such revelations, whether we side with the
speculatists in their views or those who interpret the literal meaning
in theirs, it still remains that unless the necessary relationship
exists between the spirit of that person to whom Gabriel would appear
and Gabriel, the paramount spirit, then it would be impossible for such
a thing to happen.

The relationship existed between Gabriel, the paramount spirit, and the
prophets of the highest rank such as the Messenger of God, Moses, Jesus
and Abraham. It did not exist with just anyone, and after these prophets
it did not exist with anyone else. Indeed, I have not even heard of
Gabriel descending to the Imams as he did to the prophets.

As far as I know it was only to *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, upon whom be
peace, that Gabriel appeared repeatedly during the period of these
seventy-five days, revealing future events which would take place for
her offspring which *Hazrat* Amir recorded. Perhaps he spoke to her
about the time of her exalted offspring *Hazrat* Sahib,[^43] upon whom
be peace, in which case he may have mentioned events in Iran too; who
knows, it is possible.

Be that as it may, I consider the fact that Gabriel appeared to her when
he had appeared to no one other than the prophets, upon whom be peace -
and even then not all the prophets, only those of the highest rank - and
some of the saints who are of the same rank as them, to demonstrate her
nobility and moral excellence better than any other virtue with which
she is attributed, even though those virtues too are important. The fact
that she had communication with Gabriel in those seventy-five days, and
that he has appeared to no one since then, demonstrates an excellence,
which is, but one of the characteristics of *Hazrat* Fatima, upon whom
be peace.

You should be proud, as indeed we all should be proud, that this day has
been designated Women’s Day, and you must accept the responsibilities
that come with it. If you have accepted the twentieth day of Jumada II,
which is the birthday of *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, as Women’s Day, then you
have also undertaken its concomitant responsibilities.

If a nation accepts such and such a day as the day of struggle and
endeavour (*jihad*), then on that day they should engage in that
struggle, if someone does not, then he has not truly accepted that day
as the day of *jihad*. If a nation accepts a day as the day of war but
someone declines to take part, then that person has acted against his
human responsibilities.

Likewise, if you women here, indeed all our women all over the country,
have accepted today as Women’s Day, that is have accepted the day which
marks the birthday of *Hazrat* Fatima Zahra, with all the perfection she
represents and the position she enjoys, as Women’s Day, then you have a
great task to perform, one which includes struggle, just as she
struggled, to the best of her ability, during the short span of her
life, addressing the governments of the time and passing judgement on
them. To truly accept her birthday as Women’s Day, you must imitate her.

To truly accept it you must follow her example in her renunciation of
the things of this world, in her devotion and piety and in all the
virtues she possessed. If you do not do this, then you have not entered
into the true spirit of Women’s Day. Whoever does not accept these
things has not entered into the true spirit of Women’s Day and has not
recognised the true nature of this illustrious day.

And I hope you will accept and perform those duties you are obliged to
carry out, which are to strive both in the area of education, which is
an important matter, and in the defence of Islam. These are among the
important tasks the performance of which is incumbent on every man and
woman, on the young and old alike.

Defending Islam, defending the Islamic country, is an indisputable duty
of the clerics, of those whose lives are Islam and who are Muslim. That
which is disputable is women’s role in the lesser *jihad.*[^44] It is
not incumbent on women to take part in this *jihad*. However, defending
oneself, one’s country, one’s life, one’s property and defending Islam
is the duty of us all.

Consequently, if defence is a duty incumbent on us all, then the
preparations for this defence must be carried out, and these include
military planning and military training for those who are able. For it
is not the case that it be our bounden duty to defend ourselves and we
have no idea how to do so. We have to know how to defend ourselves. It
goes without saying, however, that the environment in which you receive
military training must be a sound one, an Islamic one, all aspects of
decency and modesty, all Islamic aspects being upheld.

God be praised, just as women have always been in the forefront of every
public struggle that has arisen in Iran, for example during the protests
against the tobacco concession[^45] and during the Constitutional
Movement, so too the women of this Islamic Republic participate to a
considerable degree in tackling the problems we face today. In fact I
must say their participation is two-fold. If a number of women enter an
arena, let us say a war arena, then in addition to the fighting they do,
they also act as inspiration for the men, emboldening them.

For where women are concerned men are very sensitive. It is not the case
that if the women embark on a defence (of their country), they do so
alone, no, they defend, but they also inspire others to take part in
that defence. Men are sensitive where women are concerned. If a man sees
a hundred men being killed, he may not be moved, but if he sees one
woman, even a woman who is a stranger to him, being treated
disrespectfully, his sensitivity will force him to react. Thus your
spearheading role in all affairs, including matters of defence, *jihad*
and assisting in the war effort, will encourage the men to do more, it
will embolden them.

Today we are in such an arena, we are facing the world’s propaganda
against us and this war which has been imposed on us, and, God be
praised, we are achieving victory on both fronts. May God help these
youths of ours who are laying their lives on the line for the cause. I
should thank them for being united, for coming together and acting as
one hand.

Currently, there is no talk of being in the army, the revolutionary
guards, the volunteer forces, the police or any other unit, all are
united in driving back these depraved forces ranged against us. God be
praised, as you have heard, these groups have hitherto been victorious
on every front. Saddam, on the other hand, has had to try to hide his
humiliation by giving medals of bravery to his defeated soldiers.

In Khorramshahr, if you recall, even though his troops were driven out,
nevertheless he awarded them medals. And now too, in the case of
Fao,[^46] I have heard that he has conferred medals of bravery on his
troops even though the world - despite the fact that its propaganda
organs will not admit this directly - has recognised their defeat there.
These days he must be handing out a lot of medals for bravery, for every
day his troops are being defeated! Every day he must hand out such
medals.

You ladies must bear in mind that just as it is necessary for the men at
the fronts to push forward and spearhead the battle, so too it is
necessary for you to help on the home front and to prepare yourselves so
that if, God forbid, there comes a time when national defence is
obligatory for everyone, for every able-bodied person without exception,
you are ready to fulfil this obligation. Education is, of course, also a
bastion, a bastion of the Islamic culture.

You know that throughout these past centuries, from the period after the
demise of the Prophet, upon whom be peace and blessings, to the present,
the Islamic culture has been trampled underfoot, the laws of Islam
falling into abeyance. This culture must be brought alive again. You
ladies must be active on the educational and cultural fronts just as the
men are.

I hope that God will grant you all success and you will make advances on
these fronts too. Pray that those who are at the war front defending
their country and Islam will also be successful, God willing. May you
all be healthy and successful.  
 Peace be upon you and also the mercy and blessings of God. (31)

2 March 1985 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

Hazrat Khadija
--------------

***Hazrat*** **Khadija**[^47] **(upon whom be peace)**

When the Most Noble Messenger (upon whom be peace and blessings) was
given his prophetic mission and began to propagate his message, an
eight-year-old child (the Commander of the Faithful, upon whom be peace)
and a forty-year-old woman (his wife Khadija) were the only people who
believed in him; he had no one else.

Everyone knows of the vexations that plagued the Prophet, the obstacles
that were placed in his way, and the opposition that he faced. Yet he
never despaired or said, “I am all alone.” He persisted and, with his
spiritual power and firm resolve, was able to advance his cause from
nothing to the point it has reached today, where seven hundred million
people are gathered under his banner.

*Islamic Government*, p. 135.

When the Most Noble Messenger (upon whom be peace and blessings) was
given his mission, he was given it to perform alone: “*Arise and deliver
thy call,*” (Qur’an 73:2). The call began with the Prophet. The day he
announced his prophethood, only a woman and a child believed in him, but
the perseverance required of all the honourable prophets for leadership
was present in him to the point of perfection. *“Stand firm (in the
straight path) as thou art commanded,”* (Qur’an 11:112). (32)

19 November 1978 (28 Aban 1357 AHS)

As we are all aware, the prices of goods these days are sky-high and
some people are suffering because of this. However, their suffering is
nothing compared to what the Prophet and his great, dearly beloved wife
*Hazrat* Khadija had to endure during those years. Tradition has it that
they would put a goatskin used to make butter into water and let it soak
then suck the skin in the hope of getting some of the fat or something
nutritious from it. When they did such things for Islam, when they stood
fast before the enemies of Islam, you who are the people of that great
man must not complain about shortages. There is no scarcity of
foodstuffs, what there is a shortage of is that prinking, that making-up
which one group wanted. God willing, it no longer exists, and if it
does, it should be done away with. (33)

4 June 1983 (14 Khurdad 1362 AHS)

Hazrat Zaynab
-------------

***Hazrat*** **Zaynab** [^48](upon whom be peace)

Tomorrow is Women’s Day; it is the day when (the birth of) a woman is
commemorated of whom the world is proud. It is the day commemorating a
woman whose daughter stood against tyrannical rulers, who recited that
sermon and uttered those words, words of which you are all aware---a
woman who stood up to a tyrant who would kill anyone who breathed a word
against him. She was not afraid; she held her ground and condemned him,
condemned Yazid and his leadership. She lambasted him saying he was not
fit to be called a human being.

This is what women should be like, and, praise be to God, this is how
the women of our day are. They stood against the tyrant with clenched
fists carrying their infants in their arms and helped the movement. (34)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

The Lord of the Martyrs, his followers and the members of his household
taught us our duty: sacrifice on the field of battle, propagation off
it. The sacrifice made by Imam Husayn, upon whom be peace, was of great
value before God the Blessed and Exalted and helped advance his
movement. So too, almost to the same degree, the sermons delivered by
*Hazrat* Sajjad[^49] and *Hazrat* Zaynab were just as effective.

They taught us that women and men should not be afraid before a tyrant
or a tyrannical government. *Hazrat* Zaynab, upon whom be peace, stood
up to Yazid and humiliated him in a way that his tribe, the Bani
Umayyads, had never before experienced.

They both made it clear, along the way to Kufa, in Kufa itself, in
Damascus and in the address *Hazrat* Sajjad delivered from the pulpit,
that they had been misrepresented, that the battle was not one of right
against wrong, but that was what the regime wanted people to think it
was. It wanted to make it seem that the Lord of the Martyrs had risen up
against the ruler of the time, against the successor of the Messenger of
God. This both *Hazrat* Sajjad and *Hazrat* Zaynab revealed in public.
(35)

17 October 1982 (25 Mehr 1361 AHS)

The manner of the struggle, how a struggle between a small number of
people and a large group should be waged, how an uprising against a
tyrannical regime with wide-reaching control should be carried out with
only a limited number of people, are things which the Lord of the
Martyrs has taught the nation. And after that tragic event took place,
his noble household and his greatly esteemed son demonstrated what must
be done.

Should there be surrender? Should there be a letup in the struggle? Or
should one act as Zaynab, upon whom be peace, or *Hazrat* \`Ali ibn
Husayn, upon whom be peace, did? Following that great tragedy, beside
which others pale, *Hazrat* Zaynab persevered and spoke out against
atheism and freethinking, she spoke out at every opportunity, throwing
light on the issue. And *Hazrat* \`Ali ibn Husayn, though still
convalescing, spoke out whenever appropriate, informing people of the
facts. (36)

17 October 1982 (25 Mehr 1361 AHS)

Observe that the best of God’s creatures of his age His Holiness the
Lord of the Martyrs, upon whom be peace, and the finest youth of the
Bani Hashem tribe and his followers left this world as martyrs. Yet in
that abominable court ceremony before Yazid, *Hazrat* Zaynab, upon whom
be peace, swore that what she had witnessed at Karbala was nothing other
than a beautiful event. The death of a perfect being, the martyrdom of a
perfect being, is beautiful in the eyes of the friends (*awliya*[^50])
of God, not because he fought and was killed but because he fought for
God, he rose up for God, and was killed. (37)

10 February 1987 (21 Bahman 1365 AHS)

We have repeatedly seen great Zaynab-like women cry out that they have
lost their children and sacrificed everything they have in the way of
God the Exalted and beloved Islam, and are proud to have done so. They
realise that what they have achieved instead is higher even that the
gardens of paradise, let alone the unimportant chattels of this world.
(38)

5 June 1989 (15 Khurdad 1368 AHS)

Hazrat Maryam
-------------

***Hazrat*** **Maryam**[^51] (upon whom be peace)

In the Most Noble Qur’an there are verses, which indicate that persons
other than the prophets have seen angels, have seen Gabriel even, and
they have spoken to them. We will recite some examples here: *“Behold,
the angels said: Oh Mary! God hath chosen thee and purified thee, chosen
thee above the women of all nations,”* (Qur’an 3:42).

Then the angels related for Mary many of the circumstances of Jesus
Christ’s life and the miracles he would perform. They revealed to her
knowledge of the unseen. In Sura Maryam, Verse 17, we read: *“Then We
sent to her Our angel, and he appeared before her as a man in all
respects.”* The visits made by the angels and Gabriel to Mary are
mentioned in many verses of the Qur’an, and the knowledge of the unseen
God revealed to her.

*Kashf al-Asrar*, p. 126.

Almighty God’s blessings and peace upon *Hazrat* Jesus, the son of
Maryam, the spirit of God and exalted prophet who raised the dead and
awakened the slumberers. Almighty God’s blessings and peace upon his
exalted mother the Virgin Mary, the veracious into whose womb God blew
life and who delivered a great son to those thirsty for divine mercy.
(39)

23 December 1978 (2 Dey 1357 AHS)

*Hazrat* Jesus (upon whom be peace) - whom these people follow and whom
they believe spoke only of spiritual matters - was just the same. From
the beginning he had to struggle. When he was born, only a short time
after his birth, he spoke saying he had brought a book (of revelation).

This is what the Qur’an says of him, that when he was born, he spoke to
his mother, who was upset by the accusations levelled against her (by
the Jews), telling her to grieve not, that if anyone came to speak to
her to say she was fasting - as probably she was - and for them to go
and ask the child.

Her people came to her just after the birth and began to speak to her in
an impertinent manner. *Hazrat* Mary pointed to the child for them to go
and speak to him. They asked: “How can we converse with him?” Then Jesus
spoke telling them that God had given him a book (of revelation). (40)

10 November 1987 (8 Aban 1366 AHS)

[^1]: The word Hazrat is used as a respectful form of address.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 25, pp. 1-103.

[^3]: The archangel Gabriel accompanied the Most Noble Messenger on his
mi‘raj (ascension to the Divine Presence), but being of lowlier station
than the Messenger, he was unable to endure the splendour of the Divine
Presence.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 18, p. 382, ‘History of the Prophet’, Chapter
‘Proof of the Ascension’, Narrative 85.

[^5]: Al Arba‘in, Allama Majlisi, p. 177, description of tradition 15.

[^6]: Lailat al-Qadr: The Night of Power (or Decree), has a very special
significance in the Muslim calendar because it is the anniversary of
that night when the Qur’an was first revealed to the Prophet Muhammad.
This night has been described as ‘better than a thousand months’, and
tradition holds that requests made to God during Lailat al-Qadr will be
granted.

[^7]: This Arabic word has a large number of meanings including
‘speech’, ‘report’ and ‘narrative’. It also has the very important
specialist sense of ‘tradition’, i.e. a record of the sayings and doings
of the Prophet Muhammad and his descendants, and as such is regarded by
Muslims as a source of Islamic law, dogma and ritual second only in
importance to the Qur’an itself.

[^8]:  Al-Kafi: one of the most important collections of Shi\`ite hadith
compiled by Shaykh \`Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn-i Yaqub ibn Ishaq Kulayni
(d. 941 AD). Al-Kafi includes 16,199 traditions that can be traced back
to the Prophet and his family by an unbroken chain of transmission. The
traditions in this book cover ideological, ethical and jurisprudential
matters to name but a few. Kulayni lived relatively close in time to the
period of the Prophet and the twelve Imams, this, along with the method
of gathering, classifying and specifying the chain of transmission, has
given al-Kafi a special importance amongst the collections of traditions
and puts it alongside three other books as the most important
collections of Shi\`ite traditions collectively famous as the Kutub
al-Arba'a (The Four Books). Al-Kafi is divided into three sections: Usul
al-Kafi; Furu' al-Kafi and Rauda al-Kafi. Usul al-Kafi covers
ideological and ethical matters and consists of the books of: Reason and
Ignorance; the Excellence of Knowledge; Divine Unity; Divine Proof;
Belief; Unbelief; Qur'an and Supplicatory Prayer. Furu' al-Kafi, on the
other hand, consists of books and sections on jurisprudence and is one
of the authoritative reference books for deduction and independent
reasoning (ijtihad) from Islamic law for the Shi\`ite jurisprudents.
Rauda al-Kafi comprises different traditions on numerous matters. This
book, also known as Sharif al-Kafi, has for centuries been used by the
Shi\`ite ‘ulama and jurisprudents as a reference book. Muslim scholars
have written extensive expositions on al-Kafi, amongst them Mullah Sadra
Shirazi and Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi.

[^9]: - Imam Abu ‘l-Hasan Musa, son of Ja‘far: seventh of the Twelve
Imams, and generally known as Imam Musa al-Kazim. He was born in Medina
in 744 AD and died in prison in Baghdad in 799 AD.

[^10]: - Tafsir al-Burhan, Vol. 4, p. 158.

[^11]: - Usul al-Kafi, Vol. 2, p. 326. Kitab al-Hujjat, section on the
birth of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his descendants, Hadith 4.

[^12]: - Tasbihat = words uttered in praise of God.

[^13]: - Furu’ al-Kafi, Vol. 3, p. 343, Kitab al-Salat, the section on
supererogatory prayers performed after the prescribed prayer, and
supplications. Hadith 14.

[^14]: - 27 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS corresponding with 17 May 1979 and 20
Jumada II 1399 AH.

[^15]: - Refer to footnote 16.

[^16]: - Hadiths and their isnads, or chain of authorities, have been
subjected to a wide range of types of categorisation. A basic one is to
classify the hadith under one of several major categories of
trustworthiness. The term ‘sahih’ or sound indicates the highest level
of trustworthiness in a tradition.

[^17]: - See footnote 17.

[^18]: - Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq, the sixth Shi‘ite Imam. He was born,
lived and taught in Medina and was buried there when he died. He was a
notable scholar of hadith and in his own life gained a massive
reputation for his knowledge and holiness.

[^19]: - ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, cousin and husband of Hazrat Fatima and
first of the Twelve Imams of Shi‘ite belief. He exercised rule from 656
until his martyrdom in 661.

[^20]: - Referring to the twelfth and last Imam of Shi‘ite belief Imam
Mahdi, also known as the Imam of the Age or Lord of the Age, who is now
in occultation. According to Shi‘ite belief, he made an appearance as a
young boy at the funeral of his father after which he entered the state
of occultation. It is believed he will emerge from his occultation at a
time when injustice fills the earth and his return will herald the
approach of the end of time.

[^21]: - Referring to Imam Husayn, grandson of the Prophet, and also
known as the Lord of the Martyrs. In 680, Imam Husayn refused to swear
allegiance to Yazid, son of Mu‘awiya and second caliph of the Umayyad
dynasty, since Yazid did not possess legitimate authority and had
succeeded to the caliphate by hereditary succession. The ensuing death
of the Imam in battle at Karbala has always been commemorated by Shi‘ite
Muslims as the supreme example of martyrdom in the face of tyranny. It
served as an important point of both ideological and emotive reference
throughout the Islamic Revolution in Iran. ‘Ashura, the tenth day of
Muharram, is the day on which he was martyred in Karbala.

[^22]: - A litany that was recited by all the Imams, something true of
no other prayer or invocation, during the month of Sha’ban.

[^23]: - Day of ‘Arafa: the ninth day of the month of Dhu ‘l-Hijja, when
all the pilgrims participating in the hajj must be present at the plain
of ‘Arafa outside Mecca. For a translation of the text of the prayer
that Imam Husayn recited on this day, see ‘Allamah Muhammad Husayn
Tabataba’i, A Shi‘ite Anthology, trans. William C. Chittick, pp. 93-113.

[^24]: - The book of fifty-seven prayers known as the Sahifa-yi
Sajjadiya, which is one of the major Shi‘ite manuals of prayer, was
composed by Imam Zayn al-’Abidin Sajjad, the fourth of the Twelve Imams
and the only son of Imam Husayn to survive the massacre at Karbala.

[^25]: - Imam is referring to the simple mat on which he was sitting in
his home in Qum.

[^26]: - Referring to the pagan times before the rise of Islam.

[^27]: - A line from a poem attributed to Yazid ibn Mu’awiya, which
denies the revelation and the basis of the prophet’s mission.

[^28]: - Referring to his own humble home.

[^29]: - The fifth Imam, Muhammad al-Baqir.

[^30]: - Imam Hasan: son of Imam \`Ali and the second Imam from the
Prophet’s Progeny.

[^31]: - Umma: the entire Islamic community without territorial or
ethnic distinction.

[^32]: - 27 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS corresponding with 17 May 1979 and 20
Jumada II 1399 AH.

[^33]: - The title Aryamehr, which means ‘the sun and light of the Aryan
race’, was created by Riza Zadeh Shafaq, a senator from the province of
Azerbayjan. Asadullah \`Alam, who had asked the writers and other
literary personalities of the time to think of an honorific title for
the Shah, chose Aryamehr. In 1967, the National Consultative Assembly
bestowed this title upon the Shah. It reflected the nationalist ideology
of the regime and demonstrated its rejection of Islamic ideology. R.K.
Karanjia, in the book The Mind of a Monarch, p. 236, reports the Shah as
one who hoped for a revival of the great Aryan civilisation as seen in
the days of the Emperor Cyrus.

[^34]: - The theological school situated in the vicinity of the shrine
of Hazrat Ma’suma, upon whom be peace, in the city of Qum.

[^35]: - Xenomaniacs: those infatuated with foreign and especially
Western models of culture. This is a translation of a Persian term,
gharbzadeha, popularised by Jalal Al-i Ahmad (d. 1969) in his book
Gharbzadegi (Xenomania). He was a writer of great influence and Imam
Khomeini was acquainted with his work.

[^36]: - Taghut: one who surpasses all bounds in his despotism and
tyranny and claims the prerogatives of divinity for himself, whether
explicitly or implicitly. The illegitimate ruling power.

[^37]: - Qibla: Muslim direction of prayer towards the Ka’ba in Mecca.

[^38]: - Refer to footnote 2.

[^39]: - The Iranian Constitutional Movement of 1905-1911.

[^40]: - Refer to footnote 25.

[^41]: - Refer to footnote 27.

[^42]: - Refer to footnote 28.

[^43]: - Refer to footnote 29.

[^44]: - The lesser jihad is the struggle against the visible enemy in
the battlefield, and the greater or supreme jihad is the ceaseless war
man is called upon to wage against his lower self.

[^45]: - In 1891, Nasir al-Din Shah granted yet another in a long line
of concessions he had already given to foreigners in return for money to
satisfy court consumption and to finance his tours of Europe. This time,
in return for a personal gift of twenty-five thousand pounds, an annual
rent of fifteen thousand pounds to the state and a twenty-five percent
share of the profits for Iran, one Major Gerald Talbot acquired a
fifty-year monopoly over the distribution and exportation of tobacco.
Akhtar (Star), a liberal Persian paper published in Istanbul at the
time, expressed the general concern of Iranian merchants: "It is clear
enough that the concessionaire will commence the work with a small
capital and will purchase the tobacco from the cultivators and sell it
to the merchants and manufacturers for higher prices, and all the
profits will remain in the purse of the English. As the Persian
merchants have no right to export tobacco from Persia, those who were
formerly engaged in this trade will be obliged to give up their business
and find some other work. The concessionaire does not take into
consideration how many merchants who were engaged in this business will
be left without employment and will suffer loss in finding other
occupations." The clergymen and maraji' of the time immediately opposed
the concession and demanded its cancellation. Ayatullah Mirza Hasan
Shirazi, the maraji'-i taqlid at the time, determined the destiny of
this struggle. He issued a religious fatwa stating that the use of
tobacco in whatever form was haram (forbidden) and was tantamount to
declaring war with Imam az-Zaman (the Twelfth Imam). The bazaar in
Shiraz, the main tobacco-growing region, shut down and a general strike
of the leading bazaars particularly Tehran, Isfahan, Tabriz, Mashhad,
Qazvin, Yazd and Kermanshah ensued which spread into a state-wide
consumer's boycott. Ayatullah Shirazi's representative in Tehran, Mirza
Hasan Ashtiyani, led the protest there. Hookahs were smashed and tobacco
was set on fire as the consumer's boycott received support from
practically all classes of Iranian society, even members of the royal
harem. Consequently, Nasir al-Din Shah, seeing his position threatened
by this rebellion was forced to annul the concession and pay the
penalty. See Nikki Keddie, Religion and Rebellion in Iran: The Tobacco
Protest of 1891-92.

[^46]: - During the Iraqi-imposed war on Iran (1980-88), the Iranians
launched a big assault in February 1986 in the south which resulted in
the capture of 310 sq. miles / 800 sq. kms in the Fao Peninsula. A
determined effort by Iraq, which mounted 18,648 air missions between 9
February and 25 March 1986 (compared with 20,011 missions in the whole
of 1985) to regain Fao met with failure. During this operation the
Iraqis also deployed chemical weapons.

[^47]: The wife of the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him and his
descendants).

[^48]: The daughter of Fatima, upon whom be peace.

[^49]: - The fourth Imam from the Holy Prophet’s Progeny, \`ites, \`Ali,
known as Zayn al-\`Abidin and al-Sajjad (658-712 C.E.). The son of Imam
Husayn by the daughter of Yazdigird, the last Sassanid king of Iran, he
was not able to carry arms at Karbala because of illness, and thus he
was saved the fate of his three brothers. For most of his life he lived
in seclusion in Medina, having contact with only a few select followers.
His piety - which is reflected in his collected prayers, Sahifah
as-Sajjadiya - is proverbial. He is buried in the Baqi’ cemetery in
Medina.

[^50]: - The word awliya - like the cognate wilayat - has numerous
different meanings. It is used here in the general sense that can be
deduced from Qur’an 10:62-63: “Verily the friends (awliya) of God -
those who believe and guard against evil - shall suffer no fear nor
shall they grieve.”

[^51]: The Virgin Mary, mother of Jesus, upon whom be peace.


