The status and rights of women in the Islamic system
====================================================

The status of and esteem for women in Islam
-------------------------------------------

**The status of and esteem for women in Islam**

Islam wants men and women to develop. Islam freed women from those
circumstances, which existed for them during the age of ignorance of
pre-Islamic times. Islam did not serve men to the extent that it did
women. You cannot imagine what circumstances were like for women during
pre-Islamic times and to what degree their situation improved with the
advent of Islam. (41)

9 November 1978 (18 Aban 1357 AHS)

Islam did a service for women, which has no precedent in history. Islam
raised women up out of that slough and gave her back her identity. (42)

9 November 1978 (18 Aban 1357 AHS)

**Question:** In the eyes of Western countries, Shi\`ism is seen as
being a conservative element hindering progress. We have heard Shi\`ite
calls for the exclusion of women from active roles in society and a
return to Shi\`ite laws, which envisage religious tradition as the basis
of state laws, something stipulated in the Constitution but later and
unlawfully dropped. We have also heard that Shi\`ism rejects the Western
lifestyle because it does not conform to religious customs. Would you
please give us your view on this on the basis of the Shi\`ite faith?

**Reply:** Shi\`ism is a revolutionary school of thought and is a
continuation of the true Islam of the Prophet. Just like the Shi\`ites
themselves, their faith has always been the target of craven attacks
from dictators and imperialists. Not only does Shi\`ism not exclude
women from society, it gives them their elevated status in society. We
accept the developments of the Western world, but not the West’s
corruption of which Westerners themselves complain. (43)

15 November 1978 (24 Aban 1357 AHS)

Islam took women by the hand and made them equal with men, whereas
before the Prophet came, women had no standing. Islam gave women
strength. (44)

11 December 1978 (20 Azar 1357 AHS)

We want women to attain the high rank of true humanity. Women must have
a share in determining their destiny. (45)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

If nations were deprived of courageous women to rear true human beings,
they would decline and collapse. (46)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

Islam holds you in higher esteem than it does men. Islam wants to save
you; it wants to save you from becoming this plaything they want to turn
you into. Islam wants to train you to become a perfect human being. (47)

8 March 1979 (17 Isfand 1357 AHS)

Unfortunately, women have suffered from victimisation in the past,
notably in two periods. The first was during the Age of Ignorance, the
period before the advent of Islam. During this time, women were
oppressed; they were treated like animals, even worse than animals. Then
Islam came and bestowed its blessings on mankind, it dragged women out
of that state of oppression, [and] it pulled her from that slough of
ignorance. (48)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

. . . Women are human beings, great human beings. Women are the
educators of society. It is from the laps of women that true human
beings originate. The first stage in the development of sound men and
women begins in the lap of a woman. Women are the educators of human
beings. A country’s success or its misfortune depends on women. If they
impart sound teachings, they create (sound) human beings and a
flourishing country. Good fortune originates from the laps of women;
they should be the source of every success and happiness . . . (49)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

Mothers are the source of all blessings, but if, God forbid, they bring
their children up badly, they become the source of all evil. (50)

17 July 1979 (26 Tir 1358 AHS)

The realisation of mankind’s hopes lies in the hands of women. She is
the educator of great men and women. It is from the laps of women that
man begins his ascent. It is in the laps of women that great men and
great women are nurtured. (51)

17 May 1979 (27 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

Women raise brave men in their care. Like the Noble Qur’an itself, women
have the function of rearing and training true human beings. Indeed, it
is their duty to do so. If nations were deprived of women to rear true
human beings, they would decline and collapse. (52)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

The position of women is a high one. Women in Islam enjoy a high rank.
(53)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

We want women to enjoy the high rank of true humanity, which is theirs,
not to be a plaything in the hands of men, in the hands of depraved men.
(54)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

Islam grants woman a say in all affairs, just as it grants man a say.
Just as men should avoid corruption, so too should women. Women should
not allow themselves to be playthings in the hands of dissolute youths,
they should not lower their station and, God forbid, come out into the
streets dressed up and made up, placing themselves in full view of
depraved men. Women must act like true human beings; they must be pious.
Women enjoy a dignified position; they have free will, just as men have.
God created you free beings and gave you dignity. (55)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

Islam has particular regard for women. Islam appeared in the Arabian
Peninsula at a time when women had lost their dignity, and it raised
them up and gave them back their pride. Islam made women equal with men;
in fact, it shows a concern for women that it does not show for men.
(56)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

One of the benefits of the Islamic movement obvious today is that women,
these effective members of society, have to some extent regained their
standing. (57)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

Women’s rights in Islam
-----------------------

**Women’s rights in Islam**

As regards the issue of the right of the woman to execute a divorce, if,
at the time of marriage, she stipulates that she would possess this
right either conditionally or unconditionally, the question has been
raised: What about those women who have already entered into matrimony?

They oppose this legal power of the faqih even when they don’t know what
his powers are. If a man mistreats his wife, this is one of the concerns
of the faqih who will first of all counsel him then secondly punish him,
and if he sees that none of this has worked, he will grant the divorce.
Support this guardianship of the faqih, it is a gift from God the
Blessed and Exalted to the Muslims.

Among the concerns the faqih deals with are matters relating to the
question you have just posed: what must those women do who already have
a husband and are experiencing difficulties in their marriage? They must
refer the matter to a faqih, either at a court or elsewhere, and he will
deal with it. If the complaint is valid, he will punish the husband, he
will try to compel him to behave properly, and if this fails, the faqih
will grant the woman a divorce. He has the legal power to do so if he
sees that it would be damaging to the people involved if the marriage
were to continue.

Even though divorce is the prerogative of the man, in situations where
the faqih believes it to be in the interests of Islam, in the interests
of the Muslims, and when he realises there can be no other course of
action, he will grant the woman a divorce. This is what the guardianship
of the faqih is about. It is a divine gift to you. (58)

31 October 1978 (9 Aban 1357 AHS)

Islam put women on a par with men, and made them equal with men. Of
course, there are certain Islamic precepts, which apply only to men, and
others which apply only to women, but this does not mean that Islam
discriminates between men and women. (59)

11 December 1978 (20 Azar 1357 AHS)

**Question:** Women make up a large section of the Muslim population,
what role and what rights do you foresee for them in the Islamic system?

**Reply:** The Muslim women of Iran are currently participating in the
political struggle and the demonstrations against the Shah. I have been
told that in some Iranian cities they hold political meetings. In the
Islamic system, women will have the same rights as men: the right to
education, the right to work, the right to own property, the right to
vote, the right to stand for election.

In all aspects that men have rights, women have the same rights.
However, there are some things unlawful for men, because of the
corruption they create in men, and others unlawful for women because of
their tendency to corrupt women. Islam wants the human dignity of both
men and women to be safeguarded. It doesn’t want women to be playthings
in the hands of men. The image they have portrayed abroad of women being
treated harshly under Islam is not a correct one.

This is false propaganda emanating from elements motivated by
self-interest. In Islam both men and women enjoy free will, any
differences, which exist, do so for both of them and concern their
different natures. (60)

7 December 1978 (16 Azar 1357 AHS)

The laws of Islam are all for the benefit of both man and woman. (61)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

Just as the rights of men are propounded in Islam, so too are those of
women. Indeed, Islam shows a concern for women that it does not show for
men. It pays a greater regard to their rights than those of men. Women
have the right to vote; indeed they enjoy more rights than women in the
West. They have the right to vote, the right to elect or be elected.
They control their finances; they are free, free to choose their
profession. In the East certain restrictions are placed on men for their
own good.

Consequently Islam prevents gambling, drinking and the use of heroin
because these are a cause of corruption. Restrictions exist for
everyone. Religion imposes restrictions for the benefit of society, it
is not the case that something is beneficial to society and Islam places
restrictions on it. (62)

29 March 1979 (9 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

The rights of all segments of the population have also been observed in
the law. The rights of the religious minorities, women and other
segments of society have all been taken into consideration. Islam does
not discriminate between the various groups (in society), the only
difference between them stems from their piety and fear of God the
Exalted. (63)

1 April 1979 (12 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

Because Islam has laid down special rights for women, show moderation in
their case if it is not proved that they are spies. Likewise the black
Americans, for they have been subject to oppression and suffering for an
age and those there may have been forced to come to Iran. Dear
Students![^1]

Hand over those African Americans and women whom you do not believe to
be spies to the Foreign Ministry so their immediate departure can be
arranged. The noble nation of Iran does not give permission for the
others to be freed, consequently they will be detained until the
American government acts on the (Iranian) nation’s demands. (64)

17 November 1979 (26 Aban 1358 AHS)

When women wish to marry, there are certain prerogatives they can
stipulate for themselves that are contrary neither to the *shari‘a* nor
to their own self-respect. For example, a woman can stipulate that if
her future husband turns out to be of corrupt moral character or if he
mistreats her, she would possess the right to execute a divorce.

This is a right that Islam has granted to women. If Islam has imposed
certain restrictions on both women and men, it is for the benefit of
both. All Islamic laws, be they those which permit or those which
prohibit, are for the benefit of all. Similarly, just as Islam has
granted man the right to divorce, it has also granted it to woman, on
condition that the parties stipulate at the time of the marriage that if
the husband behaves in a certain manner, the wife will have the right to
execute a divorce.

Once the man has accepted such a stipulation, he can never repudiate it.
Apart from making it possible to include such a stipulation in the
marriage contract, Islam forbids the husband to mistreat his wife; if he
habitually mistreats her, he is to be punished, lashed even, and if he
still persists, the *mujtahid* will grant the wife a divorce. (65)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

Just as God has laid down laws for men imposing restrictions to prevent
them from becoming corrupt, so too He has laid down laws for women.
These are for your benefit; all Islamic laws are for the good of
society. (66)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

**Question:** What exactly are the rights of women in an Islamic
republic? What will become of coeducational schools? And how will such
issues as birth control and abortion be dealt with?

**Reply:** In an Islamic republic, from a human rights point of view,
there is no difference between men and women for both are human beings,
and women have as much right as men to determine their destiny. In some
areas, however, differences exist between men and women, which have
nothing to do with their status as human beings. Anything that is not
incompatible with the high social standing and dignity of women is
allowed. Abortion is prohibited in Islam. (67)

5 November 1980 (16 Aban 1359 AHS)

**Question:** The issue of divorce being a man’s prerogative is
something that has upset and worried a group of militant Iranian women
who believe that under no circumstances do they have the right to
execute a divorce. Some people have and still are exploiting this issue.
What is your opinion?

**Reply:** The law has prescribed an easy way for the respected women to
be able to execute a divorce, and that is when she enters into marriage
she must stipulate her conditions. If she stipulates that she can
execute a divorce whenever she wants or under certain conditions, such
as if the husband were to mistreat her or get another wife, then she
will have no problem in getting a divorce. I ask God Almighty to grant
the honourable women success. It is hoped that you will not fall under
the influence of those who oppose Islam and the Islamic revolution, for
Islam is beneficial to all. (68)

29 October 1980 (7 Aban 1359 AHS)

**Question:** Please tell us how married women should practise
*taqlid.*[^2] Can she follow the rulings of a different *mujtahid*[^3]
from the one her husband follows, and if so would that contradict the
requirement of a woman to obey her husband?

**Reply:** Women are independent in matters relating to *taqlid*, but
must obey their husbands in marital affairs. They should not leave their
homes without their husbands’ consent.

*Istifta’at*, Vol. 1, p. 13.

**Question:** During the *taghut* period, when the so-called courts for
family protection finalised a divorce, they would collect a sum of money
from the husband as ‘rent’ on the bride’s dower, if it were cash,
because of the period which had elapsed since the marriage, in addition
to the main dower to be paid to the woman. If the dower is cash and the
time for collecting it has not been legally stipulated, is it
permissible to put rent on the original dower?

**Reply:** Rent cannot be put on money and taking an additional sum is
prohibited.

*Istifta’at*, Vol. 1, p. 210.

**Question:** If, when the marriage vows are exchanged, the woman
stipulates that she reserves the right to execute a divorce, can this
right be taken from her?

**Reply:** If she stipulates this condition at the time of the marriage,
it cannot be taken from her later.[^4]

*Istifta’at*, Vol. 2, p. 319.

Women’s role in the establishment of an Islamic society
-------------------------------------------------------

**Women’s role in the establishment of an Islamic society**

**Question:** What does a return to Qur’anic laws mean for women? To
what extent will entertainment (alcohol, films, etc.) be available to
the people?

**Reply:** In an Islamic system, women, in their role as human beings,
can work alongside men to establish the Islamic society, but not if they
wish to act as mere objects. Women do not have the right to lower
themselves to such a level, nor do men have the right to think of them
as such. As to those things known as entertainment, Islam opposes
anything that tends to lead human beings towards acquiring a frivolous
nature or towards self-estrangement. The consumption of alcohol is
forbidden in Islam, as are films, which pervert the exalted nature of
the human being. (69)

9 November 1978 (18 Aban 1357 AHS)

**Question:** In Islam, to what extent are women permitted to
participate in the establishment of an Islamic government?

**Reply:** In Islam, women have a sensitive role to play in the
establishment of the Islamic society. Islam elevates women to the extent
that they can regain their human status in society and leave that
woman-as-object level. In proportion with such growth, she can assume
responsibilities in an Islamic government. (70)

10 November 1978 (19 Aban 1357 AHS)

Women like men have a part to play in building the Islamic society of
tomorrow. They enjoy the right to vote and be voted for. Iranian women
participate in Iran’s current struggle just as the men do. (71)

23 January 1979 (3 Bahman 1357 AHS)

Islam grants woman a say in all affairs just as it grants man a say. All
the people of Iran, men and women alike, must repair the ruins that the
previous regime has left us; the hands of men alone will not suffice to
accomplish the task. Men and women must collaborate in this respect.
(72)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

Women must have a say in the fundamental destiny of the country. Just as
you have participated in our revolutionary movement, indeed played a
basic role in it, now you must also participate in its triumph, and must
not fail to rise up again whenever it is necessary. The country belongs
to you and, God willing, you will rebuild it. (73)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

You and we together, the government and nation together, must right this
chaos, for neither can do it alone. If the ladies think they can leave
it up to the men to do, who in turn think they can leave it up to the
ladies, or both think the government can do it or all three think the
clergymen can do it, then they are all sadly mistaken. For the situation
is so chaotic, the problems so many that it is up to each individual to
do his duty and rebuild wherever he is to the best of his ability. (74)

13 September 1979 (22 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

Women have the right to participate in politics; indeed it is their duty
to do so. The clergymen too have a right to concern themselves with
politics, and it is their duty to do so. The Islamic religion is a
political religion; everything in it has a political dimension, even its
acts of worship. (75)

16 September 1979 (25 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

Greetings to you great women who through your counsel wish to lead us to
the right path. (76)

16 March 1981 (25 Isfand 1359 AHS)

It is hoped that the community of women will cease being indifferent and
will awaken from the unnatural stupor the plunderers have forced them
into, and that together, shoulder-to-shoulder, they will help those who
have been deceived and guide them to the lofty station which is theirs.

It is also hoped that women in the other Islamic countries will take
lessons from the miraculous change that has occurred in the Iranian
women as a result of the great Islamic revolution, and will strive to
reform their society and bring freedom and independence to their
countries. (77)

24 April 1981 (4 Urdibihisht 1360 AHS)

The role of women in the world enjoys certain special characteristics.
The rectitude or immorality of a society stems from the rectitude or
immorality of the women in that society. Women are the only creatures
who can bestow upon society individuals raised in their care whose deeds
can be a blessing to communities and can inspire perseverance and lofty
human values, or can have the opposite effect. (78)

14 April 1982 (25 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

Women’s activities in the social and political arenas
-----------------------------------------------------

**Women’s activities in the social and political arenas**

All of you must cast your vote, a vote for an Islamic republic, not a
word less (in this designation) nor a word more.[^5] You too must vote,
you are no different from others, indeed you lead the men. (79)

8 March 1979 (17 Isfand 1357 AHS)

It is necessary for me to reiterate that the crusading and brave women
all over Iran must participate in the referendum. The women who played a
sensitive role in the victory of the Islamic revolution at the side of
men, indeed who led the men, should realise that by actively
participating they will ensure the further victory of the Iranian
nation. Participation in this referendum is one of the national and
Islamic duties of the men and women. (80)

24 March 1979 (4 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

Women have the right to vote; indeed they enjoy more rights than women
in the West. They have the right to vote, the right to elect or be
elected. (81)

29 March 1979 (9 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

I ask Almighty God to grant you health and happiness and I hope that
side by side with the men you will vote for the Constituent Assembly[^6]
and the National Consultative Assembly so that an Islamic republic, the
Constitution of the Islamic Republic and the Consultative Assembly of
the Islamic Republic can be founded and we can attain that which we
want. (82)

10 April 1979 (21 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

Of course there is no objection to women taking up employment, sound
employment, but we do not want a repeat of the way it was during the
Pahlavi era. Then they did not have employment in mind for women, rather
their aim was to degrade both men and women, pulling them down from that
position they occupy. They did not want a natural growth for either sex.
(83)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

It is one of the blessings of the movement that you ladies from the
coastal regions, and indeed the other respected ladies of Iran, are now
involved with the issues of the day and political issues. The criminal
hands, which were manifested in the form of the hands of Muhammad Riza
and his father, had excluded all segments of the population from
involvement in social and political affairs.

Political matters were never presented for the consideration of the
ladies, nor for that matter the brothers either. And if a political
issue was put forward for the people to decide on, it was still based on
their (the West’s) plundering policy. If some classes of the population,
the so-called political classes, became involved in the political issues
of the day, they were simply involving themselves in policies dictated
by the West and aimed at plundering the East. (84)

3 July 1979 (12 Tir 1358 AHS)

It is today when all segments of society have a say in their own
affairs, in the affairs of the country and the political affairs of
state. It is today when all people of the nation, whether the esteemed
ladies or the brothers, have a say in determining their own destiny.
(85)

3 July 1979 (12 Tir 1358 AHS)

The respected women and dear ladies have gone into the villages to help
with the harvest and other things. Of course they are not reapers in the
same sense as the farmers are, but by their action, small as it may
seem, they enable the reaper to work twice as much of his land and thus
double his harvest.

For when the men who reap the land see that these ladies, who normally
sit in the shade and have nothing to do with such work, are prepared to
come out into the sun and harvest the barley, it breathes new life into
their spirit. So the action of these ladies is also valuable in that it
gives renewed vigour to the farmers and they work even harder. (86)

21 July 1979 (30 Tir 1358 AHS)

We all voted for an Islamic republic, you too voted, but voting alone is
not enough. Our votes mean only that the country of Iran is now
officially an Islamic republic. But it will be a true Islamic republic
only when you ladies, along with these gentlemen, undertake your
responsibilities and we all see ourselves as having a duty to perform.
(87)

13 September 1979 (22 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

It is important that each of us sees ourselves as having a duty to
perform. So, for example, I, as a theological student, consider it my
duty to serve (the nation) to the best of my ability, while you sisters
must consider it your duty to help rebuild this country which they (the
Pahlavis) ruined and destroyed, beginning in the area where you live,
and through your efforts put it right. (88)

20 September 1979 (29 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

The sisters who hitherto have not been involved in the issues of the day
must now involve themselves. (89)

20 September 1979 (29 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

Women must have a say in determining their destiny. Women in the Islamic
Republic must vote. Just as men have the right to vote, women too have
that right. (90)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

Today, women in the Islamic Republic shoulder-to-shoulder with the men
are striving to rebuild themselves and their country. (91)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

I return once again to you sisters and dear ones and remind you that you
must attend to the matter of observing Islamic rules in your
environment. The country is an Islamic one, it is an Islamic republic,
[and] there must be a change in all aspects of its character. (92)

13 May 1980 (23 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

Who has mobilised these women to involve themselves, and quite rightly
so, in all the country’s affairs? God has called them to this task and
they are obeying His call. (93)

12 July 1980 (21 Tir 1359 AHS)

Today, the ladies must act on their social and religious duties and
protect public morality, and in so doing carry out their social and
political activities. (94)

10 September 1980 (19 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

I hope that this movement will end in victory and you will all be
successful, God willing. May you expand your gatherings everywhere in an
even more splendid manner so that women will awaken and reject those
things of the past, reject that former role of being a plaything, of
having to dress up and make up. You yourselves know how much damage that
attitude did to our economy and how much harm it did to public morality.
Today’s women, like the men, must be properly educated and concern
themselves with the issues (of the day), they too must exercise sound
judgement in their involvement in the (country’s) affairs, and God
willing, they will be successful. (95)

10 September 1980 (19 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

All the women and all the men must involve themselves in social and
political affairs. They must be supervisors, supervising the work of the
Parliament and the government; they must express their opinions. (96)

10 September 1980 (19 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

Guiding a nation is a momentous task to undertake, and guiding half of
that nation - the women - is even more so. This task[^7] is fraught with
difficulties; indeed the decision to take it on is itself an important
undertaking. But now that you have resolved to do such a thing, let
nothing weaken or shake that resolve. (97)

7 February 1981 (18 Bahman 1359 AHS)

You ladies who are occupied with this humanitarian and Islamic task can
be absolutely certain that because you are doing this work for God, you
will be successful. (98)

7 February 1981 (18 Bahman 1359 AHS)

Today we see that the respected ladies of Iran throughout the country
are useful members (of our society) and form a committed and devout
community serving their country. They are the mainstay of this country.
I hope that, mindful of Islamic precepts and armed with the weapon of
faith and devotion to Islam, they will carry this victory forward and
will be the mainstay of this revolution too. (99)

23 May 1981 (2 Khurdad 1360 AHS)

It is the duty of every man and woman of legal voting age to go to the
polling stations and cast their vote for a president. If you waver in
this regard, then those who wish to see this country destroyed may be
victorious. All of you, all of us, men and women together, are bound by
duty to determine our destiny just as we are bound by duty to perform
our *namaz* (the ritual prayer). (100)

4 July 1981 (13 Tir 1360 AHS)

I advise both men and women who are of legal voting age to take part in
these elections and vote for any of the candidates they wish.
Participate they must. (101)

27 November 1982 (6 Azar 1361 AHS)

Wherever one looks in Iran, one sees women pursuing Islamic activities,
religious and even political activities, while at the same time
preserving their modesty and their dignity. Whereas those women who
freely mingled with men in society produced nothing other than
corruption throughout the whole of the *taghut* period, these women
(today), in this short span of time, have been so active that the
results of their endeavours are already beginning to show in Qum and
other cities. (102)

13 March 1983 (22 Isfand 1361 AHS)

If those people[^8] who wish to sabotage the activities of these
ladies - this great service they are performing which before God is a
worthy service - are Muslim, then they are committing a cardinal sin,
and if they are not Muslim and by their actions merely seek a return to
the dissoluteness which once existed, then they should know that the
season of wantonness is over, and the ladies of Iran will no longer give
them permission to return to the way they used to act.

I must thank all of you. Praise God, you are busy doing religious
activities and you also have political insight. Iranian women today
enjoy both religious and political acumen. The obstacles that once
prevented you from carrying out religious and political activities have
now been removed. I hope that very soon each one of you will reach the
point where you will be able to educate others. (103)

13 March 1983 (22 Isfand 1361 AHS)

You must involve yourselves in all aspects of the country’s life to the
extent that Islam has allowed, such as taking part in elections. The
elections are one of the most talked about issues in Iran at the moment,
and participation in them today is something that must be done. The
ladies must be active in the elections just as the men are, for when it
comes to their destiny, there is no difference between them and others.

The destiny of Iran is the destiny of all. Islam has served you ladies
more than it has the men. Islam protected you, so now you reciprocate by
protecting Islam. This means taking part in these elections, for they
will determine the formation of the second parliamentary assembly.
Elections play a very important role in your destiny and ours, a primary
role. It is elections that must lay down the path the country follows in
all its affairs, whether domestic or foreign.

Therefore, you ladies must play a very active role so that the
parliament does not become one that is, God forbid, infiltrated by some
unscrupulous elements and is gradually drawn towards the East or the
West, becoming the kind of parliament that existed in the previous era
and imposing on us policies which parliaments of that time imposed on
the people. (104)

8 April 1984 (19 Farvardin 1363 AHS)

Just as men should concern themselves with political matters and
safeguard their society, so too should women. Women should take part in
social and political activities shoulder-to-shoulder with men, while, of
course, at the same time complying with Islamic principles. God be
praised, this is happening today. (105)

8 April 1984 (19 Farvardin 1363 AHS)

We are proud that the ladies, both young and old, are present in the
cultural, economic and military arenas, and that they are active
shoulder-to-shoulder with the men or even more so than they are - in the
area of elevating Islam and advancing the goals of the Most Noble
Qur’an. (106)

5 June 1989 (15 Khurdad 1368 AHS)

Women and Education
-------------------

**Women and Education**

**Question:** Can women attain the position of *mujtahid*?[^9] Would you
please elaborate.

**Reply:** It is possible for a woman to become a *mujtahid*, however
she cannot become a *marja’ -i taqlid*[^10] for others.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 1, p. 21.

The men and women of Qum are exemplary in their learning and their
willingness to act, as are the men and women of Iran on the whole. (107)

17 May 1979 (27 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

If you are in a position that requires you to educate small girls,
educate them well. If you are in a place where your position is to
propagate, then do so well. All segments of the population in whatever
post they may occupy must carry out their duties well. (108)

13 September 1979 (22 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

One of the most significant effects of this movement is the change
brought about in all of you, in the ladies, in the brothers and sisters
alike. That change is the sense of duty that we all now feel, a duty to
our country, a duty to educate, to educate people in those things that
will be useful to them in religious and worldly affairs. (109)

16 September 1979 (25 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

All those who are illiterate should rise up and embark on a campaign to
learn, and all the literate brothers and sisters should rise up to teach
them. The Ministry of Education, with all the facilities it has at its
disposal, should also take action in this regard, not allowing
bureaucracy and administrative formalities to get in its way.

Brothers and sisters in faith! You must mobilise yourselves in order to
eradicate this painful shortcoming. Teaching and learning are forms of
worship which God the Blessed and Exalted has called on us to perform.
The congregational prayer leaders in the provincial towns and villages
should invite the people to this task.

Those who are literate should teach reading and writing to the brothers
and sisters who are not in the mosques, in other religious centres and
even in their homes. They should not wait for the authorities to take
action. For their part, the illiterate people should not shrink from
this task. (110)

28 December 1979 (7 Dey 1358 AHS)

The women of Iran today are committed, lion-hearted individuals, who
shoulder-to-shoulder with our dear men are busy rebuilding their beloved
country, just as they are busy rebuilding themselves through learning
and education. You will not find a town or village without cultural or
scientific centres composed of dedicated and honourable Muslim women.
(111)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

I hope that the teachers, the brothers and sisters, wherever they may
be, in whatever capacity they may be teaching, whether as trained
teachers, as students or simply as scholars with a knowledge to pass on,
consider themselves to be both teachers and students. Teachers to call
the people to the straight path of guidance of the prophets, and
students as they themselves tread that path. (112)

30 August 1980 (8 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

Elderly men and women too can learn. They too can receive an education.
They should not give up on themselves. (113)

27 December 1980 (6 Dey 1359 AHS)

I hope that the sisters and brothers busy with their studies and
propaganda activities at the Shahid Mutahhari (may God grant him peace)
school of higher education are mindful of the fact that this school was
named after a martyr who was very beneficial to Islam and whose
teachings serve as instruction for our youth, as well they should.

You sisters and brothers who attend this school should arrange your
daily programme in such a way that other Mutahharis or another Mutahhari
will emerge from your midst. Resolve to see this happen, direct your
attention to God and let everything you do be for God the Blessed and
Exalted alone. Strive to pursue your studies well at the school, and
even more importantly, strive to achieve moral edification.

Be Islamic, and as you complete your Islamic studies, so too perfect an
Islamic spirit in yourselves. Alongside your studies be serious about
observing Islamic decrees and striving to purify yourselves Islamically.
(114)

1 March 1981 (10 Isfand 1359 AHS)

Endless greetings to the committed women who are presently busy
throughout the country educating children and illiterate people and
teaching the rich culture of the Qur’an. (115)

24 April 1981 (4 Urdibihisht 1360 AHS)

Women who in the past were deprived of an active involvement in society,
have, over these past few years, praise God, entered the arena. And they
have done so in a fitting manner, with *shari’a* rules being adhered to.
They are now active in the areas of education and propagation. (116)

13 January 1982 (23 Dey 1360 AHS)

Praise God, those shackles that once bound our beliefs have today been
cast off. Today, all segments of the nation are engaged in education,
including the ladies. Today, ladies are among the theological students
in Qum and other places; wherever they are in the country, they are busy
with education. And this is something that has materialised in this
revolution.

Previously, the ladies were confined to such an extent that they did not
even have the right to join a group of ten people and discuss scientific
or religious matters. Today, however, while observing Islamic precepts,
they can go and speak anywhere in the country, even abroad. In these
matters we were very backward, today we must make up for that, we must
redress the failings. (117)

6 September 1983 (15 Shahrivar 1362 AHS)

I ask God, the Blessed and Exalted, to grant you ladies and sisters
success both in your educational endeavours and in your ability to take
action and to purify yourselves morally. For just as knowledge alone is
to no avail, so too is blind purification. It is knowledge and
purification together that will take man to the stage of the true human
being.

I ask God the Blessed and Exalted to grant you ladies, indeed all the
sisters throughout the country and the brothers, success in advancing
these two aspects, which are learning and action, together with Islamic
morals, so that Islam can be put into practice in Iran in a way that
pleases God the Blessed and Exalted. (118)

8 April 1984 (19 Farvardin 1363 AHS)

Now the situation is such that the women, shoulder-to-shoulder with the
brothers, are studying mysticism, philosophy, all branches of science,
and, God willing, of industry too. At that time they used to say that
the half of Iran’s population in veils could not do anything, not that
they wanted them to be able to do anything for they prevented the men
too from being productive. No, they simply wanted to get them to enter
society adopting the style that they, their friends and adherents had
adopted, and thus drag society into corruption.

God, however, did not want them to succeed. Today, you ladies are a
source of pride, for along with your brothers in the theological schools
you are busy studying and teaching or pursuing other Islamic activities;
and I hope you will prove to be even more active than they are. Still
you must be careful and act contrary to what was expected under the
former regime. They wanted to destroy Islamic values and put European
values in their place. Act contrary to this so that some of those who
were deceived, and are still to be found in Iran, may be influenced by
you and adopt your style instead. (119)

8 April 1984 (19 Farvardin 1363 AHS)

Sciences without exception, and particularly Islamic sciences, are not
the preserve of any one section of society. The respected women of Iran
have proved throughout the revolution that shoulder-to-shoulder with the
men, they can render valuable services to Islam and the Muslims in
political and social activities, and be the spearhead of the movement to
educate the great community of women (in Iran).

Praise God, currently an institute is in the process of being built in
the holy city of Qum, the city of learning and struggle (*jihad*), for
the education of the respected ladies. It is hoped that through the
efforts of the learned *\`ulama* and the teachers at Qum’s theological
schools, may their blessings continue, this Islamic goal is achieved and
proves to be an effective step towards the intellectual development of
women and the blossoming of Islamic learning among them.

Therefore, I appoint their excellencies the Hujjat-ul Islams Hajj Shaykh
Ali Meshkini, Musawi Ardabili, Hajj Shaykh Ahmad Jannati, Hajj Shaykh
Muhammad Fazel, Hajj Shaykh Muhammad Ali Shar‘ei, Hajj Shaykh Muhammad
Riza Tavassoli and Hajj Shaykh Hassan Sane‘i, may their blessings
continue, as the organising committee for this institute so that they
can take the appropriate steps to appoint the managerial board, prepare
the articles of association, determine its name and see to its other
affairs.

It is hoped that with the assistance of Almighty God and the prayers of
*Hazrat* Mahdi, may our souls be sacrificed for his coming, this
institute will render a valuable service to the community of
revolutionary Muslim women of Iran. (120)

22 August 1984 (31 Murdad 1363 AHS)

God be praised, you worked hard, you suffered and were steadfast in
every stage (of the movement). Iranian women were actively involved in
all affairs, from the cultural to the economic, and today a large number
of them are involved in agriculture, a large number in industry and
still others in the educational arena in the areas of literature,
science and the arts.

All of these efforts are commendable in the eyes of God the Blessed and
Exalted, and you are all in God’s care; as long as you remain committed,
God the Blessed and Exalted will assist you. (121)

12 March 1985 (21 Isfand 1363 AHS)

Strive to acquire learning and godliness, for learning is not the
preserve of any one person, learning is for all, godliness is for all,
and striving to acquire learning and achieve godliness is the duty of us
all.

I hope that the state organs will help you and will meet your needs in
all areas, and in your educational activities will adequately provide
you with the things you need. I hope that you will be assisted by God
and will be successful in everything you do.

The Iranian ladies have brought Islam to the stage it is now at by
sacrificing their lives, their youth and their time, and I hope that
from now on it will be advanced even further. You can be sure that as
long as you remain active and committed to Islam, as long as you are
ready to give your young ones for the cause and are willing to train
them properly, then Islam will progress and will sever the hands of the
enemies of religion from this country, and all Islamic countries,
allowing happiness and goodness to follow, God willing.

I hope that Muslim women wherever they may be will imitate you dear ones
who are striving to elevate the status of women and to make up for the
injustices, which were perpetrated against you in that era. (122)

12 March 1985 (21 Isfand 1363 AHS)

Freedom of women in the Islamic system
--------------------------------------

**Freedom of women in the Islamic system**

**Question:** You have been accused of being against civilisation and
you have turned the accusation against the Shah. That is not necessarily
convincing. How do you stand on specific issues like agrarian reform,
industrialisation and the status of women?

**Reply:** . . . As for women, Islam has never been against their
freedom. It is, to the contrary, opposed to the idea of woman-as-object
and it gives her back her dignity. A woman is a man’s equal; she and he
are both free to determine their destiny and choose their occupations.

But the Shah’s regime is trying to prevent women from becoming free by
plunging them into immorality. It is to this that Islam raises
objections. This regime has destroyed the freedom of women as well as
men. Women as well as men swell the population of Iranian prisons, and
this is where freedom is threatened. We want to free them from the
corruption menacing them. (123)

6 May 1978 (16 Urdibihisht 1357 AHS)

**Question:** Regarding social issues, what is the view of His Holiness
the Ayatullah on the presence of women in universities or the workplace?
Will there be restrictions placed upon them that do not exist in society
today? What is His Holiness’s opinion on birth control and coeducation
in universities?

**Reply:** Women are free in the Islamic society and will, under no
condition, be barred from universities, offices or Parliament. What will
be checked equally among both men and women is moral corruption which is
prohibited for both sexes. As far as birth control is concerned, that
depends on what decision the government will take on the matter. (124)

7 December 1978 (16 Azar 1357 AHS)

Both women and men are free to attend university, both are free to vote
and stand as parliamentary representatives, that which is objectionable
is the way these people (the Shah and his regime) want women to be: a
plaything in the hands of men. To quote the Shah “a woman should be
beguiling.” We want to get rid of this mistaken idea. We want a woman to
be a person like other people, a human being like any other human being,
to be free as others are free. (125)

11 December 1978 (20 Azar 1357 AHS)

**Question:** In the event of your movement’s triumph and the
establishment of an Islamic government, what will your approach to
social development and progress be, particularly with regard to women?
Will you permit polygamy?

**Reply:** Women are free, just as men are. We will act in accordance
with Islamic law. (126)

12 December 1978 (21 Azar 1357 AHS)

These people you call lawyers have always misguided our women. Today,
the Shah’s prisons are filled with our ‘free’ women, yet these lawyers
have consistently endorsed the Shah’s crimes. Which of the two is free?
(127)

28 December 1978 (7 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** What changes do you feel are needed regarding the position
of women in Iranian society? How, in your opinion, will an Islamic
government change the status of women, for example as regards employment
in the civil service and working in different professions such as
medicine, engineering etc., and in other areas such as divorce,
abortion, the right to travel and compulsory wearing of the chador?

**Reply:** The Shah’s malicious propaganda, along with that of people
bought with his money, has obscured the issue of women’s freedom for the
people, so that they think Islam has come just to make women stay at
home. Why should we oppose women’s education? Why should we oppose them
working?

Why shouldn’t women be able to work in the civil service? Why should we
oppose women being able to travel? Women, like men, are free in all
these things, women are in no way different from men. Yes, in Islam
women must dress modestly and wear a veil (i.e. have *hijab*), but that
does not necessarily mean she has to wear a chador. Women can choose any
kind of attire they like so long as it covers them properly and they
have *hijab*.

Islam does not want women to be an object, to be a doll in our hands.
Islam wants to safeguard women’s nobility, it wishes to make her a
serious and efficient human being. We shall never allow women to be
merely men’s sex objects. Islam has prohibited abortion. Women can gain
the right to execute a divorce if she adds this condition to her
marriage contract. The respect Islam shows woman and the freedom it
grants her is equalled by no other system of laws or school of thought.
(128)

28 December 1978 (7 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** A good many women who have reached a level of freedom and
education in Iran are afraid that they will be forced to return to a
reactionary religious regime. What have you to say to put their minds at
ease?

**Reply:** Islam has given women freedom. It is this government and this
Shah that have deprived them of freedom and have restricted them in
every aspect. (129)

5 January 1979 (15 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** Is an Islamic government a retrogressive one? The Shah
wants to create a modern country, the Arab countries too seek progress,
but Islam opposes reform and social change such as freedom for women.
What is your view on this?

**Reply:** The Shah’s government opposed our social development and gave
away the freedom and independence of our country. An Islamic government
is not a retrogressive one. It sanctions all the manifestations of
civilisation apart from those that disrupt the nation’s peace of mind
and are incompatible with the nation’s view of public decency. Islam not
only sanctions freedom for women, it is actually the founder of freedom
for women in all the dimensions, which exist for a woman. (130)

10 January 1979 (20 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** What will be the policy of the government of an Islamic
republic on women’s freedom, the fight against illiteracy and the
cinema?

**Reply:** The Shah has not done anything positive in Iran, trying to
mend the damage he has done will take quite a while. The Shah has given
freedom neither to women nor to men, we, however, will give freedom to
all. Cinemas under the Shah’s regime have been in the service of
corruption, in an Islamic republic they will have to serve the good of
the nation. We will fight illiteracy in the best way possible. (131)

11 January 1979 (21 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** What will the role of women be in a future Islamic
government?

**Reply:** Women are free to participate in many affairs, free in the
true sense of the word, not in the sense that the Shah wanted. Some of
our women are in prison, and of those who are not, a great number take
part in the demonstrations and the struggles. An insignificant number
are ‘free’, free in the sense that the Shah wants them to be free. We
are most definitely opposed to that kind of freedom. (132)

15 January 1979 (25 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** What will be the status of women in your future
government?

**Reply:** They will have the status of a true human being and a free
individual, contrary to these past periods we have lived through when
neither our women were free nor our men. The nation whose men and women
were not free [and] were repressed, has now thrown off the yoke and from
now on men and women are free. However, if they wish to act immodestly
or contrary to the interests of the country, then naturally they will be
prevented from doing so. (133)

15 January 1979 (25 Dey 1357 AHS)

**Question:** What will be the role of women in the Islamic government?
For example, will they be able to get involved in the affairs of state
by becoming, say, members of parliament or ministers? That being, of
course, if they demonstrate that they are suitable for and sufficiently
competent to hold such a post.

**Reply:** The Islamic government will determine the course to be taken
in such matters. Now is not the time for me to comment on such things.
Women, like men, are participating in building the Islamic society of
tomorrow; they can vote and be voted for in elections. Women have taken
part in the recent struggles in Iran to the same degree as the men. We
will give women every kind of freedom, but we will prevent corruption,
and where this is concerned, there is no difference between men and
women. (134)

23 January 1979 (3 Bahman 1357 AHS)

**Question from one of the female reporters**: The fact that I have been
accepted as a woman shows that our movement is a progressive one, even
though some have tried to portray it as retrograde. Do you think women
must necessarily wear Islamic dress (*hijab*)? Must they cover their
hair or not?

**Reply:** To say I have accepted you means nothing. I have not
personally accepted you; you came here without my knowledge. This is not
proof that Islam is progressive. Islam did not become progressive the
minute you walked in here. Progress is not what some of our women or our
men think it is.

Progress is determined in terms of human and spiritual perfections and
by how useful a person is for the nation and the country, not by whether
people go to the cinema or dances.

These are things they made you think were progressive so they could
drive you into a backward state. Later we must remedy this. In salutary
activities, you are free; you are free to go to university and to do any
kind of respectable job. The whole nation is free in this respect.
However, if anyone wants to do something immodest or harmful to the
nation, he or she will be prevented. This is a sign of being
progressive. (135)

23 January 1979 (3 Bahman 1357 AHS)

There is no suppression in Islam. In Islam there is liberty for all
strata of society, for women, men, for whites and blacks, for everyone.
From now on men should be afraid of themselves, not of the government,
they should be afraid lest they do wrong. (136)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

Islam has set you free. Islam has declared men and women free; all are
free. (137)

6 April 1979 (17 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

Today you are free, all the brothers and sisters are today free, free to
criticise the government, free to criticise anything that goes against
the path of the nation and Islam, free to make fundamental demands of
the government. This movement has made you free, has liberated you from
the bonds, which bound the nation.

You have gathered here freely, and freely you are propounding political
and social issues vital to the nation, you are not the ladies of a few
years ago. Today you are having a say in your destiny. You are
propounding political issues and are making demands of the government.
This is the meaning of freedom. (138)

3 July 1979 (12 Tir 1358 AHS)

This freedom that our nation now enjoys, which the women, men, writers
and so on, now enjoy, this freedom is in all affairs, which are
beneficial to you. You are free to go out and say what you have to say,
to criticise the government, criticise anyone who puts a foot wrong, no
one is going to ask you why you are doing so.

You are free to join the Construction Crusade (*Jihad-i Sazandeghi*) and
help your countrymen. Anything that is involved with the growth of man,
the growth of the sisters, brothers and these dear children, is free for
you. That which is not free, indeed which Islam prevents, is gambling
which corrupts the nation, drinking which corrupts the nation, and all
types of obscenities which were made available during the time of that
criminal (the Shah). Islam forbids such things. (139)

30 September 1979 (8 Mehr 1358 AHS)

**Question:** In the future government, what will freedom for women be
like? Will they have to cease attending schools and remain at home or
will it be possible for them to continue with their education?

**Reply:** The things you have heard said about women and other issues
are all simply propaganda put about by the Shah and people guided by
self-interests. Women are free (in Islam), free to study, free in other
areas too, just as the men are. It is at the present time that neither
women are free nor men. (140)

13 November 1978 (22 Aban 1357 AHS)

**Question:** Your Holiness, what do you expect the American government
to do in exchange for the release of the female and black hostages that
you have ordered?

**Reply:** We released the women and the blacks because women are shown
a special regard in Islam and the blacks have been subject to pressure
and oppression in America. We do not consider them totally culpable, for
perhaps they were pressurised into coming here.

We did this out of obedience to the command of Islam and God, we don’t
expect anything from Mr. Carter[^11] and we do not want any reward for
what we have done. The issue here is that Mr. Carter must hand this
criminal (the Shah) back to us. A criminal who has committed crimes
against a people in a country must, according to all international laws,
be returned to that country. Yet he (Carter) goes against all the rules
of reason. (141)

18 November 1979 (27 Aban 1358 AHS)

**Question:** Your Holiness, in Neauphle-le-Chateau[^12] you promised
that not only would freedoms be protected but that they would reach all,
whereas after the victory of the revolution we witnessed demonstrations
against women, pressure being brought to bear on tribal minorities such
as the Kurds and the banning of certain newspapers and political groups.
Could you please explain these apparent contradictions?

**Reply:** The women who demonstrated are the remnants of former
problems, women whom the Shah brought into the arena as “free women” and
whom he led to corruption. They prefer the former situation, which that
corruption had brought about, those freedoms that the former regime
wanted: freedom for the youth to do anything they wanted, to embrace
vice and to act indecently.

But they saw that Islam does not consent to indecency and to actions,
which drag the country into corruption and drive the nation into a state
of backwardness. It was these women who came out onto the streets, with
faces made up as everyone observed, and demonstrated. Otherwise freedom
most certainly has not been and will not be curtailed. The people are
fee, but not to create corruption and drive the nation into
backwardness. (142)

26 November 1979 (5 Azar 1358 AHS)

Today, women in the Islamic Republic are striving shoulder-to-shoulder
with the men to rebuild their country and rebuild themselves. This is
the true meaning of free men and free women, not that which was
promulgated during the reign of the deposed Shah, for freedom then meant
prison, repression, persecution and torture. (143)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

I ask the youth, the girls and boys, not to sacrifice their
independence, freedom and human values, regardless of the trouble and
suffering this may cause them, for a life of luxury, pleasure,
indulgence and frequenting the centres of corruption which the West and
its agents, men without a country, open to you. (144)

5 June 1989 (3 Khurdad 1368 AHS)

Islamic dress (hijab)
---------------------

**Islamic dress (*****hijab*****)**

**Question 1:** If a lady does her daily prayers (*namaz*) dressed in
modest attire such as a baggy manteau, trousers and a large scarf or
*miqna’a*,[^13] is this permissible or not?

**Question 2:** If a lady doing her prayers at home wears a thick, long
chador while underneath she has on a sleeveless top or dress and wears
no socks, are her prayers invalid?

**Reply 1:** There is no problem.

**Reply 2:** Her prayers are not invalid.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 1, p. 137.

**Question:** What are the rules governing the viewing of TV films which
sometimes show unveiled women, and listening to a musical instrument
being played?

**Reply:** There is no problem concerning the viewing of foreign films
in which the actresses are not known and which do not have a corrupting
influence. Dance music is forbidden, but there is no problem with other
types of music.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 2, p. 17.

**Question:** I am a woman working as a hairdresser for Muslim women who
observe the Islamic cover (*hijab*). I work in an environment closed off
to men. Could you please state your esteemed opinion of income earned in
this way?

**Reply:** Based on the conditions set out in the question there is no
problem, and income earned in this way is religiously legal.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 2, p. 32.

Women are free to choose their activities, their destiny and also their
manner of dress, providing it complies with the rules. Present-day
experience in the action against the Shah’s regime shows that women have
found more freedom than ever before in the mode of dress which Islam
stipulates for them. (145)

1 November 1978 (10 Aban 1357 AHS)

**Question:** For a long time now Your Holiness has been criticising the
Shah’s policies, to what extent will your policies, with regard to the
following, differ from those of the Shah: Social issues, will Islamic
laws be put into effect and what difference will they make to daily life
in comparison with the present laws?

‘Beneath the banner of Islamic government’, could Your Holiness explain
more precisely what this means? Will women have the right to freely
choose between the veil and Western dress? Will cinemas continue to
exist? If so, what kind of films will be selected for viewing? Will
alcoholic beverages be banned? Finally, will Iran become another Saudi
Arabia or Libya?

**Reply:** The implementation of penal laws in Islam depends on many
conditions first being fulfilled and involves many preliminaries. Many
aspects must first be justly considered and Islam must be implemented
fully. If these conditions exist, it will be seen that Islamic laws are
not as harsh as others. Women are free to choose their activities, their
destiny and also their manner of dress, while complying with the rules.

Present-day experience in the action against the Shah’s regime shows
that women have found more freedom than ever before in the mode of dress
which Islam stipulates for them. We are opposed to cinemas whose
programmes corrupt our youth morally and subvert Islamic culture, but we
approve of programmes which educate society and which contribute to its
healthy, scientific and moral development.

Alcoholic beverages, alcoholism and other narcotics, which are harmful
to society, will be banned. The Islamic republic government that we have
in mind will not be like any of the regimes mentioned (i.e. Saudi Arabia
and Libya). (146)

1 November 1978 (10 Aban 1357 AHS)

**Question:** Some of the Islamic customs, such as the mandatory veil,
have been abandoned. Will the veil be once again enforced in the Islamic
republic?

**Reply:** The veil, in the form we commonly understand it to take and
which goes by the name Islamic *hijab*, is not opposed to freedom. Islam
is against indecency. We invite the women to accept the Islamic *hijab*.
Indeed, our brave women are tired of the calamities that the West, in
the name of civilisation, has brought upon them, and they have turned to
Islam. (147)

28 December 1978 (7 Dey 1357 AHS)

In Islam women must dress modestly and wear a veil (i.e. have *hijab*),
but that does not necessarily mean she has to wear a chador. Women can
choose any kind of attire they like so long as it covers them properly
and they have *hijab*. (148)

28 December 1978 (7 Dey 1357 AHS)

Women must not enter the Islamic ministries improperly dressed. They can
work there, but they must have *hijab* and must observe *shari‘a*
principles. (149)

6 March 1978 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

**Question:** This chador, is it right that these women hide themselves
under a chador? These women took part in the revolution, they gave
lives, they were imprisoned, [and] they fought. This chador is an old
custom, the world has changed, is it right that they should have to hide
themselves in this way?

**Reply:** First of all, this is something that is their choice, and
they have chosen it for themselves. What right do you have to deprive
them of their choice? If we tell the people to come out and demonstrate
their approval for Islamic dress, whether the chador or some other form,
out of our population of 35 million, 33 million would come out. What
right do you have to stop them?

What kind of dictatorship is this you want to impose on the women?
Secondly, we do not say a woman has to wear a specific type of dress,
particularly in cases of women your age[^14] there are no
specifications. We are concerned mainly with the younger women who when
they make up and dress up draw hordes of young men after them. It is
these women we are stopping. They don’t need your sympathy. (150)

12 September 1979 (21 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

**Imam Khomeini, the Leader of the Revolution and Founder of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in reply to a question about the attacks by a number
of ignorant and possibly anti-revolutionary elements on women not
properly observing the Islamic dress code, issued this edict:**

It is possible that the attacks on women in the streets, alleys and
market places are being carried out by perverse elements opposed to the
revolution. No one has the right to perpetrate such an attack and this
kind of behaviour is unlawful (*haram*) for Muslims. The police and
revolutionary committees must prevent such incidents. (151)

4 July 1980 (13 Tir 1359 AHS)

Whereas under the former regime one’s consequence and standing were
measured by obnoxious make-up, by what one wore and in what kind of
house one lived, the values found today in Islamic countries,
particularly in Iran, are human, moral values. These values have come
about because of the change that has taken place in the ladies.

Those who once liked to show off amongst the female community with their
costly clothes and pernicious make-up are now condemned and stand
shamefaced. In those days, our Muslim ladies were embarrassed wearing
Islamic dress, and the deprived classes who observed the Islamic dress
code felt ashamed of the way they dressed before the affluent, but
corrupt, classes. Today the opposite is true, and now one of those
people who once put on such corrupt displays of make-up and dress would
be ashamed in your midst. (152)

16 March 1981 (25 Isfand 1359 AHS)

You must remember that the veil, which Islam has prescribed for you is
to protect your status. Whatever God has decreed for man or for woman is
to keep alive the true values they possess, values that may be destroyed
by the devil’s insinuations or at the corrupt hands of imperialism and
its agents.

12 March 1985 (21 Isfand 1363 AHS)

*Questions put to Imam about television programmes by the managing
director of the Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting (IRIB)
organisation and member of the IRIB’s supervisory board:*

1. On the airing of TV programmes in which the woman’s role requires her
not to observe fully the rules of the Islamic dress code concerning the
face, neck and hair.

2. On the airing of sports programmes such as wrestling and football in
which some parts of the sportsmen’s bodies are uncovered.

3. On watching such programmes when broadcast on TV.

**Reply:** There is no problem from the point of view of the *shari‘a*
to watching these kinds of films and plays, indeed many of them are
educational and it is perfectly permissible to broadcast them. The same
goes for sports programmes and music, most of them present no problem.
On rare occasions transgressions do occur and greater care must be taken
to avoid them.

Two points, however, must be heeded. Firstly, the person who does the
actor’s make-up must be *mahram*[^15] for the person being made up. It
is forbidden for anyone else to perform this task. Secondly, people
watching the programmes mentioned above must not do so in a lustful
manner. (154)

21 December 1987 (30 Azar 1366 AHS)

Most probably the struggle against the wearing of the veil by Muslim
women in educational institutions is a perverse attempt to undermine
this great manifestation of the Islamic world’s defence of the Most
Noble Messenger, peace be upon him and his descendants. The issue is one
which vexes the Islamic nations: why in the so-called free world forcing
women and girls to remove their veils is considered pure democracy, yet
when we simply state that anyone who insults the Prophet of Islam, peace
be upon him and his descendants, should be sentenced to death, and the
council of Islamic jurists issues an edict to this effect, this is
considered undemocratic!

Why does the world sit back and remain silent in the face of people who
do not allow Muslim girls who have chosen to wear Islamic dress into
universities to attend classes or teach? Is it not that the
interpretation of freedom and how it is used lies in the hands of people
who are opposed to the fundamentals of a freedom which is sacrosanct.
Today God has made us responsible, we must not be negligent. Today, we
must struggle against apathy, inaction and silence and the enthusiasm
and momentum of the revolution must be maintained. (155)

22 March 1989 (2 Farvardin 1368 AHS)

Advice for safeguarding and perpetuating the Islamic movement
-------------------------------------------------------------

**Advice for safeguarding and perpetuating the Islamic movement**

Today, the movement is in greater need of the nation of Iran, of
ideological unity, of the honourable ladies, of Chahar Mardan[^16] than
it ever was before its victory and at its climax. It is today that the
hands of the criminals and traitors, those who see their interests
endangered, are working to try to stop this movement from flourishing.
It is today that these treacherous hands must be severed. It is today
that the hands of those who spread dissension and create excuses to
cause division in the ranks of the Muslims must be severed. Our
honourable women must sever the hands of these traitors, our powerful
men must sever the hands of these traitors, the clergymen, wherever they
are, must be vigilant and must sever the hands of these traitors and
frustrate their machinations. (156)

25 April 1979 (5 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

You ladies, you brothers and sisters alike, must be vigilant, the
Iranian nation must be vigilant and not let the blood of our martyrs be
in vain, not let the spilt blood of our youth be meaningless, not let it
be trampled underfoot by personal interests. Rid yourselves of personal
interests. Do not let treacherous hands create different groups. (157)

25 April 1979 (5 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

In this period of history, at this juncture we now find ourselves, where
one road leads to ultimate victory and the other, God forbid, to defeat
and a return to the former state of affairs, it is the duty of all of
us, whether you respected ladies or the rest of the nation, all of us,
the brothers and sisters alike, to safeguard that ideological unity,
that unity of purpose which was Islam - everyone shouting out together
for Islam - and which brought this movement to victory. Hold gatherings,
fill the mosques and remember your aim, which is to put all Islamic laws
into effect in Iran. (158)

2 July 1979 (11 Tir 1358 AHS)

All of these respected sisters and you brothers, all the people of Iran,
all of us must now be mindful of this path that our movement is
following. This movement must be kept alive so that these problems are
overcome. (159)

8 July 1979 (17 Tir 1358 AHS)

Now, it is the bounden duty of us all, whether the law enforcement
officers or the people, the ladies or the brothers, to protect this
trust which is in our care and which is from God. This trust is Islam;
it is the Qur’an. (160)

2 September 1979 (11 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

We must all join hands together, not only the men but the women also,
all segments of society are one, they must join hands together to repair
this ruin they have been left with, and to get their lives back
together. (161)

9 January 1980 (19 Dey 1358 AHS)

My brothers! My sisters! Be alert, for today we are faced with great
responsibilities. If we lose this movement that has reached this stage,
this revolution that has reached this stage and this Islamic Republic
that has been made a reality in our country, we will all be responsible.
(162)

19 January 1981 (29 Dey 1359 AHS)

Complete Texts of some of Imam’s Speeches Concerning the Position and Rights of Women in the Islamic System
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Complete Texts of some of Imam’s Speeches Concerning the Position and
Rights of Women in the Islamic System**

Address to a group of women in Qum
----------------------------------

**Address to a group of women in Qum**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

Incessant greetings to the women of Iran! Peace be upon you, respected
ladies. May the mercy of God be upon you, lion-hearted women, whose
noble efforts have delivered Islam from the fetters of enslavement to
foreigners. The peace of God the Blessed and Exalted be upon the nation
of Iran, upon the ladies and the men.

Courageous sisters, you fought shoulder-to-shoulder with the men and
ensured the victory of Islam. I thank you, women of Iran and women of
Qum. May God and the Imam of the Age be pleased with you. Carrying your
infants in your arms, you came into the streets and supported Islam with
your ardent demonstrations.

I have heard what happened in Qum and other cities; I have heard what
happened in Chahar Mardan. I take pride in all the courageous deeds
accomplished by the women of Iran, in Qum and other cities for you have
been in the vanguard of our triumph and have encouraged the men. Our men
are indebted to your courage, lion-hearted women; I am indebted to both
the honourable men and women.

Islam has particular regard for women. Islam appeared in the Arabian
Peninsula at a time when women had lost their dignity, and it raised
them up and gave them back their pride. Islam made women equal with men;
in fact, it shows a concern for women that it does not show for men. In
our revolutionary movement, women have likewise earned more credit than
men, for it was the women who not only displayed courage themselves, but
also reared men of courage. Like the Noble Qur’an itself, women have the
function of rearing and training true human beings. If nations were
deprived of courageous women to rear true human beings, they would
decline and collapse. It is the women who strengthen the nations, who
make them brave.

In the earliest age of Islam, the women participated in wars together
with the men. The position of women is a high one. Women in Islam enjoy
a high rank. We saw how in this movement the women, the honourable
ladies, stood shoulder-to-shoulder with the men, in front of them even,
in the line of battle. They lost their infants and youth, but still they
bravely resisted the enemy.

We want our women to attain the high rank of true humanity, not to be a
plaything in the hands of men, in the hands of depraved men. Women must
have a share in determining their destiny. Women in the Islamic Republic
must vote. Just as men have the right to vote, women too have that
right. In this recent period, the women were degraded. One of the great
acts of treachery committed against our nation (by the former regime)
was that they robbed us of our human resources, they reined in the power
of our youth and that of our women, they degraded our women, betrayed
our nation.

They turned our women into playthings, into something akin to dolls. Our
women were warrior-like, but they wanted them to be profligate
pleasure-seekers. They insulted woman’s dignity; they wanted women to
become mere objects, a possession to pass from one hand to another. God,
however, determined otherwise.

Islam grants woman a say in all affairs, just as it grants man a say.
Just as men should avoid corruption, so too should women. Women should
not allow themselves to be playthings in the hands of dissolute youths,
they should not degrade themselves and, God forbid, come out into the
streets dressed up and made up, placing themselves in full view of
depraved men. Women must act like true human beings; they must be pious.

Women enjoy a dignified position; they have free will just as men have.
God created you free beings and gave you dignity. Just as God has laid
down laws for men imposing restrictions to prevent them from becoming
corrupt, so too He has laid down laws for women. These are for your
benefit; all Islamic laws are for the good of society. Those who want to
see women as playthings in the hands of dissolute men are traitors.

Women should not be tricked, they shouldn’t imagine their station in
life calls for them to come out into the streets dressed up and made up,
with no veil and scantily dressed. This is not the role of women; this
is the role of a doll. Women must be brave, they must involve themselves
in the fundamental destiny of the country, [and] they are the makers of
true human beings, the educators of mankind.

May God protect you women of Iran, you women of Qum, from the dangers
presented by corrupt people, people who in reality are animals (not
human beings). Just as hitherto you have always participated in our
country’s movements, just as you partook in this movement and played a
role in its victory, so too now you must continue to participate and
rise up again whenever the need arises. The country belongs to you.

God willing, the hands of foreigners, of venal elements and plunderers
have been severed, they have left and the country is yours, yours to
rebuild. All the people of Iran, men and women alike, must repair the
ruins that the previous regime has bequeathed to us; the hands of men
alone will not suffice to accomplish the task. Men and women must
collaborate in this respect.

There is one particular point concerning women to which attention should
be paid. When women wish to marry, there are certain prerogatives they
can stipulate for themselves that are contrary neither to the *shari‘a*
nor to their own self-respect. For example, a woman can stipulate that
if her future husband turns out to be of corrupt moral character or if
he mistreats her, she would possess the right to execute a divorce.

This is a right that Islam has granted to women. If Islam has imposed
certain restrictions on both women and men, it is for the benefit of
both. All Islamic laws, be they those which permit or those which
prohibit, are for the benefit of all. Similarly, just as Islam has
granted man the right to divorce, it has also granted it to woman, on
condition that the parties stipulate at the time of the marriage that if
the husband behaves in a certain manner, the wife will have the right to
execute a divorce.

Once the man has accepted such a stipulation, he can never repudiate it.
Apart from making it possible to include such a stipulation in the
marriage contract, Islam forbids the husband to mistreat his wife; if he
habitually mistreats her, he is to be punished and the *mujtahid* will
grant the wife a divorce.

May God adorn all of you with dignity, health, happiness and perfect
faith and character.  
 Peace be upon you, beloved and respected ladies. (163)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

Imam’s address to a group of ladies from Qum
--------------------------------------------

**Imam’s address to a group of ladies from Qum**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

When I left Qum you ladies and gentlemen of this city were afflicted
with troubles, but you had your youth at your side. When I returned,
they were gone. Their loss brought grief not only to the hearts of the
mothers and fathers, but to my heart also. I saw the pictures of these
brave youth on the walls of the Fayziya theological school.[^17] I offer
my condolences to the people of Qum, to the bereaved mothers, on their
loss.

When I left, the whole of our country was afflicted with such troubles;
indeed the whole of our country for the past fifty odd years has been in
a state of affliction, hardship, repression and dependence on
foreigners. God only knows what this father and son[^18] have done to
this country of ours. Throughout its history Iran has not witnessed the
likes of such acts of treason.

All the monarchs throughout the 2,500 years or more of monarchical rule
in Iran were traitors; even those who were reputed to be good were
traitors, yet their treachery did not reach the bounds, which that of
these two did. Indeed, no one really knows to what bounds Riza Shah and
his son’s treachery did in fact reach, the extent of their crimes was
huge, but the extent of their treachery was even greater.

What scenes we witnessed during the reign of Riza Khan, a reign that
perhaps most of you cannot remember. In Qum and indeed in all the towns
and cities in accordance with the wishes of those who instructed him and
in the name of *kashf-i hijab*, he violated that which is inviolable in
Islam; he violated that which is sacrosanct to the believers and to our
respected women. What his agents did to our veiled ladies! How they
treated them! They tore off their chadors and scarves and confiscated
them. I myself witnessed these scenes, and you witnessed what this son
did to this country on the plea of creating a ‘great civilisation’.

We cannot imagine the true extent of what they did to this country. We
cannot know the volume of their crimes and their treachery. We don’t
know where they have bank accounts or the exact amount they have in
them. We don’t know for sure that the amount, which has been revealed,
is the true amount. It’s not known how much they have in Swiss,
American, British or other banks. It is said that recently $3 billion
has been taken, but we have no idea how much was taken previously.

At the time of the father, when he entered the war and the Allies sent
him into exile, he collected together the crown jewels, filled his
suitcases with them and took them with him. As I was told, once out at
sea a ship used for transporting livestock drew up alongside the ship on
which he was travelling, and he was told (by the British) to board it.
That wicked man, who himself was worse than an animal, asked what he
should do with his suitcases, he was told they would be brought for him
later. But the British took them and kept them for themselves.

In the reign of this son too everything we had, all our self-respect,
all our resources, has been taken. Our material strength was damaged,
but not to the extent that our human resources were. The people were not
allowed to develop, centres of corruption were made, gambling houses and
houses of ill repute built and placed at the disposal of our youth. They
were made to be unmindful of their destinies. So many of our youth
became addicted to drugs during his reign, they were stupefied through
addiction so they wouldn’t bother about their destinies or where their
true destiny lay.

However, God, the Blessed and Exalted, wanted otherwise; He helped you
and during these past two years the movement - which originated in the
15th Khurdad movement[^19] - blossomed. You ladies have proved that you
are in the vanguard of the movement; you have proved that you lead the
men; men get their inspiration from you. The men of Iran have learnt
lessons from the ladies of Iran and the men of Qum have learnt lessons
from you dear ladies. You are in the vanguard of the movement.

Islam holds you in higher esteem that it does men. Islam wants to save
you, it wants to save you from becoming this plaything they want to turn
you into. Islam wants to train you to become an integrated and virtuous
human being, so that in your care suchlike human beings may be raised.

I thank you all for participating in this movement. I thank all the
mothers who took part in this movement and lost their loved ones. I am
deeply sorry for their loss. May God have mercy upon the souls of their
martyrs. May He grant you all mercy, happiness and help you attain
perfection. All of you must cast your vote, a vote for an Islamic
republic, not a word less (in this designation) nor a word more.[^20]

You too must vote, you are no different from others; indeed you lead the
men. Men are raised in your care, you are the educators of men,
recognise your own worth, just as Islam does. All of you take part in
this upcoming referendum and vote for an Islamic republic.

I hope that an Islamic republic will be established and Islamic justice
and a just government will emerge to save our country from these
problems, stop the hands of foreigners from ever again having free rein
in this land and ensure freedom and independence for you all. May God’s
mercy be upon you all.  
 Peace be upon you, and also the blessings and mercy of God. (164)

8 March 1979 (17 Isfand 1357 AHS)

[^1]: - Addressing the students following Imam’s line who seized the
American Embassy on 3rd November 1979.

[^2]: - The adoption of the authoritative rulings of a scholar of proven
learning and piety in matters of religious practice.

[^3]: - Refer to footnote 3.

[^4]: - If when exchanging the marriage vows the woman stipulates that
she will become the man’s wife only if he accepts her condition that she
has the irrevocable right to execute a divorce, and the man accepts this
condition, then that right of the wife cannot be taken away from her.

[^5]: - The reference here is to arguments advanced before the
referendum of 29-30 March 1979 by various non-Islamic elements who said
it would be enough to have a republic, that to speak of Islam in this
connection was unnecessary, or others who said they wanted a ‘democratic
republic’ not an Islamic one, or those who said they wanted a
‘democratic Islamic republic.’ For more of Imam’s views on this matter
refer to p. 337 of the book Islam and Revolution, translated by Hamid
Algar (Mizan Press).

[^6]: - As it turned out, the plan to form a Constituent Assembly that
would draw up the definitive text for a new constitution was abandoned
in favour of convening a numerically more limited Assembly of Experts,
for which an election was held on 3 August 1979.

[^7]: - Referring to the publication of an informative magazine for
women.

[^8]: - Referring to those people who for various reasons opposed
women’s social activities.

[^9]: - Refer to footnote 3.

[^10]: - Refer to footnote 2.

[^11]: - James Earl Carter, the former American president.

[^12]: - A hamlet near Paris where Imam took up residence in early
October 1978 during his period in exile.

[^13]: - A scarf sewn at the front under the chin and covering the
chest.

[^14]: - Addressing Oriana Fallaci, a famous Italian journalist.

[^15]: - Either someone of the same sex or who shares a degree of
consanguinity with the person being made up, if of the opposite sex,
thus precluding marriage.

[^16]: - Chahar Mardan: a district in the city of Qum the people of
which played a very significant role in the struggle against the Shah’s
regime.

[^17]: - The seminary situated in Qum next to the shrine of Hazrat
Fatima, the Immaculate One (upon whom be peace), the sister of Imam
Riza, the eighth Imam from the Holy Prophet’s Progeny. Her tomb in Qum
is the centre of the shrine complex.

[^18]: - Meaning Riza Khan and his son Muhammad Riza Pahlavi.

[^19]: - On 3 June 1963, Imam Khomeini delivered a historic speech in
Qum, repeating former denunciations of the Shah’s regime and warning the
Shah not to behave in such a way that the people would rejoice when he
should ultimately be forced to leave the country. Two days later, he was
arrested at his residence and taken to confinement in Tehran. His arrest
prompted a major uprising in many Iranian cities, which resulted in the
deaths of not less than 15,000 people in the span of a few days when the
Shah’s troops opened fire on unarmed demonstrators. The date on which
this uprising began was 5th June or 15th Khurdad according to the solar
calendar used in Iran and became known as the uprising or movement of
15th Khurdad.

[^20]: - Refer to footnote 63.


