Women and the Sacred Defence, Jihad
===================================

Defence of Islam and the Islamic country, incumbent on women
------------------------------------------------------------

**Defence of Islam and the Islamic country, incumbent on women**

**Question:** What is the duty of Muslim women in the battle of truth
against falsehood?

**Reply:** *Jihad* is not incumbent on women, but defence is incumbent
on everyone in line with their ability and means.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 1, p. 503

Dear sisters and brothers, in whatever country you may live, defend your
Islamic and national honour! Defend fearlessly and unhesitatingly the
peoples and countries of Islam against their enemies: America,
international Zionism, and all the superpowers of East and West. Loudly
proclaim the crimes of the enemies of Islam. (343)

29 September 1979 (7 Mehr 1358 AHS)

If, God forbid, an attack is made on an Islamic country, then all the
people, women as well as men, must take action. Defence is not a duty
confined to men or something that pertains exclusively to one group,
everyone must defend their country. (344)

27 December 1979 (6 Dey 1358 AHS)

I ask the brothers and sisters of Kurdistan to stand together in a
fraternal manner with the rest of their Muslim brothers and defend their
country. (345)

1 April 1980 (12 Farvardin 1359 AHS)

Now that we are confronting the world’s major powers and are on the
defensive, defending the things that our movement, our uprising has
brought for us, defending Islamic objectives, our Islamic country and
everything to do with Islam and the country, the mobilisation must be a
general one. *Jihad* is one matter and defence another. *Jihad* has
particular conditions attached to it, only certain people or groups can
take part, whereas defence is for everyone, men, women, young and old
alike.

Just as reason dictates that if someone forces their way into another
person’s home, the people of that house will defend themselves, or if a
city is attacked the inhabitants of that city will defend themselves in
order to protect their lives and property, so too there are no
conditions attached to the defence of one’s country.

If our country, our Islamic country, is attacked and invaded, then it is
the duty of everyone living there, women and men, young and old, to help
defend it. So defence is different from *jihad*, it has no conditions
attached, everyone must take part; even the old man who is not able to
do much must defend his country to the extent that he is able. (346)

15 April 1980 (26 Farvardin 1359 AHS)

My brothers! My sisters! We are in a situation that we must handle
wisely. We are faced with one superpower in the West and one in the
East, both of whom want to swallow us up. But by the will of God the
Blessed and Exalted, and through the determination of the devout
brothers and sisters of Iran, we are standing against them both with the
utmost resolve.

Indeed, we will not allow any power to threaten us and try to take
control of our destiny. Do not fear big powers, for you are under God’s
protection and all powers are transient before that of God the Blessed
and Exalted. (347)

17 May 1980 (27 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

The men and women of this country are all guards of Islam. It is a
matter of faith, not of material gain; they are not seeking to gain
something so that when they fail to do so they give up trying. No, this
is a matter of faith, it is a matter of defending Islam, and this must
be carried out until the last person left standing. In other words, if
necessary a population of 35 million must perish and then there will be
no country left for a coup d’état to take place. Of course, a coup
d’état is something that will never happen, those who think it possible
are mistaken, they don’t understand. (348)

12 July 1980 (21 Tir 1359 AHS)

Oh brave tribes of the Tigris and the Euphrates! Oh fighters and
warriors! Rise up and defend Islam, protect the Qur’an and its decrees,
for defending Islam and the Most Noble Qur’an is a duty incumbent on all
Muslims, women and men alike. (349)

4 October 1980 (12 Mehr 1359 AHS)

We have a duty to safeguard this Islam, which has been handed down to
us, until, God forbid, the last person left standing. Everyone, women,
men, young and old, has a duty to protect Islam, to defend the nation
and defend their Islamic country to the last. Defence is a matter that
concerns all, it is incumbent on all, whoever is able to defend his or
her Islamic country must do so to the best of his or her ability. (350)

18 August 1981 (27 Murdad 1360 AHS)

When an Islamic country is threatened by enemies of Islam, it is
incumbent on us all to strive to the best of our ability to defend that
country and the honour of the Muslims. When we found ourselves in such a
situation, you all, all the men and women of our country, praise God,
proved yourselves ready to handle it, so you should not be intimidated
by talk of a group coming from Paris or somewhere else to do whatever.
They made one attempt by setting Saddam loose to attack Iran, and what a
slap in the face he was dealt! (351)

18 August 1981 (27 Murdad 1360 AHS)

And I hope you will accept and perform those duties you are obliged to
carry out, which are to strive both in the area of education, which is
an important matter, and in the defence of Islam. These are among the
important tasks the performance of which is incumbent on every man and
woman, on the young and old alike.

Defending Islam, defending the Islamic country, is an indisputable duty
of the clerics, of those whose lives are Islam and who are Muslim. That
which is disputable is women’s role in the lesser *jihad.*[^1] It is not
incumbent on women to take part in this *jihad*. However, defending
oneself, one’s country, one’s life, one’s property and defending Islam
is the duty of us all. (352)

2 March 1985 (11 Isfand 1364)

You ladies must bear in mind that just as it is necessary for the men at
the fronts to push forward and spearhead the battle, so too it is
necessary for you to help on the home front and to prepare yourselves so
that if, God forbid, there comes a time when national defence is
obligatory for everyone, for every able-bodied person without exception,
you are ready to fulfil this obligation. Education is, of course, also a
bastion, a bastion of the Islamic culture.

You know that throughout these past centuries, from the period after the
demise of the Prophet, upon whom be peace and blessings, to the present,
the Islamic culture has been trampled underfoot, the laws of Islam
falling into abeyance. This culture must be brought alive again. You
ladies must be active on the educational and cultural fronts just as the
men are.

I hope that God will grant you all success and you will make advances on
these fronts too. Pray that those who are at the war front defending
their country and Islam will also be successful, God willing. May you
all be healthy and successful. (353)

2 March 1985 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

What is at stake here is not simply a government or one aspect of life;
it is Islam. Islam is the concern. So it is incumbent on the men and
women of this country to defend it to the best of their ability. And
this defence must be continued until we attain the victories that God
the Blessed and Exalted wants for us, if He so wills. (354)

19 July 1986 (28 Tir 1365 AHS)

Military training for women
---------------------------

**Military training for women**

**Question:** I am a girl who would like to serve the revolution by
entering the Revolutionary Guards Corps, but my father does not approve.
Please could you tell me what my position is according to the *shari’a*
law?

**Reply:** The sisters may become revolutionary guards so long as
Islamic precepts are observed. You had better seek your father’s
consent.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 1, p. 503.

As I said earlier, women can join the army. That which Islam opposes and
which it forbids as something sinful (*haram*) is corruption, whether on
the part of the woman or the man, it makes no difference. (355)

28 December 1978 (7 Dey 1357 AHS)

Bearing in mind all that has been achieved so far through the efforts of
the noble and crusading men and women, I hope that, with the support of
Almighty God, they will be successful in their multidimensional
mobilisation for military, ideological, moral and educational training,
and that they will complete their practical military training in a
manner befitting an Islamic nation that has risen. (356)

20 February 1979 (1 Isfand 1358 AHS)

Praise Almighty God, our dear nation has young combatants among the
sisters and brothers who, through their military instruction throughout
the country, have perplexed the enemies of Iran and Islam. With
confidence in God’s power and a willingness to make sacrifices for the
cause of Islam, they will surmount all difficulties and triumph over all
satanic powers. (357)

8 September 1980 (17 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

Consequently, if defence is a duty incumbent on us all, then the
preparations for this defence must be carried out, and these include
military planning and military training for those who are able. For it
is not the case that it is our bounden duty to defend ourselves and we
have no idea how to do so. We have to know how to defend ourselves. It
goes without saying, however, that the environment in which you receive
military training must be a sound one, an Islamic one, all aspects of
decency and modesty, all Islamic aspects being upheld. (358)

2 March 1985 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

It makes me proud to see the ladies, young and old alike, playing a role
in the educational, economic and military arenas and
shoulder-to-shoulder with the men, ahead of them even, actively
involving themselves in the cause of exalting Islam and advancing the
aims of the Most Noble Qur’an. Those who are able to fight are partaking
in military training - for this is one of the important duties that must
be carried out in order to defend Islam and the Islamic homeland.

They have bravely and resolutely freed themselves from the restrictions
that have been imposed on them, as indeed on Islam and the Muslims in
general, by the enemies’ plots and the friends’ unfamiliarity with the
laws of Islam and the Qur’an. They have thrown off the shackles of
superstition in which the self-seeking enemies, using people suffering
from ignorance and some *akhunds*[^2] oblivious to the interests of the
Muslims, had bound them. (359)

5 June 1989 (15 Khurdad 1368 AHS)

Women’s presence on the fields of battle
----------------------------------------

**Women’s presence on the fields of battle**

**Question:** What are the rules governing female relief and medical
workers going to the war fronts, where their presence would be useful,
without the consent of their parents?

**Reply:** If it is going to cause the parents distress, their consent
must first be obtained.

*Istifta’at* Vol. 1, p. 499

They are trying to frighten you away from an Islamic government. They
say that if an Islamic government were set up, women would be locked up
in rooms for all time. This is not so, in the early history of Islam,
women went to battle! They stayed with the armies throughout the years
of battle and tended to the soldiers’ wounds. (360)

8 November 1978 (17 Aban 1357 AHS)

They say they are afraid that Islam will take power and keep the women
behind closed doors, that it will lock the doors of their homes so they
can’t come out. Such talk and such myths come from abroad, God forbid
that some of our own youth should be taken in by these. In the earliest
age of Islam, women participated in the wars. They were there on the
battlefields tending to the wounds of the injured, and many were killed
there! Who has told you that women will be locked up?! They are free
like men. (361)

9 November 1978 (18 Aban 1357 AHS)

This regime has disseminated propaganda to the effect that were Islam to
come to power, women, for example, would have to remain at home with the
doors locked to prevent them from getting out! Such falsehoods they
spread about Islam. In the earliest age of Islam, women formed part of
the army and entered the field of battle together with the men. (362)

11 December 1978 (20 Azar 1357 AHS)

In the earliest age of Islam, the women participated in wars together
with the men. We saw how in this movement the women, the honourable
ladies, stood shoulder-to-shoulder with the men, in front of them even,
in the line of battle. They lost their infants and youth, but still they
bravely resisted the enemy. (363)

6 March 1979 (15 Isfand 1357 AHS)

You are on a par with the soldiers of Islam and the ladies of the early
days of Islam. Just as those ladies assisted Islam and helped in the
Islamic movements and wars of that time, so too you ladies today, ladies
everywhere in Iran, particularly the ladies of Qum, play a role in this
movement and shoulder-to-shoulder with the men helped in our struggle
against despotism and imperialism. (364)

10 May 1979 (20 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

In the earliest age of Islam, the women participated in wars together
with the men. The position of women is a high one. Women in Islam enjoy
a high rank. We saw how in this movement the women, the honourable
ladies, stood shoulder-to-shoulder with the men, in front of them even,
in the line of battle. They lost their infants and youth, but still they
bravely resisted the enemy. (365)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

A nation whose women enter the arenas to battle with the superpowers and
confront satanic powers ahead of the men will be victorious. (366)

18 August 1980 (27 Murdad 1359 AHS)

The sacrifices made by women during the sacred defence
------------------------------------------------------

**The sacrifices made by women during the sacred defence**

Greetings to the disabled brothers and sisters who bravely rose up in
the way of truth and victory, who made sacrifices and gave the nation
cause to hold its head high in the world. (367)

30 December 1979 (9 Dey 1358 AHS)

Greetings to you all, sisters and brothers, who are bravely living your
lives in the war-stricken areas, and who are not afraid of dying for God
at the hands of His enemies. You are defending your beloved homeland
tooth and nail to please God, and you have inspired the fighters of
Islam.

You have given everything you had with the purest of intentions, and
through your repeated sacrifices, episodes of bravery and gallantry have
been recorded in the annals of your unremitting struggles, and will
continue to be so. Through your lessons of self-sacrifice and valour,
you teach the meek of the earth the truth of God’s pledge that they
shall inherit the earth. I salute you who through your struggles have
brought shame upon the superpowers, and I stand humble before your
forbearance and steadfastness. (368)

31 March 1980 (11 Farvardin 1359 AHS)

May the Islamic movement of the great women of Iran be victorious and
glorious. Glory be to this exalted segment of the population who with
their valuable and brave contribution to the defence of the Islamic
homeland and the venerable Qur’an brought victory to the revolution, and
who today are actively involved in the war effort, either at the front
or in other areas, and are prepared to make sacrifices. (369)

24 April 1981 (4 Urdibihisht 1360 AHS)

You can see how the people are making sacrifices in this war, how these
young people, these mothers and these fathers are making sacrifices.
(370)

13 April 1982 (24 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

The resistance demonstrated by these great women in the imposed war and
the sacrifices they are making are so astonishing that pens and tongues
cannot adequately describe them, indeed they put them to shame.

Throughout this war, I have seen the mothers, sisters and wives who have
lost their dear ones do things that I don’t think could be witnessed
anywhere else other than here in this revolution. One event in
particular stands out in my mind from all the rest, and that is the
marriage of a young girl to a dear revolutionary guard who had lost both
his hands in the war and had received injuries to both his eyes.

That brave young girl whose magnanimous spirit overflowed with sincerity
and genuineness said: \`Since I cannot go to the war front, let me pay
my debt to the revolution and my religion through this marriage.’

No writer, poet, speaker, painter, artist, mystic, philosopher or
jurisprudent, indeed anyone you care to name, can adequately convey the
spiritual magnificence of this event or the human worth and the divine
tones contained therein. No one can evaluate this great girl’s
self-sacrifice, her otherworldliness and devotion to God using current
criteria.  
 This blessed day is the day of women such as her, may God keep them for
Islam and Iran. (371)

14 April 1982 (25 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

Martyrdom and the martyrdom-seeking spirit of women
---------------------------------------------------

**Martyrdom and the martyrdom-seeking spirit of women**

This is the light of the Qur’an and Islam that has appeared in your
hearts and the hearts of the entire Iranian nation. It is the light of
faith that stops you ladies from fearing martyrdom. (372)

6 May 1979 (16 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

Our young people are ready for martyrdom; our men and our women both are
ready for martyrdom. (373)

9 May 1979 (19 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

A group of honourable ladies were here. One of them insisted that I
allow them to go to Kurdistan. I told her it was not necessary for the
women to go there, that their going would not solve Kurdistan’s
problems. Another lady came after me asking me to pray that she be
martyred. I told her to serve her country and I would pray that she
would receive the reward from God that the martyrs receive. This is a
transformation that has taken place. In the early days of Islam, they
advanced with just such a spirit, they sought martyrdom, and in only
half a century they had conquered the civilised world of that time.
(374)

3 September 1979 (12 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

Some ladies would come here asking me to allow them to go to Kurdistan
to fight, and to pray that they would be martyred there. I would tell
them that I did not think it advisable for them to go, that the people
and the army would deal with the situation there. (375)

2 October 1979 (10 Mehr 1358 AHS)

Some of the ladies come here asking me to pray that they attain
martyrdom; some of the brothers do the same. This spiritual
transformation that came about in all classes of the nation, this change
in attitude whereby all sought the same thing, that is an Islamic
republic, this is what led to victory. For it is right, and rightness
will prevail. This transformation must be safeguarded. (376)

3 October 1979 (11 Mehr 1358 AHS)

When I see the esteemed ladies treading the path towards their goal with
a firm resolve and prepared for all kinds of suffering, prepared even
for martyrdom, I am confident that this path will lead to victory. (377)

31 December 1979 (10 Dey 1358 AHS)

A young couple once came here to be married by me. Before she left, the
young lady handed me a note, in it she asked me to pray for our young
people, and at the end she wrote ‘I long for martyrdom’. There are many
like her. This is a transformation wrought in you by God, it is God’s
gift to you; cherish it. (378)

2 January 1980 (12 Dey 1358 AHS)

You know that our young people seek martyrdom, sometimes when they meet
with me, some of them, some of the women, ask me to promise them that I
will pray that they may become martyrs. But I tell them I will pray that
they receive the same reward from God a martyr receives, and that they
will be victorious. (379)

15 April 1980 (26 Farvardin 1359 AHS)

Since this movement’s inception, women and men have frequently come to
see me insisting I pray that they become martyrs. I tell them I will
pray that they are successful and that they receive the reward from God
a martyr receives. Serve Islam. This spirit you possess will bring
progress; strive to preserve it. (380)

15 May 1980 (25 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

From the very beginning of the movement almost - when I was in Najaf -
up to the present, young men and women have come to me imploring me to
pray that they are martyred. I pray they will receive the reward from
God a martyr receives. Here in Tehran not long ago we had a marriage
ceremony. When the ceremony was over, the lady handed me a note, in it
she asked me to pray that she would become a martyr. A lady who had just
got married asked me to pray that she may attain martyrdom. A people who
seek martyrdom, who ask for prayers to be said for their martyrdom, are
they afraid of military intervention? (381)

4 June 1980 (14 Khurdad 1359 AHS)

A nation whose martyrs in the way of Islam are from the class of women
as well as men and whose women actually seek martyrdom along with its
men will not suffer harm. We have confidence in this thunderous torrent
of people led by the esteemed ladies, who form the most precious class
of the nation and who struggle to advance the aims of Islam.

I congratulate the Iranian nation, we fear no power for none can
confront a nation whose men and women are ready to make sacrifices and
who seek martyrdom. Your power is a divine power. (382)

18 August 1980 (27 Murdad 1359 AHS)

What can intimidate a nation whose young newly-weds volunteer for
martyrdom and who tread God’s path prepared for any event? Triumphant is
the nation for whom martyrdom is good fortune. Triumphant is the nation
that will give itself and everything it has for Islam. We are victorious
whether we get killed or kill. (383)

8 September 1980 (17 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

Today our people, our men and women, young and old alike, are determined
to stand against aggression as they have already demonstrated by curbing
that perpetrated against them up until now, and sacrifice their lives
for freedom and independence and for freeing themselves from the yoke of
oppression. We have this expectation, as human beings, of all nations
and governments. (384)

11 February 1981 (22 Bahman 1359 AHS)

May God’s blessings be upon the women who in this revolution and in the
defence of the homeland attained the high rank of martyrdom. (385)

24 April 1981 (4 Urdibihisht 1360 AHS)

A nation, the hearts of whose women and men, young and old alike, beat
for martyrdom, whose people vie with one another for attaining it, who
flee from carnal desires and who believe in the invisible world and in
the Supreme Companion, will not give up and leave the scene because of
these losses, no matter how great they may be. (386)

11 February 1982 (22 Bahman 1360 AHS)

These exemplary women, men and children who under air bombardment and
from hospital beds sing the song of martyrdom, who with limbs amputated
wish to return to the fronts where true human beings are fashioned, are
beyond the bounds of human conception, they transcend that about which a
philosopher or gnostic could write, are beyond that which an artist or
painter could portray.

That which the latter found through a scientific, gnostic or rational
approach, the former found through a belief in that which is
transcendent. That which the one found in books and papers, the other
found in arenas of blood and martyrdom and in the path of Truth. (387)

28 August 1983 (6 Shahrivar 1362 AHS)

A nation that aspires after martyrdom, a nation whose women and men long
for martyrdom, who cry out for it, such a nation does not care whether
something is in short supply or in abundance. It doesn’t let the state
of the economy bother it, this is for those who are tied to the economy,
who have given their hearts to the economy. Those who have given their
hearts to God don’t care whether something can be found easily on the
market or not, whether something is cheap or expensive. (388)

18 February 1985 (29 Bahman 1363 AHS)

You came and attacked the Friday Prayer gathering thinking that by so
doing our nation would back down! But you saw how the people at the
Friday Prayers reacted. What happened there will go down in history. It
had to be seen to be believed.

Women with their infants in their arms, men with their small children at
their sides remained where they were despite the distressing
circumstances. On one side there was the explosion set off by those
inhuman cowards, and on the other the shooting[^3], yet no one moved,
everyone kept their composure and remained where they were sitting. This
nation is such a nation. (389)

15 March 1985 (24 Isfand 1363 AHS)

Women’s role behind the front lines and their support for the fighters
----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Women’s role behind the front lines and their support for the
fighters**

Where throughout history have you heard of young women, who are supposed
to be enjoying their youth, old women and old men striving the way ours
are doing here today to support their army? Where in the world have you
seen women struggling shoulder-to-shoulder with their men folks, with
their revolutionary guards, police, army and all the armed forces? If
you know of such a place tell us so that we may know too. (390)

28 October 1980 (6 Aban 1359 AHS)

You yourselves can see that the entire country is now at war. Even girls
in their homes have joined the war by contributing to the war effort.
(391)

3 November 1980 (12 Aban 1359 AHS)

Can you find a single village in Iraq that would help them[^4] in their
war effort as our people are helping in ours? Of course they get the
things they need, but by forcing the people to contribute, by plundering
their people. You can’t find one village in the whole of the country of
Iraq whose women would bake bread, pack it and send it for the soldiers
as ours are doing. Such a nation fears no one, it has no reason to fear.
(392)

3 November 1980 (12 Aban 1359 AHS)

Who are supporting our armed forces, may God assist them, now that they
are at the war fronts and are in the thick of the fighting? [They are]
those ladies who bake bread for them and those people who send money,
provisions and so many other things for them. [They are] these Muslim
people. You can see on your televisions a lady who donates ten eggs, a
young child who gives his ten tumans. Why are they doing this? They are
doing it for Islam, for their Islamic country. (393)

16 November 1980 (25 Aban 1359 AHS)

If a war had broken out during the time of Muhammad Riza in Ahwaz, for
example, would the women of Khorasan province[^5] have baked bread for
his soldiers? They would have prayed for their defeat! Now, however,
things have changed. Where in the world can you find a similar situation
where the people support their government, support their army as they
are doing here today? This has no equal; you cannot find its likes in
history.

From the small child who donates his ten tumans to the aged 80-year-old
who gives her few eggs to help the armed forces, these are very valuable
acts. Such values must be preserved, our country’s victory stems from
such values; the victory over hearts is much greater than the victory
over a country. (394)

6 December 1980 (15 Azar 1359 AHS)

The entire nation, not only the young people and those at the war
fronts, but even the aged men and women and the very young girls, all
are active in the struggles and the war effort, all consider themselves
to be at the battle front. (395)

19 March 1981 (28 Isfand 1359 AHS)

When I see on the television those esteemed ladies who are busy helping
and supporting the armed forces, my heart is filled with admiration for
them such that no one else can inspire. The things they do, they do
without expecting anything in return, they are not seeking a post or
something from the people in return. They are the unknown soldiers who
are busy performing their *jihad* on the different fronts.

If we have gained nothing else from this Islamic Republic, this active
involvement of all segments of the population in the country’s affairs,
their supervision of these affairs, is in itself a miracle that I don’t
believe has occurred anywhere else. And this is a gift from God, the
hands of man are not involved here, God, the Blessed and Exalted, has
bestowed this upon us. We must cherish this gift.

Let us imitate these ladies and children who are working behind the
lines, and those who have remained in these ruined and half-ruined
cities. We must learn Islamic ethics, faith and turning to God from
them. (396)

19 March 1981 (28 Isfand 1359 AHS)

Perhaps throughout the whole of history you cannot find anything quite
like it. Small children, young adults, old women, young brides and
bridegrooms, all take part in the war effort together. The battlefield
here is one on which the entire nation is present. (397)

5 April 1981 (16 Farvardin 1360 AHS)

What was more significant than anything else in Iran was the change,
which took place in the Iranian women. The ladies of Iran have played a
greater role in this movement and this revolution than the men, and
today as they pursue their activities behind the front lines, their role
is greater still. Through their educational pursuits, whether in the
form of educating their own children or teaching in classrooms or other
places, they still play a great role in this revolution.

Women have a special kind of compassion and benevolence in their natures
which men lack and which pushes them to strive harder than the men
behind the front lines. It is this compassion, which has led them to
make very useful and valuable contributions to the war effort and to
continue to do so. (398)

23 May 1981 (2 Khurdad 1360 AHS)

However, God the Blessed and Exalted bestowed His favour on this nation
and granted our country this victory. I am hopeful that through the
dedication and commitment of the ladies, support for this nation and
Islam will become stronger in the future, and through the efforts of you
esteemed women, young people will emerge who will help bring victory at
the warfront and will work behind the lines to develop and improve the
country. (399)

23 May 1981 (2 Khurdad 1360 AHS)

All the Muslim people of Iran support the army. As you fight at the
fronts, they help behind the lines. No one forces them to do so; they do
so willingly. Small children come forward and give their savings for
you; a 70-year-old lady comes and gives the gold she has had for years
to help you. (400)

14 June 1981 (24 Khurdad 1360 AHS)

Today the people’s co-operation and help is unprecedented. Every day we
see women giving their life savings, their pieces of gold, for God and
the war effort. (401)

25 May 1982 (4 Khurdad 1361 AHS)

Greetings to you lion-hearted men and women who through your
mobilisation, financial help and co-operation in other areas, whether at
the front line or behind the lines, encourage our brave fighters and
reinforce these warriors, and who are instrumental in uncovering and
neutralising the plots of our enemies. (402)

4 June 1982 (14 Khurdad 1361 AHS)

We are indeed indebted to the kindness of these generous masses who give
all they have and expect nothing in return. From those old ladies who
give for Islam what it has taken them a lifetime to collect, to those
who break open their moneyboxes and donate the contents. I can find no
words to adequately describe this nation; I cannot praise them enough. I
leave it to God the Blessed and Exalted to bestow His special favour
upon them. May God protect you all and keep you steadfast in these
bastions. (403)

17 October 1982 (25 Mehr 1361 AHS)

I must thank the people of Qum, the great ladies of Qum, who, at a time
when we are forced to confront the superpowers and other corrupt powers
who are attacking Iran on all sides, are active behind the lines just as
the warriors are in the front lines. You are active on two fronts, on
one you are fashioning yourselves and your young ones, and on the other
you are supporting those at the war fronts. What you are doing is worthy
of thanks; it is very valuable and carries much weight before God the
Blessed and Exalted. (404)

13 March 1983 (22 Isfand 1361 AHS)

These people in the streets and bazaars, these people in the provincial
towns, cities and villages, they are the nation; they are the ones
helping the war effort, helping behind the lines. It is their women,
their children, all of them together who are busy rendering a service.
They are not tired. What is there to be tired of? Should they turn away
from Islam?! (405)

17 August 1983 (26 Murdad 1362 AHS)

If it were not for your efforts, along with those of your noble brothers
and sisters at the war fronts and behind the front lines who through
their particular form of sincere devotion attracted Almighty God’s
special favour, which power and which weapon of war could save the
Islamic Republic and your beloved country from this raging tidal wave
which the East and West, hand in glove with its satellites, created in
the hope of submerging it? (406)

7 February 1985 (18 Bahman 1363 AHS)

While acknowledging my own weaknesses and failures, I should like to
express my gratitude and appreciation to the dear warriors who through
their valour and martyrdom-seeking spirit defended their Islamic
homeland, and with their pure blood have lit up the path to freedom for
all the captive nations. Also to the honourable mothers, fathers,
sisters, brothers and spouses on the home front who have risen up in
support of the dear combatants, sparing no effort in the sacred defence
of Islam and their Islamic country. Indeed, I thank the entire nation of
great and committed people who form an active presence on all scenes.
(407)

1 September 1985 (10 Shahrivar 1364 AHS)

You ladies should bear in mind that just as it is necessary for the men
at the fronts to push forward and spearhead the battle, so too it is
necessary for you to help on the home front. (408)

2 March 1986 (11 Isfand 1364 AHS)

A very significant sum of money donated by the esteemed Iraqi ladies has
been received. May God assist them further in their service to Islam and
to the dear combatants who are sacrificing their lives to eliminate the
wickedness of the powers and their vile dependants. I ask Almighty God
to grant health and happiness to all. (409)

19 December 1987 (28 Azar 1366 AHS)

[^1]: - Refer to footnote 53.

[^2]: - Akhund: a word of uncertain etymology that originally denoted a
scholar of unusual attainment, but was later applied to lesser-ranking
scholars, and then acquired a pejorative connotation, particularly in
secularist usage.

[^3]: - This refers to the bomb that went off during the Friday Prayer
ceremony in Tehran on 18 February 1985 (29 Bahman 1363 AHS).

[^4]: - The Ba’athist regime in Iraq.

[^5]: - In the northeast of Iran.


