The crimes perpetrated against women and the plots devised against them by imperialism and the Pahlavi regime
=============================================================================================================

Loss of self-esteem and Westernisation
--------------------------------------

**Loss of self-esteem and Westernisation**

They disseminated propaganda with the aim of making you ladies lose your
self-esteem and of Westernising you. Beauty products had to come from
the West, the latest fashions had to be brought in from the West, and
you had to change every day in keeping with the changes in fashion.
Everything of yours came from the West. This is what they propagated and
everyone fell into this habit (of copying the West).

If word arrived that in England, for example, such and such was the
fashion, and then all previous models would have to be discarded in
favour of the new one. When they were designing a dress for Farah, for
her coronation I think it was, the designers flew back and forth many
times at immense cost all for the sake of one dress! What is amusing
then is that according to the newspapers, she used to say ‘our children
share their clothes, the younger wearing the elder’s hand-me-downs’!!

This said by someone who sends her designers abroad three times simply
to get the design right, and spends I don’t know how much, 150,000
tumans or so, on the design of just one dress! What was their aim behind
all this? They simply wanted to shut your eyes (to other things). (410)

3 May 1979 (12 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

They (the Pahlavis) completely did away with promoting human values in
Iran, replacing them instead with values from the West. And it wasn’t
the good Western values they proceeded to spread among us, rather the
corrupt ones. It was perhaps during the period of the son (Muhammad
Riza) that most of our spiritual values were destroyed. But in his time
(the time of the father, Riza Shah), one could say the oppression was
more noticeable. They tormented the women more then, as indeed they did
all the people. (411)

2 July 1979 (11 Tir 1358 AHS)

I can say that during the reigns of this father and son, our ladies
suffered more than any other segment of society. Perhaps most of you
cannot remember what they did to the ladies in the time of Riza Shah,
what calamities they created on the plea of wanting to make Iran like
Europe, of wanting to modernise Iran and bring half of its population
into society. You have no idea what they did to the ladies. (412)

2 July 1979 (11 Tir 1358 AHS)

As long as these ladies (I am not referring to you ladies, you are of
the people, I mean the other ladies) continue to direct their attention
to such things as fashion that must come from the West - the latest mode
there having to be copied here - as long as they keep imitating the
West, they will not enjoy any self-esteem nor be independent. If you
want to be independent, if you want to be seen as, or rather if you want
to be a truly independent nation, you must stop imitating the West.
Don’t even hope for independence before you can do this. (413)

8 September 1979 (17 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

All the things they used to pervert our youth were gifts from the West.
Their plan was to devise the means to pervert both our men and our
women, to corrupt them and thus prevent them from their human
development. (414)

13 September 1979 (22 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

Those who want to see women as playthings in the hands of dissolute men
are traitors. Women should not be tricked, they shouldn’t imagine their
station in life calls for them to come out into the streets dressed up
and made up, with no veil and scantily dressed. This is not the role of
women; this is the role of a doll. (415)

1 February 1980 (12 Bahman 1358 AHS)

For during this past half-century of blackness and bondage, this
opprobrious Pahlavi era, the poisonous pens of the misguided and the
words of benighted speakers sought to give women the status of a
commodity, and those women who were vulnerable were drawn to centres
that the pen is ashamed to mention.

Anyone wishing to know something of these crimes can refer to the
newspapers and magazines of the Riza Khan era, to the poems of the
blackguards and scoundrels of that period, that corrupt period from the
compulsory unveiling of women onwards. One can find out about the social
gatherings of those days and the centres of corruption that existed.

Shame on those people. May the pens of such intellectuals be broken. Do
not think that the crimes perpetrated on the plea of freedom for women
and freedom for men had nothing to do with the plans of the
world-plunderers and the international criminals. (416)

5 May 1980 (15 Urdibihisht 1359 AHS)

Another thing about which I have spoken on previous occasions is that
they instilled in us the idea that it was either the European culture or
nothing at all. If a young man or lady were to dress from head to toe in
European fashion, this showed that they were really somebody, whereas if
they were to dress like the other Muslims, they would be considered
extremely backward. European styles were the criteria, the type of
clothes one wore, these determined backwardness or progressiveness.
Everything we used had to be from the West. They turned us into a
country of consumers. (417)

8 March 1982 (17 Isfand 1360 AHS)

Those who can remember those days know only too well what this criminal
traitor did with the aid of his perfidious agents who had no homeland,
and what measures they took to lead the innocent women astray, to turn
them into consumers and drag them into corruption in order to expedite
the success of their plans.

It is enough for the present generation, who did not experience those
black days, to look at the books, poems, writings, plays, songs,
newspapers and magazines of that period and the centres of corruption,
the gambling houses, liquor stores and cinemas which are all vestiges of
those times. Alternatively, they can speak to those who lived through
that period and ask them what acts of oppression and betrayal were
carried out against women, this segment of the population that nurtures
human beings, in the guise of advancing their position. (418)

14 April 1982 (25 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

When you looked at society, at men and women both, you saw that it was
their appearance that determined their worth: what kind of clothes they
wore, how they were tailored, what kind of make-up they wore. Whoever
dressed better and with greater chic was held in higher esteem by the
people. A woman who copied the European style of dress and make-up
commanded more respect and admiration from most other women than those
who didn’t. The value system was based on the material. (419)

26 December 1982 (5 Dey 1361 AHS)

Throughout the not-too-distant past, especially in the recent centuries,
we were deprived of progress in any form. Perfidious statesmen, and the
Pahlavi family in particular, along with the dissemination of propaganda
discouraging domestic achievement and instilling in the people a lack of
self-worth and a feeling of self-contempt, worked together to stop us
doing anything that would ensure our development.

They imported goods of every sort, preoccupying the men and women,
particularly the young generation, with all kinds of make-up, styles and
luxury goods imported from abroad. They kept them busy with infantile
games, made them feel they had to compete with one another socially,
turned them into ardent consumers - which is a sorrowful tale in
itself - sought to corrupt the youth, who are the active members of a
society, by opening centres of fornication and by inflicting scores of
other similar adversities upon us, all with the sole intention of
keeping our country in a state of backwardness. (420)

5 June 1989 (15 Khurdad 1368 AHS)

Unveiling
---------

**Unveiling**

The clergy say this shameful unveiling (of women), this ‘movement of the
bayonet’,[^1] is detrimental to the country both in a material and
spiritual sense and is prohibited by the laws of God and the Messenger.
The clergy say this basin-shaped cap,[^2] the cast-off of the
foreigners, brings shame to an Islamic country, is damaging to our
independence and is forbidden by God’s law.

*Kashf al-Asrar* p. 213.

Of course, they regard the civilisation and advancement of the country
as being dependent upon women’s going naked in the streets, or to quote
their own idiotic words, turning half the population into workers by
unveiling them (we know only too well what kind of work is involved
here). They will not agree to the country’s being administered
rationally and in accordance with God’s law.

*Kashf al-Asrar* p. 224.

A government which, contrary to the laws of the land and everything
considered just, appoints a group of predatory animals as police in
every town and city to fall upon chaste Muslim women, who have committed
no crime, and by force of the bayonet to tear their veils from their
heads and confiscate them, to kick these defenceless women causing some
of the pregnant ones amongst them to miscarry their innocent, unborn
babes, we call a tyrannical government, and say assisting or working
with it in any way is tantamount to blasphemy.

We say a dictatorial government is an oppressive one, and those who work
for it are tyrants and oppressors. If you have anything to say on this
matter do so, so that their infamy may be added to.

The oppressed masses of Iran today also abhor the agents of the
dictatorial regime of that day who so mistreated their innocent women
and children the way they did, and perpetrated such shameful injustices
against them. Indeed, whoever regards them as decent, honourable people
is himself devoid of honour and justice. Those newspapers that back the
oppressive actions of the runaway dictator, the most painful of which is
the unveiling of women, are actually aiding the savage principles of
dictatorship and should be burnt in public.

*Kashf al-Asrar* p. 239.

When men see that the police, instead of keeping the peace, use their
boots and bayonets to force their innocent women to remove their veils
or to establish brothels, and that they themselves are mistreated so
that the disgraceful basin cap (Pahlavi cap) can be imposed on them, do
you still expect them to accept taxes as the legitimate right of the
state?

*Kashf al-Asrar* p. 250.

These lascivious animals who, on the plea of wanting to develop the
country, engage in bacchanalian revelry with the young daughters of the
people, continue to persist with this heinous policy of unveiling -
which cast the modesty and correctness of our susceptible youth to the
winds and was one of Riza Khan’s biggest acts of treason against this
country - oblivious to the fact that very soon, if God wills, the
religious people will raise an iron fist and deliver them a blow such
that it will knock these feelings of lust right out of their foolish
heads.

*Kashf al-Asrar* p. 283.

So where is the prosperity and happiness that this country has been so
fortunate to have had so far? Yes, it amounts to nothing other than a
basin-shaped hat, the cast-off of others, the unveiling of women, which
committed modesty and chastity to the flames, and several boulevards for
which our resources of wealth and moral excellence were forfeited.

*Kashf al-Asrar* p. 292.

They forced the women to attend certain gatherings. They forced the men
to attend those corrupt gatherings they held with their wives and
daughters. The situation was the same in every city, even in Qum, the
spiritual centre of the country. (421)

2 December 1962 (11 Azar 1341 AHS)

Twenty-odd years have passed since the scandalous forced removal of the
Islamic veil took place. Check and see what you have done. You’ve put
women into the offices, and every office they’ve been put into has
become paralysed. (422)

2 December 1962 (11 Azar 1341 AHS)

Why are the events of the 7th January (17 Dey)[^3] freely celebrated?
These things create hatred. Don’t make the country’s king hated. We
advise you not to turn the 7th January into a day of celebration. We
believe this to be a heinous act. Protect this country. The events of
7th January do not signify progress. (423)

2 December 1962 (11 Azar 1341 AHS)

God only knows how this nation of Iran suffered when he forced the women
to remove their veils. The veil of humanity was rent asunder. God knows
which women he dishonoured in this way, which people he humiliated. He
forced the *\`ulama* at bayonet-point to attend celebratory parties with
their wives, which they did with heavy hearts and which ended with the
people crying.

Other people as well, different groups in turn, were invited and obliged
to attend parties with their wives. This was the freedom for women,
which Riza Shah enforced. He used bayonets and the police to compel the
respected people, the merchants and the \`*ulama*, to attend these
parties on the excuse that he himself had organised them. At some of
these celebrations - as the regime called them - the people cried so
much that those agents with a sense of shame regretted having forced
them to attend. (424)

9 January 1978 (19 Dey 1356 AHS)

Could any Muslim agree with this scandalous uncovering of women? The
women of Iran have themselves risen up against the Shah and given him a
punch in the mouth with the cry: “We don’t want to live this way! We
want to be free!” To which this good-for-nothing replies: “But you are
free! The only thing is that you cannot go to school wearing a chador or
head-covering!” You call this freedom? (425)

18 February 1978 (29 Bahman 1356 AHS)

Today is 7th January (17 Dey), I can remember, as perhaps this man (the
Shah) does, indeed anyone of our age may recall what wickedness this man
(Riza Shah) perpetrated around this time. Such pressure he put this
nation under, such repression; what disgraceful acts were carried out
against so many honourable women because of him; so many miscarriages
occurred around the time of 7th January.

Such acts of aggression this man's agents and executioners perpetrated
against the men, how outrageously they violated the rights of the women
and dragged them from their homes. These are the deeds your father
perpetrated; they are beyond description. His true character will be
evident in the next world; we could not understand him properly while he
was in this world, we could not understand what kind of an animal he
truly was. (426)

7 January 1979 (17 Dey 1357 AHS)

God only knows what this father and son[^4] have done to this country of
ours. Throughout its history Iran has not witnessed the likes of such
acts of treason. All the monarchs throughout the 2,500 years or more of
monarchical rule in Iran were traitors; even those who were reputed to
be good were traitors, yet their treachery did not reach the bounds
which that of these two did. Indeed, no one really knows to what bounds
Riza Shah and his son’s treachery did in fact reach, the extent of their
crimes was huge, but the extent of their treachery was even greater.

What scenes we witnessed during the reign of Riza Khan, a reign that
perhaps most of you cannot remember. In Qum and indeed in all the towns
and cities in accordance with the wishes of those who instructed him and
in the name of *kashf-i hijab*, he violated that which is inviolable in
Islam; he violated that which is sacrosanct to the believers and to our
respected women. What his agents did to our veiled ladies! How they
treated them! They tore off their chadors and scarves and confiscated
them. I myself witnessed these scenes, and you have witnessed what this
son did to this country on the plea of creating a ‘great civilisation’.
(427)

8 March 1979 (17 Isfand 1357 AHS)

You have no idea what they did to the ladies of Qum. There was a police
chief there, I don’t know if he’s still alive or not, who treated the
women very badly. One day, so it was said, he had a nosebleed, as he sat
there with blood dripping from his nose, his eyes fell on a lady wearing
a chador or a scarf. Paying no heed to his nosebleed, he jumped up and
attacked her. This is how they treated the women in those days, and in
this recent period you yourselves witnessed what they did to this
nation, what killings they perpetrated in all cities, what calamities
they brought about in Qum alone. (428)

28 March 1979 (8 Farvardin 1358 AHS)

News came from villages, towns and cities that could not be repeated.
Our ladies had information that blackened the face of history. You don’t
know what events took place here, in Qum, the spiritual centre. You have
no idea what a spectacle they created, how they brought the women out
and forced them to attend parties celebrating the unveiling. (429)

23 April 1979 (3 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

The goal was to pervert not to reform. The goal was to stop the country
from developing. Thus, from this we can deduce that the unveiling which
Riza Khan pursued in imitation of Turkey and the West and in accordance
with the mission with which he had been assigned was against our
country’s interests. (430)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

You must realise that all the inhabitants of our country were subjected
to pressure. During that period, when the former ruler (Riza Shah) took
steps to enforce the unveiling and drag the nation into depravation and
ruination, perhaps Qum, and Tehran too, suffered more as a consequence
than anywhere else. Pressure, however, was brought to bear on the people
everywhere. (431)

13 June 1979 (23 Khurdad 1358 AHS)

He did things that caused much opprobrium, like the unveiling. You have
no idea what a calamity the unveiling at that time was for the people;
you can’t imagine what his agents did to the people and the women
causing much public discontent. But their power was great and people had
no leadership, they couldn’t do anything in the face of such power; the
grudges, however, were many. (432)

27 May 1979 (6 Khurdad 1358 AHS)

You may not remember most of what went on, but I can remember what they
did at the time of Riza Khan in the name of uniformity of dress and
unveiling, how the taboos of this country were torn apart, how they
bullied and how miscarriages occurred as a result of their attacking the
women in order to rend their chadors from their heads. (433)

5 November 1979 (14 Aban 1358 AHS)

In the final years of my period in Qum, perhaps it was in my last year
there just before the uprising of the 15th Khurdad,[^5] I heard that the
government was planning for some women to gather at the tomb of Riza
Shah and commemorate the unveiling of women.[^6] Some government
officials in Qum came to see me and I told them each to inform their
ministries that were this plan to be carried out, I would call on the
nation to hold a day of national mourning for those killed in the
massacre perpetrated by the regime at the Gauhar Shad mosque.[^7]

They reported what I’d said to them and subsequently the government
changed its plans. Be that as it may, the circumstances that the regime
had created were in direct contradiction to what the nation had to do.
(434)

10 September 1980 (19 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

The goal behind the unveiling affair was not, as they purported, to
bring the women, say ten million women, into society and get them
involved in social affairs. Rather it was an order that they had
received from abroad and which they carried out with the intention of
leading us into captivity.

Perhaps none of you can remember the affair, you may have been too small
at that time, but the bitter taste of the unveiling, which later Riza
Khan’s son called creating ‘free men and free women’ remains in my
mouth. You don’t know what they did to the esteemed ladies, indeed to
all segments of the society. Merchants, tradesmen and clergymen all were
forced to attend parties (celebrating the unveiling) along with their
wives; if they refused, they were beaten and subjected to verbal abuse.

Their aim was to use the women as a preoccupation for the youth so that
they would not get involved in fundamental issues. They employed
different methods to stop our youth and our academics from pondering
their own situation and that of their country, the unveiling, with the
disgraceful acts they perpetrated, being one of them. Respectable women
were mistreated, clergymen likewise, agents even approached the late Mr.
Kashani and told him he had to attend the parties too, but he sent them
away, protesting that they were only obeying orders, with a flea in
their ear.

In towns and villages everywhere throughout the country the story was
the same. The deeds they perpetrated in Qum were so opprobrious they
defy description. And this was all in order to bring the young people,
the gullible young people, men and women, together socially and
preoccupy them with one another, so that they became indifferent towards
the fundamental problems facing the country.

They created centres of fornication and other forms of corruption for
the same reason; from Tehran to Tajrish hundreds of these centres were
opened. So as you see they used the women, and consequently our youth,
our people, did not attend to the basic problems, as they should have,
neither the men nor the women. (435)

10 September 1980 (19 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

Through the ignominious scheme for the unveiling of women devised during
the reign of that dim-witted thug Riza Khan, they conspired to change
this beloved segment of the population whose role it is to develop
society, into one that would corrupt society. And their plan was not
aimed only at you ladies. It also sought to corrupt the young men too by
luring them into centres of corruption, and to train them in such a way
that were their country to fall into the hands of others they would
remain indifferent or even assist in its capitulation. (436)

16 March 1981 (25 Isfand 1359 AHS)

Those of you who say the Riza Shah period was better than the
present,[^8] what was life like for you at that time? Not only you, but
our late Shaykh[^9] too, may God’s blessings be upon him, what was his
situation at that time? The late Shaykh \`Abdulkarim Ha’iri wrote a
letter to Riza Shah about one affair, which may have been the unveiling,
but he didn’t receive a reply. However, his prime minister told him his
concerns had been reported to His Imperial Majesty to which the latter
had retorted: ‘He had better mind his own business.’ (437)

21 March 1982 (1 Farvardin 1361 AHS)

Perhaps I know better than most the problems, which beset this country
throughout the reigns of this father and son, for there are not many,
like me who have lived long enough to witness events in both eras. Most
of you ladies will not be able to remember the period of Riza Shah,
perhaps there are only a few among you who can recall those sad times.

During that era, on the plea of wanting to make one half of the
population of Iran (i.e. the women) active members of society, that
villainous scoundrel perpetrated the crime of the unveiling, and instead
of making half the population active, to a great extent he paralysed the
other half, that is the men. Those dolls he and his regime created and
put in all the offices, simply prevented others in the office from
working effectively, and those they put on the streets led our youth
astray and robbed them of their activeness. They claimed to want to
bring Eastern civilisation into Iran, but in the process, they destroyed
the great Islamic civilisation in the country. (438)

13 March 1982 (22 Isfand 1361 AHS)

The oppression suffered by the esteemed ladies of Iran under the
*taghuti* Pahlavi regime was not suffered by the men. Those ladies who
felt obliged to act in accordance with Islamic principles, who accepted
the precepts Islam laid down for them and dressed accordingly, suffered
in different ways under both Riza Shah and Muhammad Riza.

I can remember what happened to the ladies during the time of Riza Shah,
and it’s a good thing that you cannot, for what occurred was so
horrendous it defies description. One cannot begin to put into words the
oppression suffered by this class of the nation during the period of
that corrupt shah, nor determine the extent of the pressures they were
subjected to and the tragedies they were made to endure.

Under Muhammad Riza the situation changed and the depth of the crime
deepened. While under Riza Shah the women were bullied, pressurised,
beaten, arrested, had their chadors ripped off them and their hair
pulled, Muhammad Riza took a radical stand against women’s modesty,
indeed against everything in Iran, the women being just one aspect.

Each of them adopted his own special method, devised his own particular
plot to drag the women into corruption and rob our society of its
modesty and decency. Praise God though, the Iranian women resisted, and
apart from a group of their relatives or women infatuated with the West
or connected to the regime, the rest of the sisters resisted this
onslaught. (439)

8 April 1984 (19 Farvardin 1363 AHS)

The undertaking to remove the veil of modesty from the heads of virtuous
Muslim women was spurred by carnal desires and is now rampant in the
country at variance with religion and the laws, yet no one utters a word
against it. (440)

The year 1946

At that time the propaganda was such that women did not dare come out
dressed the way they should (according to Islamic precepts). Those who
wanted to keep their *hijab* either did not leave their homes at all or
they came out only when darkness had fallen, and crept surreptitiously
from one place to another. As we observe, everything else was the same.
(441)

27 August 1985 (5 Shahrivar 1364 AHS)

Women’s entry into rubber-stamp parliaments and other assemblies
----------------------------------------------------------------

**Women’s entry into rubber-stamp parliaments and other assemblies**

From the time this ignorant, despicable government[^10] came into power,
its target has been Islam. In the newspapers they wrote in big, bold
print that they had given women the right to participate in elections,
but this was just a devilish ruse to deflect public criticism from the
true intention, which was to eliminate Islam and the Qur’an from the
process.[^11]

Consequently, when we first met here to discuss the issue,[^12] our
minds were initially distracted by the matter of women’s participation.
Later, after studying the issue more closely, we realised that it was
not about women, this was only a minor point; it was about opposing
Islam. (442)

30 March 1963 (10 Farvardin 1342 AHS)

Imam’s telegram to the Shah
---------------------------

**Imam’s telegram to the Shah**

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

His Imperial Majesty,

Greetings and good wishes. According to that which has been published in
the newspapers, the government has not made Islamic qualifications a
prerequisite for candidates and voters in the elections for the
Provincial and County Councils, and has given women the right to vote.
This is of great concern to the religious authorities and other Muslims.

As Your Majesty knows, the well being of this country lies in the
preservation of Islamic decrees and in the people’s peace of mind.
Therefore, it is requested that you order for those issues, which
contravene the official religion of this country to be excluded from the
programmes of the government and political parties so that you will be
the recipient of the Muslim nation’s prayers. (443)

Ruhullah al-Musawi

9 October 1962 (17 Mehr 1341 AHS)

Telegram to Assadollah \`Alam
-----------------------------

**Telegram to Assadollah \`Alam**

In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful

Tehran - The Honourable Mr. Assadollah \`Alam, Prime Minister of Iran.

This long recess of the Parliament proves that the government is
considering procedures, which are against divine laws and clearly
contradict the constitutional law. Know for certain that any violation
of Islamic and constitutional laws, as well as those enacted by the
Consultative Assembly (Parliament), will make His Excellency and the
government seriously accountable before Almighty God, the Muslim nation
and the law.

The entry of women into Parliament, Provincial and County Councils and
Town Councils contravenes the indisputable laws of Islam,[^13] the
interpretation of which, according to the text of the Constitution, is
given over to the learned *\`ulama* and the *maraji’*, no one else
having the right to interfere.

The jurists of Islam and the Muslims’ *maraji’* have issued an edict
forbidding it. Such being the case, women’s franchise and right to be
elected at any level contravenes Article 2 of the Supplementary
Constitutional Law. Similarly, the National Consultative Assembly’s
Electoral Law ratified in Rabi’ II 1325 deprives women of the right to
vote or be voted for in Provincial and County Council and Town Council
elections. Refer to Articles 7 and 9 of the Provincial and County
Council Bill and Articles 15 and 17 of the Municipal Law. Thus, granting
the women such a right would be an infringement of the law.

Likewise the abrogation of the qualification that electors and
candidates must be Muslim, which is stipulated in the said law, and
replacing the policy of swearing the oath on the Holy Qur’an to one
which stipulates swearing on a ‘holy book’, are an infringement of the
said law, are dangerous for Islam and the independence of the country,
and have been carried out either unintentionally or, God forbid, with
malice aforethought.

Now that His Majesty has referred the learned *\`ulama*’s request to the
government, and has passed on the responsibility for dealing with this
matter to your government, it is expected that, in compliance with the
unassailable laws of Islam and the country, this matter be rectified as
soon as possible, and that you are careful to avoid a repetition of
anything similar.

If the honourable prime minister is uncertain about anything, he can do
us the honour of visiting us here in Qum so that any ambiguity can be
removed in his presence, and he can be notified of matters which are in
the interests of the country but which cannot be put down on paper.

Finally, I would like to remind you that the learned *\`ulama* of Iran
and the major centres of Shi\`ite learning, along with other Muslims,
will not remain silent on issues that contravene the inviolable
*shari’a* laws. Through the power and strength of Almighty God, issues
that contravene Islam will not become official. (444)

20 October 1962 (28 Mehr 1341 AHS)

The opinion of the maraji’-i taqlid and the Grand Ayatullahs of the Qum religious seminary on the decree concerning the Provincial and County Council elections which opposed both shari’a and statute law
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The opinion of the maraji’-i taqlid and the Grand Ayatullahs of the
Qum religious seminary on the decree concerning the Provincial and
County Council elections which opposed both shari’a and statute law.**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

There is no power and no strength save in God the Almighty

Because the government of Mr. \`Alam has, by means of legislation, with
surprising haste and without first giving due thought to the articles of
the constitutional law, granted women the right to vote and be voted for
in elections, it has become necessary to notify the Muslim nation of
Iran of a few points so that they know under what conditions and what
kind of governments they are living. Thus, we would like to draw the
public’s attention to the following:

1 - The Interior Minister in a proposal presented to the Prime Minister
wrote: “As you are well aware, in the preamble to the constitutional law
it clearly stipulates that each citizen of the country is entitled to
participate in the approval and supervision of public affairs, and
according to Article 2 of the constitutional law, the National
Consultative Assembly represents all the inhabitants of the country of
Iran who participate in the political and economic affairs of their
homeland.

Consequently, excluding the class of women from the voting process is
not only impermissible according to the constitutional law and its
supplement, but in view of the phrase ‘each citizen of the country’ in
the preamble to the law and the phrase ‘all the inhabitants of the
country’ mentioned in Article 2, it contravenes these as well.

The Cabinet has approved the deletion of paragraph one of Article 10 and
paragraph two of Article 13 of the National Consultative Assembly
Electoral Law, and also the qualification ‘male’ from Articles 6 and 9
of the Senate Electoral Law.”[^14]

Additionally, the Interior Ministry has been charged with the duty to
obtain authorisation for this legislation when Parliament convenes. Thus
it is necessary to explain the problems with the above argument.

a) - If the participation of women in elections can be reconciled with
the constitutional law, as the Interior Minister and the Cabinet too
apparently seem to think it can, then the approval of the Cabinet is
meaningless, for it is as if they were approving the participation of
men in the elections. If, on the other hand, it is correct to seek their
approval, then it is obvious that in the opinion of the Cabinet the
participation of women is at variance with the constitutional law.

b) - If the non-participation of women is in their eyes contrary to the
constitutional law, then the Cabinet’s act of commissioning the Interior
Minister to obtain authorisation for this legislation when the deputies
convene has no basis, and if it needs authorisation, then it is obvious
that the government views the participation of women as being contrary
to the constitutional law. Wouldn’t it have been better had the Cabinet
not employed a little thought and deliberation before introducing
legislation which gives rise to such clear contradictions?

2 - The preamble to the constitutional law does not constitute a part of
the law; it is simply the words of the shah of the time and does not
carry any legal weight. However, the Interior Minister, either for want
of sufficient deliberation or in order to deceive, has used it to draw
his conclusions. However, had he studied it to the end before doing so,
then it would have been made clear to him that according to that same
preamble, women do not have the right to participate in elections
because it is written therein: ‘Now that the National Consultative
Assembly, in conformity with our holy intentions, has convened.’ This
being the case, if the participation of women was envisaged, then how
could the Parliament open ‘in conformity with our holy intentions’
without their presence?

So it is obvious that women did not have the right, and this phrase
makes it clear that the first session of Parliament was held in
conformity with the Shah’s intentions, for women did not participate.

3 - From the previous explanation it is evident that the meaning of ‘all
the inhabitants of the country’ in Article 2, is not that which the
Cabinet understands it to be. Rather its meaning is that the
representative for Tehran represents the entire nation, as does the
representative for Qum.

They do not represent their own constituency as stipulated in Article 30
of the supplement to the constitutional law. The reason behind this
claim lies in the fact that more than ten classes of the population do
not have the right to vote even though they also form ‘all the
inhabitants of the country.’ Thus, they must accept that either
depriving these other groups of participation is unconstitutional or the
participation of women is.

4 - Supposing there is a mistake in the interpretation of this article,
according to Article 27 of the Supplementary Constitutional Law, the
explanation and interpretation of the law is one of the prerogatives of
the National Consultative Assembly, which the ministers do not enjoy.

5 - It is the opinion of the government that women and other excluded
groups have the constitutional right to participate in elections. Thus,
from the beginning of the constitutional period up to the present all
the parliaments have been formed in contravention of the constitutional
law and were illegal because women and more than ten other groups have,
according to the Electoral Law, not been allowed to participate, and
this contravenes the constitutional law.

In this case it becomes necessary to point out many irregularities,
which stem from that:

a) - All the laws effective in the country from the beginning of the
constitutional period to the present were null and void and must be
declared to be so.

b) - In the view of Mr. \`Alam’s government, the Constituent Assemblies
that have been convened were unconstitutional and were consequently null
and void. According to the law, to make such a claim is a crime and the
person making it must be indicted.

c) - The government of Mr. \`Alam is illegal, as were all the
governments formed since the beginning of the constitutional period up
to the present. Consequently, an illegal government has no right to
issue decrees or anything else, on the contrary its interference in the
country’s affairs and its handling of the treasury is a crime and is
subject to prosecution.

d) - According to the government of Mr. \`Alam, all the agreements
signed with foreign governments, among them oil agreements, are null and
void, and this must be declared to be so to the nation.

6 - The deletion of the first paragraph of Article 10 and paragraph 2 of
Article 13 of the National Consultative Assembly Electoral Law approved
in Shawwal 1329 AS, and the deletion of the qualification ‘male’ from
paragraphs 6 and 9 of the Senate Electoral Law approved on 14
Urdibihisht 1339 (4 May 1960), based on the preamble to the
constitutional law and Article 2 of this law, is illegal, and the
government has no right to do this because it itself has no basis in the
law. Additionally, the government does not have the right to annul
legislation approved by the Parliament, and according to the text of
Article 28 of the Supplementary Constitutional Law, the executive power
will always be separate and distinct from the legislative power.

This lists the illegal aspects of an illegal law. This law also
contravenes Article 2[^15] and Article 27 of the Supplementary
Constitutional Law.

Despite the pressures and difficulties that the government has imposed
and will further impose on them, and the insults that it will continue
to hurl against them, the clergy consider it their religious and moral
duty to point out to the Muslim governments and people both the
advantages and the harm that may ensue from these actions.

They consider it incumbent on them not to withhold their friendly advice
from the authorities and, in the face of this worrying suppression of
the press and police repression, whereby people are carried off to
prison and subjected to abuse and torture simply for printing or
circulating a leaflet containing advice and guidance, to let mankind
know what these actions portend for this poor, weak and hungry nation,
the signs of which are already becoming apparent one after the other.

The clergy observe that the government has made the official religion of
the country a plaything, and in meetings it allows it to be said that
steps have been taken to establish equal rights for men and women. Islam
has stipulated what action must be taken against anyone who, because of
his belief in equal rights for women, annuls the unequivocal and
mandatory laws of Islam concerning inheritance, divorce and the
suchlike.

The clergy observe that the pillars of this country’s economy are
crumbling; the market is on the verge of collapse as demonstrated by the
ever-increasing number of files on bad debts. Likewise, the country’s
agriculture is tottering on the brink of ruin because while each
province of this country should be able to meet the agricultural needs
of the whole land, bills for the import of wheat, or, as was said to be
the case recently, for flour, are approved every so often on the plea of
the possibility of a drought or some other excuse, thus making the land,
along with Iranian mills, idle.

Faced with this deplorable situation, the government, instead of trying
to find a solution, keeps itself and the people preoccupied with issues
such as women’s franchise, with granting rights to women and bringing
half the Iranian population into society and other such deceptions which
will bring nothing but misery, corruption and fornication.

The gentlemen don’t realise that Islam shows a special regard for women
in all aspects not found anywhere else. It has brought respect for their
social and moral standing which prevents the kind of social mixing of
the sexes that is incompatible with women’s modesty and virtue, and this
is not because Islam thinks, God forbid, that they are legally
incompetent or they are prisoners. Is entering these parliaments the
only sign of them not being incompetent?

If such is the case then it must be said that all those in the land and
naval forces, the officers and members of the security and police
forces, the immediate members of the royal family and those under 20
years of age are also among the legally incompetent and prisoners.

In their declarations of 2-3 months ago, the clergy foresaw this turn of
events you are witnessing today and predicted that similar incidents
would happen in the future, and this they stated unequivocally therein.

Now too today, they announce an even greater danger and express their
grave concern about what the consequences of these attacks on the
*shari’a* law and the Constitution may mean for the independence and
economy of this country, indeed for all aspects of this country’s life.

Consequently, the clergy hereby discharge the important duty they have
in this matter, of which the entire nation is aware, and state most
categorically that the government’s recently introduced legislation
concerning the participation of women in elections has no legal force
according to both the *shari’a* and the constitutional law.

Furthermore, despite suppression of the press, pressures brought to bear
by the police and the prevention of the printing and publication of
notices, such as this one, containing exhortations and facts, they will
take steps to publish such notices to the best of their ability so that
the governments cannot say we introduced legislation and the *\`ulama*
did not object. God willing, the clergy will take measures at the
appropriate time to stop this law being practised.

The nation of Iran also opposes this kind of legislation, as
demonstrated two-three months ago, when the pressure and intimidation
were a little less, in the telegrams and communications sent from all
around Iran in which they declared their acceptance of the Islamic
*\`ulama*’s authority and called for the annulment of the government’s
illegal legislation concerning the Provincial and County Council
Elections.

The government in turn acceded to the nation’s request and turned the
matter over to the Parliament. However, now that it has gained sway over
the nation through imprisonment, persecution and abuse of the clergymen
and pious elements in society, the government is, with blatant disregard
for the laws of Islam, the Constitution and electoral laws, adopting
measures the consequences of which are dangerous and alarming for Islam
and the Muslims.

May God awaken our governments from this sleep of ignorance and have
mercy on the Muslim nation and country.

O Lord we complain to Thee for the loss of our Prophet, peace and
blessings be upon him and his descendants, for the absence of our Imam,
the multitude of our enemies, the fewness of our number and the
domination of life and circumstances. Then greet Muhammad and his
family, assist us in all affairs by quick victory from Thy side, to
eradicate pain and ennui and to provide us with aid and power that Thou
cherish, for you are the Lord and Master of rights to unveil. We are
from God and to Him is our return.[^16]

Murtaza al-Husayni al-Langarudi, Ahmad al-Husayni al-Zanjani, Muhammad
Husayn Tabataba’i, Muhammad al-Musawi al-Yazdi, Muhammad Riza al-Musawi
al-Gulpaygani, Sayyid Kazim Shari’atmadari, Ruhullah al-Musawi
al-Khomeini, Hashim al-Amuli, Murtaza al-Ha’iri. (445)

March 1963 (Isfand 1341 AHS)

What is there for this "developed nation" to learn? What do you think?
What's your opinion? Do you really think that words are sufficient? Can
development result from sending a few women to the Majlis (Parliament)?
Have the male members of the Majlis actually accomplished anything for
you so far which leads you to believe that your women may now do so? We
believe that sending women to the Majlis will result in nothing but
immorality, and we believe that in ten, twenty or thirty years’ time you
will see that we were right. We in no way oppose women's progress, but
we do oppose fornication and other such sinful deeds. (446)

15 April 1964 (26 Farvardin 1343 AHS)

Those lords seated in their palaces speak of ‘the developed nation’;
does a ‘developed nation’ die of starvation?! \`Ali, upon whom be peace,
the emir of Islam, used to eat barley bread, but now they spend five
hundred thousand or one million tumans, if not more, for the receptions
arranged in honour of their masters; and all they ever talk about is the
‘development’ programme! They maintain that our country is on a par with
advanced countries, but how can the admission of a few women to
Parliament cause a country to be developed?[^17] You won't put the
country right by implementing Israel's policies. (447)

10 April 1964 (21 Farvardin 1343 AHS)

Claims made about equal rights for women
----------------------------------------

**Claims made about equal rights for women**

The ruling regime (of the Shah) in Iran infringed upon the holy Islamic
laws and is now set to violate the unequivocal and mandatory laws of the
Qur’an. The honour and dignity of the Muslims are about to be violated
and through legislation, which contravenes shari’a, law and the
Constitution, the tyrannical regime means to put chaste women to shame
and humiliate the Iranian nation.

The tyrannical regime intends to introduce legislation and implement
equal rights for men and women, in other words it means to trample
underfoot the incontrovertible and mandatory laws of Islam and the Most
Noble Qur’an. They want to force 18-year-old girls to do military
service and drag them to the barracks. At the point of the bayonet they
mean to force young, chaste Muslim girls into centres of fornication.
(448)

1962 (1341 AHS)

They yet again espoused equal rights for women in all aspects, which
means in effect trampling underfoot the unequivocal and mandatory laws
of Islam and disclaiming some clear Qur'anic ordinances. Afterwards,
they again saw that this was the cause of certain resentment, objection
and difficulties and so once more they denied the issue; it was
disclaimed by the minister in one place and by the commanding official
in another.[^18]

In the press it was quite explicitly reported that women's conscription
was in the process of being legislated. Nevertheless, when they saw that
the matter gave rise to opprobrium and that the people and even the
regime's henchmen were truly perturbed, again they said that it was a
lie.[^19] Indeed, they wanted to open a lawsuit because of it - a most
foolish, ludicrous intention.[^20] (449)

30 March 1962 (10 Farvardin 1341 AHS)

This year (1962) was a bad year because these events took place, and yet
it was a good year because you gentlemen, by confronting oppression gave
new life to Islam. Had you not shown resistance, God knows that by now
they would have fully executed all of their evil schemes. It was your
resistance which caused them to deny their former intentions, whereby
they said: "Of course divorce is a man's prerogative, when did we ever
say otherwise?"[^21]

Whilst one voice from the "People's Party"[^22] can be heard advocating
full and equal rights, another voice from the other Party asks: "When
did we say that divorce is a woman's prerogative?" Hence, on one
occasion they espouse equality in all spheres of life, but on another
they advocate something quite different. Again they speak in similar
terms with regard to inheritance and women's conscription, advocating
one thing one minute and denying it the next. As for women's
conscription, we read about it in your (the Shah's) very own newspapers,
which write whatever the security forces dictate to them. (450)

30 March 1962 (10 Farvardin 1341 AHS)

The clergy observe that the government has made the official religion of
the country a plaything, and in meetings it allows it to be said that
steps have been taken to establish equal rights for men and women. Islam
has stipulated what action must be taken against anyone who, because of
his belief in equal rights for women, annuls the unequivocal and
mandatory laws of Islam concerning inheritance, divorce and the
suchlike. (451)

March 1963 (Isfand 1341 AHS)

I must draw the honourable gentlemen’s attention to the past and present
actions of the tyrannical regime. In the past, it abused Islam and the
Qur’an, and tried to put the Qur’an in the same category as other
misguided books. Now, with the announcement of equal rights, a number of
the mandatory and unequivocal laws of Islam will be effaced. Recently,
the justice minister abolished the requirement that judges be Muslim and
male. (452)

April 1963 (Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

The tyrannical regime imagined that with this talk about equal rights it
could open the way for advancing its evil goal, which is to deliver the
final blow to Islam. But they didn’t count on the reaction they would
have to face. (453)

2 May 1963 (12 Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

It is necessary for me to point out to the respected gentlemen that
there is every indication the tyrannical regime intends to disregard
mandatory and unequivocal Islamic laws and perhaps, God forbid, take
even more drastic measures. Repeatedly in their meaningless, absurd
speeches they have spoken openly about equal rights for men and women in
all political and social aspects, which would involve changing some
ordinances of the Most Noble Qur’an.

Yet when they came up against strong objections from the Muslims, they
made excuses worse than the offence itself and hypocritically denied the
whole issue. They don’t realise that we know them only too well, and
have no confidence in what they say. (454)

2 May 1963 (12 Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

. . . One thing is certain - if, gentlemen, you take a look at the
Baha'i almanac of two or three years ago, you will read: "\`Abdul
Baha[^23] advocates equal rights for men and women"; and this is the
line that has been adopted by them. Then the ignorant Mr. Shah also
steps forward and talks of equal rights for men and women! You poor
wretch, they have purposely set you up so that they can say that you are
a Baha'i, and so that I in turn denounce you as an unbeliever and you
are finally got rid of. Don't continue in this way. (455)

3 June 1963 (13 Khurdad 1342 AHS)

We have evidence that suggests that the tyrannical regime, due to its
evil nature and to meet its own needs, is set on fundamentally
destroying Islam. The armed attacks on the centres of religious
jurisprudence; the aspersions cast on the good name of the *maraji’* and
the jurisprudents of Islam; the imprisonment and persecution of students
of the Islamic schools; the disrespect shown the Most Noble Qur’an and
other sacred things, all clearly point to this.

The announcement of equal rights for men and women in all aspects, the
annulment of the requirement that candidates and electors must be Muslim
and male, and the abolition of the same requirement for judges, are
other patent signs. (456)

6 May 1963 (16 Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

Beware the wrath of Almighty God. If because of your[^24] silence Islam
is dealt a blow, you will be responsible before God and the Muslim
nation. “Scholars must, through their knowledge, challenge a heresy,
otherwise God’s curse will be upon them.”[^25]

Express you loathing for this equal rights idea and your repugnance for
the participation of women in social affairs, which will give rise to
numerous acts of corruption. Assist the religion of God and remember,
“*If ye will aid (the cause of) God, He will aid you and plant your feet
firmly,*” (Qur’an 40:7).

Do not let the police and others intimidate you, for they, like you,
have a duty to perform and they are compelled to do what they do. If the
truth be told, many of them actually support you and despise the regime.
(457)

18 May 1963 (28 Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

Conscription of girls into the military
---------------------------------------

**Conscription of girls into the military**

Do not deceive our girls and carry them off to the barracks; do not
betray the honour of the Muslims. Will you once again deny this bitter
reality, now that it is being practised, as you did previously saying
that those who espouse such a notion should be prosecuted? Do you deny
the atrocities, which took place during the twenty-fifth anniversary
celebrations (for the Shah’s rule) and the thoroughly benighted things
you did therein? (458)

16 April 1967 (27 Farvardin 1346 AHS)

They invite and encourage girls to join the Literacy Corps and then
declare that first they have to do military service. When they see the
matter gives rise to opprobrium, they begin to deny it and in the press
it is announced that the bill for female conscription is in the process
of being prepared. Even then they continue to deny it and resort to
preposterous excuses. (459)

2 May 1963 (12 Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

Mixing of the sexes
-------------------

**Mixing of the sexes**

It is a good idea for you to compare the time the boys and girls of our
country spend learning matters of worship and religious culture with the
time they spend together in the cinemas, theatres, dance halls and
swimming pools, and on other such activities which have torn the veil of
modesty from them and smothered the spirit of piety and valour in them,
so that it is made clear just what you consider to be time wasted and
what you consider to be time well spent.

*Kashf al-Asrar*, p. 194

The result they obtained from the Sepah Salar School, which they made
the school of theology, was unfavourable. Students there who were to
qualify the following term as clergymen and to go out into society to
purify the morals and spirit of the future generations were forced into
a line to exercise and dance with half-naked girls. Now too, as long as
the schools are in the hands of the government and its agents, the same
sorry state of affairs will persist.

*Kashf al-Asrar*, p. 201

The clergy say that these coeducational schools, mixing young girls and
lustful young boys, destroy chastity and manliness. They are both a
material and spiritual detriment to the country and are forbidden
according to God’s command.

*Kashf al-Asrar*, p. 213

Islam shows a special regard for women in all aspects not found anywhere
else. It has brought respect for their social and moral standing which
prevents the kind of social mixing of the sexes that is incompatible
with women’s modesty and virtue, and this is not because Islam thinks,
God forbid, that they are legally incompetent or they are prisoners.
(460)

March 1963 (Isfand 1341 AHS)

If the religious leaders have influence, they will not permit the
Parliament to come to such a miserable state as this; they will not
permit the Parliament to be formed at bayonet-point, with the
ignominious results that we see.

If the religious leaders have influence, they will not permit girls and
boys to wrestle together, as recently happened in Shiraz.

If the religious leaders have influence, they will not permit people's
innocent daughters to be under the tutelage of young men at school; they
will not permit women to teach at boys' schools and men to teach at
girls' schools, with the resulting corruption.

If the religious leaders have influence, they will strike this
government in the mouth; they will strike this Parliament in the mouth
and chase these deputies out of both its houses! (461)

26 October 1964 (4 Aban 1343 AHS)

. . . Instead of thinking up ways to improve the economy, to prevent the
bankruptcy of the respected traders, to provide bread and water for the
destitute during the winter months ahead and to find employment for the
young graduates and others in society, the ruling clique is bent upon
destructive measures referred to above and upon such measures
contributing to moral corruption as the employment of women teachers for
boys’ high schools and men teachers for girls’ high schools, upon
insisting on employing women in government offices to spread corruption.
(462)

26 October 1964 (4 Aban 1343 AHS)

Islam prevents lustful behaviour. It will not tolerate men and women
going swimming together half-naked in the sea. During the period of the
*taghut*, such things occurred and the women would then go into the
towns dressed in their bathing costumes. Today, if they did such a
thing, the people would skin them alive. The people are Muslim, they
won’t allow men and women to frolic in the sea together the way they
used to.

This is their idea of civilisation. This is the kind of civilisation
they want, the kind of freedom. They want the Western form of freedom,
which allows men and women to go swimming together in the sea
half-naked.

This is the kind of civilisation that those gentlemen want. This is the
kind of civilisation that was imposed on our country under the former
regime, whereby men and women could swim together in the sea and the
women could enter the seaside resorts with hardly any clothes on, and
the people would not dare say a word.

We know what to do with them today should they try to do such a thing.
Indeed the government has taken measures to prevent it. According to the
Interior Minister, a stop has been put to such behaviour, and if the
government does not stop it, the people will.

Do you really think the people of Mazandaran or Rasht will allow a
repeat of such behaviour on their beaches today? Are the people of
Bandar Pahlavi so incapacitated that they would allow men and women to
go into the sea and carry on as they did at that time? Do you really
think the people will let them do such things?

This is the kind of civilisation and freedom that they want. They want
to be free to gamble, they want to see men and women frolicking together
half-naked and doing other things together. (463)

28 June 1979 (7 Tir 1358 AHS)

Once again those venal writers are at work, their pens hired to lead our
youth astray. Some of the newspapers have even turned to this problem of
the beaches and the shameful activities, which normally go on there,
saying to stop them, would be reactionary.

Nowadays it seems civilisation consists of nothing other than men and
women frolicking about together in the sea, and anything short of this
is reactionism. Civilisation, it seems, entails the youth spending
nearly all their time at the cinema, for it to take over their lives,
all their ideals and desires to be found therein. (464)

21 July 1979 (30 Tir 1358 AHS)

In the summer they would get the resorts by the seas and lakes ready to
attract the young. Men and women would mix together freely there, making
use of the facilities, which were available free of charge, and doing
whatever they wanted. This wasn’t something that developed naturally; it
was all part of a special plan, a plot devised to stunt the natural and
human development of the young people by keeping them busy with such
pursuits. (465)

21 July 1979 (30 Tir 1358 AHS)

One of the things they encouraged at the seaside was the mixing of the
sexes. They didn’t do this out of wanting our youth to enjoy themselves;
rather their aim was to drag them into corruption. (466)

21 July 1979 (30 Tir 1358 AHS)

. . . The mixing of the sexes at the seaside was one such plan. The
people must try hard to stop it themselves. The police and government
must prevent it. Let the radio be used to propagate against it and to
advise the people of its pernicious and corrupting nature. (467)

21 July 1979 (30 Tir 1358 AHS)

A man (I don’t know who) at the seaside was quoted in a magazine as
saying that segregating men and women was a disgrace, that civilisation
meant boys and girls playing together in the sea!! Is this what
civilisation is?! (468)

22 July 1979 (31 Tir 1358 AHS)

These *akhunds*[^26] won’t let men and women frolic about together in
the sea. These *akhunds* won’t let these young people of ours be free to
frequent bars, casinos and houses of ill repute. (469)

8 September 1979 (17 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

The pretence of women’s freedom during the regime of the taghut
---------------------------------------------------------------

**The pretence of women’s freedom during the regime of the taghut**

The tyrannical regime, which grants freedom to no one in this country
and which for years has deprived the nation of freedom in order to
advance its aims, thought that on the plea of granting women freedom, it
could deceive the Muslim nation and implement Israel’s malicious goals.
Oh Muslim nation! I have repeatedly warned you of the danger, and do so
again. (470)

2 May 1963 (12 Urdibihisht 1342 AHS)

It’s all too easy to talk about ‘men’s freedom’ and ‘women’s freedom’,
but will it be achieved by mere words? And anyway, do men themselves
really enjoy ‘freedom’ in this country that you now want to offer
‘freedom’ to women? Exactly what is it men are free to do? (471)

15 May 1964 (25 Urdibihisht 1343 AHS)

To speak of freedom for women in a country whose people in these past 50
years of despotic Pahlavi rule have not had even a whiff of freedom, is
both ludicrous and deluding. (472)

22 January 1978 (2 Bahman 1356 AHS)

It is the Shah’s regime, which by immersing the women in immoral issues
actually strives to prevent their freedom; Islam is strongly opposed to
this. This regime has trampled on the freedom of women and destroyed it,
just as it has that of the men. Like men, women too have filled Iranian
jails. It is this corruption, which threatens and endangers their
freedom, and we want to free them from this. (473)

6 May 1978 (16 Urdibihisht 1357 AHS)

Unfortunately, women have suffered from victimisation in the past,
notably in two periods. The first was during the Age of Ignorance, the
period before the advent of Islam. During this time, women were
oppressed; they were treated like animals, even worse than animals. Then
Islam came and bestowed its blessings on mankind, it dragged women out
of that state of oppression, it pulled her from that slough of
ignorance.

The second period when women have been oppressed occurred in our Iran,
during the reigns of the former Shah (Riza Khan) and his son (Muhammad
Riza). In the name of wanting to liberate women, they oppressed the
women; they committed outrages against them. They dragged them down from
that position of honour and esteem that they occupied, from that
spiritual position that they enjoyed, making them instead mere objects.

In the name of freedom, freedom for women and freedom for men, they
deprived men and women of their freedom. They corrupted our women and
our youth. The Shah (Muhammad Riza) believed women should be ‘ravishing
and beguiling’ as he put it. Of course it was because he had allowed the
animal aspect of his nature, the base animal aspect with its concern for
the physical, for the material, to overcome him that he viewed women as
such.

Accordingly, he pulled women down from their position as human beings to
the level of an animal, and on the plea of wanting to give women status,
he dragged her down from the status she had to a lower one. He turned
women into dolls, whereas women are human beings, great human beings.
(474)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

The Shah speaks of freedom for women, freedom for which women? Today in
Iran women of character, who are seeking their basic human rights and
who make up the majority of women in Iran, are all opposed to the Shah
and are demanding his overthrow.

All of them know that freedom for women in the Shah’s logic means
dragging them down from their status as human beings and treating them
as nothing better than objects. Freedom for women in the Shah’s way of
reasoning means filling the prisons with Iranian women who are not
prepared to yield to the moral degradations he promotes. (475)

15 December 1978 (24 Azar 1357 AHS)

During their reigns, Riza Khan and Muhammad Riza Khan vulgarised women,
dragging them down from that status they once enjoyed, doing the same to
the men and youth too. Numerous centres of corruption were created for
our youth. In the name of freedom, in the name of progress, in the name
of civilisation, they dragged our youth into corruption. In the name of
freedom, they deprived us of all freedoms.

Those who lived through the Riza Khan period understand perfectly well
what I am talking about, they witnessed for themselves what we were put
through and what our respected women were put through, just as those who
lived through Muhammad Riza’s era saw what went on then. With deceptive
words and bombastic terms, they set our country on a course for
destruction. And worse than everything else, much worse, was the fact
that they corrupted our youth.

Our human resources were put in a state of backwardness because of them.
Women during the time of Riza Shah and Muhammad Riza Pahlavi were
oppressed creatures and did not know it. It is doubtful that women were
subjected to as much oppression during the Age of Ignorance as they were
during the reigns of these two men, or as much degradation.

In both periods (the Age of Ignorance and under the Pahlavis), women
were oppressed. In the first, Islam came and rescued them from their
bondage, and in this period too I hope that Islam will be able to take
their hands and save them from the maelstrom of abjectness and
oppression. (476)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

. . . The Pahlavis had no intention of granting the ladies freedom,
because during their rule the men weren’t given it either. Neither the
ladies nor the men were free. They saw freedom to lie in allowing other
things, all of which were corrupt. (477)

2 July 1979 (11 Tir 1358 AHS)

They claimed to have freed half the population, but on the plea of doing
this, they deprived the entire population of freedom. (478)

3 July 1979 (12 Tir 1358 AHS)

With deceptive words and bombastic terms, in the name of this and that,
they destroyed the power of our youth. How they harped on about wanting
‘free men and free women’, how ‘everyone in the country is now free, the
peasants are no more, now they are farmers’. (479)

5 July 1979 (14 Tir 1358 AHS)

It is that kind of freedom that you want. The kind through which you can
nurture indifference in our youth so that they have no interest in what
goes on. The big powers can come and take all our resources and they are
too preoccupied with enjoying themselves to care. Places were opened to
provide for their enjoyment, bars and cinemas were opened and young men
and women were encouraged to go there together. Thus, in the name of
freedom, they dragged both into corruption. Our country was plundered,
but those who were free, those who acted with licence, were indifferent.
(480)

24 August 1979 (2 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

They purported that they had created free men and free women, and, for
example, that they had freed some fifteen million women. But what kind
of freedom was it that they gave? Were the men free that they were going
to make the women free? What kind of freedom did these ‘free men’ and
‘free women’ enjoy? What kind of freedom did any of us enjoy?

Yes, in some areas there was freedom, in frequenting the centres of
corruption, which the regime encouraged. Those women and young men who
were in the same class as them were free in those centres to do whatever
they wanted. On these beaches, you all know what went on. The people
there acted with licence.

This is what being a ‘free woman’ and a ‘free man’ meant. Otherwise,
which section of the press was free at that time to speak out? Which one
of you was free to utter a word? That which they wanted to be free was
corruption and that which brought corruption, affliction and that which
brought affliction. During these few years they destroyed our youth.
(481)

16 September 1979 (25 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

When you look at it, you see that the women realised what kind of
circumstances the previous regime wanted to bring about for them in the
name of creating ‘free women and free men’, and that this talk of
freedom was just a sham, a deceptive ruse. During his (the Shah’s)
reign, nobody was free, neither men nor women, the press nor the radio.

True freedom did not exist, just plenty of talk and propaganda about it.
The kind of freedom they envisaged for our country - and today too some
of the writers are suggesting the same - was the kind that dragged our
young boys and girls into corruption, the kind that I call an ‘imported
freedom’, an ‘imperialist freedom’, a gift the imperialists give to
countries they want to make dependent. (482)

17 September 1979 (26 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

The clergy are not against progress, but they are against Muhammad
Riza’s kind of progress. They are against this civilisation, this
‘gateway to civilisation’, which destroyed everything, we had. They are
against this ‘free men and free women’ idea that he espoused, not
freedom per se. Freedom is one thing, but should it be of the
uncontrolled kind that causes harm? Does freedom mean allowing people to
do whatever they want, regardless of the consequences? (483)

17 September 1979 (26 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

The bit of freedom that existed in our country during these periods was
a pernicious, corrupting freedom. It was the freedom to drink alcohol,
the freedom to gamble, the freedom for men and women to frolic together
on the beaches, the freedom to frequent those centres of corruption. It
was in these things people were free; but they were not free to write a
word against them (the Shah and his regime) or in the interests of the
country.

They were not free to utter a word against him (the Shah). He was right
when he talked about ‘free men and free women’, but what was this
freedom they enjoyed? It was the kind they wanted, the kind I call an
‘imported freedom’, an ‘imperialist freedom’. It was all part of the
plan. (484)

18 September 1979 (27 Shahrivar 1358 AHS)

At the time of that regime which ranted on about ‘free men and free
women’, what activities did the women actually perform? All we saw them
do was a few of them get together and go, in that shameful state, to the
tomb of Riza Khan to thank him for having freed them. What freedom did
he give them? What did he do? They don’t think about the kind of freedom
they were granted, or to what extent these people really wanted the
women or the men to be free.

Yes, they wanted freedom; they wanted the kind that these people today
with pens in their hands who write against Islam and against the clergy
also want, and that is a freedom dictated by the West and aimed at
luring our youth into corruption.

They (these writers) want the men and women to be free, the women to be
free to attend gatherings as they used to, dressed the way the used to
and acting the way they used to before the lecherous eyes of men. They
want this kind of corruption that drags both our sisters into corruption
and our men and youth.

They want all kinds of obscenities to be free. During this ‘free women’
period, which woman could speak out on current issues of concern? Which
man could write a word about the sufferings endured by our nation at the
hands of foreign and domestic elements? Which section of our press was
free? In what way were the radio and television free?

In what way were the people, the youth, those at the universities and
the seminaries free? Over these past 50 years that I can vouch for,
having witnessed what went on, society has been deprived of a true,
beneficial freedom. We had nothing. The women weren’t free to get
involved in the affairs of society or to speak about the nation’s
problems. They weren’t free to say a word about the problems besetting
the nation because of the East and West, or the difficulties the nation
had to suffer because of the puppet governments. (485)

30 September 1979 (8 Mehr 1358 AHS)

. . . So we have two types of freedom, one is the beneficial kind, which
did not exist during the period of these two criminals,[^27] indeed
which was forbidden during their time. The kind of freedom they wanted
to see prevalent was that which allowed women to go out into the streets
dressed up to kill and, God forbid, behave however they liked with young
men. This was the type of freedom they implemented, and it is this type
that is desired by those today who don’t want Islam. (486)

30 September 1979 (8 Mehr 1358 AHS)

They limited freedom to one area and ranted on about ‘free men’ and
‘free women’, meaning that they were free to frequent any kind of centre
of corruption they pleased. On another front though there was
suppression. Those who wished to write anything concerning the interests
of the country or the interests of Islam were not free to do so, they
were suppressed. (487)

26 October 1979 (4 Aban 1358 AHS)

The women who demonstrated are the remnants of former problems, women
whom the Shah brought into the arena as “free women” and whom he led to
corruption. They prefer the former situation, which that corruption had
brought about, those freedoms that the former regime wanted: freedom for
the youth to do anything they wanted, to embrace vice and to act
indecently.

But they saw that Islam does not consent to indecency and to actions,
which drag the country into corruption and drive the nation into a state
of backwardness. It was these women who came out onto the streets, with
faces made up as everyone observed, and demonstrated. (488)

31 October 1979 (9 Aban 1358 AHS)

What a ballyhoo they made about this ‘free men’ and ‘free women’ idea.
What hype they and those parasites in the Imperial - I can’t call it the
National - Consultative Assembly and in the Senate made about it. What a
fuss the SAVAK[^28] agents and the Shah’s own agents made about the idea
that now our country is free, we are ‘free men and free women’.

And yet throughout the reigns of this father and son[^29] - and
especially this son who was a true heir to his father and who went even
further than he in his policies - throughout the incumbency of these two
criminals, you can see that freedom existed for no one. No one was free
to utter a word of truth.

Freedom existed in the sense that they (the Pahlavis) were free to
create whatever kind of corruption they liked in order to rein in the
power of our youth. They did not harm the country’s natural resources to
the same extent they did its human resources. They incapacitated people,
they destroyed (the power of) our youth. Our youth who were meant to
serve this country were lured into places which did nothing for them
only stupefy their minds so that they could be of no service.

All the centres of corruption were opened by them. They promoted them
with great fanfare over their propaganda loudspeakers, aiding and
encouraging our young people to frequent them and thus have no function.
Their youth had to be interred there, the youth of our young people, it
was taken off them, they were paralysed. These respected sisters who
fell into their propaganda trap, who were prevented from performing
their human duty, became playthings in the hands of criminals.

This was deplored by self-respecting individuals, by those who had not
lost their human disposition. What they did to these respected ladies in
the name of freedom is a source of great sorrow that will remain with us
for all times. (489)

16 December 1979 (25 Azar 1358 AHS)

Complete texts of some speeches about the crimes perpetrated against women and the plots devised against them by imperialism and the Pahlavi regime
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Complete texts of some speeches about the crimes perpetrated against
women and the plots devised against them by imperialism and the Pahlavi
regime**

16 May 1979
-----------

**Imam Khomeini’s address to a group of ladies from Mashhad**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

First of all I must thank you respected ladies and apologise that you
have to sit under this blazing sun. Both when I was abroad and here at
home, I heard about the valuable activities carried out by the ladies of
Mashhad. I am proud of such ladies. As I see you are uncomfortable in
this heat, I will keep my address short.

I would like to turn to some of the actions carried out by governments
or holders of power and shed light on some points, which may be obscure.
Riza Shah came, carried out a coup d’état, overthrew the government of
Iran and put himself in power.[^30] After him Muhammad Riza took over.

They carried out policies some of which at first may have appeared
positive and beneficial to some naive people, and others in the name of
reform or civilisation the pernicious nature of which was only too clear
from the start. Such was the case with the programme for land reform.
Initially they created such ballyhoo for this land reform programme[^31]
saying things like ‘we want this and that for the farmers and the
peasant-landowner relationship no longer exists, all are farmers now.’

The newspapers wrote about it, the radios spoke about it, and it was
talked about in speeches, all with a view to deceiving the people. But
we knew what was really going on, and now the nation too has realised
that it had nothing to do with reforms, they didn’t want to free the
peasants, they didn’t want them and the indigent to prosper, rather the
aim was to make Iran a market for America and ruin her agrarian economy
so that she would depend on America for everything; a dependence which
still persists today. They talked about land reforms but we knew it was
really all about weakening the country and dragging it into decay.

Another example is this ‘freedom for the classes, for women and men’,
this ‘free men and free women’ business. We all know that during the
time of this father and son a repression existed that was perhaps
unprecedented throughout the whole of the history of Iran. Neither men
nor women were free. Everyone was subjected to suppression; everyone
suffered.

One day celebrations were held marking the abrogation of capitulation
(at the time of Riza Khan), and in the newspapers and in speeches given
it was said we could do this because we were an advanced country, then
another it was reinstated and immunity given to the Americans. This was
in obedience to what the power wielders decided should be done. Whatever
the powerful class said should be done, others created a real fuss over.
In the puppet parliaments noisy approval was made and the policies
praised to the skies.

Two policies that were implemented at the time of Riza Khan in imitation
of Ataturk[^32] were uniformity of dress and the unveiling of women.
Both were trumpeted over their (the regime’s) propaganda loudspeakers
and praised highly.

What accusations they levelled against those *akhunds* who opposed these
policies, calling them liars and composing defamatory poems, which some
of you may have heard but which cannot be repeated. Then we all realised
that this unveiling policy was not one meant to do the women a service,
rather by putting them under pressure and exerting force, they tried to
destroy this segment of the population too.

They strove to stop them from performing that glorious deed which is
theirs to perform, from executing those services that this segment
wishes to render the nation, those valuable services which our ladies
are entrusted to undertake, and prevent them from performing that most
fundamental of services which it is their duty to render, that is
training their children in whose hands the destiny of the country lies.

They feared lest in their laps children were brought up to be pious,
Islamic and with a love for their homeland, and that even when these
children entered the school system, they still would not be able to
change them, not even with all the propaganda they disseminated at the
schools through the teachers and propagators they had installed there.
Thus, their plan was to turn these ladies away from that great,
fundamental role they have and pretend that in so doing they had freed
half the population of Iran.

You saw what kind of freedom they gave the women (during the reign of
Riza Khan), or perhaps most of you cannot recall that period, but I
witnessed for myself what they did with the respected ladies of Iran,
what pressures they subjected them to. I saw the bayonets they used to
carry out this improper act (the unveiling).

Then later, they decided to get results by taking from women their
fundamental occupation, that of rearing their children, the only one in
which they act according to their instincts. Of course, there is no
objection to women taking up employment, sound employment, but we do not
want a repeat of the way it was during the Pahlavi era. At that time,
they did not have employment in mind for women, rather their aim was to
degrade both men and women, pulling them down from that position they
occupy.

They did not want a natural growth for either sex. They did not want our
children to receive a sound upbringing, so they took steps to prevent
this from the very beginning by depriving many of the chance to be
raised in their mothers’ laps, which are centres for a child’s training.

Then later, at the primary schools, there too they misguided the
children and led them astray with their malicious propaganda and
misleading books. Even later still, at the universities, their agents
there did not let them develop properly, they did not allow training to
be given that would produce genuine scholars or individuals committed to
the welfare of the country and to Islam.

So from their policies, which we have seen were actually against our
nation and in conflict with the interests of our country, like this
capitulation affair, these land reforms and others, we realise that the
goal was to pervert, not to reform. The goal was to stop the country
from developing. Thus, from this we can deduce that the unveiling which
Riza Khan pursued in imitation of Turkey and the West and in accordance
with the mission with which he had been assigned was against our
country’s interests.

We saw that it was you who were active members of our society, who did
this movement a great service. It was you who dressed the way you are
here now, poured into the streets and helped our movement. If any of
those who were brought up with their (the Pahlavis’) form of training
took part, it was a group of them who were closer to you in their way of
thinking. Otherwise, those who were brought up with a Pahlavi mentality
had nothing to do with this affair at all.

Some of the men too played no role in this movement, but now they come
forward and want to reap the benefits. Now that this oppressed class,
this class that others deemed weak but who were, praise God, strong,
this class that they referred to as the third class whereas in fact they
are the first class and it is they themselves who are in the third or
rather the seventh class in hell, have worked for the country, have
smashed this great barrier, have opened the way, the gentlemen pour in
from America and Europe wanting to partake of the fruits of their
success. Some of the women too, who played no role in this affair, now
think they can join in the victory feast.

But you class of people, may God preserve you, may God grant you
happiness, you have no expectations. You continue to serve Islam as you
did then, expecting nothing in return. It is those who had nothing to do
with this affair, who did not make any sacrifices for the cause and lost
no one, who are now coming forward with their ridiculous expectations,
one wanting to become a minister, another a member of Parliament and
another something else.

They are just building castles in the air, they had better come down to
earth. What idle fancy it is they entertain thinking that now they can
come and reap the benefits for themselves after they sat comfortable at
home or abroad while others struggled.

This nation is indebted first and foremost to this group of women sat
here today, and the community they represent: the respected ladies of
Mashhad and the other ladies of Iran. Among the men, it is to these
workers, farmers, tradesmen, people from the universities and from our
deprived classes that the nation owes a debt, for they were the ones who
took our movement forward. Today, they do not aspire after the things
those who contributed nothing to this movement do.

The latter have come forward now wanting to become the president for
example or the prime minister. Those who were the mouthpieces of the
former regime now want to return and participate. Today, everyone has
become a revolutionary. Whoever comes to see me nowadays tells me: ‘I
was a combatant, I spent time in jail’ etc. I know they are lying to me,
but what can I say to them. You think I am unaware, but I know, I know
only too well that most of you were servants of the regime and it’s only
now that you’ve become ‘revolutionaries’.

No, you are not revolutionaries and will never be. At the first sign of
trouble or, God forbid, defeat, you are the ones who will rush out there
shouting long live so and so. Yes, we know what kind of people you are,
you should correct yourselves and be a little bit careful.

The government must do something for these workers who are of the weak
and oppressed class, this class that you consider to be lower than you
but who are in fact of a much higher station than you. You who have
money in banks at home and abroad, who own companies and have
businesses, what say do you have in the matter?

It was these people who have nothing who got involved in this affair.
One day the television showed these slum-dwellers of Tehran (at a
demonstration), when one of them was asked what he was doing there he
replied ‘every morning we go to the demonstrations with our children.’
It was these poor slum-dwellers who demonstrated and brought about this
victory, the governments should do something for them. You opportunists
who sat by and watched and who now come and try to take advantage of the
situation, you had better mind your own business.

May God preserve this class of people (the deprived).  
 May God keep you dear, respected ladies and grant you happiness. Please
give my greetings to all the ladies of Mashhad whom you represent.  
 I am the servant of you all.  
 Peace and blessings be upon you and also the mercy of God. (490)

16 May 1979 (26 Urdibihisht 1358 AHS)

30 September 1979
-----------------

**Imam’s address to a group of female teachers and students from
Mashhad, Amul and Abadan**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

I would like, first of all, to thank these young girls for their
recitation, and all the sisters who have come from different areas, from
Khorrasan, Amul and Abadan to be here today. I am, God willing, your
humble supplicant.

We should analyse this matter to see what kind of freedom it was the
former Shah had in mind - and what it is these people today who follow
the same path want - and what role women played during his time and
throughout other periods in our history. Those acquainted with the past
hundred years of Iran’s history know that in the most important
movements, which took place before the Pahlavi era, such as the Tobacco
Movement[^33] and the Constitutional Movement,[^34] women participated
shoulder-to-shoulder with the men.

Women played an active role in the society and involved themselves,
along with the men, in the political and social affairs of their country
and in the problems that beset it. Just as the men rose up against the
tobacco concession, which threatened to throw everything we had to the
wind, so too did the women. In the Constitutional Movement also, just as
the men were active, so too were the women. This was how it was before
the Pahlavi regime.

During the period of its decline, in the movement started by the
Muslims, by our nation, you all saw for yourselves that the women were
in the vanguard. Their activities in this regard were even more valuable
than those of the men, because when these sisters poured into the
streets and demonstrated before the tanks and cannons with clenched
fists, they doubled the resolve of the men.

When men see ladies coming and standing before tanks and cannons, it
spurs them to make more of an effort. As we ourselves saw, these sisters
played a very great role throughout this movement, and now that the
regime has gone, we see that they participate in all affairs, in the
campaign to reform and purge our establishments, in the crusade for
reconstruction (*Jihad-i Sazandeghi*), in all these affairs they
actively and freely participate.

Such was the situation before the Pahlavi era and such is the situation
now, the details of which you know and therefore no explanation is
needed. Now let’s take a look at the time of that regime which ranted on
about ‘free men and free women’, what activities did the women actually
perform? All we saw them do was a few of them get together and go, in
that shameful state, to the tomb of Riza Khan to thank him for having
freed them.

What freedom did he give them? What did he do? They don’t think about
the kind of freedom they were granted, or to what extent these people
really wanted the women or the men to be free. Yes, they wanted freedom;
they wanted the kind that these people today with pens in their hands
who write against Islam and against the clergy also want, and that is a
freedom dictated by the West and aimed at luring our youth into
corruption.

They (these writers) want the men and women to be free, the women to be
free to attend gatherings as they used to, dressed the way they used to
and acting the way they used to before the lecherous eyes of men. They
want this kind of corruption that drags both our sisters into corruption
and our men and youth. They want all kinds of obscenities to be free.

During this ‘free women’ period, which woman could speak out on current
issues of concern? Which man could write a word about the sufferings
endured by our nation at the hands of foreign and domestic elements?
Which section of our press was free? In what way were the radio and
television free? In what way were the people, the youth, those at the
universities and the seminaries free?

Over these past 50 years that I can vouch for, having witnessed what
went on, society has been deprived of a true, beneficial freedom. We had
nothing. The women weren’t free to get involved in the affairs of
society or to speak about the nation’s problems. They weren’t free to
say a word about the problems besetting the nation because of the East
and West, or the difficulties the nation had to suffer because of the
puppet governments.

The last one hundred years then can be divided into three periods. Some
events that occurred during these periods you witnessed for yourselves,
but all of them have been recorded in history. Let us take the period
from the beginning of these one hundred years covering the
constitutional period and up to the reign of Riza Khan as the first,
and, regardless of the fact that the government at that time was also
corrupt, let us look at the circumstances then and what freedom women
and men enjoyed.

Let us take another period as covering the era of the Pahlavi regime,
from the time Riza Khan enacted his coup d’etat to the time of its
dwindling power, and the third period as being from the fall of this
regime, or rather the time when it was facing defeat and had become
ineffective, to the present.

Let us examine these three periods and present our findings to those who
are still shedding tears over the loss of the Pahlavi regime, those who
would like to see its return or the installation of one similar and who
remonstrate against Islam and the Muslims in the name of freedom and
democracy. We will examine these three periods and see whether the
freedom the women and men enjoyed in the first and third periods was
true freedom, or whether they enjoyed it in this second period from the
time of Riza Khan’s coup d’etat to the decline in his son’s power.

It must be noted that the first period fell during the time of Qajar
rule, which was also not pleasing to Islam, however the Muslims were
much stronger then and the government did not have the same power and
hold over the clergy of Islam (it acquired in the Pahlavi era). It was
weak in the face of the clergy and the nation. It was only when Riza
Khan came along and was given the reins of power that the clergy were
suppressed along with the rest of the nation.

So if we assess the freedom the men and women have enjoyed in these
first and third periods, we see it was a freedom that was useful for
their country, for Islam, for the Muslims, for their nation. In both
periods they were free to play a role in social affairs, to serve the
country, to have a say in matters concerning the good of the country and
to criticise the government and public figures of the day, and they
availed themselves of this freedom and do so today, as you yourselves
can vouch.

Today, you are free to participate in social matters, in these
fundamental matters that are related to the interests of your own
country and your own nation. There are no restrictions, as you can see.
Give us one example when you have wanted to talk about a matter that is
in the interests of the country - and is not some kind of plot as has
sometimes been the case in the past - when you have wanted to take
action over something that is in your interests and the interests of the
country, and you have been stopped and the bayonets unsheathed against
you.

You can’t. In the first period too, the women played an active role in
dealing with any problem that arose, including the two I mentioned
above; that is the issue of the tobacco concession and in the
Constitutional Movement, which were the most important issues of that
time. They involved themselves in all the affairs of the day, they
played a leading role alongside the men, they spoke up on matters, which
concerned their country; they vociferated their views.[^35]

During this third period you yourselves were there on the scene playing
an active and effective role, so you yourselves can vouch for the fact
that nothing stopped you from gathering, from coming out amongst the
people and shouting out against the tyrannies perpetrated. It was
because of these activities of yours and this freedom, which you enjoyed
that this victory came about for our nation.

However, the freedom Riza Khan and, in particular, his son sought to
bring about, was not really freedom, it was more the corruption and
ruination of the nation. In this second period too you can divide
freedom into two kinds, one freedom of the press, including the radio
and television, and in general freedom to write or say anything in the
interests of the nation and the country.

All this at that time was subject to censorship, no one was free to do
such a thing because our problems came from the government itself and
its masters, and anything you wanted to say would have been first and
foremost about the actions of Riza Khan, about the treachery he
perpetrated and the crimes he committed, or about the perfidy of his
son. But you weren’t free at that time to utter one word about such
things.

You couldn’t criticise the police, the government or the army, our press
were not free to criticise such things. Our country was completely
denied a freedom that was beneficial to its interests. Pens were broken,
tongues silenced, no one had the right to say a word. Whatever appeared
in the press, whatever was broadcast over the radio and television,
whatever was written, had to be in praise of someone who had thrown
everything we had to the winds.

There was no true, sound freedom during this second period. Some
freedoms, however, did exist. They opened the doors of cinemas, and
these being in the state they were in those days corrupted those of our
youth who frequented them and stopped them completely from pondering
ways to help their country. The doors of casinos were opened too, to all
our young people, the doors of brothels likewise. It is said numerous
centres of corruption were operating from Tehran to Shemiran, too many
to be counted. These were what they made free, what they promoted even.
They gave us the kind of freedom, which is detrimental to the country
and the people.

Following this second period, we returned to a period similar to the
first only much better. The first period occurred at the time of the
Qajar dynasty whose kings too were wicked and depraved, but not as bad
as the Pahlavis, this father and son broke the record for corruption and
evil. This freedom that our nation now enjoys, which the women, men,
writers and so on, now enjoy, this freedom is in all affairs, which are
beneficial to you.

You are free to go out and say what you have to say, to criticise the
government, criticise anyone who puts a foot wrong, no one is going to
ask you why you are doing so. You are free to join the Construction
Crusade (*Jihad-i Sazandeghi*) and help your countrymen.

Anything that is involved with the growth of man, the growth of the
sisters, brothers and these dear children, is free for you. That which
is not free, indeed which Islam prevents, is gambling which corrupts the
nation, drinking which corrupts the nation, and all types of obscenities
which were made available during the time of that criminal. Islam
forbids such things.

So we have two types of freedom, one is the beneficial kind, which did
not exist during the period of these two criminals,[^36] indeed which
was forbidden during their time. The kind of freedom they wanted to see
prevalent was that which allowed women to go out into the streets
dressed up to kill and, God forbid, behave however they liked with young
men. This was the type of freedom they implemented, and it is this type
that is desired by those today who don’t want Islam. The kind we propose
is not even open to consideration for them.

You won’t find one of these people who go on about ‘our country’ and
‘our nation’ helping the brothers and sisters in the Construction
Crusade as you have done. Those who shout about ‘the people, the people’
are those who go and burn the harvest, not gather it. You go through the
trouble to help your brothers and sisters with the harvest, weeding and
reaping the crops, then those who shout about the people, about how they
are for the masses, come along and, if they can, burn all you have
reaped.

It is these individuals who claim to be doing mighty things for the
people who blow up our oil pipelines with their guns, these democrats
and their followers in Kurdistan. It was these people who, fearing an
Islamic republic would be established and would grab them by the tails
and throw them out, tried to destroy our oil installations, to ruin our
farmers and destroy our industry and our agriculture. Indeed, this was
the fear of all those opposed to the course pursued by the nation, thus
their cries for freedom were not about freedom, they were about
perverting the nation (from that course).

Freedom exists now, and if the remnants of the former regime, their
servants and the servants of the foreigners let you, you will see what
freedom is.

May God keep all you sisters, brothers, children and young men.  
 May you be successful and serve this country well.  
 May you teachers train these children well, and give them an Islamic
and a human education, which is beneficial both to the country and to
their spiritual well being, and in which can be found happiness in this
world and the next.  
 Peace be upon all you ladies and brothers. (491)

30 September 1979 (8 Mehr 1358 AHS)

10 September 1980
-----------------

**Address to a gathering of Iranians recently returned from a
five-yearly conference on women held in Copenhagen**

**In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

Basically, any organisation in which the superpowers have a hand has to
be one, which works to their benefit. Take the United Nations, these
meetings it has abroad, the Security Council meetings, all serve the
purposes of the superpowers and are held to deceive the other countries.
Thus, they create the right of veto for themselves and use it to reject
anything they deem not to be in their interests. Indeed, the United
Nations is itself in the service of the superpowers.

The agencies they (the superpowers) set up under whatever name, all
attempt to bring others into line with their interests. We are so
suspicious of the superpowers that even if they are honest about
something, still we will think they are saying it to deceive the people.

The task you have performed is very valuable, and God willing you will
be even more successful. As you all know, our revolution is portrayed
abroad contrary to that which it truly is. We must begin to gradually
remedy this and start giving the world a true picture of our revolution.
It is not only concerning the women (in the country), who are truly free
in Iran now, who are committed, dedicated individuals, perhaps even more
so than the men, that a false picture has been painted.

Indeed abroad the idea was promulgated that it was Riza Khan who brought
up the issue of women’s freedom and through the unveiling sought to free
them. But the goal behind the unveiling affair was not, as they
purported, to bring the women, say ten million women, into society and
get them involved in social affairs. Rather it was an order that they
had received from abroad and which they carried out with the intention
of leading us into captivity.

Perhaps none of you can remember the affair, you may have been too small
at that time, but the bitter taste of the unveiling, which later Riza
Khan’s son called creating ‘free men and free women’ remains in my
mouth. You don’t know what they did to the esteemed ladies, indeed to
all segments of the society. Merchants, tradesmen and clergymen all were
forced to attend parties (celebrating the unveiling) along with their
wives, and if they refused, they were beaten and subjected to verbal
abuse.

Their aim was to use the women as a preoccupation for the youth so that
they would not get involved in fundamental issues. They employed
different methods to stop our youth and our academics from pondering
their own situation and that of their country, the unveiling, with the
disgraceful acts they perpetrated, being one of them. Respectable women
were mistreated, clergymen likewise, agents even approached the late Mr.
Kashani and told him he had to attend the parties too, but he sent them
away, protesting that they were only obeying orders, with a flea in
their ear.

In towns and villages everywhere throughout the country the story was
the same. The deeds they perpetrated in Qum were so opprobrious they
defy description. And this was all in order to bring the young people,
the gullible young people, men and women, together socially and
preoccupy them with one another, so that they became indifferent towards
the fundamental problems facing the country.

They created centres of fornication and other forms of corruption for
the same reason; from Tehran to Tajrish hundreds of these centres were
opened. So as you see they used the women, and consequently our youth,
our people, did not attend to the basic problems, as they should have,
neither the men nor the women. Neither were free, they were just called
free men and free women.

This was the foundation that Riza Khan first laid. He was brought to
power by the British, may God’s curse rest upon them, and it was the
British who pushed him into such action. Then their (the regime’s)
poets, writers and media took up the cause and worked to make this
nation turn away from itself and preoccupy itself with the pursuit of
pleasure and animal gratification. Centres of debauchery were freely
opened to the public, yet perhaps in the whole of Tehran there was not
one centre of religious learning for these men or these women who were
supposed to be free to study whatever they liked.

Be that as it may, these are problems that the superpowers brought about
through their very carefully prepared plans devised by their experts,
and these conferences and gatherings may be part of the same plans. We
must all be very vigilant, the entire nation of Iran must be careful not
to fall into their trap. When they attend these gatherings, the Iranians
must preserve their dignity, just as you say you did at this recent
gathering, and not allow themselves to be influenced by the people
there. If Iranians are going to attend such conferences, let it not be
that their participation will end up being in their (the superpowers’)
favour. Most of the time people are neglectful.

The things you ladies say you have done are very valuable actions, and
if there are to be other gatherings, the men too, the committed men that
is, not those who would go there and act against the interests of our
country, should attend. I wish you all success, God willing.

Today is not like the olden days; today is different from the former
period. Today the ladies must act on their social and religious duties
and protect public morality, and in so doing carry out their social and
political activities. Today is not like the former period when women of
uncertain repute and uncertain objectives were brought into the
Parliament. Women enter the Parliament today, but the circumstances are
totally different.

In those days they had their gatherings, they had their Women’s Day, but
it was a day when the unveiling was celebrated. In the final years of my
period in Qum, perhaps it was in my last year there just before the
uprising of the 15th Khurdad, I heard that the government was planning
for some women to gather at the tomb of Riza Shah and commemorate the
unveiling of women.

Some government officials in Qum came to see me and I told them each to
inform their ministries that were this plan to be carried out, I would
call on the nation to hold a day of national mourning for those killed
in the massacre perpetrated by the regime at the Gauhar Shad mosque.
They reported what I’d said to them and subsequently the government
changed its plans. Be that as it may, the circumstances that the regime
had created were in direct contradiction to what the nation had to do.

Praise God those days are over and all the women and all the men must
involve themselves in the social and political affairs. They must be
supervisors, supervising the work of the Majlis (Parliament) and the
government; they must express their opinions. The entire nation must
today watch over affairs, they must express their opinions, comment on
political and social problems and all that the government does. If they
see something wrong they must take the proper action.

I hope that this movement will end in victory and you will all be
successful, God willing. May you expand your gatherings everywhere in an
even more splendid manner so that women will awaken and reject those
things of the past, reject that former role of being a plaything, of
having to dress up and make up. You yourselves know how much damage that
attitude did to our economy and how much harm it did to public morality.
Today’s women, like the men, must be properly educated and concern
themselves with the issues (of the day), they too must exercise sound
judgement in their involvement in the (country’s) affairs, and God
willing, they will be successful. (492)

10 September 1980 (19 Shahrivar 1359 AHS)

[^1]: - Soldiers were ordered to tear apart women’s veils on the street
with their bayonets.

[^2]: - In December 1928, Riza Shah imposed on the Iranian nation a
Uniform Dress law, which made it obligatory for men to wear a round
peaked cap---similar to a kepi---which became known as the Pahlavi cap.
This measure - like much else in his programme of ‘reform’ - was
doubtless inspired by the example of Ataturk, who had, in November 1925,
enacted the notorious Hat Law, which provided the death penalty for all
who refused to don European headgear.

[^3]: - Refer to footnote 1.

[^4]: - Referring to Riza Shah and his son Muhammad Riza Shah.

[^5]: - Refer to footnote 77.

[^6]: - Parades and celebrations were planned to commemorate 7 January
1935 (17 Dey 1314 AHS), the day the law calling for the unveiling of
women was implemented in Iran.

[^7]: - In late 1935, Riza Khan gave orders for strict enforcement of
his decree requiring men to wear Western headgear and the Islamic veils
of women to be removed. This move angered the people and prompted
opposition from the clergy. Ayatullah Hajj Aqa Husayn Qummi, a religious
leader of Mashhad, travelled to Tehran in protest. He set up residence
in the vicinity of the shrine of \`Abd al-\`Azim and when the people
heard of his arrival, they rushed from all areas of Tehran to the shrine
to see him. The gathering of people there worried Riza Khan, and he gave
orders that the residence of Ayatullah Qummi and the shrine be
surrounded and no one be allowed to enter. When news of this occurrence
reached Mashhad, the people held a large gathering in the new courtyard
of the shrine of Imam Riza (pbuh) and immediately orders were given to
shoot those gathered there. After this event, Bahlul, a famous preacher
of Khurasan province, called the mourners of those murdered in the
incident to come together at the mosque of Gauhar Shad, part of the
shrine complex in that city. Upon hearing of this second large
gathering, Riza Khan ordered that machine-gun fire be used to disperse
the crowd and that mercy be shown to no one. Police in Mashhad, along
with the infantry, entered the mosque and massacred several hundred
people. The bodies of the martyrs and even the wounded were then
mercilessly loaded onto trucks and taken out of the city where they were
buried in a mass grave. The site of this grave is known as the "seat of
carnage."

[^8]: - Referring to comments made by a group of simple-minded people
who, using the excuse of some inadequacies, cast aspersions on the
fundaments of the Islamic republic system.

[^9]: - The late Ayatullah al-\`Uzma Hajj Shaykh \`Abdulkarim Ha'iri
Yazdi (1856-1935) is considered to be one of the most outstanding
maraji’ of the Shi\`a. Initially he began his studies in Yazd and then
in the holy cities of Baghdad, Karbala and Najaf (\`Atabat \`Aliyat).
Studying alongside such eminent scholars as Sayyid Muhammad Faysharaki,
Mirza Muhammad Taqi Shirazi, Mirzayi Bozurg Shirazi and Akhund
Khurasani, he achieved the noble rank of ijtihad and successfully
initiated religious classes in Karbala. In 1912 he travelled to Arak and
brought high repute to the theological centre there. In 1920 he visited
the holy city of Qum with the intention of making a pilgrimage. Whilst
there, local \`ulama insisted on his remaining in order to establish a
religious learning centre. Many distinguished jurisprudents have
received training and education from his classes, they include Ayatullah
al-\`Uzma Sayyid Muhammad Taqi Khansari, Ayatullah al- \`Uzma Sayyid
Ahmad Khansari, Ayatullah al-\`Uzma Sayyid Sadruddin Sadr, Ayatullah
al-\`Uzma Shaykh Muhammad \`Ali Araki and Ayatullah al-\`Uzma Sayyid
Muhammad Riza Gulpaygani. Among his students was the founder of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Ayatullah al-\`Uzma Imam Khomeini. His
eminence Ayatullah Ha'iri was able to retain his extremely modest way of
life even when he was recognised as the marja’-i taqlid and much has
been related with regard to his moral and ethical virtues. The grave of
this magnanimous and honourable scholar is situated by the holy shrine
of Hazrat Ma'suma (pbuh) in Qum.

[^10]: - The government and cabinet of Amir Assadollah \`Alam.

[^11]: - Laws governing Provincial and County Council elections were
announced by the national press on 8 October 1962 (16 Mehr 1341 AHS) and
the headlines read: ‘Women Given the Right to Vote’. On the face of it
the laws were not in contradiction with Islam, but the regime planned to
cover up its true intentions which were to eliminate the qualification
which stipulated that candidates and voters were to be Muslim, and to
replace the policy of taking oaths on the Holy Qur’an with another which
stipulated swearing in on a ‘Holy Book’. In addition to this assault on
Islam, the regime also planned to officially approve pseudo-religious
activities instigated by the imperialists. Any objections to their
scheme were labelled as opposition to the legal rights and freedom of
women. The new laws, promulgated by the Shah’s regime on 6 October 1962,
were seen as a prelude to increased participation in public life by the
Baha’is and eventual abolition of the Constitution of 1906. After a
prolonged campaign against the laws in which Imam Khomeini took a
prominent part, they were annulled by the government on 28 November
1962.

[^12]: - When the newspapers carrying this report reached Qum, the
maraji’ and high-ranking religious leaders such as Imam Khomeini held a
meeting that same evening in the home of the late Ayatullah Murtaza
Ha’iri (eldest son of the late Shaykh \`Abdulkarim Ha’iri) to hold
discussions and exchange views. As a result of this meeting, the
religious leaders sent telegrams to the Shah who passed on the
responsibility of replying to the Prime Minister.

[^13]: - It is clear that Imam’s view expressed here concerns the entry
of women into Parliament during the period of the Shah with all its
concomitant corruption, and takes this into account along with the
political and economic circumstances of the time. Otherwise, as this
book demonstrates only too well, not only did he not consider women’s
participation in social and political affairs to be a violation of
religious law, he actually encouraged it.

[^14]: - The Cabinet had assumed charge of the legislative process
following the dissolution of Parliament by royal decree the preceding
year.

[^15]: - Article 2 of the Supplementary Constitutional Law stipulates
that no law is valid unless the mujtahids (Islamic jurisprudents)
exercise a supervisory role in the Parliament, which they did not.

[^16]: - From the Mafatih al-Jinan (Keys to the Gardens of Paradise) a
standard collection of Shi\`ite prayers compiled from Bihar al-Anwar
(Oceans of Light) and other sources by \`Abbas Qummi (d. 1940-1).

[^17]: -  According to the precept "Reforming the Electoral Law" - one
of the underlying principles of the Shah's "White Revolution" - both the
right to vote and the right to be elected to the Majlis had been given
to women. In the first election to follow the "White Revolution" a
number of women from the Royal Court and upper classes entered the
Majlis as parliamentary representatives. These included: Showkat
Jahanbani, Farukhrow Parsa (the wife of General Shirinsokhan), Hajar
Tarbiyat, Mehrangiz Dowlatshahi and several others.

[^18]: -  Imam Khomeini, in his New Year declaration of 1963 (1342 AHS)
entitled "The Clergy of Islam Does Not Hold New Year Celebrations This
Year", objected very strongly to the legislation calling for the
compulsory conscription of eighteen-year-old girls for military service.
As a result of this objection, despite the fact that this news had
already been published and that speeches and interviews had already been
given on the radio, the Shah and his government were forced to deny what
they had formerly said. In fact the Shah denied the validity of the news
reports on two different occasions before the end of that month.
Jahangir Tafazzuli, Minister of State in charge of publications and
broadcasting, in an interview he gave, described the news concerning
women's conscription as totally unfounded. Refer to the speeches
delivered by the Shah on 1 April 1963 (12 Farvardin 1342 AHS) in Mashhad
and 2 April 1963 in Birjand; also refer to the 11,056th issue of the
Ittila\`at newspaper dated 31 March 1963 (11 Farvardin 1342 AHS).

[^19]: -  Tehran evening press, 1 April 1963 (12 Farvardin 1342 AHS),
the Shah: ". . . A publication has recently reported that they are
trying to conscript eighteen-year-old girls for military service, how
ridiculous! We are in no way short of military personnel. Such falsities
are a sign of the weakness of those who are responsible for fabricating
this news. Our girls must continue their education and pursue their
female responsibilities. We have enough people to safeguard the security
of this land."

[^20]: -  The publication of Imam Khomeini's declaration, and the
determined stance taken by him in opposition to the conscription of
young girls, left the Shah with no alternative but to request that the
judiciary make the necessary enquiries and prosecute those responsible
for circulating such news. In turn, the judicial system filed a lawsuit
against the movement's leadership and proceeded to arrange for its
arrest, although this never actually amounted to anything. It is worth
mentioning that the official who actually delivered the summons to
Imam's house, entered the building with tearful eyes saying: "They have
ordered me to obtain Imam's signature for this letter and I feel that as
a follower of Imam I must apologise for this." He left the house
however, without having obtained a signature. (Quoted from the memoirs
of Hujjat al-Islam wal Muslimin Hajj Sayyid Ahmad Khomeini).

[^21]: -  By adopting the blanket phrase "full and equal rights" the
ground was laid for the elimination of Islam and the propagation of
Western culture. The granting of women's divorce rights was initially
denied by the Shah, his Prime Minister and other officials. However,
several years later during Hoveyda's premiership a law was ratified in
Parliament entitled "The Family Protection Law" according to which women
were permitted to divorce their husbands on the approval of the law
courts. The rulings of the judges of these courts were not recognised by
Islamic law according to which a husband is able to endorse a women's
right to divorce on condition that this stipulation has been included in
the marriage vows.

[^22]: -  In the year 1960 (1339 AHS), a time of international political
upheaval, the Shah was compelled to reconsider his style of government
and his domestic policies. He therefore called on his Prime Minister,
Dr. Iqbal and his Royal Court adviser \`Alam to form two political
parties called "The National Party" (Hizb-i Melliyun) and "The People's
Party" (Hizb-i Mardom) both of which were to give the appearance of
being mutual rivals. In 1974 however, when the "National Resurgence
Party" (Hizb-i Rastakhiz) was founded by the Shah himself, the two
aforementioned parties were abolished.

[^23]: -  \`Abbas Effendi, the celebrated \`Abdul Baha (1844-1921), son
of Mirza Husayn \`Ali (Baha'ullah) became the leader of the Baha'is
after his father. He was amongst the British government's active spies
who actually worked for the British in Palestine. The services rendered
by \`Abbas Effendi to the British government made him worthy of a
knighthood and the title of ‘Sir’. \`Abdul Baha published Ta'alim-i
Baha'iyyat (The Teachings of Baha'ism) in which he addressed the issue
of full and equal rights of the sexes.

[^24]: - Addressing the \`ulama of Islam.

[^25]: - Usul al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 54, the book Fazl al-ilm.

[^26]: - Refer to footnote 104.

[^27]: - Riza Shah and Muhammad Riza Pahlavi.

[^28]: - The bill for the formation of SAVAK, The State Security and
Intelligence Organisation, was passed by Parliament in 1956 (1335 AHS)
and the organisation was subsequently officially established in 1957
(1336 AHS). SAVAK's mission was to quash and confront any Islamic
struggle or opposition to the regime. SAVAK was closely linked to the
intelligence agencies of both America and Israel (CIA and MOSSAD) and
gradually it turned into a terrorist organisation. This institution,
which in fact served as the CIA's headquarters, possessed several
investigative and detective teams. In order to obtain information from
those they had arrested, SAVAK would firstly send the latter to torture
chambers, after which it would hand its captives over to rubber-stamp
courts where, after the passing of a predetermined court verdict, the
accused would be convicted and taken to horrendous prisons. The cruelty
and callousness of SAVAK was so great that the Secretary General of
Amnesty International, in a report made in 1975 stated: "No country in
the world has a worse record in human rights than Iran . . . In order to
obtain confessions, the torturers of SAVAK subject its captives to
beatings and electric shocks. It employs all kinds of horrendous and
inhumane methods to achieve its ends; the inflicting of agonising pain
on the sexual organs and the sexual assault of the wives and daughters
of the captives before the latter's very eyes, are but two of such
atrocities perpetrated." The Shah was fully aware of SAVAK's practices.
This organisation was abolished by Iranian Muslims in 1978 (1357 AHS)
and its torturers were prosecuted in revolutionary courts.

[^29]: - Riza Shah and Muhammad Riza Pahlavi.

[^30]: -  During the reign of Ahmad Shah Qajar, a contract known as "The
Contract of Vusuq al-Dula" (the Prime Minister of the day) was concluded
between Iran and Britain (1919), according to which Britain was obliged
to pay a loan of two million pounds sterling to Iran and was to be
responsible for organising and administering the Iranian army. In
effect, this contract rendered Iran a subject of British sovereignty
whilst also serving to protect the country from Russia. Ahmad Shah
Qajar, for reasons too lengthy to mention here, opposed this contract
and thus the British government decided to remove him from their path -
a task not too difficult for he was not very popular with the people
anyway. Therefore, in 1920 (1299 AHS), a coup d'etat was staged by Riza
Khan Mirpanj, military commander of a cossack unit in Qazvin, which not
only resulted in Ahmad Shah's dethronement, but also paved the way for
the overthrow of the Qajar dynasty and the establishment of the Pahlavi
dynasty; and indeed, shortly afterwards, it led to Riza Khan being
placed on the imperial throne.

[^31]: -  Land Reform was one of the main principles of neo-colonialism,
which was urged on all the countries under the dominance of colonialism,
from Latin America to Asia and Africa, and was implemented by the
governments of these countries in a very similar manner. In 1962 (1342
AHS), the Shah launched the land reform programme as the first tenet of
his six-point 'White Revolution,' later renamed the 'Shah-People
Revolution.' This 'Revolution' was not a revolution at all, rather it
was put into effect on the one hand to win the confidence of American
capitalism; to show his approval of and co-operation with the new
strategy; and to open a new market for the Western economy, and on the
other to curb internal discontent and actually prevent a revolution! The
reform programme, which was dependent on foreign, especially American
investment, dragged the Iranian agrarian economy into bankruptcy, such
that a few years after its implementation the country had been changed
from a wheat exporter to a major wheat importer. In addition, as a
result of the migration of villagers into the towns and cities and their
attraction as a cheap work force to the industries and the service
sector, over a period of eleven years from 1966-1977 (1345-56 AHS),
20,000 Iranian villages became uninhabited!

[^32]: - Ataturk, Kemal (1881-1938), Turkish general and statesman. He
was first president of the Turkish republic when it was officially
established in 1923, and remained in power until his death, wielding
almost dictatorial powers in his struggle to make Turkey a modern
secular state. Known first as Mustapha Kemal, and then as Kemal Pasha,
he took the name of Ataturk ( = father-Turk) in 1934.

[^33]: -­ Refer to footnote 54.

[^34]: -­ The Iranian Constitutional Movement (1905-1911) greatly
benefited from the support and co-operation it received from such
personalities as Akhund Mullah Muhammad Kazim Khurasani and Aqa Shaykh
\`Abdullah Mazandarani both maraji' of Najaf, and from Sayyid \`Abdullah
Bihbihani and Sayyid Muhammad Tabataba\`i, two of Tehran's prominent
\`ulama. Akhund Khurasani issued a fatwa (decree) about the importance
of the Constitution and in this way made the Constitutional Movement in
Iran indebted to him. Shaykh \`Abdullah Mazandarani was one of Akhund
Khurasani's close associates throughout the movement. A proclamation
issued by these two religious scholars read: "The Constitution of each
country limits and conditions the will of the ruler and the offices of
government so that the divine ordinances and common laws based on the
official religion of the country are not transgressed."

[^35]: - Take for example the time in 1911 when three hundred women
marched into the public galleries of the Parliament building with
pistols hidden under their long veils and threatened to shoot any deputy
willing to submit to a recently issued Russian ultimatum.

[^36]: - Riza Shah and Muhammad Riza Pahlavi.


