A Glance at the Created World
=============================

In the morning you see how the sun rises gently from behind the
mountains and what beauty it carries and how it illuminates the plains
and fields. Truly what beauty and clarity this illuminated ball bestows
to the mountains and plains! Just think! If the sun does not arise and
all the time it is only a dark night what we would have done? Have you
thought how the sun got such light and heat? Do you know how much is the
volume of the sun?

The volume of the sun is approximately a million times that of the
earth. That is if the sun was a ball empty from inside, it would have
accommodated nearly one million earths inside it. The surface
temperature of this fiery ball is 6000 degrees centigrade. You know that
with all this heat how it heats up this earth and all that is on it.
Since it is situated at an appropriate and determined distance (at a
distance of around 150 million kilometers) it conveys only necessary
light and elements to the earth.

No one knows what would have happened if the distance of the sun to the
earth had not been as such. If the distance of the sun to the earth had
been less than this; for example it had been half of this, what would
have happened? It is definite that no living being would have been able
to survive on its surface, and the heat of the sun would have scorched
all the plants, animals and human beings. If the distance of the sun to
the earth had been more than this; for example if it had been twice than
what it is at present, what would have happened?

In that case, sufficient light and heat would not have reached the earth
and everything would have frozen to death. All the water would have
frozen to ice and no life would have survived. Thus it is clear that
this distance is linked to an awareness, precision, determination and
foresight.

It is through the light and heat of the sun that pretty bunches of wheat
reach such ripeness; it is as a result of the hot rays of the sun that
all vegetation and trees reach maturity and provide fruits and food for
us human beings. Different types of foods that we obtain are prepared
through the energy of the sun. It is in fact the energy of the sun,
which collects in all plants and food articles and we gain energy from
them. Animals also benefit from the energy stored in plants and they
transfer them to us in form of animal food. For example, they feed on
grass and provide us with milk and we also benefit from the meat and
other secondary foods based on milk and meat.

What do you understand by contemplating on the glory and beauty of the
sun, its precise and determined distance to the earth, benefit of the
plants, animals and human beings from the heat and energy of the sun?
And what do you conclude after seeing and pondering on the perpetuity
and amazing compatibility of all the parts of the world? What do you
see? Do you see an unsystematic and incompatible collection or a
collection which is great and perfectly compatible; of which we are also
a part. What can you conclude from the system and compatibility of this
precise collection?

System and precision, which encompasses all the parts of this world,
what does it show? Can you reply to this query in a foolish way and say:
The creator of this great system is a being who is unaware, ignorant and
powerless? Such a reply would never be accepted by our awakened
conscience and wise intellect. On the contrary it would say: The
intricate system and the coherence and perpetuity of this great
collection is a sign of the greatness, power and awareness of a superior
creator who is capable of creating and controlling the beings of this
world in this way and he had the foresight to know from before the needs
of each of them perfectly and gave them the capacity to fulfill them. He
also determined the path and aim for each of them. Who is that powerful
and knowing creator?

That knowing and powerful creator is none but God, who has created all
the bounties for us and which He has given under our control. He created
the sun, moon and earth for us so that we might through efforts and
cooperation, inhabit the earth and by obtaining knowledge and learning,
discover the secrets and amazements and look at the great signs of our
creator and Lord and through confidential prayers beseech Him:

The highest and the best condition of man is when he supplicates his
Lord and beseeches Him in secret. And if supplication and secret prayer
to his God had not been there, what value life would have had? How
worthless man would have been?

You contemplate on the creation of the night and day and every morning
and evening you recite confidential supplications to the creator of the
night and day. You know that night and day is due to rotation of the
earth. Every night and day completes one rotation. Half the earth which
comes before the sun is illuminated and it is day over there and the
other half is dark and it is night over there. By rotation of the earth,
the day seems to be entering the night and the night seems to be
entering the day and days and nights follow each other in a systematic
way. During the day, plants and trees grow under the light and heat of
the sun. Human beings become involved in efforts and work renovated by
the rest they got during the night and begin a new day with more vigor
and supplication to the Almighty.

Have you ever thought what would have happened if the rotation of the
earth had not been so systematic and precise? In some parts of the earth
there would have been perpetual nights and in some parts there would
have been continuous day; hot and scorching. Appearance of day and night
are also clear signs of the power, greatness and awareness of the wise
and powerful creator of the world.

Three Important Points
----------------------

1. We should look in the world of creation, and ponder and realize the
system, coherence and compatibility of its innumerable parts and ask:
“Who has created this world and who controls it?”

2. The great and systematic collection of the world of creation is clear
evidence that: “A knowing and powerful creator has created it and only
He controls it, and He is God.”

3. The knowing and powerful God who has created the world has also
determined duties for our growth and success; the most important of
which may be listed as follows:

A) We look at the signs of the greatness and power of our Lord and
contemplate on it.

B) That we discover the secrets and amazing aspects of the world through
knowledge and learning.

C) That we gain proximity to Him through worship and supplications.

D) That we inhabit the earth through efforts and cooperation and spread
justice and equity in it.


