Every Phenomenon has a Cause
============================

You move your hand and pick up the pen, but your friend does not move
his hand and pick up the pen, why? It is so because you intended to pick
up the pen your friend had no such intention and desire. The intention
of picking up the pen is a new phenomenon which is actualized in
yourself; you have brought this new phenomenon into existence. Intention
is related to you and is the act of yourself, and the movement of the
hand is also related to you and is your intention. You did not move your
hand previously since you had no intention; you intended at a later
stage and after intending, you moved your hand and picked up the pen.
The phenomenon of intention is the effect of you; if you had not been
there, no intention would have taken place. The intention has not come
into being on its own; on the contrary it is from you. There is a
special relationship between you and intention, which is called as the
relationship of cause and effect. You see this special relationship in
your own being with perfect clarity and are perfectly aware of it.

Another Example
---------------

You have the memory of a bunch of flowers that you had previously seen;
now you recall it (which is called as the imaginative form): This image
of the flowers is a new phenomenon, which has come in your mind. Has it
appeared automatically or you have brought it into being? Of course, you
have brought it into existence. If you were not there, the form of the
flowery branch would also not have been there.

This mental image is related to you; that is its existence is not
independent; on the contrary it has come into existence from you. You
are the cause and the mental image is the effect and this special
relationship is named as the relationship of the cause and effect. You
see this relationship in your own self and are perfectly familiar with
it.

Therefore, we conclude that you and every person will find the causality
in the self and you see it perfectly clearly.

Moreover, you will find this special relationship, ‘relationship of the
cause and effect’ between yourself and your bodily and mental acts and
relate them to yourself as you are their cause and say: I saw, I heard,
I touched, I smelt, I tasted, I moved, I thought…you consider yourself
as the cause and seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, tasting, moving
and thinking as you effects and connected to you. These actions have
originated from your being and if you had not been there, your actions
and movements would also not have been there.

Man has named causation that is the relationship with the cause to
effect as the law of cause and effect. In the beginning between his own
being and spiritual and mental phenomena and verbalized his movements
and actions between his own self and his mental phenomena, actions and
movements; then he transmitted this law from outside his being.

Law Of Causation Is A Fundamental, Absolute And Universal Law
-------------------------------------------------------------

Man, on the basis of that realization when he comes across a phenomenon
whose existence depends on (or is related to) another phenomenon he
understands that between these two phenomena also the relationship of
cause and effect is present and in these circumstances he decides that
the phenomena which are themselves in need of others are effects and the
factor which has brought these into existence is the cause.

Man through study, research and excessive experiments has concluded that
some worldly phenomenon have different types of relationships with other
phenomena; such relationship which exist between himself and his mental
phenomena and on the basis of this deep understanding he accepts the law
of causation to be complete and universal.

It is like completing a job in anticipation of its desired result; it is
the best evidence that one has accepted the law of causality as a
comprehensive law, on drinking water he awaits for the quenching of
thirst and on eating, waits for the satiation of his hunger. In winter,
he takes the refuge of warmth of fire and in summer heat he looks for
the coolness of shade. In any case, all of us in daily life and in all
our movements and actions accept causality as an absolute and universal
fundamental and in this way create an impression.

No Effect Is Without Cause
--------------------------

If the window opens and you have not seen who opened it, what will you
think? Would you say that it opened automatically (without any cause)?
If you heard a sound and do not see what has produced it, what will you
conclude? Would you think that it came by coincidence and without any
proper cause? If you heard a voice and do not see who has produced it,
what will you conclude? If you feel hot or cold, would you think that it
has no cause? If a stone is thrown at the window, breaking the glass and
you cannot find who has thrown it, what would you conclude? Would you
conclude that the stone arose from the ground automatically and without
any cause and hit the glass?

Your reply to the above questions is clear. You will say: I possess
reason and intellect and I know that none of the worldly phenomena are
without a cause or a doer, even though I might not know what the cause
is, because not knowing it is not the proof of its absence. That is why
you will make as much investigation and be curious about it till you
don’t find the real cause of the phenomena. And if suppose you cannot
find the cause in one instance, you will not say that it has no cause,
on the contrary you would say that the cause of this phenomenon is not
known.

Intellectuals and inventors have fully accepted the law of causation and
they try to find the cause of things in laboratories. Whenever they come
across a new phenomenon, they are certain that it is having a cause and
that is why they conduct fresh efforts to find it.

World Is Also Having A Cause
----------------------------

We know that the law of cause and effect is a fundamental, absolute and
a universal law. And no phenomenon is without a cause and all the
phenomena of the world have a cause. This complete law is practically
accepted by everyone in the world.

Every phenomenon has a cause, if the cause of that is a phenomenon it
also has a cause, therefore since the whole created world is a
phenomenon and needful and does not have independent existence – it is
in need of someone or something superior; basically being in need of
another is the first quality of a phenomenon, every big and small
phenomenon is – needful and related to someone or something else, its
existence is not on its own, if it had existed independently, it would
have endured forever and had also not been needful. The world of
phenomena is needful of existence and being, that is why it is in need
of a being that is higher and needful – which is the source of bestowing
existence to all the phenomena and the existing beings are needful and
limited.

That being which is higher and that incomparable and unlimited entity,
which is the source of existence and which does not have any defect and
need, is the Almighty God. He is the one who created this world, is
always controlling it through his blessings and nurtures it. If His
blessing and favor is cut off for even a moment, all would be destroyed.

### Objection

You said that every phenomenon is in need of a cause; therefore God also
is in need of a cause, what is the cause of God? In other words: God has
created every existing thing, so who has created God?

### Reply

Yes, we said that every phenomenon is needful of a cause, but I did not
say that every entity is needful of a cause; therefore every phenomenon
and every existing thing, which is needful and limited, is in need of a
cause, but not the Almighty Allah who is Self-sufficient and a perfect
entity. He does not have need of a cause. Existence is His very being.
He does not have any need that others may fulfill His need.

In other words, the criteria of needfulness of cause is need and
limitation; and generosity and personal poverty; and there is no defect
and limitation in God Almighty that He should have need of cause; on the
contrary he is absolutely Self-sufficient and there is nothing higher
than Him that He should be need of it; if he had been the effect of
another, He would have been in need of that other and in that case he
would not be God. He is there by Himself and by His own being and others
endure because of Him; God is higher and superior.

In the Holy Quran, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَآ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ أَنتُمُ الْفُقَرَآءُ إِلَى اللَّهِ وَاللَّهُ
هُوَ الْغَنِىُّ الْحَمِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O men! you are they who stand in need of Allah, and Allah is He Who
is the Self-sufficient, the Praised One.” (35:15)***

Man is intelligent and he is having foresight. He can understand the
realities of the world through contemplation and making logical
reasonings. So far we have learnt about two reasonings of Knowing God:
proof of order and proof of causation. We have also discussed these two
topics in some details:

With regard to the reasoning of order, we said: The created world is
based on order, system and coordination and perfect relationship; every
order, system and coordination and determination is created by a wise
and powerful creator; thus this world is also the creation of a wise and
a powerful creator.

In this reasoning (reasoning of order) we first pay attention to the
order, coordination, precision and determination that is present between
parts of the world and at that time with reference to this belief that
‘every system and determination has an aware and a powerful coordinator
and determiner’, we conclude that this great order and coordination in
this world also has a wise and a powerful creator.

But in the evidence of cause, we don’t see other than order and
compatibility between the phenomena of this world; on the contrary, we
looked at the being and the existence of phenomena and noted the need
and special need which every phenomenon has for cause – that every
person has profound belief in it – we present the matter in this manner:

Every phenomenon that comes into existence, its existence is not
independent; on the contrary it is related and dependant on something
else, which is called as the cause.

This world is also composed of various phenomena; therefore it has to
have a cause.

With regard to the reasoning of causality it can be said that every
phenomenon that comes into being, its existence is dependant and
needful. And its being is not on its own, on the contrary it is
dependent on a cause and the world and everything present in it on one
side is a phenomenon and all are created – so they must have come into
being from the source of creation and we call that unlimited power as
God.

Both the reasonings of order and causality are to remove the dust of
ignorance and carelessness from the eyes of foresight and nature of man,
so that he may see the reality with a clean nature and an awakened
intellect. And that he sees the brightest of the bright and strengthens
his faith in the High and the Mighty Lord.

But the pure natures of man are aware of his great and powerful creator
in such a way and this matter is so clear to them that they require the
least reasonings. These pure natures and aware persons consider
everything to be relying on the power and invincible determination of
Almighty Allah and in all hardships and difficulties, he takes refuge in
Him and is never afflicted with despair and hopelessness, since he knows
no matter how powerful the phenomena may be they are in need of Almighty
God and they are under His control. These pure natures and these aware
persons – since they saw that everything was in need of God – they do
not submit to anything other than the Almighty Allah and they do not
accept any command and guardianship except His – and join the life of
the world with respect and success with everlasting happiness of the
hereafter.

Ultimately, we consider it necessary to mention that in order to prove
the existence of the creator of the world we also depend on evidences in
books of philosophy and scholasticism for numerous and profound
reasonings; but for the sake of brevity, we shall be content with this
much.

It is mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ بَل رَّبُّكُمْ رَبُّ السَّمَوَتِ وَالْأَرْضِ الَّذِى فَطَرَهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who brought
them into existence…” (21:56)***


