Qualities of God
================

On the basis of the discussion so far, we have understood that this
world is having a cause which has created and manages it. In this
section, we would learn about the qualities of Almighty God, in order to
recognize Him better. The qualities of God can be divided into two:
Qualities of perfection and qualities of majesty.

Every quality that is from perfections and elevated ranks is the root of
existence and which increases its value and existence. Without that it
should necessitate defect and limitation, is named as the quality of
perfection and beauty. Like: knowledge, power, life, hearing, sight,
intention, speaking, beneficence, mercy and other such qualities.

For example knowledge, which can be defined as the presence, appearance
and existence of a thing for the knower, is a perfection of existence.
And there is no defect in its meaning and its evidence is not described
as one necessitating defect and limitation.

Although it is possible that it may be true in some limited
implications, but this implication has not appeared from the aspect of
defect and limitation, on the contrary it is a rank from the ranks of
existence and which comes into existence from the root. And in this way
the quality of power and life is also included as the qualities of
perfection.

The Almighty Allah is the possessor of all of them and is endowed with
them. Qualities of perfection are also called as Positive Attributes
(Sifaat-e-Thubutiyyah), as they are proved to belong to Allah.

Scholars have mentioned reasonings to prove the qualities of perfection
for Almighty Allah and two of those reasonings are comparatively simple:

First evidence – These perfections exist outwardly, knowledge is in the
outward and some existing beings possess knowledge, power also exists
outwardly and some existing beings possess power and perform some
actions. Life is also in the outward and some existing beings are alive
and perform their functions with knowledge and intention.

Thus the qualities of perfection have an outward existence and are
themselves a phenomenon and as we stated previously, every phenomenon is
in need of a cause and a doer that invents it, and that is the Almighty
Allah, the creator of the world. Therefore since existent beings and
phenomena of the world in fact are related to the being of the Almighty
Allah, the qualities of being and perfection are also related to God and
it is Him that has bestowed those qualities to them. On the other hand,
the Bestower of perfection Himself possesses those perfections. On the
contrary He is higher than those stages. God, who has given knowledge,
power and life to the creatures, it is not possible for Him to lack
those qualities. If He did not have them, He would not have been able to
bestow others with them.

Second evidence is the proof of order – You discovered and understood
the various aspects of the precise and amazing system by the creator of
the world in the previous lessons, that how much precision and beauties
He has employed in their creation and with what connection and precise
coordination has He created and managed them although all phenomena of
the beautiful world are inter-related. Through study of such an amazing
and compatible system it can be easily concluded that their creator is
also is all-knowing, powerful and living, and he has created this
precise system through knowledge, power and plan and He has been aware
and aimed in its creation.

Existence of such a precise and beautiful system is the best proof that
their creator has knowledge, power and life. But can senseless matter
create and manage such a precise and coordinated system? Or can a book
of science or a beautiful work of art be produced from a senseless and
weak being? Then how can it be imagined that this great world, with all
the secrets and amazing things, with such system and coordination could
have come into being from senseless and non-intentional nature?

Attributes Of Perfection
------------------------

In the previous lessons, where the process and relationship of cause and
effect was explained and proved, it became clear that: the effect no
matter how much perfection and beauty it had, all of it is received from
its cause and the cause is in possession of all these perfections and
beauty at a higher scale. Therefore God Almighty, who is the creator and
real cause of the heavens and earth and all that is present in them, He
possesses all the perfections and beauties of the universe.

Knowledge, power and life are the attributes of perfection, which are
present in some creatures: sight, hearing and speech are the attributes
of perfection, which man is in possession of.

We consider the learned and aware man due to his learning and awareness
to be superior and more perfect than one who is not in possession of
this knowledge. We also consider the powerful and strong man due to his
power and strength to be superior to one who does not have this power
and strength. The seeing and the hearing man or one who has these two
qualities is in possession of perfections, which a blind and deaf person
does not have.

Therefore we say: Life, knowledge, power, insight are the attributes of
perfection and values that some creatures possess them in a limited
quantum. For example, the body of man possesses life, but this life is
limited in every aspect; if he does not eat, he would die; if he does
not breathe, he would die. His life has a beginning and an end; it has
limitations and conditions.

Man is seeing, but his sight is limited and conditional, and he cannot
see beyond a distance and he cannot see the whole world in a single
moment. He is also unable to see in the dark…and in this way every
attribute of perfection present in the creatures is limited and
conditional.

Seeing the perfections and beauties present in existing things we
conclude that the God of the world, is the creator and the real creator
cause of all creatures, and He possesses these attributes; because if He
had not possessed them, He would not have been able to bestow them to
the creatures. But the perfections that the Almighty Allah possesses do
not have any condition and limitation and they do not have any decrease
and are much higher.

Since we conclude that God is the possessor of all perfections that
exist in the world, we describe the Almighty Allah with these qualities
and say: God is living. God is all-knowing. God is all-powerful. God is
seeing. God is hearing. God is speaking. God is merciful. God is
beneficent, God is self-sufficient…but since all of us are concerned in
a limited and restricted sense with these qualities, we use comparison
in our descriptions and we say: God is living, but not like our life
which is limited, deficient and which is to end, on the contrary He is
much higher.

God is knowing, but not like our knowledge, which is limited and
deficient and which can be separated from our being, that sometimes we
are knowing and sometimes ignorant; therefore we always accompany our
description with two sentences: ‘Allah is the greatest’ and ‘Glory be to
Allah’ as both these sentences absolve the Almighty Allah of every kind
of limitation, defect and shortcoming.

Can we imagine God and His Attributes?
--------------------------------------

This imagination implies whether we can see God and His attributes in
our imagination? It is clear that we can imagine the scenes of the
heavens and we can imagine the scene of sunset. We can imagine the face
of parents and affection of parents. Can we imagine God and His
attributes in the same way? If we see what we imagine, we would see that
it is also limited and it has occupied our imagination. But that which
is unlimited in every way, cannot be occupied in a limited mind.
Therefore when we imagine the attributes of the perfection of Allah and
for example, when we think about His power, we should say: Allah is the
greatest and glory be to God; that is Allah is the most superior and is
pure of every defect and deficiency.

### Comparison: How will you describe the sea to one who has never seen it?

Just suppose one of your friends has never seen the sea; how will you
describe it to him? You would have to help his intelligence and
imagination. For example if he has seen a small pond or a small ditch
filled with rain water, you will say: sea is also a water body, but not
like these water bodies, on the contrary it is much bigger and deeper;
you would say: sea is also a pool of water like these pools, but much
deeper, wider, but in spite of that some of those who have never seen
the sea would not be able to imagine its wideness and depth and you will
have to say that the sea is much wider and deeper than what you imagine.

Somewhat such is our condition with regard to the attributes of
perfection of God; in every perfection we see a small pool having
hundreds of limits, restrictions and defects; but we understand that
Almighty Allah is having all these perfections and beauties in an
unbounded and limitless manner and without any defect or shortcoming;
therefore with imagination of every quality of perfection that we see in
the creatures, we remove limit and restrictions from it and associate it
to Allah and as much good the quality is, we believe in its better and
higher form for the Almighty Allah and although the Almighty Allah is
much higher than the description of one who does not recognize Him.
(Glory be to God from what they attribute to Him except the sincere
servants of Allah)

Can God be seen?
----------------

Eyes can see things, for example that tree which is in the garden of the
school and that flower which grows under the tree will also be seen with
the eye. Our eyes can see only some bodies among all the existing
beings. Bodies which are in range of sight and sufficient light from
them reaches to the eyes are only the ones visible to the eyes.

But the eyes are not able to see many things which are at a great
distance or lie beyond the focus of the eyes. Can the eyes see all that
which lies in the depths of the skies and seas? Moreover, there are many
things which are present, but which are not visible to the human eye;
for example, you possess knowledge, intellect and love; are they visible
to your eyes; or it is that their effects are seen by the eyes.

If we had been able to see God with the eyes, He would indeed have had a
body like other bodies and which occupy a space and which are present at
one place and absent elsewhere, He would have been like a creature, like
other creatures which are limited and which need space; and like other
things which have a beginning and an end, and which go on changing from
one state to another. If God had been a body, He would be present here
and absent there. And He could not have been able to create and see the
things which are there. If God had been a body like other bodies of
creatures He would not have been their creator and superior to them.
That is why since God is not a body He cannot be seen with the physical
eyes, on the contrary He can be discovered by reason and insight of man
through seeing existing things (which are in fact His signs and
effects). Eyes cannot see Him but He sees all eyes and He is most
knowing and is well informed in every aspect.

Some Attributes Of Perfection
-----------------------------

### 1. Power

God is powerful; that is He can do anything that is logically possible.
He performs all His acts from the aspect of knowledge, choice and
intention and He is neither compelled to do anything or to leave it. His
power is endless and without any limit. In the Holy Quran, He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَى‏ كُلِّ شَى‏ءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…surely Allah has power over all things.” (2:20)***

### 2. Knowledge

That is He knows everything and encompasses all existing things and
worldly phenomena; and nothing is hidden from Him; so much so that He is
also cognizant of the intentions and thoughts of people. He says in
Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ تُخْفُواْ مَا فِى صُدُورِكُمْ أَوْ تُبْدُوهُ يَعْلَمْهُ
اللَّهُ وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِى الْسَّمَوَ تِ وَمَا فِى الْأَرْضِ وَاللَّهُ
عَلَى‏ كُلِّ شَى‏ءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Whether you hide what is in your hearts or manifest it, Allah
knows it, and He knows whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the
earth, and Allah has power over all things.” (3:29)***

### 3. Life

God is living. That is He is a being that acts according to knowledge
and power. Life of God does not imply that He breathes and moves like
human beings and that he eats and grows. On the contrary, it implies
that His acts are based on intention and knowledge.

### 4. Intention

God is having intention; that is He performs His actions with intention.
And He is not like fire, which had no intention of its own to burn and
which does not have discretion. But He does whatever He wants. And if He
does not make an intention, He does not do it. His intention and will is
a perfection of the subject but God who is at the ultimate stage of
perfection and existence, would not lack any of these perfections. In
Quran also, intention is related to God. He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا قَوْلُنَا لِشَىْ‏ءٍ إِذَآ أَرْدْنَهُ أَن نَّقُولَ لَهُ كُن
فَيَكُونُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our word for a thing when We intend it, is only that We say to it,
Be, and it is.” (16:40)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُدْخِلُ الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُواْ وَعِملُواْ الصَّلِحَتِ
جَنَّتٍ تَجْرِى مِن تَحْتِهَا الْأَنْهَرُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَفْعَلُ مَا
يُرِيدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah will cause those who believe and do good deeds to enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow, surely Allah does what He pleases.”
(22:14)***

### 5. Hearing

God is hearing; that is He is aware of every sound and nothing is hidden
from Him.

### 6. Seeing

God is seeing. That is He can see every event and phenomenon and He is
the witness and seer of them all. In Quran also, in numerous places,
hearing and seeing is related to God. For example the Almighty Allah
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُكُمْ أَن تُؤَدُّواْ الأَمَنَتِ إِلَى أَهْلِهَا
وَإِذَا حَكَمْتُم بَيْنَ النَّاسِ أَن تَحْكُمُواْ بِالْعَدْلِ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ نِعِمَّا يَعِظُكُم بِهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ سَمِيَعاً بَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and
that when you judge between people you judge with justice; surely Allah
admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing, Hearing.”
(4:58)***

### 7. Speech

God is speaking. That is He can express and explain His facts and aims
to others…these are some of the qualities of perfection or positive
attributes with which the Almighty Allah is described.

He possesses other attributes and names also, which are presently not
mentioned here.

Important Reminder
------------------

Qualities of God are not deficient and limited like our qualities. Since
we are deficient in attributes and being, we cannot do anything without
senses and physical organs. Although we possess them, we cannot do
anything without seeking limbs and organs. We possess the capacity to
hear but we cannot hear without ears. We possess the capacity to see but
we cannot hear without eyes.

But the being of the Almighty Allah, since it is at the ultimate level
of perfection and His qualities also are perfected to the highest level,
He sees without eyes, He hears without ears and performs acts without
limbs and organs and He understands without brain and nerves. Since the
way of seeing and hearing is that they can only be performed through
eyes, ears and nerves, on the contrary the reality of seeing and hearing
is nothing except that they should be for a person who is apparent and
clear, although it should be without the interference of senses.

We also, if we had not been defective, would have been able to see and
hear without the interference of eyes and ears; indeed seeing and
hearing would have been proved from them. But the Lord of the created
world, since with regard to His being and qualities is at the ultimate
level of perfection, His qualities and acts are also perfect and
unrestricted and do not have needs like us.

In the same way, since we are deficient, we are compelled to use the
tongue, mouth and outlets of pronunciation in explaining our aims, but
Almighty Allah has no need of tongue and mouth in speaking and
expressing Himself, but He expresses His aims in other ways and which is
also speaking. Since speaking does not only mean that its aims should be
expressed through the tongue and mouth, on the contrary if this same
action can be performed without tongue and mouth, it would also be
considered speaking.

Therefore the qualities of God are very much different from our
qualities.

Negative Attributes
-------------------

Every attribute that negates defect and limitation for the Almighty
Allah is called as negative attribute. It is also called as Sifat
Salbiya, because their meaning is negative. The being of the Almighty
Allah is a perfect being without any limit and is having no defect and
limitation. That is why He is having necessity of existence and absence
cannot be imagined about Him. He possesses all perfections and no
perfection can be taken away from Him.

On the contrary, He is pure of every kind of defect. Qualities that
negate His defects are called as Negative attributes or Sifaat Salbiyah.
They are too many, but here we mention only a few of them:

### 1. God is not Body

Body is something which possesses length and breath, depth and form,
which occupies space according to its volume and it cannot remain
without having a special space. And that is why God is not a body,
because if He had been a body He would need space, so that He may occupy
it. And such a needful being cannot be Necessary Being (Wajibul Wujud),
because necessity of being is not compatible with needfulness and
limitation. God is the creator of spaces, how can He be needful of
space?

### 2. God is not visible to Physical Eyes

That is He cannot be seen with material eyes, because only bodies,
effects and their specialties can be seen with eyes, while the fact is
that we have proved above that God is not a body. Therefore He would
never be visible. Almighty Allah would neither be seen in this world nor
in the world of the hereafter. He is an unlimited and abstract being
without the effects and qualities of matter and body; how can He become
visible to a material eye? Eyes can see a thing which is placed at a
particular distance from it.

Since the being of God is neither limited nor occupies space, in that
case it is possible that someone says: If God had existed He would have
been visible to the eye or perceived through one of the senses. How can
His being be accepted when none of the senses perceive Him? It would be
said in reply: The scope of being is not confined to perceptions; in
this world we are having hundreds and thousands of material things,
which cannot be perceived through senses.

Can you not see the power of gravity of the earth and power of
electricity in wires? Can you see electrons and protons present in an
atom and their movement? Can you see life in a living thing? Can you see
the human and animal soul? Can you see the affection of the mother for
her children? Can you see and hear all the sounds in the atmosphere?
Etc.

Even though all these things are material and physical, they are not
perceived by any of the senses, but you accept their existence, since
you see their effects.

Thus how can you expect to see the creator of the world when He is a
being abstract of matter and materiality and much above time and space?
Such unlimited being cannot occupy the limited vessel of perception, but
you see the effects and signs of the creator of the world in the
beauties and amazing aspects of the world and gain faith in His being.

In the Holy Quran also, it is mentioned clearly that the Almighty Allah
would never be visible to the physical eyes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا تُدْرِكُهُ الاَْبْصَرُ وَهُوَ يُدْرِكُ الْأَبْصَرَ وَهُوَ
اللَّطِيفُ الْخَبِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (all) vision; and He
is the Knower of subtleties, the Aware.” (6:103)***

### 3. God is not Ignorant

In the discussion of Positive Attributes it was proved that knowledge is
a perfection of being which the holy being of God possesses. Since the
being of God is unlimited, His knowledge would also be unlimited and He
is aware of everything in every condition and defect and ignorance is
not present in His being. Therefore the Almighty Allah is not ignorant.

It is mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَخْفَى‏ عَلَيْهِ شَى‏ءٌ فِى الْأَرْضِ وَلَا فِى
السَّمَآءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah – surely nothing is hidden from Him in the earth or in the
heaven.” (3:5)***

### 4. God is not Helpless

Previously in the discussion of the Positive attributes, we proved that
power is an excellence and the being of God is in possession of it. And
since the Almighty Allah is an unlimited being, His power is also not
having any limit, and He has power over every possible matter. That is
why God is not helpless in anything.

### 5. He is not subject to Change

He does not age and is not susceptible to disease. He neither sleeps nor
gets tired. He does not become regretful of consequences, because such
qualities are only associated with materiality and physicality; and
since we have already proved that God is not a physical body, such
changes can never apply to Him. Therefore knowledge, hearing and seeing,
intention and His other positive attributes are also such that they
cannot change or be affected by anything.

It is said in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْحَىُّ الْقَيُّومُ لَا تَأْخُذُهُ
سِنَةٌ وَلَا نَوْمٌ لَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is He besides Whom there is no god, the Ever living, the
Self-subsisting by Whom all subsist; slumber does not overtake Him nor
sleep…” (2:255)***

### 6. God does not occupy Space

He can neither be confined to a place either in the earth or the
heavens, because He is not a body that He should be in need of space. He
is the creator of the spaces and He existed before them. God is a being
abstract from matter and materiality and He encompasses all the beings
and He does not occupy a particular vessel. His being is unlimited and
unrestricted and He encompasses all the places. He is present and seeing
everywhere and the terms of ‘here’ and ‘there’ are not used about Him.

But when we raise our hands to the sky in supplication it does not imply
that we consider God to be in the heavens. On the contrary we express
our humility and sincerity to Him and we visualize ourselves as a
helpless and an anxious beggar.

Also if we label a mosque and the Kaaba as the House of Allah, it is so
because we mean to say that the Almighty Allah is worshipped in them and
that He had Himself honored them by mentioning them as His houses.

### 7. Allah is not Needful

Allah is a being that is unlimited and perfect from every aspect and no
defect, limit or absence is present in His being. That is why He is a
Necessary Being (Wajibul Wujud) and absence and deficiency cannot be
imagined about Him. And since He is such, He is not in need of anything.
All perfections are bestowed by Him and He Himself in the position of a
unique being is in possession of all perfections. He does not lack
anything that he should be in need of it. Therefore God is not needful
of anyone or anything.

If He has fixed duties for the people and wants them to struggle in
Jihad, it is not because He is in need of worship and Jihad. On the
contrary, people themselves are in need of religion, Jihad and worship
for perfection of selves and success of hereafter. And merciful God by
sending the prophets and framing of laws and rules of religion has
guaranteed their needs. People do not favor God by being religious, on
the contrary the Almighty Allah is Kind that He has favored and guided
them by sending prophets and framing laws for them.

If He has made Zakat and Khums obligatory, and asked people to help the
needy and use funds in charitable and public welfare, it is not because
He is in need of material help of the people; it is because such things
are necessary to administer society and are there for the well-being of
the people in general.

Moreover, the Almighty Allah favored human beings and the material help,
which was for the well-being of human society, He labeled it as worship
act. On the contrary He considered it to be the greatest worship act.
Such that if it is performed with the intention of solely seeking the
proximity of God, it will be a factor of perfection of self and will
earn a hundred fold reward in the world of the hereafter.

### 8. God is not Unjust

God never commits any kind of injustice since He does not require
anything that He should be unjust. More details on this matter will be
mentioned in the discussion of divine justice.

### 9. God has no Partner

Neither has He a partner in creation nor in the administration of the
world; nor has He permitted taking anyone or anything else as a deity.
More details on this matter will be mentioned in the discussion of
oneness of God.

It is mentioned in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ وَإِنْ تَكُ حَسَنَةً
يُضَعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِنْ لَّدُنْهُ أَجْراً عَظِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah does not do injustice to the weight of an atom, and if
it is a good deed He multiplies it and gives from Himself a great
reward.” (4:40)***


