Oneness of God
==============

Oneness of the godhead is the fundamental principle of all heavenly
religions and a specialty of the religion of Islam. Divine prophets
called people to belief in oneness of God and monotheism and prohibited
them from polytheism and duality. The Holy Prophet of Islam (S) began
his mission with monotheism and in the first stage announced: Say ‘there
is no god except Allah’ and be successful. Laws and beliefs of Islam are
based on the oneness of the godhead.

The Holy Quran has accorded a special position to monotheism through
numerous verses in such a way that it can be said to be a book of
monotheism that opposes polytheism. The Holy Quran considers polytheism
to be the only sin which is unforgivable under every circumstance. And
He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَغْفِرُ أَن يُشْرَكَ بِهِ وَيَغْفِرُ مَا دُونَ ذَ
لِكَ لِمَن يَشَآءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated
with Him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He pleases…”
(4:48)***

There are many kinds of monotheisms and we mention some of them in brief
as follows:

Monotheism Of The Being
-----------------------

Monotheism of the being implies that all worldly phenomena are caused by
a single being and except Him there is no other creator. The great
being, who is called as ‘Allah’ is one and not more and He is unique. He
has an independent existence without any need whereas all phenomena of
the world are related to Him and are in need of Him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: He, Allah, is One.” (112:1)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا هُوَ إِلَهٌ وَحِدٌ وَإِنَّنِى بَرِى‏ءٌ مِّمَّا
تُشْرِكُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: He is only one God, and surely I am clear of that which you set
up (with Him).” (6:19)***

In books of philosophy and scholasticism oneness of the godhood is
proved through various logical reasonings.

But we do not need to mention their details and explanations. If it is
in the meaning of being that is necessary, pure and limitless, you will
indeed realize that such a being should necessarily be unique and not
multiple. In explanation of the matter it can be said that existing
beings are not other than of two kinds: either they are limited or
unlimited and absolute.

Limited beings are those whose existence is having a limit and they do
not possess the being and perfections of others and they can be negated
from it. For example: the existence of man is limited because he is a
man and that is why other things like plants and lifeless things are
placed with him and they can be negated from him. It can be said: Man is
not plant and lifeless matter and they are also not human.

Since such beings do not possess existence in the position of their own
being, they are needful and they have to take their existence from
others. In such limited beings multiplicity, imagination and possibility
of occurrence is present. As it is said (in plural form): Human beings,
animals, plants and lifeless matters.

The second type is unlimited beings: Since such beings do not have
limits and quantities; on the contrary they are absolute, pure and
unlimited. Since they are unlimited and do not have any defect, they
possess all the perfections and are needless from every aspect and free
of need in their being. In this supposition, the existence of the
greater and more free of need is not there that it should be needed.

In such a being actually, there is no imagination of multiplicity. In
front of a being that is unlimited, how can we imagine another being who
is unlimited and which should be its partner in creating and controlling
the universe? Because if the second supposed being also possesses all
the perfections of the being and is a part of its being, and if it lacks
some of the perfections of the first being, he would be one and the
same.

And if he lacks some perfection he would be limited and needful and such
a being cannot be considered as a partner of God. This leads us to
conclude that all phenomena of the world are limited and needful and are
related to the Almighty Allah and we only have a single unique and pure
being and He is one and has no partner.

Oneness in Attributes
---------------------

Oneness in attributes means that the qualities of the Almighty Allah are
His very being and not additional to His being. A few points can be
mentioned to explain it:

1. Existing beings possess an existence and qualities; for example you
see a white paper and say: This is a white paper. In this example,
‘paper’ is the being and ‘white’ is the quality. Paper can be white and
it cannot be white. Whiteness is incidental to the paper and it does not
have a separate existence. Whiteness is other than the paper and that is
why it is possible for it not to be white.

Another example: Let us consider a knowing man. Here we have a knowing
man and knowledge. Man is a being and knowledge is his attribute.
Knowledge is not in the position of the being of man; on the contrary it
is an incidental matter. If knowledge had been in the being of man, he
would not have required acquiring it. Thus knowledge is neither the very
being of man nor a part of his being.

2. Previously you read that the Almighty Allah possesses all the
attributes of perfection. Since He is an unlimited being, it is
necessary for Him to have all perfections. And if not, He would be
deficient, limited, needful and an effect. You also learnt about the
qualities of perfection like knowledge, power, life, hearing and sight.

Now the question arises that of what type the qualities of Almighty
Allah are? Are they like qualities of other people which are incidental
and additional to their beings? Can the divine being of Almighty Allah
be ever bereft of knowledge, hearing and seeing and are these qualities
incidental to His being, as in the case of human beings? Or that the
qualities of Almighty Allah are of some other kind? If you ponder on the
above discussion, you would easily get the reply to this query?

In order to explain this we should say: The Almighty Allah is a being in
such a way that His existence is unlimited, absolute, and pure and has
no end. Positive attributes of such a being cannot be denied. And if
not, He would be limited, deficient and needful. Therefore knowledge,
power and life and other positive attributes are the very being of
Almighty Allah, and not incidental and additional to His being. That is
why He is always in possession of the qualities and He does not need to
acquire them.

The Almighty Allah is an unlimited being, and is knowledge, power and
life itself. Since His being is Necessary Being (Wajibul Wujud), His
knowledge, life and power would also be necessary and free of need of
cause and unlimited; although He is only a single being and not more;
but He is such an unlimited being that different meanings can be
separated from Him.

With regard to Almighty Allah it is not that we should have a described
being and the attributes be separate from Him; on the contrary, His
divine being and positive attributes are in fact each other and He is
one unlimited and absolute being.

In Nahjul Balagha, Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s.) has mentioned this critical
matter and said:

“Perfection of sincerity is to deny Him attributes, because every
attribute is a proof that it is different from that to which it is
attributed and everything to which something is attributed is different
from the attribute. Thus whoever attaches attributes to Allah recognizes
His like, and who recognizes His like regards Him two; and who regards
Him two recognizes parts for Him; and who recognizes parts for Him
mistook Him; and who mistook Him pointed at Him; and who pointed at Him
admitted limitations for Him; and who admitted limitations for Him
numbered Him.”[^1]

Oneness in Creation
-------------------

Creation is in the meaning of origination. Oneness in creation implies
that Almighty Allah, since He is one in His being and does not have any
partner, in creation also He is one and there is no creator other than
Him. Previously we mentioned that beings are of two types: one is such
that its being is its very existence and has no need of anyone or
anything else. Secondly there are beings, which in the position of
existence do not have independent existence and they need other beings
to bring them into existence; and that is unique being of the Lord of
the worlds.

That is why all phenomena of the world need Almighty Allah for their
existence and they have no other who has given them existence, as the
possible phenomenon since originally are needful of the holy being of
Almighty Allah and in survival, continuity of being, and in their
actions and effects are also related to and needful of this needless
being. If they are not independent existence they also do not have
independence in action and effects.

It is God who has brought them into existence and not made their beings
null and void. That is why whatever is there, is from Almighty Allah and
it does not have any creator and originator other than Him. This is the
meaning of oneness in creation.

There is no power and strength except that of Allah, the High and the
Mighty. Although phenomena of the world have effects; for example the
Sun possesses light and heat, it helps in the growth of plants and
plants in turn prepare food for animals and human beings. And hundreds
and thousands of other effect like we see in Nature in this world; such
effects cannot be denied, but they are not creators and originators. On
the contrary in effect of natural actions or reaction the effects that
are bestowed to them become obvious.

The creator of the universe is one who has given existence to natural
beings and has bestowed effects and specialties to them. Scientists have
made amazing new inventions through experiments and research, but with a
little attention it can be concluded that they have not brought them
into existence; on the contrary their most important achievement is the
exposition of secrets hidden in material natures, which the creator of
the world has placed in their beings. We do not negate the causality and
effects and effectuality of the material world. On the contrary we also
do not negate the independence of their effects. From these statements
we can conclude that since the Almighty Allah is one in His being, He is
also one in His creation and that He has no partners.

We can conclude from the Holy Quran that the polytheists of the Arabian
Peninsula also confessed to oneness in creation.

The Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَسَخَّرَ
الشَّمْسَ وَ الْقَمَرَ لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ فَأَنَّى‏ يُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth and made
the sun and the moon subservient, they will certainly say, Allah. Whence
are they then turned away?” (29:61)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَّن نَّزَّلَ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَأَحْيَا بِهِ
الْأَرْضَ مِن بَعْدِ مَوْتِهَا لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you ask them Who is it that sends down water from the clouds,
then gives life to the earth with it after its death, they will
certainly say, Allah.” (29:63)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفِى اللَّهِ شَكٌّ فَاطِرِ السَّمَوَ تِ وَالْأَرْضِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is there doubt about Allah, the Maker of the heavens and the earth?”
(14:10)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُ خَلِقُ كُلِّ شَىْ‏ءٍ وَهُوَ الْوَ حِدُ الْقَهَّرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the
Supreme.” (13:16)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ اللَّهُ الْخَالِقُ الْبَارِئُ الْمُصَوِّرُ لَهُ الْأَسْمَآءُ
الْحُسْنَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is Allah the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the most
excellent names…” (59:24)***

It can be concluded from such verses that the polytheists of the Arabian
Peninsula and the ones addressed in the Quran knew that creation was
from Almighty Allah and they were not polytheists in this matter. But it
cannot be concluded from these verses that the polytheists of all areas
of the world also have same belief and that they accept oneness of god
in creation; as in the case of Zoroastrians; who believe that all good
is created by Yazdan and all evil is created by Ahriman. However we
would refute this belief in the discussion of monotheism through logical
reasonings.

Oneness in Lordship and Will
----------------------------

We mentioned previously that since Almighty Allah is a unique and single
being; He also is one in creation and has no partner in it. Now we shall
prove that He is also one in Lordship and control of universe. First we
should define lordship and will and after that we should set out to
reason out from them.

Lord in dictionary means one having something in His control so that He
may reform its condition. Will is also in the same meaning: for example
a piece of land is given in charge of a person in order that he may
perform all necessary acts with regard to it. The gardener is identified
as the lord and manager of the agricultural plot. The gardener is not
the creator of the plot; on the contrary he is the lord and caretaker.
Or for example if a person is given the power of creation and
administrative matters are left at his discretion, he would also be
called as the lord and controller. Or a man who is entrusted with the
matter concerning quadrupeds; he is also considered as their lord and
administrator.

Now the question arises that who is in control of the universe? Is it
under the control of God, who has created it without any partner? Or He
has handed over the charge of all or some of the phenomena to someone or
something else? And this same matter is the topic of our discussion.
From Quran and history it can be concluded that although the polytheists
of the Arabian Peninsula accepted the oneness of god in creation, they
did not ascribe to belief in the oneness of god in controlling and
administering the world; on the contrary they considered other persons
and things to be His associates in this regard.

Polytheists of the Arabian Peninsula, like polytheists of all countries
of the world, believed that the Lord creator of the world (greater
being) has entrusted the management of the world to invisible powers
like angels, jinn, god of men, god of animals, god of seas and deserts,
god of plants, god of human reproduction, holy spirits, evil spirits; so
that they may control the world of nature independently and because of
this belief, whenever they were confronted by dangers, calamities and to
solve difficulties and fulfillment of needs they take refuge in a power
related to the unseen; and to attract his attention perform offerings
and rituals.

And as they were only ‘imaginary’ unseen powers, they shaped their
images in wood, stone and metal and named them as idols and during
worship focused their attention on them and humbled themselves before
them while in fact their aim was to focus attention on unseen powers and
different deities.

But the Holy Quran considers polytheism in lordship and will an invalid
belief and also regards lordship as a special attribute of Almighty
Allah. There are numerous verses in the Holy Quran which mention this
point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِى رَفَعَ السَّمَوَ تِ بِغَيْرِ عَمَدٍ تَرَوْنَهَا ثُمَّ
اسْتَوَى‏ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ وَ سَخَّرَ الشَّمْسَ وَ الْقَمَرَ كُلٌّ
يَجْرِى لِأَجَلٍ مُّسَمّىً يُدَبِّرُ الْاُمْرَ يُفَصِّلُ الْأَيَتِ
لَعَلَّكُمْ بِلِقَآءِ رَبِّكُمْ تُوقِنُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is He Who raised the heavens without any pillars that you see,
and He is firm in power and He made the sun and the moon subservient (to
you); each one pursues its course to an appointed time; He regulates the
affair, making clear the signs that you may be certain of meeting your
Lord.” (13:2)***

And it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبَّكُمُ اللَّهُ الَّذِى خَلَقَ السَّمَوَتِ وَالْأَرْضَ فِى
سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ ثُمَّ اسْتَوَى‏ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ يُدَبِّرُ الْأَمْرَ
مَا مِن شَفِيعٍ إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ إِذْنِهِ ذَ لِكُمُ اللَّهُ رَبُّكُمْ
فَاعْبُدُوهُ أَفَلَا تَذَكَّرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods, and He is firm in power, regulating the affair, there is no
intercessor except after His permission; this is Allah, your Lord,
therefore serve Him; will you not then mind?” (10:3)***

Occupying the seat of authority and command (Arsh) is a simile for
complete authority on the entire world to administer and ruling which is
this same destiny and lordship. That is why lordship and divine will are
also qualities only of Almighty Allah and the holy being of Allah from
this aspect is also unique; and effect of causes and other cause will be
there with His existential permission.

As mentioned in other verses also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَل رَّبُّكُمْ رَبُّ السَّمَوَتِ وَالْأَرْضِ الَّذِى فَطَرَهُنَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Nay! your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, Who brought
them into existence…” (21:56)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَغَيْرَ اللَّهِ أَبْغِى رَبّاً وَهُوَ رَبُّ كُلِّ شَىْ‏ءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: What! shall I seek a Lord other than Allah? And He is the Lord
of all things…” (6:164)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَمْدُ ِللَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَلَمِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.” (1:2)***

Therefore as the Almighty Allah is single in His being and creation and
previously you have learnt about the argumentations of the same, in
lordship and administering of the world also He is alone, without any
partners. He controls the world and does not leave matters related to
the whole world to anyone or anything else. Philosophical reasoning
means the same that was mentioned in the oneness in creation.

There we mentioned that the possible phenomena of the world in His being
and actions are needful of a being as His existence is free of need of
others and such a being is not except the being of the Almighty Allah.
It was also mentioned there that the worldly phenomena (visible and
invisible) since they are dependent on a higher being for their
existence, in their actions and effects also they are in need of that
self-sufficient being and are fully dependent on it. We don’t have a
permanent and needless being among the worldly phenomena that lordship
and control of the world can be entrusted to it.

And if we see causality and effectiveness in the phenomena of the world,
we should consider them to be His direct actions and imagine that the
control of the world is entrusted to it. On the contrary as mentioned in
Quran, mediums and causes act through the permission of Allah. Although
angels are mediums of divine favors and possess effects, but their
influence is not independent. In the same way, material causes have
effect in the being of causality and not that they are independent; on
the contrary they themselves and their effects are needful and dependent
on Almighty Allah.

Oneness in Worship
------------------

Oneness in worship means monotheism and restricting worship only to the
holy being of Almighty Allah. Oneness in worship was the most important
call of the prophets. Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِى كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَّسُولاً أَنِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُواْ الطَّغُوتَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We raised in every nation an apostle saying: Serve
Allah and shun the Shaitan.” (16:36)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَرْسَلْنَا مِن قَبْلِكَ مِن رَّسُولٍ إِلَّا نُوحِى إِلَيْهِ
أَنَّهُ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنَاْ فَاعْبُدُونِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We did not send before you any apostle but We revealed to him
that there is no god but Me, therefore serve Me.” (21:25)***

Worship means servitude and obeisance and a special humility in front of
the deity with the condition that the worship act should arise from
belief in divinity, lordship, will and creatibility of the deity. Since
divinity, lordship, will and creatibility are reserved only for the holy
being of Almighty Allah worship and servitude should also be reserved
for Him and no other being is eligible for this position and this is the
meaning of oneness in worship.

As opposed to oneness in worship, we have polytheism in worship. It can
be concluded from the Holy Quran that some people worship beings other
than Allah, like: angels, unseen powers, sun and moon and some stars;
they pay homage to them and make offerings and sacrifices to them. Their
worship arises from belief that those deities have lordship and control
of the universe and they can guarantee the fulfillment of their needs
effectively and directly. They perform worships, offerings and
sacrifices to be noticed by them. And if they paid homage before the
idols of stone, woods and metals, it was because they considered them to
be an expression of those hidden beings and through invalid conjectures
considered their worship to be a medium of divine proximity, while they
cannot do anything. Quran has ridiculed the polytheists for this worship
and says: Worship Allah as He is the doer of the world. The Holy Quran
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَتَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرّاً
وَلَا نَفْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Do you serve besides Allah that which does not control for you
any harm, or any profit?” (5:76)***

And says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ تَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ لَا يَمْلِكُونَ لَكُمْ
رِزْقاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You only worship idols besides Allah and you create a lie; surely
they whom you serve besides Allah do not control for you any
sustenance…” (29:17)***

And says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ رَبِّى وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ هَذَا صِرَاطٌ
مُّسْتَقِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this
is the right path.” (19:36)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا النّاسُ اعْبُدُواْ رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِى خَلَقَكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ
مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O men! serve your Lord Who created you and those before you so that
you may guard (against evil).” (2:21)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقَوْمِ اعْبُدُواْ اللَّهَ مَا لَكُم مِّنْ إِلَهٍ غَيْرُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We sent Nuh to his people, so he said: O my people! serve
Allah, you have no god other than Him…” (7:59)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَعْبُدُونَ مِن دُونِ اللَّهِ مَا لَا يَضُرُّهُمْ وَلَا يَنْفَعُهُمْ
وَيَقُولُونَ هَؤُلَآءِ شُفَعَؤُنَا عِندَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they serve beside Allah what can neither harm them nor profit
them, and they say: These are our intercessors with Allah.” (10:18)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أُمِرُواْ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُواْ إِلَهاً وَ حِداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…they were enjoined that they should serve one God only.” (9:31)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلْ إِنَّمَآ أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ وَلَا أُشْرِكَ بِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: I am only commanded that I should serve Allah and not associate
anything with Him…” (13:36)***

As you must have noted, the Holy Quran negates the lordship, divinity
and creation of false deities and their worship; and declares it to be a
wrongful and useless act and considers worship to be reserved only for
the Almighty Allah as lordship and control of the universe is reserved
for Him alone. In the previous lessons we have learnt through
philosophical reasonings and there is no need to repeat it again.

As mentioned in the history of worship (religion), every humility, even
the goal of humility cannot be taken to be an implication of worship, on
the contrary humility in worship is that it should have come from belief
in divinity, creation and lordship of the deity. And that is why the
prostration of angels before His Eminence, Adam; since Almighty Allah
had ordered it, it was not polytheism. Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قُلْنَا لِلْمَلَئِكَةِ اسْجُدُواْ لِأَدَمَ فَسَجَدُواْ إِلَّا
إِبْلِيسَ قَالَ ءَأَسْجُدُ لِمَنْ خَلَقْتَ طِيناً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when We said to the angels: Make obeisance to Adam; they made
obeisance, but Iblis (did it not). He said: Shall I make obeisance to
him whom Thou hast created of dust?” (17:61)***

It is known that prostration before His Eminence, Adam (a.s.) was not
worship and polytheism, otherwise Almighty Allah would never have
ordered it. And in the same way, the prostration of Prophet Yusuf and
his brothers in front of their parents was not worship and polytheism as
mentioned in Quran that Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) seated his parents on the
throne and fell down in prostration to them along with his brothers.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَفَعَ أَبَوَيْهِ عَلَى الْعَرْشِ وَ خَرُّواْ لَهُ سُجَّداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And he raised his parents upon the throne and they fell down in
prostration before him.” (12:100)***

It is learnt that the prostration of angels for Adam (a.s.) and the
prostration of Prophet Yusuf (a.s.) and his brothers for Prophet Yaqub
(a.s.) was not worship and polytheism. Because angels, Prophet Yusuf
(a.s.) and his brothers did not prostrate before Adam (a.s.) and Yaqub
(a.s.) due to belief in their divinity, creation and lordship. On the
contrary it was on account of respect and honor.

Kissing the Black Stone and touching it and circling the Kaaba in the
holy religion of Islam is considered as worship act and it is ordered to
perform it. In spite of the fact that the goal of humility is Kaaba, it
is not considered as polytheism. Therefore the Ziyarat of the holy tomb
of the Holy Prophet of Islam and kissing of the sarcophagus and
supplication near it also will not be considered as implied polytheism.
And in the same way, visiting the tombs of the Holy Imams (a.s.) and
kissing their graves and seeking the mediation of those purified souls
with Almighty Allah and praying and seeking their intercession are also
not considered polytheism.

Because all visitors know that the Holy Prophet (S) and Holy Imams
(a.s.) were servants of Almighty Allah and needful of Him. Their honor
and respect is not due to belief in their divinity, creation and
lordship. Respect of those holy tombs is only due to the fact that they
are related to the holy souls of the Holy Prophet (S) and his chosen
descendants and in traditions Almighty Allah has ordered paying respect
to them, to keep their memory alive and express our loyalty to those
chosen ones.

Mediation through these holy souls, which is proved beyond doubt in
Islamic law, is in fact obedience of the laws of Shariah and a medium of
gaining proximity to Almighty Allah. You take advantage of natural
causes in the matters of life and it is not polytheism, seeking
mediation of holy souls of divine saints can also be from unnatural
causes. But in any case neither natural cause have independence in their
effects, nor unnatural cause; and they cannot be considered as
polytheism.

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 1.


