Divine Justice
==============

Divine Justice is a positive attribute and one of actions; implying that
all acts of God are performed in accordance with justice and His holy
being is pure of injustice. Divine justice is an Islamic belief and it
is ascribed to by all Muslims in general, although there is difference
of opinion in its interpretation between scholastic theologians and they
are divided into two groups: Mutazali and Ashari or Adliya and Ghair
Adliya.

In the Holy Quran, the quality of justice is proved for Almighty Allah
and injustice is negated about Him. For example:

It is said in Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَهِدَ اللَّهُ أَنَّهُ لَآ إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ وَالْمَلَِكَةُ
وَأُوْلُواْ الْعِلْمِ قَآئِمَاً بِالْقِسْطِ لَآ إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation with
justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.” (3:18)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ تَمَّتْ كَلِمَتُ رَبِّكَ صِدْقاً وَ عَدْلاً لَا مُبَدِّلَ
لِكَلِمَتِهِ وَ هُوَ الْسَّمِيعُ الْعَلِيمُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the word of your Lord has been accomplished truly and justly;
there is none who can change His words, and He is the Hearing, the
Knowing.” (6:115)***

And says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ وَإِنْ تَكُ حَسَنَةً
يُضَعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِنْ لَّدُنْهُ أَجْراً عَظِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah does not do injustice to the weight of an atom, and if
it is a good deed He multiplies it and gives from Himself a great
reward.” (4:40)***

There is no doubt in the goodness of justice and evil of injustice.
Everyone likes justice and praises one who is just; they consider
injustice as evil and condemn the unjust. Justice has many definitions,
but this is not the time to mention them or to do any research on this
topic.

The best definition is that which is derived from the words of Nahjul
Balagha: Imam Ali (a.s.) has mentioned justice to be superior to
generosity and he says:

Justice is placing everything in its appropriate place.[^1]

Justice implies fulfillment of the rights of all those who have a right.

Every person, according to his creation, has some special rights and
others are duty-bound to honor them; like the right to work and
possession of the fruits of their labor, right of security and freedom,
life and right of education, right to marry and reproduce and tens of
other rights; just as one who respects the right of others in his
society and he does not trespass on them. We can use two reasonings to
prove justice of Allah and to negate that He is unjust:

The First Proof Is Quran
------------------------

The Almighty Allah in numerous verses of Quran has ordered justice and
equity and He has prohibited injustice and cruelty.

We present three verses by way of example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَأْمُرُ بِالْعَدْلِ وَالْإِحْسَنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of good (to
others)…” (16:90)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ ءَامَنُوا كُونُوا قَوَّ مِينَ بِالْقِسْطِ
شُهَدَاءَ لِلَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness of
Allah’s sake…” (4:135)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ اللَّهَ غَفِلاً عَمَّا يَعْمَلُ الظَّلِمُونَ
إِنَّمَا يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ لِيَوْمٍ تَشْخَصُ فِيهِ الْأَبْصَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And do not think Allah to be heedless of what the unjust do; He only
respites them to a day on which the eyes shall be fixedly open.”
(14:42)***

The God, who has commanded justice and equity to people, and warned them
against injustice and cruelty; how is it possible that He should Himself
be unjust to His creatures.

The Second Is Logical Proof
---------------------------

One who does not observe the rights of others and oppresses them, is not
in other than some conditions: either he does not perceive the evil of
injustice or he is needful of that which he takes from the oppressed; or
usurps the fruits of their labor in order to remove his deficiency or he
does not have the power of fulfilling their rights. Or he is miserly and
he observes miserliness in fulfilling the rights of others or commits
injustice by way of revenge or a vain past time.

But none of these possibilities exist with regard to Almighty Allah,
because you have seen before He is all-knowing and wise and He performs
all His actions under the dictates of His knowledge and wisdom, and
ignorance is not found in His being. He is in possession of all
perfections and is not deficient in any of them.

He is the owner of all perfections and does not have any defect so that
He should need to oppress others in order to make up for His deficiency.
He is beneficent and generous and His own possessions are not reduced in
bestowing them to others so that He should be miserly in it. He is
absolute power and He does not weaken by giving power to others.

Therefore since injustice is an evil act whose evil is perceived by all
sensible beings, Almighty Allah is also pure of injustice. He bestows
perfection to every existing being, including man, according to its
capacity and capability and He does not trespass any of their rights.

Justice in Creation
-------------------

Justice in creation is in the meaning that consideration must be
observed with regard to capacities in creation of existing beings of the
world and from the side of Almighty Allah there is no hindrance of grace
and unlawful discrimination is exercised and in explanation of this
statement, it is necessary to understand the following points:

First point: Phenomena of the world of existence can be divided into two
kinds: abstract world and material world.

A) Abstract world: Abstractions are existing beings, which do not have
movement and growth; they are from the beginning as they should be and
in terminology they have absolute functions and are not material and
physical; they are not visible; they neither deteriorate nor die. They
are mediums of divine favors and they have no disobedience or
opposition.

These invisible beings in the terminology of religion are introduced as
angels, armies of God, destiny, distributor, throne, chair, tablet and
pen. From such definitions it can be concluded that between the creator
of the world and the phenomenon of the existing world there are
connections which are invisible. In other words, the system of creation
has come into being with a particular sequence and is being administered
in this way. Angels are enforcers of divine commands and they never
disobey or oppose God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا يَعْصُونَ اللَّهَ مَآ أَمَرَهُمْ وَ يَفْعَلُونَ مَا يُؤْمَرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…they do not disobey Allah in what He commands them, and do as they
are commanded.” (66:6)***

Also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِنَّآ إِلَّا لَهُ مَقَامٌ مَّعْلُومٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there is none of us but has an assigned place.” (37:164)***

It is said that the positions of angels are divinely ordained and not by
way of gaining eligibility for the same; such that each of them have a
special existence and their responsibilities are derived from it. It
should not remain unsaid that angels in their beings and actions do not
have independence, on the contrary, they are mediums and not more than
that and they are needful of and related to Almighty Allah who is
needless, powerful, knowing and wise.

B) Material and physical world: Materiality as opposed to abstractness
possesses a form and shape. They are changeable in essence and they have
movement and growth. Material forms undergo changes, but the matter
remains. When matter, under the effect of movement becomes capable to
accept a new form it is bestowed that form; for example the apple tree;
it possesses a matter and a form. Its form can be defined to be an apple
tree, which grows and gives fruits.

And its matter is defined as something, which has taken the shape of the
apple tree. It means that the matter of the apple tree was having
another form previously; for example it was an apple seed and it
developed the capability to become a tree. After that the form of the
tree was given to it. Then the tree became dried and its form changed
and it turned into dust. But its matter is the same previous matter, but
it does not have the signs of the apple tree. State of the matter, its
form, change and transformation will continue in the same way.

The world of matter and materiality is very vast and human beings do not
have perfect and correct knowledge about them. Our awareness is limited
with the earth and limited number of earthly existing things like
different kinds of plants, animals, minerals, water, air, light, heat
and some knowledge of the sun and some stars; but we are mostly ignorant
of the universe and galaxies and stars. We do not have perfect knowledge
of the great universe, which is mostly unseen by us, although we have
conducted extensive researches and still continue to do so; and the
secrets unraveled so far are very less in comparison to the millions of
secrets that still remain to be unraveled.

But that which can be said in brief is that all of them are phenomena of
material beings which have evolved through ages under the effect of
different natural factors to assume a new form and when new capabilities
developed, they assumed a new form. We also do not have precise and
complete awareness about the future of this movement and perpetual
search. Glory be to Allah, the greatest.

Second point – Law of general causality: Previously we learnt the
meaning of cause and effect. Effect is the phenomenon, which does not
exist in its own being. Its existence and non-existence is same and it
is in this aspect that it is needful of a cause. Cause is something on
which the effect depends. Between every cause and effect there is a
relation of particular originality. Every effect is not created by every
cause.

And every effect is not resultant of every cause. If the cause is a
phenomenon, it is itself in need of a cause. And in the same way, its
cause and the cause of its cause, and this continues till we come to a
cause, which is not a phenomenon. That is a being free of need and
self-sufficient in its existence and that is the Almighty Allah who is a
necessary being (Wajibul Wujud) and who is also called as the cause of
all causes.

Therefore, the law of cause and effect is a complete and
all-encompassing law, which controls the world of existence and which
has endowed it a system. Almighty Allah has created the universe and He
controls it through the system of cause and effect. The world is having
discipline and it follows a fixed law; it is administered by the command
of God. It is mentioned in the Holy Quran that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا كُلَّ شَىْ‏ءٍ خَلَقْنَاهُ بِقَدَرٍ /وَمَآ أَمْرُنَآ إِلَّا
وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have created everything according to a measure. And Our
command is but one, as the twinkling of an eye.” (54:49-50)***

In this legal system, every phenomenon holds a particular position and
does not infringe it. If it had been other than this, the whole system
would have collapsed.

Now we shall explain divine justice in creation in detail: Divine
justice in creation implies that the origin of the creation of man and
the distinctive qualities of all just persons is according to their
capability and eligibility and denying grace and improper prejudice has
not been resorted to.

According to this explanation, man is an existing being of the natural
world. Like plants, he responds to nutrition, he has growth and
reproduction; like different animals he possesses perceptions and
intentional movement. Therefore he can be considered as a kind of plant
and animal. But he is in possession of an important excellence, which is
not present in other plants and animals.

Man has intelligence and reason, which is not found in any of the
animals. The cause of this excellence is his abstract and ethereal soul
to which the humanity of man is related. In terminology he is called as
the ‘form of human genus’. Like other existing beings, man also
possesses matter as well as a form.

Matter of man is that which was present in another form previously and
now it has assumed the shape of man and has accepted the abstract
ethereal soul. Every matter is not capable to accept the human soul.
Matters that have accepted the form of plants or animals cannot directly
accept the human soul and become humans. It is only the seed of man
(sperm) that can accept the soul of man and become a human being; and
that also after many amazing changes and growths.

The seed of man also was not a seed previously; on the contrary it was
present in another form. It became a seed gradually and after undergoing
changes. When the human sperm was placed in an appropriate place – that
is in the womb of a mother – it mixed with the female egg and becomes
capable of accepting the human soul and it is joined to it and it should
be as such since Almighty Allah is not miserly.

But human beings also all are not same from the aspect of sense, memory,
form, skin color, height and physical perfection or deficiency; on the
contrary they are different from each other. These differences are also
effects of the specialties of the parents and their ancestors; kind of
nutrition of the parents is effective during pregnancy and lactation;
their environment, health or sickness of the father mother or
grandparents. The sperm, which accepts the form of a special human
being, is capable in this way and according to the system of cause and
effect should be created like this.

Therefore every man in the system of cause and effect possesses a
special position and according to special qualities, which his matter
has bestowed has the eligibility of being and in the same way and
without injustice and discrimination obtains the being and perfections
of being. But if it is other than this, it should be that the universal
law of cause and effect will be deranged and the original system will go
awry and basically will not create existence.

Therefore justice in the creation of man and the world implies that
phenomenon of the world, including human beings are according to the
capability that they have developed eligibility of being and in the same
quantum and in the same manner are given similar existence, perfections
of being, and denying grace and improper prejudice has not been resorted
to.

Divine Justice and Objections Against It
----------------------------------------

Divine Justice is an important Islamic topic, which is discussed
everywhere in books of theology and philosophy. Philosophers and
scholars of Islam believe in it and they defended it energetically; on
the other hand some opponents have denied and refuted justice of Allah
and have expressed doubts in this regard and still do it. They consider
destructive earthquakes, damaging floods, children born disabled and
diseased, differences between human beings, presence of carnivorous
beasts and poisonous reptiles as signs of the absence of justice in
creation and in this way they have also denied the root of the existence
of the creator of the world and also created doubts in resurrection.

Therefore, in present conditions, need is felt for a plan to prove the
matter of divine justice and replying to the doubts. Discussion of
justice and replying to objections against it is one of the important
points of philosophy and theology, which is studied in detail in books
of philosophy and theology and proved as a fact. Regretfully all those
objections cannot be studied fully in this brief writing, but in order
to assure that none of the doubts remain unanswered, we shall mention
their simple and brief replies. The most important objections and their
replies can be divided into four groups:

### First: Natural Calamities

Like destructive earthquakes, damaging floods, terrifying storms and
other natural calamities are included in this group. It is said:
Occurrence of these bitter happenings, which are mostly accompanied by
great losses in terms of life and property; how can they be compatible
with divine justice. Why He does not prevent such incidents? Why He has
created the world in this way?

In brief, it can be said that such kinds of occurrences, like natural
happenings are as a result of particular causes, on the other hand
previously you have seen that Almighty Allah has created and He
administers the world of nature and material phenomena through the
system of cause and effect; and that He has arranged the world according
to the system of cause and effect and not that He first created the
phenomena and after that He gave cause and effect to them; on the
contrary cause and effect in their very essence are related to each
other. Each of the causes and effects are placed in a particular
position and negation of each of them would be construed as denial of
the total system. For example, look at the stages of numbers: each of
the numbers (1-2-3…and so on) holds a special position. Number five
cannot take the place of ten and vice versa. It is not possible to
completely remove number five from the serial of numbers. Its removal
would imply removal of numeric system.

The system of creation is also like this. Every phenomenon holds a
special position and is connected to its natural cause. It terminates at
the cause of the causes; that is Almighty Allah as His being is free of
need of others. All phenomena of the world of existence has come into
existence through His intention and they are administered by the same;
but not through different intentions; on the contrary through a
widespread intention. Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَمْرُنَآ إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Our command is but one, as the twinkling of an eye.” (54:50)***

Therefore earthquake is a natural phenomenon and according to the
statement of experts, it has numerous benefits with it and in the system
of nature it is considered to be an important matter. They say: If there
had been no earthquakes, there would have been no mountains. And if
mountains had not been there, there had been no rain and snow; and if
rain had not been there, plant, animal and human life would have not
been possible.

Although sometimes, some earthquakes are accompanied by destruction of
life and property, which are requisites of competition between natural
phenomena it cannot be expected from Almighty Allah that He should
personally intervene in case of destructive earthquakes and prevent them
as preventing it would be only possible by negating its cause and it
would necessitate the derangement of system of creation.

Preventing the damages of earthquakes is the function of human beings
themselves. Almighty Allah has given sense and intelligence to man, so
that through gaining knowledge and experience he may understand the
causes and factors underlying the earthquakes; and through the reins of
natures he may prevent the damages caused by them; or at least minimize
them; that he should not inhabit areas prone to earthquakes and avoid
constructions there; as some countries have taken profound steps in
solving this problem.

Especially, the same thing can be said with regard to damaging floods:
Floods are caused by heavy rains due to slope of surfaces of the earth
and fluidity of water. Therefore the flowing of floods in special
circumstances is a natural phenomenon as it is the effect of a
particular cause. Falling of rain on highlands, sloping of land and
flowing of water is among the great divine bounties, which provide life
to plants, animals and human beings.

And all of them are good in their own position; have you so far thought
that if rain had not fallen on highlands or if the earth had not been
sloping or if the nature of water had not been flowing, how our life
would have been? Although their necessary factor is such that in some
instances there will be floods entailing loss of life and property and
the responsibility of preventing these losses rests on sensible human
beings. He must not build residential buildings in flood prone areas and
that he must strengthen his constructions in accordance to the
possibility of floods. If man falls short in this regard and suffers
losses, it is due to his own shortcoming.

### Second: Children born with physical defects

One of the instances that refute divine justice is the creation of
children born with physical defects. Like children who at the time of
birth are deaf, dumb, blind, paralyzed, disabled, insane or spastic. It
is said: Existence of such deformed children who are compelled to lead a
difficult life and their parents also have to suffer a great deal on
account of them; how can it be compatible to divine justice? Why they do
not possess perfect physical health like other children? And why they
were created at all? Is it not injustice?

In reply to this doubt, it can be said: The defect of these children is
either due to genetic mutation through the parents or can also be as a
result of inappropriate diet of the parents, especially of the mother
during pregnancy and lactation. Or as a result of toxic and harmful
matters that it may come in contact with during fetal development in a
dirty environment. Or it can be due to an injury received during its
fetal stage.

In any case, the defect of the newborn is related to the defect of the
matter that has accepted the form of human being. Almighty Allah has not
given a defective existence to such children; on the contrary He created
them but their capacity of accepting matter was not more than this.
Special capacity and capability of the matter of each of them also would
be the effect of the cause and its special causes.

Two questions arise at this point: Firstly, the God who is aware of the
defect of this matter, why did He bring that defective human being into
existence? Secondly, is the Almighty Allah not capable of bestowing a
perfect and healthy matter to man?

In reply to the first question, it can be said: As mentioned previously,
the existence of material phenomena is related to a particular
capability that develops in that matter. Every capability that develops
in that matter is according to the form, which would be given to it.
Matters which develop the capability to create the form of human beings
would be given human forms. Human soul is good and perfection, it should
be increased, finally it is that if this matter is having the capacity
of physical maturity it will mature in the proper manner and if there
was defect in it, it would be deprived of perfect maturity.

In reply to the second question, it can be said: As mentioned
previously, Almighty Allah has created and manages the phenomena of
existence through causes and effects and it is through this that the
world is arranged. It cannot be expected from Almighty Allah to
personally intervene in some circumstances, and that without natural
causes He should assure the perfect development of a thing, which does
not possess perfect matter. It would imply that Allah in some instances
nullifies the law of cause and effect causing disruption of the system
of the world; and this is not acceptable. In other words, there is no
doubt in the power of Almighty Allah but His power cannot be related to
a logically impossible matter and the derangement of the system of cause
and effect is from the logically impossible matters.

Therefore, defects which are seen in children are due to defective sperm
and lack of capability of the sperm with which the soul of man was
added. And those defects themselves also were effects of their special
cause and were necessary factors of the material world and a product of
competition of material beings and their prevention is not possible
except through prevention of occurrence of their natural causes. Allah
has bestowed man with intelligence and sense, so that he may discover
through study and experience the causes of these defects and that he may
use this knowledge in childbirth; on the contrary even at the time of
selecting the spouse; and that he may observe all the rules of hygiene
in his environment and nutrition during pregnancy and delivery and can
prevent the birth of defective children to the maximum.

It is possible that someone might say: In case the parents and those
responsible for making the environment healthy and general hygiene do
not fulfill their obligations and they brought a defective child into
this word; but what is its fault that it is compelled to spend its life
in extreme difficulties? We reply: Although he is not responsible for
this, Almighty Allah has also not made him responsible more than what he
can bear. He is a man and every man is given spiritual perfection
according to his capability and efforts. His patience and forbearance
would also not remain unrewarded and in the world after death, he would
be recompensed for them. His parents and other caretakers would also be
rewarded well.

### Third: Differences between Individuals

Another excuse for objecting to the justice of God is the difference of
complexion, beauty and ugliness, intelligence and memory, physical
powers and other types of such matters. It is said that all human beings
have right to live, why are they created with such differences? Why all
human beings are not given equal intelligence? What is the fault of ugly
people that they are created so ugly? Are such differences not
discrimination and injustice?

In reply, it can be said: These differences or causes of different
capabilities were present in the eggs of the parents and which they
inherited from their ancestors or it is the effect of the parts and
environment of their life or it is the effect of type of nutrition of
the parents, especially that of the mother during pregnancy. In any
case, differences in human beings are due to differences in their
natural capabilities. In other words, differences cannot be denied, but
they should not be considered as improper prejudice; prejudice is
justified only when two seeds which were same from the aspect of
capability are given two kinds of perfection of existence; while the
fact is that it is not so.

### Fourth: Existence of Harmful Creatures

It is said that the existence of harmful creatures, like carnivorous
beasts, poisonous reptiles, different harmful viruses and microbes which
pose danger to the life and safety of human beings and some animals; how
can they be compatible with divine justice? What is the benefit of such
harmful creatures? And why were they created at all?

In reply it can be said: Generosity and beneficence of Almighty Allah
demands that He must bestow existence to every matter, which develops in
itself the capability to accept a soul in proportion of its capability.
If it develops the ability to accept the soul of animals, it would be
given the soul of wild and harmful beasts, the soul of animals will be
added to it and if it develops the capacity of the existence of microbe,
the same existence will be given to it.

Although such animals may be harmful to man, they are beneficial and
good to themselves. Although the scorpion is harmful for human beings,
it is good and perfection for itself. Moreover, the existence of these
animals is absolutely beneficial although man has not yet discovered
those benefits. Our ignorance is not a proof of their uselessness.

Almighty Allah has given intelligence and sense to man so that he may
gain benefits from even poisonous animals and that he may prevent their
harms. Man is able to even confront harmful viruses and microbes by
observing hygiene and by using antibiotics; and he can neutralize them
effectively. Therefore the existence of harmful animals cannot be
considered as evil and absence of justice in creation.

[^1]: Compilation of Nahjul Balagha, Pg. 131.


