Role of Justice in Prophethood
==============================

Justice is one of the qualities of the acts of God implying that all
acts of God are based on justice and that He does not oppress anyone.
This fundamental is not present only in the creation of existing beings,
as was mentioned previously; on the contrary it is the basis of all the
principles of faith like prophethood, Imamate and resurrection also. If
someone has doubt in divine justice, he can also not prove the
authenticity of prophethood, Imamate and resurrection. In the discussion
of prophethood, divine justice is used as reasoning in four instances:

The First Instance
------------------

The first instance is about the framing of the laws of the Shariah and
duties of people and conveying them through the prophets, which is
called as general prophethood. In this discussion it is said as follows:

1. In philosophy and theology, it is proved through reasoning that
although man is a reality and not more than one; he has a few stages of
existence; on one hand he is a physical and natural body possessing its
effects. Since he is a body, he requires nutrition and has potential for
growth. On the other hand he has an animal soul; and possesses
perception and movement. But the highest stage of his existence is the
abstract ethereal soul with which his humanity is connected.

2. It is proved that although the material body of man is prone to
dissolution and death, his human soul has no death and annihilation; on
the contrary at the time of death, he is transferred from this world to
the world of the hereafter so that in the everlasting world of the
hereafter, he may be recompensed for his good and bad deeds.

3. Man in this world has two types of lives: One is a vegetative and
animal life, which is related to his physical body. Another is the inner
life, which is related to the soul and spirit of man.

4. The spiritual life of man is related to the kind of beliefs, morals
and his good and bad deeds. If he was having correct beliefs in the
world and possessed good morals; and that he walked on the straight
path; his ethereal soul would be perfected and it will be given a happy
and successful life after death. And if he had harbored invalid beliefs
and had bad morals and behavior; and was deviated from the straight path
of humanity; he would sink into the dark valleys of bestiality and would
have a difficult and painful life in the world of the hereafter.

The Holy Quran has, in numerous verses, introduced religion and
religious law as the straight path; Almighty Allah as the guide and the
prophets as warner and givers of glad tidings. For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّنِى هَدَينِى رَبِّى إِلَى‏ صِرَ طٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ دِيناً
قِيَماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Surely, (as for) me, my Lord has guided me to the right path;
(to) a most right religion…” (6:161)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهَدَيْنَهُمْ صِرَ طَاً مُّسْتَقِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We would certainly have guided them in the right path.”
(4:68)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّهُ يَهْدِى مَن يَشَآءُ إِلَى‏ صِرَطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and Allah guides whom He pleases to the right way.” (24:46)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلَّهِ المَشْرِقُ وَالمَغْرِبُ يَهْدِى مَنْ يَشَآءُ إِلَى‏
صِرَطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: The East and the West belong only to Allah; He guides whom He
likes to the right path.” (2:142)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ رَبِّى وَرَبُّكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوهُ هَذَا صِرَاطٌ
مُّسْتَقِيمٌ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this is
the right path.” (3:51)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَآ أَرْسَلْنَكَ إِلَّا مُبَشِّراً وَنَذِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have not sent you but as a giver of good news and as a
warner.” (25:56)***

As you have seen, in these verses and tens of others like them, religion
and religious law is described as the straight path and Almighty Allah
is introduced as the guide. Guidance is in the meaning of showing the
way and it cannot be imagined without the presence of a path. Religion
is defined as a collection of correct principles of faith, morals and
laws and rules of religion; and it is the same straight path. Which we
ask from Allah again and again in prayers that He may guide us to it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اهْدِنَا الصِّرَ طَ الْمُستَقِيمَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Keep us on the right path.” (1:6)***

With attention to what is said above we conclude that: The God who has
created man and bestowed perfections to him, and through the power of
perfection has equipped him and opened the way of perfection for him and
so that in treading this difficult path, he should be in need of
guidance and help; He did not at all leave him in ignorance and without
any duties. To abandon needy human beings is considered as injustice and
an evil deed and the holy being of the wise, knowing and self-sufficient
God will be pure of it.

Although in the discussion of general prophethood, the law of grace has
been employed, but as you saw, belief in divine justice is very
important. If divine justice is not accepted in proving the need of
prophethood, relying on the law of divine grace would alone not have
sufficed and it would not have been able to reply to all the doubts.

The Second Instance
-------------------

The second instance is about the distinctive qualities of the prophets:
In the discussion of prophethood, it was proved that prophets possess
distinctive qualities and the most important of them are the following
three:

One: Complete knowledge; like the knowledge of laws and rules of
religion; valid beliefs, good morals, which are needed by human beings.’

Two: Infallibility; that is immunity from mistakes, forgetfulness and
sins.

Three: Power to perform extraordinary feats in instances when it is
necessary to prove the veracity of the claim of prophethood.

These three qualities are considered necessary in prophet. In proving
their view they have generally resorted to the ‘proof of grace’; with
the explanation that divine grace demands that His prophets should have
the three above mentioned virtues so that they be most suitable for the
guidance of human beings.

But I think that in this matter also it is better to take the benefit of
divine justice with the mention that sending of prophets who are
ignorant of all or some of laws and in whose propagation there is chance
of mistake or that who does not have a miracle to prove his prophethood,
which is not compatible according to justice of Allah; because religion
becomes deficient in guidance of people on the right path and the divine
being of Almighty Allah is pure of this.

Third Instance: Allotting Of Duties
-----------------------------------

In scholastic theology, it is proved that religious laws and duties
should be according to the strength and capabilities of the people; in
this also especially it can be concluded from verses of Quran and
traditions as well as through logical reasonings. For example the Holy
Quran says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْساً إِلّا وُسْعَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability.” (2:286)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْساً إِلَّا مَآ آتَاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not lay on any soul a burden except to the extent to
which He has granted it.” (65:7)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ جَهِدُواْ فِى اللَّهِ حَقَّ جِهَادِهِ هُوَ اجْتَبَكُمْ وَ مَا
جَعَلَ عَلَيْكُم فِى الدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And strive hard in (the way of) Allah, (such) a striving as is due
to Him; He has chosen you and has not laid upon you any hardship in
religion…” (22:78)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيْجَعْلَ عَلَيْكُم مِّنْ حَرَجٍ وَلَكِن يُرِيدُ
لِيُطَهِّرَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not desire to put on you any difficulty, but He wishes to
purify you…” (5:6)***

This point is also mentioned in traditions; for example:

The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“Harm and causing harm are not sanctioned by Islam. Islam increases the
benefits of Muslim and does not cause any evil to him.”[^1]

The Holy Prophet (S) also said:

“The Almighty Allah has made lawful everything about which a person is
distressed.”[^2]

From such verses and traditions an absolute law can be derived that
Almighty Allah in framing laws and duties has taken into consideration
the strength of people, and the duty imposed on us is not difficult and
intolerable. Through this command, we can derive a general law with
regard to acts, which are harmful and difficult as the Holy Imams (a.s.)
have clarified them.

We can see numerous examples of them in the traditions of Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s.) and the verdicts of the Islamic jurisprudents.

For example: One of the most important Islamic laws is with regard to
fasting during the month of Ramadan, which are highly emphasized. But
one for whom it is difficult to fast, is exempted from it.

Like those who are indisposed and the fast is harmful for them; the
expectant women who are near to their term and the fast may be harmful
to them or the fetus; travelers on a journey sanctioned by religion and
aged persons for whom it is difficult to fast; all of them are allowed
exemptions in keeping the fasts of Ramadan; although after Ramadan, in
case their excuse does not exist anymore, they must make up for the
lapsed fasts by keeping them now except for aged persons who are not
bound to make up for lapsed fasts. Same order applies to other laws and
religious duties.

Most of these excepted orders are mentioned in traditions in
circumstances that there should not be a particular textual order about
them and in case no such text exists, a general law can be derived with
regard to acts which are impossible or beyond human capacity.

To prove this principle in addition to verses of Quran and traditions,
we can also employ the ‘rule of kindness’; with the explanation that:

Divine justice on people demands that the Divine law should not impose
extremely difficult duties or expect them to perform deeds, which are
beyond their capacity.

Apart from these, one can also make use of the principle of divine
justice; with the explanation that imposition of duties, which are
beyond human capacity and harmful is also an evil act and the holy being
of Almighty Allah is pure from such acts.

It is said that in Islamic Shariah also there are some laws, which in
the beginning seem to be absolute and difficult; like the obligatory
nature of holy war and defense, which in addition to being difficult
also sometimes ends in injuries and martyrdom of the fighters. But we
should note the important point that Jihad is a logical matter and it is
considered as a need of the social life of man.

This order is not restricted to Islam, on the contrary all heavenly
religions, communities and sects in circumstances in which their
beliefs, ideals, territories and their own community is surrounded by
enemies, they know that their duty is to make efforts to defend it. Not
only do they consider this difficult act to be a duty, which they cannot
bear and a hardship, on the contrary they take precedence in loyalty and
sacrifice. They consider their dead as martyrs and honor their memory.
In Islam also it is in the same way; in verses of Quran and traditions
sacrifice and loyalty in the way of Allah is praised and exalted and a
high position is accorded for martyrs.

Fourth Instance: Justice of God in the World After Death
--------------------------------------------------------

Divine Messengers throughout the period of history have always spoken of
resurrection and the day of recompense. From the statement of Almighty
Allah to the believers and pious He has promised Paradise and bounties
of Paradise and in this way encouraged belief and good deeds. And to the
infidels He has promised Hell and chastisement of the Hereafter. The
basis of the call of the prophets was as such and through this the
believers and righteous are given hope and the infidels and unjust are
warned.

Now the question arises that whether Almighty Allah in the world of the
hereafter would really fulfill His promise or that it is possible from
Him not to fulfill His promise; or in contrast He would send the
believers and the righteous to Hell and send the infidels and unjust
ones to Paradise? Believer in divine justice say: Almighty Allah would
definitely honor His promise since breaking of the promise is an evil
deed and evil acts cannot be committed by Almighty Allah.

The same point is explained in numerous verses of Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَزِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَمَةِ فَلَا تُظْلَمُ
نَفْسٌ شَيْئاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection, so no
soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least…” (21:47)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْيَوْمَ لَا تُظْلَمُ نَفْسٌ شَيْئاً وَلَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا
كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So this day no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and
you shall not be rewarded aught but that which you did.” (36:54)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْساً إِلّا وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah does not impose upon any soul a duty but to the extent of its
ability; for it is (the benefit of) what it has earned and upon it (the
evil of) what it has wrought.” (2:286)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُواْ يَوْماً تُرْجَعُونَ فِيهِ إِلَى‏ اللَّهِ ثُمَّ تُوَفَّى‏
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا كَسَبَتْ وَ هُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And guard yourselves against a day in which you shall be returned to
Allah; then every soul shall be paid back in full what it has earned,
and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.” (2:281)***

Here we consider it necessary to mention some important and subtle
points:

It is concluded from traditions and verses that the reward and
punishment of the hereafter is not a supposed and stipulated; on the
contrary it is factual and conclusive and in the form of the good or bad
morals that man had in the world. Paradise and bounties of Paradise are
the unseen aspect of good morals and character of man and his attitude
in the world, which would be exposed in the world of the hereafter. Hell
and chastisement of the hereafter is also as such.

In the Holy Quran, it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَراً وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِنْ سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَداً
بَعِيداً وَيُحَذِّرُكُمُ اللَّهُ نَفْسَهُ وَ اللَّهُ رَءُوفٌ
بِالْعِبَادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the day that every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and
that (evil) there were a long duration of time; and Allah makes you to
be cautious of (retribution from) Himself; and Allah is Compassionate to
the servants.” (3:30)***

Therefore good or bad morals and good and bad character that man has in
this world and which became the essence of man, would remain with him
until Judgment Day and he would be resurrected along with it. Paradise
and bounties of Paradise would be prepared from good morals and
character and Hell and the different chastisements of the hereafter
would be brought into existence through evil behaviors and despised
morals.

[^1]: Mizanul Hikmah, Vol. 2, Pg. 180.

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 75, Pg. 413.


