Effect Of Faith On Morals And Good Behavior
===========================================

Knowing God, prophethood and resurrection are not imaginative and
ineffective matters; on the contrary it is faith in the responsibility
of creation and with action, and they are interdependent of each other.
Faith is like the root of a tree and good deeds are like branches,
leaves and fruits of that tree. Faith and belief of conscience cannot be
without the effects of deeds. On the contrary they are definitely
followed by effects and necessities.

Through the medium of deeds, people can scale the stages of faith. As
much strong the faith is; as much will be the effects flowing from it.
As less are deeds, the faith would also be as weak. One who expresses
faith and religiosity, but the effects of faith is not visible in his
deeds; or that he is faithless in his inward being and he makes a show
of faith to deceive others or that he is having a very weak faith and he
cannot put it into practice.

Faith is the source of deeds, fulfillment of the vow of creation and
religious duties. Faith impels man to submit before divine commands in
all dimensions of life and to follow the programs and guidance of
prophets. In numerous traditions, faith is explained in this way. For
example Imam Ali (a.s.) says:

“I asked the Messenger of Allah (S): What is faith? He replied:
Testimony by the heart, acceptance by the tongue and action by the
physical organs and limbs.”[^1]

If faith has really permeated in the heart of man, its effect would be
definitely seen in his words and deeds.

The believer in his whole being has accepted Almighty Allah and has
faith in His existence. He considers himself answerable before Him and
submits before Him and commands of prophets. He has accepted the reality
that man and the world are not aimless and in vain and man has not come
into existence to end in annihilation.

On the contrary, he has come for the perfection of his soul and to be
transferred to the world of the hereafter and to continue his life in
that world. He knows that every man is responsible for his own deeds and
he would have to account each of his acts in this world. He would in any
case have to face the consequences of his deeds. A believer has faith
that death is not the end of life; on the contrary it is transfer from
the temporal world to the world of effulgence and joy and an everlasting
life in the hereafter.

How can a believer who has such faith be careless and ignorant of good
morals, acts and words? Such a belief transforms the life of man in all
dimensions and it turns his attention only towards one direction:
seeking the pleasure of Allah through following the commands of
prophets. Belief lies under the foundation of deeds and affects man in
three ways:

1. Morals
---------

A believer has faith in spiritual life and he knows that he can
construct and nurture his future personality in this world and that he
would be raised with the same on Judgment Day.

If he is righteous, he would be good and successful in the future and if
he is evil, he would have a dark and unfortunate future and that is why
he always makes efforts to reform his self and purify his being from all
sorts of impurities and strives to develop perfect traits of character.
He also tries to strengthen his human and ethereal personality and to
control his selfish and animal desires.

2. Worship
----------

Since believer has faith in Allah and considers Him as the sole creator
and controller of the universe, he submits before His greatness and
unlimited power and worships only Him. He assures himself by Allah and
remains inclined to Him. He also presents his requests to Him alone and
is always seeking His refuge. He begs for His eternal power and through
worship and remembrance of Allah, tries to perfect and nurture his self
and seeks His proximity.

3. Social Responsibilities
--------------------------

A believer considers the political and social system as the best medium
of success in his world and hereafter and regards himself bound to
fulfill the duties imposed on him to perfection. When confronted by
injustice and oppression, he strives most in establishment of social
justice. The believer man regards himself to be connected to the great
and unique community of Islam.

He considers greatness and well-being of the community as his personal
success and well-being and he takes its weakness and degradation as his
personal weakness and degradation. In his view, the members of the
Islamic Ummah are parts of his physical body. He is always desirous to
impart comfort to them and to maintain their health and also feels their
pain and discomfort.

What he desires for himself, the same he desires for other Muslims. What
he dislikes for himself, the same he dislikes for others also. As much
as he is thoughtful of his personal comfort and prosperity, as much he
tries for the well-being and comfort for others. Like he feels
responsible for his own well-being and that of his family members in the
same way he feels responsible for the well-being of the united community
of Islam and Muslims as social responsibilities also originate from
faith and shape an important aspect of Islam. A faith, which sends man
to retirement and makes him indifferent to the future of society, is not
true faith. The Messenger of Allah (S) said:

“One who does not arrange the affairs of Muslims is not a Muslim. And
one who hears the entreaty of a Muslim and does not respond to it, is
not a Muslim.”[^2]

Life of the prophets and important religious personalities is also the
best testimony. They spent their nights in worship and in the
battlefield were as brave as lions. They did not sit in recluse away
from the problems of the world engrossed in worship and supplication; on
the contrary they were also present in the forefront in the social
sphere and public life.

And in confronting injustice, oppression and deprivation, they tried
their very best; and strived to establish social justice. And in
fulfilling these great responsibilities they did not flinch in any way.
They fought the unjust and tyrants and did not in any way fear hardships
and difficulties.

Yes, the school of monotheism, school of morals, piety, school of
worship and inclination to Allah, school of Jihad and steadfastness and
loyalty, confronting injustice and inequity, enjoining good and
forbidding evil; all of them originate from right faith.

It is said that since faith is the source of good deeds; just as good
deeds also plays an important role in strengthening and steadfastness of
faith. As much as we refrain from sins and bad character and as much as
we try to perform good deeds, as much the effulgence of faith would
increase in our hearts.

Therefore after faith in Allah, resurrection and prophethood, we should
act on the commands of Allah so that we may scale the lofty stages of
faith. One who is content only with a notional belief and he does not
put it into practice, and who follows the selfish desires would not only
fail to achieve the final aim of life but gradually, lose his faith as
well. Knowledge and deeds for the human soul are having the same
position of two such great things that not having any of them would
prevent man from scaling the high points of God-worship and wayfaring in
the path of Almighty.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 69, Pg. 68.

[^2]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, Pg. 164.


