Perfecting Man's Faith and Conviction 
======================================

Human beliefs, like man's knowledge, science and technology, advance
with the centuries. Religion predates history, and has always engaged
mankind's particular affection and attention. Language, writing, and
means of livelihood have all progressed in parallel with man's mental
and spiritual growth. They wax and wane, as is the human condition.
Religions multiplied; deities proliferated. Some were represented as
imaginary beings, some as animals, then some as humans; and so step by
step ascended towards the metaphysical, the spiritual, and the
transcendent, to the ultimate reality of the Unity.

Knowledge and religion had similar lowly origins. It is debatable
whether man's road to spirituality was harder than his path to science
and morality. Tangible entities are easier to accept than ideas; the
seen world easier to grasp than the unseen. Aeons are required for minds
to rise to the heights needed for knowledge of the Divine. The sun, the
most obvious of objects, shines on all. Yet analysis of its composition
and conformation has been reached only after the creation and
abandonment of innumerable hypotheses. Despite the sun's light, the
truth behind the hypotheses remained in darkness. This darkness was not
due to depravity or depression of thought. Science and knowledge were
equally backward and had to go through the same eras of myth and
superstition as the philosophies and beliefs of our forebears.

Myths and legends gave savage tribes their creeds and developed their
morality. Slowly knowledge and experience attained a level capable of
grasping the unity and orderliness of creation and the mathematical
perfection of relations between natural phenomena. 

From these man deduced that all obeyed the will of a single unique
Creator, One Totally Other, unlike any visible object. He deduced that
every effect has its own separate cause, and posed an independent
creation for each phenomenon. They went further. In early stages they
imagined that such creations, or creators, had the form or appearance of
animals. Speculations advanced through man to spirits and eventually to
the One.

Research through all regions and eras shows that this progress is an
expression of the essence of the nature of man as much as language,
thought, and customs. 

The faculty which distinguishes man from all other animals is his mind.
A newborn infant manifests this power of mind. As its body grows, so do
its mental muscles. They develop as observation, reflection, comparison,
deduction, imagination, prognosis and cognition. Just as the physical
must be tended and trained, so must the mind. And just as the physical
community of the political and world state must be advanced by united
effort, so also must the intellectual ethical, philosophical, and
scientific community-mind of mankind be advanced by mutual endeavour.

During the millennia of human existence, man has developed a store of
ideas which had deepened, widened, and enhanced century by century.
Finally this store became so enriched and supplied that faith and
conviction were generated. This was a great advancement for man as each
discovery in turn had been. 

It brought into being a new era in history, giving purpose to existence
in pursuit of values not before recognised. 

Despite science's admission, on the basis of historical research, that
the religious sense is one of the oldest of human qualities, differing
ideas are held as to its origins and how it arose. Some hold that
humanity felt the sense of oppression at its weakness and impotence
vis-à-vis the forces of nature and of living creatures, and so turned to
religion.

But weakness cannot explain religion. The source of faith is not
feebleness. The firmest believers are not feeble and frail. The saints
and prophets who put humanity on the road to faith and assurance were
people of greater resolve, will, force, and religious faith than anyone
else.   
 What power could have armed these noble personalities in their holy
strife against rebellion, evil, and corruption? Could expectation of
material gain or of political success strengthen them to endure the
bitterness of tragedy, persecution, and opposition? Never! 

So it is not the sense of weakness which gives strength to faith. The
pioneers who led humanity onto the path of religion could not have done
so from a position of weakness, inferiority, and impotence.

The more man grasps the glory of the world and penetrates the secrets of
the universe, the stronger grows his faith.

Religion is no malady. No healthier person can be found than the one who
searches for reality, both about the world and within himself. Illness
makes a man forget all other realities except his own pain and
suffering.

Faith and conviction are too large a subject to be contained within the
scope of one treatise. It is a vast domain. Exploration of it must range
far and wide. Like the study of every quality in human nature, no single
treatise can cover the entire sphere of their causes and effects.

The rich storehouse of the treasures of faith and conviction cannot be
inventoried in any single treatise; no more than can any of the deepest
movements in the human heart. No single definition can cover any one of
them. For instance, 'love' is more than affection for another,
'attraction by beauty', 'altruism' or even a combination of all three.
What treatise can probe the depths of the reality of what love is in its
entirety? How much less, then, can it explain the universe of existence
and the reality of its entirety?

The science and art of medicine progressed from superstition and magic
into becoming a useful craft. Chemistry progressed from alchemy and
fantasy to modern science. Inevitably, research starts with erroneous
hypotheses, and by trial and error seeks and finds truth.

"Religions have been erroneous", many say. True, but that is not an
adequate argument - despite its use by enemies of God - to disprove
God's existence. The errors are merely mankind's stumbling steps in its
search for truth.

Bertrand Russell says that religion is rooted in human fear; fear of the
unknown, of death, of destruction, of mysteries. [*Why I Am Not a
Christian,* p. 37] He gives no reasoning to support his contention nor
can he answer the question: "If fear was the only motive that prompted
man to turn towards the Creator, does that prove that no Creator
exists?" Even if it was in search of a refuge from fear that man
discovered God, does that invalidate His reality? Would it invalidate
the reality of any other truth that man should discover under the
impulse of fear? If it was fear of lightning which drove man to discover
the secrets of electricity, is electricity any less real for that?

It is true that faith in an omniscient, omnipotent Providence which is
very apparent in time of trouble. That is one subject. Whether man's
first impulse towards seeking some such refuge sprang from fear is a
different subject. The two questions must be handled quite separately.


