Preface
=======

The youth of today looks at the world and then at himself through
natural curiosity and inquisitiveness and gradually questions like:
‘From have I come?’, ‘Where am I at present?’ and ‘Where am I headed?’
crop up in his mind; queries that in fact bear the sign of continuous
enthusiasm and perpetual clamor of his inner conscience.

Every kind of reply to these queries shapes the beliefs for him and also
becomes the basis of all individual and social roles. If his reflective
queries are replied with materialistic logic, his behavior will take
different material shapes or he would develop invalid beliefs, but if it
is on the basis of divine logic, all beings for him – from all people
and the world – will be having an aim and meaning and the logic will be
stretched to perfection of man.

That is why one should be watchful so that the natural and inevitable
queries of youth about existence and its aims and after that his duties
in this world are answered properly so that he is not deviated and that
his natural and mental needs are fulfilled in the right manner.

Quran and traditions have through logical and sensible replies have made
the views of man inclined to take the shape of logical beliefs, Muslim
intellectuals have also with the help of these teachings put forth these
firm and attractive argumentations and in this manner in the system of
Islamic beliefs, basic questions of man, have been given firm and
logical replies; but this great scholastic and philosophical heritage,
in writings and speeches of people who reflect, is sometimes full of
technical and complex terms in such a way that it is very difficult to
be understood by laymen and especially the youth of today.

His Eminence, Ayatullah Amini,[^1] who has since many years, due to his
insight of religious texts and sources and his continuous contacts with
the youth and concern about their religious and training problems has
written a number of books; including the six-volume Youth and beliefs,
which is written in a lucid and organized logical manner; comprising of
the following: Knowing God, Resurrection, Prophethood and the Prophet of
Islam, Knowing Islam, Duties and Rights of Women, Imamate and the Holy
Imams (a.s.). Without any doubt, the youth of today can easily derive
the replies to all his questions from these books.

[^1]: Ustad Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini was born in 1304 Solar year in
Najafabad. Having finished his primary studies in Najafabad, he joined
the Religious Learning Center of Isfahan. After completing his
curriculum of religious studies in Isfahan, he joined the most famous
Religious Learning Center of Qom, where he learned jurisprudence and its
principles, under the tutorship of most eminent religious scholars of
that period: Like Ayatullah Burujardi, Ayatullah Khomeini, Ayatullah
Gulpaygani and Muhaqqiq Damaad. He studied Philosophy under the
tutorship of Allamah Tabatabai. In addition to the duties of teaching
jurisprudence, its principles and philosophy, he began to write and
research from 1342 and most of his books have been published a number of
times. Some of them are as follows: Dad-Gustar -e-Jahan (World
Administer of Justice) about the life of Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.);
Bano-e-Namuna-e-lslam (The Ideal Woman of Islam), about the life of
Fatimeh az-Zahra (s.a.) the daughter of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s.);
Hame Bayad Be Danand (Everybody should know); A small booklet containing
the details of Roots and Branches of the Religion for younger people;
Aayeen-e-Hamsar Dari (the Code of Marital Relationship);
Aayeen-e-Tarbiyat dar Tarbiyate-Kudak (The Code of Child-training);
Barrasi Masail-e-Kulli Imamat (Overall review of affairs related to
Divinely Appointed Vicegerency); Wahy Dar Adyaan Aasmaani (Revelation in
Heavenly Religions); Khud Sazi dar Akhlaque (Moral Self-building);
Intekhab-e-Hamsar (Selection of Spouse); Islam wa Talim wa Tarbiyat
(Education and Training in Islam); Aashnai ba Masail-e-Kulli Islam
(Acquaintance with over all Islamic Affairs); Droos min al-Saqafateh
al-Islamiyah (A complete course of Roots and Branches of Religion of
Intermediate level); Islam wa Tammudan-e-Gharb (Islam and Western
Civilization): Translation from Arabic into Persian of Moududi’s Book:
Nahn wa al-Hazarate al-Gharbiyeh; Imamaan Ra Behtar Shanaseem (Let us
know more about the Imams); Articles on various ideological, political,
social, ethical and educational topics for presentation at seminars and
conferences. Most of the above books have been translated into one or
more foreign languages.


