Seeking God is of the Essence
=============================

Man is born with a number of axiomatic assumptions. They are
instinctive. No outside instruction gave rise to them, though later may
have reinforced them. This is true of both educated and uneducated
individuals. For example, the axiom, "the whole is greater than the
part," requires no special instruction to make that clear. Erudition,
science, and philosophy are secondary results of the application of that
and similar axioms. It is only when man forgets his axiomatic
precognitions that he starts to doubt basic truths. Some philosophic
schools deny the society of violated meanings. Faith in God is one of
man's innate senses.

This becomes plain if a person empties the mind of all religious or
anti-religious prejudices and then opens his eyes to gaze upon the
universe of creation. He finds himself at once contained within the
sphere of beings in motion. He has started willy-nilly from a point he
did not choose and is moving willy-nilly towards a destination he did
not choose. Without his own consent or comprehension, he is part of a
universal orderliness and procession of entities. Observation leads him
to deduce from the manifold a connection between its orderliness and
himself.

He senses that behind the scenes of the world of being there reigns an
invisible power which controls the course of all entities according to a
will with order and accuracy. Himself, an infinitesimal particle in the
vast manifold, possesses knowledge, power, and will. Hence he deduces
that a knowledge, a power, and a will - though of a totally other
dimension and wholly invisible - makes, preserves, and finally removes
every living being without permission or agreement.

That this is an innate axiom of mind is confirmed by man's observation
that there is nothing made without a maker, nothing done without a doer.
Even the newborn infant, fresh from the womb, which has never before
heard a sound or seen a movement, instinctively turns towards the source
of a sound or movement. Likewise, practical living and experimental
science assume that a cause exists for each observed effect.

The principle of causality admits of no exception. All the sciences -
geology, physics, chemistry, economics, and the rest - observe phenomena
to determine their causes, operative factors, interrelations, and
interactions. Likewise mathematics, the most exact of the sciences,
formulates theorems, adduces their proof, and draws their consequences
as equations, interrelations, rules, differentials, and integrals. A
scientist who arbitrarily replaces a plus with a minus in an equation,
or inserts an intrusive number, confirms his own incompetence and
ignorance. In fact, all human progress has been due to research
uncovering causes of observed effects and adapting these natural laws
for the use of man.

If we could find an instance in nature of spontaneous creation, we would
then have the right to hypothesise the possibility of a similar
phenomenon in other fields. But the law holds, which experimental
science proves, that: "No matter or energy is ever annihilated; no new
matter or energy ever emerges." We realise that in reality no autonomous
entry contrary to the laws of nature is possible for any natural
material or element. All our experiments, perceptions, and inferences
reinforce the conclusion that there is no effect without a cause. It is
therefore patent that anyone who holds otherwise is treading underfoot
scientific laws, first principles, deductions of reason, and the
ordinances of the Creator.

The human faculty of innate certainty about some axioms corresponds with
instinct in the animal. Instinct, stripped of the limitations of its
origin, is enabled to penetrate the barriers of sense and investigate
the infinitesimal and the infinite, the unknown and the invisible. This
limbic consciousness of axioms is akin to the orderliness of nature, and
averse to human divergences, so long as it remains free of meretricious
fripperies propounded by self-opinionated "philosophers" and
"scientists," or the pontifications of the pious. The acceptance of
axioms must guide reason, and by throwing off every material
consideration or motive, cleave to the truth, the absolute and the real.
This innate insight is not the prerogative of any race or culture. It
knows no boundaries. It recognises no East or West. There are such
limbic laws in every human being: not implanted by systems or beliefs or
education or social environment, but innate. One such is a mother's love
for her child.

Yet cultural and environmental factors are among later influences which
bend the innate consciousness of axiomatic truths, sometimes undermining
sometimes undergirding them. Persons who remain firm in the mould they
were made in, true to themselves, unhindered by local customs or
bourgeois conventions, retain their innate knowledge uncoloured by
popular catchwords or trendy fashions, can hear the inner voice more
clearly and so can tell right from wrong in actions, truth from
falsehood in beliefs. Therefore atheism, which derails true human
nature, is less seen in such integrated personalities. If you say to
such a person: "The universe is a mere chance agglomeration, an
accidental conjuncture"; even back the assertion with eloquence, with
seemingly logical arguments, with philosophy; none of this will move
that person. The inner voice with its instinctive, innate, limbic
certainties bids them to reject all such opinions. The "demon" which led
Socrates was the name by which he called what Islam calls fitrah, that
innate sense man is born with.

But so-called "science" weaves a spider's web of such human concepts
which traps its captives into doubt and scepticism.

The arrogant delusions of limited knowledge place glass slides of many
colours before the lens of the eye of reason and inner certainty. Those
who boast of this type of human learning, paint the universe in the
colours of their own spectacles of "science", "knowledge", "craft", and
"skill". They then consider their portrait to be reality itself. They
are unable to distinguish the lens of reason from the coloured glasses
of wishful fantasy.

By this it is not intended to say that a person, by perfecting his
intelligence, can stand so firm that he is immune to all deviatory
influences. It is intended to say that a man should not be enslaved by
limited human knowledge and delusions of technological prowess. He
should rather regard every new piece of learning and science as a rung
on the upward ladder of human endeavour. Setting his foot firmly on each
new rung, he raises himself upward towards higher things, and sets
himself free from the stagnant immobility of imprisonment within four
walls of current phraseology and opinion.

In Persian, we use the Arabic word fitrah, for this inner compass or
guide which is inborn in every individual. Bertrand Russell's contention
that fear is the seedbed of religion, denies the fact that fitrah
hurries to man's aid at moments of peril. But, of course, Bertrand
Russell put the cart before the horse. It is not fear that generates
religion; it is religion that runs to the aid of fear. When a person is
under pressure from problems and difficulties; when all material factors
fail; when every possibility in life has been exhausted; when the sea of
troubles is so overwhelming that death is faced; fitrah's inner voice
directs the sufferer to a non-material refuge. Grasping onto the One,
Whose supreme power is above all powers, the sinking person finds that
Beneficent Being able to do exceedingly more than we ask or think.
Taking the human's hand, He gives salvation from the mortal danger, the
deadly peril. The experience encourages the person to turn with all his
being, with heart and soul, to this same Providence in every time of
need or of thanksgiving.

Yes, indeed, it is the consciousness of the perils of being alone in the
world that kindles the inner light of a person and awakens awareness,
leading to faith in the Lord.

The inner light radiates a sense of power and might in its hermit-cell
in the human heart. Even materialists; indifferent in their days of
glory, prominence, and domination; and blind to the boundless power of
God, once faced with difficulty, defeat, and disaster: straightway
return to the Deity they had denied while they dwelt in the tents of
wickedness and strayed from the right path. In their trouble, with heart
and soul, they seek the origin of all being, the source of all power.

So atheism and polytheism, in all their forms, from raw idolatry and
crude animism to materialist progressivism, all result from disregard of
fitrah. It is in these areas that the light of divine guidance, the
whisper of direction, is required to lend strength and enlightenment to
fitrah and to reason, to preserve them from error and to rescue them
from stagnation in the haunts of fear.

The call of the prophets accompanies this inner restlessness which is
fitrah's yearning for God. The first persons who heeded the prophets'
call were people of enlightened heart and of a living fitrah. In
opposition to the prophets were persons inflated by their own conceits,
by their boasted knowledge and vaunted intelligence, reliant on their
own wealth or position. As one scientist said, "In ethics also, the law
of supply and demand exists." If the demand for religion was not an
integral part of the inmost being of humans, the supply offered by the
prophets would go unsought. We observe that the prophets' supply does
not remain unpatronised by customers. In fact it enjoys the custom of
innumerable adherents. This is evidence that desire for faith is of the
essence of humanity. Furthermore, under the prophets' teachings is
subsumed the worship of the One. Their world did not return unto them
void.

Idolatry; worship of the sun, moon, and stars, or of other images;
though primitive, crude, and undeveloped forms of man's upward
aspirations, are also evidence in their own distorted fashion of the
heart's need for a deity, something to be worshipped. These early stages
were like the early stages of science when it dealt in magical
hypotheses; untested and untried fruits of the imagination; yet
nonetheless, steps on the ladder up to the One Who is the Essence of
Being, the Origin of All Being. They were mirages, allowed by God, to
draw the heart towards the cooling streams of the refreshing Grace of
the One, the totally Other. However erroneous and external, they
appealed to man's inmost being wherein dwelt the innate restlessness
that only finds rest in pure monotheism.

In the past century - the 14th of the Muslim era, which ends in 1979
AD - religious experience has been a subject of scrutiny for the
learned. Discoveries have been made which, because of their importance,
are still subjunctive, debatable points for research and discussion, for
weighing and sifting. Yet they put valuable and profitable results
within our grasp. Studies of comparative religions, of the history of
religion, aided by sociology, archaeology, palaeontology, anthropology,
psychology and the like, pour the religious instinct and feeling into a
new crucible in which it is separated into its different components so
that its elements can be analysed.

Freud was the pioneer of the exploration into the human conscious,
subconscious, and other elements of mental and emotional performance.

Adler and Jung followed. They penetrated into the inner depths of the
human mental and emotional make-up. They investigated a whole new world.
In it they found capabilities, types of perception, insight, cognition,
motivation, occult fantasy (some shaped by folk-inheritance), choice,
and decision-making. These all seemed primary, innate, and limbic. Among
such faculties, not secondarily developed by reason, they placed the
religious sense. They opened it up as a domain for further scientific
investigation, seeking the key to its enigma.

These new scientific advances have convinced the savants of every school
that the religious sense is of the essence of humanity; innate, limbic,
primal, and basic. Without it, the human is not human. It is not
exchangeable with any other element. It is of the quiddity of natural
conviction and intellectual insight. Its source lies in the depths of
the spirit. It makes the person aware of himself. It informs him of his
own existence. Among other innate senses in the same category are:

(1) Truth
---------

The impulse to seek for hidden treasure, for accuracy and righteousness;
the sense which has led the thoughts of man since the day of his first
appearance on earth to study and research into the myriad problems of
the unknown and the obscure. It is this which has brought science and
industry into being.

The difficulties and hardships which obstructed the path of scientific
researchers, inventors, and discoverers in penetrating the veil of
obscurity that cloaks the hidden secrets of the world, were only faced
because this instinct urged them on to successful conquest of uncharted
territories of knowledge.

(2) Goodness
------------

The sense of goodness is the abode of virtues, duties, divine
revelation, righteousness, justice, and philanthropy. This innate
instinct impels man to desire a pure disposition. It repels and abhors
impurity.

(3) Beauty
----------

The sense of beauty inspires taste, appreciation, art and embellishment.

To these three we must add:

(4) The Religious Sense
-----------------------

The instinct for the luminous, the holy, something to be worshipped;
shares the basis and independence of the other three.

The concept of God answers human needs of every type. Some of these
needs are those of reason; some are not.

Reason seeks God by the road of orderliness and thought.

Instinct (the religious sense) seeks God by the road of love. It looks
for a relationship with Him.

Proof of God's existence, like that which was offered by the
philosophical systems of Descartes and St. Thomas Aquinas, appeal to
man's reason. Modern science and philosophy will accept as proof only
those capable of being tested by experiment.

Mystics, like Pascal, respond to the religious sense along the channels
of the innate impulses and the inner witnesses. Pascal writes: "Of God's
existence, man's heart has proofs his brain wots not of." [Rise of
Wisdom in Europe, v.2, p. 18]

Will Durant: "Religion is a natural matter, born directly of our
instinctive needs and feelings."  
 Dr. Alexis Carrel wrote: "The mystic sense is the stirring deep within
us of a basic instinct. Man, just as he needs water, so likewise needs
God."

In the 1920's, Dr. Rudolf Otto affirmed that the elements of reason are
paralleled by the elements of fitrah. The two, he said, are partners
mutually assisting each other. All the attributes of God (like
Omnipotence, Holiness, and Sovereignty) must be understood as separate
entities. Thus "Holiness" is an independent concept. It is not the
result of any other idea. It is not to be reckoned the same as any other
concept of the human being, whether a concept of reason, or of instinct.

We live in what we call "the Space Age". We have added the fourth
dimension of outer space to the three terrestrial dimensions of length,
breadth, and depth. So also this age adds to the three basic concepts of
"Truth, Goodness, and Beauty"; "Holiness", the fourth dimension of the
human soul. It is possible that this fourth dimension is the foundation
of the other three. The fact that in every age a minority has propagated
materialistic ideas in no way invalidates the claim of the religious
sense as limbic. Materialist atheism is a speciality of a small, though
vocal minority. They are an exception to the rule incarnated in the vast
majority of mankind. Metaphysical views are natural. And there are
exceptions to every rule.

In history the first sceptical school of thought arose near the end of
the 7th century BC. Its protagonists were Thales (622-560 BC);
Heraclitus (530-470 BC), and his near contemporary, Democritus. One of
the most renowned of them all was Epicurus in the middle of the 4th
century BC.

Yet even these thinkers cannot be ascribed with totally materialist
views. In his History of Philosophy, a learned scientist writes that
Thales held that material changes are the result of spiritual impulse;
that Democritus was no materialist but convinced of the existence of
spirit.  
 It was in the 17th century after Christ that materialism began to make
progress among thinkers. Even so, there are contradictory verdicts.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, for instance, is by some writers called a
materialist and by others a God-fearing man. It is true that he
criticised the Church. Perhaps it is because of that that his
adversaries accused him of "materialism".

The Egyptian writer, Farid Wajdi, in his book, Da'iratu'l-Ma'arif,
writes that Rousseau said:  
 "As I observe events which show natural forces at work, and scrutinise
the way in which one cause influences another, one result reacts with
transforming power upon another, it grows increasingly clear to me that
the Prime Cause must be beneficent and benevolent. I have become
convinced that His Will set existence in motion, and raised life out of
dead things. You ask me where He is. I reply, 'In the firmament which He
set revolving, in the stars which shed their light on us, in me, in that
lamb grazing, that bird flying, that stone lying on the ground, that
tree's leaf blown hither and thither by the wind - everywhere in
everything.' (Do these ideas not spring from reason? Whence the
orderliness we observe? Blind chance? An accidental agglomeration? Let
others do as they will. For myself, I cannot observe this sovereign
orderliness without inferring that a Supreme Wisdom ordained it. How
could dead matter produce life? How could blind accident create these
smoothly- functioning, co-ordinated phenomena? How could a brainless
wonder create what is intelligent and intelligible?)"


