God and the Reasoning of the Experimental Science
=================================================

Modern man tends to take refuge in the reasoning of the experimental
sciences without stopping to consider its limits and boundaries. This
attitude of mind is one of the most misleading and most destructive when
God is brought into consideration. The more the human mind works on a
particular subject and the stronger it grows in the mastery of that
subject, the more it tends to neglect other subjects and drop them from
its purview.

Thus men tend to regard divine matters as secondary, and outside the
scope of the researches of science. The tendency is to use the same
spectacles to look at every type of phenomenon, however diverse. Since
the specialists of the experimental sciences devote the entire force of
their thought to their own particular subject, all other interests
remain foreign to them. It is this lack of acquaintance with and
distance from the intangible which prevents them from conceiving
anything beyond the natural world where they can make tests and
experiments, always with material elements.

Their tools are the weights and measures of materials. So they accept
only those forms of human knowledge which admit of quantification. The
sciences, devoted to describing and explaining factual occurrences,
research into the relations within the phenomenal world from the
infinitely large to the infinitesimal. But the relation between God and
that world is outside their range. Measures of the physical cannot be
asked to yield information about the metaphysical. God cannot be put on
a microscopic slide for laboratory observation! The Creator of the
material universe, of the space-time continuum, transcends matter,
space, and time. Measures of the tangible He cannot be reduced to. 

We know that a relation exists between the taking of a certain drug and
an alteration of metabolism or of health. Ask a doctor how the drug
works and he'll answer in terms suited to your degree of knowledge,
rather than in obscure technical terms. To say "God is the answer" to a
particular medical problem is not a scientific answer, but a layman's.
Medical problems require medical answers. Each science must use its own
technical terms in its own universe of discourse. Divinity has its own
universe of discourse and its own terminology. Specialists confine
themselves to one science. The independence of such sectional scientific
studies from the more all-embracing study of the idea of God has left in
the subconscious of many a scepticism about the Divine because they do
not recognise that their work has deliberately confined itself to a
small portion of reality, and to that alone. 

Further, all experimental sciences lead to material results, which can
be put to work for daily life. These seem real and immediate to the
people who use them. Those people therefore are hesitant and sceptical
about larger ideas whose relevance to day-to-day details is not so
immediately obvious. Each science has set up an impregnable confining
wall round its territory. Its effectiveness within those walls naturally
increases our confidence and reliance on its work. Our world-outlook
tends to take colour from the attitudes of mind which the sciences have
injected into our consciousness and unconsciousness, to their own
advantage, and so to the diminution of other influences. 

Unless a man is possessed of a firm and stable faith he remains a
stranger to the ways of those who know God. His scepticism grows. He
regards as acceptable whatever in life coincides with scientific thought
and reading. He discounts anything that his sciences do not prove – or
even try to prove – for him. The basis of religious thinking is thus
left untilled and untended. He considers undeserving of attention any
problem which cannot be taken in isolation from all religion, be judged
by its outward appearance, and proved by experiment. Having grown used
to scientific language, with its formulae and equations, he regards
religious matters as lightweight and commonplace. 

The error is great. Science may start by expressing its observations in
abstruse and complicated formulae. But once they are translated into
life, they too become simple and commonplace. 

Medical science may employ meticulous care in examining an involved
case, and put to work much technical knowledge expressed in abstruse
terms. But when it comes to telling the sick person what is wrong and
what has to be done, it must be made simple enough. "Take this medicine.
Avoid X in your diet. Rest a lot for several days." The knowledgeable
doctor does not explain to the patient the fundamental formulae or of
drugs that affect it. He only states the bare essentials of the
treatment. 

Again, anyone nowadays can use the telephone or radio. They have become
parts of everyday life. The rules for getting the best out of them are
explained to the user in simple, ordinary, everyday language. All the
abstruse terminology of technicalities is omitted. The proper place for
that sort of language is in the scientific and industrial centres which
invent and construct the instruments, or in the books and libraries
dedicated to the matter. 

It is therefore unjust and illogical for science to regard religious
affirmations as simple and outside their sphere merely because they are
not expressed in abstruse or scientific terminology. It is in fact the
glory of religion that its principles and precepts can be expressed in
simple everyday words to be understood by the people. 

Further, if the precepts and principles of religion were within the
scope of human research, proof, and taste, there would be no need for
apostles or prophets. We could have constructed it ourselves, just as
scientist and manufacturer together construct a machine. 

Man has, in no age so far, been able to claim that he has researched
into and mastered all the secrets of this earth, or knows all that there
is to know. Man is still evolving. He must frequently correct his
errors. And he has still much ignorance to turn into knowledge.

Now let us examine the boundaries of scientific domain, and what
problems the sciences have a right to express opinions about. Has the
range of their activities, and the realm of their researches, become
fixed within definite limits? 

The subject that the experimental sciences must study is the material
world – material phenomena alone. The scientific tools, and their
measures for attaining their goals, consist of observation, hypothesis.
experiment with control, and proof.

They work on the world and its objects, from the largest to the
infinitesimal. Hence they are judged to be objective and impersonal. If
their findings accord with the external world, they are accepted. If
not, they are rejected. Testing proves the conformity of a finding with
the world around it. 

Which scientific research has the right to penetrate the realm of faith
and belief? At what point do the experimental sciences make contact with
God?   
 In fact, the experimental sciences have nothing to do with a person's
faith or lack of faith. Since the sphere of the natural sciences is
natural phenomena, they cannot express an opinion about God, whether
negative or positive. All religious schools, at least of the People of
the Book, teach us that God is not bodily substance. The five senses
cannot perceive Him. He is not contained in the space-time continuum. 

His essence is all-sufficient and self-sufficient. He has no need of
anything outside Himself. Read all the books of the experimental
scientists; you will not find that experiment can test God or any of His
attributes. For God is not a phenomenon of nature. No experiment can be
set up to test a hypothesis about Him. If an experimental scientist
utters all kinds of denials about God on the basis of his research, he
has moved out of line even of the rules of his own science. He shows
himself ignorant of the subjects and sphere of his occupation. The
sciences have not even an A-B-C of the knowledge of God. So it is
utterly illogical for a person who has sunk himself in the ocean of the
experimental sciences to start denying God. 

George Lister in his book, *Introduction to Philosophical Principles,*
writes: "To imagine something which occupies neither space nor time and
is immune to alteration or change is impossible." 

Such a statement obviously reflects a mentality pivoted on nature and
the tangible. Such a mind is bound to regard anything outside its sphere
of action as impossible. The most an honest natural scientist can say
is: "The metaphysical is outside my universe of discourse. So I keep
silent about it. I neither affirm nor deny it." He dare not commit
himself to anything beyond that. A person who confines himself to that
realm in the world of being which permits tangible experiments may not
deny that there can be realities outside his sphere of work. If he does
make such a denial, he must recognise that it is merely an expression of
his own choice, not the fruit of research, test, and proof by scientific
experiment. 

For God-fearers, the sort of god a natural scientist might want – that
is, one who establishes his existence and identity in terms of natural
causes and effects – is no God at all.


