Materialistic and Religious World View; Effects and Consequences
================================================================

Who am I? Where have I come from? Have I come on my own and would I go
away automatically? Or it is someone else who has brought me and he
would also take me away? What is my future and where am I
headed?...Would death be the end of my life? Or there is life after
death as well?...Has this great universe come into being automatically
and by accident or it is having a creator? And so on.

Such types of questions arise for every sensible man, especially during
the period of youth and he tries to obtain their correct replies and
satisfy his curiosity.

Believers and disbelievers have replies to the above question that we
present here:

World in the view of elievers
-----------------------------

The believer considers the world to be a continuous, arranged and
compatible collection, which has not come into being on its own; on the
contrary it is created by the wise and powerful creator and it is Him
that manages it.

The world with a series of precise laws and stable system has its source
in the wisdom and intention of the Almighty Allah, who controls and
guards it. And if the favors and blessings of the Almighty Allah had not
been there it would not have survived for even a single moment. A
believer has faith that the world is an organized and aimed system which
has come into existence through the wise command of the Almighty Allah
and everything is good in itself and this precise and harmonious system
is moving to a higher aim.

In view of a believer man, existing things of the world are needful of a
creator for their creation and survival. If the grace of the Almighty
Allah had not been there, they would not have come into existence and if
His favor had not been there they would not have endured. Due to this,
the believer considers every existing thing to be a sign of the grace
and mercy of the Lord of the worlds.

End of Life
-----------

A believer does not regard death as annihilation and end of life; on the
contrary he considers death to be a transfer to the everlasting abode of
the hereafter and the beginning of a new everlasting life. The man of
faith believes that life in this world is not without aim; on the
contrary it is the period of coming and nurturing of the soul and a time
for obtaining provisions for the hereafter.

The believer is of the view that the righteous and the wicked are not
same and both would definitely see the fruits of their deeds: the
Almighty Allah would reward the good deeds of righteous and they would
occupy the everlasting abode with perennial happiness in the hereafter.
On the other hand, the wicked would also receive the punishment of their
vile deeds and have a very difficult life in that world.

The believer considers success of his future as the fruits of his deeds,
character, words and good morals and is always trying to prepare the
means of his success in the hereafter and makes efforts to keep away
from evil and wickedness.

Creator of the Universe
-----------------------

The believer man has faith in the being of the Almighty Allah and
considers Him as the creator, owner and controller of all the worlds and
creatures. In belief of the faithful, the greatest being, who is known
as ‘Allah’ has created this world and it is Him that administers it and
that He is wise, powerful, merciful and eternal. According to the man of
belief, Allah is the source of all goodness and perfections.

And that He is absolutely Self-sufficient while the universe and His
creatures are always in need of Him. It is Him that protects the
universe and creatures and maintains them. It is Him that safeguards the
earth and the skies and even if He cuts off His mercy from them for a
moment, all of them would be annihilated. He is with everything and
everyone and is present everywhere and nothing and no one is equal or
like Him.

Prophets
--------

In the view of the believer, prophets are human beings who are
absolutely pure and perfect in every aspect and who are chosen to guide
mankind to the path of perfection. It is so because the Wise Lord has
not abandoned human beings in a condition of perplexity and ignorance.
On the contrary, He sent His infallible prophets to them and entrusted
them with the program for individual, social, political, material,
spiritual and worldly, other-worldly life so that they may guide the
human beings and convey to them the life-giving and praiseworthy
program.

Where have I come from, where am I at present, and where am I going?

The all-knowing and all-powerful Lord by His grace and kindness has
created me in the most beautiful creation (Where have I come from?).

I am in a passing and a changing world, which the wise Lord has created
and manages it too. I live in this world so that with the guidance of
divine prophets and their successors I may nurture myself and my human
morals and perfections and that I should be prepared for the success of
an everlasting life and unlimited bounties of the hereafter (Where am I
at present?).

I am heading on the path to the world of permanence and perpetuity in
the hereafter and there I would be recompensed for my deeds. Death is
not the end of life, on the contrary it is transfer from the life of the
world and the beginning of another new life (Where am I going?).


