World in the view of non-believers
==================================

Who am I? What duties are imposed on me? What is my origin and who has
brought me into existence? Where am I at present and what was the aim of
my arrival? Where am I going and what would happen at the end of my
life?

As we stated earlier, such questions confront every person and every
sensible person through mental effort and his curiosity wants to obtain
the correct replies and to satisfy his conscience. Indeed, these
questions also confront the non-believers. But they do not contemplate
upon them in the proper way; they do not employ their reason and
thinking in the right way regarding these basic matters.

Attachment to worldly matters and selfish desires cast a veil on their
insight and reason; too much of pleasure seeking keeps them occupied and
makes them oblivious of the truth. They avoid contemplating on this
important matter and even when they have the opportunity and hear the
call of their conscience, they change their mind and even deceive
themselves and assure themselves through conjectures. The disbeliever
does not have any reply with certainty; on the contrary he only depends
on his personal views as follows:

Who am I?
---------

I am an animal who named as ‘man’ and I am like other beasts. I eat and
drink and roam about here and there to fulfill my innate desires and
needs. I am free from every restriction to satisfy my desires; and as
opposed to higher beings, I don’t have any responsibility and duty.

Where have I come from?
-----------------------

In reply to this question, the disbeliever says on the basis of his
defective notion, that: I am a material being. No one has created me. I
have not been created by a conscious creator. I have come into being
through coincidence. It is not that a wise and a powerful creator has
created me and my creation is aimless and without any purpose.

Where am I?
-----------

In a world, which is purely material, aimless and unaware and before
existing things, animals and human beings who themselves are created
unaware and since I am myself aimless and confused, no awareness and aim
is needed either in my creation or in the creation of the world.

Where am I going?
-----------------

To illness, old age, pain, weakness and finally to annihilation and
nothingness.

Life in the view of the disbeliever is as follows:

It began with nothing, it grows with unawareness and goes higher and
higher till it leaves behind childhood, during the youth his structure
is at its peak and the youth lives in the highest fort of life. However,
it is a pity that this form and strength is soon a thing of past and
after a short time, man falls into decadence, pain and then falls to the
lowest level. Diseases and difficulties surround him, the power of youth
gradually goes on decreasing and physical faculties reach their end.
Eyes, ears and limbs become weak and day by day become useless. The
period of the fulfillment of base desires comes to an end and the period
of weakness and old age begins. Children and friends become unkind and
disloyal and leave him alone in his problems…and finally he moves
towards nothingness and is buried under dust…

The end of life in the view of the disbeliever is useless, terrible and
painful like this. And what a dark end it is! The disbeliever believes
that his end is decadence into a horrible nothingness. That is why
during his lifetime, he avoids the thought of death and when he is
confronted by questions, especially regarding life hereafter and death,
he just gives false assurance to himself.

He tries to pacify his mind and conscience through vain pastimes and
sensuality; even though they may comfort his nerves only for a short
while. However can this stop the inquisitive conscience of man and his
curious intellect from asking those questions?

Imagination of uselessness and annihilation and nothingness for the
disbeliever is very bitter and painful. These thoughts are like
poisonous snakes in his inner being, who continue to sting him and
secrete poison and he continues to live in that pain and chastisement.
How nice it had been if he had used the faculty of reason and had
obtained the right and satisfactory replies.


