Search for God
==============

Even history clearly shows and it can be concluded through research and
investigation also that the man of the past and even pre-historic man
was aware of a higher being (who is named as God or any other name) and
he humbled before Him and worshipped Him and performed various rituals
to seek His pleasure.

Now the question arises, that how man in the beginning became attentive
to God? What was the cause that turned his thinking to God? Which factor
made him inclined to go out in search of the creator of universe? What
is the aim and cause of this view? Basically which factor was effective
in compelling man to think about God and God-worship and to contemplate
on these lines?

Replies to these questions are possible if one puts in a little effort:
Human beings possess an instinct called as the instinct of finding out
the cause of every phenomenon. Since the first day, man was aware of
causation and he searched for the cause of every phenomenon and every
needful existing being. If he became hungry, he went in search of food,
because he considered eating as a cause of removal of hunger. If he
became thirsty, he went in search of water, as he considered drinking
water to be the cause of removing thirst. If he heard a sound from
behind the wall, he became certain that it had a cause and went to find
it. If he fell ill, he knew that it was as a result of a cause and he
went out in search of its cure. In order to escape cold, he took refuge
with heat, since he considered heat to be the cause of removing cold.

Seeking the cause and inquisitiveness is placed in the nature of all
human beings. Every man is always trying to become aware of causes.
Therefore, with regard to every phenomenon, the question, “Why and for
what reason” arises. He always tries to satisfy his sense of curiosity
through satisfactory replies.

Man is basically a ‘seeker of cause’ and he cannot give up this instinct
or ignore it. All human beings – especially the earliest man – were
having this natural instinct. Man lived in this world and was confronted
by incidents and astonishing phenomena; the change of days and nights,
summer and winter, movement of moon, sun and stars, peculiarities of
animals and plants, lofty mountains, vast seas, flowing water bodies…he
saw all of this with his eyes and fell into contemplation and asked
himself: What is the cause of this world and who has brought it into
existence? This universe must definitely be having a cause and the wise
and powerful creator has created it and He is controlling it.

In this way, the earliest man became cognizant of Almighty Allah and
confessed to his existence, and humbled himself before His greatness and
in brief it can be said that seeking God is in the nature of man.

Although a group has fallen into doubts and became involved in worship
of false deities and gradually sun worship, moon worship, fire worship
and star worship…also appeared in human beings.

However the appearance of false deities is itself proof that man paid
attention to his innate nature of seeking cause and concluded that a
cause was necessary to control this world. But he fell into
misunderstandings with regard to other aspects and considered false gods
to be the cause and considered them as true creators, and became
involved in their adoration.

In short, it can be said that man searches for the cause of all existing
things and phenomena through natural instinct placed in his nature and
in this way, he reaches up to Almighty Allah, who is the final cause of
all things and One to whom all are needful. In this way, His being is
revealed to them and they begin to worship Him.

Quran also considers seeking God to be an innate nature and says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ لَيَقُولُنَّ
خَلَقَهُنَّ الْعَزِيزُ الْعَلِيمُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you should ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth?
they would most certainly say: The Mighty, the Knowing One, has created
them…” (43/9)***

And says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَئِن سَأَلْتَهُم مَّنْ خَلَقَ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَسَخَّرَ
الشَّمْسَ وَ الْقَمَرَ لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ فَأَنَّى‏ يُؤْفَكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth and made
the sun and the moon subservient, they will certainly say, Allah. Whence
are they then turned away?” (29:61)***

Then He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَئِنْ سَأَلْتَهُمْ مَنْ نَزَّلَ مِنَ السَّماءِ ماءً فَأَحْيا بِهِ
الْأَرْضَ مِنْ بَعْدِ مَوْتِها لَيَقُولُنَّ اللَّهُ قُلِ الْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ بَلْ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لا يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you ask them Who is it that sends down water from the clouds,
then gives life to the earth with it after its death, they will
certainly say, Allah. Say: All praise is due to Allah. Nay, most of them
do not understand.” (29:63)***

Evidences for existence of God
------------------------------

### Knowing God according to the Holy Quran

The Holy Quran has used many simple and very basic techniques to prove
the existence of God; methods, which are nice as well as easy to
understand for everyone. This style is not complex and difficult like
the reasonings employed by philosophy, that it may not be understood by
all. This most simple method does not require prefaces and advanced
learning.

Every person can benefit from it in accordance with his or her awareness
and knowledge. That simple and beautiful method is called as ‘evidence
of order’ that awakens the innate natures of seeking God. Therefore
study and contemplation on the secrets and peculiarities of the created
world is one of the best ways of knowing God.

In a large number of verses, Quran has mentioned examples of the
astonishing aspects of universe and wants man to think in the right way
and to conclude the existence and being of the Almighty Allah from the
order and compatibility. According to Quran, each phenomenon of the
world is a divine sign (Ayah). Ayah implies a sign or a mark. If man
sees the phenomena of the world as they are, he would begin to believe
in existence of their creator; although Quran is not a book of natural
science that it may discuss secrets of the phenomena of the world in
detail and expose them to man. But it has mentioned in brief their
astonishing aspects only to prove the existence of the maker of Universe
so that it may awaken the minds of those who have the faculty of
thinking; and that it may call their attention so that they may discuss
and be curious about the exposition of astonishing secrets of Nature and
in this way they may begin to have faith in the creator of the world. In
addition to this, they may also benefit to secure the needs of life and
inhabit the world.

That is why it can be said that the science of knowing man, knowing
animals, knowing plants, knowing lands, knowing space, physics and
chemistry are the best ways to know God.

In the Holy Quran, there are numerous verses which mention examples of
the astonishing aspects of creation which awaken the nature of man to
seek God, so that he may begin to have belief in the existence of a wise
and a powerful creator through his conscience. So that he may see the
creator of the world with the eyes of his conscience and that he may
become attached to Him. These verses can be divided into different
groups and each of them talk of one particular aspect:

A) Verses that emphasize contemplation on the creation of man
-------------------------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah says in Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ مِمَّ خُلِقَ \* خُلِقَ مِن مَّآءٍ دَافِقٍ \*
يَخْرُجُ مِن بَيْنِ الصُّلْبِ وَ التَّرَآئِبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So let man consider of what he is created: He is created of water
pouring forth, Coming from between the back and the ribs.” (86:5-7)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَكُم مِّن تُرَابٍ ثُمَّ إِذَآ أَنتُم بَشَرٌ
تَنتَشِرُونَ \* وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَن خَلَقَ لَكُم مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ
أَزْوَاجاً لِّتَسْكُنُواْ إِلَيْهَا وَ جَعَلَ بَيْنَكُم مَّوَدَّةً
وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And one of His signs is that He created you from dust, then lo! you
are mortals (who) scatter. And one of His signs is that He created mates
for you from yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He put
between you love and compassion; most surely there are signs in this for
a people who reflect.” (30/20-21)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ خَلْقُ السَّمَوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلاَفُ
أَلْسِنَتِكُمْ وَ أَلْوَانِكُمْ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ
لِّلْعَالِمِينَ \* وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ مَنَامُكُم بِالَّيْلِ وَالنَّهَارِ
وَابْتِغَآؤُكُم مِّن فَضْلِهِ إِنَّ فِى ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ
يَسْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth
and the diversity of your tongues and colors; most surely there are
signs in this for the learned. And one of His signs is your sleeping and
your seeking of His grace by night and (by) day; most surely there are
signs in this for a people who would hear.” (30/22-23)***

And He says:

وَاللَّهُ أَخْرَجَكُم مِّن بُطُونِ أُمَّهَتِكُمْ لَا تَعْلَمُونَ شَي

**  
**

ْ

  
ئاً وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ وَالْأَبْصَرَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تَشْكُرُونَ‏

***“And Allah has brought you forth from the wombs of your mothers – you
did not know anything – and He gave you hearing and sight and hearts
that you may give thanks.” (16:78)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَحْنُ خَلَقْنَاكُمْ فَلَوْلَا تُصَدِّقُونَ / أَفَرَءَيْتُم مَّا
تُمْنُونَ / أَأَنتُمْ تَخْلُقُونَهُ أَمْ نَحْنُ الْخَالِقُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have created you, why do you not then assent? Have you considered
the seed? Is it you that create it or are We the creators?”
(56:57-59)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ أَتَى‏ عَلَى الْإِنسَانِ حِينٌ مِّنَ الدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُن شَيْئاً
مَذْكُوراً \* إِنَّا خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِن نُّطْفَةٍ أَمْشَاجٍ
نَّبْتَلِيهِ فَجَعَلْنَاهُ سَمِيعاً بَصِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There surely came over man a period of time when he was a thing not
worth mentioning. Surely We have created man from a small life-germ
uniting (itself): We mean to try him, so We have made him hearing,
seeing.” (76:1-2)***

### Points

Important points are mentioned in the above verses for man to
contemplate on:

1. Previously man was nothing, except a mixed sperm, which underwent
various stages to finally assume the shape of man. This process is worth
contemplation and study.

2. Human beings are created in pairs so that they might reproduce and
also derive comfort from each other; and God has put love and mercy
amongst them, which is one of the divine signs.

3. He created human beings in various colors and races, who speak
different languages and this is also a remarkable sign and it is worth
contemplation.

4. In the beginning man was not aware of anything and he leant
everything from eyes, ears and other senses and conscience. And this too
is an astonishing sign worth contemplation and study.

5. Sleep, rest and willingness to obtain livelihood is also a great
divine sign.

If man looks at his beautiful structure and ponders well on the
extraordinary system and its astonishing aspects, he would conclude that
it has not come into being on its own by coincidence. On the contrary it
has a wise and a powerful creator.

B) Verses that emphasize contemplation on creation of plants, fruits and human foods
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah says in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِى أَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَاءِ مَاءً فَأَخْرَجْنَا بِهِ
نَبَاتَ كُلِّ شَىْ‏ءٍ فَأَخْرَجْنَا مِنْهُ خَضِراً نُخْرِجُ مِنْهُ
حَبّاً متَرَاكِباً وَمِنَ الْنَّخْلِ مِن طَلْعِهَا قِنْوَانٌ دَانِيَةٌ
وَجَنَّتٍ مِنْ أَعْنَابٍ وَالزَّيْتُونَ وَالرُّمَّانَ مُشْتَبِهاً
وَغَيْرَ مَتَشَبِهٍ انظُرُواْ إِلَى‏ ثَمَرِهِ إِذَا أَثْمَرَ
وَيَنْعِهِ إِنَّ فِى ذَ لِكُمْ لَأَيَتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He it is Who sends down water from the cloud, then We bring
forth with it buds of all (plants), then We bring forth from it green
(foliage) from which We produce grain piled up (in the ear); and of the
palm-tree, of the sheaths of it, come forth clusters (of dates) within
reach, and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, alike and
unlike; behold the*** ***fruit of it when it yields the fruit and the
ripening of it; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
believe.” (6:99)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفِى الْأَرْضِ قِطَعٌ مُّتَجَوِرَ تٌ وَجَنَّتٌ مِّنْ أَعْنَبٍ وَ
زَرْعٌ وَ نَخِيلٌ صِنْوَانٌ وَغَيْرُ صِنْوَانٍ يُسْقَى‏ بِمَآءٍ وَ
حِدٍ وَ نُفَضِّلُ بَعْضَهَا عَلَى‏ بَعْضٍ فِى الْأُكُلِ إِنَّ فِى ذَ
لِكَ لَأَيَتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And in the earth there are tracts side by side and gardens of grapes
and corn and palm trees having one root and (others) having distinct
roots – they are watered with one water, and We make some of them excel
others in fruit; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
understand.” (13:4)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنظُرِ الْإِنسَانُ إِلَى‏ طَعَامِهِ/ أَنَّا صَبَبْنَا الْمَآءَ
صَبّاً / ثُمَّ شَقَقْنَا الْأَرْضَ شَقّاً / فَأَنبَتْنَا فِيهَا حَبّاً
/ وَ عِنَباً وَقَضْباً / وَزَيْتُوناً وَنَخْلاً / وَ حَدَآئِقَ غُلْباً
/ وَفَاكِهَةً وَأَبّاً / مَّتَاعاً لَّكُمْ وَلِأَنْعَامِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then let man look to his food, that We pour down the water, pouring
(it) down in abundance, then We cleave the earth, cleaving (it) asunder,
then We cause to grow therein the grain, and grapes and clover, and the
olive and the palm, And thick gardens, And fruits and herbage, a
provision for you and for your cattle.” (80:24-32)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَرَءَيْتُم مَّا تَحْرُثُونَ / أَأَنتُمْ تَزْرَعُونَهُ أَمْ نَحْنُ
الزَّ ارِعُونَ / لَوْ نَشَآءُ لَجَعَلْنَاهُ حُطَاماً فَظَلْتُمْ
تَفَكَّهُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you considered what you sow? Is it you that cause it to grow,
or are We the causers of growth? If We pleased, We should have certainly
made it broken down into pieces, then would you begin to lament.”
(56:63-65)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألَّذِى جَعَلَ لَكُمُ الْأَرْضَ مَهْداً وَسَلَكَ لَكُمْ فِيهَا سُبُلاً
وَأَنزَلَ مِنَ السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَأَخْرَجْنَا بِهِ أَزْوَاجاً مِّن
نَّبَاتٍ شَتَّى‏ / كُلُواْ وَارْعَوْاْ أَنْعَامَكُمْ إِنَّ فِى ذَ لِكَ
لَآيَاتٍ لاُِّوْلِى النُّهَى‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who made the earth for you an expanse and made for you therein paths
and sent down water from the cloud; then thereby We have brought forth
many species of various herbs. Eat and pasture your cattle; most surely
there are signs in this for those endowed with understanding.”
(20:53-54)***

### Points

Some very important points are mentioned in the above verses also so
that man may ponder over them:

1. Man is in need of different types of foods, and vegetation and plants
guarantee this need and produce food for him.

2. Plants depend on water for their own growth, which falls from the sky
as rain.

3. Although trees and shrubs grow from the same earth and use the same
water, they produce different kinds of fruits and grains.

4. Plants, like animals are also created in pairs.

5. Creation of fruits, grains, vegetables are remarkable and deserve
contemplation and attention. In these verses, Quran has called attention
to the world of plants and vegetation to highlight astonishing aspects
of the plant kingdom so that all may become aware of God creator and
that they may benefit from them and their fruits.

C) Verses that emphasize contemplation on the importance of rain and water
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Almighty Allah says in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ فِى خَلْقِ الْسَّمَوَ تِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَاخْتِلَفِ اللَّيْلِ
وَالنَّهَارِ وَ الْفُلْكِ الّتِى تَجْرِى فِى الْبَحْرِ بِمَا يَنْفَعُ
الْنَّاسَ وَمَآ أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْسَّمآءِ مِنْ مَّآءٍ فَأَحْيَا
بِهِ الْأَرْضَ بَعْدَ مَوْتِهَا وَبَثَّ فِيهَا مِنْ كُلِّ دَآبَّةٍ
وَتَصْرِيفِ الْرِّيَحِ وَالْسَّحَابِ الْمُسَخَّرِ بَيْنَ الْسَّمَآءِ
وَ الْأَرْضِ لَأَيَتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day, and the ships that run in the sea
with that which profits men, and the water that Allah sends down from
the cloud, then gives life with it to the earth after its death and
spreads in it all (kinds of) animals, and the changing of the winds and
the clouds made subservient between the heaven and the earth, there are
signs for a people who understand.” (2:164)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَرَاَيْتُمُ الْمَآءَ الَّذِى تَشْرَبُونَ / أَأَنتُمْ أَنزَلُْتمُوهُ
مِنَ الْمُزْنِ أَمْ نَحْنُ الْمُنزِلُونَ / لَوْ نَشَآءُ جَعَلْنَاهُ
أُجَاجاً فَلَوْلَا تَشْكُرُونَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you considered the water which you drink? Is it you that send
it down from the clouds, or are We the senders? If We pleased, We would
have made it salty; why do you not then give thanks?” (56:68-70)***

And He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الَّذِى خَلَقَ السَّمَوَتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَأَنزَلَ مِنَ
السَّمَآءِ مَآءً فَأَخْرَجَ بِهِ مِنَ الثَّمَرَتِ رِزْقاً لَّكُمْ
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الْفُلْكَ لِتَجْرِىَ فِى الْبَحْرِبِأَمْرِهِ
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمُ الْأَنْهَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and sent down
water from the clouds, then brought forth with it fruits as a sustenance
for you, and He has made the ships subservient to you, that they might
run their course in the sea by His command, and He has made the rivers
subservient to you.” (14:32)***

### Points

1. These verses describe the beautiful water cycle in nature. The water
in oceans evaporates through heat of sun and appears in the sky in form
of clouds; and then through the movement of the winds, is transferred to
different parts of the earth, where it falls in form of rain and becomes
available for human beings, animals and plants. This is one of the
divine signs that He has created such a novel system.

2. Although sea water is saline and bitter, rain water is sweet and
potable.

3. Water, which is the nectar of life for plants, animals and human
beings; was created as a liquid, so that it may flow in the form of
streams to be made available for all and also used as mode of
transportation (shipping).

Creation of water and its cycle in nature is one of the amazing signs of
His creation and for those who have sense, it is worth contemplation;
and the order, coordination and connection between human beings,
animals, plants, heat of the sun, wind and earth show that these are the
best evidences of the existence of a wise and powerful creator.


