Foreword
========

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

The precious legacy left behind by the Holy Prophet’s Household [*ahl
al-bayt*] (may peace be upon them all) and their followers’ preservation
of this legacy from the menace of extinction is a perfect example of an
all-encompassing school [*maktab*], which embraces the different
branches of the Islamic knowledge and has been able to train many of the
talented personalities by quenching them with this gushing-forth
fountain.

This school has presented scholars to the Muslim *ummah* who, by
following the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*), have occupied the station
of clarifying the doubts and skepticisms brought forth by the various
creeds and intellectual currents both inside and outside the Muslim
society, and throughout the past centuries, they have been the
presenters of the firmest answers and solutions to these doubts.

Anchored in the responsibilities it is shouldering, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has embarked upon defending the sanctity of
*risalah* [apostleship] and its authentic beliefs—truths which have
always been opposed by the chiefs and leaders of the anti-Islamic sects,
religions and trends. In this sacred path, the Assembly regards itself
as a follower of the upright pupils of the Ahl al-Bayt’s (*‘a*)
school—those who have always been ready to refute those accusations and
calumnies and have tried to be always in the frontline of this struggle
on the basis of the expediencies of time and space.

The experiences in this field, which have been preserved in the books of
the scholars of the Ahl al-Bayt’s (*‘a*) school, are unique in their own
right. It is because these experiences have been based upon knowledge
[*‘ilm*] and the preeminence of intellect and reasoning, and at the same
time, devoid of any iota of blind prejudices as well as whims and
caprices.

These experiences address the experts, scholars and thinkers in such a
manner that is acceptable to a healthy mind and the pure human natural
disposition [*fitrah*].

In a bid to assist those who are in quest of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly has endeavored to enter the new phase of these
worthy experiences within the framework of research and writing works of
the contemporary Shi‘ah writers or those who, through the divine
guidance, embraced this noble school.

This Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of the
valuable works of the pious predecessors and outstanding Shi‘ah
personalities so that those who are thirsty of truth could quench their
thirst from this refreshing fountain by listening and embracing this
truth, which the Holy Prophet’s Household (*‘a*) has offered as gift to
the entire world.

It is hoped that the dear readers would not deprive the Ahl al-Bayt
(*‘a*) World Assembly of their valuable views and suggestions as well as
constructive criticisms in this arena.

We also do invite the scholars, translators and other institutions to
assist us in propagating the pure Muhammadan (S) Islam.

We ask God, the Exalted, to accept this trivial effort and enhance it
further under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth, Hadrat al-Mahdi
(may Allah, the Exalted, expedite his glorious advent).

It is appropriate here to express our utmost gratitude to Professor
Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi for writing the book,[^1] and to
Dr. Mansoor Limba for translating it, as well as to all our honorable
colleagues in accomplishing this task especially the dear ones in the
Translation Office for performing their responsibility.

***Cultural Affairs Department***  
**Ahl al-Bayt** **(*****‘a*****) World Assembly**

[^1]: Muḥammad Taqī Miṣbāḥ Yazdī, Negāhī Gozarā beh Naẓariyyeh-ye
Wilāyat-e Faqīh, compiled and edited by Muḥammad Mahdī Nādirī Qummī
(Qum: Imām Khomeinī Educational and Research Institute, Spring 1382 AHS
(2003)), 160 pages.


