Preface
=======

**In the Name of Allah, the All-beneficent, the All-merciful**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْحَمْدُ للهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلىٰ سَيِّدِنَا وَ نَبِيِّنَا مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ
الطَّاهِرِيْنَ وَ لَعْنَةُ اللهِ عَلىٰ أَعْدَائِهِمْ أَجْمَعِيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may the
blessings of Allah be upon our Master and Prophet, Muhammad, and his
pure progeny, and may the curse of Allah be upon all their enemies.**

Indeed, the theory of *wilayat al-faqih* [guardianship of the jurist]
can be regarded as the most important foundation of the political system
in Islam during the period of occultation [*‘asr al-ghaybah*] of the
Imam of the Time [*imam az-zaman*][^1] (*‘a*).[^2] It is the theory that
practically proved during the last quarter of the 20th century to all
and sundry that religion is competent to administer the affairs of
society. Relying on this idea, the founder of the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Haḍrat[^3] Imam Khomeini (*qs*),[^4] was able to establish the
Islamic government system and to administer it well notwithstanding the
opposition of all imperialist powers in the world.

Though the notion of separation of religion and politics and the
irresponsiveness of religion in solving social problems and its
incompetence in administering the society have been vigorously
propagated since the end of the 16th century in the West by both
political scientists and statesmen and also acknowledged by the
ecclesiastical authority, a Muslim cleric who was a source of emulation
was able to bewilder both friends and foes by setting up a government
system based on religious principles, values, laws, and in brief, the
religious thought.

By emphasizing the slogan that “Government is the practical philosophy
of all Islamic laws” and refusing to give any name to the new government
other than “Islamic republic” and that is, that omitting the word
“democratic” suggested by some for this government, he has shown in
theory and practice that the “Islamic republic system” under the axis of
*wilayat al-faqih* is a purely religious system, and that this new
system which is detached and distinct from all the current systems in
the world, in spite of the arbitrary claim of the opponents, is able to
administer the society successfully.

Now that two decades[^5] have elapsed after the victory of the Islamic
Revolution and the beginning of the rule of Islam and *wilayat al-faqih*
system in our beloved Iran, our nation’s avowed enemies who correctly
realized that the secret behind the perpetuity, independence, grandeur,
and honor of this country is people’s fidelity to religion and *wilayat
al-faqih,* are hatching various cultural plots to undermine the Islamic
ideology and cast doubt upon the Islamic and religious beliefs,
principles and values of our people and society with the aim of
weakening the principle of *wilayat al-faqih* which is one of their
strategic objectives. Regrettably, a group of intellectuals render
assistance, consciously or unconsciously, to this trend through actions,
behavior, speech, and writings.

We believe that in the current status of our society, *wilayat al-faqih*
constitutes the central pillar of Islam, and its safety contributes to
the splendor of Islam and Islamic laws and values in the society. As
such, we have decided to elucidate this theory, support it academically
and logically, and enlighten the general public, particularly the young
generation of our country who probably know very little about this
theory and its ramifications, and thus discharge a small part of our
religious duty.

Observing the academic coherence of the discussion, we have endeavored
to avoid using technical and complicated terms and dialectical methods
so that the discussion may appeal to those who have little familiarity
with the seminarian and academic issues and terminologies. We have also
tried, as far as possible, to use simple words and expressions and avoid
dealing with complicated and ambiguous topics.

Likewise, we have tried to deal with all the aspects of this theory to
address the subjects which we find significant and controversial.
However, things like the brevity of content and the readers’ patience
and the time that they have been taken into account as far as possible.

In conclusion, it is worth noting that this work contains a number of
speeches, articles, books, and question-and-answer sessions of the
erudite professor, Haḍrat Ayatullah Muhammad Taqi Misbah Yazdi (may his
sublime presence endure), which have been compiled, edited and published
by the author. Since the theory of *wilayat al-faqih* constitutes part
of the Islamic political theory, those who are willing to be familiar
with the different aspects of it may refer to the other two pertinent
books of the author, viz. *Huquq va Siyasat dar Qur’an* [Law and
Politics in the Qur’an] and *Naẓariyyeh-ye Siyasi-ye Islam* [Islamic
Political Theory] (Volumes 1 and 2).

Muhammad Mahdi Nadiri Qummi  
 Esfand 1378 AHS  
 (Circa February-March 2000)

[^1]: It refers to Imām Muhammad ibn Hasan al-Mahdī, the Twelfth and
Last Imām from the Prophet’s Holy Progeny who is presently in the state
of major occultation [ghaybah al-kubrā] and will appear on the appointed
time in the future to fill the world with truth, justice and faith after
being engulfed by falsehood, injustice and unbelief. For further
information on the Islamic belief on the Mahdī, see Āyatullāh Ibrāhīm
Amīnī, Imam Mahdi: The Just Leader of Humanity,
http://www.al-islam.org/mahdi/nontl/index.htm; Āyatullāh Sayyid Muhammad
Bāqir as-Sadr and Āyatullāh Murtadā Mutahharī, Awaited Savior,
http://www.al-islam.org/awaited/index.htm. [Trans.]

[^2]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhis-salām, ‘alayhimus-salām, or ‘alayhās-salām [may peace be upon
him/them/her], which is used after the names of the prophets, angels,
Imāms from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^3]: Hadrat: The Arabic word Hadrat is used as a respectful form of
address. [Trans.]

[^4]: The abbreviation, “qs” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
quddisa sirruh [may his soul be sanctified], which is used after the
names of pious people. [Trans.]

[^5]: It is now three decades after the triumph of the Islamic
Revolution (February 11, 1979). [Trans.]


