Chapter 4: Arguments for Wilayat al-Faqih
=========================================

Before dealing with the proofs substantiating *wilayat al-faqih*, it is
appropriate to explain the meaning of *wilayat al-faqih* first so as to
clear up any ambiguity about it and in the light of the clear picture we
have, we can examine its proofs.

Ontological guardianship and legislative guardianship
-----------------------------------------------------

**Ontological guardianship [wilayat at-takwiniyyah] and legislative
guardianship [wilayat at-tashri‘iyyah]**

Perhaps, there is no need to note that by *wilayat al-faqih*, we do not
mean the ontological guardianship. Rather, we try to prove the
legislative guardianship of *faqih*. *Wilayat at-takwiniyyah* which
means having authority over the entire universe and the rules governing
it is basically related to God, the Exalted, the Creator of the entire
universe, the order of creation and the laws governing them.

Sometimes, certain examples of this guardianship are granted by God to
some of His servants, whereby they can exercise authority over whatever
exists in the universe. The miracles and wonders shown by the prophets
(*‘a*) and divine saints [*awliya’*] are among these examples. According
to the Shi‘ah, the most extensive example of ontological guardianship
granted to the servants of God is that which God granted to the Prophet
of Islam (S) and the infallible Imams (*‘a*) after him. In any case, in
our the discussion of *wilayat al-faqih* we are not concerned with the
idea of exercising authority over the system of creation the laws of
nature though sometimes a *faqih* having such a quality may have
miracles [*karamah*].

The question of the management of society which concerns the Prophet (S)
and the infallible Imams (*‘a*) as well as the *faqih* is connected to
their legislative guardianship [*wilayah at-tashri‘i*]. That is, it is
the question to which the Qur’an refers in some verses, such as

***“The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves”***[^1]

and in some *hadith*s, such as “Of whosoever I am Master [*mawla*], then
‘Ali is also his Master [*mawla*].” Legislative guardianship has a legal
basis. That is, a person can, through laying down laws and executing
them, have authority over the people and members of the society, and it
is incumbent upon them to submit to him and to comply with the laws. The
meaning of

***“The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves”***

is that the decision made by the Prophet (S) regarding a Muslim or
Islamic society is binding and has precedence over the decision they
themselves make concerning their personal and individual affairs. In
other words, the society is in need of some center of power that has the
power and right to decide on social issues and his decision is final. In
the aforementioned verse, God has specified this epicenter of power
which has dominance over all.

As such, *wilayat al-faqih* does not mean one’s guardianship over the
insane and ignorant; rather it means the legal authority and right of
law-making, decision-making and execution which we think the *faqih* has
regarding the administration of the society’s affairs and social issues.
For this reason, we regard him as superior to others, and since right
and duty are inseparable and intertwined with each other, once proved
the *faqih* has this right, it follows that people have to respect this
right and obey the *faqih*’s decisions, orders and rules. As such, on
the basis of the verse,

 ***“The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves,”***

if the Prophet (S) orders a person to go to the battlefield, he or she
has to obey even though he or she does not like to go. Or, if the
Prophet (S) orders a person to contribute for the battlefront even
though he or she has given *khums*[^2] and *zakat*[^3] and no religious
levy is due to him or her, it is incumbent on him or her to obey and has
no right to object.

The late Imam Khomeini (may Allah elevate his station) often cited this
example in his lectures: “If an Islamic ruler asks me to hand this cloak
of mine over to him, I would obey and say, “With pleasure”. Whenever the
*wali al-faqih* sees that the expediency of the Islamic society demands
that I should hand over to him my cloak, I have to obey and give it
over.” This is the true meaning of *wilayat al-faqih* which
characterizes our culture and it is taken for granted. Men and women,
young and old, rural and urban, are familiar with it and accept it.

There are numerous cases, which support this fact, the most famous of
which is the tobacco controversy and the religious edict issued by the
late Mirza Shirazi.[^4] All the Shi‘ah at that time believed that the
*‘ulama’* and *mujtahidun* are the successors of the Imam of the Age
(*‘a*) and if the successor of the Imam (*‘a*) says something he has to
be obeyed. Therefore, when the late Mirza Shirazi declared, “Today, the
use of tobacco is unlawful [*haram*] and tantamount to war against the
Imam of the Age (*‘a*)” they threw away and smashed their hookahs, and
no one knew what happened. Until the day before, the use of tobacco had
been lawful and was not a problem. Does God’s decree on the lawful
[*halal*] and the prohibited [*haram*] change?! Everybody, including the
*‘ulama’* and the *maraji‘ at-taqlid* who issued religious edicts
[*fatawa*] regarded themselves bound to observe this decree of Mirza
Shirazi.

Now, in light of this explanation and clarification of the true meaning
of *wilayat al-faqih*, we will, after discussing one point, embark on
the proofs substantiating the idea of *wilayat al-faqih*.

Is wilayat al-faqih founded on imitation [taqlid] or on research [tahqiq]?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Since the issue of *wilayat al-faqih* is an offshoot of the question of
Imamate [*imamah*], some say it is among the subjects which are relevant
to scholastic theology [*‘ilm al-kalam*]. *‘Ilm al-kalam* technically
means the science dealing with the subjects related to the principles of
religion [*usul ad-din*], i.e. the subjects about God, prophethood
[*nubuwwah*] and the Day of Resurrection [*ma‘ad*]. After establishing
the idea of prophethood in *‘ilm al-kalam*, this question arises: “After
the Prophet of Islam (S), what becomes of the issue of leadership of the
Islamic society?” Following this question, the question of Imamate can
be discussed, and according to the proofs at their disposal, the Shi‘ah
believe that the infallible Imam has the right to lead the society after
the Prophet of Islam (S).

After establishing the idea of the Imamate of the infallible Imams
(*‘a*), this question is posed: “In a time like ours when we practically
have no access to the infallible Imam, what must the people’s stance
with regard to the leadership of the Muslim society be?” It is in
pursuit of this question that the question of *wilayat al-faqih* is
discussed. Since it is commonly known that “Imitation [*taqlid*] in
matters connected to the principles of religion is not permissible,”
some imagine that because the issue of *wilayat al-faqih* is, as stated
above, among the subjects related to the principles of religion and
scholastic theology, it follows that this issue, like the question of
proving the existence of God or the prophethood of the Prophet (S), is
among the issues which one has to investigate [*tahqiq*] by himself, and
in sum, it is not a matter of imitation [*taqlid*].

As a matter of fact, this a notion is not correct, firstly, because it
is not correct to assume that it is not permissible for one to practice
*taqlid* in every issue connected to scholastic theology or to the
principles of religion, and one has to prove it through solid and
convincing arguments. In fact, there are so many theological issues in
which people have to practice *taqlid* and see the view of an authority
about them.

For example, the issue of questioning the dead person on the “first
night in the grave” is among the subjects related to the Day of
Resurrection [*ma‘ad*]. Yet, concerning such questions like what, in
essence, is the “first night in the grave” and if, for instance, a
person is buried at daytime shall we wait until the night comes and then
we can say that it is his or her first night in the grave? If the corpse
is burnt and turned into ashes and the ashes were blown by the wind or
fell prey to rapacious animals and nothing of it remains to be buried,
will the dead person have no “first night in the grave”? In addition to
tens of other questions about the “first night in the grave,” most of us
have not investigated by ourselves nor do we have sufficient expertise
to do research on them.

We have known the answers to such questions through reading books or
listening to the lectures of the great figures whom we trust. Besides,
although *wilayat al-faqih* is, in a sense, a theological issue and
among the subjects pertaining to prophethood and Imamate, it is not
among the issues about which every person can research because it has a
special character. Thus, one has to rely on a trustworthy expert’s
opinion.

Secondly, although the issue of *wilayat al-faqih*, which is considered
an offshoot of the discussion on Imamate, is a theological issue and
among the subjects pertaining to the principles of religions, regarding
the idea that it is incumbent upon the people to obey the decree of
*wali al-faqih*, what the duties of the *wali al-faqih* are, what his
jurisdiction is and similar other questions, it is considered a juristic
issue.

For this reason, the *fuqaha* have dealt with it in their books of
*fiqh* and in juristic discourses. There is no doubt that concerning the
issues related to Islamic jurisprudence (or, the very branches of
religion [*furu‘ ad-din*]), *taqlid* is permissible and it is obligatory
for most people.

At any rate, it is necessary to notice that the issue on proving
*wilayat al-faqih* is a specialized one, the investigation of which
requires particular tools and expertise. However, since many people ask
about it and it has become one of the society’s current and basic
issues, we shall hereby try to enumerate the proofs substantiating
*wilayat al-faqih* in a relatively simple manner. It is obvious that for
further explanation, one has to refer to the books, magazines and
discussions which deal with this issue.

The proofs substantiating wilayat al-faqih
------------------------------------------

The proofs which are introduced to establish *wilayat al-faqih* are
classified as intellectual [*‘aqli*] and transmitted [*naqli*]. It is
worth noticing that the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’* believe that in proving a
religious injunction, we can make use of four types of proofs: the
Qur’an, *Sunnah* of the Infallibles (*‘a*), consensus [*ijma‘*], and
reason [*‘aql*].

According to the Shi‘ah *‘ulama’*, in proving a religious injunction,
our proof should not necessarily be based on a Qur’anic verse or a
*hadith* but a religious injunction in Islam can be established through
reasoning and a sound intellectual proof. As such, according to Islamic
jurisprudence, citing an intellectual proof for proving *wilayat
al-faqih* is in no way less important than citing transmitted proofs,
such as Qur’anic verses and *hadith*s. Here, we shall mention two
intellectual proofs and two transmitted proofs and thereby try to prove
*wilayat al-faqih*.

Intellectual proofs
-------------------

### The first intellectual proof

In brief, this proof consists of the following premises:

1. For ensuring individual and collective welfare for mankind, and
avoiding chaos, turmoil and corruption and decadence of the social
order, it is necessary for a society to have a government.

2. The ideal government in its loftiest and best form is the government
which is ruled by an infallible Imam.

3. For this reason, when it is not possible to achieve a necessary and
exigent thing in its ideal and optimum level, we should achieve what is
nearest to the ideal level. Consequently, when the people are deprived
of the blessing of the government of the Infallibles (*‘a*), their aim
should be achieving what is nearest to the ideal government.

4. The nearness of a government to the government of the Infallibles
[*ma‘sumin*] is crystallized into three main things: first, having
knowledge of the general rulings of Islam (expertise in Islamic
jurisprudence [*fiqahah*]); second, having moral and spiritual
excellence whereby one can curb his carnal desires, physical threats and
worldly temptations (God-wariness [*taqwa*]); third, having expertise in
the management of society represented in such qualities and attributes
like social and political acumen, awareness of the international issues;
courage vis-à-vis the enemies and offenders, right judgment in
identifying the priorities, etc.

To sum up, during the period of occultation of the infallible Imam
(*‘a*), the one who is most efficient and best of those who enjoy the
requirements is to assume the leadership of the society and by holding
the highest post of the government, he is to organize its organs and
direct it toward perfection.

Now, we shall elaborate on this proof and each of its premises:

The first premise of this proof is the well-known discussion on the
necessity of the existence of government with which we have dealt in the
previous chapters. In the mentioned discussion we pointed out the
presuppositions of the theory of *wilayat al-faqih*, stating that one of
this theory’s presuppositions acknowledges the urgent need of society
for government and we said that the vast majority of political thinkers
and others accept this principle and none raises doubt about it except
anarchists and Marxists who have certain views about it. In any case,
there are numerous solid grounds for the need of society for government
which confirm this point. In this regard, the Commander of the Faithful,
‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ بُدَّ لِلنَّاسِ مِنْ أَمِيرِ بَرٍّ أَوْ فَاجِرٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“People cannot do without ruler, good or bad.”***[^5]

This statement clearly indicates the urgent need of society for
government.

The second premise of this proof is clear it needs no elaboration. What
is meant by the “Infallibles” [*ma‘sumin*] here is the Prophet (S) and
the twelve Imams (*a*) who, in our belief, have the characteristic of
*ismah* [infallibility]. That is, they do not commit any sin or mistake
intentionally or unintentionally, and their behavior, action, thinking,
and decision are free from imperfection or mistake.

This peculiarity makes them most suitable to take charge of government
because rulers may either stray from the path of truth and justice and
corrupt the society due to their involvement in personal and carnal
interests, or on account of their mismanagement, blunders, and incorrect
and unsound decisions, they may give way to the prevalence of corruption
and wastage of the society’s interests.

But an infallible person neither commits sins nor makes mistakes in
thought and action because he enjoys the *‘ismah* [infallibility].
Meanwhile, it is argued in *‘ilm al-kalam* that the characteristic of
*‘ismah* is also rooted in abundant knowledge and utter insight which
are attributed to the Infallibles (*‘a*). In other words, the *ma‘sum*
is a perfect man who, by virtue of the possession of intellect and
knowledge par excellence, does not consciously or unconsciously fall
prey to the snare of any sin and mistake.

Therefore, the reason of every sensible person confirms that the
government of such a person enjoys all the virtues of an ideal and
desirable government and achieves the highest possible welfare for the
society.

The third premise of this argument is, perhaps, the most significant
one. In explaining this premise, we had better cite one or two examples:

Let us assume that ten persons—from among the most distinguished
personalities, each of whom is so important and useful for the
society—are on the verge of drowning and if we use all the facilities,
equipments and rescuers at our disposal, we can save only seven of them
and the remaining three will drown.

What will, in this case, the dictate of a sound mind be? Will it be
sensible to say that since it is impossible to save all the ten persons
for three of them will definitely drown, there is no need to attempt to
rescue them? Or, will it be sensible to say that if it is possible to
save all the ten, then action has to be taken to rescue them all but if
it is not possible to do so, then if we want to rescue the remaining
seven it makes no difference if we save all the seven, or only six or
five of them, or even only one of them and if it is not possible to save
the ten, what is important is the very idea of setting out to rescue
them, but in spite of the possibility of saving the remaining seven, it
makes no difference if we set out to save all of the seven or, for
example, just two or even one of them?

Or, will it be sensible that if it is not possible to save all the ten
persons as an absolute and perfect expediency, we have to do our best to
save all the remaining seven persons (as the nearest possible level to
the absolute and perfect expediency) and we are not allowed to neglect
even one of them, let alone disregarding, for example, six or five
persons and making no effort to rescue them? The definite dictate of
reason is the third option and all other options will be rejected by
reason.

Or, let us suppose that a person was attacked by a shark in the sea, and
we know that even if we did our best to rescue him, one or both of his
legs would be lost. In sum, even if we succeeded in rescuing him, some
parts of his body would be lost.

The question is: Regarding this scenario, what will be the dictate of
reason? Will it suggest that since we cannot get him out safe and sound,
then it is of no use attempting to rescue him and we should only sit and
watch what is going on? Or, will the reason of every a sensible,
conscientious person dictate that although one or both of his legs will
certainly be amputated and some parts of his body will be damaged, in
any case, he has to be rescued, and the impossibility to rescue him safe
and sound (as a hundred percent expediency) is no excuse for not
attempting to rescue a one-legged person (as an incomplete expediency)
and to watch how his legs devoured by the shark? Now the answer is
clear.

The dictate of reason in the stated two examples is, in reality, based
on a general rule which is accepted by reason and it is the very rule
that comprises the third premise of our argument, and that is, *if it is
impossible to obtain a necessary and exigent thing at its best, the
nearest possible level to it has to be sought*. In fact, our present
discussion is a manifestation of this general rule. The expediency of
having a government is a necessity which no one can deny.

The ideal and desirable type of this expediency is not attainable except
in the government of the Infallibles (*‘a*). But when we do not
practically have access to the Infallibles and their government, and we
cannot attain expediency in its best, should we sit and do nothing? Or,
are we allowed in spite of the possibility of attaining the nearest
level to the ideal expediency to overlook it and be satisfied with its
lower levels? The dictate of reason is that under the pretext of not
having access to the ideal and desirable level of government, we should
not totally dispense with the need for government.

Neither should we regard all governments to be equal in spite of their
different levels of goodness and badness and approve of them in the same
way. Instead, we should seek to establish a government which will be
nearest to that of the Infallibles (*‘a*) and expediency nearest to the
ideal one.

For explaining the fourth and last premise of this argument, we see that
the things which contribute to the achievement of the highest level of
expediency of government in the government of an infallible one are not
all the characteristics he enjoys including his behavioral, moral,
intellectual, physical and outward, emotional and psychological,
domestic, and other peculiarities, and the things that have major
contribution in this regard are, firstly, his full and all-dimensional
knowledge of Islam and Islamic laws according to which he can direct the
society toward the straight path of Islam and Islamic values; secondly,
his absolute immunity from any kind of corruption, error, sin,
selfishness, etc.; and finally, his comprehensive and perfect insight
and competence in social conditions and management of social affairs.

Therefore, when we say in the third premise that we have to strive for
achieving the nearest type of government to that of the Infallibles
(*‘a*), we refer to the government which is headed by a person who, in
terms of all the three characteristics, is the best and most brilliant
in the society. Since full acquaintance with the Islamic laws is among
these characteristics, it follows that this person has to be a *faqih*
because a *faqih* is capable of defining Islamic laws through research.
Of course, only to be a *faqih* is not enough because having the other
two characteristics, viz. God-wariness [*taqwa*] and expertise in
managing the affairs of society, are also necessary.

As such, according to these premises, the soundness of each of which we
have examined separately, the logical and definite conclusion will be
that when we have no access to an Infallible or the government led by an
Infallible one, we have to turn to a duly competent jurist [*faqih jami‘
ash-sharayit*] who has the right to rule, and when such a person is
found in the society, the rule of others will not be legitimate or
permissible.

### The second intellectual proof

This proof consists of the following premises:

1. Guardianship over people’s properties, honor and lives is among the
things which concern Divine Lordship [*rububiyyat-e ilahi*], and it is
only with the designation and permission of God, the Exalted, that
guardianship can be legitimate.

2. This legal authority and right of custody of the honor and lives of
people has been given by God, the Exalted, to the Holy Prophet (S) and
the infallible Imams (*‘a*).

3. During the time when the people are deprived of the presence of an
infallible [*ma‘sum*] leader among them, either God, the Exalted, has
given no attention to the implementation of the social laws of Islam, or
He has given the permission to the most appropriate person to implement
them.

4. The assumption that during the time of the society’s lack of access
to an infallible leader God has given no attention to the implementation
of social laws of Islam is contrary to the divine purpose, inconsistent
with wisdom and that which is not worthy of being preferred. According
to the second assumption, we can realize through the definite dictate of
reason that permission has been given to the most appropriate person to
implement the social laws.

5. A duly competent jurist, viz. the *faqih* who possesses the two
qualities of God-wariness [*taqwa*] and expertise in governing society
and ensuring its welfare has a greater authority than any other person.

Hence, a duly competent jurist is the best and most appropriate person
who has gained the permission of God, the Exalted, and infallible saints
[*awliya’*] (*‘a*) to implement the social laws of Islam when the people
are deprived of an infallible leader. Below is a detailed explanation of
this proof and its premises.

The first premise is the one which we have mentioned many times. In
discussing the presuppositions of the theory of *wilayat al-faqih* and
the role of the people in Islamic government and the basis of
legitimacy, we have relatively elaborated on it. The conclusion we
reached was that since God is the Creator and Master of the entire
creation including human beings, and since according to the general
dictate of reason, to exercise authority over the property of others
without their permission is an unjust and unacceptable act, it follows
that God has the right to exercise authority over man and his property,
and in lower level, this right may be given by God to some human beings.

In the second premise which is concerned with the role of the people in
Islamic government and we said that according to all Muslims’ belief,
the right to exercise authority over the properties, honor and lives of
the people have been entrusted to the Holy Prophet (S) by God. In the
same token, the Shi‘ah believe that after the Prophet (S), this right
has also been granted to the twelve infallible people.

The third and fourth premises, in reality, answer this question: “In a
time like ours when the people have no access to the Prophet (S) or to
one of the infallible Imams (*‘a*), what decision should be taken?” Has
God, the Exalted, besides the many social laws in Islam whose
implementation requires having an administrative system and political
power, taken no care to these laws, and given attention only to the
personal laws of Islam and their implementation, or has He emphasized
the implementation of the social laws of Islam as well? In other words,
according to the dictate of reason, during the absence of an infallible
[*ma‘sum*] in the society, only two things are possible: Either the
purpose of God is to implement the social laws of Islam or not to
implement them. Now, we shall examine what is for and what is against
each of these propositions.

If we say that during the absence of the Infallibles (*‘a*), God does
not want to take care of implementing the social laws of Islam and
suffices Himself with the personal obligations such as prayer, fasting,
*Hajj* pilgrimage, and ritual purification and impurity, this will be
contrary to the wisdom of God and preferring that which is not worthy to
be preferred. Let us elaborate on this point.

In principle, we believe that the reason behind founding the system of
“prophethood” [*nubuwwah*] and sending down prophets (*‘a*) and heavenly
scriptures is that God, the Exalted, has not created this world and
human beings without a purpose. In fact, His purpose is to bring every
creature to perfection commensurate with its existential potentiality
and man is no exception; he has been created to attain perfection.

Yet, since man is unable to define his ultimate perfection and its exact
limits and path by relying solely on reasoning, God, the Exalted, has
guided man and shown him the way to perfection by sending down prophets
(*‘a*) and making known to him the laws and commands through religion,
and all these religious commands and laws have certain effects on man’s
perfection. As a matter of fact, religion has been presented to man to
enable him attain perfection.

Given this analysis, if we assume that God, the Exalted, has suspended
and disregarded an immense part of the laws of Islam, this will mean
that God has abandoned His purpose, and that is man’s attainment of
perfection because what ensures man’s achievement of felicity and
perfection commensurate with his existential potentiality is the set of
religious laws and commandments, and ignoring some of them is strongly
refused by the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿ أَفَتُؤْمِنُونَ بِبَعْضِ الْكِتَابِ وَتَكْفُرُونَ بِبَعْضٍ فَمَا
جَزَاء مَن يَفْعَلُ ذَلِكَ مِنكُمْ إِلاَّ خِزْيٌ فِي الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَيَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ يُرَدُّونَ إِلَى أَشَدِّ الْعَذَابِ ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What! Do you believe in part of the Book and defy another part? So
what is the requital of those of you who do that except disgrace in the
life of this world? And on the Day of Resurrection, they shall be
consigned to a severer punishment.”***[^6]

In principle, if the social laws of Islam had had no impact whatsoever
upon man’s felicity and perfection, they would not have initially been
promulgated. So, the effect of this set of laws on the felicity and
perfection of man is certain, and naturally to ignore them will obstruct
man’s attainment of bliss and perfection, and it will be contrary to
wisdom and God is too wise to ignore them.

In the same vein, as we have shown in the explanation of one of the
premises of the first rational proof, according to the dictate of
reason, if it is impossible to obtain necessary expediency in its ideal
and most desirable form, it is necessary and obligatory to obtain what
is nearest to its ideal and most desirable form, and one should, under
the pretext of impossibility of obtaining the good thing in its best,
neither totally overlook it nor suffice himself with its lower degree
when it is possible for him to attain a higher level.

Now, in view of this rule, we say that the prerequisite for the
implementation of the social laws of Islam is the establishment of
government whose perfect model is the government of the Infallibles
(*‘a*). However, in case of lack of access to the Infallibles (*‘a*) and
when they are not present among the people, there are three
possibilities:

(1) By giving the permission to implement these laws to the most
appropriate person, we can obtain the highest degree of expediency after
the government of the Infallibles (*‘a*) as a result of implementing
these laws;

(2) Notwithstanding the possibility of obtaining a higher level of
expediency, we consider all the levels of expediency to be identical and
to obtain a higher level as not necessary;

(3) In spite of the possibility of obtaining some levels of expediency
through the implementation of social laws of Islam, we totally disregard
this expediency and suspend the implementation of the social laws of
Islam.

It is obvious that the first possibility is the most preferable while
the other two are being preferred over, and preferring what is being
preferred over to what is preferable is unsound and never becomes a wise
person.

Given this argument, the third and fourth premises have been proved
convincing and so far it has become evident that the dictate of reason
entails that during the lack of access to the Infallibles (*‘a*), the
permission to implement the social laws of Islam has been given to the
most appropriate person, and if it was not so, there would be violation
of the purpose, refutation of wisdom, and preferring what is being
preferred over to what is preferable on the part of God, the Exalted.

Now, after proving that during the absence of the Infallibles (*‘a*) the
permission to implement the laws of Islam has been granted to the most
appropriate person, this question will arise: “Who is the most
appropriate person and what makes this person most qualified, competent
and worthy to assume the post?” We clearly stated the answer to this
question while explaining the fourth premise of the first rational proof
and we said that among the qualities and attributes of the Infallibles
(*‘a*) that cause their government to be most perfect are these things:
infallibility [*‘ismah*], knowledge and complete awareness of the laws
and injunctions of Islam, and good acquaintance with social issues and
the dexterity in managing them. Thus, anyone who possesses all these
three attributes and most similarity and nearness to the infallible Imam
(*‘a*) is the best and most appropriate of the rest. And such a thing
applies to no one but the *faqih* who has a good knowledge of Islam, is
pious and has the expertise required for managing the affairs of the
people and society.

To sum up, a duly competent jurist is the best and most appropriate
person who has been given permission by God and the infallible saints
[*awliya’*] (*‘a*) to implement the social laws of Islam at the time
when people are deprived of the presence of an infallible leader.

### Transmitted proofs

We have said that for proving the theory of *wilayat al-faqih*, both
intellectual [*‘aqli*] and transmitted [*naqli*] proofs can be cited.
The transmited proofs of this issue are the *hadith*s which prove the
people’s turning to *fuqaha* to help them solve their administrative
problems (particularly judicial issues and legal disputes) or which
introduce *fuqaha* as functionaries [*umana’*], caliphs [*khulafa’*],
inheritors [*waratha*] of the prophets (*‘a*), and those who manage the
affairs.

Regarding the chain of transmission [*sanad*] and authenticity of these
*hadith*s, extensive discussions have been made and since it is not
possible to mention them here, it is better to refer to certain
voluminous books and treatises which focus on this subject. Among these
*hadith*s are the *maqbulah*[^7] of ‘Umar ibn Hanẓalah, the *mashhurah*
of Abu Khadijah[^8] and the *tawqi‘ ash-sharif* [noble signature] which
was a reply to a question asked by Ishaq ibn Ya‘qub, and in our opinion,
casting doubt upon the chain of transmission of the mentioned *hadith*s
is unjustifiable because their transmitters and contents are well-known.
As for their proof that substantiates the designation of *fuqaha* as the
agents of Imams (*‘a*), it is indisputable and if there is no more need
for such designation during the period of occultation, it will not be
less either.

Therefore, by applying the criterion of designation of *faqih* during
the time of presence to the period of occultation and establishing the
idea that the designation of *faqih* during the period of occultation
through what is technically termed *dalalat al-mawfaqah*, the
probability of delegating to the people the designation of *wali
al-faqih* during the period of occultation, though there is no proof to
support it, is inconsistent with the Legislative Lordship of God (as
indicated in the verse, *“Verily, the authority belongs to Allah”* and
according to other transmitted proofs). Besides, no Shi‘ah *faqih*
(except in recent times) has ever put forward such a probability
[*ihtimal*].

At any rate, the aforementioned *hadith*s strongly corroborate the
rational proofs we have mentioned, and even assuming that somebody
disputes about their chain of transmission or proofs, our citation of
rational proofs will remain valid.

After this preliminary explanation, let us review some of the
transmitted proofs that support *wilayat al-faqih*:

1. The *hadith* which is well-known among the *fuqaha* as the *tawqi‘
ash-sharif* [noble signed decree]. This *hadith* has been mentioned by
the great and outstanding Shi‘ah scholar [*‘alim*], the late Shaykh
as-Saduq[^9] in his book, *Ikmal ad-Din*.[^10] This signed decree is
actually a reply to the letter of Ishaq ibn Ya‘qub written by *Haḍrat
Wali al-‘Asr*, the Imam of the Age (*‘a*). In the said letter Ishaq ibn
Ya‘qub posed questions to the Imam (*‘a*) one of which is: “What do we
have to do in case of occurring social problems [*al-hawadith
al-waqi‘ah*] during the period of occultation?” In reply to this
question, the Imam (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَمَّا ٱلْحَوَادِثُ ٱلْوَاقِعَةِ فَارْجِعُوا فِيهَا إِلىٰ رُوَاةِ
حَدِيثُنَا فَإِنَّهُمْ حُجَّتِي عَلَيكُمْ وَ أَنَا حُجَّةُ اللهِ
عَلَيهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“In case of occurring social problems, refer for guidance to those
who relate from us, for they are my argument [hujjah] against you, and I
am Allah’s argument against them.”***[^11]

If what is meant by “occurring social problems” [*al-hawadith
al-waqi‘ah*] and “those who relate from us” [*ruwatu hadithuna*] in this
signed decree is known, then its proof for our claim which is
establishing *wilayat al-faqih* will become clear.

When clarifying the purport of *al-hawadith al-waqi‘ah* mentioned in the
text carrying the signed decree, we notice that what Ishaq ibn Ya‘qub
means is by far other than the religious laws and issues presented
nowadays in the books of practical laws [*risalah al-‘amaliyyah*]
firstly because it is clear for the Shi‘ah that regarding these issues,
they have to refer to religious scholars and to those who are familiar
with the traditions and narrations of the Prophet (S) and Imams (*‘a*),
and thus, they do not need to ask about them.

The same is true of the time of presence of the Imams (*‘a*) themselves
when, due to the emergence of problems like geographical distance and
the like, the Imams (*‘a*) used to tell the people who had religious
questions to refer to such people like Yunus ibn ‘Abd ar-Rahman,
Zakariyya ibn Adam and the like. The four special deputies [*nawwab
al-arba‘ah*] of the Imam of the Age (*‘a*) during the period of his
minor occultation [*‘asr al-ghaybah as-sughra*] (each of whom was a
*faqih* and religious scholar) is another example.

In sum, this is not something new for the Shi‘ah. Secondly, if by
*al-hawadith al-waqi‘ah* Ishaq ibn Ya‘qub meant religious laws, he would
say something like: “What is our duty regarding the lawful [*halal*] and
the unlawful [*haram*]?” or “What is our duty regarding Divine laws?”
and similar expressions, which are very common in most narrations.
Anyhow, the expression, *al-hawadith al-waqi‘ah*, is never used to refer
to religious laws. Thirdly, the connotation of words is essentially
connected with the situation, and in terms of lexicography and
situation, *al-hawadith al-waqi‘ah* never means religious laws.

Rather, it has a very wide meaning which includes social issues,
problems and happenings. As such, the question of Ishaq ibn Ya‘qub to
*Haḍrat Wali al-‘Asr* (*‘a*) actually means: “Regarding the social
issues and concerns which the Muslim community faces during the period
of your occultation, what will our duty be and to whom shall we turn for
guidance?” In reply to it, the Imam (*‘a*) wrote: “In this case, you
have to refer to “those who relate from us”.” Now, let us see what is
meant by “those who relate from us”.

One may possibly argue that what is meant by “those who relate from us”
is anyone who cites *hadith*s or narrations from such books like *Usul
al-Kafi*,[^12] *Wasa’il ash-Shi‘ah*[^13] or any other *hadith* book and
narrates them to the people. But if we make a closer examination, we
will find that this notion is not correct because in this time of ours
anyone who wants to narrate a *hadith* or narration from the Prophet
(S), Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) or any other Imam has to be sure, in one way
or another, that the *hadith* is really ascribed to the Prophet, or Imam
as-Sadiq or any other Imam; otherwise, one has no right to say that Imam
as-Sadiq (*‘a*) has said so-and-so. If one does not have solid evidence
that the said *hadith* and narration is ascribed to Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
or to one of the Imams and Infallibles (*‘a*), and says that it is
ascribed to them, this act will be considered lying.

Besides, ascribing to the Prophet (S) and the Imams (*‘a*) what they
have not said is considered a major sin. To be more precise, if someone
intends to narrate a *hadith* from the Prophet (S) or an Imam, he has to
be able to rely on the Infallibles (*‘a*) according to a certain
credible religious proof or evidence. It is quite obvious that the
proper way of narrating *hadith* requires expertise, which is not in the
fields of medicine, engineering, computer science, and other sciences.
It has to be in Islamic jurisprudence [*fiqh*] and no one has such an
expertise except the *faqih*. Thus, what is meant by “those who relate
from us” is in reality the *fuqaha* and religious scholars [*‘ulama’*].

In view of our explanation of the two phrases, “*al-hawadith
al-waqi‘ah*” and “*ruwatu hadithuna*”, it is clear that the meaning of
the signed decree of the Imam of the Age (*‘a*) is: “Regarding the
social problems and events that the Muslim community faces during the
period of my occultation, turn for guidance to the *fuqaha* and
religious scholars because they are my argument against you and I am
Allah’s argument against them.” Such a statement is a solid evidence for
*wilayat al-faqih* during the period of occultation.

2. The other *hadith* that may be cited for proving *wilayat al-faqih*
is a *hadith* known as the *maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah. In this
*hadith*, stating the duty of the people concerning solving disputes and
turning for guidance to a competent authority who rules over the
Muslims, Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَ مِنْكُمْ قَدْ رَوىٰ حَدِيثُنَا وَ نَظَرَ في حَلاَلِنَا وَ
حَرَامِنَا وَ عَرَفَ أَحْكَامَنَا فَلْيَرْضُوا بِهِ حَكَمًا فَإِنّي
قَدْ جَعَلْتُهُ عَلَيْكُمْ حَاكِمًا فَإِذَا حَكَمَ بِحُكْمِنَا فَلَمْ
يَقْبَلْهُ مِنْهُ فَإِنَّمَا إِسْتَخَفَّ بِحُكْمِ اللهِ وَ عَلَيْنَا
رَدَّ وَ الرَّادُّ عَلَيْنَا كَالرَّادَّ عَلىٰ حَدِّ الشِّرْكِ
بِاللهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If there is a person among you who narrates from us, is versed in
the lawful and the unlawful, and is well acquainted with our laws and
ordinances, accept him as judge and arbiter, for I have appointed him as
a ruler over you. So, if he rules according to our law and you reject
his ruling, you will belittle Allah’s law and oppose us, and to oppose
us means to oppose Allah, and opposing Him is tantamount to associating
partners with Him.”***[^14]

It is obvious that the expression, “who narrates from us, is versed in
the lawful and the unlawful, and is well acquainted with our laws and
ordinances” applies to anybody except the *faqih* and *mujtahid* who is
well-versed in religious laws and issues, and the Imam (*‘a*) definitely
means the *fuqaha* and religious scholars whom he has assigned as rulers
over the people and regarded the ruling of the *faqih* like his ruling.

And it is crystal clear that obedience to the decree of the infallible
Imam (*‘a*) is obligatory and mandatory. As such, to obey the decree of
the *faqih* is obligatory and mandatory, too. As stated by the Imam
(*‘a*), the rejection of the ruling of the *faqih* is tantamount to the
rejection of the ruling of the infallible Imam (*‘a*) and ignoring his
command, which is a major and unforgivable sin because it is an open
rejection of the legislative sovereignty of God, the Exalted, according
to the said *hadith*, it corresponds to polytheism [*shirk*], i.e.
associating partners with Him. The Holy Qur’an says:

 ***“Polytheism is indeed a great injustice”***[^15] **and** ***“Indeed
Allah does not forgive that any partner should be ascribed to Him, but
He forgives anything besides that to whomever He wishes.”***[^16]

Thus, defiance of the rule of *faqih* and rejection of his command is
such a grave injustice and dreadful sin that it is not forgiven by God.

The criticism usually made against this way of understanding the
mentioned *hadith* is that this narration of the Imam (*‘a*) was only a
reply to a question about the legal disputes and conflicts among the
Shi‘ah and the narrator wanted to say: “What is our duty? Shall we refer
to the judicial organization and courts of the usurping ‘Abbasid
government or not?” And so what the Imam said was a reply to these
questions.

The *maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah is, in fact, concerned with the
implementation of juridical laws in Islam which forms part of the
governmental issues while *wilayat al-faqih* is related to the entire
affairs of government and implementation of all Islamic laws and the
rule of the *faqih* over the entire affairs of Islamic society. So, even
if we accept this narration and do not argue against its chain of
transmission, the only thing which it suggests is that the *faqih* has
the authority and right to manage judicial affairs and that is all.

In reply to this criticism, two things can be considered: *firstly*, it
is true that the inquiry of the narrator is about a particular case
(judicial issue), but it is quite common in Islamic jurisprudence that
the particularity of the question does not always necessitate giving a
reply that will be on specific case and cover no other cases. In fact,
it is possible that a general reply is given to a question which is
concerned with a certain case.

For instance, we have many narrations about prayer in which the narrator
asks about the case of a man to whom such-and-such happens while
praying. Regarding these narrations, no *faqih* has said or says that
the reply given by any infallible Imam (*‘a*) to such questions is a
ruling pertaining only to the case of the man praying and that if the
same thing exactly happens to a woman praying no ruling for the case of
the mentioned woman can be drawn from the narrations and we have to look
for it in other narrations.

Concerning this type of narrations, the *fuqaha* see that although the
question being posed is about a specific case, i.e. a man praying, the
ruling [*hukm*] of the Imam (*‘a*) in reply to the question is
applicable to every person praying, male or female.

*Secondly*, in the *maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah Imam as-Sadiq (*‘a*)
said: “I have appointed such a person (i.e. who narrates from us, is
versed in the lawful and the unlawful and is well acquainted with our
laws) as a ruler [*hakim*] over you” and not “I have appointed him as a
judge [*qaḍi*] over you.” There is difference between saying “I have
appointed him as *hakim* over you” and “I have appointed him as *qaḍi*
over you”. The general meaning of the word *hakim* encompasses all the
affairs of governance and rule.

In any case, in view of the intellectual and transmitted proofs, some
examples of which have been mentioned, in our view there is no more
doubt about the idea that during the period of occultation of the
infallible Imam (*‘a*), it is only the duly competent jurist [*faqih
jami‘ ash-sharayit*] who has been granted the right and permission by
God, the Exalted, and the infallible Imam (*‘a*) to govern and rule, and
to exercise authority.

So, any government, at the top of which is someone other than *faqih*
and is managed without the permission and supervision of *faqih* is a
government of the *taghut* wherever it is and whoever its ruler is, and
to support such a government is sinful and unlawful. Also, if the duly
competent *faqih* was a person of authority and the situation was
conducive so that this ruler could establish a government, according to
the proofs we have stated, obedience to him is obligatory and opposing
his rule is unlawful because the Imam of the Age (*‘a*) said: “He is my
argument against you” and “So, whoever rejects his ruling belittles
Allah’s ruling and opposes us.” Similarly, if the Commander of the
Faithful (*‘a*) appointed someone as the governor of a region, it was
incumbent upon the people to obey the appointed person and opposing that
governor would be tantamount to opposing the Commander of the Faithful
(*‘a*).

When, for example, the Imam appointed Malik al-Ashtar[^17] as the
governor of Egypt, nobody had the right to defy Malik’s order and say:
“I know that ‘Ali (*‘a*) has designated Malik and appointed him as a
governor, but since, for example, Malik is not infallible and identical
to ‘Ali, I do not need to obey him, even though his orders and the laws
enacted by him come within his jurisdiction, and it is not wrong from
the perspective of religious law to behave like that.”

It is obvious that such an argument and statement is invalid and unsound
for it is impossible to oppose Malik al-Ashtar who had been designated
by ‘Ali (*‘a*). The purport of the stated proofs is that in these days
the *faqih* is considered representative and deputy of God and the Imam
of the Age (*‘a*), and as stated by the Imam (*‘a*) himself, to oppose
the *faqih* is religiously impermissible.

[^1]: Sūrah al-Ahzāb 33:6.

[^2]: Khums: literally means one-fifth. According to the Shī‘ah school
of jurisprudence [fiqh], this one-fifth tax is obligatorily levied on
every adult Muslim who is financially secure and has surplus in his
income out of annual savings, net commercial profits, and all movable
and immovable properties which are not commensurable with the needs and
social standing of the person. Khums is divided into two equal parts:
the Share of the Imām [sahm al-Imām] and the Share of the Sayyids/Sādāt
(descendants of the Prophet) [sahm as-Sādāt]. Accordingly, the Share of
the Imām is to be paid to the living Imām, and in the period of
occultation [aṣr al-ghaybah], to the most learned living mujtahid who is
the giver’s marja‘ at-taqlīd [Source of Emulation]. The other half of
the khums, the Share of the Sayyids/Sādāt, is to be given to needy pious
Sayyids who do not have financial resources to lead a respectable
living. For more information, see Sayyid Muhammad Rizvi, Khums: An
Islamic Tax, http://www.al-islam.org/beliefs/practices/khums.html.
[Trans.]

[^3]: Zakāt: the tax levied on various kinds of wealth and spent
according to the injunctions specified in Sūrah at-Tawbah 9:60. [Trans.]

[^4]: Āyatullāh Mīrzā Ḥasan Shīrāzī (d. 1312 AH/1894): the mujtahid who
declared in December 1891 that “the use of tobacco is unlawful [ḥarām]
and tantamount to war against the Imām of the Age (‘a)” after the
production and marketing of tobacco in Iran had been made the monopoly
of a British company. In response to his declaration, all of Iran
boycotted tobacco, forcing the cancellation of the concession in early
1892. See Hamid Algar, Religion and State in Iran in 1785-1906: The Role
of the Ulama in the Qajar Period (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University
of California Press, 1969), pp. 205-215; Nikki Keddie, Religion and
Rebellion in Iran: The Tobacco Protest of 1891-92 (London: Frank Cass,
1966). [Trans.]

[^5]: Nahj al-Balāghah, Sermon 40.

[^6]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:85.

[^7]: Maqbūlah: a ḥadīth to which one may make acceptable reference.
[Trans.]

[^8]: Abū Khadījah, one of the trusted companions of Imām aṣ-Ṣādiq (‘a),
relates: “I was commanded by the Imām (‘a) to convey the following
message to our friends (i.e., the Shī‘ah): ‘When enmity and dispute
arise among you, or you disagree concerning the receipt or payment of a
sum of money, be sure not to refer the matter to one of these
malefactors for judgment. Designate as judge and arbiter someone from
among you who is acquainted with our injunctions concerning what is
permitted and what is prohibited, for I appoint such a man as judge over
you. Do not submit the complaint you have against one another to the
tyrannical ruling power.’ ” Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah, vol. 18, p. 100.
[Trans.]

[^9]: Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq: also known as Ibn Babūyah, one of the most
important of the early Shī‘ah scholars who died in 381 AH/991 CE. For
having an idea about the biography and works of Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq, see the
introduction to Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq, I’tiqādātu ’l-Imāmiyyah: A Shī‘ite
Creed, 3rd ed., trans. Asaf A. A. Fyzee (Tehran: World Organization for
Islamic Services, 1999), pp. 6-23. [Trans.]

[^10]: Ikmāl ad-Dīn: in full, Ikmāl ad-Dīn wa Itmām an-Ni‘mah is a work
by Shaykh aṣ-Ṣadūq on the occultation [ghaybah] of the Imām of the Age
(‘a). [Trans.]

[^11]: Ikmāl ad-Dīn wa Itmām an-Ni‘mah, vol. 1, p. 483.

[^12]: Usūl al-Kāfī is the first of the three sections of Al-Kāfī, one
of the most important Shī‘ah collections of hadīth compiled by Shaykh
Abū Ja‘far Muhammad ibn Ya‘qūb ibn Isḥāq al-Kulaynī (d. 941 CE). It
covers ideological and ethical matters and consists of the books of
Reason and Ignorance; the Excellence of Knowledge; Divine Unity; Divine
Proof; Belief; Unbelief; the Qur’an; and Supplications. [Trans.]

[^13]: The book Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah compiled by Shaykh Muhammad ibn
Ḥasan al-Ḥurr al-‘Āmilī (d. 1693 CE) is one of the best collections of
traditions [hadīths] ever compiled in recent centuries. It includes
traditions from the Prophet of Islam and the Imāms which are quoted in
the Four Books [kutub al-arba‘ah] and in many other hadīth collections.
It comprises more than fifty-one sections ranging from Kitāb
at-Tahārah to Kitāb ad-Diyāt and provides a comprehensive review of
issues on Islamic jurisprudence, laws, ethics and the practices of the
Ja‘farī school of thought. [Trans.]

[^14]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 67; Wasā’il ash-Shī‘ah, vol. 18, 98.

[^15]: Sūrah Luqmān 31:13.

[^16]: Sūrah an-Nisā’ 4:48.

[^17]: Mālik al-Ashtar: more fully, Mālik ibn Hārith from Nakha‘ known
as al-Ashtar, was among the prominent commanders of Imām ‘Alī’s army and
the one whom Imām ‘Alī (‘a) appointed as the governor of Egypt. He
accompanied the Imām in the Battles of Jamal and Siffīn. On his way to
Egypt, he was killed by Mu‘āwiyah through conspiracy. For further
details about the account of the Imām’s famous instructions to him
before his setting forth to Egypt, see Nahj al-Balāghah, Letter 53. A
complete translation is contained in William C. Chittick, A Shī‘ite
Anthology (Albany, N.Y., 1980), pp. 68-82. [Trans.]


