Chapter 5: The Concept of Absolute Guardianship of the Jurist [Wilayat al-Faqih al-Mutlaqah]
============================================================================================

The proofs we have presented in the previous chapter substantiating
*wilayat al-faqih* testify to the idea of absoluteness of *wilayat
al-faqih* and this entails that the *faqih* enjoys all the prerogatives
which the infallible Imam (*‘a*) as the holder of authority of the
Islamic society has. According to this perspective, the prerogatives of
*wali al-faqih* are not limited unless there is evidence that some of
the prerogatives of the infallible Imam (*‘a*) have not been given to
the *wali al-faqih* as in the case of the issue of the initial *jihad*.

 According to the famous view of the Shi‘ah *fuqaha*, the announcement
of the initial *jihad* is among the special prerogatives of the
Infallible (*‘a*). But apart from these cases (which are very few),
there is not any difference between the guardianship of the *faqih* and
that of the Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams (*‘a*).This idea
corresponds with what is called “absolute guardianship of the jurist”
[*wilayat al-faqih al-mutlaqah*]. The founder of the Islamic Republic,
Haḍrat Imam Khomeini used to say: “The guardianship of the *faqih* is
the guardianship of the Messenger of Allah (S) itself.”

Absolute Guardianship
---------------------

One of the doubts which is sometimes raised against the principle of
*wilayat al-faqih* in general and against the term “absolute” [*mutlaq*]
in particular is that *wilayat al-faqih* and in particular, *wilayat
al-faqih* *al-mutlaqah* [absolute guardianship of the jurist]
corresponds with despotic government and *wilayat al-faqih*
*al-mutlaqah* is identical to dictatorship.

That is, when *faqih* assumes power he does whatever he likes, issues
whatever decree he wants, and appoints or dismisses whoever he wishes.
In sum, he has absolute power and is not held accountable for whatever
he does. In other words, it is claimed that there are two types of
government: liberalism which based on the will of the people, and
fascism which is founded on someone’s whims and caprice. “Consequently,
when *wilayat al-faqih* system is not liberal, naturally it is a fascist
system.”

In reply to this allegation, we say that categorizing government into
two, i.e. liberal and fascist is a fallacy. We should remember that
there is a third type of government in which the ruler relies neither on
the will and choice neither of the people (liberal government) nor on
personal will and choice (fascist government) but he rules according to
the will and choice of God, the Exalted, following the divine laws.
*Wilayat al-faqih* belongs to this third category and it is, therefore,
not a fascist government.

Given this explanation, it is very clear that the claim that *wilayat
al-faqih* means that the *faqih* does whatever he likes and issues
whatever decree he wants, has absolute power, and is not accountable for
whatever he does is not true. In fact, those who understand and
interpret the term “absolute” [*mutlaq*] like that are mistaken. Of
course, some interpret it this way for special purposes and out of
spite. In any case, for refuting this claim, it is expedient here to
expound the term “absolute” in “absolute guardianship of the jurist”.

The word “absolute” in “absolute guardianship of the jurist” indicates
some points which are interrelated. Let us see what these points are:

One of these points is that “absolute guardianship of the jurist” is
used in contrast with the limited concept of guardianship which jurists
had during the time of the *taghut*.[^1] Let us elaborate on this point.
Prior to the victory of the Islamic Revolution and during the reign of
the *taghut*, which was a period of strangulation, owing to the
limitations imposed on Shi‘ah *fuqaha*, they could hardly get involved
in social affairs, and the people could ask them about certain social
issues and if this was possible, it was concealed from the ruling
authority.

For example, the people used to refer to *fuqaha* to ask them about
things like marriage, divorce, pious endowment [*waqf*] and some legal
disputes and affairs while the *fuqaha* on their part used to answer
them according to their guardianship. As we have indicated, the
*fuqaha*’s exercising of this guardianship both in term of range and
case was so limited that they were unable to get involved in those
things which, according to Islamic law, were among the rights and
prerogatives granted to them by God, the Exalted, and the infallible
Imams (*‘a*).

With the victory of the Islamic Revolution in Iran and the setting up of
the Islamic government by Imam Khomeini (*r*), the ground for exercising
comprehensive authority by Shi‘ah *fuqaha* was paved, and the late Imam
had the opportunity and power as the *faqih* at the highest post in
government to exercise authority in all that comes within the
jurisdiction of the *wali al-faqih*.

During this time, the *faqih* has been able to exercise all the
prerogatives and rights granted to him by the Promulgator of religious
law and Owner of the universe and mankind, and so the numerous
limitations and restrictions placed on his way during the period of the
*taghuti* governments have been removed. In consonance with this given
explanation, “absolute guardianship of the jurist” is used in contrast
to limited guardianship of the jurist during the reign of the *taghut*,
and so it is clear that this idea has nothing to do with dictatorship,
despotism and waywardness.

The second point to which “absolute guardianship of the jurist” implies
is that when the *faqih* occupies the highest post of government, he
enjoys all the prerogatives and rights which are required for governing,
and there is no difference between him and the infallible Imam (*‘a*) in
this particular case.

That is, we should not say that the *faqih* cannot exercise certain
rights and prerogatives, in spite of their being necessary for
governance because they belong only to the infallible Imam (*‘a*) or
that only the infallible Imam (*‘a*) can exercise them when he gains
authority and so the *faqih* cannot claim he has such prerogatives and
rights.

Obviously, such a claim is unacceptable because when we admit that these
rights are necessary for governance, their absence will have bad effects
on administering the affairs and the ruler will be able to play his role
of managing the society’s affairs. Hence, one can logically find no
difference between the infallible Imam (*‘a*) and the *wali al-faqih* in
this respect, and if we set any limitation for the *faqih*’s
prerogatives and rights, the result will be losing the welfare of the
Islamic society and disregarding its interests.

As such, it is necessary for the *faqih*, like the infallible Imam
(*‘a*), to possess all the rights and prerogatives. This second point to
which the word “absolute” indicates in “absolute guardianship of the
jurist” has been clarified, and it is, like the previous point, has no
relation with the fascist government and does not contribute to
totalitarianization. This issue has a logical basis, is very plain and
is accepted by the other kinds of governments.

The other point to which “absolute guardianship of the jurist” indicates
is connected with this question: Is the scope of authority and
prerogatives of *wali al-faqih* confined to necessary and urgent cases
or can the *faqih* exercise authority when things are not so necessary
and urgent and there is rational and reasonable preference? It is
appropriate to cite an example in order to clarify the issue.

*The first example:* Suppose that the problem of traffic jam in a city
became very serious and due to the lack of highways or to the narrowness
of roads, the vehicles always got stuck for hours. In a nutshell, the
condition of the streets was not responsive to society’s need.
Trustworthy and competent authorities decided that the problem could be
solved by constructing one or many expressways.

Or, perhaps the air pollution in the city became so alarming that the
authorities and medical experts warned the people and government of its
danger and suggested that parks be opened. In such cases, *wali
al-faqih*, without doubt, can use his governmental prerogatives, and
give order for the construction of those expressways and parks, for
ensuring comfort to society even though the compensating of the owners
of the real estates to be turned into expressways and parks was against
the owners’ will.

*The second example:* Suppose that for the purpose of adding beauty to
the city we wanted to construct a plaza or park in a certain district,
but in this case the problem is not that if we did not open the park,
there would be traffic jam or air pollution. And opening a plaza or park
would necessitate the demolition of houses and shops and infringement
upon real estates.

Chances were some of the owners objected the demolition of the houses
and shops and occupation of their real estates even if they knew that
they would get current market prices in compensation for the demolition
of their estates. Does the scope of governmental prerogatives of the
*faqih* extend for enough to allow him order for the construction of the
plaza and park notwithstanding the unwillingness of the owners?

The absolute guardianship of the *faqih* means that the scope of
prerogatives and guardianship of the *faqih* is not confined only to
what is expedient and emergent. It is rather absolute in the sense that
it includes even the cases which are not emergent but have rational and
reasonable basis.

In constructing the expressway, plaza and park, and getting involved in
social affairs, it is not necessary that the cases belong to the first
supposition. In fact, even if it belongs to the second supposition, the
*wali al-faqih* is able to exercise his authority and thus, the scope of
his guardianship also includes such cases. Now, it is so obvious that
this belief has no relation whatsoever with despotism, dictatorship and
fascism.

Now, given these explanations, it is clear that *wilayat al-faqih* and
in particular, *wilayat al-faqih* *al-mutlaqah*, does not mean that,
without taking into consideration any standard, the *faqih* acts merely
on the basis of his personal whims and caprice, and does whatever he
likes, and that it is his personal whims, carnal desire and the like
that govern.

Rather, the *wali al-faqih* is the implementer of the laws of Islam, and
in principle, the basis of legitimacy and proof that prove his
guardianship is his implementation of the sacred laws of Islam, thereby
ensuring welfare for society. It is natural therefore that decisions and
choices, dismissals and appointments, and all the functions of the
*faqih* is Islamic laws ensuring welfare for society and seeking the
good pleasure of God, the Exalted, and it must be so. If the *wali
al-faqih* drifts away from this basis, he will spontaneously lose his
credibility, his guardianship will be lost, and his decisions and views
will not be obeyed.

On this basis, we can simply say that the guardianship of the *faqih* is
actually the guardianship of law because he is obliged to act within the
bounds of Islamic law and he has no right to circumvent them. This is
the way that the Prophet (S) and the infallible Imams (*‘a*) followed.
As such, instead of the term *wilayat al-faqih*, we can also use the
expression “the rule of law”.

Of course, it is needless to say that in this context by “law” we mean
Islamic law. Also, we should not forget that we pointed out in chapter 4
that among the qualifications of the *wali al-faqih* is “justice” and a
just person is the one who acts according to the commands and
prohibitions of God and not according to the dictate of one’s carnal
desires and inclinations.

Given this explanation, the falsity of the claim that the *wali
al-faqih* does whatever he likes and imposes his inclinations on others
has become more vivid. In fact, it must be said that the just *wali
al-faqih* is he who acts and governs on the basis of the laws of
religion and according to the will of God. Of course, the enemies of
Islam and the *‘ulama’* insert lies about this theory in some of their
words and writings.

They say, for example, that *wilayah al-faqih al-mutlaqah* means that
the *faqih* has authority over everything; he can even modify and deny
*tawhid* [monotheism] or, take prayer away from religion. There are
hundreds of other untenable claims and inconsistent features which the
enemies and those who have private motive have attempted to associate
with this theory. In fact, no one has said such a thing so far and no
one dare say so.

The primary task of the *faqih* is the preservation of Islam; so, would
there be Islam without *tawhid*? Would there be Islam without
prophethood [*nubuwwah*]? Would there be Islam without the fundamentals
of religion such as prayer and fasting? If we take them away from Islam,
what will remain of it for the *faqih* to preserve?

What makes some suggest these skepticisms and fallacies is that
sometimes there appear two affairs: one, an important one and a more
important one, and in order to ensure the interests of Islam, the
*faqih* may sacrifice what is important for the sake of what is more
important. For instance, if performing *Hajj* pilgrimage has harmful
effects on the Islamic society, the *faqih* has the right to order
people not to go to *Hajj*.

Although some people are able to perform the pilgrimage, he may suspend
its performance for a time for the sake of what is more important. Or,
for example, prayer time has just begun which is best time for prayer,
but everything indicates that the enemies’ attack is due and thus, the
battlefront must be on red alert. In this case, the *faqih* has the
right to say that the prayer must be delayed and not to be offered very
early and decide that to perform it at appointed and best hour is
unlawful or that its performance be at its last hour.

In such cases, not only the *faqih* but also the commander designated by
him can give such an order whenever necessary. Yet, all these cases are
different from supposing that the *faqih* says that there is no more
*Hajj* pilgrimage in Islam; there are no more daily obligatory prayers
or to say that Islam has no *Hajj* pilgrimage and prayer at all.” What
takes place in these cases is that the *faqih* identifies what is
important and what is more important, and sacrifices what is important
for the sake of what is more important. This is not something new. In
fact, all the Shi‘ah *fuqaha* say so and we all know it.

There is a famous example in this connection which is mentioned in most
books of Islamic jurisprudence. If a lad is drowning in the swimming
pool in a neighboring house while your neighbor is away, and for saving
the life of the child you have to go into your neighbor’s backyard
without his permission—an act which is regarded in Islamic jurisprudence
as encroachment and usurpation [*ghasb*] which is *haram*—in such a
situation, could you say: “Since I have no permission to go I will not
go and even if the lad is about to die I will not hurry to save him?”

No reasonable person will ever doubt that in such a situation, one has
to hurry to save the life of the child and say to oneself: “Even if my
neighbor is there and I was explicitly told that I had no permission to
go into his backward, and see that my neighbor does not take any step to
save the life of the child, I will pay no attention to his words and
immediately run to save the drowning child. In this situation, we have
to deal with two issues: one is the encroachment upon the property of
others without his permission and approval which is considered unlawful
and an act of usurpation and the other is saving the life of a Muslim
which is obligatory.

In this case, we cannot comply with both of them so we have to measure
things and see for ourselves which one is more important, and act upon
it and abandon the less important obligation. In Islamic jurisprudence,
this act is technically called “preferring what is more important over
what is important,” which, in reality, has a rational root and it is not
related only to religious law. In the example of *Hajj* pilgrimage and
prayer, the criterion of the *faqih*’s issuance of the decree of
temporary suspension of *Hajj* or the decree of delaying the performance
of prayer is the same, and the *faqih* does not decide according to his
whims and caprice and what he likes or dislikes.

In any case, in view of the explanations given so far, it is now clear
what the correct meaning of *wilayah al-faqih al-mutlaqah* is, this
concept in no way connotes despotism, dictatorship or the like and most
of what has been propagated against this theory are calumnies and lies.

Wilayat al-faqih and the Constitution
-------------------------------------

One of the issues which are usually brought forth while discussing the
concept of “absolute guardianship of the jurist” is the relationship
between *wilayat al-faqih* and the Constitution which, in reality, is
related to the explanation of the idea of “absolute” in “absolute
guardianship of the jurist”. For this reason, this point ought to have
been mentioned in the previous section when we dealt with “absolute
guardianship”.

However, on account of the special emphasis on it by some people and
because people sometimes raise doubts about this point or ask a lot of
questions about it, we had better discuss it in a separate section. The
question posed in this regard is possibly expressed in difference forms,
but in essence all of them are about a single thing or question. Below
are the most common forms:

• Does *wilayat al-faqih* act into line with the Constitution, or go
beyond it?

• Is *wilayat al-faqih* above the Constitution?

• Does the Constitution preside over *wilayat al-faqih*, or does
*wilayat al-faqih* preside over the Constitution?

• Can the *wali al-faqih* transgress the duties and prerogatives set for
him by the Constitution?

• Is *wilayat al-faqih* above the codified Constitution, or is the
Constitution above *wilayat al-faqih*?

• Are the prerogatives of the *wali al-faqih* stipulated in the
Constitution (particularly in Article 110) literal or allegorical?

As we have said, all these statements are in reality a single question
and refer to the relationship between *wilayat al-faqih* and the
Constitution. The following section seeks to elaborate on them. Of
course, we should note that we have tried, just as in the other
discussions in this book, that we observe the necessary academic
coherence and also use a relatively simple language in this discussion
so that they may be easily understood by common readers. Using technical
terms and approaching the subject b using a complex and highly academic
style have been avoided as well.

Firstly, it must be noted that if one thinks that *wilayat al-faqih* is
governed by no law or order, and that to be above the law means that the
*wali al-faqih* himself is the law and can do whatever he likes and no
law can restrain him and that the absoluteness of *wilayat al-faqih*
means that the *wali al-faqih* is bound by no limitation, then we have
to say that such conception is certainly false and wrong.

In the previous discussion, we pointed out that the *wali al-faqih* is
bound and obliged to act within the framework of the Islamic laws and
standards. In essence, the purpose of establishing the government of the
*faqih* is the implementation of Islamic law. If the *faqih*
intentionally acts at any time contrary to the laws of Islam and the
expediency of Islamic society, he will be spontaneously removed from the
post of guardianship and leadership. In Islam we do not have a *wali
al-faqih* who is above the law and whose will is a law.

However, if, just as we previously explained, what is meant by “laws” is
a set of instructions which form the Constitution, in order to reply to
this question, we have to set the initial point of the discussion as the
criterion of legitimacy of the law—that is, in principle, why is it
necessary for us to observe a law and to act upon it? Are we bound to
accept and act upon any law solely because it is a “law”?

From the different discussions that we have had so far in this book, it
has become clear, though briefly, that in our view the credibility of
law emanates from God and His religion. That is, if a law stems, in one
way or another, from God and His religion, it has credibility, otherwise
it is not, and it will not be incumbent upon us to obey it. Therefore,
if law has been upheld by all the citizens of a country and by all the
people in the world but has no religious and divine source, in our view
it is not credible, and we think that we are not obliged to observe it
and the same is true of the laws of our country.

That is, if any law, including the Constitution, bills approved by the
Islamic Consultative Assembly (Iranian Parliament or Majlis) and other
laws, has not been, in a sense, endorsed by religion and God, we think
that it has no credibility at all in our sight, and thus, we do not have
to obey it. This ruling was also applied to the Constitution and other
laws of the time of the *taghut*, which, according to us, had no value
and credibility at all.

As such, law in itself has no credibility even if all the people have
approved it. Of course, those who have approved it have moral obligation
to obey it but those who have not approved it have no such moral
obligation. Even those who have approved it have moral obligation; they
have no religious or legal obligation.

Of course, this is a brief explanation of this subject whose detailed
explanation is found in the philosophy of law and political philosophy,
which is beyond this discussion of ours. At any rate, in view of the
earlier discussions of this book, it is clear now that when we regard
the present Constitution of the Islamic Republic as credible, it is not
because of its being the constitution of a country or because the
overwhelming majority of the people have voted for it.

Rather, it is because this constitution has been endorsed and approved
by the *wali al-faqih* and in our opinion the *wali al-faqih* is someone
who has been designated in a sense by the Imam of the Age (*‘a*) who, in
turn, has been designated by God. Just as the Imam (*‘a*) said in the
*maqbulah* of ‘Umar ibn Hanzalah, rejection of the ruling of the *wali
al-faqih* is tantamount to rejection of the ruling of the infallible
Imam (*‘a*), and rejection of the ruling of the infallible Imam (*‘a*)
is tantamount to the rejection of the ruling of God and if it was
otherwise and the signature and approval of the *wali al-faqih* was not
there, the Constitution would, in our opinion, have no value and
credibility.

If the attachment to the Constitution is takn as a manifestation of
national alliance, it is because the *wali al-faqih* has bestowed it
legitimacy. It is due to support of the *wali al-faqih* that the
Constitution has legitimacy and it is not that the Constitution has lent
credibility and integrity to the *wali al-faqih*. We pointed out earlier
that the *wali al-faqih* does not acquire his legitimacy and
guardianship through the choice of the people but through the will of
God, the Exalted, and decree of the Imam of the Age (*‘a*).

The crux of the issue is that the Sole Real Master of the universe and
man is God, the Exalted, and the exercise of any authority must be by
direct or indirect permission and consent of the Sacred Essence.

Thus, the *wali al-faqih*’s exercising of authority and guardianship is
ascribed to the permission granted to him by God, the Exalted, and the
Imam of the Age (*‘a*), and not through the prerogative that the
Constitution gives him because the Constitution itself acquires its
legitimacy and credibility from the *wali al-faqih*.

Now, from what we have said so far, it is clear that the *wali al-faqih*
is not above the law and decree of God, but he is, as we have stated,
above the Constitution and that he presides over the Constitution and
not the other way around. It has also become clear that the duties and
prerogatives of the *wali al-faqih* stated in the Constitution are
allegorical and not literal, in the sense that only a part of the most
important duties and prerogatives of the *wali al-faqih* which are
usually required is enumerated.

It can also be said that in reality, they represent the literal duties
and prerogatives of the *wali al-faqih* “for normal and common
circumstances” and sometimes the Leader does not need to refer to all of
them at usual times. However, when the society is in a state of crisis
and emergency, the *wali al-faqih* can exercise his guardianship and
determine things even if these things have not been explicitly
stipulated in the Constitution.

Of course, according to the principles of the Constitution itself, the
meaning of absoluteness of the *wilayat al-faqih* as reflected in the
text of the Constitution is that the duties and prerogatives of the
*wali al-faqih* enumerated in the Constitution are allegorical and not
literal. Otherwise, the term “absolute” in the text of the Constitution
would not be there particularly when know that the term “absolute” was
added to the text of the Constitution by the legislators after reviewing
and thereafter amending the Constitution in 1367 (1988) and that it had
not been there before the amendment.

This fact connotes that the legislators have had particular purport in
adding the term “absolute”, and that is to show that the prerogatives of
the *wali al-faqih* are not confined to the points mentioned in the
Constitution and that the mentioned prerogatives are relevant to common
cases whereas in exceptional circumstances and in times of emergency,
the *wali al-faqih* may take necessary measures on the basis of the
absolute guardianship he possesses.

Also, in the practices of Haḍrat Imam Khomeini (*r*) there are examples
which indicate that the authority of *wilayat al-faqih* is not confined
to what is prescribed by the Constitution. For example, the decree of
formation of the Expediency Council and its interference in the
law-making process were were not reflected by the Constitution of the
time.

According to the Constitution, forming the said council was not among
the prerogatives of the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih*, but Haḍrat
Imam (*r*) ordered to form it on the basis of his absolute guardianship.
Moreover, regarding what is called the “Supreme Council of the Cultural
Revolution”, its composition and members, and relevant issues were not
mentioned in any law, but by virtue of the absolute guardianship of the
jurist, Imam Khomeini (*r*) issued an order to establish it and he
appointed its members and defined its composition. Similarly, in no law
the formation of a judicial court named “Special Court for the Clergy”
had been mentioned, yet it was established according to the order of
Haḍrat Imam (*r*). Regarding the Office of the President, it has been
stipulated in the Constitution that the Supreme Leader is to confirm
[*tanfidh*] the decision of the people regarding the President.

That is, whoever the people vote for is the criterion and the Supreme
Leader is just to affix his signature accordingly. Yet, regarding the
President selected by the people, Imam Khomeini (*r*) wrote in the
decree pertaining to the President’s assumption of office: “I hereby
designate [*nasb*] him.”[^2]

This act of the Imam was contrary to what has been stipulated in the
Constitution because it is not stated in it that the Supreme Leader is
to designate the President. Apart from all these things, in his speeches
as well as his writings, Haḍrat Imam (*r*) theoretically upheld the
absolute guardianship of the *faqih*, in the sense that within the
framework and bounds of the sacred law of Islam and its standards and in
accordance with the expediency of the Islamic society, the *faqih* may
decide and carry out any affair required for running the affairs of
government whenever he sees it is necessary.

We also mentioned earlier that the proofs supporting the idea of
*wilayat al-faqih* bespeak of its absoluteness. Besides, there is no
Qur’anic verse, tradition, proof, or evidence which substantiates that
the idea of *wilayat al-faqih* is considered only within the framework
of the Constitution or enacted laws.

Marja‘iyyah and wilayat al-faqih
--------------------------------

One of the questions raised about the theory of *wilayat al-faqih* is:
What is the status of the other *maraji‘ at-taqlid* and *mujtahidun*
other than the *wali al-faqih* in the political system based on *wilayat
al-faqih*? In the case of the existence of *wali al-faqih*, on one hand,
and *maraji‘ at-taqlid*, on the other, will there happen any
contradiction between them? Will the acceptance of the theory of
*wilayat al-faqih* necessitate the acknowledgment of a single religious
authority [*marja‘iyyah*] and the negation of other *maraji‘ at-taqlid*?

If this is not the case and if according to this theory the people can
refer to other sources of emulation notwithstanding the existence of the
*wali al-faqih* in the society, what, in case there is difference of
opinion between the *wali al-faqih*, on one hand, and the *maraji‘
at-taqlid*, on the other, will happen to the society and will the duty
of the *muqallidin* [followers] of those *maraji‘ at-taqlid* be? Can one
act according to the religious edicts [*fatawa*] of *maraji‘ at-taqlid*
as well as the decrees of the *wali al-faqih*?

There are other questions of this kind which, like the case in our
previous discussion, in essence constitute a single question connected
to the relationship between *marja‘iyyah* and *wilayat al-faqih*. By
clarifying this relationship, the reply to these questions and other
similar questions will be clear.

In elucidating the relationship between *marja‘iyyah* and *wilayat
al-faqih*, it is necessary to see what the nature of *taqlid*, function
of the *‘ulama’* and *maraji‘ at-taqlid* and function of *wali al-faqih*
are so that the difference between the two and the difference between
decree [*hukm*] and edict [*fatwa*] may be clarified.

In stating the nature of the issue of *taqlid* and function of the
*‘ulama’* and the *maraji‘ at-taqlid*, we notice that the people’s
referring to *‘ulama’* and emulating them in religious issues is a
manifestation of “an inexperienced person’s reference to an expert and
knowledgeable person” and this is true of other aspects of human life.
Let us elaborate.

Since it is not possible for everyone to become expert in everything and
it is impossible for a person to acquire expertise in all fields,
naturally people would according to the dictate of reason refer to
experts and specialists in the matters they need and about which they
have no expertise. For example, a person, who wants to build a house and
has no acquaintance with construction or engineering, would refer to an
architect, an engineer or a builder for making the design of the house
and constructing it. For its iron framework, making the doors of the
rooms and cabinets, installing electric and telephone wires, and doing
the plumbing and laying gas pipes, one has to refer to specialized
experts and entrust to them the responsibility of carrying out these
works.

Or, when one becomes sick, he consults a doctor for the diagnosis of the
ailment and prescription of medicine. In all these cases, relevant
experts would determine what to do and one would do according to what
they decide. For instance, if a physician says, “Take a tablet three
times a day; two spoons of syrup every day; one capsule every day; etc.”
the patient will not argue or say, “Why should I take this tablet? Why
should I take this syrup? Why *three* tablets and not only *one* capsule
a day?” Instances of this kind are imposed thousands or perhaps tens of
thousands of times everyday in our life.

All these are connected to a rational and intellectual ruling called “an
inexperienced person’s reference to an expert or knowledgeable person”.
This is not something new in human life. Human societies have known it
for thousands of years. In Islamic society, too, one of the issues that
is the special concern of every Muslim is the religious issues and
commandments. Since a person has no expertise in all injunctions, he or
she refers to those who are specialists in religious laws, viz. the
*‘ulama’* and *maraji‘ at-taqlid* whose views are guidelines for people
to follow.

So, *ijtihad*, in reality, means expertise and competence in religious
issues while *taqlid* means the reference of those who lack knowledge
about the laws of Islam to the one who is expert in the said field. The
task of a *mujtahid* or *marja‘ at-taqlid* is to show what an expert’s
opinion is. This is the true nature of *taqlid*.

Meanwhile, the issue of *wilayat al-faqih* is distinct from the issue of
*taqlid* for it belongs to another realm. What is at stake here is
governance and administering the affairs of society. *Wilayat al-faqih*
means reaching a conclusion through rational and/or transmitted proofs
that society is in need of a person who assumes power and has the final
word regarding social issues, and his views and orders are legally
binding.

Obviously, it is not appropriate that every person does whatever he or
she likes. Instead, there must be a specific decree or law to follow;
otherwise, the society will plunge into chaos and turmoil. In social
affairs, it is not right that one would, for example, say, “I consider
green light as the sign for pedestrians to cross the street” while
another person would say, “I regard yellow light as the sign for
pedestrians to cross the street.” Then, a third person would say, “For
me, red light is the sign for pedestrians to cross the street.” Instead,
a specific decision must be made and everybody has to observe it.

The same is true of all social issues. Therefore, the function of the
*wali al-faqih* and the offices, organizations and institutions in the
system based on *wilayat al-faqih* has the same function as that of
states and governments. Also, it is clear that the function of state and
government is not merely to show an expert’s opinion but to administer
the society’s affairs through the enactment of laws and regulations and
implementing them. In other words, the nature of a state and
government’s function, and consequently, that of the *wali al-faqih* is
an obligatory one, without which government will have no meaning at all
and this is unlike the case of our asking an expert’s opinion from
someone.

For example, when a patient consults a doctor and the doctor writes a
medical prescription for him or her or says that he or she has to
undergo a certain medical test, the patient will not be under any
compulsion; he may not observe any of the doctor’s prescriptions and no
one has the right to fine or imprison the patient for not taking the
medicines prescribed by the doctor or for not undergoing the said
medical test.

Thus, after clarifying the nature of the function of *mujtahid* and that
of *wali al-faqih* and the difference between each of them, we can
expound the nature of each of religious edict [*fatwa*] and ruling or
decree [*hukm*] and the difference between the two. A *mujtahid* and
*marja‘ at-taqlid*’s duty is issuing *fatwa*.

As an expert and knowledgeable person in religious matters, the *marja‘
at-taqlid* explains to us, for example, how we should pray or how we
should fast. Therefore, *fatwa* is the view shown by *marja‘ at-taqlid*
about general issues and Islamic precepts. In other words, the task of
the *marja‘ at-taqlid*, like any other expert, is to guide and enlighten
others, and he has no apparatus which to oblige individuals to obey. He
only states Islamic precepts if you so request, but whether to abide by
them or not is up to the individual persons and it is not the concern of
the *marja‘ at-taqlid*.

What we ask the *marja‘ at-taqlid* about is something like: “What is
your opinion regarding this case?” But in the case of the *wali
al-faqih* things are different. What we ask the *wali al-faqih* about is
something like: “What do you give order?” That is, the task of *wali
al-faqih* is not to issue a religious edict but to give a *hukm*
[decree]. *Hukm* refers to the order released by the *wali* *al-faqih*
as the religious ruler [*hakim* *ash-shar‘i*] on social issues and
particular cases.

In other words, the *fatawa* [religious edicts] of the *marja‘
at-taqlid* are usually issued under general headings, and the duty of
identifying their applications lies on the shoulder of the people
themselves. If, for example, there is in the external world, a liquid
called “drink”—a general label which in actuality has numerous
implications. *Marja‘ at-taqlid* issues a religious edict stating that
this general label, i.e. wine is *haram* to drink.

Now, let us assume that there is a red liquid in the glass and we do not
know if it is wine or fruit juice. In this case, to determine what it is
in the external world is beyond the responsibility of *marja‘
at-taqlid*. Even if he says, for example, that it is fruit juice, his
statement will have no effect on his *muqallid* [follower] and will not
be obligatory for the latter. This is just like the common expression in
jurisprudence which states, “The opinion of the *faqih* in determining
the point does not have authority.” In principle, it is not the duty of
the *faqih* to say: “This is wine or this is fruit juice.” Instead, as
stated earlier, he only gives a general ruling regarding the two and
says: “Drinking wine is *haram* while drinking fruit juice is *halal*.”
Every *muqallid* has to determine for himself or herself in such
cases—whether the liquid he sees is wine or fruit juice.

Or, for instance, the *faqih* may issue such a religious edict: “If the
enemies attack the Islamic territory and the men in the battlefield are
able to counter the aggression, the presence of the women is not
necessary, but if the presence of men alone does not meet the need, then
it is incumbent upon women to go to the battlefield to defend the
Islamic territory.” The function of *marja‘ at-taqlid* goes as far as
this point and that is, giving such a general ruling or decree.

But as to whether or not in a certain war or in a certain condition, the
presence of men in the battlefield meets the need is determined by the
people or followers [*muqallidin*] themselves. The *wali al-faqih*,
however, transcends this point and he himself does such a thing and
according to it he gives decisions and issues orders.

No one can say: “The function of *wali al-faqih* is only to state
decrees or rulings [*ahkam*] while to determine the actual fact is the
duty of the people themselves and his discernment of the point has no
authority to me.” As a matter of fact, everybody is obliged to act in
accordance with his discernment of the point. For instance, if the *wali
al-faqih* gives a ruling that at a certain time the presence of the
women in the battlefront is necessary; in such a case, the presence of
the women in the battlefront will become religiously obligatory.

This is the same as what is sometimes called “governmental decrees”
[*ahkam-e hukumati*] or “guardianship decrees” [*ahkam-e wilayati*],
which also indicates the difference between *fatwa* and *hukm*. It is
necessary at this juncture to note that it is very common that both the
*fatwa* and opinion of a *mujtahid* about a certain issue are called
*hukm*, and we say, for example, “This is the *hukm* of prayer” or “This
is the *hukm* of *hijab* [Islamic dress code]. Yet, we should know that
the word “*hukm*” in such cases is another thing with different
connotation, and it must not be mistaken with the term “*hukm*” which we
use in relation to the *wali al-faqih*.

From what we have said so far, it has become clear that since the
reference to the *mujtahid* and *marja‘ at-taqlid* corresponds to the
reference to experts and specialists and that in consulting the expert,
individuals are free to refer to any expert which they deem the best and
most qualified, and so regarding the issue of *taqlid* and *fatwa*
everyone can do research and emulate any *mujtahid* whom one deems most
knowledgeable and most qualified. There is nothing wrong in the
existence of numerous *maraji‘ at-taqlid* in the society and so every
group of people may act according to the opinion of anyone of them.

As for the social issues pertaining to government, such a thing is not
possible. For example, in the case of driving and traffic rules, it is
not possible that every group acts according to its own opinion. It is
known to every rational person that if, concerning social issues, there
are numerous decision-making authorities and everyone is free to refer
to any decision-making authority he likes, the social order will plunge
in chaos.

As such, with regard to the social issues and affairs related to
administering society, there must be only one decision-making authority,
and according to the theory of *wilayat al-faqih*, this single authority
is the ruling *wali al-faqih* and to obey him is incumbent upon
everybody including the other *fuqaha*. As *maraji‘ at-taqlid* and
*fuqaha* themselves have declared and written in their juristic
discussions, if a religious authority [*hakim* *ash-shar‘i*] gives a
ruling, no other *faqih* has the right to contradict it.

One of the famous examples which we mentioned earlier is the tobacco
controversy and the *hukm* of the late Mirza Shirazi. When he declared,
“Today, the use of tobacco is unlawful [*haram*] and tantamount to war
against the Imam of the Age (*‘a*),” everybody including the other
*‘ulama’*, *maraji‘ at-taqlid* and *fuqaha* regarded themselves bound to
observe it because this act of the later Mirza Shirazi was not
*fatwa*-giving or expression of a juristic opinion but an issuance of a
“guardianship decree” [*hukm-e wilayati*].

In sum, what we have said so far regarding the nature of the function of
*marja‘ at-taqlid* and that of the *wali al-faqih*, and the difference
between the two is that one of the differences between the *marja‘
at-taqlid* and the *wali al-faqih* is that the former gives general laws
(about both individual and social issues) and it is not his concern to
determine the application of these laws.

The function of *wali al-faqih*, however, is to issue orders and make
decision suitable to specific social needs and conditions. In another
perspective, the difference between *marja‘ at-taqlid* and *wali
al-faqih* is that *marja‘ at-taqlid* is an authority from whom an
expert’s opinion is asked, and in principle, reference to *mujtahid* and
*marja‘ at-taqlid* is the same as reference of an inexperienced to an
expert while, the *wali al-faqih* is asked this question, “What is your
decision and order?” In other words, the function of the former is to
issue *fatwa* while that of the latter is to give orders and make
decisions.

The other point is that there have been so many *fuqaha* and *maraji‘
at-taqlid* and the emulation [*taqlid*] of any of them by people is
permissible. This situation has been among the Muslims for hundreds of
years and there has been no problem. However, the *faqih* who acts as
the ruler [*hakim*] and guardian of the affair [*wali al-amr*] must be
no more than one person and multiplicity of them leads to social chaos
and absence of the social order.

Now, concerning the issue of a person’s possession of both *marja‘iyyah*
(being a *marja‘ at-taqlid*) and *wilayat al-amr* (being the *wali
al-faqih*), in essence, it is not necessary that the *faqih* who is to
govern and assume the *wilayah* will be *marja‘ at-taqlid* of all people
or at least the majority of the people.

In fact, in principle, it is not even necessary for him to be *marja‘
at-taqlid* and have emulators [*muqallidin*]. It is necessary that the
*wali al-faqih* enjoys the chaacteristic of being a *faqih* and expert
in identifying Islamic injunctions and in exercising *ijtihad* about
them. Of course, in practice it is possible that prior to his being
recognized as *wali al-faqih*, he may be *marja‘ at-taqlid* and has
*muqallidin*, or he may be a *marja‘ at-taqlid* who is followed by the
majority of the people.

Such was the case of the founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Haḍrat
Imam Khomeini (*r*). But it is also possible that, as in the time of the
late Ayatullah Gulpaygani[^3] or Ayatullah Araki,[^4] the possession of
*marja‘iyyah* and *wilayah* is not obtained by one person, and so the
majority of the people follow a certain person concerning individual
issues and general Islamic injunctions and refer to another person (the
*wali al-faqih*) concerning decisions, social issues and determining the
ruling of particular cases.

‘Guardianship of the Jurist’or ‘Guardianship of the Most Qualified Jurist’?
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

**‘Guardianship of the Jurist’ [wilayat al-faqih] or ‘Guardianship of
the Most Qualified Jurist’ [wilayat al-afqah]?**

Another issue which may come into one’s mind and about which questions
may be posed is the question of the guardianship of the jurist [*faqih*]
or the most qualified jurist [*afqah*]. Of course, a brief answer was
given to it in the previous section because due to its importance, it is
necessary to discuss it at length so that no doubt and question may
remain about it.

To begin the discussion, it is appropriate to elucidate the question
itself first; thereafter attempt to answer it. In every science and
field of specialization, we usually notice that all the experts and
authorities in a certain field and specialization are not of the same
level because there are some who are ahead and more knowledgeable and
skilled. For example, among the doctors who are specialized in heart
diseases in a city or a country usually there are some who are more
qualified than the rest and all of them are equal in terms of their
knowledge about the heart, its diseases and the methods of treating
them.

Each of them possesses a medical license and valid medical degree
diploma duly accredited by the Ministry of Health and Medical Treatment
and all of them have permission to practice medicine. This does not
mean, however, that they are all of the same level of knowledge,
experience and talent. The same is true of the *fuqaha* and
*mujtahidin*. That is, all of them are capable of exercising *ijtihad*
and deducing religious laws from the primary sources.

Yet, this does not mean that the level of the aptitude and ability of
all of them is the same. Rather, in usual cases, some are more
meritorious and superior. In Islamic jurisprudence, these are
technically called “*a‘lam*” [most knowledgeable] and those who are not
that competent are called “*ghayr a‘lam*” [not *a‘lam*]. The common
opinion of the *fuqaha* and *mujtahidin* is that it is obligatory to
follow the most knowledgeable [*a‘lam*] while it is not permissible to
follow or refer to *ghayr a‘lam*.

Now, in view of the explanation above, the question raised in our
discussion is: Should the *wali al-faqih* be a person who, in terms of
the deduction of religious laws and knowledge about Islamic
jurisprudence, is most capable and superior and is technically referred
to as the most knowledgeable [*a‘lam*] and the leading jurist [*afqih*],
or does the *wali al-faqih* not need to have such a condition and all
that he needs is to possess the expertise in exercising *ijtihad*?

The reply to this question is that we have to bear in mind that, as we
have mentioned in discussing the proofs supporting *wilayat al-faqih*,
apart from having the knowledge about Islamic jurisprudence, the *wali
al-faqih* must possess two other important qualities, i.e. God-wariness
[*taqwa*] and efficiency in managing the society. The last quality
(efficiency in managing the society) itself consists of a number of
qualities.

Thus, for identifying the *wali al-faqih*, the knowledge about Islamic
jurisprudence is not the only criterion but the combination of different
criteria is necessary as well, and so, in identifying the *wali
al-faqih* the aggregate of these qualities and conditions have to be
taken into account and by giving scores to each of them, the average has
to be discerned. If we, for instance, want to appoint a president for a
university, we do not consider only one criterion but we need to
consider a number of significant criteria.

Such criteria such as possession of a doctoral degree, teaching
experience, administrative and managerial experience, and approval of
university staff, professors and students may be the most significant
criteria for such a selection. If we take these qualities as the
condition for holding the post of university president, many persons may
be suggested. For example, there is among them one who has the best
teaching experience but lacks good administrative experience. Or, there
is one who has a good administrative and managerial record but in terms
of scientific achievement, he is not the best.

Or, there is one who has both impressive administrative and teaching
records but because of his inability to establish relations with others,
he has not gained the approval of all university staff, professors and
students. It is clear that in this case, for selecting the best aspirant
we have to find someone who, in addition to possessing the satisfactory
ability in each of the conditions, has a higher average than any other
one.

The same is true of the *wali al-faqih*. That is, firstly, he must have
an acceptable degree in each of the three characteristics (expertise in
Islamic jurisprudence, God-wariness and efficiency in managing the
society). Secondly, in terms of his average t has to be higher than
anybody else.

Having stated this, if, for example, a certain person is a *faqih* and
also expert in managing the society but impious, or he is a *faqih* and
pious but in terms of management he is unable to properly manage his
five-member family, in principle, such a person cannot be among the
initial candidates for the office of *wilayat al-faqih* even if he is
the most knowledgeable [*a‘lam*] and leading *faqih* and *mujtahid*.

The reason is that, as we have said earlier, for the assumption of this
post, it is necessary to gain an acceptable degree in each of the
required conditions. So, in reality, the question about the guardianship
of the *faqih* or the most knowledgeable *faqih* can be posed and
answered under the following three assumptions:

1. The first assumption is to have a person ahead of all the existing
*fuqaha* in exercising *ijtihad* or deducing religious laws from the
primary sources but totally lacks one or two of the other qualities
(i.e. God-wariness and efficiency in managing the society). From the
previous discussion, it became clear that in principle, such a person
lacks the basic qualification to assume this post.

2. The second assumption is to have a person who, in addition to
possessing all the three conditions, i.e. knowledge in Islamic
jurisprudence, God-wariness and efficiency in managing the society, is
most competent as far as Islamic jurisprudence is concerned. In view of
what we have just stated, it is clear that such a person has the basic
qualification to assume the post of *wilayat al-faqih*, yet the average
he gains in all the qualifications must be checked first to see whether
there is another person who is better and more qualified than him or
not.

3. The third assumption is that we have among the existing *fuqaha* and
*mujtahidun* some who are equal in God-wariness and efficiency in
managing the society, but one of them is the most knowledgeable of all
in Islamic jurisprudence. On the basis of our previous discussions, such
a person ought to assume the office of *wilayat al-faqih*.

At this juncture and at the end of this section, it is not out of place
to discuss whether or not necessary for the *wali al-faqih* to have
competence in the rest of proficiencies. Let us elaborate. In discussing
the proofs supporting *wilayat al-faqih* as well as in the last
discussion, we pointed out to three basic criteria and qualifications
for the person who is to assume the post of *wilayat al-faqih*, viz.
knowledge in Islamic jurisprudence, God-wariness and efficiency in
managing the society.

The following question may be asked: Why has the possession of such
skills as proficiency in military affairs, expertise in economic affairs
and the like not been considered among the key pillars of administering
the society? Does the lack of the *wali al-faqih* who serves as the
leader of Islamic society of such skills not cause weakness in his
management and leadership or disorder in administering social affairs?
Is it not necessary to regard as credible the enjoyment of some other
skills by the person who has to assume this important post?

The answer is that the indispensability of the *wali al-faqih*’s
enjoyment of the three mentioned conditions lies in the fact that the
basic and fundamental raison d’être of *wilayat al-faqih* is the
implementation of Islamic laws and ordinances. As such, it is natural
that the person who is to assume the highest post of the *wilayat
al-faqih* must first and foremost be knowledgeable, familiar with the
laws of Islam and is able to identify them very well (expertise in
Islamic jurisprudence).

Secondly, the people must trust him and have certainty that he does not
act on the basis of personal and factional inclinations and interests,
but his main concern is to protect Islam and ensure welfare for the
Islamic society, and to refrain from any kind of treachery
(God-wariness). Thirdly, in addition to having expertise in Islamic
jurisprudence and God-wariness, he should have the power of realizing
social issues as well as domestic politics and foreign policy, and is
able to manage the society (inefficiency in administration).

It is natural that if he does not personally possess all these three
qualities, irreparable loss will probably befall the society as a result
of his leadership. Yet, with respect to the other skills this is not the
case. For example, if he himself does not have much acquaintance with
military issues, he can simply consult military experts and make
appropriate decisions in this field. Or, in economic affairs, he can
consult economists and take the necessary economic policies and
decisions.

Of course, such a thing is not confined to the *wilayat al-faqih* system
but it exists in all kinds of governments. At the present, no president,
prime minister, or chief executive of a country in the world has
expertise in all fields including politics, economy, law, military, and
the like, and is capable of directly deciding issues of this kind. In
essence, such a thing is impossible and inconceivable for anyone apart
from the Infallibles (*‘a*).

It is common everywhere that different advisers and consultants play a
pivotal role in decision-making and formulating various policies. In the
*wilayat al-faqih* system and the Islamic Republic, the Supreme Leader
also makes use of consultation and opinions of the experts and concerned
authorities and makes decisions. Numerous consultative bodies render
assistance to him, one of which being the Expediency Council which
functions as the highest advisory body of the Supreme Leader and the
*wali al-faqih*.

[^1]: Time of the ṭāghūt: the monarchial period in Iran, in general, and
in particular, the Pahlavī dynasty which ended in February 1979 with the
triumph of the Islamic Revolution. [Trans.]

[^2]: Ṣaḥīfeh-ye Nūr, vol. 15, p. 76.

[^3]: Āyatullāh al-‘Uẓmā Sayyid Muḥammad Riḍā Gulpāygānī (1899-1993): a
contemporary of Imām Khomeinī, marja‘ at-taqlīd for 32 years and teacher
at the Theological Seminary [ḥawzah al-‘ilmiyyah] in Qum for about 72
years. Here, “the time of the late Āyatullāh Gulpāygānī” specifically
refers to the short period beginning with the assumption of Āyatullāh
Sayyid ‘Alī Khāmene’ī to the office of wilāyah al-faqīh in early June
1989 up to the demise of Āyatullāh Gulpāygānī on December 9, 1993.
[Trans.]

[^4]: Āyatullāh al-‘Uẓmā Shaykh Muḥammad ‘Alī Arākī (d. 1994): a
contemporary of Imām Khomeinī and a marja‘ at-taqlīd for many decades.
Here, “the time of the late… Āyatullāh Arākī” specifically refers to the
short period beginning with the assumption of Āyatullāh Sayyid ‘Alī
Khāmene’ī to the office of wilāyah al-faqīh in early June 1989 up to the
demise of Āyatullāh Arākī on November 29, 1994. [Trans.]


