Chapter 6: The Assembly of Experts and Wilayat al-Faqih
=======================================================

After introducing strong arguments for *wilayat al-faqih* and stating
that the *wali al-faqih* is the best *mujtahid* who, in terms of the
qualities required to assume the leadership and hold the reign of
government, is the closest one to the infallible Imam (*‘a*), it is
important to elucidate the theory of *wilayat al-faqih* to see how such
a person is to be recognized and what approach is used for identifying
such a *mujtahid* from among the other *fuqaha* and *mujtahidin*. In
reality, discussing this issue entails reviewing some secondary
subjects, which constitute the main topics of the last chapter of this
book, and clarify the relationship between *wilayat al-faqih* and the
Assembly of Experts.

Why the Assembly of Experts?
----------------------------

Nowadays, what is practically observed in the political structure of the
Islamic Republic system which is based on *wilayat al-faqih*, is that
the *wali al-faqih* is identified on the basis of the opinion and
decision of the Assembly of Experts. At this point, we would like to
examine this issue academically and theoretically to see whether or not
this method has a sound scientific and theoretical basis.

For identifying the *wali al-faqih*, hypothetically different
assumptions can be taken into account such as people’s direct vote,
nomination by the previous *wali al-faqih* and Supreme Leader, selection
by the Assembly of Experts, and selection by the Islamic Consultative
Assembly (Majlis). Of course, there are other assumptions as well.

Perhaps the most important of them, the acceptance of which is possibly
easier and has a relatively logical basis are the following assumptions:

(1) selection by people’s direct vote and general elections;

(2) selection by the Assembly of Experts; and

(3) nomination by the preceding *wali al-faqih* and Supreme Leader.

Among the three options, the first two are given special attention in
the discussions and discourses.

At any rate, in our opinion, clarifying the degree of credibility and
value of each of these three views and the topics pertinent to them
helps to examine and comment on the other views and there will be no
need for us to criticize and analyze the other views. At the outset, it
is worth noticing that in discussing the status of the people’s vote in
the theory of *wilayat al-faqih* (Chapter 3), we pointed out that
regarding the legitimacy of the *wali al-faqih*, we advocated the theory
of ‘discovery’ [*kashf*] which we have previously discussed lengthily
before. In discussing some of the subjects of this chapter, we shall
also adhere to this very approach.

Initially, we shall examine the two views on the people’s selection
through direct vote and the selection by the Assembly of Experts. In the
beginning of the discussion, we shall cite an example:

Suppose we wanted to choose the best professor of mathematics in the
country and give him a special award. This question will arise: What is
the logical and correct way of achieving this goal? For recognizing and
selecting the outstanding national professor of mathematics, shall we
roam around the city, and ask all the strata of people ranging from the
jewelry shopkeeper, street cleaner, carpet vendor, and bus driver to the
housewife, farmer, student, and medical specialist, to see what their
opinion is concerning who the most outstanding and the best mathematics
professor in the country is? It is very obvious that in the first place,
this method is unscientific and inappropriate, and the result of this
survey, whatever it is, is devoid of any credibility and value.

Secondly, in essence, if there are sensible and fair individuals among
those who are asked, they will say that the issue is beyond them and
they are not worthy to give opinion in that matter. In any case, there
is no doubt that in selecting the most outstanding professor of
mathematics in the country, no one will apply this method, and if anyone
does, the result will be unsatisfactory and rejected.

It is natural that the one who wants to assess the potential and
expertise of the professor of mathematics should be well versed in
mathematics and belongs to this field. In cases similar to this only
relevant authorities and experts can judge. In this case, for instance,
initially, in every university professors of mathematics can select the
best professor from among themselves.

If there is more than one university in a city, the selected professors
of the universities of that city can select the best one from among
themselves. Then, at provincial level, the selected professors of the
cities will meet and select the best one from among themselves. For
example, thirty professors from thirty provinces will be introduced as
the best, and again, they will exchange ideas and finally select the
model professor in the country from among themselves.

Of course, it is also possible that in this phase or the earlier phases,
a committee of judges composed of a number of outstanding professors of
mathematics will do the selection, or there will be some slight
differences in applying this method. In any case, there is a single
general method for all the cases and that is, the expert and authorities
on mathematics are to play the pivotal and crucial role in selecting the
model professor of mathematics of the country.

In selecting the model professor of mathematics of the country, is this
method really the reasonable one, or the one in which all the people,
illiterate and literate, from university and who are not at university,
expert and non-expert, and in sum, every stratum gather together and
give their opinion as to who the model professor of mathematics is?

For identifying the *wali al-faqih*, we have to select the model and
superior *faqih*—the *faqih* who is most meritorious and best of all the
*fuqaha* as far as the three qualities of knowledge in Islamic
jurisprudence, God-wariness and efficiency in managing the society are
concerned.

The question is: What is the way of choosing such a *faqih*? Who is
worthy to decide on the best and most meritorious *faqih*? Which is
correct and logical to hold public referendum and ask the opinion of the
people by conducting a national election or to refer to the concerned
authorities; namely, the *fuqaha*, and ask them to select the most
outstanding person from among themselves to assume this office? If, in
selecting the model professor of mathematics in the country, referring
to the public opinion and holding elections is not considered correct
(and it is indeed incorrect) and that the professors of mathematics in
the country must give their opinion in this regard, then for selecting
the model *faqih*, the rational and correct way is to entrust the
responsibility of selecting the most meritorious *faqih* to the
*fuqaha*, and so referring to the people and direct vote of the people
on this issue cannot be dependable.

What is stipulated in the present Constitution of the Islamic Republic
of Iran is that selecting the Supreme Leader and the *wali al-faqih*
lies on the shoulder of the Assembly of Experts—experts all of whom are
*fuqaha* and *mujtahidun* who have their life to studying Islamic
jurisprudence.

These experts who want to finally choose the *wali al-faqih* can be
selected in two ways. One is that in every city where there are a number
of *fuqaha*, one of the most qualified is selected from among themselves
and in the second phase at the provincial level the same is done and in
the end, a limited number of them will be selected for the Assembly of
Experts.

The other way is that in every province or city, these individuals are
identified through public elections. Since the number of the *fuqaha*
and *mujtahidin* is usually limited and sometimes in a city there is not
a single *faqih* or *mujtahid*, it is sensible that the people, who
themselves are not experts in Islamic jurisprudence and *ijtihad* and
those number in every city or every province is limited, will do some
research and investigation to decide who is or are more meritorious than
the rest.

Similarly, if we want to find out the best physician of heart diseases
in a city or a province, we, who ourselves are not specialized in
medicine, can make a right decision by referring to the doctors and
specialists as well as by asking the patients who have consulted them.

It has become clear so far that for identifying the Supreme Leader and
*wali al-faqih*, the second of the two ways, i.e. the people’s direct
choice and selection by the experts is the logical and scientifically
defendable one.

Concerning the way of nominating the *wali al-faqih* by the previous
Supreme Leader, it is worth noticing that although in practice this way
ensures a relatively high certainly and leads to a proper and desirable
nomination because of the previous leader’s knowledge and insight with
respect to the prominent academic and political figures and individuals
of the country and their capabilities, the previous *wali al-faqih* can,
with some reflection and contemplation, identify the most meritorious
one from among the most prominent *fuqaha* and introduce him to the
people.

However, using this way can pose two serious problems. First, it gives
way to the sinister and nefarious propaganda of the enemies to influence
the people inside and outside the country by depicting the *wilayat
al-faqih* system as a despotic regime while accusing the Islamic
government of dictatorship.

Nowadays, we notice how, in spite of the twenty public elections held
over the past twenty years following the Islamic Revolution, the enemies
and some thinkers both inside and outside the country spitefully and
deceitfully accuse the Islamic Republic system of being a form of
dictatorship and despotism.

The other problem is that the previous Supreme Leader can be accused of
observing emotional and kinship matters and considering personal and
factional interests, a problem which was faced by no less than the Holy
Prophet of Islam (S) when he was accused by some Muslims and non-Muslims
who claimed that he (S) nominated Haḍrat ‘Ali (*‘a*) as his successor
and raised his station because ‘Ali (*‘a*) was his son-in-law.

Therefore, in spite of the good and positive results that the nomination
of the preceding Supreme Leader brings about, we should, for some
reasons, discard it.

To sum up, the most logical and rational of the three ways—(1) selection
of the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih* through direct public
suffrage, (2) selection of the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih*
through the duly competent experts, and (3) selection of the Supreme
Leader and *wali al-faqih* through nomination by the preceding Supreme
Leader—is the selection of the Supreme Leader through the duly competent
experts. After the reflection and scrutiny on the subject of the
assessment of the three ways, the status of the other methods which may
be raised in this regard has become clear and so there is no need to
deal with them separately.

The problem of circularity
--------------------------

It has become clear so far that the logical and justifiable way of
selecting the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih* is referring to the
opinion and view of the experts. There are some questions about the
Assembly of Experts and its relationship with the *wali al-faqih* and
Supreme Leader, one of which is the problem of circularity[^1] allegedly
pertaining to the relationship between the Assembly of Experts and the
Supreme Leader.

It is claimed that on one hand, the Assembly of Experts designates the
Supreme Leader and on the other hand, the credibility of this assembly
and its function are dependent on the Supreme Leader’s approval, and
this is nothing but a circular argument which is a false claim. Let us
elaborate. The qualification of those who want to be candidates and
finally be elected to the Assembly of Experts has to be approved by the
Council of Guardians.

Therefore, the members of the Assembly of Experts’ credibility is
determined by the Council of Guardians and if their credibility is not
confirmed by the Council of Guardians, the great number of votes in the
ballot boxes they garner will not be a criterion for their credibility
and membership to the assembly. Meanwhile, the members of the Council of
Guardians have obtained credibility through the approval of the Supreme
Leader because, as stipulated in the Constitution, the selection of the
jurists to the Council of Guardians is the *wali al-faqih*’s
prerogative. Therefore, the reason why the views of the Council of
Guardians are credible and binding is because its members are selected
by the Supreme Leader.

Given this, we can say that if the credibility of the members of the
Assembly of Experts depends on the approval of the Council of Guardians
and the credibility of the Council of Guardians, in turn, depends on the
approval of the Supreme Leader, it follows that the credibility of the
Assembly of Experts depends on the approval of the Supreme Leader
through a single intermediary. And it is the Supreme Leader and *wali
al-faqih* who lends credibility to the Assembly of Experts and its
performance:

On the other hand, the performance of the Assembly of Experts is to
elect and designate the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih*, and it is
through the approval and vote of the Assembly of Experts that the
Supreme Leadership and *wilayat al-faqih* acquires credibility and the
right to rule. In this manner, there will be philosophical circularity:

That is, if the Assembly of Experts does not cast its vote, the decree
and view of the *wali al-faqih* will not be valid. On the other hand, if
the *wali al-faqih* does not indirectly approve the Assembly of Experts
(through the Council of Guardians), its decision, that is, the
designation of the Supreme Leader, will be invalid. This is the same
circular relationship which is proved in philosophy and logic to be
false and impossible.

Before refuting this allegation of circularity, it is worthy of note
that the root of this allegation actually pertains to one of the topics
in political philosophy about the democratic systems based on elections
where this critical question is raised: What is the basis of the
credibility of the laws and regulations enacted by the legislative
bodies or the executive body in a democratic system? The initial answer
is that its credibility is based on the vote of the people. That is,
since the people have voted for these representatives, or to this party
or cabinet, it follows that the laws and specific regulations laid down
by them acquire credibility:

Here, this question arises: During the establishment of a democratic
system and, when the first election is intended to be held, when there
are no parliament and cabinet and when a decision is made to establish
them through the said election, this election itself necessitates a set
of rules and regulations such as whether or not the women have also the
right to vote, the minimum age of the voters, the minimum vote of the
candidate, whether the rule will be absolute majority, relative
majority, 50% plus 1, or one-third of the vote.

Also, for the age, level of education and other cases, the required
qualifications of the candidate and tens of other issues, there should
be certain rules and regulations. It is crystal clear that each of these
rules, regulations and decisions about the conduct of election has its
effect on the outcome of the election in determining which candidate or
party will garner more votes. In the Western countries (or in most of
them) which are considered the forerunners of establishing democratic
systems in the past two centuries, at the beginning the women had no
right to vote, and did not take part in the elections.

If the women had been given the right to vote, most probably the names
of today’s individuals, parties and figures of the political history of
many Western countries would not have existed. Until recently, in
Switzerland which has more than twenty autonomous cantons,[^2] the women
had no right to vote in many of these cantons.[^3] By changing the
minimum age of eligible voters from 16 to 15 in countries such as ours
where the youth constitute almost 80 percent of the population, there is
a strong probability that the state of elections and the individuals and
groups eligible to vote will totally change.

Now, the question is: In the first election held by every democratic
system when there is no cabinet or legislative body, what will be the
authority which determines the age and gender of the voters or the
qualifications of the candidates, the percentage of votes they need to
win, and other similar cases related to conducting the election? Here,
we have to pay attention to the fact that if we fail to make a
convincing and correct decision for the first cabinet and first
legislative body, all the cabinets and legislative bodies in all
countries will be questionable and their credibility and legitimacy will
be groundless.

This is because the establishment of the second cabinet and legislature
is based on the laws and regulations approved by the first cabinet and
parliament. The establishment of the third cabinet and legislature is
based on the laws and regulations approved by the second cabinet and
parliament. The establishment of the fourth cabinet and legislature is
based on the laws and regulations approved by the third cabinet and
parliament, and so on:

It is natural that if the stated problem in the first cabinet and
parliament is not solved and their credibility not established, the
credibility of all the succeeding cabinets and parliaments and their
enacted laws will be questionable.

In an attempt to solve this problem, some theoreticians and political
scientists say: “Finally, we have no option but to hold the first
election on the basis of a certain set of rules and regulations.”
Suppose we held an election on the basis of the following rules and
regulations:

1. The minimum age eligible for voting is 16;

2. The women have no right to vote or be voted;

3. The specific level of education of the candidates is of no worth;

4. The minimum votes needed by the candidate to win is one-third of the
total votes; and

5. The minimum age eligible for candidacy is 20.

Then, after holding the election on the basis of these rules and
regulations and establishing the first cabinet and parliament, this
first cabinet and parliament would confirm the validity of the election
held according to such rules and regulations. In this manner, this first
election would be rendered legal and valid. Obviously, the first cabinet
and parliament have to decide how the succeeding elections would be and
the same rules and regulations may remain, or some or all of them may be
changed. Yet, finally, the problem in the first election and its legal
credibility will be solved through the stated way.

It is very obvious that such answer is not correct and the problem will
remain unsolved because our question is about the first cabinet and
parliament which are to bestow credibility to the succeeding cabinets
and parliaments and their enacted laws.

This is while the first cabinet and parliament have come into existence
as a result of an election based on a certain set of rules and
regulations which had not been enacted and approved by any
popularly-elected cabinet and parliament. This cabinet and parliament
which are to bestow credibility to the election through which it has
come into being is nothing but the circular relationship to which we
have referred at the beginning:

At any rate, this problem is found in all the systems based on democracy
and they have no logical and convincing justification. For this reason,
almost all political philosophers and political scientists especially in
the current time have acknowledge this problem, but they say, “There is
no option and alternative other than this, and in establishing a
democratic system based on the will of the people, facing such a problem
is inevitable and there is no practical solution to it.”

Therefore, the answer that can be given concerning the problem of
circularity which is also raised in discussing the relationship of the
Assembly of Experts with the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih* will be:
Just as this problem exists in all the systems based on democracy and
has not induced its proponents to discard democracy and think of other
kinds of systems, the existence of such problem in the *wilayat
al-faqih* system should not persuade us to disregard the essence of this
system; otherwise, we have to reject all the past, present and future
democratic governments and systems in the world.

The truth of the matter, however, is that the problem of circularity
exists only in democratic systems. The system based on *wilayat
al-faqih* is basically exempt from such a thing, i.e. there is no
circularity in it. The reason is that, as lengthily discussed earlier in
this book, the *wali al-faqih* gets his credibility and legitimacy from
God, the Exalted, and not from the people. As we pointed out earlier,
the law and command of God, the Exalted, have essential credibility
[*i‘tibar-e dhati*] and there is no need to refer to someone or some
authority to bestow credibility to the law and command of God. Instead,
according to His Real Ownership [*malikiyyat-e haqiqi*], God, the
Exalted, with respect to the entire universe, can exercise any kind of
ontological [*takwini*] and legislative [*tashri‘i*] authority He likes
over the universe and creatures. That is, in the system based upon
*wilayat al-faqih*, what happens at the beginning of establishment of
the system is as follows:

The fallacy in attributing the problem of circularity to the
relationship between the *wali al-faqih* and the Assembly of Experts
lies in the assumption that the *wali al-faqih* acquires his credibility
from the Assembly of Experts whereas the credibility of the Assembly of
Experts is acquired by the approval of the *wali al-faqih* through the
Council of Guardians whose credibility is also granted by the Supreme
Leader. The reply to this fallacy is that the credibility of the *wali
al-faqih* is, as we have said, not granted by the Assembly of Experts
but through the decree of God, the Exalted, and designation of the
infallible Imam (*‘a*).

In reality, the role of the Assembly of Experts is not to designate the
Supreme Leader but, as we have explained in Chapter 3 of this book, to
‘discover’ [*kashf*] the leader appointed by the Imam of the Age (*‘a*)
through general designation. Similarly, when, in choosing the *marja‘
at-taqlid* and determining the most knowledgeable [*a‘lam*] *faqih*, we
refer to and consult experts and well-informed people, we do not want
them to ‘designate’ a *marja‘ at-taqlid* or the most knowledgeable
*faqih*; rather, in reality and actuality the person in question is
either *mujtahid* or not, either the most knowledgeable or not.

If he is indeed a *mujtahid* or a most knowledgeable *faqih* the result
of our research will not arbitrarily affect his status. And if he is
really not *mujtahid* and *a‘lam*, the outcome of our investigation will
not render him *mujtahid* and *a‘lam*. So, the sole purpose of our
consulting the experts is to discover, through their testimony, who the
most knowledgeable *mujtahid* is (a thing which exists in reality prior
to our inquiry).

The same is true of the Assembly of Experts whose duty is not to
designate the *wali al-faqih* to the Supreme Leadership but to merely
bear testimony which *mujtahid* has, according to the decree of the Imam
of the Age (*‘a*), the right to govern and whose command has to be
obeyed.

The other reply, i.e. the third reply, is that the founder of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Haḍrat Imam Khomeini (*‘a*), for example, set
up the Council of Guardians for the first time and the said Council
confirmed the qualification of the candidates who were elected to the
Assembly of Experts, but the task of this Assembly of Experts is to
choose the *next* Supreme Leader. Therefore, this process does not
undergo any circularity.

There would have been circularity if Imam Khomeini (*qs*) had, through
an intermediary (Council of Guardians), approved the Assembly of Experts
and the Assembly of Experts had designated the Imam to the Supreme
Leadership. Similar to this case is when at the beginning we have a lit
candle and with this candle we light a matchstick with which we light
another candle. This is not considered circularity. There will be
circularity if the light of the first candle is taken from the
matchstick while the light of the matchstick is taken from the first
candle. Naturally, neither the candle nor the matchstick will be
lighted.

One may say that originally the leadership of Imam Khomeini (*qs*) has
nothing to do with the Assembly of Experts but the continuation of his
leadership depends on the discretion, approval and testimony of the
Assembly of Experts.

Therefore, there is no circularity with respect to the beginning of his
leadership, but as far as the continuation of his leadership is
concerned, the problem of circularity exists. This is because the
continuation of his leadership is the outcome of the confirmation of the
Assembly of Experts and at the same time the Assembly of Experts enjoys
credibility because it has been approved by Imam Khomeini (*qs*).

The reply to this objection is similar to the case when we have alit
candle at the beginning (first light) and this candle is used to light a
matchstick, and then the candle stops burning. Then to light the candle
again (second light), we use the matchstick which has acquired its light
from the candle. Here no circularity exists because the light to which
the light of the matchstick is ascribed was the first light while the
thing to which the light of the matchstick is ascribed is the
persistence of the candle’s light and the second light, and so there is
no circularity in it:

In our discussion, we have clarified that first Imam Khomeini (*qs*) had
set up the Council of Guardians and the said Council, in turn, confirmed
the qualification of the candidates selected to the Assembly of Experts,
but the thing approved by the Assembly of Experts after its
establishment is the continuance of leadership of Imam Khomeini (*qs*)
and this has nothing to do with the period prior to it (first light of
the candle). The credibility of the said period is not confirmed by the
Assembly of Experts but by the general designation of the Imam of the
Age (*‘a*). Given this, there is no circularity at work.

To sum up, the problem of circularity is actually detected in the
systems based upon democracy and populist thought. These systems which
suffer from this problem try to attribute it to the theory of *wilayat
al-faqih*. The truth of the matter, however, is that this problem is
ascribed to the democratic systems, and no acceptable and rational reply
is given to it. But, as we have clarified in our discussion, ascribing
this problem to the system based on *wilayat al-faqih* has no
justification at all.

The experts and types of specialization
---------------------------------------

One of the questions and objections raised regarding the Assembly of
Experts and its members is related to the necessity of their possession
of different kinds of specialization. Let us elaborate on the question.
Firstly, the Constitution states that qualifications needed for assuming
the Leadership are summarized in three qualifications, i.e. Islamic
jurisprudence, justice, and efficiency in managing the society.

But, in view of the qualification of the *ijtihad* of the candidates to
the Assembly of Experts stipulated in the text of the Constitution, the
members of the Assembly of Experts is composed of a group of individuals
who have the capability of determining the *wali al-faqih*’s knowledge
of Islamic jurisprudence and justice. As for the *wali al-faqih*’s
competence in managing the society which entails having a set of
qualities such as administrative power, familiarity with social issues
and events, awareness of the current domestic and world politics and the
like, the members of this assembly are unable to make decisions.

Therefore, there is a need for some among the Experts who can, with
their professional expertise and scientific position in administrative,
political and social issues, express their opinion about the Supreme
Leader and *wali al-faqih*’s proficiency in management. Secondly, since
in accordance with the existing Constitution, such duties and
prerogatives as commandership-in-chief of the armed forces and
determining the overall policies of the system including the economic,
military, political and other fields are assigned to the Supreme Leader,
to determine whether the Supreme Leader can discharge these duties or
not requires the existence of different experts in military, political,
economic, and other affairs among the members of the

Assembly of Experts so that, in addition to determining the *wali
al-faqih*’s expertise in Islamic jurisprudence and justice, they may be
able to assess the qualifications necessary for becoming a supreme
leader and *wali al-faqih*, and give their professional opinions.

As such, the gist of this critical remark is that the condition that the
*ijtihad* which the members of the Assembly of Experts enjoy allows only
one type of specialists to the Assembly. But, in view of the position of
the Supreme Leader in our system and his duties and prerogatives
stipulated in the Constitution, it seems that having different types of
specialists in the said assembly is also expedient.

In reply to this question, we have to state that firstly, for confirming
the qualification of the candidates for the Assembly of Experts, the
existence of the condition of *ijtihad* alone is not sufficient.

Rather, it is natural that when these candidates are elected to the
Assembly of Experts, they can define the Supreme Leader and *wali
al-faqih* which is regarded as a sociopolitical position and not merely
a religious one, it follows that in addition to the possession of a good
command of *ijtihad*, they themselves have to be well acquainted with
the sociopolitical issues. And this matter is treated as a key and
important criterion for confirming the suitability of the candidates for
the Assembly of Experts.

Hence, we should never suppose that the members of the Assembly of
Experts are merely an aggregate of God-wary *mujtahidin* who have no
expertise at all in politics and social issues, or know nothing about
such matters. Rather, they certainly have a considerably acceptable
level of familiarity with sociopolitical issues. In addition, we have to
bear in mind that the presence in the Assembly of Experts of the
individuals who are merely statesmen and who are not *fuqaha* is exactly
like the presence of the individuals who are merely *fuqaha* and who do
not have an iota of knowledge about politics.

The objection directed to the presence of the *fuqaha* who lack
knowledge about politics and social issues in the Assembly of Experts is
also directed to the presence of the politicians who are non-*mujtahid*
and have no sufficient knowledge about Islamic jurisprudence.
Consequently, the members of the Assembly of Experts must be among the
*mujtahidin* who are familiar with the sociopolitical issues of the day.

Secondly, it is true that the three conditions of the *wali al-faqih*,
i.e. knowledge of Islamic jurisprudence, justice and efficiency in
managing the society have been stipulated in the Constitution, but it is
worth noting that having these three conditions on equal terms, is, in
our view, not important. Rather, one of them is more important than and
takes precedence over the other two. Let us elaborate on it. We believe
that what constitutes the fundamental element of our system is Islam.

Also in all other countries, management and politics occupy special
position and it is incorrect to assume that the leading figure of any
country whose system is not based on Islam not among the administrators
and statesmen. So, we have no advantage over the others in this regard.
The merit and distinctive feature of our country is that it is governed
by an Islamic system. That is, the thing on which we lay emphasis more
than anything else and which we consider our main objective in setting
up the government and conducting the political affairs is Islam and the
spread of its values and laws.

Therefore, the leader, the towering figure of such a system, must have,
both in theory and practice, the necessary and enough proximity to,
fondness of and commitment to Islam and its laws and values. It is for
the same reason that we consider that the leader of this country and
this system to be a just *faqih* and we regard his *fiqahat* (being a
*faqih*) to have precedence over his *‘adalah* (his being just
[*‘adil*]). *Faqih* is someone who knows Islam very well and has
correct, in-depth and comprehensive knowledge of its teachings and
values.

If there is no such a person on top of this system to guide it in line
with Islam and supervise the Islamic character of the general trend
governing the system and its institutions, the establishment of Islamic
government will not be accessible. In fact, the system will turn into a
system similar to the current systems of the countries all over the
world. The sole objective of such systems is to administer the affairs
of society, and according to them, its being of Islamic or non-Islamic
nature has no meaning, and of no importance.

Therefore, concerning the *wali al-faqih* and Supreme Leader of the
Islamic system, the preeminent condition is his being *faqih* and
research-based understanding of Islam and its laws. Determining whether
or not the Supreme Leader has this characteristic is very crucial and
vital, and so this task is entrusted to those who are experts in this
field, i.e. Islamic jurisprudence and *ijtihad*. Of course, as we
stated, God-wariness [*taqwa*] and familiarity with politics and social
issues of the day by the members of the Assembly of Experts and by the
Supreme Leader himself are important and are taken into account.

Regarding possession of expertise in military, economic and other
fields, we should say that no leader in the world is expert in military
affairs and also expert in political and diplomatic issues, domestic and
foreign policies, and is an authority on all these affairs. Mainly the
political leaders’ management and familiarity with the issues pertaining
to domestic politics and foreign policy is regarded as important.

For making decisions on military, economic, developmental and other
affairs, these leaders benefit from groups of reliable and well-informed
advisers. The same is true of our Islamic system. What the Supreme
Leader personally needs is proficiency in management and high and
acceptable capability to understand and comprehend politics.

Of course, we have pointed out that in view of the Islamic character of
our system, along with the characteristics that the leaders in the world
possess, the *wali al-faqih*’s command over another thing, and that is
knowledge of Islamic jurisprudence, in particular and about Islam, in
general, is general.

But it is not necessary that the leader himself be an authority on other
things and has profound and extensive knowledge of them. In fact, he may
benefit from a group of trustworthy advisers who are well-versed in
different fields and make use of the prerogatives granted to him to make
appropriate decisions.

Thus, we notice that logically, the members of the Assembly of Experts’
possession of expertise in various fields—military, economic and
others—is not indispensable, and the election of individuals who are
God-wary and have the prescribed level of expertise in *ijtihad* and
awareness of the society’s domestic and international sociopolitical
issues of the day is enough for identifying the Supreme Leader and *wali
al-faqih* by the Assembly of Experts.

At the conclusion of this section, it is worth noting that sometimes, it
is argued that Islam has different branches of science such as exegesis
of the Qur’an [*tafsir*], scholastic theology [*‘ilm al-kalam*],
*hadith*, *rijal*,[^4] philosophy, and others. The *faqih* [scholar of
jurisprudence] is referred to as the Islamologist or Islamic scholar
while technically, *faqahah* means familiarity with the secondary laws
of Islam and expertise in jurisprudence (as indicated in the books on
practical laws [*risalah al-‘amaliyyah*]).

As such, if by *wali al-faqih* and leader of the Islamic system we
really mean Islamologist, then it is necessary that in addition to his
authority on Islamic jurisprudence [*fiqh*], he must have expertise in
different branches of Islamic science such as *tafsir*, *kalam*,
*hadith*, philosophy, *rijal*, and the like. This entails that a number
of scholars in *tafsir*, *kalam*, philosophy, and others be among the
members of the Assembly of Experts so that they may assess whether or
not the Supreme Leader has the required prescribed level of expertise in
these fields.

The reply to this critical remark is that the thing which affects the
implementation of the Islamic system is the authority on Islamic
jurisprudence. It is true that Islam has various branches but part of
them is relevant to man’s esoteric and inner concerns which are referred
to as beliefs [*i‘iqadat*]. Another branch is related to family affairs
while yet a number of things like ritual purification [*taharah*] and
impurity [*najasah*], prayer and fasting is related to devotional
issues, acts of worship and personal conduct.

But what has a significant and vital influence on the Leadership of the
*wali al-faqih* and on directing the Islamic system is the familiarity
with the sociopolitical laws of Islam. The *wali al-faqih* must have a
profound understanding in this respect and must surpass others, although
*ijtihad* in other secondary issues is also necessary. Of course, the
other areas of Islam are also important, and *fiqh* and *fiqahah* in
their broad sense also include these branches.

The paradox of discharge
------------------------

Sometimes, a question which seems to be a puzzler is raised, such as:
What will happen if the Assembly of Experts decides that the Supreme
Leader lacks the required qualifications and discharges him, and if, at
the same time, the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih* finds that the
Assembly of Experts has lost its credibility and decides to dissolve it?
Will the decree of the *wali al-faqih* be upheld, and on the basis of
the rule of necessity of obedience to him, the Assembly of Experts be
regarded as dissolved and its decision of discharging the Supreme Leader
be of no avail? Or will, in accordance with the decree of the Assembly
of Experts, the Supreme Leader be regarded as lacking the necessary
qualifications and so his decision of dissolving the Assembly of Experts
be lacking credibility and have no effect?

For elaborating on this question, we have to state that on one hand, it
is stipulated in the Constitution that one of the duties and
prerogatives of the Assembly of Experts is to supervise over the
activities of the Supreme Leader and discharge him when the Assembly
finds that he has lost some or all the necessary qualifications for
leadership; for example, if, God forbid, he is found to have committed
indecency or a major sin, have strayed from the path of justice and
God-wariness [*taqwa*], have lost the right frame of mind and the power
to exercise *ijtihad* as a result of an ailment or some other reason, or
is no longer capable of comprehending and analyzing sociopolitical
issues and does not have the ability of managing the society or the
competence necessary for the Leader.

On the other hand, it is also possible that one day, the *wali al-faqih*
truly discovers that the majority or all of the members of the Assembly
of Experts have given in to bribes and threats, or according to some
other logical and plausible reasons, he really comes to the conclusion
that the existing assembly is incongruous with the interests of Islam
and Islamic society and is to the detriment of the people. In this case,
by invoking the guardianship he has, the *wali al-faqih* can dissolve
the Assembly of Experts even though there is no law which explicitly
stipulates that one of the prerogatives of the *wali al-faqih* is
“dissolution of the Assembly of Experts”.

It is clear that if we encounter only one of the two above cases, there
will be no problem. That is, if only the Assembly of Experts discharges
the *wali al-faqih*, he will be removed from the said position. Also, if
only the Supreme Leader and *wali al-faqih* decides to dissolve the
Assembly of Experts, the said assembly will be dissolved accordingly,
and by holding an election, a new Assembly of Experts can come.

But the problem arises if both these decrees are issued simultaneously,
and each of the *wali al-faqih* and the Assembly of Experts
simultaneously gives a decision on the lack of qualification and
credibility of the other. This is the source of the paradox of
dismissal, and this is what makes one ask: “What will then the nation
and country do?”

Regarding this question, first, we have to bear in mind that this enigma
is ascribed not only to the theory of *wilayat al-faqih*. Wherever two
powers, two bodies, or two institutions have the right to give opinion
on some of or all the qualification and credibility of the other, such a
problem can emerge.

For example, in the recent years, we have witnessed the dispute between
the Russian State Duma (lower house of the national bicameral
legislature) and the president of the said country.[^5] In many other
countries such a problem will possibly arise because of the legal
prerogatives which each principal institution and government has.

At any rate, in general, what can be said here is whichever of the
Assembly of Experts and the *wali al-faqih* issues a decree ahead of the
other, its or his decree will be binding and the decree of the other
will not be valid and to assume that these two decrees simultaneously
occur is merely hypothetical and very rare and practically, to discuss
it is of no avail. As we have said, this phenomenon is probably found in
other systems and it is not something which is connected only to the
theory of *wilayat al-faqih* and is taken as a point of weakness versus
other systems and theories.

However, the important and considerable academic point present in this
case is that principally, the Assembly of Experts’ duty is announcing
the dismissal, and not decreeing it. This is because just as when
identifying the Leader and choosing him as the *wali al-faqih* (the
question we have explained in Chapter 3), it is now clear that the task
of the Assembly of Experts is not “designating” [*nasb*] the *wali
al-faqih*, and it is clear that it is not through the decree of the
Assembly of Experts that the *wali al-faqih* becomes eligible and
qualified to the post of Supreme Leadership and *wilayat al-faqih*.

Rather, he already had the qualifications and all that the Assembly of
Experts does is testifying and identifying the person who enjoys the
qualities indicated in the general designation of the Imam of the Age
(*‘a*) during the period of major occultation. Also, with respect to the
question of discharge, whenever the Leader loses some or all of the
necessary qualifications for Leadership and *wilayat al-faqih*, he is
automatically discharged from the Leadership and the legitimacy which he
enjoys, comes to an end.

Also for this reason, the Assembly of Experts today determines such
deviation and lack of qualifications, nevertheless all his decisions,
discharges and appointments, acts and orders are all rendered invalid
from the time he loses the necessary qualifications. Therefore, just as
in the beginning, the task of the Assembly of Experts is to ‘discover’
and identify the person who enjoys the necessary qualifications, and not
to ‘designate’ him.

At the end too, the task of the Assembly of Experts is merely to
‘discover’ and determine the lack of the qualifications, and the
discharge happens as an automatic effect. In fact, one of the merits and
salient features of the theory *wilayat al-faqih* is that as soon as the
least defect emerges in the necessary qualifications required for
Leadership, the Supreme Leader will be discharged automatically and his
credibility and legitimacy come to an end.

This is while today we see even in powerful and known countries in the
world such as the United States of America that the president of the
country commits a crime and the crime is affirmed by the court and the
House of Senate yet, the only effect for his act is that he has to be
fined, but as a president he remains in his post.

Not only his previous decisions, works and orders (from the time of
performing the crime up to the present) are all regarded as credible and
legal and subject to no criticism. Furthermore, this president, whose
act of bribery is recognized by every group and assembly, is allowed to
rule and use all his legal rights and prerogatives. Now, which one of
these two theories is more logical and tenable?

We hope that the day when the banner of guardianship [*wilayah*] and
government of the Imam of the Age (*‘a*) is hoisted throughout the world
and the noble state of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) prevails will come, God
willing.

[^1]: That is, petitio principi (begging the question) or the act of
using an idea or a statement to prove something which is then used to
prove the idea or statement at the beginning; in short, to use the claim
as the proof and vice versa. [Trans.]

[^2]: Switzerland is a confederation of 26 states, called cantons. There
are 20 full cantons and six half-cantons; the half-cantons were formed
when three full cantons were subdivided. The cantons and half-cantons
are subdivided into communes (German gemeinde), which are roughly
equivalent to counties and number about 3,000. [Trans.]

[^3]: It was only in 1971 that a referendum granted women the right to
vote in federal elections and it was only in 1990 that the same right
was eventually extended to all the cantons. Besides, it was only in 1981
that an equal rights amendment to the constitution was approved by
referendum. [Trans.]

[^4]: Rijāl or ‘Ilm ar-Rijāl: a branch of the science of hadīth dealing
with the biography of the hadīth transmitters or reporters. [Trans.]

[^5]: This refers to the then Russian President Boris Yeltsin’s decision
to dissolve the parliament in September 1993 while armed opposition
leaders and conservative deputies occupied the parliament building and
refused to disband. The following month, troops loyal to Yeltsin stormed
the building and arrested the opposition leaders, leaving more than 100
dead. This settlement reached through the use of force is a consequence
of the absence of clear constitutional provisions which delineate the
powers and resolve the conflicts between executive and legislature.
[Trans.]


