Chapter 1 : Fast in History
===========================

Since the dawn of history, man did not find any means better than fast
to ascend above yielding to his desires and worldly wishes, attain
spiritual upliftment, return to spirituality, and renounce contemptible
habits to which he became addicted and which led him to perdition.
Divinely revealed creeds, non-Muslim societies and former nations have
been familiar with the fast.

Ancient Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Chinese and other nations knew and
practised fast for various reasons. Many still do even today. The Greeks
came to know about fast and its merits from ancient Egyptians. They used
to fast immediately before engaging in a war. The Romans emulated the
Greeks not only in mythology, but also in observing the fast, especially
when they were attacked, in order to gain victory.

They believed that fast strengthened them and taught them patience and
perseverance, two prerequisites required to win the battle against
internal temptations and external dangers. Ancient Chinese, too,
incorporated fast into their doctrines and prescribed it for those who
were passing through periods of trials and tribulations.

For centuries Hindus and Buddhists have been observing a somehow more
rigid form of fast. Jews and Christians observe certain types of fast.
Moses, peace be upon him, observed the fast for forty days at Mount
Sinai; see Exodus 24:18. During that period, he was granted the heavy
responsibilities embedded in the Ten Commandments. He was commanded in
the Torah to fast the tenth day of the seventh month and the ninth of
the eighth.

Jews used to (and some still do) fast during times of grief and
mourning and when exposed to danger. They were also accustomed to fast
one day as an act of atonement and whenever they believed that God was
angry with them. Nowadays, they fast one week to commemorate the
destruction of Jerusalem at the hands of Nebuchadnezzar 11(605-562 B.C.)
son of Nabopolassar, founder of the Chaldean or Neo-Babylonian empire,
on March 16, 597 B.C. They observe fast on other days too.

Jesus of Nazareth (6 B.C.-30 A.D.), peace be upon him and his virgin
mother Mary daughter of Imran (Amram), was reported to have observed the
fast on the day of atonement. He and his disciples fasted the forty days
observed by Moses before him; see Matthew 4:2. This set the precedence
for the pre-Easter fast among some Christians. Other Christian
theologians started other types of fast during which they do not eat
meat, fish, or eggs.


**Chapter 2 : Name and Derivation**

Allah Almighty has said, ‘Surely the number of months with Allah is
twelve in Allah’s ordinance since the day He created the heavens and the
earth, of these four are sacred; that is the right reckoning; therefore,
do not be unjust to your own selves regarding them (Holy Qur’an, 9:36)."
These are the lunar months upon the reckoning of which does a Muslim in
the east of the earth or the west rely;

chronologically arranged, they are as follows: 1) Muharram, 2) Safar,
3) Rabi’ I, 4) Rabi’ II, 5) Jumada I, 6) Jumada II, 7) Rajab, 8)
Sha’ban, 9) the month of Ramadhan, 10) Shawwal, 11) Thul-Qi’da, and 12)
Thul-Hijja. According to astronomy, the lunar calendar cannot be less
than 29 days, nor can it be more than 30. It may once be 29 days and
another 30, and its average is 29 days and 12 hours and five minutes.
The beginning of each lunar month is recognised by the sighting of the
new moon, the crescent.

The Almighty says, ‘They ask you concerning the new moons. Say: They
are times appointed for the benefit of men, and for the pilgrimage"
(Holy Qur’an, 2:189).

In this verse, the Almighty has explained to us how to calculate and
determine time by mentioning the word ahilla, which is the plural of the
Arabic singular hilal, crescent, when it becomes visible to the naked
eye. These crescents set the time for people and help them determine
when the pilgrimage is to be performed.


**Chapter 3 : Fast of the Month of Ramadhan**

The lunar calendar of Islam brings the fast of the month of Ramadhan
eleven days earlier every year. Thus, in a cycle of about thirty-three
years, it passes through all the seasons successively. Fast was first
prescribed on the second of Sha’ban in the second year of Hijrah (the
migration of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny, from Mecca to Medina, corresponding to 622 A.D.).

On p. 59, of al-Saduq’s Amali (or Majalis), the faqih mentor and author
quotes Ja’fer ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn All ibn Abdullah ibn al-Mughirah
al-Kufi as saying that his grandfather al-Hassan ibn Ali quotes his
grandfather Abdullah ibn al-Mughirab quoting Isma’eel ibn Abu Ziyad
quoting Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’fer ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (as) (Acronyms
for Alahis Salam, peace be upon him) citing his forefathers, peace be
upon all of them,

saying that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) (These are acronyms that
stand for "peace be upon him". Once asked his companions, "Shall I tell
you about something which, if you do it, will distance you from Satan as
much as the distance between the east and the west?" They said, "O yes!
Please do so," whereupon he (pbuh) said, "It is fast.

It darkens his [Satan’s] face, while charity breaks his back and the
love for Allah’s sake and assisting others in doing good deeds cut off
his tail and seeking Allah’s forgiveness splits his spine. For
everything there is a nicat (purification), and the zakat of the bodies
is fast."

Because the reader will come across the name of Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq
(as) quite often in this book, we ought to stop here for a moment to
introduce this great personality to those who may not be familiar with
him. Needless to say, the Imam (as) is very well known to Muslims
following the Shi’a Ja’feri Ithna-’Asheri School of Muslim Law;

after all, they derive their fiqh from him and regard him as highly as,
say, Hanafis regard Imam Abu Haneefah al-Nu’man, or as the Hanbalis
regard Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal. But those who are not Shi’as are justified
in wondering how Imam al-Sadiq (as) knew the forthcoming information;
so, let us introduce them to one of the most knowledgeable men who ever
lived on earth:

His full name is Abu Abdullah Ja’fer ibn Imam Muhammad al-Baqir ibn
Imam Ali al-Azgher Zaynul-’Abidin ibn Imam Hussein ibn Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib, of the clan of Banu Hashim, of the tribe of Quraysh, peace and
blessings of Allah be upon all of them and many, many salutations. He
was born in the sacred precincts of Medina on the 17th of Rabee’
al-Awwal of 83 A.H.,

and he died at the age of 65 after being poisoned by the Abbaside
caliph Abu Ja’fer al-Mansur and was buried at Baqee’, Medina. His mother
was a relative of the first caliph Abu Bakr: she was Umm Farwa Fatima
daughter of Abdel-Rahman son of Abu Bakr.

His father was Abu Ja’fer Imam Muhammad ibn All al-Baqir (as) (57 - 114
A.H.), grandson of Imam Husain (as). If you wish to realise the
greatness of Imam al-Sadiq (as), you will see his praise not only by
Sunnis but also by non-Muslims as well, especially since his
contributions to his contemporary intellectual revolution were
invaluable and quite diverse. Not only was he a theologian, he was also
a mathematician, a botanist, and alchemist, a scientist, and a man of
letters.

To quote what Shi’as say about him may be out of place here. Probably
the best compliment the Imam (as) received was from one of his world
famous students: Imam Abu Haneefah al-Nu’man, founder of the major Sunni
sect, the Hanafis, who was one of tens of thousands of scholars who
prided himself in being Abu Abdullah’s students.

Abu Haneefah said verbatim: "Lawlal sanatan, Ia halaka al-Nu’man,"
which means, ‘Had it not been for those couple of years, al-Nu’man would
have perished," a reference to two years which he spent in Baghdad as a
student of Imam al-Sadiq (as) during al-Mansur’s caliphate. In his
Musnad Abu Haneefah, Abul-Qasim al-Baghghar quotes al-Hasan ibn Ziyad as
saying, "Abu Haneefah was asked once in my presence, ‘Who is the most
outstanding faqih you have ever seen?’ and he answered by saying,
‘Ja’fer ibn Muhammad.

When-al Mansur brought him [from Medina to Baghdad], he sent for me and
said, ‘O Abu Haneefah! People are enchanted by Ja’fer ibn Muhammad, so
you should prepare some of your most difficult questions for him.

’ I prepared forty questions for him, then his [alSadiq’s] father was
brought from Heera. I visited him, greeted him, and sat at his place of
meeting. Then he turned to him and said, ‘O Abu Abdullah! This is Abu
Haneefah.’ ‘Yes, I know him,’ he responded.

Then he turned to me and said, ‘Ask Abu Abdullah some of your
questions,’ so I kept asking him, and he answered all my questions,
telling me our answers to them as well as those of the people of Medina,
till I finished asking him all the forty questions which I had prepared.
He fully answered all of them."’ Then Abu Haneefah said, "Is not one who
best knows people’s different views the most knowledgeable among
them?"

Where did Imam al-Sadiq (as) get his knowledge from? Let us answer this
question not from the Shi’a but from the Sunni viewpoint in order to
satisfy the curiosity of, and perhaps convince, some sceptical readers
of this book. On p. 221, Vol. 2, of the original Arabic text of
al-Bukhari’s Sahih, the author makes a reference to one particular
saheefa, a parchment type scroll, which was being written by Imam Ali
ibn Abu Talib (as) during the revelation of the Holy Qur’an, i.e.,
during more than two decades, reaching in the end a total length of
seventy yards. As he was writing it, Imam Au (as) used to tie its
pieces, one at a time, to his sword’s scabbard as a protective
measure.

This signifies how much he esteemed it. It consisted of ahadith of the
Holy Prophet (pbuh), be they his own or those which he narrated about
the Almighty and which he learned from archangel Gabriel (as), i.e.
Qudsi ahadith. Al-Bukhari on the said page quotes al-A’mash quoting
Ibrahim al-Tameemi quoting his father quoting Imam All (as) as saying
that all they (AM and his family) had were "The Book of Allah and this
saheefa from the Prophet (pbuh).

" On p. 36, Vol. 1, of al-Bukhari’s Solili, the author quotes al-Sahib
quoting Abu Juhayfa asking Ali (as), "Do you have any book?" All (as)
said, "The Book of Allah, (what we have learned from) some knowledge
bestowed upon a Muslim, and this saheefa." "What is written in this
saheefa?" asked Abu Juhayfa. Ali (as) said,

"It contains reason, [injunctions such as] the freeing of captives, and
that no Muslim should kill another Muslim." On p. 143 of Basair
atDarajat, Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted as saying, "We have the
saheefa; it is dictated by the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and
hand-written by Ali (as); nothing permissible or prohibitive except that
it is recorded in it, and nothing people need, nor any issue, except
that it contains it, even the penalty for slightly scratching one’s
cheek."

Other references to this saheefa exist on pages 67 and 69, Vol. 4, and
on p. 144, Vol. 8, of al-Bukhari’s Sahih, as well as on p. 115, Vol. 4,
of Muslim’s Sahih. Another name for this saheefa is al-jami’a, the book
which includes or contains all knowledge. In Arabic, a university is
call jamia, a place where knowledge and those who learn it gather, a
gathering place of knowledge and scholarship.

If you are fortunate enough to be in possession of a copy of Usul
al-Kafi by Muhammad ibm Ya’qub al-Kulayni published in 1990 by Dar
al-Ta’aruf of Beirut, Lebanon, read pp. 294-298 of its first volume to
learn numerous details about not only this saheefa but also about
Fatima’s Mushaf, the copy of the Holy Qur’an kept by Fatima (as)
daughter of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) many years before Othman ibn
‘Affan asked Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) to help compile the text of the
Holy Qur’an. There are other references to this "university of
knowledge,

" but we think this much suffices to let the reader know that the
section of this book dealing with the rewards one receives from reciting
a particular chapter of the Holy Qur’an is derived from me of the most
ancient, if not the very most ancient, books written n the history of
Islam.

Fast of the month of Ramadhan is the fourth pillar of Islam. The Arabic
word shahr is used for a month due to its being mushtahr, well-known or
famous, that is, the knowledge thereof reaches all people, as we are
told by Imam Ibn Manzoor, author of Lisan al-Arab on p. 432, Vol. 4.
Such knowledge can be attained by sighting its crescent. As to the
reasofl why it has been called the month of Ramadhan, it is due to the
fact that the Arabs gave the names of the months according to the times
during which they occurred, and to the fact that it so happened that the
month of Ramadhan coincided with the parching days of the summer.

Its root word ramd as the same author tells us on pp. 160-161, Vol. 7,
of the same lexicon, means to burn due to excessive sun-heat reflected
on the desert sands. The rainda is the buffing rock. This is why it was
called the month of Ramadhan. One may say in Arabic that a man’s feet
were burnt due to the heat, so he became nimad. It is also said that it
was called the month of Ramadhan because people become tired due to
their suffering from the combination of hunger and thirst during a very
hot month. Arab linguists say that to make something armad is to squeeze
it between two soft rocks then to pound it. A person fasting, by
analogy, pounds his own nature between two rocks: hunger and thirst.

According to one of his numero.us traditions, Prophet Muhomammd (pbuh)
is quoted saying, ‘The month of Ramadhan was named so because it tends
to ramad the sins, that is, burn them." The righteous at the dawn of
Islam used to call it al-midmar, meaning that it emaciates the souls and
bodies and helps them get rid of the excesses of evils and sins whereby
the souls and bodies were laden. During the life-time of the Prophet
(pbuh), the blessed month of Ramadhan used to be called al-marzooq, the
one full of sustenance, due to the abundance of the blessings of Allah
whereby His servants are sustained during it.

In a letter he sent to Jarrah al-Madayini, Muhammad ibn Ya’qub cites
Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) saying, "Fast is not only to abstain
from eating and drinking." Then the Imam (as) quoted Mary (as) mother of
Christ (as), as the Holy Qur’an tells us, saying that she had vowed a
fast for the Most Merciful One. The Imam (as) continued to say, "When
you fast, you should safeguard your tongues, lower your gaze, and you
should neither dispute with nor envy one another." This is recorded on
p. 351, Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar.

The Imam (as) is also quoted in the same and following page of the said
reference saying, "When you fast, let your hearing and vision abstain
with you from anything unlawful, against everything ugly, and leave
hypocrisy aside, and do not harm those who serve you. Rather, adorn
yourself with the dignity of the fast, and do not make your fasting day
any different from the day when you do not fast."


**The Niyyat (intention) to Fast**

When the crescent is sighted in your area or country, a niyyat, that
is, a silent declaration of intention, should be made to fast during
this sacred month to attain nearness to Allah (wajib qurbatan do-Allah).
Just like the five daily prayers, the nijyat of fast is obligatory and
mental, and so is the case of every deed according to Islam.


