Chapter 19 : Rewards of Reciting Chapters From the Holy Qur’an - 1
==================================================================

Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as), as we are told by Shaykh Taqi al-Deen
Ibrabim ibn All ibn al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Salih
al-’Amili-alKaf’ami, has made the following statement with regard to the
merits of reciting chapters and verses of the Holy Qur’an:

One who recites ten verses in one night will never be written down
among the indifferent. One who recites fifty verses will be written down
among those who remember Allah often (i.e., thakireen). If he recites a
hundred, he will be written down among those who constantly supplicate
(qaniteen). If he recites three hundred, he will be written down among
the winners (faaizeen).

If lie recites five hundred verses, he will be written down among those
who reach the degree of jitihad (muitahideen). And if one recites a
thousand verses, he will be rewarded with one kantar which is five
thousand mithqals: each mithqal is twenty-four karats the smallest of
which [in as far as the weighing in the hereafter is concerned] is as
big as the mountain of Uhud, and the largest extends from the earth to
the sky (Misbah al-Kaf’ami, Vol. 2, p. 531).

The Imain (as) has also said, as quoted in the same reference, "If one
recites the Qur’an, Allah will let him enjoy his vision, and such
recitation decreases the penalty of his parents even if they may be
kajirs (apostates)." Imagine, dear reader, what it does to your parents
who raised you as a Muslim...

The reader is requested to refer to what is indicated early in this
book with reference to who Imam al-Sadiq (as) was, what his source of
information was, and what relation he had had with the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh). We, however, would like to add one more statement made by
this great Imam (as) that sheds light on his narration of Audit/i, since
we all know that had it/i is the second source of the Sunnah, the Holy
Qur’an being the first. Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said,

My hadith is the same as my father’s, while my father’s hadith is the
same as my grandfather’s, and the hadith of my grandather is similar to
that of al-Husain ((as) Husain’s hadith is the same as that of al-Hasan;
al-Hasan’s hadith is similar to that of the Commander of the Faithful
(as); the hadith of the Commander of the Faithful (as) is the same
hadith of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), and the hadith of the Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) is the speech of Allah, the Lord of Dignity and
Greatness (This statement is recorded onp. 53, Vol. 1, of al-Kulayni’s
book AI-Kafi).

From the viewpoint of Muslims who believe in and follow the flqh of
Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as), whatever he said was the echo of what his
great grandfather the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) had said. He is one of
twelve Imams followed byJa’feri Shi’as and who the latter believe are
divinely inspired; they are the Imams of AhI al-Bayt (as) referred to in
verse 33 of Surat al-Ahzab (Chapter 33). The fad that their number is
twelve and that all of them descended from Quraysh is stated in the
Sahib books of our Sunni brethren.

This is what all3ukhari and Muslims, as well as many others, have
confirmed. Some Sunni references indicate that the Prophet (pbuh) named
all of them, saying that the first was Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) followed
by his son alHasan (as) then al-Hasan’s brother al-Husain (as), followed
by nine from the offspring of al-Husain (as) the last of whom is
al-Mahdi (as).

The great Sunni Hanafi author of Yanabee’ al-Mawaddaa narrates an
incident in his book as follows:

A Jew named al-A’tal came to the Prophet (pbuh) and said, "Muhammad! I
wish to ask you about certain things which I have been keeping to
myself; so, if you answer them, I shall declare my acceptance of Islam
before you." The Prophet (pbuh) said, "Ask me, O father of Imarah!" So
he asked him about many things till he was satisfied and admitted that
the Prophet (pbuh) was right.

Then he said, "Tell me about your wasi (successor): who is he? No
prophet can ever be without a wasi, and our prophet Moses (as) had
appointed Yusha’ IJoshna] son of Noon as his successor." He (pbuh) said,
"My wasi is Ali ibn Abu Talib followed by my grandsons al-Hasan and
al-Husain followed by nine men from the loins of al-Husain." He said,
"Then name them for me, O Muhammad!" The Prophet (pbuh) said, "Once
al-Husain departs, he will be followed by his son Ali; when Ali departs,
his son Muhammad will succeed him.

When Muhammad departs, his son Ja’fer will follow him. When Ja’fer
departs, he will be followed by his son Mousa. When Mousa departs, his
son All will succeed him. When Ali departs, his son Muhammad will
succeed him. When Muhammad departs, his son al-Hujjah Muhammad al-Mahdi
will succeed him. These are the twelve ones.

" So that Jew embraced Islam and praised Allah for having guided
him(‘This is recorded on p.440 of al-Hafiz al-Qandoozi al-Hanafi’s book
Yanabi’ al-Mawaddak and also by al-Hamawayni in his book Faraid
al-Simtain wherein he relies on the authority of Mujahid who quotes Ibn
Abbas).

If we wish to turn the pages of Shi’a books and discern the facts the
contain with regard to this subject, we will surely find many times a
many ahadith as this one, but this suffices to prove that Sum scholars
do admit that the number of the Imams (as) is twelve, an there are no
such Imams besides Ali (as) and his purified offspring.

What strengthens our conviction that the Twelve Imams fror AhI al-Bayt
(as) were never tutored by any of the Ummah’s scholai is the fact that
no historian, nor any traditionist, nor any biographei has ever
indicated that one of the Imams from Ahl al-.Bayt (as learned what he
knew from some suhaba or tubi’een as is the cas with all the Ummah’s
scholars and Imams.

Abu Haneefah, for example, was a student of Imam Ja’fer-a] Sadiq (as);
Malik was a student of Abu Haneefab; al-Shafi’i learne’ from Malik and
so did Afimed ibn Hanbal. As regarding the Imam from AhI al-Bayt (as),
their knowledge is gifted by Allah, Gloiy an Exaltation to Him, and they
inherit such knowledge son from fathei for they are the ones to whom the
Almighty specifically refers whe: He says, "Then We gave the Book for an
inheritance to those whor We chose from among Our servants" (Holy
Qur’an, 35:32).

This much ought to convince the discreet reader that th information
stated in this section is taken from a very reliable source


**The Basmala**

Whenever we recite a verse from the Holy Qur’an, we start with th
Basmala, that is: Bismillahir-Rahrnunir-Rahuin, In the Name of Allal the
Most Gracious, the most Merciful. In the Fatiha, the first chapte of the
Holy Qur’an, this Basmala is a verse all by itselt whereas in a, other
chapters, with the exception of Bara’ah or Tawbah where it not recited,
it serves as an introduction to other verses.

On pp. 39-4t Vol. 1, of his Taft ir, al-Qummi chronologically arranges
the isnud o one particular statement made by Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as)
an’ recounts the longest list of narrators we have ever come across. Th
list of narrators ends with Abu Busayr, a well-known companion o this
great Imam (as), saying that he once asked Imam al-Sadiq (as about the
tafsir of Bismillu/iir-Rahmunir-Rahim, so he said, and xv would like to
quote his statement as well as its isnad in its origins text as
follows:

After the long list of the said narrators, the Imam (as) indicates the
derivation of each letter of the Basmala as follows:

The "ba" is derived from "baha-Allah," the Splendor of Allah; the
‘seen" is derived from "sanna-Allah," the Majesty of Allah; the "meem"
is derived from "mulk-Allah," the Kingdom of Allah; "Allah’ is the God
of everything; "alRahman" is the One Who is Merciful to all His
creation; "al-Rahim" is the One Who singles out those who believe in Him
to receive the greatest share of His mercy.

On p. 506 of Misbah al-Kaf’umi, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted
saying that when a teacher teaching a child to recite the Holy Qur’an
tells the child to recite "Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim," and the child
recites it, Allah will decree a clearance for the child, for his
parents, and for the teacher, from hell, and that it is comprised of
nineteen letters, the same number corresponding to the number of the
keepers of the gates of hell; therefore, whoever pronounces it, Allah
will permit these letters to close the gates of hell against him.

Now let us research and find out how each of the 114 chapters of the
Holy Qur’an stands out among the rest, and what rewards the faithful
will Insaia-Allah receive from the most Generous One for reciting it.
Following is a translation from the Arabic of most of the original text
on pp. 506-542 of Vol. 2 of Misbah ul-Kaf’umi by Shaykh Taqi al-Deen
Ibrahim ibn Ali ibn al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn Salih al-’Axnili
al-Kaf’ami, in addition to selected texts included in Vol. 89 of
al-Majlisi’s Bihar ul-Anwar

**Chapter 1 (al-Fatiha)**

Al-Tibrisi, in his exegesis Mujma’rd-Bayun fee Tafsir al-Qur’un,
provides ten names for the first chapter of the Holy Qur’an, namely
Surat al-Fatiha:

al-Fatiha, the one that opens, for it is like a gate when opened, it
leads one to the Book of Allah;

al-Hamd, the praise, for its verses are clearly praising the
Almighty;

Ummul Kitab, the mother of the Book, for its status is superior to all
other chapters of the Holy Qur’an, or like the war standard: it is
always in the forefront;

al-Sab’, the seven verses, for it is comprised of seven verses and the
only one whose verses are seven, and there is no room here to elaborate
on the merits of the number 7 especially since most readers of this book
are already aware of such merits;

al-Mathani, the oft-repeated Chapter, for no other Chapter of the Holy
Qur’an is repeated as often as this one;

al-Kafiya, the chapter that suffices and that has no substitute; you
simply cannot replace its recitation with that of any other chapter of
the Holy Qur’an in the first two rek’ats of the prayers, whereas it can
substitute others;

al-Asas, the basis or foundation or bed-rock, a connotation of its
being the foundation upon which the Holy Qur’an stands just as the
Basmala ("Bismillahir-Rahmanir-Rahim") is the foundation of the
Fatiha;

alShifa, the healing, due to the fact that the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) has said that the Fatiha heals from all ailments except death;
and al-Salat, the prayers, or the basic requirement of the daily
prayers, one without the recitation of which no prayer can be accepted,
especially since tue Prophet (pbuh) has quoted the Almighty saying, ‘The
prayers have been divided between Me and My servant: one half for Me,
and one for him;" so when one recites it and says, "Alhamdu lillahi
Rabbil-’Alameen," the Almighty says, "My servant has praised Me." And
when he says, "Arrahmanir-Raheem," the Almighty says,

"My servant has praised Me." And when he says, "Maliki YawmidDeen,"
Allah says, "My servant has exalted Me." And when he says, "Iyyaka
Na’budu wa iyyaka nasta’een," Allah will say, "This is a covenant
between Me and My servant, and My servant shall be granted the
fulfillment of his pleas." Then if he finishes reciting the Fatiha to
the end, Allah will again confirm His promise by saying, "This is for
[the benefit of] My servant, and My servant will be granted the answer
to his wishes."

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted by Abu Ali al-Fadl ibn
al-Hassan ibn al-Eadi al-Tibrisi, may Allah have mercy on his soul,
saying that one who recites al-Fatiha will be regarded by the Almighty
as though he recited two-thirds of the Holy Qur’an and as though he gave
by way of charity to each and every believing man and woman. "By the One
in Whose hand my soul is," the Prophet (pbuh) continues, "Allah Almighty
did not reveal in the Torah,

the Gospel, or the Psalms any chapter like it; it is the Mother of the
Book and alSab’ al-Mathani (the oft-repeated seven verses), and it is
divided between Allah and His servant, and His servant shall get
whatever he asks; it is the best Sura in the Book of the most Exalted
One, and it is a healing from every ailment except poison, which is
death.

" He (pbuh) is also quoted by al-Kaf’ ami as saying, "He (Allah)
bestowed it upon me as His blessing, making it equivalent to the Holy
Qur’an, saying, ‘And We have granted you al-Sab’ al-Mathani and the
Great Qur’an (Surat al-Hijr, verse 87).’ It is the most precious among
the treasures of the ‘Arsh." Indeed, Allah, the most Sublime, has chosen
Muhammad (pbuh) alone to be honored by it without doing so to any other
Prophet or Messenger of His with the exception of Sulayman (Solomon),
peace be upon him, who was granted the Basmala (see verse 30 of Surat
al-Naml, Chapter of the Ant).

One who recites it, being fully convinced of his following in the
footsteps of Muhammad (pbuh) and his Progeny (as), adhering to its
injunctions, believing in its outward and inward meanings, will be
granted by Allah for each of its letters a blessing better than what all
there is in the world of wealth and good things, and whoever listens to
someone reciting it will receive one third of the rewards due to its
reciter.

**Chapter 2 (aI-Baqarah)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted by Ubayy saying, "Whoever
recites it will receive blessings from Allah and His mercy and will be
granted the rewards due to one who camps for a full year, in the way of
Allah, as a soldier on the borders of the Islamic domains to protect
them, being constantly on vigil." Then the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
turned to the narrator, Ubayy, and said, "O Ubayy! Order the Muslims to
learn it, for learning it is a blessing, while leaving it is a loss, and
no magician can ever overpower it.

" He (pbuh) is also quoted saying that everything has a zenith, and the
zenith of the Qur’an is Surat al-Baqarah. "Which ayat (verse)," he
(pbuh) was asked, "in it is the best, O Messenger of Allah?" He (pbuh)
said, "Ayat al-Kursi [2:255]," he (pbuh) answered. And he (pbuh)
entrusted the youngest among his companions, namely al-Harith ibn Zayd
ibn al-Harithah, due to the fact that he knew Surat al-Baqarah by head,
to command an army to defend Islam.

**Chapter 3 (ali-’Imran)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites it
will be given for each of its verses security on the bridge over hell,
and whoever recites it on Friday will be blessed by Allah and His angels
all day long till sunset. He (pbuh) is also quoted saying, "Memorize
Surat al-Baqarah and Surat Aali-’Imran, for they are like two fragrant
flowers, and they will shade the one who learns them by heart on the Day
of Judgment like two clouds..." to shade those who used to recite them
quite often from the intense heat of that Day.

**Chapter 4 (aI-Nisaa)**

He (pbuh) is also quoted saying that one who recites it will be
regarded by the Almighty as though he were charitable to all orphans,
and he will be granted rewards due to one who emancipates a person who
dissociates himself from shirk and who, by the will of Allah, is
forgiven." Imam Ali (as) is quoted saying that whoever recites it every
Friday will be secure from the constriction of the grave.

**Chapter 5 (al-Maida)**

Imam Ali (as) is also quoted saying that whoever recites it will be
given ten good deeds, and ten of his sins will be forgiven, and his
status will be elevated by ten degrees for each and every Jew and
Christian alive. (This may be due to the fact that this Qur’anic chapter
discusses Judaism and Christianity in great detail). Imam-alSadiq (as)
says that one who recites it on every Thursday will not mix his belief
with any oppression, nor will he ever commit shirk.

**Chapter 6 (al-An’am)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that this Chapter was revealed
as a whole escorted by seventy thousand angels praising and glorifying
the Almighty in unison; so, whoever recites it will be blessed by those
same seventy thousand angels for a full day and night. Imam al-Rida (as)
is quoted saying that those angels will keep blessing him till the Day
of Judgment.

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "One who recites it from its
beginning till the verse saying, ‘And thus do We make some oppressors
befriend others on account of what they earned (6:129),’ Allah will
assign for him forty thousand angels to write for him (in his book of
good deeds) the like of their own adoration till the Day of
Resurrection.

" According to the author of AI-Afrad wul Gharaib, one who does the
same after having performed the fajr prayers, forty angels will descend
for him, and it will be recorded for him the like of their adoration.
According to the author of Al-Waseer, if one does so upon waking up,
Allah Almighty will assign for him a thousand angels to protect him and
to record for him the like of their deeds (of adoration) till the Day of
Judgment.

**Chapter 7 (aI-A’raf)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that if one recites this
chapter, Allah, the most Exalted One, will install a protective veil
between him and Iblis, and Adam (as) will seek intercession for him on
the Day of Judgment. Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that one
who reads it every month will be among those who shall have no fear on
the Day of Judgment, nor shall they grieve; so, if he recites it every
Friday, he will be among those who will not be tried on the Day of
Judgment.

**Chapter 8 (al-Anfal)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying, "If someone recites
both Surat al-Anfal and Bara’ah together, I shall seek intercession for
him and testify for him on the Day of Judgment that he is free from
hypocrisy, and he will be granted of the rewards ten times as many as
the number of hypocritical men and women in the world,

and ten of his sins will be wiped out, and his status will be elevated
by ten degrees, and the ‘Arsh and those (angels) that bear it shall
bless him as long as he lives." Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said, "One who
recites both of these chapters every month will not undergo any
hypocrisy, and he will be as a true Shi ‘a of the Commander of the
Faithful (as) and will be eating on the Day of Judgment of the tables of
Paradise with them till Allah, the most Exalted One, is through with the
Judgment."

**Chapter 9 (Bara’ah)**

Its merits are similar to those of Surat al-Anfal above. In a footnote
regarding this Chapter, al-Kaf’ami explains that "Bara’ah" (which means
clearance or dissociation or a separation from) means: dissociation (of
the infidels) from Ali (as); the Basmala was not included at its
beginning, as is the case with all other Chapters of the Holy Qur’an,
simply because the Basmala connotes security and mercy, whereas Bara’ah
was revealed to lift such security and to warn of confrontation. This
chapter, al-Kaf’ami goes on, has ten names: 1)

"Bara’ah," after the first word in it; 2) ‘Tawbah," due to the
repentance to which it refers within its text; 3) "Faziha," the
revealer, unveiler, or announcer, for it unveils and reveals the truth
about and announces the hypocrisy of those hypocrites about whom it
infonns us; 4) "Muba’thira," scatterer, because it scatters and displays
to everyone the hidden secrets of those hypocrites; 5)

"Muqashqisha," a chapter that cures or heals or clears those who
believe in it of hypocrisy and polytheism due to the supplication and
sincerity it contains; 6) "Bahooth," investigator or researcher or
seeker, because it looks for the hypocrites’ secret schemes; 7)

"Mudamdima," annihilator, because it annihilates hypocrisy and
hypocrites; 8) "Hafira," excavator or digger: it dug up the hearts of
the hypocrites and unveiled what they were hiding; 9) "Mubashshira,"
bearer of glad tidings: By making public the abominations and ugly
schemes of those hypocrites, it brought glad tidings to those who were
not among them, and; 10) "Athab," torment or torture, because of
repeatedly referring to the torment awaiting those hypocrites and all
others like them.

**Chapter 10 (Younus)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this chapter will be given ten good deeds for each and everyone who
believed in prophet Younus (as) as well as for those who disbelieved in
him and who were drowned with Pharaoh. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted
saying that whoever recites it once a month will not be among the
ignorant ones and will instead be on the Day of Judgment among those
near to the Almighty.

**Chapter 11 (Hud)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this chapter will be granted of the rewards ten good deeds for the
number of each person who believed in prophet Noah (as) and who
disbelieved in him and in prophets Hud, Salih, Shu’ayb, Lot, Ibrahim and
Musa (Moses), peace be upon all of them, and he will be on the Day of
Judgment among the happy ones. Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying that
anyone who recites it every Friday will be resurrected on the Day of
Judgment among the group that will include the prophets, peace be upon
all of them, and he will receive an easy trial and no sin will be
recorded against him.

**Chapter 12 (Yousuf)**

About this chapter, Iniam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying, "Let your
slaves memorize it, for whoever teaches it to his slaves and those whose
right hand possesses will die an easy death, and he will be empowered to
the extent that he will envy no other Muslim at all." The Imam (as) is
also quoted saying that whoever recites it every day or every night will
be resurrected on the Day of Judgment with beauty similar to that of
Yousuf, peace be upon him, and he will not be affected by the great
terror of the Day of Judgment and will be among the best of Allah’s
servants.

**Chapter 13 (al-Ra’d)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that one who recites
this chapter will be rewarded with rewards as many as the clouds that
passed away as well as those that will pass till the Day of Judgment,
and he will be on the Day of Judgment among those who fulfilled their
covenant with Allah. Imam Ja"fer al-Sadiq (as) is also quoted saying
that one who recites this chapter quite often will never be hit by
lightning and will be admitted into Paradise without reckoning, and he
will be granted the right to intercede on behalf of all those of his
family and brethren whom he knows.

**Chapter 14 (Ibrahim)**

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said that a person who recites this
chapter will be rewarded with ten good deeds for each and everyone who
worshipped the idols and who did not worship them. Imam al-Sadiq (as)
has also said that one who recites both this chapter and the next one
(al-Hijr) during an optional prayers of two rek"uts every Friday will
never be impoverished, nor will he suffer insanity nor any calamity
whatsoever.


(Note: For the other Surahs, please go the the 'Holy Quran' section on
IUA-NET and click on 'Rewards of reciting the Holy Qur'an)


