Chapter 20 : the Significance of the Fast Will Only Be Realised At the Moment of Death
======================================================================================

One will know how well he observed the fast at the moment he dies; it
is then that prayers will take a form and stand at his right, as he lies
in his grave, and zakat on his left, while his benevolence and good
treatment of his parents will look him in the eyes. Everything will be
personified in the life hereafter, starting from the moment of death.

The fast will then be personified as perseverance, the exercise in
patience as one faces thirst and hunger; it will stand not far away,
urging prayers and zakat to help the deceased person, telling them that
if they did not, he would. It is in such dire situation that the true
value of fast is realized—when it is too late for many.

And one will feel the profound pain of regret for not having observed
the fast and the prayers as he should have when questions are put forth
to him by the two angels Munldr and Nakeer who will come to him in the
most horrific form, addressing him in a voice louder than thunder and
looking at him with eyes emitting lightning, asking him one question
after another. Nothing can compare with the agony of death for those
with whom Allah is not pleased, absolutely nothing.

A dying person, as we are told in many books dealing with death and the
hereafter, will encounter agonies the extent of which is known only by
the Almighty. Life, real life, starts at the moment of death. A dying
person is like one awakening from a brief dream.

This brief dream is life, as we know it here on earth. Shaykt al
Ohazali had made a very terse statement in this regard when he said, on
p. 445, Vol. 4. of his book Al-Alwa, "Had a servant of Allah had no more
than the agony, the horror, and the torment of the moments of death, he
would have found no joy in his life at all, and he would not have felt
happy for a moment, and he would not have become indifferent or
negligent [with regard to his obligations] in the least.

" Prophet Moses (as) was asked by the Almighty how he found death. "I
found it," he said, "like a live bird being fried in a pan; it neither
dies so it can rest, nor does it fly away and be saved." He also is
quoted saying that he found it like a live sheep being skinned by a
butcher. It is during moments Jike these that a servant of Allah wishes
he had spent his entire life in fast and prayers. Abraham (Prophet
Ibrahim, peace be upon him), as we are told on p. ‘79 of Ibrahim
Muhammad al-Jamal’s book on life .

after death, asked the angel of death (as) to show him how he takes
away the soul of a good servant of Allah, one who has performed his
prayers and observed the fast and all other obligations, so he told him
to look the other way. He did, then he looked at the angel and saw a
young man wearing good clothes, smelling good, and his complexion was
radiant.

Ibrahim (as) said, "By Allah! Had a believer enjoyed nothing more than
casting a look at your face, he would have felt contented." Then he
asked him how he took the souls of the disbelievers away. "Look the
other way," said the angel of death to Ibrahim (as). When Ibrahim (as)
looked again, the angel of death appeared to him in human form: a person
as dark as coal with his feet on earth and head in the skies, the
ugliest the eyes can ever see; each hair on his body was a flame of
fire. Ibrahim (as) then said, "By Allah! Had a disbeliever cast one look
at you, it would have sufficed him."


**Chapter 21 : What is Sirat Al-Mustageem?**

The significance of fast will be realised during a much more critical
time: when the souls are to pass on al-Sirat al-Mustaqeem, the Straight
Path, the path regarding which the believers pray Allah to keep their
feet firm as they pass on it, the one mentioned in Surat al-Fatiha and
regarding which they plead to the Almighty at least ten times a day
(twice in each rek’a) saying: "Guide us to the Straight Path (al-Sirat
al-Mustaqeem)" (Holy Qur’an, 1:6). Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as), as
recorded on p.41, Vol. 1, of Tabatabai’s (1His full name is: Muhammad
I-Iusain ihn Sayyid Muhammad ibn Sayyid Husain ibn Mirza Ali Asgher
al-Tabrizi al Tabatabai, the judge.

He was born in 1892 in Tabriz and died in Oum in 1981. His 2l-Volume
exegesis, AlMizan, is only one of his numerous works. The edition
utilized for this book was published in 1991 by AI-A’lami Establishment
of Beirut, Lebanon. Hujjatul-Islam Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, founder of the
Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania, has for years been translating this
valuable exegesis into English) Al Mizan fi Tafsiral-Qur’an, was asked
once about the meaning of this verse;

he said, "It means: Guide us to upholding the path that leads to Your
pleasure, that ends at Your Paradise, that prohibits us from following
our own desires and thus deviate, or follow our own views and thus
perish." In his Tafsir, al-Ayyashi quotes Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as)
saying that al-Sirat at-Mustaqeem is the Commander of the Faithful Imam
Ali (as). Al-Sirat al-Mustageem described in Surat al-Shura and in other
verses where it is described as the Sabeel, another word for path,
leading to the Almighty.

Abdul-Rahrnan ibn Muhammad al-I-Jassani quotes Ahmed ibn ‘Eisa ibn Abu
Maryam quoting Muhammad ibn Ahmed al- ‘Ariami quoting All ibn Hatim
alMinqari quoting al-Mufaddal ibn ‘Ilmer saying, "I asked Abu I Abdullah
(Imam aJ-Sadiq [as]) about the Siren, and he said, ‘It is the Path to
knowing Allah, the most Exalted, the most Great, and there are two such
paths:

one in the life of this world, and one in the life hereafter. The Sirat
in this life is the Imam whose obedience is incumbent; whoever knows him
in this life andfollows his guidance will be able to pass on the (other)
Siren which is a path over hell in the hereafter, and whoever does not
know him in this life, his feet will slip away from the Sirat in the
hereafter so he falls into the lire of hell."’ This is recorded on pp.
13-14 of Ma"ani al-A Idibar and also on p. 66, Vol. 8, of Bihar
al-Anwar.

It is when you come to that Sirat that you will find out how wed you
performed your fast in the life of this world. Each and every soul has
to pass over al-Siren al-Mustaqeem the straight path over hell, a fire
more intense in heat than boiling molten brass, with seven bridges over
it the length of each one of which is three thousand years: one thousand
to vertically ascend, one thousand to horizontally cross, and one
thousand to descend. It is thinner than a human hair, more sharp than
the sharpest sword, and darker than the darkest night inside a tunnel.

Each bridge has seven branches, and each branch is like a long lance
with sharp teeth: each servant of Allah win be confined on each and
every one of them and be asked about all the injunctions the Almighty
had required him to perform during his life on this planet. In the first
of such stops he will be asked about belief and conviction, about shirk
and hypocrisy.

In the second he will be asked about prayers, what they contain, how to
perform them, and whether he performed them properly and on time. In the
third he will be asked about zalcat, its types, and whether he paid it
or not. And it is in the fourth one that he will be asked about the
fast... It is then that he will realize whether he upheld this important
obligation or not, whether he offered charity or not, and whether he
regretted and repented during the month of Ramadhan or not. In the fifth
he will be asked about the pilgrimage and ‘umra, why he did not perform
them, or why he failed to perform them properly, and how they are to be
performed. In the sixth he will be asked about wudu (ablution) and
ghusul, how he performed them, which one is compulsory and which one is
optional.

Finally, in the seventh, he will be asked about how kind he was to his
parents and kin, and whether he did injustice to any human being. In the
absence of sufficient optional good deeds such as offering charity,
helping a needy Muslim, performing optional prayers or fasts..., etc.,
if one gives the wrong answer to any question in any of these stops,

he will fall into the pit of hell underneath..., as Abdel-Jabbar
al-Rubay’i tells us in his book At-Tathkira ft ahwal atmawt wal akhira,
having collected such details from various books of hadith and Sunnah.
He adds saying, on p. 130, that the bridges will be shaken by the weight
of crossing people who will climb on top of one another, causing these
bridges to move like a ship tossed by a wind storm in the midst of the
sea. al-Siren separates Paradise from hell. Only those who cross it
successfully will achieve salvation and bliss. With reference to those
who will fall into hell, the Almighty says the following:

Have you not considered those who have changed Allah’s favor into
blasphemy and caused their people to fall into the abode of perdition?
(Holy Qur’an, 14:28)

To whomsoever My wrath is due, he shall fall therein. (Holy Qur’an
20:81)

Whoever follows My guidance will not lose his way nor fall into
perdition. (Holy Qur’an, 20:123)

Nor will his wealth benefit him when he falls headlong (into the pit of
fire) (Holy Our’an, 92:11).

If one is found as having been derelict in performing any of his
obligations, the angels questioning him will try to find out whether he
somehow made up with optional good deeds. Once he is cleared, he will be
escorted into Paradise. It is to such stopping and questioning that the
Almighty refers when He addresses His angels to Stop them, for they must
be questioned. (Holy Our’an, 37:24)

On p. 133, Vol. 17, of his AI-Mizan, Tabatabai quotes various views
regarding what the questioning will be about. He says that some scholars
are of the opinion that they will be asked about the Unity of Allah,
while others believe it will be about the wilayat of Imam Ali (as), but
he also concedes that such stopping and questioning will take place on
the Sirat over hell.

On p. 107 of al-Saduq’s Al-A mali, and also on pp. 64-65, Vol. 8, of
alMajlisi’sBiharatAnwar al-Waleed quotes al-Saffar quoting Ibn ‘Lisa
quoting Muhammad al-Barqi quoting al-Qasim ibn Muhammad alJawhari
quoting Ali ibn Abu Hamza quoting Au Busayr quoting Abu Abdullah Imam
Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) saying, "People will pass on different levels on
the Siren, and it is thinner than hair and sharper than the sword. Some
will pass as swiftly as lightning, while others will pass as fast as a
horse, while some of them will crawl on it, some will walk on it, while
some others will pass hanging, so the fire will consume some of their
body parts and leave others.

" Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir (as) is quoted on p. 65, Vol. 8, of
al-Mailisi’s Bihar al-Anwar saying, "When the verse saying ‘And hell is
brought that Day’ was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) was asked
about what it meant, so he (pbuh) said, ‘The trusted Spirit (Gabriel)
has informed me that when Allah, the One and only God,

resurrects all people and gathers their early generations and the late
ones, hell will be brought by a hundred thousand angels, very stern and
mighty angels, and it will be coming roaring, inhaling and exhaling. The
force of its exhalation is such that had Allah not delayed them for the
reckoning, it would have caused everyone of them to perish.

Then a flame will come out of it and encircle all humans, the good and
the bad, so much so that any servant of Allah, be he an angel or a
prophet, will call out: ‘Save me, O Lord, save me,’ except you, O
Prophet of Allah, for you will call out: ‘Save my nation, O Lord, save
my nation!"’ Muqatil, ‘Ataa and Ibn Abbas are among the greatest
traditionists in the history of Islam without any contention.

They are the ones who transmitted the ahadith of the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) for all posterity. All three of them, as stated on p. 67, Vol. 8,
of Bihar al-Anwar, have interpreted the verse saying, "The Day when
Allah shall not humiliate the Prophet" to mean: "Allah will not torment
the Prophet (that Day, the Day of Judgment)," and the phrase "and those
who believed with him" to mean that He will not torment Ali ibn Abu
Talib, Fatima, al-Hassan, al-ilusain, peace be upon them, al-Hamza, and
Ja’fer, Allah be pleased with them, that "their light runs before then)"
means "their light shall illuminate the Siren for Ali and Fatima seventy
times more so than light in the life of this world."

Their light will then be before them as they continue to cross. The
intensity of their light will be indicative of their iman, conviction.
Others will follow. "Members of the AhI al-Bayt (as) of Muhammad (pbuh)
will pass over the Siren like swift lightning. Then they will be
followed by those who will pass like a speedy wind.

Then there will be those who will pass as fast as a racing horse. Then
another group of people will pass in a walking pace followed by those
who will crawl on their hands and bellies, and finally by those who will
crawl on their bellies (with extreme difficulty). Allah will make it
wide for the believers and very narrow for the sinners.

" Then these narrators interpret the verse saying "Lord! Complete our
light for us" to mean "complete it for us so that we may be able to pass
on the Siren." lbn Shahr Ashub, in his Manaqib AU ibn Abu Talib,
comments, as quoted by al-Majlisi on the same page, saying, "The
Commander of the Faithful (as) will pass in a howdah of green emeralds
accompanied by Fatima on a conveyance of red rubies, and she will be
surrounded by seventy thousand hurls, as fast as lightning."

On p. 182 of his Amali, al-Tusi quotes al-Fahham quoting Muhammad ibn
al-Hashim al-Hashimi quoting Abu Hashim ibn al-Qasim quoting Muhammad
ibn Zakariyya ibn Abdujlah quoting Abdullah ibn alMuthanna quoting
Tumamah ibn Abdullah ibn Anas ibn Malik quoting his father quoting his
grandfather quoting the Prophet (pbuh) saying, "On the Day of Judgement,
the Siren will be spread over hell. None can pass over it except one who
carries a permit admitting the wilaya of Ali ibn Abu Talib (as)." Also
with reference to the Siren,

Abu Than al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, is quoted by both
al-Majlisi on p. 67, Vol. 8, of his book Bihar al-A nwar, and by
al-Kulayni on p. 152, Vol. 2, of his ALKafi, as saying, "1 have heard
the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) say, ‘The edges of our Siren on the Day of
Judgment will be kindness to the kin and the returning of the trust.

When one who is kind to his kin and faithful to his trust passes (over
the Sirat), he will make his way to Paradise, but when one who is
unfaithful to the trust and severs his ties with his kin passes, none of
his good deeds will avail him, and the Sirat will hurl him into
hell."’

There are so many references to noor, diving light, throughout the Holy
Qur’an, in the hadith, and in du ‘a, supplication. It is the light of
guidance whereby the Almighty guides whomseover He pleases both in the
life of this fleeting world and in the hereafter. Such light will be
most sorely needed especially in the life hereafter.

The reader is reminded that the intensity of his light, be it during
the period of the barzakh, when most graves will be almost as dark as
hell, during the time when people are judged on the Day of Judgment, or
as one passes over the Siren..., all depends on the depth and sincerity
of his conviction, on his iman. No good deeds,

no matter how great, will avail him as will his sincere and deep
conviction regarding the Unity (Tawhid) and Justice (‘AdI) of the
Almighty, the truth which He revealed to His prophets (Nubuwwah), and
that we will most certainly be resurrected and judged (Ma’ad), so that
one will be either rewarded or punished. There will be no sun in the
life hereafter, nor will there be electricity; so, one’s own light will
be his guiding star. Everything in the life hereafter will have a light
of its own; there will be no reflection, nor can one walk in the light
of another, nor can one be benevolent and give of his light to another.
There will be no giving.

The time of giving is right here; so, it is now your golden chance to
give your all to your Maker, to worship Him and obey Him as He ought to
be worshipped and obeyed—or at least try; pay Him His dues, and be aware
of your responsibilities towards His servants, believing men and women,
and to manJdnd, your extended family. Give them of what Allah has given
you; pray for them; be kind to them; think well of them so that they may
think well of you;

observe the fast in months other than the month of Ramadhan in order to
remind yourself of the hunger from which others, especially indigent
Muslims, suffer, and give by way of charity. Otherwise, keep everything
to yourself hoard, treasure, and be damned. Hell is characterized by its
darkness, yet its residents will still be able to see things, and what
they will see will net please them at all. May Allah Subhanahu wa Ta’ala
keep I. away from us, Allahomma Aameen.

Nobody in the entire lengthy history of Arabia (estimated at more than
seven thousand and five hundred years) has ever been known to be more
courageous and daring when combatting his foes than Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib (as) who was the right hand of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), the
man who single-handedly uprooted the main gate of the fort of Khaybar, a
gate so heavy it required forty men to close or open it. Ali (as) once
was suffering acutely from an inflammation of the eye,

and he was in extreme pain, screaming, the hero that he was. The
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) visited him and saw him scream, so he asked
him whether he was suffering from an acute pain or whether it was due to
his frustration and agony. The Imam (as) said, "How intense my pain is!
I have never felt such pain..." whereupon the Prophet (pbuh) said to
him, "When the angel of death comes to take away the soul of a
disbeliever, he brings with him a rod of fire whereby he takes his soul
away, whereupon hell itself will scream because of the intensity of his
pain and suffering." Having heard him, the Imam (as) stood up then sat
and said, "O Messenger of Allah!

Please repeat what you have said, for it has made me forget my own
pain." Then the Imam (as) asked the Messenger of Allah, "Will the soul
of any member of your nation be taken away as you have described?" The
Prophet (pbuh) answered, "Yes The soul of an unjust ruler, or of one who
consumes the wealth of an orphan, or of one who falsely testifies [will
be thus taken away]." The disbeliever referred to in this tradition is
one who is unfair to Allah, Glory to I-Tim and Exaltation, regarding one
of the commandments which He has required him to uphold, one who does
not recognize th Prophethood of Muhammad (pbuh) and his Sunnah or anythi
required by Islam; such is the disbeliever.

You can reduce the agony of your death, or that of your love one, by
offering charity, fasting, or praying nafi prayers; among such prayers
is one in two rek’ats in each of which you should recite Surat,
al-Fatiha once and al-Ikililas thrice. Fasting either a few days or all
of, the months of Rajab and Sha’ban, according to your ability, will.
surely reduce the agony of death and the pain of loneliness in the
grave. If you are truly concerned about these matters, and you should.
be, the month of Ramadhan is your golden opportunity to earn as many
blessings as Allah enables you to. It is an opportunity that may not
recur, for nobody knows when his/her turn comes to die.

We pray the Almighty to enable us to cross over His Siren with hardship
only in the life of this world, and without any hardship in the life
hereafter, to forgive our sins, and to accept our fast and repentance,
Alla homma Aameen.


