Chapter 22 : Sharing Iftar With Others
======================================

The Almighty and Praised One has said, "O people-you are the ones who
stand in need of Allah, while Allah is the self-Sufficient One, the
Praised" (Holy Qur’an, 35:15). Islam, which has carried the banner of
protecting the poor, the indigent, the orphans, ad the wayfarers, has
urged the faithful to share the iftar with one another, to visit each
other, and to invite others to break their fast with them. Islam, which
does not favor an Arab over a non-Arab except on the basis of piety,

according to the tradition of His greatest Prophet Muhammad ibn
Abdullah (pbuh), has established the fast in order to remind the rich of
what the poor have to endure. The greatest Prophet Muhammad ibn Abdullah
(pbuh) has said, "No poor person feels hungry except due to what another
rich one is enjoying.

" Islam has informed us of all of this through the Islamic code of
ethics, i.e., the Holy Qur’an, and through the revered Sunnah of the
Prophet (pbuh) and his progeny (as), about whom the greatest Prophet
Muhammad (pbuh) has said, "I am leaving among you the Two Weighty
Things: the Book of Allah, and my progeny, that is, my family; you shall
never go astray so long as you follow them both."


**Chapter 23 : The Early Meal of the Month of Ramadhan (Suhoor)
**
The Exalted and Praised One has said in His Glorious Book: "... and eat
and drink till the whiteness of the day becomes distinct from the
blackness of the night at dawn, then complete the fast till nighttime"
(2:187). He has also said, "Little did they sleep during the night, and
they sought their Lord’s forgiveness in the early hours of the morn"
(Holy Qur’an, 51:17-18). And the Almighty has also said, "Those who
persevere, and the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah), and those who
spend (benevolently), and those who ask forgiveness during the timL of
the morn" (Holy Qur’an, 3:17).

Suhoor is the meal comprised of food and water taken before daybreak by
a Muslim who intends to perform the. obligation of the fast. It helps
him while abstaining from eating aid drinking during daytime. This is
the suhoor in its absolute meaning. Its timing has been defined by the
Almighty thus: "... and eat and drink till the whiteness of the day
becomes distinct from the blackness of the night at dawn" (Holy Qur’an,
2:187). This means that suhoor can be eaten at any time during the night
till a short time before daybreak.

But what about this "short time" defined before daybreak? Anas ibn Zaid
ibn Thabit, may Allah be pleased with him, once said, "The Prophet
(pbuh) ate suhoor with us once, after that he stood for the prayers. lie
was asked, "What was the length of time from the suhoor till the adhan?"
He answered, "About the time it takes one to recite fifty Quranic
verses." This tradition is recorded by al-Bukhari, Muslim, and Ibn
Khuzaymah.

Muhammad ibn Ya’qub quotes Abu Yahya al-San’ani quoting Imam Abu
Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) saying, "lf a believer fasts and reads Surat
al-Qadr during the time of his iftar and suhoor, he will be rewarded
with the rewards due to a martyr." This tradition is recorded on p. 344,
Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar.

The real meaning of suhoor transcends the physical and nutritious
benefits with which it provides the person who observes the fast.
Quoting what the Almighty has said explains the real meaning of suhoor:
"Little do they sleep during the night, and they seek their Lord’s
forgiveness in the early hours of the morn" (Holy Qur’an, 51:17-18). He
has also said, "The patient, and the truthful, and the obedient (to
Allah), and those who spend (benevolently), and those who ask
forgiveness during the time of fthe morn" (Holy Qur’an, 3:17).

The first verse tells us that nighttime is the time for sleep, and the
zenith of times to adore the Almighty and seek His forgiveness is during
the Suhoor the plural of which is ashar The second verse contains the
definition of the status of those who seek their Lord’s forgiveness
during the as/tar times, a status which is quite lofty and is compared
only to those to whom the Almighty refers as "those who persevere, and
the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah)." We may derive the following
conclusions from the above-quoted verses:

1) The time of suhoor has its own status and function which transcends
eating and drinking, which help the fasting person during his daytime
abstention from both, and this function is to wake up during the night
to perform an act of worship.

2) The epic of adoration and the seeking of His forgiveness, which the
Almighty, out of His divine wisdom, has decreed, is during the time of
as/Jar otherwise, why has He not specified other periods during which
His servants adore Him during the glorious month of Ramadhan?

3) Allah, the Almighty, has granted those who seek His forgiveness
during the times of al-fajar a status which comes out of His blessing,
and He includes them among those whom He describes as "those who
persevere, and the truthful, and the obedient (to Allah)."

Probably one of the greatest blessings of the Almighty is that He has
included those who eat their suhoor among those who shall receive His
forgiveness so that they will be the ones freed by the Most Merciful One
from the fire during the month of the Glorious Qur’an. The commander of
the faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him, quotes the holy
Prophet (pbuh) saying, "Allah, the Praised and the Exalted, and His
angels send blessings unto those who take their suhoor meal and seek His
forgiveness;

so, let each one of you observe suhoor even by drinking some water.~i
Ali ibn Muhammad, quoting al-Nawfali who quotes al-Sukooni who quotes
hadith number 1062 in Saidi al-Targheeb wal.Tarteeli turn quotes his
forefathers, Allah’s blessings and peace be upon them all, has cited the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying,

"There is a great deal of bliss in three things: the congregational
prayers, the dish of sopped bread and meat (thireed), and the suhoor"
Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) as recorded on pages 1063-1064 of Sahih
atThrgheeb wal Tarheeb, has also said, "The best a believer can eat
during the suhoor is dates; but if he cannot do so, then let him at
least drink some water.( This is hadith number 1057 among the hadiths of
Sahik al-Targheeb wa! Tar/teeli, and hadith number 1045 among the
"Series of sahib hadiths)"

**Chapter 24 : Prayers during the Glorious Month of Ramadhan**

As regarding prayers during the nights of the month of Ramadhan, these
are documented by al-Kaf’ami in Vol. 2 of his Misliali. On pp. 657-660,
he cites al-Shaheed’s book on the forty ahadich which quotes the Prophet
(pbuh) saying that whoever says his prayers during the first night (of
the month of Ramadhan, reciting the Fatiha once and the chapter of
Tawheed (Unity, Chapter 112) twenty-five times, will receive the rewards
of all those who were foremost in testi%uing to the truth of Allah’s
prophets and those who sacrificed their lives for Aliaft’s cause;
moreover, all his sins will be forgiven, and he will on the Day ot
Judgment be among the winners.

Anyone who says his prayers during the second night, repeating the
Fatiha four times and the Qadr twenty times, will have all his sins
forgiven and his sustenance increased, and he will be regarded as one
who followed the Sunnah of the Prophet (pbuh). Anyone who says his
prayers during the third night repeating the Fatiha ten times and the
Chapter of Ikhlas fifty times will be addressed on the Day of
Resurrection and told that Allah has set him free from the fire, and
seven gates of heaven will be opened for him.

Whoever spends the entire night saying optional prayers will have all
his sins forgiven. Anyone, who says his prayers during the fourth night
reciting the Fatiha once and the Qadr twenty times, his deeds will be
presented before Allah together with those of His prophets. Whoever says
his prayers during the fifth night making two rekats while reciting the
Fatiha once and the Chapter of Tawheed fifty times, once he sends
salutations unto the Prophet (pbuh) and his progeny a hundred times,
will be beside the Prophet (pbuh) as he enters Paradise.

Anyone who says his prayers during the sixth night reciting the Fatiha
four times and Tabarak once will be regarded as though he were doing so
during the Night of Destiny (LailatulQadr) Whoever says his prayers
during the seventh night reciting the Fatiha once and the Qadr thirteen
times, the Almighty will build him in the Garden of Eden a mansion of
gold and he will be in security from Allah’s Wrath till the next year.

Anyone who says his prayers during the eighth night making two rek’ats
in which he recites the Fatiha once and the chapter of Tawheed eleven
times, then when he sends salutations unto the Prophet (pbuh) and his
progeny he praises the Almighty a thousand times, the gates of Paradise
will be opened for him to enter from whichever he wishes.

Anyone who says his prayers during the ninth night reciting during the
time from sunset till nighttime the Fatiha once and ayat al-Kursi seven
times, sending salutations unto the Prophet (pbuh) and his progeny fifty
times, his deeds will be raised as those of the siddeeqs, the martyrs,
and the righteous. Whoever says his prayers during the tenth night for
twenty rek’ats, repeating the Fatiha once and the Tawheed thirty-one
times, Allah will expand his sustenance and he will be (on the Day of
Resurrection) among the winners. Whoever says two rek’acs during the
eleventh night, reciting the Fatiha once and Surat al-Kawthar twenty
times, all his sins will be forgiven that day.

Whoever says his prayers during the twelfth night eight times, reciting
the Fatiha once and the Qadr thirty times, will be granted the rewards
of those who have thanked Allah as He ought to be thanked, and he will
be regarded on the Day of Resurrection as one of those who persevered.
Whoever says his prayers during the thirteenth night in four rek’ats,

reciting the Fatiha once and the Tawheed twenty-five times, will pass
on the right path (al-Siren) as swiftly as lightning. Whoever says his
prayers during the fourteenth night six times, reciting the Fatiha once
and the Zalzala thirty times, Allah will make the hours of death, and
[his being questioned by] both Munkir and Nakeer, easy for him. Whoever
says his prayers during the fifteenth night in four rek’ats, repeating
in the first two of them, after reciting the Fatiha, the chapter of
Tawheed a hundred times, and after the Fatiha of the other two the
Tawheed fifty times, will be granted what nobody knows except Allah.

Whoever says his prayers during the sixteenth night in twelve rek’ at.
Reciting the Fatiha once and the Takathur twelve times will leave his
grave like one whose thirst has been quenched, repeating the shahada
till he reaches Paradise and enters it without reckoning.

Whoever says his prayers during the seventeenth night in two rek’at,
reciting in the first one the Fatiha and whatever he wishes after it,
and in the second the Fatiha once and the Tawheed one hundred times,
then, after having sent salutations unto the Prophet (pbuh) and his
progeny, acknowledging tthe unity of his Lord (i.e., by saying: La
illaha il-Allah!) a hundred times, will be granted the rewards of
performing the pilgrimage a million times, and the rewards of a million
‘umras, and the rewards of a millionghazwas.

Whoever says his prayers during the eighteenth night in four rek’acs
reciting the Fatiha once and the Kawthar twenty-five times, the angel of
death will bring him the glad tidings that the Almighty is pleased with
him. Whoever says his prayers during the nineteenth night fifty times,
reciting the Fatiha once and the Zalzala fifty times, will be regarded
as though he had performed the pilgrimage and the ‘wnra a hundred times,
and Allah will accept all his deeds. Anyone who performs his prayers
during the twentieth night in eight rek’ats reciting whatever Qur’anic
chapters he wishes, his sins will be forgiven.

Anyone who says his prayers during the twenty-first night in eight
rek’ats reciting whatever he pleases, the gates of heaven will be opened
for him, and his plea will be answered, and he will have even more
rewards from Allah. Whoever says his prayers during the twenty-second
night in eight rek’ats, reciting whatever he pleases, will be regarded
as one who performed both hajj and ‘umra. Anyone who performs his
prayers during the twenty-fifth night in eight rek’ats, reciting in each
the Fatiha once and the Tawheed ten times, Allah will grant him the
rewards of the pious.

Whoever says his prayers during the twenty-seventh night in four
rek’ats reciting the Fatiha once and Tabarak once, but if he does not
memorize Tabarak, then let him recite the Fatiha twenty-five times, he
and his parents will be forgiven. Anyone who says his prayers during the
twenty-eighth night in six rek’ats reciting the Fatiha once and ten
times Surat al-Kursi, al-Kawthar and al-Tawheed, then after he sends
salutations unto the Prophet (pbuh) and his progeny a hundred times, he
will surely be forgiven.

Whoever says his prayers during the twenty-ninth night in two rek’ats
reciting the Fatiha Once and Tawheed twenty times will receive mercy,
and his book of reckoning will be raised to ‘illieen. Whoever says his
prayers during the thirtieth night in twelve rek ‘gus reciting the
Fatiha once and th Tawheed twenty times, his deeds will be sealed with
mercy from Allah after he sends salutations unto the Prophet (pbuh) and
his progeni a hundred times.

**Chapter 25 : Ghusl**

Lailatul-Qadr is one of the last ten nights of the month of Ramadhan.
Al-Majlisi, on p. 10, Vol. 94, of his Bihar al-Anwar, quotes Imam Ali
ibn Abu Talib (as) saying the following about it: "Seek it in the last
ten days, for the mash ‘ars are seven, and so are the heavens, and the
(layers of the) earth, and seven kine, and seven ears of grain.

" He (as) is also quoted saying that during those days, the Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) used to roll his bed, tie his mantle, and keep his
family awake (especially) during the 23rd night, sprinkling water on the
faces of those who were overcome by sleep. Fatima al-Zahra (as) used not
to permit anyone in her house to sleep, giving them very little to eat
(since over-eating causes drowsiness and heaviness), and she used to get
ready for it even during daytime.

She (as) used to say, "One who is deprived of its goodness truly
suffers the greate~t deprivation." It is highly recommended, therefore,
to perform ghusul particularly during the last ten days of the month of
Ramadhan. According to AlIqbal, Abu Abdullah, peace be upon him, is
quoted saying that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) used to have his ghusul
each night during the last ten nights of the month of Ramadhan.


