Chapter 26 : the Night of Destiny (lailatul-qadr)
=================================================

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted on page 265, Vol. 3, of
alAmin’s work Muftahul Jannat, saying, "Allah has favored Friday over
all other days, the month of Ramadhan over all other months, and the
Night of Destiny (Lailatul-Qadr) over all other nights." And Allah has
favored the Holy Qur’an over all other Books which He revealed. ibrahim,
one of the companions of 1mm Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as), is quoted on p.
25, Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar, saying that he once asked the Imam (as)
about how the Holy Qur’an was revealed during Lailatul-Qadr, knowing
that it took more than twenty years to reveal.

The Imam (as) answered by saying, "The Holy Qur’an was revealed as a
whole during the month of Ramadhan at the Ancient House (the Ka’ba),
then from there it was revealed along the span of (more than) twenty
years." Then he cited the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying, "The Books
of Ibrahim (as) were revealed on the first night of the month of
Ramadhan;

the Torah was revealed on the sixth of the month of Ramadhan; the
Gospel (Injil) was revealed on the thirteenth of the month of Ramadhan;
the Psalms (Zabur) were revealed on the eighteenth of the month of
Ramadhan, and the Holy Qur’an was revealed on the twenty-fourth of the
month of Ramadhan." This tradition is also recorded on p. 80, Vol. 1, of
al-’Avyashi’s Tafsir.

This name was used for Lailatul-Qadr because Allah Almighty determines
in it for everyone all what will happen the entire next year. The "Oadr"
in this sense means destiny. According to alQummi’s Tafsir, as explained
on p. 432 of its second volume, such destiny includes life and death,
sustenance, abundance of crops or famine, and everything good or bad.
This means that Allah the Glorified and Exalted determines in this night
each and every event to occur during the next year to any and all of His
creation.

Al-Majlisi quotes his father on p. 12, Vol. 94, of his own Rihar
al-Anwar quoting al-Nadar quoting Yahya al-Halabi quoting Ibn Maskan
quoting Imam Abu Abdullab al-Sadiq (as) saying, "During Lailatul-Qadr,
the angels, the spirit, and the trusted scribes all descend to the lower
heavens and write down whatever Allah decrees that year, and if Allah
wishes to advance something or postpone it or add thereto, 1-Ic orders
the angel to erase it and replace it with whatever He decrees.

" This is also cofifirmed by al-Qummi in his renown Tafsir, exegesis of
the Holy Qur’an. On p. 182, Vol. 1, of ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, and on p.
14, Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar, Ja’fer ibn Ali ibn Ahmed quotes
al-Hassan ibn Muhammad ibn All ‘bn Sadaqah quotes Muhammad son of ‘Iimer
ibn ‘Abdul-’Aziz quoting al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali quoting
Sulayman at Marzawi asking Imam al-Rida (as),

"Could you please tell us why the Chapter of Qadr was revealed?" The
Imam (as) said, "O Sulayman! Lailatul-Qadr is the night when Allah, the
most Exalted, the most Great, decrees what will take place from one year
to another of life or death, good or evil, or regarding sustenance, and
whatever He then decrees is sure destiny."

On p. 315 of Ma’ani al-A kit bar, and also on p. 18, Vol. 94, of
BiharatAnwar, Ibn Musa quotes Ibn Zakariyya citing Muhammad ibn al-Abbas
quoting Muhammad ibn al-Sary quoting Ahmed ibn Abdullah ibn Yunus
quoting Ibn Tareef quoting Jbn Nubatah quoting Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib
(as) saying, "The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) asked me once,

‘O All! Do you know the implication of LailatulQadr?’ I said, ‘No,
indeed, O Messenger of Allah!’ He (pbuh) said, ‘Allah, the Praised One,
the Most Glorified, decreed in it what will take place till the Day of
Judgment, and among wha\>t He, the most Exalted, the Most Great, decreed
was your own Imamate and Wilayat and the Imamate and Wilayat of your
offspring till the Day of Resurrection."

BothMa ‘ani al-A Id-i bar and Riharal-Anwar quote Sa ‘ d citing the
great traditionist Abdullah son of ‘Umer ibn al-Khattab quoting Muhammad
ibn ‘Ubayd ibn Mahran quoting Salih quoting Salih ibn ‘Uqbah quoting
al-FadI ibn ‘Uthman saying, "When the Chapter of Qadr was mentioned in
the presence of Abu Abdullah Imam Ia fer al-Sadiq (as), he was asked
about its merits over other chapters,

and he said, ‘It was revealed with reference to the Wilayat of the
Commander of the Faithful (Imam Ali) (as).’ He (as) was asked, ‘Do you
mean Lailatul-Qadr for which we look in anticipation during the month of
Ramadhan?’ He (as) said, ‘Yes; it is the night in which the heavens and
the earth were determined, and the Wilayat of the Commander of the
Faithful (as) was decreed."’

Ahmed ibn Muhammad and Ahmed ibn Ishaq, as recorded on p. 21, Vol. 94,
of Biharal-Anwar, quote al-Qasim ibn Yahya quoting others citing Imam
Abu Abdullah (as) saying that Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) quite often used to
say, "We saw the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) once in the company of
al-Taymi and a friend of his while the latter was reciting Chapter
al-Qadr.

He (pbuh) was profoundly moved and he kept weeping to the extent that
he (pbuh) was asked, ‘How so deeply moved by this Chapter your heart
is!’

He (pbuh) said, ‘My heart is deeply impressed because of what my eyes
hadwitnessed, and what my mind had comprehended, and because of what the
hean of this man [meaning Ali (as)] will go through after me.’ Both men
asked the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), ‘Did you really see all of that?!
And what will he (Ali) see?’ He (pbuh) would then recite the verse
saying, ‘The angels and the Spirit descend therein with the permission
of their Lord for every affair; peace, it is, till the break of the
morn.

’ Then he (pbuh) would pause and ask them, ‘Is there anything left
after the Almighty having verbally said ‘every affair’?’ They would both
answer in the negative, and he (pbuh) would then ask them, ‘Do you both
know regarding whom it is revealed?’ They would both say, ‘No, by Allah,
O Messenger of Allah!’ He (pbuh) would then say, ‘Yes; is there going to
be a Lailatul-Qadr after me (i.e., after my demise)?’ They would answer
in the affirmative, and he (pbuh) would then ask them,

‘Will every affair descend therein?’ They said: ‘Yes.’ He then asked
them, ‘To whom will it descend?’ They answered, ‘We do not know.’ He
(pbuh), with his hand on my head, pushed me gently forward and said, ‘If
you do not know, then it is regarding this person after me.’ Both men,
ever since the demise of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), used to be
filled with awe whenever that night approached."’

The Almighty says, "Therein every wise affair is made distinct" (44:4).
This means that in this night, the Exalted One decrees everything that
will happen next year. It is also said in Arabic that someone has a
"qadr," a social status or a certain prestige, which he enjoys among
people. The "Qadr" in this sense, therefore, also connotes prestige and
significance.

The Almighty also says in the Holy Qur’an, ‘They did not honor Allah as
He ought to be honored," that is, they did not glorify Him as He ought
to be glorified; thus, "qadr" in this verse implies glorification.
Lailatul-Qadr, then, is the great night which enjoys a great deal of
prestige and high esteem with Allah and in which He determines and
decrees the fate and sustenance of all His creation. It has a special
status simply because obedience to Him during it is regarded with great
seriousness and urgency, and a great reward awaits those who honor the
month wherein it falls.

It is also said that it was so named because a Book from Allah which
enjoys greatness of status was revealed to a Prophet who also enjoys a
great honor and prestige. Another view is that it was named so because
the earth becomes straitened due to the number of angels on it. "Qadr,"
according to this view, carries the meaning of straitness due to the
fact that the Almighty has said "... and whoever He decides to straiten
his sustenance... and Allah knows best.

The Almighty has addressed His servant and Messenger, our master,
Muhammad (pbuh), saying, "And what will make you comprehend what
LailatulQadr is? Lailatuloadr is better than a thousand months;" that
is, "flow would you know the greatness, significance, and sanctity of
this night which I have dccreed to be better than a thousand months?"

There are indications that the Holy Qur’an was revealed as a whole to
the Messenger (pbuh). In the Holy Qur’an, we read: "Haa, Meem. By the
Book that makes (the truth) manifest, surely We revealed it on a blessed
night" (44:1-3), and also, "Surely We revealed it on Lailatul-Qadr"
(98:1).

Ibn Abbas is quoted saying, "The Holy Qur’an was revealed as a whole
from the Safeguarded Scroll from the heavens to the lower earth on
Lailatul-Qadr, then Gabriel (as) used to reveal it unto Muhammad (pbuh)
gradually." It is well known that the Holy Qur’an was revealed unto the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) in installments during a period of
twenty-three years. The first chapter revealed unto the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh) at the Cave of Hira was the Chapter of al-’Alaq when
Gabriel said to him:

"(O Muhammad!) Read!" He (pbuh) said: "1 cannot read." He repeated,
"Read!" Again the Prophet (pbuh) said, "I cannot read." So he said once
more, "Read in the Name of your Lord Who created (96:1), up to the end
of the chapter. The last verse of the Glorious Book of Allah revealed
unto the Messenger (pbuh) was: "Today have I completed for you your
religion, perfected My blessing unto you, and accepted Islam as your
religion" (5:3).

Thus, suffices this blessed night the honor and dignity of being
particularly chosen by the Glorified and Exalted One for the revelation
of His Glorious Qur’an which is the shining and guiding light of the
religion of Islam and the constitution of its adherents.

Why is Lailatul-Qadr better than a thousand months? Why not better than
ten or a hundred thousands?! Al-Qummi indicates on page 432, Vol. 2, of
his Tafrir, that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) once saw in a vision
monkeys climbing over his pulpit, and he felt very distressed;
thereupon, the chapter of Qadr was revealed to remove his distress. The
period of Banu Umayyad’s government lasted roughly a thousand months:
from 661 to 750 A.D., with the first ruler being Abu Sufyan and the last
Mu’ awiyah al-Himar.

Both al-Kulayni in his Al-Kafi and al-Majlisi in his Bihar al-Anwar
quote Ahmed ibn Muhammad quoting Ali ibn al-Hassan quoting Muhammad ibn
al-Walid and Muhammad ibn Ahmed quoting Yunus ibn Ya’qub quoting Ali ibn
‘Eisa al-Qammat quoting his uncle quoting Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq
(as) saying, "The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) was shown in a vision how
Banu Umayyah climbed over his pulpit (like monkeys climb over trees), so
he felt very unhappy, whereupon Gabriel (as) descended upon him and
asked him why he was so forlorn.

He (pbuh) said, ‘I have seen (in a vision) tonight Banu Umayya
ascending my pulpit after having misled people from the Straight Path.’
Gabriel (as) said, ‘I swear by the One Who has sent me (as a messenger)
with the truth, this is something with which I am not familiar.’ Having
said so, he ascended to the heavens.

After a short while, he brought him one verse to remove thereby his
grief; it said: ‘Have you considered if We would let them enjoy
themselves for (a few) years, then that with which they are threatened
comes to them, so much so that whatever they were permitted to enjoy
shall not avail them (in the least)?’ (Holy Qur’an, 26:205-207). And he
also brought him: ‘We revealed it in Lailatul-Qadr, and what will make
you comprehend what Lailatul-Qadr is? Lailatul-Qadr is better than a
thousand months, etc."’

Lailatul-Qadr is a blessed night also because the Almighty brings down
during it goodness, bliss, and forgiveness for His servants. One
tradition of the greatest of all prophets Muhammad ibn Abdullah (pbuh)
states that when Lailatul-Qadr approaches, the Almighty orders Gabriel
(as) to descend accompanied by a crowd of angels to the earth with a
green banner.

He would mount the banner atop the Ka’ba while having six hundred wings
one of which is not spread except on Lailatul-Qadr; so, he would spread
them during that night, and he and all other angels would greet everyone
who is standing for his prayers, sitting, adoring, or reciting the Holy
Qur’an. They would shake hands with them and pray the Almighty to accept
their pleas,

and they would continue doing so till daybreak. It is then that they
would ask Gabriel: "What has the Almighty Allah done with the wishes of
the believers among the nation of Muhammad (pbuh)?" He would answer,
"The Almighty Allah has looked upon them on this night and forgiven
them, all of them, except the following: one who is addicted to
drinking, one who severs his ties with his kin, and one who is a
trouble-maker."

The Almighty has said, "Lailatul-Qadr is better than a thousand
months," meaning, mathematically, that this night, which is comprised of
a few hours, is honored by Allah the Exalted and Praised over about
eighty-three years which is the equivalent of a thousand months. The
TJmayyads fought Islam since its inception, then they fought the family
of the Prophet (pbuh), that is, AhI alBayt, the whole time they were in
power. The first self-declared Umayyad ruler was Abu Sufyan, and the
last was Mu’awiya al-Himar.

If you trace the period extending from the first year during which Abu
Sufyan forced his authority on the Muslims until the Umayyad lost grip
over power, you will come to a figure equivalent to a thousand months.
It is as if the Holy Qur’an is saying that one night in the sight of
Allah is better than all the thousand months those corrupt Umayyads
ruled the Muslim masses by sheer force.

The Almighty has also said, "Peace, it is, till t~he break of the
morn," that is, "Lailatul-Qadr is a night of peace and tranquility
against all evils, tribulations, and the mischief of the devils. No evil
can take place during it, nor can a demon practice his evil designs. It
is peace for the devotees who are greeted whenever they are met by the
angels. The angels greet them and greet you, O Muhammad, and so does My
Spirit, since the moment they descend from heavens and till the time of
daybreak."

According to the book titled al-Iqbal which cites Kanzul Yawaqeec by
Abul-FadI ibn Muhammad al-Harwi, the Prophet (pbuh) has said, "Whoever
remains awake during Lailatul-Qadr and spends it in adoration will have
his penalty postponed till the next year." According to the same
reference, the Prophet (pbuh) says that Moses (as) once addressed the
Almighty saying,

"Lord! I desire to be near to You." The Almighty said, "Whoever desires
nearness to Me is one who remains awake during Lailatul-Qadr
(worshipping Me)." I-fe said, "Lord! I wish to earn Your mercy." The
Almighty said, "My mercy is granted to anyone who is merciful to the
indigent during LailatulQadr." He said, "Lord! I wish to pass on the
right path." He said, ‘This is granted to anyone who spends alms during
Lailatul-Qadr.

" He said, "Lord! I wish to enjoy the trees and fruits of Paradise!"
The Almighty said, ‘This is granted to anyone who praises Me during
Lailatul-Qadr." He said, "Lord! I wish to achieve salvation from the
fire!" He said, "This is granted to anyone who seeks forgiveness during
Lailatul-Qadr." He said, "Lord! I wish to achieve Your pleasure!" The
Almighty said, "I shall be pleased with anyone who prays two (optional)
rek’ats during Lailatul-Qadr."

The same book quotes the Holy Prophet (pbuh) saying that the gates of
heaven will be opened during Lailatul-Qadr; every devotee who performs
prayers during it will receive a tree in Paradise for each prostration
he makes, a tree under whose shade a rider may keep riding for a hundred
years without leaving its shade. And he will receive for each rek’at
mansion in Paradise of pearls, sapphires, chrysolites and diamonds. For
each verse he recites he will receive one of the crowns of Paradise. The
tradition is lengthy and it contains quite a generous reward indeed.

AI-Dooryasti, in Kitab al-Husna, relying on the authority of Abu Ja ‘
fer al-Jawad who quotes his forefathers quoting Imam alBaqir, peace be
upon all of them, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying that
whoever spends Lailatul-Qadr adoring his Lord will have all his sins
forgiven even if they had numbered as many as the stars in the heavens,
the weight of the mountains, or the measures of the seas. AI-Harwi
reported a similar tradition which is recorded in Kanz at-Yawaqeet.

Ibn Abbas, may Allah be pleased with him and his father, is quoted on
page 5351 of Al-Soljib al-Jami’ citing the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
saying, "Lailatul-Qadr is easy, airy, neither very hot nor very cold;
the sun rises on its morning colored pale red." The Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) is also quoted saying, "At the morning of Lailatul-Qadr,

the sun rises without rays, looking like a washbowl, till it is high."
This tradition is reported by Muslim and al-Tirmithi. The Messenger of
Allah (pbuh) is also reported saying, "Lailatul-Qadr is a serene night,
neither hot nor cold, and no comet is hurled during it. One of the signs
of its advent is that the sun rises without a ray."

Zad al-Ma’ad quotes a few scholars who believe in its perpetuity,
indicating that some of them say that it is at the conclusion of the
year; therefore, it has to be observed during all nights of the year so
that one of them will be it. Others say that it is in Sha’ban and the
month of Ramadhan, while still others say that it is the night of the
middle of Sha’ban: Others say that it is the beginning of the month of
Ramadhan, while others say it is the middle of it; yet others say it is
the seventeenth. Still others say it is the twenty-ninth of it, while
others say it is the last night of it, and most Sunnis of our time are
of the view that it is the twenty-seventh. This proves that the reason
why it was not determined exactly is due to the purpose of observing the
entire month.

On Lailatul-Qadr did the night journey (israa) to heavens take place,
and the Almighty raised Jesus son of Mary (as) to Him. On it, His
servant and prophet Moses (as) died, and so did Joshua son of Noon, the
wasi of Moses, peace be upon both of them. Also on it was the commander
of the faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) martyred.

Relying on the authority of Abu Ja ‘ fer, peace be upon him, a few
narrators of hadith have indicated that the Prophet (pbuh) had been
asked once about the Night of Destiny (Lailatul-Qadr). So he ascended
the pulpit and, having praised the Almighty, he (pbuh) said, "You have
asked me about the Night of Destiny.

I have not concealed the knowledge of it from you out of my ignorance
thereof. Be informed, O people, that whoever during the month of
Ramadhan is healthy, and he fasts during its days and performs prayers
during a portion of its nights and is punctual regarding the obligatory
prayers, and makes an effort to attend congregational prayers on Fridays
during it and attends the Bid prayers as well, he will then have honored
the Night of Destiny duly, and he will receive his reward from the
Creator."

Do you need any more clues regarding the greatness of Lailatul-Qadr?
Then let us tell you that the authors of Thawab a)A ‘mat and Bihar
al-Anwar have cited the son of al-MutawakJcil quoting Muhammad al-Attar
quoting al-Ash’ ad quoting Muhammad ibn Hassan quoting Ibn Mahran
quoting al-Bataini quoting his father quoting Abu Busayr quoting Imam
Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as), the men whose truthfulness is not doubted
even by the most skeptic scholar, saying that whoever recites Surat
al-’Ankabut (The Spider) and Surat al-Rum (Romans) during the 23rd night
of the month of Ramadhan will secure admission into Paradise without any
exception.

On p. 19, Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar , the Imam (as) is quoted adding,
"I do not fear lest Allah should record that I have committed a sin for
having said surely these two Chapters enjoy a great status with
Allah."


**Chapter 27 : The Night of Destiny (Lailatul-Qadr)Which night is
Lailatul-Qadr?**

is it the 17th or the 19th? [Main Abu Ja"fer Muhammad ibn Ali-alBaqir
(as) is quoted in Bihar al-A nwar and Da ‘aim al-Islam as having said,
‘The 17th night of the month of Ramadhan is when the two parties met,
and the 19th is when the lists of the pilgrims is written down, and the
21st is when successors to the Prophets passed away and Jesus Christ
(as) was raised to heaven and Moses (as) passed away, whereas the 23rd
is hoped to be Lailatnl-Qadr.

" Both al‘Ayyashi’s Tafsir and al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-A nwar quote ‘Amr
ibn Sa’eed saying, "A man from Medina disagreed with me regarding the
night (Lailatul-Qadr) when the two hosts meet, saying that it was the
night of the 17th of the month of Ramadhan, so I went to see Abu
Abdullah (as) and told him about our disagreement, whereupon he (as)
said, ‘The man from Medina did not say the truth;

I know that you mean it is the 19th when the Commander of the Faithful
(Imam ;li. as) was wounded, and it is the same night when Jesus son of
Mary (as) was raised to heavens." Both references quote Humran quoting
Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) saying, "The destiny referred to
as Lailatul-Qadr is the same destiny referred to in another verse (of
Surat al-A’ raf) wherein the most Exalted One says: ‘When their doom is
come, they shall not remain behind in the least, nor will they go
before’ (Holy Qur’an, 7:34)."
Or is it the 21st or the 23rd? Al-Husain ibn ‘Ubaydullah, according to
Majalis al-Shaykh, as quoted on p. 2, Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar, quotes
Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Yahya who in turn quotes his father saying, "I
was in the company of Abu Abdullah (as) when Abu Busayr asked him,
‘Which night is the one when one is to plead to his Lord whatever he
wishes to plead?

’ The Imam (as) answered him by saying, ‘Either the twenty-first or the
twenty-third.’ He then asked him (as), ‘What if I have no strength to
observe both of them?’ The Imam (as) said, ‘How easy it is to observe
them when compared to your pleas!"’ Abu Abdullah (as) is also quoted in
the same volume of Bihar al-Anwar saying,

"The twenty-third night of the month of Ramadhan is the one when every
weighty matter is decided, when trials, tribulations, deaths, and means
of sustenance and other matters are determined, and so will whatever
Allah decrees to take place for the entire next year; so,
congratulations to anyone who remains awake during it bowing,
prostrating, contemplating upon his sins, weeping on their account, for
if you do all of that, God willing, you will never be disappointed."

Then he added, "Allah will order an angel to call out during each and
every day of the month of Ramadhan conveying Allah’s message to them
thus: ‘Good news, O My servants! I have forgiven your past sins and
permitted some of you to intercede on behalf of the rest on
Lailatul-Qadr except those who break their fast with an intoxicant or
those who bear grudge against another Muslim brother!"’ It is narrated
that Allah Subhanahu wa Ta’ala wards off evil and sins and all types of
trials on the 25th night from all His servants who fast and grants them
light in their hearing and vision; Paradise is decorated during
Lailatul-Qadr’s day and night.

The great Sunni scholar Urn Abul-Hadid, in his commentary on
NahjulBalaghei, cites Ibn Durayd’s Amali stating that al-Jarmoothi
quotes lbn al-Muhallabi quoting Ibn al-Kalbi quoting Shaddad ibil
Ibrahim quoting ‘Ubaydullah ibn al-Hassan al-Fahri quoting Ibn ‘Aradah
saying, ‘The Commander of the Faithful (as) was once asked about
Lailatul-Qadr, and he said, ‘It is not at all improbable that I know
which night it is and deliberately hide such knowledge, and I do not at
all doubt that Allah hid such knowledge from you only out of His love
for you, for if you knew which night it is, you would have honored it
and left the others, and I hope you will not err in its regard."


