Chapter 28 :recommended Deeds For Each Night of the Last Ten Nights of the Month
================================================================================

These are many; among them is what is recommended by the Prophet (pbuh)
who has said: "Whoever prays two rek’ats on Lailatul-Qadr and recites
the Fatiha once in each rek’a and the Tawheed seven times, then when he
finishes he seeks forgiveness seventy times, then he adds, ‘I seek
Allah’s forgiveness and to Him do I repent,’ by the time he leaves his
place, Allah will have forgiven him and his parents and sent angels to
record good deeds for him for another year, and He would send angels to
plant trees for him in Paradise and build him mansions and draw rivers,
and he would not leave the Life of this world before seeing all what is
in store for him in Paradise."

Another recommended deed is ghusl (ceremonialbath) which is highly
recommended and emphasized especially during the last three nights (of
the month), and the best time to take it is after sunset prayers. And
speaking of ghusul, it is recommended, as the Prophet of Islam (pbuh)
had himself done, to stay away from women during these most sacred days
but to approach two days.

As a matter of fact, p. 180, Vol. 4, of al-Kulayni’s AI-Kafi, p. 348,
Vol. 94, of al-Mailisi’s Bihar al-Anwar , and p. 112, Vol. 2, of Ibn
Babawayehs work Man La yahduru al-faqih all suggest that it is highly
recommended to approach women particularly during the first nights of
the month of Ramadhan. These classic books quote the Commander of the
Faithful (as) saying that it is recommended for a believer to cohabit
with his wife (particularly) during the first night of this sacred
month.

Another recommended deed is what is called the "plea by the sanctity of
the Holy Qur’ an" which is reported on the authority of both Imains
al-Baqir and al-Sadiq, peace be upon them, who have said, "You must take
the Holy Qur’an during thor last three nights of the month of Ramadhan,
open it, then put it on your hands and say:

Lord! I plead to You by Your revealed Book and everything in it, and in
it is Your great Name and the most snblim.t attributes. I plead to You
to send blessings unto Muhammad (pbuh) and the progeny of Muhammad
(phub) and to free rue from the bondage of the fire,’ then you ask Allah
whatever you wish.

" Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying, ‘Take the Holy Qur’an, put it on
your head and say, ‘Lord! By the grace of this Holy Qur’at~ and to whom
You have revealed it, and by every believer You have praised therein,
and by Your right upon them, for none knows Your right more than You!’
Then you. repeat ten times each of the following:

‘By Your Grace, O Mighty God! By Muhammad, by Ali, by Fatima, by
al~Has5a1I, by al~I-{usSa1n, by All ibm al-Hussain, by Muhammad ibm All,
by Ja’fer ibn Muhammad, by Mousa ibm Ja’fer, by Ali ibn Mousa, by
Muhammad ibn Ali, by Ali ibn Muhammad, by al-I-lassan ibn AM, by
al-Hujja (alMabdi),’ then you state your plea, and Allah will help you
attain your objective if He pleases." Another special invocation quoted
from the Prophet (pbuh) says:

"I bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One and Only God,
without a partners and that Muhammad (phub) is His servant and
messenger. I bear witness that Paradise is right and that the fire is
right, and that the bout is approaching~ there is no doubt about it, and
that Allah shall bring life to those in the graves. I further bear
witness that the Lord is my God:


there is no partner with I-jim, nor a son, nor a father, and I bear
witness that He does whatever He pleases and is able to do everything
and is the Doer of what He wills. He humiliates whomsoever He wills and
raises whomsoever He pleases, Owner of the domain, Sustainer of the
servants, the Forgiving, the Mercy-giving, the Omniscient, the Kind. I
bear witness again and again and again and again and again and again and
again that You, Lord, are exactly so and even more, and that none can
describe Your greatness. Lord! I pray You to send blessings unto
Muhammad (phub) and the progeny of Muhammad (pbuh) and to guide me and
not to leave me to stray after having guided me, for You guide
whomsoever You please."


**Chapter 29 :Recommended deeds of the twenty-third Night of the Month
of Ramadhan**

All recommended deeds stated above are also recommended for this night
and for all the nights referred to above one of which, according to the
above-quoted traditions, Lailatul-Qadr may as well be. On all these
nights, it is recommended that you perform tke ghusul twice: once at the
beginning of the night, and once at its end as Imam alSadiq, peace be
upon him, is quoted saying.

It is also recommended that you read the Chapter of the Holy Qur’an
dealing with the Romans and the one with the Spider. Imam al-Sadiq,
peace be upon him, has told Abu Baseer that whoever recites both
chapters of al‘Ankaboot (Spider) and al-Room (Romans) on the
twenty-third night of the month of Ramadhan will certainly be among the
residents of Paradise without any exception, adding, "... and I do not
fear that Allah will record a sin against me for giving such a status
for these two Chapters." It is also recommended to recite the Dukhkhan
(Smoke) Chapter too.

Imam Ali, peace be upon him, has said, "Everything has a fruit, and the
fruit of the Holy Qur’an is the Qadr Chapter. Everything has a treasure,
and the treasure that removes poverty is the Qadr Chapter. For
everything there is a means whereby it can be attained, and the means of
the weak is the Qadr Chapter. For every hardship there is ease, and the
ease of those suffering from hardship is the Qadr Chapter.

There is a shield against everything evil, and the shield of the
believers is the Qadr Chapter. For everything there is guidance, and the
guidance of the righteous is the Qadr Chapter. There is excellence for
everything, and the excellence of knowledge is the Qadr Chapter. There
is a decoration for everything, and the decoration of the Holy Qur’an is
the Qadr Chapter. There is a canopy for everything, and the canopy of
the devotees is the Qadr Chapter.

There is a glad tiding for everything, and the glad tiding of the
innocent is the Qadr Chapter. There is a Proof (Hujia) for everything,
and the Hujja after the Prophet (pbuh) is the Qadr Chapter; therefore,
believe in it." He (as) was asked how to believe in it, and he answered,
"That it shall occur in each and every year, and that everything
revealed in it is true."

He (as) is also quoted saying, "For anyone who recites the Qadr
Chapter, God Almighty writes down a good deed for every particle of dust
where he sits while reciting it." He (as) is also quoted saying, "It is
a good companion for anyone who wishes to pay off his diN. esteem his
creed, prolong his life-span, and improve his condition. Anyone who
recites it quite often will meet Allah as a sxddeeq and as a martyr."

The book Misbah al-Mutahaflid quotes Muhammad ibn ‘Isa relying on the
authority of the righteous, peace be upon them, says: "You should repeat
the following invocation on the twenty-third night of the blessed month
of Raniadan either prostrating, standing up, or sitting down, or in any
other way, and during the entire month and however you can, and whenever
you are faced with hard times. Having glorified Allah and sent blessings
unto the Prophet and his progeny, peace be upon all of them, you should
say,

‘Lord! Be for Your wali Muhammad ibn al-Hassan at this hour and at
every hour of the night and the day a Protector, Guardian, Leader,
Supporter, Guide and Reconnoiterer, till You let him reside in Your
earth willingly and grant him enjoyment therein for a long period of
time. O You Who manages all affairs, Who brings life back to the
residents of the graves, Who permits the oceans to flow and the iron to
be pliant for David, peace be upon him, I pray You to send blessings
unto Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad,’ then you mention your wish,
raising your hands.

You may repeat it while you are prostrating, kneeling, standing or
sitting, and repeat it on the last night of the nights of the month of
Ramadhan."

Invocation for the twenty-third night (of the month of Ramadhan)

This is narrated from the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and it is as
follows:

"Praised One, Glorified, Lord of the angels and the Spirit, Praised
One, Glorified, Lord of the angels and the Throne, Praised One,
Glorified, Lord of the heavens and the earth, Praised One, Glorified,
Lord of the oceans and themountains; Praised One, Glorified, praised by
the fish in the oceans, by the reptiles and the beasts and the hills;

Praised One, Glorified, praised by the angels and those who are near to
Him; Praised One, Glorified, Exalted, Vanquished everything and created
everything in a measure. Praised, Praised, Praised, Praised, Praised,
Praised, Praised! Glorified, Glorified, Glorified, Glorified, Glorified,
Glorified, Glorified! I pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad (pbuh)
and the progeny of Muhammad (pbuh) and to forgive me and have mercy on
me, for You are the One, the Unique."

Then you ought to add the following:

"Lord! I pray You to make my share of every goodness You have sent down
this night, or are sending down this night to be the most generous, of
light whereby You guide, or mercy You spread out, or sustenance You
divide, or a tribulation You shun, or an evil you expose, and to write
for me what you write for Your righteous servants who deserve Your
rewards and who deserved security by pleasing You. You affect
retribution. You give without a measure; You are the Generous One! I
pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad (pbuh) and the progeny of
Muhammad (pbuh) and to deal with me mercifully; You are the most
Merciful of those who are merciful unto others."

Then you should say:

"I pray You like one who is poor and helpless, and I invoke You like
one who is poor and humble, and I ask you like one who has submitted
willingly to You and admitted his wrong-doing and whose eyes have
over-flown with tears, who is most helpless, who has no other means, to
grant me this night forgiveness for all my past sins, and to protect me
from sinning for the rest of my life, to grant me pilgrimage and ‘umra
this year, to make it pilgrimage purely for the sake of achieving Your
pleasure, and to enable me to always do so,

and do not hinder me from visiting Your House and the grave-site of
Your Messenger Muhammad Your blessings and peace be upon him and his
progeny. And I plead You, Lord, not to let me remain in dire need of
Your creatures, of the jinns and of mankind, of the Arabs and of the
non-Arabs, of every being whom You can overpower; for You are on the
right path.

Lord! Grant me, Lord, of whatever You decide and decree of every
destined matter on this night, the fate which cannot be avoided nor can
it be altered, to visit Your sacred House among other pilgrims this year
whose pilgrimage You appreciate and whose endeavor is forgiven and so
are their sins, and to prolong my life-span, to increase my sustenance,
and to grant me a dutiful son, for You can do whatever You will, and You
are aware of everything."

**What ought to be repeated every night for the last ten nights of the
month**

An annotation on al-Kaf’amis book Al-Misbah contains an invocation
narrated through the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (as). It is recommended
to be repeated on each of the last ten nights of the month. The author
indicates that he (as) used to say the following on each such night:

"Lord! You have said in Your revealed Rook: ‘The month of Ramadhan is
that in which the Holy Qur’an was revealed, a guidance to men and clear
proofs of the guidance and the distinction,’ and You glorified the
sanctity of the month of Ramadhan due to the Holy Qur’an which You
revealed therein, assigning Lailatul-Qadr to it and making it better
than a thousand months.

Lord! These are the days of the month of Ramadhan which have gone by
and so have its nights. Lord! You are more knowledgeable than I, and
more aware, of the number of Your devotees; so, I pray You in whatever
Your angels who are close to You, Your messengers, and Your righteous
devotees, pray You to send blessings unto Muhammad (pbuh) and the
progeny of Muhammad, and to free me from the fire, to let me enter into
Paradise by Your mercy, and to be Gracious unto me, to forgive me,

to accept my endeavor to be near to You, to respond to my invocation
and to grant me security on the day when everyone will be terrified,
apprehensive of the horrors prepared on the Day of Judgment. Lord! I
seek refuge with Your Glory and Great Prestige not to let the days and
nights of the month of Ramadhan pass away without forgiving me for the
sins for which You intend that I should atone.

O Lord, Lord, Lord! I pray You, You with Whom there is no other god,
for there is no god but You, to be pleased with me in this month, and to
be even more pleased with me if You were pleased with me before. So, be
pleased with me, Lord, for You are the most Merciful of those who are
merciful unto others, O You Who is the One and Only God, the One
Independent of any need, the One Who did not beget nor is He begotten,
nor is there ever the like of Him.

Then repeat the following at least three times:

"O You Who made the iron pliant to David, peace be upon him! O You Who
removed distress and the great agony from Jacob, peace be upon him! O
You Who removed the distress of Joseph, peace be upon him! I pray You to
send blessings unto Muhammad (pbuh) and the progeny of Muhammad, for You
are Capable of doing so, and not to punish me with the punishment that I
deserve."


**Chapter 30: Zakatul-Fitr**

Zakatul-Fitr is a mandatory religious tax paid by those who can afford
it at the end of the month of Ramadhan. It depends on the type of major
item of food consumed by the believer during the year. This may be rice,
wheat, barley, dates, etc. In weight, it should be at least three
kilograms of food per person. It is also permissible to pay cash of
equivalent value.

Due to the inflation and rising prices, we suggest that a fin-a of
$5.50 per person is reasonable. It must be paid by the head of the
family on behalf of his dependents, including servants of both sexes,
and/or dependent relatives who are fed in his house. If a Muslim or even
a non-Muslim guest arrives at someone’s house prior to the night
preceding Eidul-Fitr and dines with his host, it is incumbent on the
latter to pay for the former’s film. If the guest arrives after sunset
of the night preceding the Eid, fitra is not obligatory even if he dines
with his host.

If the guest who arrives before sunset does not dine, fitra is still
obligatory on his host. It is better, however, if both host and guest
give fin-a. If one’s wife is at her parents’ house on the night
preceding the Eid, her parents should take out her fin-a. On the last
day of the month of Raniadan, if someone arranges a majlis which
commences after sunset, and if he treats his guests to iftar, he does
not have to pay fin-a on their behalf.

**Who receives Fitra**

Fitra should be given to deserving believers whose income is not
sufficient to spend on their families for one year. Fin-a cannot be
given to one’s own dependents. Deserving neighbors and pious persons are
good candidates to receive and enjoy the fitra. Fitra from Sayyids
(descendants of Prophet Muhammad, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) can be given to poor Sayyids or non-Sayyids. Fitra
from non-Sayyids cannot be given to Sayyids. If deserving persons are
not easy to find or identify, fitra should be sent to places where such
persons can be found, or the amount should be sent to a mujtahid who
would do justice in its distribution.

It is absolutely mandatory that the recipient of fin-a be ‘cdii, i.e.,
a just and fair person who can be trusted to distribute it properly, and
it is necessary to ensure that fin-a is not given to anyone who may in
any possibility use it for sinful acts such as drinking liquors,
gambling, etc. Although it is permissible to send fitra to any place, it
is better to distribute it to a deserving person locally.

The time for givingfitra is from the night preceding Eidul-Fitr up till
noon. If this is not possible for any reason, the amount of film must
then be set aside and be distributed when deserving persons are present,
or it may be sent to a mujtahid for proper distribution, and it cannot
be paid prior to the time when it becomes due. The best time to pay it
is the first day of Eid al-Fitr before noon prayers.

**Eid Al-Fitr and its prayers**

Once the holy month of Ramadhan is over, the pious get ready to
celebrate Eid al-Fitr, Feast of Fast-Breaking, to thank the Almighty who
enabled them to fast and to remember the needy and the indigent. It is
also customary on such an occasion to give gifts to the members of the
family, especially children. Once it becomes known that the next day is
going to be the Eid,

it is very highly recommended to spend the night preceding the Eid in
prayers and adoration. On p. 104 of al-Saduq’s Thawab al-A ‘mat,
Muhammad ibn Ibrahim is quoted saying that he heard Isma’eel ibn
Muhammad quoting Muhammad ibn Sulayrnan quoting Abmed ibn Bakr-aIFarisi
quoting Muhammadibn Mis’ab quoting 1-lammad quoting Thabit quoting the
great sahabi Anas ibn Malik saying that the Messenger of Allah (phuh)
has said, "The heart of anyone who spends the Eid night [the night
preceding the Lid] will not die oh the Day when the hearts die."

How to perform the Eid prayers, what is recommended and what is not in
its regard, and all fighi related to it in the following paragraphs are
excerpted from Vol. 1 of Man Ia Yahduruhu al-Faqh by Shaykh (mentor) Abu
Ja’fer ibn Au ibn al-Husain ibn Babawayh al-Qunimi (306-381 AR.).

Is the Eid prayer compulsory (Sunnab wajibah) or is it highly
recommended (Sunnak mustahabbah)? Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq, whose followers
are referred to as Shi’as Ja’feris Ithna-’Asheris, followers of the
Sunnah of the Messenger ofAllah (pbuh) as outlined by Imam AR (as) and
according to the fiqh of Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) and who follow all
the Infallible Twelve Imams (as), is quoted on p. 339, Vol. 1, of
al-Saduq’s book Man Ia Yahduruhu al-Faqih saying, "Prayers on both Lids
(al-Pitr and alAdha) are compulsory, and so is the prayer on the
eclipse." The author comments on this weighty statement by saying that
the Imani (as) means they are among "minor obligations," that is, due to
one narration by Hareez which states the following:

Zurarab quotes Imam Abu Ja’fer (as) saying: "To pray both Eid prayers
with an Imam is a Sunnab; no prayers should be performed before or after
them on that occasion till the time of zawal He (as) is also quoted on
the same page as saying, "No Eid prayers on both Eids should be offered
without an Irnam (a just one), but if you pray it by yourself, there is
no harm in doing so." Hareez,

on p. 340 of the same reference, quotes Zurarah citing Imam Abu Ja"fer
al-Baqir (as) saying, "The Commander of the Faithful (Imarn All), peace
be upon him, used not to eat anything on Eid al-Adha till he eats of
what he offers by way of sacrifice. And he used not to go out How should
the Eid (be it Eid al-Fitr or Eid al-Adha) prayers be performed? They
are two rek’ats without iqamah or athan. The imam starts by calling
"Allahu Akbar!" once, then he recites Surat al-Fatiha and "Sabbili ismi
Rabbikal-A’la" (Surat al-A’la, The Most High, Chapter 87, which is
comprised of 19 verses), then he makes takbeer (by saying: "Allahu
Akbar!") five times, then he makes qunoot followed by rukoo ‘,

then he is to prostrate twice (as is the case with fajr prayers). When
he stands to perform the second re/Ca, be should recite Surat al-Fatiha
followed by "Wal shamsi ‘wa Duhaha, etc." (Surat al-Shams EThe Sun],
Chapter 91, which is comprised of 15 verses), followed by four takbeers,
including takbeerat al-qiyatn. Having made takbeer for the fifth time,

he makes rukoo and goes on to the prostrations as described above. What
is recommended to be said during the qunoot (in the first rek’at) of a
great occasion such as the Lid? We think the most beautiful supplication
is one narrated by Muhammad bin al-Fudayl who quotes Abu al-Sabah
al-Kinani quoting Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’fer al-Sadig (as), our sixth
Imam, as follows:

In order to benetit the readers who are not versed in Arabic, we would
like to offer this modest translation of the sophisticated text cited
above, imploring the Almighty to forgive us for falling short of
matching the Arabic text (English never rises to the level of classic
Arabic especially when it comes to prayers, the Holy Qur’an, and
supplications:

I testify that there is no god but Allah, the One and Only God, without
any partner, and that Muhammad is His Servant and Messenger. Lord! You
are the Lord of greatness and magnanimity, generosity and might,
potence, authority and dignity! I plead to You on this Day which You
have made as an Eid for the Muslims and as a treasure for Muhammad
(pbuh) and an increase (in his prestige), to bless Muhammad and the
progeny of Muhammad, to also bless Your angels who are near to You~ as
well as all Your deputied messengers,

and to forgive us and all believing men and women, and all Muslim men
and women, the living and the dead. O Lord! I plead to You to grant me
of the best of that for which your righteous servants plead to You, and
I seek refuge with You against all (evil) from which Your righteous
servants seek refuge with You. Allah is the First and the Last of
everything, the One Who knows everything and Who brings them back to
life.

The destiny of everything is to Him and so is its return. I-fe is the
One Who manages the affairs and brings life back to those in the graves.
He accepts good deeds and unveils what is hidden; He reveals the secrets
of the hearts. Allaho Akbar! His Kingdom is great; He is the ever.Living
Who never dies; when He decrees a thing, He only says to it "Be!" and it
is! To You are the voices humbled and the faces succumb, and no vision
can ever reach him, nor can any tongue glorify You enough. All forelocks
are in Your grip and all affairs are referred to You:

none can judge in their regard besides You, nor can anything be
accomplished without Your aid. is Allaho Akbar. Your protection
encompasses everything; Your Dignity subdues everything; Your command
overwhelms everything, and everything stands through You. Everything is
humbled to Your greatness; everything is subjected to Your Exaltation;
everything surrenders to Your will, and everything is a subject in Your
Kingdom! Allaho Akbar The same reference contains other such sermons for
those who appreciate them and who seek nearness to Allah Sub hanahu wa
Ta ‘ala through reciting them.


**Chapter 31 : Conclusion**

It is hoped that this small book has shed some light on the
significance of fast in Islam and on the greatness of the month of
Ramadhan. It is also hoped that it has made some readers realize the
importance of considering this life as a golden and unique opportunity
to prepare for the life to come. It is also hoped that those who read
this book will share its knowledge with others rather than keep it all
to themselves. This is a book, we believe, which should not be left on
the shelf to collect dust but circulated among our community to bring
them closer to their Maker and to make them mote serious about their
creed. One hadith says: "Lot everything there is zakat, and the zakat of
knowledge is its dissemination."

Does one who knows something useful have any choice with regard to
sharingwhat he knows with others? Is it up to him whether to inform
others of it or to just remain silent and keep it all to himself? Is
there a free will to excercise in this regard? If you think that the
answer to these questions is in the affirmative, read the following
verses of the Holy Qur’an and see how the Almighty curses and condemns
those who know and who do not share their knowledge with others:

Surely those who conceal the clear proofs and the guidance that We
revealed, having made it clear in the Book for men, these it is whom
Allah shall curse, and those who curse shall curse them (too). (Holy
Qur’an, 2:159)

Allah made a covenant with those who were given the Book: You shall
certainly make it known to men, and you shall not hide it, but they cast
it behind their backs and took a small price for it; so evil is that
which they buy. (Holy Our’an, 3:187)

Do not mix the truth with falsehood, nor should you hide the truth
while knowing it. (Holy Qur’an, 2:42)

Holy Qur’an 3:187 above refers to the People of the Book (Christians
and Jews) who were given knowledge by the Almighty and who did not
disseminate it. This is quite ironic especially since they regard hiding
knowledge as one of the "seven deadly sins," the sins which can never be
forgiven.

Does Islam forgive those who have knowledge and who hide it or fail to
share it with others? On p. 67, Vol. 2, of Bihar al-Anwar, Imam Mousa
ibn Ja’fer (as) quotes his forefathers citing the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) saying, "One who reneges from his oath of allegiance, or who
promotes what misleads people, or hides some knowledge with him, or
confines some wealth with him unjustly, or knowingly aids an oppressor
in committing oppression whild being fully aware of his oppression, is
outside the folds of Islam.

" Truly if you consider this hadith, you will find it awe-inspiring.
One who hides knowledge, according to this hadith, is on the same level
with one who deliberately assists oppressors and oppression. Islam is
clear of those who deliberately and in any way hide useful knowledge;
so, we seek refuge with Allah, dear reader, against being among them.
Rather, we should spare no means to share what we know with others. Good
knowledge is like a good seed: once sown, it will Insallah grow and
multiply.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) is quoted on
p. 67, Vol. 2, of Bihar al-Anwar , saying, "The creed stands on four
pillars: 1) a scholar who informs people of the knowledge which he has
and who acts upon it; 2) a wealthy person who is not miserly when giving
those who safeguard the religion of Allah; 3) a poor person who does not
sell his hereafter in order to buy the life of this world; and

4) an ignorant person who is never too proud to seek knowledge." What a
beautiful statement!

Here we have to stop for a moment to ask ourselves: "Who is qualified
enough to be called a scholar, an ‘ailm, one to whom the Almighty refers
in one of the most Glorious of Qur’anic verses:

‘ Surely those among Allah’s servants who fear Him most are the
scholars (‘ulema)’ (Holy Qur’an, 35:28)"?

The answer is provided by the very best man who ever walked on the face
of planet Earth: our beloved Messenger of Allah, peace and blessings of
Allah be upon him and his pure and sinless Progeny: "Each one of you is
an ‘aiim (scholar) so long as he pursues knowledge, but when he thinks
he achieved it, then he becomes ignorant." Ignorant are the haughty ones
who think that "they know it all." Although he (pbuh) was the embodiment
of each and every imaginable virtue, he (pbuh) nevertheless was ordered
by his Maker to: "Say: Lord! Increase my share of knowledge!" (Holy
Qur’an, 20:114).

The Holy Prophet of Islam (pbuh) is quoted on p. 66, Vol. 2, of Bihar
al-Anwar, saying, "Jesus son of Mary (as) once stood to address the
Israelites and said, ‘O Children of Israel! Do not impart wisdom to the
ignorant else you should do knowledge injustice, nor should you prohibit
those who seek it from doing so else you should do them injustice." The
Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (as) is quoted on p. 67, Vol. 2, of
Bihar al-Anwar, saying, "One who hides some knowledge with which he is
familiar is as good as the ignorant."

AI-Majlisi quotes Ibn al-Walid quoting al-’Ubaydi quoting alDahqan
quoting Durust quoting Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) saying that four
things will always be lost:

1. Friendship you grant to someone who is untrustworthy;
2. A favor to someone who does not appreciate it;
3. Knowledge imparted upon someone who is not inclined to listen to it;
and
4. A secret you share with someone who lacks discretion. Not all people
are inclined to learn, and unfortunately few are those who share what
they learn with others. One of my favorite axioms says: "Do not cast
pearls before swine." Pearls of wisdom, when cast before the dumb, will
not be held with any esteem. Give this book to someone who appreciates
it.

The kind reader is requested to write me on the following address to
tell me what he thinks of this book, what suggestions he has to improve
its second edition, and whether it in any way helped him realize how
great fast is, how significant our life on this earth is, and how Allah
looks upon knowledge and those who disseminate it; my address is: Yasin
T. al-Jibouri, P.O. Box 5132, Falls Church, VA 22044, U.S.A. And if you
appreciate the time and effort exerted in writing this book, please
recite Surat al-Fatiha for the soul of my father the late aI-Hajj Tu’ma
Abbas al-Jibouri and for the souls of all believing Muslim men and
women, the living and the dead, and rest assured that you will be richly
rewarded by the Most Generous and Compassionate One for doing so.

Reciting the Fatiha for all believing men and women, the living and the
dead, should be the daily practice of every Muslim especially after
performing the daily prayers. It is also a good habit to do so while you
are on your way to work or back home therefrom. Life is too short to be
wasted. If you do so, you will Insha-Allah taste the sweetness of iman,
and none of this fleeting world’s worries and woes will trouble or harm
you, Insha-Allah What happiness is greater than that"

We pray Allah Ta’ala to accept our prayers and fast and yours, and to
reward all of us with everlasting bliss and happiness in this life and
the life to come, Allahomma Aameen, Wassalamo Alaikom wa Rahmatullahi wa
Barakatuh.


