Chapter 4 : Significance of the Month of Ramadhan and Its Fast
==============================================================

On p. 64, Vol. 2, of Safeenat al-Rinw, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is
quoted saying that Allah Almighty has charged a group of His angels with
the task of supplicating for those who observe the fast. On the same
page of the same reference, Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) is quoted saying
that if a person fasts during a hot day,

and he suffers from thirst, Allah will assign a thousand angels to wipe
his face and convey to him glad tidings, and when he breaks his fast,
Allah, the most Exalted, the most Glorified, addresses him with these
words, "How sweet your smell and soul are! O My angels! Bear witness
that I have forgiven him."

On page 96 of Thawab al-A’mal wa ‘Iqal al-A’mal, and also on page 48 of
his book Al-Amali (or pp. 29-32 of old editions), Shaikh Abu Ja’fer
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husain ibn Babawayh al-Qummi al-Saduq (306-381
A.H) quotes Muhammad Ibn Ibrahim al-Ma’athi saying that Ahmed ibn
Jaylawayh al-Jurjani alMuthakkar] quotes Abu Ishaq Ibrahim ibn Bilal
quoting Abu Muhammad quoting Abu Abdullah Muhammad ibn Kiram quoting
Abmed ibn Abdullah quoting Sufyan ibn ‘Ayeenah quoting Mu’awiya ibn Abu
Ishaq quoting Sa’eed ibn Jubayr saying,

"I asked Ibn Abbas once about the reward of one who fasts during the
month of Ramadhan knowing its greatness. He said: ‘O Ibn Jubayr! Get
ready to listen to what your ears have never heard before, nor your
heart has ever experienced, nor your soul has ever reckoned regarding
that about which you have inquired! What you are seeking is the
knowledge of the first generations and the last!’ So I left him and
prepared myself to meet him again. I returned to him at early
daybreak.

Having said the fair prayers (together), I reminded him of he tradition
which I had sought, so he turned his face to me and aid, ‘Listen
carefully to what I am going to tell you. I have heard the Aessenger of
Allah (pbuh) saying: ‘Had you ever come to know about your rewards
during the month of Ramadhan, you would surely have thanked the Almighty
a great deal more (than you usually do).

When the first night is over, Allah, the Almighty and the Exalted one
forgives the sins committed by all members of my nation, the ones
committed in secrecy and the ones committed in public, and He elevates
your status two thousand degrees and builds you fifty towns in
Paradise.

On the next day, He rewards you for every step you take luring that day
with the rewards of one who adored Him for a full rear and the reward of
one of His prophets, and He will reward you is though you had performed
the fast for a full year.

On the third day, the Exalted and Dear One grants you a dome in
Paradise for ach hair on your body, a dome of a white pearl on top of
which are twelve thousand light houses and at the bottom of which are
twelve thousand houses in each one of which there are one thousand beds
and on each bed of which there is a nymph (hur) with large lovely eyes,
each served by one thousand servants the head-covering of each me of
them is better than this world and everything in it.

On the fifth day, He builds you in Paradise a million (In Arabic, the
word "million" does not exist; instead, Arabs use "a thousand
thousands") cities in each one of which here are seventy thousand
houses, inside each one of which there are, seventy thousand tables, and
on each table there are seventy thousand bowls, and in each bowl there
are sixty thousand types of food each one of which is different from the
other.

On the sixth day, He will grant you in the Abode of Peace a hundred
thousand towns in each one of which there are a hundred thousand rooms,
in each room there are a hundred thousand beds of gold the length of
each is a thousand yards, and on each bed is a hur wife with large
lovely eyes whose hair has thirty thousand locks braided with pearls and
sapphires, and each lock is carried by a hundred concubines.

On the seventh day, the Almighty grants you in the Garden of Bliss the
rewards of forty thousand martyrs and forty thousand sideeqs.

On the eighth day, Allah Almighty grants you the rewards of the good
deeds of sixty thousand worshippers and sixty thousand ascetics.

On the ninth day, Allah, the Exalted One, gives you what is equal to
what He gives a thousand scholars and a thousand devotees and a thousand
warriors fighting for Allah in a foreign land.

On the tenth day, He gives you the fulfilment of seventy thousand of
your worldly wishes and orders the sun, the moon, the stars, the
animals, the birds, the casts, every rock and every rain-drop,
everything wet and everything my, all fish in the oceans and all leaves
on the trees, to pray for your forgiveness.

On the eleventh day, the Exalted and Mighty One grants m the rewards
whereby He rewards one who performs the pilgrimage and ‘umra four times
and one who performs the pilgrimage with His prophets and the ‘umra with
every siddeeq or Martyr.

On the twelfth Day, He takes upon replace your as with good deeds, then
He multiplies your good deeds many times rid gives you the rewards of
each of your good deeds a million times.

On the thirteenth day, Allah Almighty grants you what He grants the
devotees of Mecca and Medina and bestows upon you an intercession of
each and every stone and raindrop between Mecca and Medina.

In the fourteenth day, He treats you as though you had met and followed
in the footsteps of Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, David and Solomon [peace
be upon all of them], and as though you had worshiped the Almighty Allah
in the company of His prophets for hundred years.

On the fifteenth day, He fulfils ten of your worldly wishes and those
of the hereafter and grants you what He granted Job (as), then He orders
the angels who bear the ‘Arsh to say for your forgiveness and grants you
on the Day of Resurrection lights: ten on your right, ten on your left,
ten before you and ten behind you.

On the sixteenth day, the Almighty grants you sixty outfits to wear as
soon as you abandon your grave and a she-camel ‘ride, and He will send a
cloud to overshadow you to protect you froom the heat of that Day.

On the seventeenth day, the Almighty llah says: ‘I have forgiven them
and their parents and exempted em from having to undergo the hardships
of the Day of Resurrection.’

On the eighteenth day, the Praised and Exalted One orders Gabriel,
Michael and Israil as well as the angels who bear the ‘Arsh all
archangels to seek forgiveness for the nation of Muhammad (pbuh) till
the next year, and He will also grant you on the Day of resurrection
whatever rewards He grants to those who participated the Battle of
Badr].

On the nineteenth day, all angels in the heavens and on earth will have
already sought permission of their Lord to visit your graves and to
bring you every day a present and a drink (as long as you remain in the
barzakh).

So, if you complete your fast for twenty full days, the Almighty Allah
sends you seventy thousand angels to protect you from every accursed
devil, and He will have granted you for each day of your fast your
rewards as though you fasted a hundred years, and He will set a ditch
between you and hell and grant you the rewards of all those who recited
the Torah, the Gospel, the Psalms and the Holy Qur’an, and will write
for you for each feather on Gabriel the reward of a full year and will
grant you the rewards of those who glorify Him at the ‘Arsh and Kursi
and will marry you to a thousand nymphs for each of the verses of the
Qur’an.

On the twenty-first day, the Almighty expands your grave a thousand
parasangs and lifts the darkness and loneliness of your graves and makes
your graves look like the graves of the martyrs and your faces like the
face of Joseph son of Jacob (as).

On the twenty-second day, the Almighty dispatches the angel of death as
He dispatches him to His prophets to remove your worldly worries and the
torment of the hereafter.

On the twenty-third day, you will pass on the Straight Path in the
company of the prophets, the first to follow the prophets, and the
martyrs, as if you had fed each orphan and clothed everyone who needed
to be clothed.

On the twenty-fourth day, you will not leave this life before each one
of you sees the place reserved for him/her in Paradise and is given the
rewards of a thousand sick and a thousand who go back to their creed and
will grant you the rewards of one who freed a thousand captives from the
descendants of Ishmael (as).

On the twenty-fifth day, Allah will have built you under His ‘Arsh a
thousand green domes on top of each one of which is a tent of light. The
Almighty and Exalted One will then say: ‘O followers of Muhammad! I am
your Lord and you are My servants! Enjoy the shade of My ‘Arsh in these
domes and eat and drink with enjoyment, for there will be no fear on
you, nor will you grieve.

O nation of Muhammad! By My Dignity and Greatness! I shall dispatch you
to Paradise in a way which will amaze the first generations and the
last, and I shall crown each one of you with a thousand light crowns,
and I shall provide for each one of you a she-camel whose reins are made
of light, and in it are a thousand gold rings, in each is an angel
looking after it,

in the hand of each angel is a light rod so that he may enter Paradise
without a reckoning.’ And on the twenty-sixth day, Allah will look at
you with compassion and will forgive all your sins except those of
shedding innocent blood or robbing people’s wealth, and He will grant
you every day a thousand barriers against backbiting, lying and
slandering.

On the twenty-seventh day, He will consider you as though you had aided
every believing man and woman and clothed seventy thousand naked persons
and equipped a thousand soldiers to camp in a foreign land to defend
Islam, and as if you have recited every book Allah has revealed to His
prophets.

On the twenty-eighth day, Allah will have built you in Paradise a
hundred thousand light cities and granted you in the garden of bliss a
hundred thousand silver mansions and a hundred thousand cities in each
one of which there are a thousand rooms, and granted you in the garden
of greatness a hundred thousand pulpits of musk inside each one of which
there is a thousand saffron houses in each one of which there are a
thousand beds of pearls and sapphires and on each bed a wife of the
hurts with large lovely eyes.

So if you complete your fast fill the twenty-ninth day, the Almighty
Allah will grant you a million quarters, inside each quarter is a white
dome underneath which is a white camphor bed on which there are a
thousand mattresses of green silk on each one of which there is a hurt
decorated with seventy thousand ornaments and crowned with eighty
thousand locks each one of which is decorated with diamonds and
sapphires.

So if you finish thirty complete days of fast, the Almighty will have
granted you for each day the rewards of a thousand martyrs and a
thousand foremost believers in His Prophets, and He will have assigned
for you the rewards of fifty years of adoration, and He will have
decreed a clearance for you from hell and a passage on the Straight Path
and a security against the torment. One of the gates of Paradise is
called al-Rayyan, and it shall never be opened before the Day of
Resurrection.

It will be opened for those among the nation of Muhammad (pbuh) who
performed the fast. Ridwan, custodian of Paradise, will call out saying:
‘O followers of Muhammad! Come to the al-Rayyan gate!’ So he will let my
nation enter Paradise through that gate. Therefore, if one is not
forgiven during the month of Ramadhan, in which month can he be
forgiven? There is neither will nor strength except from Allah; Allah
suffices us, and what a great Helper He is!"

This lengthy tradition is also recorded on pp. 183-185, Vol. 8, of
Bihar al-Anwar.

On page 92 of his book Thowob al-A’mol wo ‘Iqab alA’mol, in a chapter
dealing with the glory of the month of Ramadhan and the rewards for its
fast, Shaikh Abu Ja’fer Muhammad ibn Ali ibn alHusain ibn Babawayh
al-Qummi al-Saduq relies on the authority of Jabir who quotes Imam Abu
Ja’fer al-Baqir, peace be upon him, and also inAl-Misbah, where Jabir
ibn Yazid quotes Imam Abu Ja’fer, peace be upon him, saying the
following to Jabir ibn Abdullah alAnsari, oone of the greatest sahbai
(companions of the Holy Prophet, pbuh),

"O Jabir! This is the month of Ramadhan; whoever fasts during its day,
and spends a portion of its night saying prayers and abstaining from
eating anything unlawful, safeguarding his modesty against anything
unlawful, and withholding his tongue against saying anything unlawful,
will leave his sins behind him as the month leaves.

" Jabir said, "O Messenger of Allah! What a beautiful hadith this is!"
The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) whereupon said, "And what difficult terms
these are!" The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, his progeny
and companions, is also quoted saying, "Whoever fasts during the month
of Ramadhan out of firm belief and a sincere desire to please Allah will
have all his past and future sins forgiven.

" He (pbuh) is also quoted saying, ‘The gates of Paradise are opened on
the first night of the month of Ramadhan, and they remain open till the
last night of it." He (pbuh) is also quoted saying that the Almighty has
entrusted seven angels to keep each demon fettered till the end of the
month of Ramadhan.

On the same page of the same reference, Muhammad ibn alHassan is quoted
saying that al-Husain ibn al-Hassan ibn Sa’eed has quoted al-Husain ibn
‘Auwan quoting ‘Amr ibn Shimr citing Jabir who in turn cites Imam Abu
Ja’fer al-Baqir (as) saying that whenever the month of Ramadhan
approached, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) used to come out to the
public, face the Qibla and supplicate thus:

O Allah! I invoke You to let this crescent be the harbinger of security
and conviction, safety and peace, crowned health, vast sustenance,
prevention against all ailments, recitation of the Holy Our’an, and help
in performing the prayers and upholding the fast! O Lord! Safeguard us
for the month of Ramadhan, safeguard it for us, and safeguard it from us
till the month is over and You have forgiven us!

Then he (pbuh) would face the public and address them thus:

"O Muslim multitudes! When the crescent of the month of Ramadhan
appears, the demons among the devils are chained, and the gates of the
heavens and Paradise are opened, and so are the gates of His Mercy,
while the gates of hell are closed. Pleas are answered and the Almighty
releases at the time of iftar a number of residents of hell. In every
night, a caller calls:

‘Is there anyone who has a plea? Is there anyone who seeks forgiveness?
O Almighty Allah! Reward everyone who spends in Your way, and grant
perdition to everyone who withholds. And when the month of Shawwal
approaches, the believers are called upon to receive their rewards, for
that will be their day to receive their rewards".

On page 94 of the reference cited above, Muhammad ibn Musa ibn
al-Mutawakldi is quoted saying that Abdullah ibn Ja’fer al1-limyari has
said that Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Eisa has said that al-Hassan ibn
Mahboob al-Zarrad has said that Abu Ayyub has quoted Abul-Ward citing
Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir, peace be upon him, saying that the Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) delivered a sermon on the last Friday of the month of
Sha’ban. In it, he praised Allah then said, ‘O people! You have been
shadowed by a month one night of which is better than a thousand
months;

it is the month of Ramadhan during which Allah has enjoined you to fast
and equalled the rewards for voluntary prayers during its nights with
the rewards due to those who volunteered to say optional prayers for
seventy years in other months. He also equalled the rewards of the good
deeds of those who do good deeds during it with those who perform one of
the obligations enjoined by the Almighty (in other months). And whoever
performs one of the enjoined obligations during it will be rewarded as
though he had performed seventy other obligations in other months.

It is the month of perseverance, and the reward of perseverance is
Paradise. It is the month of consolation, the one wherein Allah
increases the sustenance of the believers... Allah will decrease the
hardship of the reckoning of whoever decreases the hardship of his slave
during it.

It is a month the beginning of which is mercy, the middle of which is
forgiveness, and the end of which is acceptance and emancipation from
the fire. You cannot by any means take lightly during it four merits
with two of which you please Allah, and two others you cannot do
without. The two merits whereby you please Allah are: you testify that
There is no god except Allah and that I, Muhammad, is the Messenger of
Allah; as for the two merits which you cannot do without, these are: you
plead to Allah to fulfill your worldly needs and grant you Paradise, and
that you plead to Allah during it for your health and well-being, and
you seek refuge with Him against the fire."

On pp. 56-57 of al-Saduq’s Amali, Sa’d ibn Abdullah is quoted saying
that Ahmed ibn Muhammad ibn Eisa ibn Sa’eed quotes Eadal citing Yousuf
ibn ‘Umayrah quoting ‘Ubaydullah ibn Abdullah quoting individuals who
heard Abu Ja’fer, peace be upon him, saying that when the month of
Ramadhan was about to approach, that is, on the twenty-seventh of
Sha’ban, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) told Bilal to call upon people to
assemble.

People assembled, so he (pbuh) ascended the pulpit, praised the
Almighty then said, "O people! The month (of Ramadhan) has approached,
and it is the master of all months wherein one night is better than a
thousand months.

During it, the gates of hell are closed and those of Paradise are kept
open. Whoever lives through it and is not forgiven will be distanced
from the mercy of Allah, and whoever during it does not receive Allah’s
forgiveness while his parents are living will surely be further away
from receiving Allah’s mercy. And whoever hears my name and fails to
send blessings unto me will (likewise) be distanced from Allah’s
mercy."


