Chapter 5 :a Few Benefits of the Fast
=====================================

In Islam, the spiritual, social, economic, political and psychological
benefits of fast are interrelated, each affecting the other. Rituals
regulate the Muslims’ social and individual life and bring them closer
to their Creator. A combination of fast, prayers, and meditation may be
the very best dose for any and all psychological, financial, and
spiritual ills from which one may be suffering. They purify the soul,
cleanse the intention, and bring about an abundance of good from the
Almighty Who is ever-watching over us and Who desires nothing but good
for His sincere servants.

On p. 353, Vol. 94, of Bihar al-Anwar, al-Majlisi traces a saying of
Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (as) saying that if one fasts at the beginning of
a month, reciting in the first rek'at the Fatiha once and al-Ikhlas
thirty times (i.e., as many as the maximum days of the lunar month), and
the Fatiha once and al-Qadr thirty times in the second rek’at following
that with offering the poor something by way of charity, it will dispel
everything about which he apprehensive during the entire month.

Two other rek’ats are prescribed in the same reference as having even a
greater effect on a eliever’5 life: Imam al-Jawad (as) is quoted saying,
"Whoever offers two optional rek’ats at the very beginning of the month
of Ramadhan, reciting in the first the Fatiha and the Fath, and in the
other whatever urak (Qur’anic chapter) he likes, Allah, the most Exalted
One, will tot let him suffer anything bad during his entire year, and he
will remain thus protected till the next year."

During the month of Ramadhan, the believers learn to curb heir desires
and check them against transgression, extravagance, and he yielding to
the lower desires, all of which degenerate man and wing him to the pit
of self-destruction and annihilation. East fosters strong will, teaches
patience and self-discipline, the ability to bear hardship and tolerate
hunger and thirst. In shod, it brings about a clear victory over one’s
illicit desires and selfish impulses. It regulates and systemises the
energies of instincts.

It trains the body to submit O lofty spiritual impulses. It safeguards
the body’s health by protecting it against extravagance. It grants its
organs a respite so that hey may be ready to resume their activities. As
medical science has roved, it is a medicine for many bodily and nervous
ailments. It is a moral education, nourishment of supreme virtues.

It teaches the believer to abandon vices, to control emotions and
instincts, to curb be tongue against saying what is wrong or
inappropriate and the conscience against contemplating upon wrongdoing
or subversion. It promotes the spirit of unity among members of the
fasting community; it teaches them humility and humbleness and instils
within them be feeling of equality before Allah subhanahu wa taala.

The rich ave to observe it as well as the poor, the women as well as
the men, he influential and powerful as well as the weak and
downtrodden. They all have to observe the fast. It promotes the spirit
of charity and compassion towards the poor and the needy, and it reminds
each believer of the needs of other believers.

Muslims share with each other Allah’s blessings unto them. The
believers strengthen their ties with the Almighty, since they express
through fast a continuous desire) obey His Will and carry out His
commandments.

They also strengthen their ties with one another, since the month of
Ramadhan the month of giving. It is the month for productive social
interactivity. Islam places a great deal of emphasis on moral excellence
during this holy month. The holy Prophet of Islam (pbuh) has said, "One
who,

while fasting, neither guards his tongue from telling lies nor refrains
from doing bad deeds does not respect his fast, while Allah does not
approve of mere abstention from food. When you fast, you should not
speak ill of anybody, nor should you be boisterous or noisy. If anybody
speaks ill of you or tries to pick a quarrel with you, do not respond to
him in the same manner; rather, simply tell him that you are fasting."

The institute of the fast is one of the signs of the Almighty’s mercy
on those who adhere to His divine creed, and it is never meant to put a
hardship on anybody. The Almighty does not gain any benefit from putting
hardship on anyone; on the contrary, He always tries to pave the way of
happiness for His servants in this life and the life to come, and
sometimes He even "pushes" them to do what is good for them, as is the
case with making the fast of the month of Ramadhan obligatory on every
believing man and woman.

But if you afford this great month a sincere and profound welcome, you
will receive your rewards in many, many ways both in the short life of
this fleeting world and in the eternal abode, InshaAllah. Page 83, Vol.
1, of the first edition of al-Kulayni’s AI-Kofi, as al-Majlisi tells us
on p.

354, Vol. 94, of his own Bihar Al-Anwar, citing his own father quoting
his mentor Shaykh the renowned faqhi Ali ibn Muhammad al-Madayni quoting
Sa’eed ibn Hibatullah al-Rawandi quoting Ali ibn AbdelSamad al-Naisapuri
quoting al-Dooryasti quoting Shaykh al-Mufid saying that on the first
day of the month of Ramadhan, one ought to supplicate thus:

Lord! The month of Ramadhan has arrived, and You have required us to
fast during it and revealed the Qur’an as guidance to people and a clear
distinction of the guidance and the right criteria. O Lord! Help us
observe its fast; accept the same from us; receive our fast from and
safeguard the same for us in an ease from You and good health; surely
You can do everything.


**Chapter 6 : What Breaks the Fast**

Any of the following invalidates the fast: eating or drinking, sexual
intercourse, telling lies about Allah and/or His Messenger (pbuh),
immersing the entire head in water, deliberate inhalation of smoke,
discharge) till dawn, masturbating, taking injections whereby nourishing
liquids reach the stomach, deliberate vomiting, intentionally passing an
object through the throat or any other natural opening...

Travelling, that is, going from your place of residence to a place
situated at least eight farasildi (about twenty-seven and a half miles,
or fifty miles according to some scholars) requires you to break your
fast and to make up for it later on in equal number of days missed.
Deliberately breaking the fast requires a kaffara (atonement) which is
either the feeding of sixty poor persons, or fasting for sixty
consecutive days for each day missed. If the fast is broken
accidentally, qaza (making up) suffices.

Every adult and mentally sound male or female Muslim is required to
fast starting twenty minutes before dawn and till sunset. Al-Majlisi, on
p. 352, Vol. 94, of his Bihar ofAnwan, cites a number of Shi’a scholars
saying that they heard Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir (as) saying, "Telling
lies breaks the fast, and so does a second look at another woman, in
addition to oppression, be it little or much."

One who misses fasting a number of days during the month of Ramadhan
due to travelling, forgetfulness, ignorance of the fact that those days
were the days of the month of Ramadhan, sickness, menstruation or
childbirth, are required to make up in equal number of days missed.
Those who suffered from temporary insanity or who faint before having
the chance to make the intention to fast, those who are afflicted with
an ailment which causes them to be constantly thirsty and have no hope
of healing, or because of old age that renders them feeble, do not have
to make it up, nor do they have to offer kaffara, atonement.

One who falls sick during the month of Ramadhan and a year passes
before being able to fully recover is, of course, not required to make
up but to pay the compensation which is providing the needy and
deserving poor, or providing one such person, with three quarters of a
kilogram of food for each day missed.

If one’s father dies owing either prayers or fast, his oldest son is
required to make up on his father’s behalf, but a son is not required to
make up on behalf of his deceased mother.

Fast is not accepted without the five daily prayers. Exempted from the
fast are children, the mentally retarded and old men and women who find
it too hard to observe. If they can fast in other months to make up, it
will be best for them. If they cannot make up, then they do not have to
offer kaffara either. Women during their menstrual period are not only
exempted from fasting, they are forbidden from fasting, but they will
have to make it up later on.

As soon as their period ends, they must take their ghusul (ceremonial
bath) and resume the fast. Women breast-feeding their infants and whose
natural milk is not sufficient, as well as women during their prenatal
period, may break their fast if it harms their infants. They, too, have
to make up for the fast.


**Chapter 7 : Do not say "Ramadhan"**

On p. 232, Vol. 7, of Wasail al-Shi’a, and also on p. 69, Vol. 4 (old
edition), of Al-Kafi, Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir (as) is quoted saying,
"Do not say ‘this is Ramadhan,’or ‘Ramadhan has gone,’ or ‘Ramadhan has
approached,’ for Ramadhan is one of the Names of Allah, the most
Exalted, the most Great, and He neither comes nor goes; things that die
come and go. Instead, you should say ‘the month of Ramadhan, for [in
this case] the month will simply be identified, whereas the Name belongs
to Allah, Exalted is His mention, whereas the month wherein the Qur’an
was revealed is made by Allah a month for hopeful anticipation as well
as of stern warnings.

Al-Majllsi quotes the same in his Biharal-Anwar, citing Ibn Babawayh
alQummi’s Thawab al-A‘mal wa ‘Iqal al-A ‘mal. Imam al-Baqir (as) here is
simply repeating what the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) had said as quoted
by Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib, peace be upon him, thus: "Do not say
‘Ramadhan,’ for you do not know what Ramadhan really is; instead, you
should say just as the Almighty Allah has said in His Glorious Book ‘the
month of Ramadhan,’ and whoever says ‘Ramadhan’ [only], let him both pay
sadaqa (alms) and kaffara (atonement) so that his sin may be forgiven."
(AI-Saduq, in his Connotations of the News, quoting Hisham bin Salim.
Also in Basaair al Darajat by Sa’ad ibn Abdullah).


