Chapter 14 : Invocations At the Time of Breaking the Fast
=========================================================

Relying on the authority of Imam al-Sadiq (as), Shaikh al-Saduq, in his
work Al-Misbah, quotes the Imam (as) citing his forefathers saying that
the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) used to say the following whenever he
broke his fast: "O Almighty God! For You have we fasted, and with Your
sustenance have we broken our fast; so, accept it from us.

Thirst has dissipated; the veins have become wet, and the reward has
been secured by the Will of Allah." He (pbuh) is also quoted as saying
that if anyone says the following invocation at the time of breaking his
fast, he will come out of his sins and face the world as he faced it the
first time upon his birth:

"O Great One! O Great One! You are Allah; there is no god but You!
Forgive my great sins for none forgives the great sins but You, O Great
One!" The book AI-Iqbal, relying on the authority of Imam
Zainul-’Abidin, peace be upon him, states that whoever recites the Qadr
chapter at the time of breaking his fast and at the time of his last
meal before daybreak (i.e., suhoon) will be regarded by the Almighty as
one who sheds his own blood (i.e. becomes a martyr) for the cause of
Allah. The Prophet (pbuh) has said the following to Imam Ali ibn Abu
Talib (as):

"O father of al-Hassan! The month of Ramadhan is approaching; so,
recite your invocation before you break your fast for Gabriel has
informed me that the Almighty has said that He would accept the prayers
of whoever recited this invocation during the month of Ramadhan before
breaking his fast, before-starting his fast, and before saying his
prayers,

and He will answer ten of his pleas, forgive his sins, remove the cause
of his distress, eliminate the reason behind his agony, fulfil his
worldly wishes, help him achieve his objective, count his good deeds
among those of the prophets and the foremost to believe in them, and he
will come on the Day of Resurrection with a face shining like the full
moon." The invocation referred to above may be translated thus:

Lord! You are the Lord of the great light, of the lofty Throne, of the
over-flowing sea, of the great intercession, of the dear light, of the
Torah, of the Gospel, of the Psalms and of the great Our’an! You are the
Lord of all those in the heavens and those on earth! There is no god in
them other than You, and You are the Mighty One in the heavens and on
earth;

there is none mighty in them but You! And You are the King in the
heavens and on earth; there is no king in them other than You! I beseech
You by the greatness of Your great Name and the light of Your shining
greatness, and by Your domain! O Living One, O Sustainer! I beseech You
by the greatness of Your Name which shines upon the heavens and the
earth, and by Your Name whereby the first generations achieved
righteousness and so will the last ones!

O Living One before there was anyone living, and O Living One after
everyone else is no longer alive! There is no god but You! I beseech You
to send blessings unto Muhammad and the progeny of Muhammad and to
forgive my sins and ease my affair and grant me a speedy recovery and
keep my feet firm on the path of the religion of Muhammad and the
progeny of Muhammad and make my deeds acceptable and grant me the like
of what You granted Your sincere servants and devotees! I am a sincere
believer in You, and upon You do I rely and to You do I entrust my fate!
I beseech You to grant me,

my family and offspring, all goodness, and to keep away from us
all-evil! You are the Compassionate, the ever-Giving, the Creator of the
heavens and the earth! You bestow goodness upon whomsoever You will and
You withhold it from whomsoever You please! Bless me with Your mercy,
for You are the most Merciful of the merciful ones.

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as), used to say
the following whenever he was about to break his fast:

"In the Name of Allah! Lord! To You have we fasted, and with Your
sustenance have we broken our fast! Lord! Accept our deeds, for You
hear, and you know." Imam al-Sadiq (as) has recommended that you say the
following every night during the month of Ramadhan at the time of
breaking the fast: "All praise is due to Allah Who enabled us to fast
and provided us with sustenance so that we may break our fast
(therewith). Lord! Accept our deeds, help us fast, protect us during it,
accept it from us an easy acceptance, and grant us good health and well
being.

All praise is due to Allah Who has enabled us to fast a day of the
month of Ramadhan." According to the author of Al-Iqbal, who relies on
the authority of Muhammad ibn Abu Qurrah, in a chapter dealing with
recommended deeds during the month of Ramadhan, through the authority of
Imam al-Kathim who quotes his father who quotes his grandfather who
quotes Imam al-Hassan ibn All, peace be upon all of these Imams, the
invocation of everyone who fasts during the month of Ramadhan is
accepted as soon as he breaks his fast; so, upon eating the first
morsel, he used to say, "In the Name of Allah! O You Who expands
forgiveness, forgive me!

In the Name of Allah, Most Gracious, Most Merciful.

O You Who expands forgiveness! I implore You to forgive me!" Whoever
says so upon breaking his fast will be forgiven. Quoting his
forefathers, peace be upon him and them, Imam al-Kathim (as) says, "If
you enter the evening after having fasted, and you say the following as
soon as you break your fast: ‘Lord! To You have I fasted, and with Your
sustenance have I broken my fast! Upon You have I relied and depended,’
you will receive a reward equal to that of all those who fasted that
day."

It is recommended that you ought to perform your prayers before
finishing the iftar except when there is someone else waiting to eat, or
if you are more inclined to eat first. In his AI-Tahtheeb, Shaikh
al-Saduq quotes Imam al-Baqir (as) saying, "During the month of
Ramadhan, you should perform your prayers,

then break your fast, except if you are with others who are waiting to
break theirs; so, do not do something which they would not be doing but
break your fast with them then perform your prayers; otherwise, perform
your prayers first.’ So I asked him why it was so; he answered: ‘You
have to select one of two options: breaking the fast or performing the
prayers, and you should choose the best of them, and the best option is
performing the prayers.’ Then he added, ‘If you perform your obligatory
prayers while still fasting, and your prayers conclude your fast, it is
surely better for you."
- In Mizan al-Hikma, the Prophet (pbuh) is quoted saying: "The plea of
anyone who fasts is answered when he breaks his fast."

- It is reported in al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-Anwar that Imam al-Sadiq (as)
has said that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) used to say the following
whenever he ate with others: "May those fasting break their fast with
you, and may your food feed those who are devoted to Allah."

- Both al-Tirniithi and Ibn Majah have quoted the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) saying, "The supplications of three types of persons will never
be rejected: those who fast till they break their fast, a fair Imam, and
one who is wronged."

On p. 53 of his Aniali (or Majalis), the faqih and mentor Abu Ja’fer
Muhammad ibn Ali ibn al-Husain ibn Musa ibn Babawayh al-Qummi quotes his
father saying that Sa’d ibn Abdullah quotes Ahmed ibn al-Husain quoting
Muhammad ibn Jumhoor, and also Muhammad ibn Ziyad, citing Muhammad ibn
Muslim al-Thaqafi saying that he heard Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir (as)
saying, "The Almighty and Exalted One has angels who are charged with
those who perform the fast.

They seek forgiveness for them during each day of the month of Ramadhan
till its end. Every night, they call upon those who fast, when they
break their fast, ‘O servants of Allah! Receive the glad tidings! You
have felt hungry for a short while, so you shall be fed for quite a long
period of time! Blessed are you and yours!’ In the last night of the
month of Ramadhan, they call upon them saying, ‘O servants of Allah!
Receive the glad tidings! Allah has indeed forgiven your sins and
accepted your repentance! So see how you shall fare from now on!"


**Chapter 15 : The month of Repentance**

The month of Ramadhan is known as the month of repentance and
forgiveness. What is repentance? Does it suffice to say, "I regret and
repent and hope Allah will forgive me" to be forgiven? How does the
Almighty expect His sinning servants to seek repentance, and what
assurances, if any, can they receive from Him of His acceptance of their
repentance? What are the consequences if one’s repentance is rejected?
If you have not wondered about these questions,

and if you have not sought the answers for them, what is your chance of
saving your skin from the fire of Hell? One is tempted even to go beyond
all of this to ask: What does hell look like, and what are the other
situations, starting from the moment of death, of which one should be
apprehensive and for which he/she should prepare himself/herself? These
are very serious questions, and to answer all of them requires a book by
itself especially if their healing benefits are included.

Verse 82 of Surat al-Israa refers to such healing when the Almighty
says, and most surely what He says is the truth, "And We reveal of the
Qur’an that which is a healing and a mercy to the believers." Numerous
ahadith of the Holy Prophet of Islam (pbuh) and his Aid al-Bayt (as)
have explained which verses heal what ailments. We need your prayers,
dear reader, to enable us to publish a book containing such precious and
useful knowledge for our believing brethren.

Qur’anic verses referring to repentance are numerous. Repentance is so
importance that the Almighty dedicated an entire Chapter in His Book
(the Holy Qur’an) to iL: Surat al-Tawbah, Chapter of repentance (No. 9).
Other references to repentance can be found in Chapters such as these:

al-Baqarah, al-Maaida, al-An’am, Hud, al-Furqan, al-Qasas, al-Mujadila,
al-Muzzammil, Aali ‘Imran, al-Nisa, al-A’raf, al-NahI, al-Noor, Ghafir,
al-Ahqaf, al-Tahrim, alHujurat, al-Furqan, al-Ahzab, al-Buruj, al-Shura,
al-Tahrim, al-Nasr, al-Ra’d, al-Furqan, and many others. As a matter of
fact, Qur’anic verses referring to repentance, death and the life
hereafter outnumber all verses dealing with Islamic obligations
combined. This is how important repentance is.

Nobody is exempted from having to seek Allah’s forgiveness and to
repent for his faults and shortcomings, not even the Prophets and
Messengers of Allah, including the very greatest of all of them, our
Prophet and Messenger Muhammad (pbuh) who used to seek forgiveness at
least a hundred times a day without having committed a sin.

On p. 407, Vol. 2, of al-Kulayni’sAl-Kafi, Imam Abu Abdullah al-Sadiq
(as) is quoted saying that once a servant of Allah truly repents, that
is, regrets having done something wrong and ceases to repeat doing it,
Allah will love him and grants him a covering in the life of this world
and in the hereafter.

Mu’awiya ibn Wahab asked the Imam (as) what kind of covering he was
talking about, whereupon the Imam (as) said, "He (Allah) will order the
angels recording his deeds to wipe out the record of his sins, then He
inspires his senses to hide his sins, then He inspires the regions of
the earth to hide whatever sins that man committed in them;

so, he will meet the Almighty without carrying the burden of any sin,
and there will be none to testify against him [on the Day of Judgment]."
The Almighty has even assigned angels to pray Him to forgive those on
earth and in the heavens as these verses from Surat al-Mu’min testify:

Those who bear the ‘Arsh, and those around it, glorify and praise their
Lord; they believe in Him and implore His forgiveness for those who
believe (saying): Lord! Your Mercy has encompassed everything, and so
has Your Knowledge; so forgive those who turn (to You) in repentance and
follow Your Path, and protect them from the torment of the blazing fire!
And grant them, O Lord, admission into the Garden of Eternity which You
have promised them and the righteous among their fathers, wives, and
posterity, for You are the One Exalted in Might, the all-Knowing.
(Qur’an, 40:7-9)

And the Almighty never tires of forgiving His servants and accepting
their repentance. Muhammad ibn Yahya quotes Ahmed ibn Muhammad quoting
Ibn Mahbub quoting al-’Alaa quoting Muhammad ibn Muslim quoting Imam Abu
[father of] Ja’fer al-Baqir (as) saying the following to Muhammad: "O
Muhammad ibn Muslim! A sinner’s sins are forgiven when he repents
them;

so, let believers do good deeds following his repentance and [Allah’s]
forgiveness. By Allah! This applies only to those of deep conviction."
Muhammad asked the Imam (as), "What if he goes back to committing those
sins after having repented and sought forgiveness for them, then he
repents again?"

The Imam (as) said, "O Muhammad ibn Muslim! Do you think that a servant
of Allah regrets having committed a sin, then seeks forgiveness for it
and repents, that Allah does not accept his repentance?" Muhammad said,
"But he has done so repeatedly: he commits a sin then repents and seeks
[Allah’s] forgiveness [and so on]...

" He (as) said, "Whenever a believer returns to Allah and seeks His
forgiveness and the acceptance of his own repentance, Allah will return
to him forgiving, and Allah is most Forgiving, most Merciful; He accepts
repentance and overlooks the sins; therefore, beware of letting any
believer lose hope of achieving Allah’s mercy." This dialogue is
recorded on p. 409, Vol. 1, of al-Kulayni’s AI-Kafi.

But nobody should ever take the Almighty for granted. A man in the
company of the Commander of the Faithful Imam Au (as) once said:
‘Astaghfirullah." The Imam (as) said to him, "May your mother lose you!
Do you really know what forgiveness is? Forgiveness is the degree of
‘Jlliyyeen (see verses 18 and 19 of Surat al-Mutaffifun),

and it is a proper noun incorporating six meanings: 1) regret about the
past; 2) the determination never to go back to doing t again; 3) that
you should pay people what they owe you till you neet Allah without
having any burden to bear; 4) that you should rake up for any religious
obligation and meet its requirements; 5) hat you should approach your
flesh that grew out of consuming what s unlawful and make it dissolve
through your grief till your skin ouches your bones and new flesh grows
between them; and 6)

that iou make your body taste of the pain of obedience [to Allah’s
commanndments] just as you made it taste the sweetness of disobedimee. I
It is only after that can you say "Astaghfirulla." This is recorded n
NahjuI Balagha (wise saying number 253 of the original Arabic text; all
present English translations of this great book fall short of doing
justice to its original text).


