Chapter 16 : a Glance At Paradise and Hell - 1
==============================================

Although the Holy Qur’an tells us a good deal about Paradise and hell,
more details are provided through Qudsi ahadith related by archangel
Jibrael (Gabriel), peace be upon him, to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
who, in turn, is quoted by his right hand, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as),
and by the other eleven infallible Imams (as).

The Prophet of Islam (pbuh), moreover, was able, during his ascension
to heaven not only to see but even to walk through Paradise, to eat of
its fruit, and to observe its grounds. He (pbuh) was also able to cast a
look at hell and see the methods whereby its residents are being
tortured.

Both al-Tirmithi and Abu Dawood quote the following Qudsi hadith as
narrated by the Messenger of Allah (pbuh):

When Allah created Paradise and hell, He sent Gabriel to Paradise
saying, "Look at it and at what I have prepared therein for its
inhabitants." He came to it and looked at it, observing what Allah had
prepared therein for its inhabitants, then he returned to the Almighty
and said, "By Your Glory do I swear that nobody hears of it without
(desiring to) enter it.

" So He ordered it to be surrounded with obstacles and hardships then
ordered Gabriel to return to it and see what obstacles and hardships
with which it was surrounded. Having returned to it and observed it, he
addressed the Almighty saying, "By Your Glory do I swear that I fear
lest not even one person should be able to enter it.

" Allah said to him, "Go to take a look at hell and at what I have
prepared therein for its inhabitants," and Gabriel found it to be layers
above layers. He returned and said, "By your Glory do I swear that
nobody who hears of it will ever (wish to) enter it." So He ordered it
to be surrounded with incitements and attractions then ordered Gabriel
to return to it. Having returned to it, he said, "By Your Glory do I
swear that I am afraid lest nobody should be able to escape entering
it."

Let us now glance at each of these places separately.

**1) A Description of Paradise**

Paradise (or heaven) is of different degrees of loftiness and
happiness. Unlike hell, which is a very deep pit of fire, Paradise is
level (or, say, many levels), so much so that even its rivers do not
bore holes on its surface but flow miraculously in their paths without
scathing the surface. And there is more than one heaven or garden. Verse
64 of Surat al-Rahman (Chapter 55) is comprised of one single word:

Mudhamunatan, which describes two dark-green gardens, while verse 62 of
the same sura tells us that there are "Besides these two gardens there
are two other ones," bringing the total number of gardens comprising the
eternal abode of bliss to four. The highest pinnacle of Paradise is the
Garden of Eden, orjannat ‘adan. On p. 99, Vol. 13, of Lisan al-Arab, we
are told that jannat means: orchard, a garden with many fruit trees.

Jannat ‘adan is described in: verse 72 of Surat al-Tawbah (Ch. 9),
verse 23 of Surat al-Ra’d (Ch. 13), verse 31 of Surat al-NahI (Ch. 16),
verse 31 of Surat al-Kahaf (Ch. 18), verse 61 of Surat Maryam (Ch. 19),
verse 76 of Surat Ta-Ha (Ch. 20), verse 33 of Surat Fatir (Ch. 35),
verse 50 of Surat Sad (Ch. 38), verse 8 of Surat Ghafir (Ch. 40), verse
12 of Surat al-Saff (Ch. 61), and verse 8 of Surat al-Bayyinah (Ch. 98).
On p. 279, Vol. 13, of Lisan alArab, we are told that jannat ‘adan means
"the place of eternity",

the very central (al-awsat) garden." Page 427, Vol. 7, of Lisan
al-Arabs suggests that one of the meanings of al-awsat is: the best. No
wonder, then, to see more reference to jannat ‘adan than to, say, al-fl
rdaws, Paradise, in the Holy Qur’an. This leaves us with the conclusion
that the very best, the central, the focal, the highest pinnacle of
al-jannat, the heavenly Garden, is jannat ‘adan.

Paradise, or al-firdaws, as it is called in Arabic, is a loan word. The
Arabs to whom Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) was sent had no concept whatsoever
of life after death, of heaven and hell. This is one of the main
challenges faced by the Prophet (pbuh) when he started preaching Islam
to them. The Holy Qur’an refers to this challenge in Surat Ya-Sin: "And
he strikes out a likeness for Us and forgets his own creation. Says he:
Who will give life to the bones when they are rotten?

Say: The One Who brought them into existence the first time Alll give
life (back) to them, and He is Cognizant of all creation" 36:79). Even
the author of the best Arabic lexicon, Lisan al-Arab, is ~ot sure
whether firdaws is a word borrowed from Latin or Persian, ~or is
al-Majlisi, as the latter admits on p. 91, Vol. 8, of his one iundred
and ten volume encylopedia—not counting Vol.

Zero—known is Bihar al-Anwar . A third view, which may be more
accurate, is that is neither; its origin maybe Babylonian. The other
word used in the Holy Qur’an for it is Jannat, garden. But Paradise is a
lot more than ust a garden or an orchard. The Arabs never had the habit
of living nside their orchards.

Their homes, built of sun dried or fire baked lay, were grouped
together rather than scattered inside orchards as s the case with
Paradise. The presence of a good number of Jews in ioth Medina (where
they were more numerous due to the city’s olerable climate) and Mecca
permitted the Jews’ contribution to such oan words. Jahannam, a
derivation from Hebrew Gehinnom (According to the Oxford English
Dictionary (GED),

its full Hebrew name ge hen Hinnom, the valley of the son of I-linnom,
denoting a place near erusalem where, according to Jeremiah 19:5,
children were burnt in sacrifice to Baal the fertility god of polytheist
Canaanites, or to Molech (Moloch). For more information, refer to II
Kings 23:10 and Jeremiah 32:35 in the Bible.) (Latin 7ehenna), hell, is
another.

An overall ‘View" of this heavenly place can fill a book and nay be out
of the scope of this book; therefore, let us take a look at its gates as
seen by an eye-witness: Prophet Muhammad (pbuh) who is quoted on p. 144,
Vol. 8, of Bihar al-Anwar, describing it as transmitted by Abdullah ibn
Mas’ud thus:

When my Lord permitted me to ascend to heaven, Gabriel (as) said to me,
"I have been ordered to show you both Paradise and hell." So I saw
Paradise and the blessings it contains, and I saw hell and the types of
torment it has. Paradise has eight gates, on each one of which are four
statements, each one of which is better than the world and what is in it
for those who comprehend and act upon them. And hell has seven gates, on
each one of which are three statements, each one of which is better than
this world and what is therein for those who comprehend and act upon
them. Gabriel (as) said to me, "O Muhammad! Read what is written on
these gates!" So I read them.

On the first gate of Paradise it is written: There is no god except
Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wall)
of Allah; there are means to attain everything, and the means of
livelihood are four: contentment, spending on the right cause,
renunciation of grudge, and keeping company with the people of
righteousness.

On the second gate it is written: There is no god except Allah;
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wali) of
Allah; there are means to attain everything, and the means to attain
happiness in the life hereafter are four: rubbing the heads of (i.e.,
showing kindness to) the orphans, kindness to the widows, the effort to
assist the faithful in attaining their objectives, and looking after the
poor and the indigent.

On the third gate it is written: There is no god except Allah; Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wall) of Allah; there
are means to attain everything, and the means to attain good health in
the short life are four: saying the least, sleeping the least, walking
the least, and eating the least.

On the fourth gate it is written: There is no god except Allah;
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wali) of
Allah; whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day should be generous to
his guest; whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day ought to be
generous to his neighbor; whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day
ought to be generous to his parents; whoever believes in Allah and the
Last Day should either say what is good or remain silent.

On the fifth gate it is written: There is no god except Allah; Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wali) of Allah;
whoever wishes not to be oppressed should not oppress anyone; whoever
wishes not to be taunted should not taunt anyone; whoever wishes not to
be humiliated should not humiliate anyone; whoever wishes to cling to
the firm and reliable nitche in the short life as well as in the life
hereafter should testify that: There is no god except Allah; Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wali) of Allah.

On the sixth gate it is written: There is no god except Allah; Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a true servant (wali) of Allah;

whoever wishes his grave to be wide and spacious, let him build
mosques; whoever wishes the earth worms not to consume him in the
ground, let him make the mosques his home (That is, let him frequent
them so often as though he lives in them) whoever wishes to remain
fresh, (That is, suffering no thirst in this life nor after resurrection
when very few will not suffer thirst) let him sweep the mosques;

and whoever wishes to see his place in Paradise, let him cover the
mosques’ floors with carpets. On the seventh gate it is written: There
is no god except Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; Ali is a
true servant (wali) of Allah; a pure heart is [attainable] in [the
attainment of] four merits: visiting the sick, walking behind borne
coffins, buying shrouds (for the dead); and paying the debts back. On
the eighth gate it is written: There is no God except Allah; Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah;

All is a true servant (wali) of Allah; whoever wishes to enter these
gates should uphold four merits: generosity, good manners, charity, and
staying away from harming the servants of Allah. On the first gate of
hell I found three statements written: Whoever places his hope in Allah
will be happy; whoever fears Allah (alone) is granted security; a
conceited person who is doomed to perdition is the one who does not
place his hope on Allah nor does he fear Him.

On the second gate is the following writing: If one does not wish to be
naked on the Day of Judgment, he should clothe those who are naked in
the short life of the world; whoever wishes not to suffer from thirst on
the Day of Resurrection should give water to the thirsty to drink during
his life in the world; whoever wishes not to come on the Day of
Judgement hungry should feed the hungry in the life of the world. On the
third gate it is written: Allah curses the liars; Allah curses those who
are miserly; Allah curses the oppressors.

On the fourth gate, three statements are written: Allah humiliates
whoever demeans the religion of Islam; Allah humiliates whoever insults
AhI al-Bayt (as); Allah humiliates whoever assists the oppressors in
oppressing people. On the fifth gate three statements are written: Do
not follow your inclination, for inclinations oppose conviction;

do not talk much about that which does not concern you so you will fall
from the mercy of Allah; and do not be a helper to the oppressors. On
the sixth gate it is written: I am prohibited from admitting the
muftahids (These are those who attain the degree of ijtihad, the ability
to deduct injunctions.

See Glossary for explanations of Islamic terms) I am prohibited from
admitting those who give in charity; I am prohibited from admitting
those who fast, On the seventh gate three statements are written: Take
account of your deeds before you are accounted for them; rebuke your
souls before you are rebuked; and invoke Allah, the most Exalted, the
most Great, before you come back to Him and you will not then be able to
do so.

Al-Majlisi, on p. 131, Vol. 8, of his Bihar al-Anwar, quotes p. 39,
Vol. 2, of AI-Kaisal, where Ubayy quotes Sa’d quoting al-Barqi quoting
his father quoting Afimed ibn al-Nasr quoting ‘Amr ibn Shemr quoting
Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari quoting Imam Ja"fer al-Sadiq (as) saying,
"Think about Allah with the best of your thoughts, and be informed that
Paradise has eight gates the width of each one of which is the distance
of forty years."

In various sermons of Nahjul Balagha, Imam Ali (as) vividly describes
both Paradise and hell; this is a paraphrasing of how he (as) portrays
Paradise:

The degrees of its bliss and felicity vary a great deal from one person
or place to another; its bliss never ends; those who reside in it are
never evicted from its premises, nor do they ever get old, and nobody in
it is afflicted with misery (Sermon 85). They do not brag with one
another, nor do they multiply and have offspring (Sermon 161).

Nobody enters it except those who are familiar with (and who follow in
the footsteps of) the Imams from the progeny of the Prophet (pbuh) and
whom they (as) identify (on the Day of Judgment) as such (Sermon 152).

If you can ever conceive what may be described for you of it, your soul
will turn away from the most alluring of what is in the life of this
world of pleasures and temptations and things that please the eyes, and
you will be perplexed at how its trees are lined up in rows, and their
roots are buried in heaps of musk along its shores. Its fruits are very
easy to reach. Its inhabitants are treated periodically to drinks of
pure honey and wines, which do not cause intoxication, while such
residents are enjoying life in the pavilions of their mansions. Its
shade is Allah’s ‘Arsh; its light is His felicity, and its residents are
often visited by His angels.

The best enjoyment the residents of Paradise will appreciate will be
nearness to the Almighty and the ability to communicate with Him. He
will address them like a host surrounding his guests with his attention.
On p. 114, Vol. 8, of his Sahib, al-Bukhari quotes Ma’ath ibn Asad
quoting Abdullah quoting Malik ibn Anas quoting Zayd ibn Aslam quoting
‘Ata ibn Yasar quoting Abu Sa’eed al-Khudri, may Allah be pleased with
him, quoting the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying that Allah will
address the residents of Paradise and say, "O people of Paradise!" and
they will answer Him by saying, "Labbayk, Lord! At your Pleasure!"

Then He will ask them, "Are you contented?" They will answer, "And how
could we not be contented while You have given us what You have not
given anyone else of Your creation?" Then He will say, "I will give you
something even better than that," and they will say, "O Lord! And what
is better than that?" He will say, "I shall cause My favor to descend
upon you and I shall never be displeased with you.

" The same author, in his chapter on Tawhid, quotes Muhammad ibn Sinan
quoting Fulayh quoting Hilal quoting ‘Ata ibn Yasar saying that one day
the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) happened to be delivering had ith and a
bedouin was present. He (pbuh) said that a bedouin among the people of
Paradise once sought permission of his Lord to cultivate the land,
whereupon the Almighty asked him,

"Haven’t you acquired whatever you desire [of the trees and plants of
Paradise]?" He answered by saying, "Yes, but I still like to cultivate
the land." The Almighty permitted him to do so; therefore, he sowed
seeds and within seconds plants grew and ripened and yielded heaps of
harvest as high as mountains. It was then that the Almighty said, "Take
it, O son of Adam, for nothing satisfies you!" The bedouin said, "O
Messenger of Allah! This man must have been either from Quraysh or from
the Ansar, for they are farmers whereas we [bedouins] are not." The
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) smiled.

Since the love of acquisition and accumulation is instinctive among the
descendants of Adam, al-Tirmithi, on pp. 89-90, Vol. 2, of his Jami’,
quotes traditions of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) wherein he informs
his companions that the residents of Paradise will be treated
periodically to a feast that will remind them of how they used to spend
Fridays here on earth, and they will go to a bazaar where each one of
them will select whatever clothes, jewelry, or anything else he likes
and take it back to his residence.

The "Garden of Eden," that is, jannat ‘adan, is referred to in the Holy
Qur’an in more than one place. According to Ibn Mas’ud, it is the
central part of Paradise. According to al-Dhahhak, it is a city within a
city, one in which the messengers, prophets, martyrs, and the Imams of
guidance reside surrounded by all others.

It mansions are built of jewels, emeralds, sapphires, crysolites,
pearls, gold and silver and plated in musk, and, according to Muqatil
and al-Kalbi, a wind blows on it from underneath the ‘Arsh, immersing it
in white musk. Even Iblis, Satan, envied the humans on account of this
Garden of Eden. On p.

115 of Al-Mahasin, Muhammad ibn Qays quotes Imam Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir
(as) saying that Iblis the accursed saw prophet Noah (as) once saying
his prayers, and he envied him for it. Then he said to him, "O Noah!
Allah, the most Exalted One, the most Sublime, planted the trees of the
Garden of Eden Himself and built its mansions and let its rivers flow.
Then He looked at it and said, ‘The believers are surely the winners!
No, by My dignity! No immoral person shall ever reside here."’

The types of food and drink in Paradise are detailed in the Holy Qur’an
and Sunnah, and so are the huris, the women with large lovely eyes who
will be the wives of the lucky ones, yet one is tempted to ask: What
will the residents of Paradise enjoy most? Will it be the drinks, the
food, the music played by the branches and leaves of Paradise, or the
singing of these hurLs whose songs, sung individually or in groups, will
praise the Almighty and glorify Him? In his Tafsir, al-’Ayyashi, as
quoted on p. 139, Vol. 8, of Riliar al-Anwar, quotes Abu Baseer quoting
Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) saying, ‘The residents of
Paradise will enjoy neither food nor drink more than enjoying sexual
intercourse."

On pp. 438-439 of Ali ibn Ibrahim’s Tafsir, as quoted on pp. 120-121,
Vol. 8, of al-Majlisi’s Rihar al-Anwar, it is stated that Ibn Abu ‘Umayr
quotes Abu Busayr saying that he once asked Abu Abdullah Imam Ja’fer
al-Sadiq (as) to stir his anxiety about Paradise, whereupon the Imam
(as) said, "O Abu Muhammad!

Even from the distance of a thousand years can the sweet smell of
Paradise be detected, and the most modest residence in Paradise is one
where the jinns and humans go; there will they be well fed, and drinks
will be served to them, without diminishing anything thereof. The most
modest of the residents of Paradise is one who, upon entering his
garden, sees not one but three gardens full of wives, servants, rivers
and fruits that fill his eyes and heart with joy. Once he thanks Allah
and praises Him, he will be addressed to raise his head to see the
second garden, for it contains what the first does not.

So he implores, ‘Lord! I plead to You to grant me this one (instead)!’
The Almighty will say to him, ‘If I grant it to you, you may ask Me to
give you some other one!’ He will say, ‘This one is the one I want, O
Lord!’ So when he enters it, his pleasure will increase, and he will
thank and praise Allah, whereupon its gate is ordered open and he will
be told to raise his head.

Once the garden of eternity is opened for him, he will see many times
as much as he saw before. When his happiness is multiplied, he will say,
‘Praise to You, Lord, a Praise that can never be computed for having
granted me gardens and saved me from the fire!"’ At that point, Abu
Busayr could not help weeping, yet he asked the Imam (as) to tell him
more. Imam al-Baqir (as) said, "O Abu Muhammad! On the edges of the
rivers of Paradise are wives waiting for their husbands like trees
standing in a row. The moment he picks one of them, another is created
for him in her place."

Abu Busayr said, "May my life be sacrificed for you! Please do tell me
more!" The Imam (as) then said, "A believer is married to eight hundred
virgins, four thousand thayyibs (A thayyib is a deflowered but unmarried
woman who may be either a pious widow or a divorcee) and two huris."
"Eight hundred virgins?!" Abu Busayr asked the Imam (as) in amazement.

"Yes. Whenever he cohabits with one of them, he always finds her so."
"May my life be sacrificed for your sake," said Abu Busayr, "What are
the huris created of?" The Imam (as) told the inquirer that they were
created of the same heavenly substance of which Paradise is created,
then he added, "Her leg can be seen even from behind seventy outfits."

Abu Busayr asked the Imam (as), "May my life be sacrificed for you, do
they say anything there?" The Imam (as) said, "Yes, they will say
something no human has ever heard." "What is it?" asked Abu Busayr.
"They will say: ‘We are the eternal ones who never die! We are the
blessed ones, so we never suffer! We are the ones who reside and never
depart! We are the ones who are pleased, so we never complain!
Congratulations to those who were created for us, and congratulations to
those for whom we are created! We are the ones who, were we to hang in
the skies, our light would overwhelm all visions.

Both Ibn Qawlawayh, as well as al-Majlisi who on p. 143, Vol. 8, of his
work Bihar al-Anwar, quote Sa’d quoting Ibn ‘Eisa quoting Sa’ eed ibn
Janah quoting Abdullah ibn Muhammad quoting Jabir ibn Yazid quoting Imam
Abu Ja’fer al-Baqir (as) quoting his forefathers (as) saying that the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) said once, "All prophets are prohibited from
entering Paradise before I do, and all nations are prohibited from
entering it before those who follow us, we AhI al-Bayt (as), enter it."
The Commander of the Faithful Imam All ibn Abu Talib (as) is quoted on
p. 139, Vol. 8, of Bilsar al-Anwar, as saying, "Paradise has seventy-one
entrances: my Alil al-Bayt (as) and followers enter through seventy of
them, while all other people enter through the other."

Other types of enjoyment include pleasures such as no weariness will
ever touch the residents of Paradise, nor will they ever suffer any pain
whatsoever; they will not need to relieve themselves at all; instead,
what they eat comes out of them in the form of sweet-smelling sweat.
They will have no chores to perform, nor will they be denied anything.

Their wishes are granted, and their happiness never ends, nor will they
ever be bored. May the Almighty admit us into His Garden by His mercy,
for no matter how much good we do, the favor for doing it is His, and
only His. He is the One Who creates within us the desire to do good; He
is the One Who enables us to do good deeds, and He is the One Who,
nevertheless, rewards us for doing them, though we would not have been
able to do them on our own. He is the source of all good. He is all
goodness.

Finally, one is tempted to ask how Paradise as a whole may be
conceived. The discussion of jannat ‘adnan above suggests that it is
quite likely it is circular with the Garden (or Gardens) of Eden being
in the very center surrounded by the gardens of those who were close in
lineage and deeds to the Prophet of Islam (pbuh), namely AhI al-Bayt
(as), surrounded by those who were loyal to them in word and in deed,
and so on. The further one goes from the central point, the less his
status will be, and the less his degree of bliss. The circle has always
symbolised eternity. The Garden may very likely be circular, and surely
Allah knows best.


