Chapter 16 : a Glance At Paradise and Hell - 2
==============================================

**2) A Description of Hell**

Muslims observe the fast so that they may be spared the torment of
hell. What kind of place is hell, and what sort of torment? Books have
been written discussing only this subject. The Holy Qur’an contains
vivid descriptions of the psychological and physical torture awaiting
those who did not live up to what the Almighty had expected of them, who
did not honour the trust whereby He entrusted them, and who did not
carry out the goal for which He created them, that is, to worship Him,
and Him alone.

Qur’anic references to such torment maybe reviewed in Surahs such as
these: al-Baqarah,Aali-’Imran, alMaaida, al-An" am, al-A’raf, al-Anfal,
Younus, Hud, al-Ra’d, al-Hijr, al-NahI, Maryam, Taha, al-Hajj,
al-Muminoon, al-Noor, al-Furqan, al‘Ankabut, Luqman, al-Sajdah,
al-Ahzab, Saba, al-Zumar, Ohafir, alTur, al-Hashr, al-Ma’ arij,
al-fluruj, al-Fajr, al-Nisaa..., in most Surabs, as a matter of fact,
for the Holy Qur’an was revealed to warn humans against the fire of hell
and to attract them to the eternal bliss and happiness: to a kingdom
that never diminishes.

What physical shape does hell take? Let us review these Qur’anic
verses:

(As for) those who disbelieve in Our Signs, they are the people of the
left hand. On them is fire closed over. (Holy Qur’an, 90:19-20)

"Closed over" means capped; hell may be compared to a pot, with a lid,
on an oven, a pot which is burning both inside and out. The meaning
becomes more clear when we recite these verses:

And what will make you realise what the crushing disaster is? It is the
fire kindled by Allah, (a fire) which rises above the hearts. Surely it
shall be closed over them, in extended columns. (Holy Our’an, 104:5-9)

"Closed over them" conveys the same meaning as in 90:20 above. And its
columns may be indicative of its depth, hence such columns are
"extended," quite lengthy, and Allah knows best. How large are its
sparks? The answer is provided by its Creator and ours: "Surely it sends
up sparks like palaces" (Holy Qur’an, 77:32).

Since references to hell abound throughout the Holy Qur’an, we ought to
stop here to review some traditions of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and
the Imams (as) describing the horrors of the place called hell, a place
as intense in heat as it is in chillness, a place whose fire is fed by
sulphur pieces each one of which is as large as the largest of the
earth’s mountains. Equally large are the areas where those being
tormented are taken to be chilled after being charred by its fire. In
other words, they are taken from one extreme to another. There are on
our planet ice mountains as well as volcanoes spewing rivers of molten
or fluid rocks as lava; so is the case with hell: it contains both heat
and chilliness.

On p. 309 of Ibrahim al-Selek’s book The Divine Traditions, a
compilation of Qudsi ahadith, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted
saying that hell complained to its Lord saying, "O Lord! [Even] my parts
are consuming one another!" whereupon the Almighty permitted it to take
two breaths, one in the winter and one in the summer, hence the severe
heat of the summer and the bitter cold of the winter. Had it been
pennitted to take more than two, no life would have become possible on
earth.

While the lucky ones are enjoying the fruits of Paradise, the residents
of hell will be eating thorn-like ‘food" that will reach their throats
and halt there; it neither reaches their stomachs, nor does it enable
them to vomit. This is one of the foods on hell’s "menu." Another type
is prepared for them from the pus of the wounds of those being tortured
in hell, then boiled to a degree that will split their bowels.

The Prophet of Islam (pbuh) is quoted on p. 145, Vol. 1, of
al-Zamakhshari’s Rabee’ al-Abrar as having asked Archangel Gabriel (as),
"Why have I never seen [archangel] Michael smiling?" Gabriel (as)
answered, "Michael never smiled since hell was created." Anas, may Allah
be merciful to his soul, is quoted by al-Zamakhshari saying that the
least degree of torture in hell are two pairs of shoes made for someone
in it from the heat of which his brain boils. More details about this
horrific place are excerpted from al-Zamakhshari thus:

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, "During my night journey
(israa), I heard a huge noise, so I asked Gabriel, ‘What is this huge
noise, O Gabriel?’ He (Gabriel) said, ‘It is a rock thrown from the tip
of hell into it, and it has been falling for the past seventy Autumns,
and it has now reached its bottom." Abu ‘Asim ‘Ubayd ibn ‘Umayr ibn
Qatadah al-Laythi, Mecca’s judge (d. 68 A.H.), has said, "Hell exhales
one exhalation because of which all angels and prophets tremble, so much
so that even Ibraliim (Abraham) (as) kneels down and says,

‘Lord! I plead to You to only spare me!"’ Abu Sa’eed alKhudri is quoted
saying, "If a mountain is hit with one of the clubs used by the angels
charged with hell, it will be fragmented into bits and turned into
dust." Tawoos ibn Keesan al-Khawlani is quoted saying, "When hell was
created, the angels became extremely frightened, and when you (humans)
were created, they became calm.

" Al-Hasan ibn Yasar al-Basir has said, "By Allah! None among the
servants of Allah can withstand its heat! It has been said to us that if
a man stands in the east and hell in the west, and if it is partially
uncovered for him, his skull will boil. Had a bucket of its pus been
dropped on earth, not a single living being would have remained alive."
Hisham ibn al-Hassan al-Dastoo’i used not to put out his lamp at night.
His family objected and said to him, "we cannot tell when it is daytime
and when it is nighttime!" He said, "By Allah! If I put the lamp out, I
will remember the darkness of the grave, and no sleep can then overcome
me."

Punishment in hell will be according to the type or types of sins
committed during the life of this world. For example, those who
treasured their money and were negligent about taking out their zakat
and other religious taxes will be burned with what they had treasured on
their foreheads, on their sides, and on their backs. In other words, on
most of their bodies.

Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, may Allah be pleased with him, used to say, ‘Tell
those who treasure their wealth that they will be burnt therewith on
their foreheads, on their sides, and on their backs till they are filled
with fire." The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said, as we are told on p.
243, Vol. 8, of Bihar al-Anwar, "No servant of Allah who has wealth and
who does not pay its due zakat except that he will be burnt with metal
pieces heated in the fire of hell whereby his forehead and sides and
back are ironed till Allah finishes trying His servants on a Day the
duration of which is a thousand years of your own calculation. Then he
will see his way, either to Paradise, or to hell."

Abu Umamah quotes the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) explaining the type of
drink given to the residents of hell. Says he, "It will be brought to
him, and he will hate it; when it is brought close to him, it will burn
his face and his skull will fall off. If he drinks of it, it will tear
his intestines to pieces till it comes out of his anus." The Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying, "The prayers of one who drinks wine
will not be accepted for forty days; so, if he dies and his stomach has
some of it, it will be incumbent on Allah to make him drink of sadeed, a
liquid that comes out of the vaginas of adultresses which will be
collected in cauldrons in hell to give to them, so it will incinerate
their stomachs and skins."

This tradition has been narrated by Shu’ayb ibn Waqid who quotes
al-Husain ibn Zayd who quotes Imam Ja’fer al-Sadiq (as) as indicated on
p. 244, Vol. 8, of Bihar al-Anwar. Those guilty of sins other than
adultery or fornication will be given a drink of lead and molten brass,
as Ibn Mas’ud is quoted in Bihar al-Anwar as saying. Mujahid says it
will be the pus and blood of those being tormented, while Ibn Jubayr
says it is black water; since hell is black, its water is black, its
trees are black, and the faces and bodies of its residents are charred
black.

This view is held by al-Dhahhak. Additional torture methods in hell
include snakes and scorpions whose fangs, as Ibn ‘Abbas and others
narrate, are as huge and as tall as palm trees. The snakes will be as
thick as elephants, and the scorpions will be as large as black mules.
And the inmates of hell will often be beaten with huge clubs: if they
are in the high levels of hell, the blows will cause them to fall into
the other layers, each more intense in heat than the other, for seventy
years. Once they reach its bottom, its flame will push them back, and so
on.

There will be no moment of respite for them in it. Which is the very
worst area of hell? Ibn Mas’ud and Ibn ‘Abbas are quoted on pp. 241-242,
Vol. 8, of al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-Anwar saying that hypocrites will be
lodged in the lowest level of hell where the torment is the most severe.
Closed fireboxes, like ovens, are their torture chambers.

Let us now return to Nahjul Balagha to see how Imam Ali (as) paints for
us the following graphic description of hell, may Allah never permit it
to touch us:

The worst calamity is when someone falls in to the pit of hell; he will
feel as if he is being boiled alive therein, and he will find it a
never-ending torment, a creature of some sort that snorts and exhales,
giving its residents no respite at all, nor does it ever afford them a
moment of rest, nor can they ever be shielded from its torment by any
power or any sure death. There is no brief slumber in it, nor any
interval between its successive waves of torture: an ever-recurring pain
from which we seek Allah’s help (Sermon 83) .

It surely is the very worst of all places, a place where the hands of
its inhabitants are tied to their necks, and their foreheads are chained
to their feet, and their clothing is made of sheets of tar. Their shirts
are made of fire, while their torment is a never-ending fire in a place
the door of which is capped over its people, in a raging fire the very
noise of which is deafening, the sparks of which crackle and there is no
freedom from it nor a period for its expiration, nor does it put an end
to the people in it to finish them (Sermon 109).

Its heat is intense, its bottom is distant, its tornament" is iron, its
drink is pus (Sermon 120). On the Day of Judgement, the unjust imam will
be brought without having anyone to help him or find an excuse for him,
so he will be hurled into the fire of hell where he will turn with it
just as a grinding mill turns, till he collides with its deepest depth
headlong. (Sermon 164) If Malik (custodian of hell) becomes angry, he
causes its parts to crush one another, and if he rebukes it, its gates
fly up and down (and spit like volcanoes). (Sermon 183)

Reference to hell being brought from one place to another suggests
beyond the shadow of doubt that distances, places, and spaces are a
matter of reality in the life to come as they are in our worldly life. A
testimony to hell being brought, that is, being moved or transferred
from one location to another, exists in verse 23 of Surat al-Fajr
(Chapter 89):

And hell, that Day, is brought (to face all humans); on that Day will
man remember, but how will that remembrance benefit him?" (Holy Qur’an,
89:23) and in numerous other Qur’anic verses. Of course those who will
move hell from one place to another will be none other than the angels
whom we cannot see in this life but whom we will see the moment we die,
but let us save the discussion of this most fascinating subject of
angels to another book, insha-allah.

Remember that all these portraits of hell do not include the horrors
resulting from being in the company of devils, demons, and condemned
jinn’s who will all share hell with condemned humans. A look cast any of
these creatures being tortured, their shrieks, their unsightly parts
being pulled out of their places, and their skins being peeled off their
flesh... may be as terrifying as hell itself. Remember how Allah
described mankind as being created in the best form.

Humans condemned to hell will realise this fact more than others, while
the blessed will be spared such horrifying realisation. Those who read
the story of Saint Joan of Arc (1412- 1431), the French heroine who,
despite her tender age, led French armies to victory over the English at
Orleans, remember her saying that she saw once a demon, and that she
would prefer to walk on burning timbers from one end of the earth to the
other rather than seeing it again. Imagine being in the company of such
demons for eternity.

Such is hell, and such is its torment. Had we had a glance at it, or
even at some of its inhabitants, we would not have minded having to fast
each and every day of our life, not only during the month of Ramadhan,
the month of Allah, the month of forgiveness and mercy, but all our
life.


**Chapter 17 : When Fast is Prohibited**

There are certain occasions when fast becomes unlawful; these are:

1) Fasting the first day of the month of Shawwal (Eidul-Fitr).

2) Fasting the tenth day of the month of Thul-Hijah (Fidul-Adha).

3) Fasting the eleventh and twelfth of Thul-Hijjh by anyone, pilgrim or
non-pilgrim, who is then present at Mina.

4) Fast which is not required, such as that of the sick, the woman
during her menstrual or post-natal (after having delivered) period, or
fasting for a transgression committed (such as fasting to thank Allah
for having been able to kill another Muslim), and the fast of one on a
journey except if such person seeks the fulfillment of a dear and lawful
worldly wish and goes to visit the Prophet’s shrine in Medina.

5) Fasting with the intention to prolong his fast till beyond sunset.

6) Fast of silence with the intention of hoping to seek nearness to
Allah. Such fast was granted to a few holy men and women after the
latter sought and obtained pennission from the Almighty such as the case
of Zakariyya (as) and Maryam mother of Jesus (as).

7) The fast of doubt: if one is not sure whether the day he is fasting
is part of the month of Sha’ban or that of the month of Ramadhan.

8) The fast of a wife who deliberately goes against her husband’s wish
not to fast.

Some Muslims, particularly Shi ‘as, may disagree with some of these
eight items depending on who they follow as their marji’ taqlid. When in
doubt, ask your marji’ or his representative, and Allah knows best.


**Chapter 18 :It is the Month of the Holy Qur’an**

The month of Ramadhan is sacred because it is the month when the Holy
Qur’an was revealed, and because it is the month containing
Lailatul-Qadr. It is, therefore, appropriate to know a little about this
Book, the greatest of all divine revelations, the best revelation the
descendants of Adam (as) have ever received from their Lord.

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted on p. 261, Vol. 2, of
al-Zamakhshari’s Rabee’ al-Abrar as saying, "Allah Almighty read Surats
Ta-Ha and Ya-Sin a thousand years before creating Adam, and when the
angels heard it, they said, ‘Congratulations to those to whom such
speech is revealed, and congratulations to the hearts that memorize it,
and congratulations to the tongues that articulate it."’ In the same
reference, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted saying, ‘The hearts
rust just as iron rusts.

’ He (pbuh) was asked, "0 Messenger of Allah! What removes their rust?’
He (pbuh) said, "The recitation of the Qur’an and the remembrance of
death." In one Qudsi hadith, the Almighty has said, "I shall give one
who is too preoccupied with his recitation of the Qur’an to plead to Me
the very best of what I give those who are grateful to Me."

Imam Ali (as) has said, "One who recites the Qur’an while standing
during the prayers will receive a hundred good deeds for each verse he
recites; if he recites it sitting during his prayers, he will receive
fifty good deeds for each verse, and whoever recites it after having
made his wudu will receive twenty-five good deeds for each verse, and
one who recites it without wudu will receive ten good deeds for each
verse he recites." One day, as al-Zamakhshari tells us on p. 264, Vol.
2, of his Rabee’ al-A brar, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) was late in
going back home. "What kept you so long from coming home" Ayesha asked
him. He (pbuh) said, "It is the recitation of a man whose voice is
better (when reciting the Holy Qur’an) than anyone else I have heard."

Then he (pbuh) stood and listened to him for a good while then said,
"He is Salim, a slave of Abu I-Iuthayfah. Praise to Allah for the
presence of people like him in my nation." During the month of Ramadhan,
Sufyan al-Thawri used to devote his time to the recitation of the Holy
Qur’an, and Malik ibn Anas used to stop studying and researching had hA,
abandon the company of scholars, and concentrate on reciting the Holy
Qur’an instead, as we are told on pp. 257-258 of Vol. 2 of
al-Zamakhshari’s Rabi’ al-Abrar. In one of his sermons, Imam All (as)
said the following about the Holy Qur’an:

Besides the Holy Qur’an, nobody should complain of needing anything
else. One who is deprived of it cannot be described as having anything
at all; so, seek in it the healing of your ailments, and solicit its
assistance when you encounter a hardship, for it contains a cure for the
worst of ailments: disbelief, hypocrisy, and misguidance.

Plead to Allah through it instead of pleading to any of His creation.
Nobody can seek Allah through anything better than it, and be admonished
that it is an intercessor that will intercede on your behalf, and a
speaker that speaks the truth. For whomsoever the Holy Qur’an intercedes
on the Day of Judgment, he will surely achieve intercession, and whoever
seeks it to testify to his truthfulness will surely be regarded as a man
of truth, for someone shall call on the Day of Judgment:

Everyone who cultivates is tried by what he cultivates except those who
cultivate the Qur’an;" so be among those who cultivate and follow it,
and make it the means to reach your Lord. Seek its advice regarding your
souls, and compare your views with those of its own, and seek its help
against yielding to your desires (Rabee’ al-A brar fee Nusoos al-A
khbar, pp. 258-259).

The Imam (as) has also said, "One who recites the Qur’an then dies and
enters the fire is among those who took Allah’s signs lightly."


