Part 1: General Meaning
=======================

1. Meaning of Imamate and Khilafah
----------------------------------

**Al-Imamah** literally means 'to lead '; al-imam means 'the leader'. In
Islamic terminology al-imamah (Imamate) means 'universal authority in
all religious and secular affairs, in succession to the Prophet'[^1].
al-Imam means 'the man who, in succession to the Prophet, has the right
to the absolute command of the Muslims in all religious and secular
affairs '.

The word 'man' signifies that a female cannot be an Imam. 'Absolute
command' excludes those who lead in the prayers: they are also called
'Imam of the prayers', but they do not have absolute authority. 'In
succession to the Prophet ' denotes the difference between a prophet and
an Imam. The Imam enjoys this authority not directly, but as the
successor of the Prophet.

The word **Al-Khilafah** means 'to succeed' and al-khalifah means 'the
successor'. In Islamic terminology al-khilafah and al-khalifah
practically signify the same meanings as al-ima'mah and al-ima'm
repectively.

**Al-Wisayah** means ' the executorship of the will', and al-wasiyy
means 'the executor of the will'. Their significance in Muslims'
writings is the same as that of al-khilafah (caliphate) and al-khalifah
(caliph).

It is interesting to note that many previous prophets were also the
caliphs of their predecessor prophets, thus they were nabiyy and
khalifah both; while other prophets (who brought new shari'ah) were not
caliphs of any previous prophets. Also there were those who were caliphs
of the prophets but not prophets themselves.

The question of Imamate and caliphate has torn the Muslim community
apart and has affected the thinking and philosophy of the different
groups so tremendously that even the belief in Allah (at-tawhid) and the
prophets (an-nubuwwah) could not escape from this divergence of views.

This is the most debated subject of Islamic theology. Muslims have
written thousands upon thousands of books on caliphate. The problem
before me is not what to write; it is what not to write. In a small work
such as this, one cannot touch on all the various aspects of this
subject, let alone go into detail on even those topics which are
described therein. This provides only a brief outline of the differences
regarding the caliphate.

It may be of help to mention here that regarding this question the
Muslims are divided into two sects: the Sunnis, who believe that Abu
Bakr was the first caliph of the Holy Prophet of Islam; and the Shi'ahs,
who believe that 'Ali Ibn Abi Talib, peace be upon him, was the first
Imam and caliph.

This fundamental difference has led to other differences which shall be
described in the following chapters.

2. Summary of Differences
-------------------------

The Holy Prophet has said in a hadith which has been accepted by all
sects of Islam:

My ummah (followers) will shortly break up into seventy-three sects, all
of which shall be condemned except one[^2].

The seekers of salvation have always made untiring efforts to inquire
into the matter to discover the right course - the path to salvation.
And indeed it is necessary for every man to take reason as his guide,
try his best in this matter and never despair of attaining the truth.
But this can only be possible when he has a clear view of the radical
differences before him, and discarding all bias and prejudices, examines
the points at issue with thoughtful mind, always praying to Allah to
lead him in the right path.

For this reason I propose to briefly mention here the important
differences and conflicts together with the arguments and reasonings of
each sect, in order to facilitate the path of inquiry. The main
questions are:

1. Does it lie with Allah to appoint a prophet's successor or is it the
duty of the ummah (the followers) to appoint whomsoever they please as
successor to the Prophet?

2. In the latter case, did Allah or the Prophet place in the hands of
the ummah any systematic code containing the rules and procedures for
the appointment of a caliph, or did the ummah by their unanimous consent
before appointing a caliph, prepare a set of rules to which they adhered
(subsequently), or did the ummah act according to what they thought
expedient at the time and according to the opportunity at their
disposal? Had they the right to act as they did?

3. Does reason and Divine Law demand the existence of any qualifications
and conditions in an Imam and caliph? If so, what are they?

4. Did the Prophet of Islam appoint anyone as his caliph and successor
or not? If he did so, who was it? If not, why?

5. After the Prophet's death, who was recognized to be his caliph and
did he possess the qualifications necessary for a caliph?[^3]

3. Basic Difference
-------------------

It will save time if we explain at the outset the basic cause of the
differences concerning the nature and character of the Imamate and
caliphate. What is the primary characteristic of the Imamate? Is an
Imam, first and foremost, the ruler of a kingdom? Or is he, first and
foremost, the representative of Allah and vicegerent of the Prophet?

As the Imamate and caliphate is generally accepted as the successorship
of the Prophet, the above questions cannot be answered until a decision
is made on the basic characteristics of a prophet. We must decide
whether a prophet is, first and foremost, the ruler of a kingdom or the
representative of Allah.

We find in the history of Islam a group which viewed the mission of the
Holy Prophet as an attempt to establish a kingdom. Their outlook was
material; their ideals were wealth, beauty and power.

They, naturally, ascribed the same motives to the Holy Prophet. 'Utbah
ibn Rabi'ah, the father-in-law of Abu Sufyan, was sent to the Holy
Prophet to convey the message of the Quraysh: "Muhammad! If you desire
power and prestige, we will make you the overlord of Mecca. Do you
desire marriage into a noble family? You may have the hand of the
fairest maiden in the land. Do you desire hoards of silver and gold? We
can provide you with all these and even more. But you must forsake these
nefarious preachings which imply that our forefathers who worshipped
these dieties of ours were fools."

The Quraysh were almost certain that Muhammad (S) would respond
favourably to this offer. But the Holy Prophet recited surah 41 in reply
which, inter alia, contained the following warning:

***But if they turn away, then say: "I have warned you of a thunderbolt
(of punishment) like the thunderbolt of the 'Ad and the Thamud " (41:
13)***

'Utbah was overwhelmed by this clear warning. He did not accept Islam,
but advised the Quraysh to leave Muhammad (S) alone to see how he could
fare with other tribes. The Quraysh claimed that he was also bewitched
by Muhammad (S)[^4]

Thus he wanted to leave Muhammad (S) to other tribes. On the other hand
when the Prophet immigrated to Medina and the Quraysh waged war upon
war, the other tribes thought it advisable to leave Muhammad (S) to his
own tribe. 'Amr ibn Salamah, a companion of the Prophet, states: "The
Arabs were waiting for the Quraysh to accept Islam. They used to say
that Muhammad (S) should be left to his own people. If he would emerge
victorious over them, he was undoubtedly a true prophet. When Mecca was
conquered, all the tribes hastened to accept Islam."[^5]

Thus according to them, victory was the criterion of truth! If Muhammad
(S) would have been defeated, he would have been considered a liar!

The view that his sacred mission was nothing but a worldly affair was
repeatedly announced by Abu Sufyan and his clan. At the time of the fall
of Mecca, Abu Sufyan left Mecca to discern the strength of the Muslim
army. He was seen by the uncle of the Prophet, 'Abbas, who took him to
the Holy Prophet and advised the Prophet that he be given protection and
shown respect, in order that he may accept Islam.

To summarize the event, 'Abbas took Abu Sufyan for a review of the
Islamic army. He pointed out to Abu Sufyan eminent personalities from
every clan who were present in the army. In the meantime, the Holy
Prophet passed with his group which was in green uniform. Abu Sufyan
cried out: "O ‘Abbas! Verily your nephew has acquired quite a kingdom!
“‘Abbas said: "Woe unto thee! This is not kingship; this is
Prophethood".[^6]

Here we see two opposing views in clear contrast. Abu Sufyan never
changed his views. When 'Uthman became caliph, Abu Sufyan came to him
and advised: "O Children of Umayyah! Now that this kingdom has come to
you, play with it as the children play with a ball, and pass it from one
to another in your clan. This kingdom is a reality; we do not know
whether there is a paradise or hell or not."[^7]

Then he went to Uhud and kicked at the grave of Hamzah (the uncle of the
Prophet) and said: "O Abu Ya'la! See that the kingdom which you fought
against has at last come to us."[^8]

The same views were inherited by his grandson, Yazid, who said: Banu
Hashim staged a play to obtain the kingdom; actually, there was neither
any news (from Allah) nor any revelation.[^9]

If that is the view held by any Muslim, then he is bound to equate the
Imamate with rulership. According to such thinking, the primary function
of the Prophet was kingship, and, therefore, anyone holding the reins of
power was the rightful successor of the Holy Prophet.

But the problem arises in-that more than ninety per cent of the prophets
did not have political power; and most of them were persecuted and
apparently helpless victims of the political powers of their times.
Their glory was not of crown and throne; it was of martyrdom and
suffering. If the primary characteristic of prophethood is political
power and rulership, then perhaps not even 50 (out of 124,000) prophets
would retain their divine title of nabiyy.

Thus it is crystal-clear that the main characteristic of the Holy
Prophet was not that he had any political power, but that he was the
Representative of Allah. And that representation was not bestowed on him
by his people; it was given to him by Allah Himself.

Likewise, his successor's chief characteristic cannot be political
power; but the fact that he was the Representative of Allah. And that
representation can never be bestowed upon anyone by his people; it must
come from Allah Himself. In short, if an Imam is to represent Allah, he
must be appointed by Allah.

4. System of Islamic Leadership
-------------------------------

There was a time when monarchy was the only system of government known
to the people. At that time the Muslim scholars used to glorify monarchs
and monarchy by saying, the king is the shadow of Allah, as though Allah
has a shadow!

Now in modern times democracy is in vogue and the Sunni scholars are
never tired of asserting in hundreds and thousands of articles, books
and treatises that the Islamic system of government is based upon
democracy. They even go so far as to claim that democracy was
established by Islam, forgetting the city-republics of Greece. In the
second half of this century, socialism and communism are gaining hold of
the undeveloped and developing countries; and I am not surprised to hear
from many well-meaning Muslim scholars tirelessly asserting that Islam
teaches and creates socialism. Some people in Pakistan and elsewhere
have invented the slogan of 'Islamic socialism'. What this 'Islamic
socialism' means, I do not know. But I would not be surprised if within
ten or twenty years these very people start claiming that Islam teaches
communism!

All this 'changing with the wind' is making a mockery of the Islamic
system of leadership. Some time ago in a gathering of Muslims in an
African country, in which the president of the country was the guest of
honour, a Muslim leader stated that Islam taught to 'Obey Allah, obey
the Apostle and your rulers'. In his reply, the president (who
incidentally, was a staunch Roman Catholic) said that he appreciated
very much the wisdom of the commandment to obey Allah and the Apostle of
Allah; but he could not understand the logic behind the order to obey
'your rulers'. What if a ruler is unjust and a tyrant'! Does Islam
enjoin Muslims to obey him passively without resistance?

This intelligent question demands an intelligent reply. It cannot be
regarded lightly. The fact is that the person, who invited that
criticism, did so because of his misinterpretation of the Holy Qur'an.

Let us examine the system of Islamic leadership. Is it democratic? The
best definition of democracy was given by Abraham Lincoln when he said
that democracy was "the government of the people, by the people and for
the people".

But in Islam it is not the government 'of the people'; it is the
'government of Allah'. How do people govern themselves? They govern
themselves by making their own laws; in Islam laws are made not by the
people, but by Allah; these laws are promulgated not by the consent and
decree of the people, but by the Prophet, by the command of Allah. The
people have no say in legislation; they are required to follow, not to
make any comment or suggestion about those laws and legislations:

***And it is not for a believer man or believer woman to have any choice
in their affair when Allah and His Apostle have decided a matter. . .
(33:36).***

Coming to the phrase 'by the people', let us now consider how people
govern themselves. They do so by electing their own rulers. The Holy
Prophet, who was the supreme executive, judicial and overall authority
of the Islamic government, was not elected by the people. In fact, had
the people of Mecca been allowed to exercise their choice they would
have elected either 'Urwah ibn Mas'ud (of at-Ta'if) or al Walid ibn
al-Mughirah (of Mecca) as the prophet of Allah! According to the Qur'an:

***And they say: "Why was not this Qur'an revealed to a man of
importance in the two towns?" ( 43 :31 )***[^10]

So not only was the Supreme Head of the Islamic State appointed without
the consultation of the people, but in fact it was done against their
expressed wishes. The Holy Prophet is the highest authority of Islam: he
combines in his person all the functions of legislative, executive and
judicial branches of the government; and he was not elected by the
people.

So Islam is neither the government of the people nor by the people.
There is no legislation by the people; and the executive and judiciary
is not responsible to the people.

Nor is it, for that matter, a government 'for the people'. The Islamic
system, from the beginning to the end, is 'for Allah'. Everything must
be done 'for Allah'; if it is done 'for the people', it is termed
'hidden polytheism'. Whatever you do-whether it is prayer or charity,
social senice or family function, obedience to parents or love of
neighbour, leading in prayer or deciding a case, entering into war or
concluding a peace-must be done with "qurbatan ila'llah", to become
nearer to Allah, to gain the pleasure of Allah. In Islam; everything is
for Allah.

In short, the Islamic form of government is the government of Allah, by
the representative of Allah, to gain the pleasure of Allah.

***And I did not create the jinn and the human beings except that they
should worship me (51:56).***

It is theocracy, and it is the nature and characteristic of Islamic
leadership. And how it affects the meaning of the above verse concerning
'obedience' shall be seen in later chapters.

[^1]: al-'Allamah al-Hilli: al-Babu 'l-hadi 'ashar, Eng. tr. W. M.
Miller, p. 62; Mughniyyah: Falsafat Islamiyyah, p. 392.

[^2]: al-Khatib at-Tabrizi: Mishkatu 'l-masabih, Eng. tr. James Robson,
vol.l, p.45; al-Majlisi has collected, in a complete chapter, traditions
to this effect in Biharu 'l-anwar,, vol. 28, pp. 2-36; al-Qummi, Sh.
'Abbas: Safinatu 'l-bihar, vol. 2, pp. 359-60.

[^3]: Najmu 'l-Hasan: an-Nubuwwah wa 'l-khilafah, tr. Liqa' 'Ali
Haydari, pp. 2 3.

[^4]: Ibn Hisham: as-Sirah an-Nabawiyyah, vol.l, pp. 313 -4.

[^5]: al-Bukhari: as-Sahih, vol. 5, p. 191; Ibn Kathir: al-Bidayah wa
'n-nihayah, vol. 5,p. 40.

[^6]: Abu'l-Fida': al-Mukhtasar, vol.1, pp 143-4; alYa'qubi: at-Tarikh,
vol. 2, p. 59.

[^7]: Ibn 'Abdi 'l-Barr: al-lsti'ab, vol. 4, p.l679; Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid
quotes the last sentence as follows: "By him in whose name Abu Sufyan
swears, there is neither punishment nor reckoning, neither Garden nor
Fire, neither Resurrection nor Day of Judgment." (Vide his Sharh Nahji
'l-balaghah, vol. 9, p. 53.)

[^8]: Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid: op. cit., vol. 16, p. 136.

[^9]: Sibt ibn al Jawzi: 'Tadhkirah, ed. S. M. S. Bahru 'l 'Ulum, p.
261; at-Tabari, at-Tarikh, vol.13, p. 2174.

[^10]: For the explanation of "a man of importance", see, as-Suyuti:
Lubabu u'n-nuqul fi asbabi'n-nuzul printed with Tafsiru 'l-jalalayn, pp.
289, 649.


