Part 3- The Sunni Point of View
===============================

18. Sunni views on the caliphate
--------------------------------

**The majority** of Sunnis today are the Ash'arites. They, as well as
the Mu'tazilites, believe that the institution of *Imamate*/Caliphate is
necessary, and it is incumbent (*wajib*) on men to appoint a caliph. The
Mu'tazilites hold that it is incumbent according to reason; the
Ash'arites believe it is incumbent according to tradition.

An-Nasaf; writes in his *al-Aqai'id*, "The Muslims cannot do without an
Imam who shall occupy himself with the enforcing of their decisions, and
in implementing their *hudud* (penal code) and guarding their frontiers,
and equipping their armies, and receiving their alms, and putting down
robberies and thieving and highwayman, and maintaining the Friday and
*'id* prayers, and removing quarrels that fall between people, and
receiving evidence bearing on legal claims, and marrying minors who have
no guardians and dividing booty."[^1]

"The Sunnites want an earthly ruler.... while the Shi'ites look for one
who can establish the Kingdom of Heaven on earth and bring an end to all
the evils of the world." [^2]

Accordingly, the Sunnis recognize four principles for appointing a
caliph.

a) *Ijma'*; that is, consensus of men of power and position on a certain
point. The agreement of all the followers of the Prophet is not
necessary, nor is it essential to secure the consent of all the persons
of power and position in the *ummah*.

b) Nomination by the previous caliph.

c) *Shura*; that is, selection by a committee.

d) Military power; that is, if anyone acquires power by military force
he will become a caliph.

The author of *Sharhu 'l-maqasid* has explained that when an Imam dies
and a person possessing the requisite qualifications claims that office
(without the oath of allegiance-*bay'ah*-having been taken for him and
without his having been nominated to succeed), his claim to caliphate
will be recognized provided his power subdues the people; and apparently
the same will be the case when the new caliph happens to be ignorant or
immoral. And similarly when a caliph has thus established himself by
superior force but is afterwards subdued by another person, he will be
deposed and the conqueror will be recognized as Imam or caliph.[^3]

19. Qualifications of a Caliph
------------------------------

The Sunnis consider ten conditions necessary for a caliph:-

1. that he be Muslim;

2. that he be of age, (i.e.,of puberty);

3. that he be male

4. that he be of sound mind;

5. that he be courageous;

6. that he be free, not a slave;

7. that he be accessible and not be concealed or hidden;

8. that he be able to conduct battles and beware of warlike tactics;

9. that he be just-*'adil*;

10. that he be able to judge and pass verdicts on points of laws and
religion, that is, he be a *mujtahid*. [^4]

But the last two conditions are in theory only. As quoted in the
previous chapter, even an ignorant and immoral person can become a
caliph. Therefore, the conditions for 'justice' and 'religious
knowledge' are without base.

They hold that infallibility (*'ismah*) is not necessary for caliphate.
The words of Abu Bakr which he spoke from the pulpit before the
Companions of the Prophet, are cited in support of that view: "O people!
" he said, "I have been made ruler over you although I am no better than
you; so, if I perform my duties well, help me; and if I go wrong, you
should set me right. You should know that Satan comes to me now and
then. So if I am angry, keep aloof from me."[^5]

at-Taftazani says in *Sharh Aqai'idi 'n-Nasafi* "An Imam is not to be
deposed from *Imamate* on account of immorality or tyranny."[^6]

20. Abu Bakr’s rise to power
----------------------------

All the above-mentioned principles are derived, not from an *ayah* or
*hadith*, but from the events and happenings after the death of the Holy
Prophet.

According to the Sunnis, the first four Caliphs are called
*al-khulafai'u'r-rashidun* (the rightly-guided Caliphs). Now let us
examine how *al khilaifatu 'r-rashidah* came into being .

Immediately after the death of the Prophet the Muslims of Medina known
as *ansar* (Helpers) gathered in the *saqifah* (covered porch) of Banu
Sa'idah. According to the author of *Ghiyathu 'l lugha't*, it was a
secret location where the Arabs used to gather for their evil
activities. [^7]Here Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah, who was then ailing, was led to a
stately chair and made to sit upon it, wrapped in a blanket, so that he
might be elected as the Caliph.

Sa'd then delivered a speech in which he recounted the virtues of the
*ansar* and told them to take over the caliphate before anyone else
could do so. The *ansar* agreed and said that they wanted him to be the
Caliph. But then among themselves, they began to ask: "What reply should
we give to the *muhajirun* (emigrants from Mecca) of the Quraysh if they
oppose this move and put forth their own claim?

A group said: "We shall tell them, let us have one leader from among you
and one from us." Sa'd said: "This is the first weakness you have
shown."

Someone informed 'Umar ibn al-Khattab of this gathering saying: "If at
all you desire to acquire the dignity of rulership you should reach the
*saqifah* before it is too late and difficult for you to change what is
being decided there." On receiving this news, 'Umar, along with Abu
Bakr, rushed to the *saqifah*. Abu 'Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah also
accompanied them.

at-Tabari, Ibnu 'l-Athir, Ibn Qutaybah[^8] and others proceed with their
narrations stating that having reached the *saqifah*, Abu Bakr, 'Umar
and Abu 'Ubaydah had hardly taken their seats when Thabit ibn Qays stood
up and began enumerating the virtues of the *ansar* and suggested that
the office of the caliphate should be offered to someone from the
*ansar*.

'Umar is reported to have said later on: "When the speaker of the
*ansar* finished his speech, I made an attempt to speak as already I had
thought over some important points, but Abu Bakr beckoned me to keep
quiet. Therefore, I remained silent. Abu Bakr had more competence and
knowledge than myself. He then said the same things I had thought of and
expressed them even better."

According to *Rawdatu 's-safa'*, Abu Bakr addressed the assembly at the
saqifah thus: "Assembly of the *ansar*! We acknowledge your good
qualities and virtues. We have also not forgotten your struggles and
endeavours for promoting the cause of Islam. But the honour and respect
the Quraysh have among the Arabs is not enjoyed by any other tribe, and
the Arabs will not submit to anyone other than the Quraysh." [^9]

In *as-Sirah al-Halabiyyah*, it is added:

"However, it is a fact that we the *muhajirun* were the first to accept
the Islamic creed. The Prophet of Islam was from our tribe. We are the
relatives of the Apostle ... and therefore we are the people who are
entitled to the caliphate... It will be advisable to have the leadership
among us and for you to take the ministry. We will not act unless we
consult with you."' [^10]

Heated arguments started, during which 'Umar cried: "By Allah, I will
kill him who Opposes us now." al-Hubab ibn al-Mundhir ibn Zayd, an
*ansari* from the Khazraj tribe, challenged him saying: "By Allah, we
will not allow anyone to rule over us as a caliph. One leader must come
from you and one from us."Abu Bakr said: 'No, this cannot be; it is our
right to be the rulers and yours to be our ministers." al-Hubab said: "O
*ansar*! Do not submit yourselves to what these people say. Be firm . .
. By Allah, if anyone dares to oppose me now, I will cut his nose with
my sword." 'Umar remarked: "By Allah, duality is not advisable in the
caliphate. There cannot be two kings in one regime, and the Arabs will
not agree to your leadership, because the Apostle was not from your
tribe."

At-Tabari and Ibnu 'l-Athir both state that there was a fairly prolonged
exchange of words between al-Hubab and 'Umar on this matter. 'Umar
cursed al-Hubab: "May Allah kill you." al-Hubab retorted: "May Allah
kill you."

'Umar then crossed over and stood at the head of Said ibn 'Ubadah and
said to him: "We want to break every limb of yours." Infuriated by this
threat, Said got up and caught 'Umar's beard. 'Umar said: "If you pull
out even one hair, you will see that all will not be well with you."
Then Abu Bakr pleaded with 'Umar to be calm and civil. 'Umar turned his
face from Sa'd who was saying: "By Allah, had I strength enough just to
stand, you would have heard the lions roar in every corner of Medina and
hidden yourselves in holes. By Allah, we would have made you join again
with those people among whom you were only a follower and not a leader."

Ibn Qutaybah says that when Bashir ibn Sa'd, the chief of the tribe of
Aws, saw that the *ansar* were uniting behind Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah, the
chief of the Khazraj, he was overcome with envy and stood up supporting
the claim of the Qurayshite *muhajirun*.

In the midst of this melee, 'Umar said to Abu Bakr: "Hold out your hand
so that 1 may give my *bay'ah* (i.e., pledge of loyalty)." Abu Bakr
said: "No, you give me your hand so that I may give my bay'ah, because
you are stronger than me and more suitable to the caliphate."

'Umar took the hand of Abu Bakr and pledged allegiance to him saying:
"My strength is not of any value when compared to your merits and
seniority. And if it is of any value then my strength added to yours
will successfully manage the caliphate."

Bashir ibn Sa'd followed suit. Khazrajites cried to him that he was
doing it out of envy for Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah. Then the tribe of Aws talked
amongst themselves that if Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah was made caliph that day,
the tribe of Khazraj would always feel themselves superior to the Aws,
and no one from the Aws would ever achieve that dignity. Therefore, they
all pledged their allegiance to Abu Bakr.

Someone from the Khazraj tribe took out his sword but was overcome by
the others.

Amidst all this unseemly wrangling, 'Ali and his friends attended to the
washing of the body of the Holy Prophet and the proper observances
regarding burial. By the time these were over, Abu Bakr had achieved a
fait accompli.

Ibn-Qutaybah writes: "When Abu Bakr had taken the caliphate, 'Ali was
dragged to Abu Bakr as he repeatedly declared, 'I am the slave of Allah
and the brother of the Messenger of Allah.' Then 'Ali was commanded to
take the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr. 'Ali said: 'I have more rights
to the caliphate than anyone of you. I will not pledge obedience to you.
As a matter of fact, you should give the pledge of obedience to me. You
called the *ansar* to give their bay'ah on the ground that you had blood
relations with the Messenger of Allah.

You are usurping the caliphate from us, the members of his house. Did
you not reason with the *ansar* that you have better rights to the
caliphate than they because the Apostle was of your kinship, and they
handed over the government to you and accepted your leadership?
Therefore, the very reason put forth by you before the *ansar* is now
forwarded by me. Our relations with the Apostle in life as well as in
death are much closer than those of anyone of you. If you are faithful
to your argument, you should do justice; otherwise you know that you
have knowingly moved towards tyranny.'

"'Umar said, 'Unless you give bay'ah, you will not be released.' 'Ali
cried, Milk out as much as you can for the udders are in your hand. Make
it as strong as possible today, for he is going to hand it over to you
tomorrow. 'Umar, I will not yield to your commands: I shall not pledge
loyalty to him.' Ultimately Abu Bakr said, 'O 'Ali! If you do not desire
to give your bay'ah, I am not going to force you for the same.' "

21. Short review
----------------

Several aspects of the above-mentioned events deserve more attention:

1. It was the tradition of the Arabs that once a person was declared,
even by a small group, to be the chief of the tribe, others did not like
to oppose him, and willy-nilly followed suit. This tradition was in the
mind of'Abbas, the Prophet's uncle, when he told 'Ali: "Give me your
hand so that I may pledge allegiance to you . . . because once this
thing is taken over no one will ask him to relinquish it."

And it was this tradition which prompted Sa'd to exhort the *ansar* to
'take over the caliphate before anyone else could do so.'

And it was because of this tradition that 'Umar was told to reach
*saqifah* 'before it was too late and difficult for him to change what
was being decided there.' And it was because of this custom that once
some people accepted Abu Bakr as Caliph, the majority of the Muslims in
Medina followed suit.

2. 'Ali was well-aware of this custom. Then why did he refuse to extend
his hand to accept the bay'ah of 'Abbas, telling him, "Who else, other
than I, can call for such pledge of allegiance?[^11]

It was because 'Ali knew that the *khalifah* (caliphate) of the Holy
Prophet was not the chieftainship of the tribe. It was not based on the
declaration of allegiance by the public. It was a responsibility given
by Allah, not by the people. And as he had already been publicly
appointed by Allah through the Prophet to the *Imamate*, there was no
need for him to rush to the public to seek their allegiance. He did not
want the people to think that his *Imamate* was based on the bay'ah of
men; if the people came to him on the basis of the declaration of Ghadir
Khumm, well and good; if they did not, it was their loss, not his.

3. Now we turn to the events of *saqifah*: During the lifetime of the
Holy Prophet, the Mosque of the Prophet was the centre of all Islamic
activities. It was here that decisions of war and peace were made,
deputations were received, sermons were delivered and cases were
decided. And when the news spread of the death of the Holy Prophet, the
Muslims assembled in that very mosque.

Then why did the partisans of Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah decide to go three miles
outside Medina to meet in saqifah which was not a place of good repute?
Was it not because they wanted to usurp the Caliphate without the
knowledge of other people and then present Sa'd as the accepted Caliph?

Keeping in view the declaration of Ghadir Khumm and the tribal custom of
Arabia there can be no other explanation.

4. When 'Umar and Abu Bakr came to know of that gathering, they were in
the mosque. A majority of the Muslim were at the mosque. Why did they
not inform any other person about that gathering? Why did they, together
with Abu 'Ubaydah, slip out secretly? Was it because 'Ali and Banu
Hashim were present in the mosque and in the house of the Prophet, and
'Umar and Abu Bakr did not want them to know of the plot? Was it because
they were afraid that if 'Ali came to know of that meeting of *saqifah*,
and if by a remote chance he decided to go there himself, no one else
would have had a chance to succeed?

5. When Abu Bakr was extolling the virtues of *muhajirun* as being from
the tribe of the Holy Prophet, did he not know that there were other
people with much more stronger right to that claim because they were
members of the very family of the Holy Prophet and his own flesh and
blood?

It was this aspect of the pretence that prompted 'Ali ibn Ab; Talib (as)
to comment: "They argued by the strength of the tree (tribe) and then
destroyed the fruit (i.e., the family of the Prophet)." [^12]

Looking dispassionately at this event, we are unable to call it an
'election', because the voters (all the Muslims scattered throughout
Arabia, or, at least, all the Muslims of Medina) did not even know that
there was to be an election, let alone when or where it was to be held.
Aside from the voters, even prospective candidates were unaware of what
was happening at *saqifah*. Again we are reminded of the words of
al-Imam 'A1i in connection with the two points mentioned above:

*If you claim to have secured authority over the Muslims' affairs by
consultation,*

*How did it happen when those to be consulted were absent!*

*And if you have scored over your opponents by (the Prophet's) kinship,*

*Then someone else has greater right on the Prophet and is nearer to
him*[^13]*.*

And we cannot call it even a ' selection' because a majority of the
prominent Companions of the Holy Prophet had no knowledge of these
events. 'Ali, 'Abbas, 'Uthman, Talhah, azZubayr, Sa'd ibn Ab; Waqqas,
Salman al-Farisl, Abu Dharr al-Ghifari, 'Ammar ibn Yasir, Miqdad, 'Abdu
'r-Rahman ibn 'Awf-none of them were consulted or even informed.

The only argument which can be offered for this caliphate is this:
"Whatever the legal position of the events of *saqifah*, as Abu Bakr
succeeded (because of tribal custom) in taking the reins of power in his
hands, he was a 'constitutional' Caliph."

In simple language, Abu Bakr became a constitutional Caliph because he
succeeded in his bid for power. Thus, the Muslims who have been taught
to glorify this event are inadvertently taught that the only thing which
counts is the 'power'. Once you are secure in the seat of power,
everything is all right. You will become the 'constitutional' head of
state.

In the end, I should quote a comment of 'Umar himself, who was the
author of this caliphate. He said in a lecture during his caliphate:

I have been informed that someone said: "When'Umar dies, I will pledge
allegiance to so-and-so." Well no one should be misled like this,
thinking that although the allegiance of Abu Bakr was by surprise, it
became all right. Of course, it was by surprise, but Allah saved us from
its evils. Now if anyone wishes to copy it I will cut his throat.[^14]

22. Nomination of 'Umar
-----------------------

The majority of Sunnis believe that what happened at *saqifah* was a
manifestation of the "democratic" spirit of Islam. In view of that
belief it was reasonable to expect the 'democratic election' (whatever
it’s meaning in the context of *saqifah*) to continue as the basis of
Islamic caliphate. But this was not to be.

Abu Bakr was indebted to 'Umar for establishing his caliphate and he
knew that if the masses were given freedom of choice, 'Umar had no
chance. (He was known as "rude and of harsh nature.") Therefore, he
decided to nominate his own successor-'Umar.

at-Tabari writes: "Abu Bakr called 'Uthman -when the former was
dying-and told him to write an appointment order, and dictated to him:
'In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is the order
of 'Abdullah ibn Abi Quhafah (i.e., Abu Bakr) to the Muslims.
Whereas...' Then he fell unconscious. 'Uthman added the words: 'I
appoint 'Umar ibn al-Khattab as my successor among you.'

"Then Abu Bakr regained his consciousness and told 'Uthman to read the
order to him. 'Uthman read it; Abu Bakr said, Allahu Akbar', and was
pleased and commented, 'I think you were afraid that people would
disagree amongst themselves if I died in that state.' 'Uthman replied,
'Yes.' Abu Bakr said: ' May Allah reward you on behalf of Islam and the
Muslims.'[^15] Thus, the appointment letter was completed and Abu Bakr
ordered it to be read before the Muslims.

Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid al-Mu'tazili writes that when Abu Bakr regained his
consciousness and the scribe read what he had written and Abu Bakr heard
the name of 'Umar, he asked him, "How did you write this?" The scribe
said, "You could not pass him over." Abu Bakr replied, "You are
right.''[^16]

Shortly afterwards Abu Bakr died:

'Umar gained the caliphate by this appointment. Here one is reminded of
a tragedy which occurred three or five days before the death of the Holy
Prophet.

In the *Sahih* of Muslim there is a tradition narrated by Ibn 'Abbas
that: "Three days before the Prophet's death 'Umar ibn al-Khattab and
other Companions were present at his side. The Apostle said, 'Now let me
write something for you by way of a will so that you are not mislead
after me.' 'Umar said, 'The Apostle is talking in delirium; the Book of
Allah is sufficient for us.' 'Umar's statement caused a furor among
those present there. Some were saying that the Apostle's command should
be obeyed so that he might write whatever he desired for their
betterment others sided with 'Umar. When the tension and uproar
increased the Apostle said, 'Go away from me. '" [^17]

A few Qur'anic injunctions should be mentioned here:

***Muslims should not raise your voices above the voice of the Prophet .
. . lest your deeds become null while you perceive not*** **(49:2).**

The Holy Prophet's words were "revelation" from Allah:

***Nor does he speak out of (his) desire. It is naught but revelation
that is revealed*** **(53: 3-4).**

And Muslims were expected to follow his command without any 'ifs' and
'buts':

***Whatever the Apostle gives you, take it; and from whatever he forbids
you, keep back.*** **(59 :7)**

And when such an Apostle, five days before his death wished to write a
directive to save Muslims from going astray, he was accused of 'talking
in delirium'.

When Abu Bakr who had no such Divine protection from error, began
dictation of the appointment letter in such critical condition that he
fell unconscious before naming his successor, 'Umar did not say that he
was talking in delirium!

No one can be sure of what it was the Holy Prophet wanted to write. But
the phrase he used gives us an idea. On several occasions the Holy
Prophet had declared:

O People! Verily, I am leaving behind among you Two Precious Things, the
Book of Allah and My Descendants who are my family members. So long as
you keep hold of them sincerely, you will never go astray after me.

When he used the same phrase five days before his death (".. Let me
write something for you by way of a will so that you are not misled
after me" ), it was easy enough to understand that the Holy Prophet was
going to write what he had been telling them all along about the Qur'an
and his *Ahlu 'l-bayt* (as).

Perhaps 'Umar guessed as much; as is apparent from his claim: "The Book
of Allah is sufficient for us." He wanted to make it known to the
Prophet that he would not follow 'the Two Precious Things '. One was
enough for him.

And he himself admitted it in a talk with 'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas, in which
he, inter alia said: "And surely he (the Prophet) intended during his
illness to declare his ('Ali's) name, so I prevented it.''[^18]

Perhaps the word "delirium" would have served his purpose even if the
Prophet had written the directive. 'Umar and his partisans would have
claimed that as it was written "in delirium" it had no validity.

23. Ash-Sura: The committee
---------------------------

After ruling for about ten years, 'Umar was fatally wounded by a
Zoroastrian slave, Firuz.

'Umar was very much indebted to 'Uthman (because of the appointment
letter) but did not wish to openly nominate him as his successor; nor
did he allow the Muslims to exercise their free will after him. He
ingeniously invented a third system.

He said, "Verily the Apostle of Allah died and he was pleased with these
six people from the Quraysh: 'Ali, 'Uthman, Talhah, az-Zubayr, Sa'd ibn
Abi Waqas and 'Abdu r-Rahman ibn 'Awf. And I have decided to make it
(the selection of caliph) a matter of consultation among them, so that
they may select one from among themselves."

They were called when he was nearing death. When he looked at them, he
asked, "so, every oneof you wants to become caliph after me?' No one
answered. He repeated the question. Then az-Zubayr said, "And what is
there to disqualify us? You got it (the caliphate) and managed it; and
we are not inferior to you in the Quraysh either in precedence or in
relation (to the Holy Prophet)."

'Umar asked, "Should not I tell you about yourselves?”

Az-Zubayr said, "Tell us, because even if we ask you not to tell, you
will not listen. Then 'Umar began enumerating the bad character points
of az-Zubayr, Talhah, Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn 'Awf.
Then he faced 'Ali and said, "By Allah you deserved it had it not been
that you are of humorous nature. However, by Allah, if you people made
him your ruler, he would surely lead you towards clear truth and on the
enlightened path."

Then he looked towards 'Uthman and said, "Take it from me. It is as
though I am seeing that the Quraysh have put this necklace (caliphate)
around your neck because of your love; then you have put the *Banu
Umayyah* and *Banu Abi Mu'ayt* ('Uthman's tribe) on the shoulders of the
people (as rulers) and have given them exclusively the booty (of the
Muslims); thereupon a group from the wolves of Arab have come to you and
have slaughtered you in your bed.

"By Allah if the Quraysh give the caliphate to you, you will surely give
exclusive rights to the *Banu Umayyah*; and if you do so, the Muslims
will surely kill you." Then he caught the forehead of 'Uthman and said:
“So if it happens, remember my words; because it is bound to happen."

Then 'Umar called Abu Talhah al-Ansari and told him that after his
('Umar's) burial, he was to collect fifty people from the *ansar*, armed
with swords, and gather the six above-mentioned candidate-voters in a
house to select one from among themselves as the caliph. If five agree
and one disagrees, he should be beheaded; if four agree and two
disagree, those two should be beheaded; if there is a division of three
and three, the choice of the group of 'Abdu 'r Rahman ibn 'Awf should
prevail and if the other three do not agree to it they should be
beheaded. And if three days pass and they are unable to reach a
decision, all of them should be beheaded and the Muslims should be left
free to select their caliph.''[^19]

The Shi'ite author Qutbu 'd-Din ar-Rawandi narrates that when 'Umar
decreed that the group of 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn 'Awf would prevail,
'Abdullah ibn 'Abbas told 'Ali, "Again this is lost to us. This man
wants 'Uthman to be the caliph." 'Ali replied, "I also know this; still
I will sit with them in the *shura'*, because 'Umar by this arrangement
has, at least publicly, accepted that I deserve the caliphate, while
before he was asserting that *nubuwwah* (prophethood) and imamah could
not be joined in one family. Therefore, I will participate in the shura
to show the people the contradiction of his actions and his words."[^20]

Why were Ibn 'Abbas and 'Ali sure that 'Umar wanted 'Uthman to be the
caliph? It was because of the constitution of the *shura* and its terms
of reference.

'Abdu 'r-Rahman was married to 'Uthman's sister; and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas
and 'Abdu'r Rahman were cousins.

Seeing the hold which family ties had in Arabia, it was unthinkable that
Sa'd would oppose 'Abdu 'r-Rahman or that 'Abdu 'r-Rahman would ignore
'Uthman. So three votes were safely in the custody of 'Uthman, including
the deciding vote of 'Abdu'r-Rahman.

Talhah (ibn 'Ubaydillah) was from the clan of Abu Bakr, and since the
day of *saqifah* the *Banu Hashim* and *Banu Taym* felt nothing but
enmity towards each other. On a personal level, 'Ali had killed his
uncle; 'Umayr ibn 'Uthman, his brother Malik ibn 'Ubaydillah and his
nephew 'Uthman ibn Malik in the battle of Badr.[^21]

It was impossible forhim to support 'Ali. az-Zubayr was the son of
Safiyyah, 'Ali's aunt, and after saqifah, he had taken out his sword to
fight those who had entered the house of 'Ali to take him to Abu Bakr.
And it was reasonable to expect him to favour 'Ali. But on the other
hand, he could be tempted to stand for the caliphate himself.

Thus, the most 'A1i could hope for was that az-Zubayr was in his favour.
Still four would have gone against him and he would have lost. Even if
Talhah had favoured 'Ali, he could not be caliph because in case of
equal division, the opinion of 'Abdu'r-Rahman would have been
upheld.[^22]

After this study of the terms of reference, what happened in the *shura*
is of academic interest only. Talhah withdrew in favour of 'Uthman;
prompting az-Zubayr to withdraw in favour of 'Ali(as), and Sa'd in
favour of 'Abdu'r-Rahman ibn 'Awf.

On the third day, 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn 'Awf withdrew his name and told
'Ali that he would make him caliph if; Ali pledged to follow the Book of
Allah, the traditions of the Holy Prophet and the system of Abu Bakr and
'Umar. 'Abdu 'r-Rahman knew very well what his reply would be. 'Ali (as)
said, "I follow the Book of Allah, the traditions of the Holy Prophet
and my own beliefs."

Then 'Abdu'r-Rahman put the same conditions to 'Uthman, who readily
accepted. Thus, 'Abdu 'r-Rahman declared 'Uthman to be the caliph.

'A1i (as) told 'Abdu r-Rahman: "By Allah, you did not do it but with the
same hope which he ('Umar) had from his friend." (He meant that 'Abdu
'r-Rahman had made 'Uthman caliph hoping that 'Uthman would nominate him
as his successor. )

Then 'A1i said, "May Allah create enmity between you two." After a few
years 'Abdu 'r Rahman and 'Uthman grew to hate each others; they did not
talk to each other till 'Abdu'r Rahman died.

'Uthman, the third Caliph, was killed by the Muslims who were not happy
with his nepotism. The circumstances did not provide him the opportunity
to choose his own successor. Muslims were, for the first time, really
free to select or elect a caliph of their choice; they flocked to the
door of 'Ali (as) .

But during the twenty-five years which had passed since the death of the
Holy Prophet, the nature and outlook of the Muslims had changed to such
an extent that many prominent people found 'Ali's administration (which
was based on absolute justice and equality, just like the government of
the Holy Prophet) unbearable; they could not think of themselves as
being treated equal to non-Arab Muslims. So first Talhah, az-Zubayr and
'A'ishah revolted; then Mu'awiyah stood against 'Ali (as).

After the martyrdom of 'Ali (as), al-Imam Hasan wanted to continue the
war with Mu'awiyah. But most of his officers were, meanwhile, bribed by
Mu'awiyah; and many were the commanders who, when sent ahead to
intercept Mu'awiyah, changed sides and went over to the enemy. In this
situation, al-Imam Hasan (as) had to accept the offer of Mu'awiyah to
conclude a treaty.

After this treaty, the Sunnis claimed that military power is a valid way
of acquiring constitutional caliphate.

Thus, the four 'constitutional' ways of caliphate came into being.

25. General review
------------------

In the realm of politics, usually the constitution of a country is
prepared beforehand. And when time comes to elect a government or enact
legislation, every function is carried out according to the provisions
of the constitution. Whatever conforms with it, is held valid and legal;
whatever is contrary to it, is rejected as invalid and illegal.

Since, according to the Sunni point of view, it was the duty of the
*ummah* to appoint a caliph, it was necessary for Allah and His Prophet
to provide them with a constitution (with details of the procedure for
election of such a caliph). And if that was not done, then the Muslims
themselves should have approved the constitutional measures in advance
before proceeding to elect a caliph.

But strangely enough this was not done. And now we find a unique
'unsettled constitution' in which actions do not follow a constitution
because there is none; rather the constitution follows the
circumstances.

The best argument put forward by the Sunnis to support their claim is
that the Muslims of the first era considered it their duty to appoint a
caliph, and that they regarded it so important that they neglected to
attend the funeral of the Holy Prophet and went to *saqifah* of Banu
Sa'idah to settle the question of the caliphate. From that event they
concluded that the appointment of a caliph was the duty of the *ummah*.

But they fail to understand that it is the validity of that very
so-called 'election' which is challenged by the Shi'ahs.

The Shi'ahs claims that that event was illegal; the Sunnis claim that it
was legal and correct. How can the Sunnis put their claim as their
argument and proof?

To put their claim as proof is like saying: "This action of mine is
legal because I have done it." Which court of justice would uphold such
an argument?

26. The practical side
----------------------

Leaving aside the academic side of these methods, let us see what
effects they had on the Muslim leadership and Muslim mentality.

Within thirty years after the death of the Holy Prophet every
conceivable way of acquiring power was used and canonized: election,
selection, nomination and military power. The result, is that today
every Muslim ruler aspires to occupy the seat of the *khilafah* and
"spiritual leadership" of the Muslims; and it is this basic defect of
the Muslims' outlook which has always been, and is today the underlying
cause of political instability in the Muslim world. Every Muslim ruler
who, as a Muslim, has been taught that "military supremacy" is a
constitutional way to *khilafah*, tries to weaken other Muslim rulers so
that he himself may emerge as the most supreme among the Muslim rulers.
In this way, this "constitution" has directly contributed to the
weakness of the Muslims in the world.

Apart from that, let us see once again how 'all-encompassing' these
methods proved immediately after they were invented. This four-sided
boundary of caliphate is so unsafe that anyone may enter into it,
irrespective of his knowledge or character. The first caliph after
Mu'awiyah was his son, Yazid, who was 'nominated' by Mu'awiyah and had
undisputed "military power".

Muslims had given their *bay'ah* during the lifetime of Mu'awiyah; thus,
there was *ijma*' also. So he was a “constitutional caliph". But what
were his beliefs and character? Yazid was a man who bluntly refused to
believe in the Holy Prophet. He frankly stated his beliefs in his poem
quoted previously that: "Banu Hashim had staged a play to obtain the
kingdom; actually there was neither any news (from God) nor any
revelation.[^23]

Neither did he believe in the Day of Judgment: "O my beloved! Do not
believe in meeting me after death, because what they have told you about
our being raised after death for judgment is only a myth which makes the
heart forget the pleasures of this real world."[^24]

After assuming the caliphate, he openly made fun of Islamic prayers; and
showed his disrespect for religion by putting the robes of religious
scholars on dogs and monkeys. Gambling and playing with bears were his
favourite pastimes. He spent all his time drinking (wine), regardless of
place or time and without any hesitation. He had no respect for any
woman, even those of the prohibited degrees such as step-mother, sister,
aunt and daughter. They were just like any other woman in his eyes.

He sent his army to Medina. That holy city of the Prophet was freely
looted. Three hundred girls, apart from other women, were criminally
assaulted by his soldiers. Three hundred *qurra'* (reciters) of the
Qur'an and seven hundred Companions of the Prophet were brutally
murdered.

The Holy Mosque of the Prophet remained closed for many days; the army
of Yazid used it as their stable. Dogs made it their shelter and the
pulpit of the Prophet was defiled.

Finally, the Commander of the army compelled the people of Medina to
submit before Yazid by giving their *bay'ah* in these words: "We are the
slaves of Yazid; it is up to him whether he gives us back our freedom or
sells us in the slaves' market." Those who wanted to swear allegiance on
the condition that Yazid should follow the instruction of the Qur'an and
traditions of the Prophet were put to death.[^25] It may not be out of
place to mention that the Prophet once said: "May Allah curse him who
frightens the people of Medina!”

Then the army, on the order of Yazid, proceeded to Mecca. That holiest
city of Allah was besieged. They could not enter the city, so they used
*manjaniq* (catapult: an ancient military device used to throw heavy
stones towards distant targets). With this, they threw stones and
flaming torches towards the Ka'bah. The *kiswah* (canopy of the Ka'bah)
was burnt and a portion of that holiest of buildings was damaged.[^26]

27. Al-Walid and Harun Ar-Rashid
--------------------------------

But this was not an exception; it sadly proved to be the general rule.
a1-Walid ibn Yazid ibn 'Abdi 'l-Malik was another caliph from the Banu
Umayyah. He was a drunkard. One night he was drinking with one of his
concubines, till they heard the adhan (call for prayer) of the dawn
prayer. He swore that the concubine would lead in the prayer. She wore
the robe of the caliph and led in the prayer in the same condition of
drunkenness.[^27]

One day he molested his teenage daughter in the presence of her servant
woman. She said that (it was not Islam) it was the religion of the
Majus. al-Walid recited a couplet: "A man who cares for the (tongues of)
people, dies in sorrow; the daring man gets all the pleasures." [^28]

Harun ar Rashid, the famous Caliph of *One Thousand and One Nights* who
is thought as one of the greatest caliphs, wanted to sleep with one of
his late father's concubines. The woman rightly pointed out that this
would be incest since she was in a position like his mother. Harun
ar-Rashid called al-Qadi Abu Yusuf and told him to help him find a way
to satisfy his lust. The Qadi said: "She is just a slave woman.

Should you accept whatever she says? No.

Do not accept her words as true. "

So the Caliph satisfied his desire.

Ibn Mubarak comments: "I do not know who among these three was more
surprising: the Caliph who put his hand into the blood and property of
the Muslims and did not respect his step-mother; or the slave woman who
refused to grant the desire of the Caliph; or the Qadi who allowed the
Caliph to dishonour his father and sleep with that concubine who was his
step-mother.'"[^29]

28. Effects on the beliefs of the justice of God and 'ismah of the prophets
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

It has been explained that the Sunni beliefs regarding "constitutional
caliphate" weakened the Muslims politically and compelled them to obey
anyone who succeeded in his bid for power irrespective of his
qualifications or character.

As though it was not enough, it compelled them to change their total
religious outlook and beliefs.

First of all, an overwhelming majority of the caliphs were devoid of any
sense of religious propriety or piety. To justify the caliphate of such
people, they claimed that even the prophets used to commit sins. Thus,
the belief in the *'ismah* (sinlessness) of the prophets was
changed.[^30]

As there were perhaps hundreds of people more knowledgeable, more pious
and more qualified for the caliphate than the caliph on the throne, they
were compelled to say that there was nothing wrong with giving
preference to an inferior person over a superior and more qualified one.

When it was pointed out by the Shi'ahs that it was 'evil' according to
reason to give preference to an inferior person when a superior person
was available, the Sunnis declared that nothing was good or evil in
itself, whatever Allah orders becomes good; whatever He forbids, becomes
evil.[^31]

As for 'reason', they denied that it exists anywhere in the religion. It
is not possible to go into further detail to show how the belief in the
Sunnis' 'constitutional caliphate' affected the whole fabric of Islamic
theology, but the following short explanation may suffice for the time
being. It is clear that to protect the caliphs, not only the prophets
were deprived of their 'ismah, but even Allah was deprived of His
'Justice . From this vantage point, we may easily understand the full
significance of the verse revealed at Ghadir Khumm:

***O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord;***
(i.e., the Caliphate of 'Ali - a.s.) ***and if you do it not, then you
have not delivered His message (at all); and Allah will protect you from
the people*** **... (5:67).**

The purity of Islamic beliefs and deeds depended upon the Caliphate of
'Ali (as); if that one message was not delivered, then it would be as
though no message were delivered at all. The safety of the whole
religion depended upon the Caliphate of 'Ali after the Holy Prophet.

29. Is Shi’ism Undemocratic?
----------------------------

Our opponents look at the succession of the early caliphs and Imams and
then claim that Shi'ism is undemocratic. All the Twelve Imams were of
one family while the first four Caliphs were of different clans. They
conclude that the Sunni school of thought is democratic in principle,
which is supposed to be the best system of governance. Shi'ism, in their
opinion, is based on hereditary rule and therefore not a good system.

Firstly, no system of government is good or bad of itself; it is as good
or bad as the person who holds the reins of the government in his hands.
Accordingly, the Shi'ite belief that an Imam is *ma'sum*, free from
every shortcoming and defect and superior in virtue, means that his rule
would be the most perfect and just. On one side is the uncompromising
justice of al-Imam ‘Ali (as), the first Imam, during his short term of
*Imamate*; on the other, the accepted *hadith* of the Prophet about the
last Imam, al-Mahdi that "he will fill the earth with justice and equity
as it will be full of oppression and injustice."[^32] Our premise is not
merely an abstraction.

Secondly, we should bear in mind that all the Sunni caliphs from Abu
Bakr to the last 'Abbasid caliph al-Musta'sim Billah (killed by Hulagu
Khan in 656/1258) were from the Quraysh. Does it not mean that one
family had ruled over all Muslims from eastern China to Spain for six
and a half centuries?

Thirdly, the Sunni system of the caliphate, as already mentioned, was
never based on democracy. The first Caliph was thrust upon the Muslims
of Medina by a handful of the Companions; the second was nominated by
the first; the third was selected nominally by five people, but actually
by one. Mu'awiyah took the caliphate by military overthrow. Before him
it was, at best, oligarchy; after him it became monarchy.

So much for the democracy of the constitutional principles utilized.
What of the performance of those early governments from the point of
view of the equality which democracy implies?

'Umar made a decision that a non-Arab cannot inherit from an Arab unless
that heir was born in Arabia.[^33] Again, the Sunni law going back to
early times, for the most part, does not allow a non-Arab man to marry
an Arab woman, nor is a non-Qurayshite or non-Hashimate man allowed to
marry a Qurayshite or Hashimite woman, respectively. According to the
Shafi'ite law, a slave, even a freed one, may not marry a free
woman.[^34] This is in spite of the well-known declaration of the
Prophet that: "There is no superiority for an Arab over a non-Arab, nor
for a non-Arab over an Arab, nor for a white man over a black, nor for a
black over a white, except by piety. People are from Adam and Adam was
from dust."[^35]

Also, it is in spite of the precedents the Prophet established when he
married his cousin to Zayd ibn al-Harithah, a freed slave, and gave the
sister of 'Abdu 'r-Rahman ibn 'Awf (a Qurayshite) in marriage to Bilal,
a freed Ethiopian slave.[^36]

The Shi'ite *shari'ah* clearly states: "It is allowed to marry a free
woman to a slave, an Arab woman to a non-Arab, a Hashimite woman to a
non-Hashimite and vice versa. Likewise, it is allowed to marry women of
learned or wealthy families to men of little learning or wealth or of
undignified professions."[^37]

In the matter of distribution of war-booty, the Prophet had established
a system of equality; it was to be distributed equally to all who had
participated in a particular battle. Abu Bakr continued that system, but
'Umar in 15 A.H., just four years after the Prophet's death, changed the
system. He fixed annual stipends for various people, clans and tribes:
'Abbas, the Prophet's uncle, was allotted 12,000 or 25,000 dmars per
year; 'A'ishah, 12,000; other wives of the Prophet, 10,000 each; the
participants in the battle of Badr, 5,000 each; those who joined between
Badr and Hudaybiyyah, 4,000 each; those who joined after Hudaybiyyah and
before Qadisiyyah, 3,000 each. The amount gradually decreased to two
dinars per year. [^38]

This system corrupted the Muslim community to such an extent that wealth
became their sole aim in life and the only benefit of their religion.
Their outlook became materialistic and, as mentioned earlier, they could
not tolerate the system of equal distribution which 'Ali reinstated in
the first speech he gave after taking over the caliphate[^39].

'Ali is quoted to have said: Well, any man from the *muhajirun* and the
*ansar*, from the Companions of the Prophet, who thinks that he is
superior to others because of his companionship (let him remember that)
the shining superiority is tomorrow before Allah, and its reward and
wages are with Allah. (He should not expect its reward in this world.)
Any man who answered the call of Allah and His Prophet, and accepted the
truth of our religion and entered into it, and faced towards our qiblah,
is entitled to all the rights of Islam and bound by its limits. You are
the servants of Allah; and all property is the property of Allah; it
will be divided among you equally; there is no preference in it for one
against the other.

Those who during the twenty years preceding 'Ali's caliphate had grown
used to the unfair distribution, advised and requested 'Ali to
compromise; and when he proved unrelenting on matters of Islamic
principle, they conspired against him.

After the victory of the Umayyads this inequality between Muslims was
carried further. Even if someone accepted Islam, he or she was not
accorded the rights of the Muslims. In some way their condition was
worse than that of their compatriot non-Muslims. The latter were obliged
to pay only *jizyah*[^40], but the Muslims had to pay that and the
*zakat* (the tax paid by the Muslims). During the Umayyad period (except
for two and a half years during 'Umar ibn 'Abdi 'l-'Aziz's reign),
*jizyah* was levied on all non Arabs including the Muslims. [^41]

It is not difficult to imagine how little this policy helped the cause
of Islam. For centuries entire countries whose cities and capitals were
"Islamic", refused to convert. Even the Berbers (who responded after
initial resistance to the Arab invasion and served so brilliantly in
Spain and on into France), as a whole were not converted until the
establishment of the first Shi'ite kingdom in al-Maghrib. When Idris ibn
'Abdillah, a great -grandson of al Imam Hasan and the founder of the
Idrisid dynasty (789 985 A.D.), marched against them, most were
non-Muslims. This was the result of the ill-treatment in earlier times.
We hear that when Yazid ibn 'Abdi'l Malik occupied the Umayyad throne
and assigned Yazid ibn Abi Muslim Dinar as Governor of al-Maghrib, the
latter re-levied *jizyah* on those who had become Muslims and ordered
them back to the villages where they had lived before their
conversion.[^42] The Idrisid change of policy and the extension of full
Islamic rights to all the Muslims brought the conversion of the Berbers.

This exaltation of Arabism is seen to be even more deeply interwoven in
the decision of those early rulers that if a subject in a conquered
country accepted Islam, he could not be accepted as a Muslim or accorded
his Islamic rights unless he attached himself as a client to some Arab
tribe. Such clients were called *mawali*. Even then they were objects of
ridicule and unequal treatment by their aristocratic patrons and at the
same time continued to be exploited by the growing bureaucracy.

By restricting the right of rule to the twelve infallible Imams. Allah
cut at the roots of strife, dissension, chaos and false electioneering,
as well as social and racial inequality.

30. A Dynastic rule?
--------------------

Some say that the Shi'ite school holds that the Holy Prophet wanted to
establish a dynastic monarchy for his family (in which he obviously
failed) .

They imply that as the Holy Prophet was far above such selfish motives,
the Shi'ite school must be wrong. But these very people say that the Hoy
Prophet said:"The Imams will be from the Quraysh." Will they say that
this *hadith* means that the Holy Prophet wanted to establish a kingdom
for his tribe? Will they say that the Holy Prophet said these words
because of "selfish motives"?

It was explained above that Abu Bakr silenced the *ansar* of Medina by
saying that as the Holy Prophet was from the Quraysh, the Arabs would
not accept any non-Qurayshite as caliph. This argument silenced the
*ansar*.

By the same argument, if a member of the family of the Holy Prophet
(like 'Ali) were made caliph, all would have obeyed him and there would
have been no strife or difficulty. This aspect of the appointment of
‘Ali (as), has been recognized also by some non-Muslim writers. Mr.
Sedillot has written:

"Had the principle of hereditary succession (in favour of 'Ali-a.s.)
been recognized at the outset, it would have prevented the rise of those
disastrous pretentions which engulfed Islam in the blood of Muslims....
The husband of Fatimah united in his person the right of succession as
the lawful heir of the Prophet, as well as the right of election. "[^43]

The fact is that such objectors have completely missed the point. The
Shi'ahs has never claimed that "inheritance” has anything to do with the
*Imamate*. As explained earlier, an Imam must be *ma'sum*, superior to
all the *ummah* in virtue and *mansus min Allah* (appointed by Allah).

But it was one of the bounties of Allah, bestowed on Prophet Ibrahim and
the Holy Prophet (peace be upon them and their progeny) that, in reality
and practice, all the Imams who followed them came from their own
family; that all those who had necessary qualifications for the
*Imamate* were of their progeny.

[^1]: at-Taftazani: Sharh 'Aqa'idi'n-Nasafi, p.185.

[^2]: Miller,W.M.: tr. of al-Babu 'l-hadi 'ashar, notes,

[^3]: at-Taftazani: Sharhu 'l-maqasidi' t-talibi'n, (vol. 2, p. 272).
See also al-Hafiz 'Ali' Muhammad and Amiru 'd-Din: Fulku 'n-najat fi
'l-imamah wa 's-salat, vol. 1 p. 203.

[^4]: at-Taftazani, op. cit.

[^5]: as-Suyuti, Tarikhu 'l-Khulafa', p.71.

[^6]: at-Taftazani: op. cit.

[^7]: Ghiyathu 'd-Din: Ghiyathu 'l-lughat, p. 228.

[^8]: at-Tabari: at-Tarikh, vol.4, p.l820; Ibnu'1-Athir: al-Kamil, ed.
C.J.Tornberg, Leiden,1897, vol.2, pp. 325ff; Ibn Qutaybah: al-lmamah
wa's-siyasah, Cairo, 387/1967, vol. 1, pp. 18ff.

[^9]: Mir Khwand: Rawdatu 's-safa', vol 2, p. 221

[^10]: al-Halabi: as-Sirah, vol. 3, p. 357.

[^11]: Ibn Qutaybah: al-imamah wa 's-siyasah, vol. 1, p. 4; al-Mawardi:
al-Ahkamu 's-sultaniyyah, p. 7.

[^12]: ar -Radi (ed ): Nah ju 'l -balaghah, ( Subhi as.Salih' s
edition), Beirut, p. 98.

[^13]: Ibid., Saying no.l90, [pp.502-3] . The words of 'Ali have been
quoted by ash-Sharif ar-Radi under Saying no. 190 which runs as follows:
"How strange? Could the caliphate be through the (Prophet's)
companionship but not through (his) companionship plus (his) kinship?"
It is surprising to note that Subhi as-Salih's edition and Muhammad
'Abduh's edition (Beirut,1973) have omitted the wordings "but not
through (his) companionship! " For a complete version of this saying,
see Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid's Sharh (Cairo,l959),vol. 18, p.416.

[^14]: al-Bukhari': as-Sahih, ("Kitabu 'l-Muhakibin"), Cairo, (n.d.),
vol.8, p.210; at-Tabari: at-Tarikh, vol.4, p.l821.

[^15]: at-Tabari: at-Tarikh, pp. 2138-9

[^16]: Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid: Sharh., vol. 1, pp.163-5.

[^17]: Muslim: as-Sahih, ("Kitabu 'l-Wasiyyah", Babu 't-tarki
'lwasiyyah), vol. 5, pp.75-6; al-Bukhari: as-Sahih, (Cairo, 1958), vol.
1, ("Kitabu 'l-'llm") pp.38-9; vol.4, p.85; vol.6, pp.ll-2; vol.7,
("Kitabu 't-Tib"), pp.155-6; vol. 9, ("Kitabu '1I' tisam bi 'l -Kitab wa
's-Sunnah" ), p. 137. It is interesting to note that where Bukhari gives
remark of the Prophet speaking in delirium, he omits the name of the
speaker; and where he paraphrases that remark in more polite language,
he mentions the name of the speaker - 'Umar - clearly. Ibn Sa'd:
at-Tabaqat, vol. 2, pp.242, 324f, 336, 368; Ahmad: al-Musnad, vol. I, pp
.232,239, 324f, 336,355

[^18]: Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid: Sharh, vol. 12, p. 21, (quoting from Tari'kh
Baghdad of al-Khatib al-Baghdad;).

[^19]: Ibid., vol. l, pp.185-8; see also Ibn Qutaybah: al-Imamah wa
's-siyasah, vol. 1, pp. 23-7; and
at-Tabari:at-Tarikh,(Egypt,n.d.),vol.5,pp.33-41.

[^20]: Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid: Sharh, p.189

[^21]: ash-Shaykh al-Mufid: al-Irshad, (with Persian tr. Of Sh. Muhammad
Baqir Sa'idi Khurasani), p.65. [See also Eng . tr. of I. K.A. Howard, p
.47 .]

[^22]: This analysis is attributed to 'Ali (as), himself by at-Tabari in
at-Tarikh, p.35; (see note 19, above). In that report, the dialogue is
said to be between 'A1i (as) and his uncle 'Abbas.

[^23]: See note 9 of Part One.

[^24]: Sibt ibn al-Jawzi: Tadhkirah, p. 291

[^25]: as-Suyuti: Tanrikhu 'l-khulafa', p. 209, [see also Eng. tr.
Major,H.S.Jarrett, p.213]; Abu'l-Fida': at-Tarikh, vol.I, p.192; Sibt
ibn al-Jawzi: Tadhkirah, p. 288; Mir Khwand: Rawdatu 's-safa', vol. 3,
p. 66; Ibn Hajar al-Haytami: as-Sawa'iqu 'l-muhriqah, p. 79.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: ad-Diyar Bakri: Tarikhu 'l-khamis, (vol. 2, p. 3 20 ), as quoted
by Nawwab Ahmad Husayn Khan of Payanwan in his Tari'kh Ahmadi, p. 328
[Ibn Shakir: Fawatu 'l-wafayat, vol.4, pp.255-9]

[^28]: as-Suyuti: Tari'khu 'l-khulafa', p. 291.

[^29]: Ibid.

[^30]: See the author's Prophethood, pp.9-18.

[^31]: See the author's Justice of God, pp.l-2

[^32]: Abu Dawud: as-Sunan, vol.4,pp.106-9;Ahmad: al-Musnad, vol.l,
pp.377,430; vol.3, p.28; al-Hakim: al-Mustadrak, vol. 4, pp. 557, 865

[^33]: Malik:al-Muwatta',vol.2,p.60.

[^34]: al-Jaziri: al-Fiqh 'ala 'l-madhahibi 'l-arba'ah, vol. 4, p.60.

[^35]: as-Suyuti:ad-Durru'l-manthur,vol.6,p.98.

[^36]: Ibnu 'l-Qayyim: Zadu 'l-ma'ad, vol. 4, p. 22

[^37]: al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli: Shara'i'u 'l-lslam, ("Kitabu 'n-Nikah" ),
vol. 5, p. 300; al-Hakim: Minhaju 's.-salihin, ("Kitabu ' n-Nikah" ),
vol. 2, p . 279

[^38]: at-Tabari: at-Tarikh, (Annales I), vol.5, pp.2411 -4;
Nicholson,R.A.: A Literary History of theArabs

[^39]: Ibn Abi 'l-Hadid: Sharh, vol.7, pp.35-7; see also al-Imam 'Ali's
Sermon no. l26 in Nahju 'l-balaghah

[^40]: Jizyah: poll-tax or tilthes, payable by non-Muslims in the realm
of Islam. (pub)

[^41]: at-Tabari: at-Tarikh, (Annales II), vol. 3, pp. 1354, 1367

[^42]: al-Amin: Islamic Shi'ite Encyclopedia, vo1. 1, pp. 38 41

[^43]: Sedillot, L.P.E.A., Histoire des Arabes, (Arabic tr.), pp.126-7.]


