Chapter 5: Imamate
==================

There is Always an Imam
-----------------------

We believe that as God has decreed to send His Messengers with divine
guidance, for every age or time God has appointed an Imam to look after
the people, leading them to the righteous path and to guard the divine
law against any deviation. An Imam has to clearly know the necessities
of the ages, and lead the people to the true path of God; he invites and
teaches the people to obey the prophets and to follow the law. If not
so, man will fail to obtain the goal for which he has been created (i.e.
prosperity and perfection) and divine law will be abandoned and people
will wander astray.

This is why we believe that after our prophet, in any age or time there
has always been and there will always be, an Imam to teach and to lead
the people. ‘Imam’ primarily means: \`he who is foremost-hence a
religious leader, a model, a pattern or one who leads the congregational
prayer’.

***"O, You who believe! Fear Allah and be with those who are truthful.”
(Holy Qur’an, 9:119)***

This verse of Holy Qur’an does not refer to a certain time or a distinct
age. It rather unconditionally orders the people to be the followers of
the ‘truthful’ Imam. All the famous commentators have taken the word
‘truthful’ to mean an innocent Imam who is free of guilt and sin
(infallible).

The Reality of Imamate
----------------------

We believe that Imamate is not only the apparent rulership or leadership
of a caliph, but rather a high spiritual or religious position. Besides
ruling and governing the Islamic society, an Imam has the overall
leadership of this mortal life of people as well as that of the
hereafter. He guides the soul and mind of people, and guards against any
deviation from the law. Meanwhile, he leads at the level of expectations
assigned by the prophet.

This is the same high rank that God gave to Abraham after passing the
stages and steps of prophethood as well as many other exams. When
Abraham asked his Lord to assign the position of Imamate to some of his
near kins, he was answered that this title or position will not be given
to the oppressors or sinners.

***"And remember when Abraham was tried by his Lord with certain
commandments which he fulfilled, God said to him: \`I will make you an
Imam to the people.' He said: \`What about making Imams out of my
offspring?' God answered: \`No! My covenant is not within the reach of
the oppressors’.” (Holy Qur’an, 2:124)***

It is evident that such a high moral and religious position cannot be
abridged or lowered to an apparent rulership or leadership, or else the
verse will not hand over a reasonable meaning or sense. We believe that
all the arch prophets had the dignity and grade of Imamate through their
prophethood. This is because whatever they decreed by their prophethood,
they put it to work as leaders.. So was the great prophet of Islam, when
at the beginning of his mission he conveyed the messages of God to God’s
servants, and meanwhile he carried out his leadership, teaching people
and leading them to the path of truth.

We believe that after the prophet Muhammad, his mission was continued by
the infallible Imams who succeeded him from among his nearest kin and
their offspring. By the definitions given above, to reach the high rank
of an Imam is very difficult and heavy conditions are to be observed,
such as piety to the level of innocence, having the highest level of
knowledge of religion and the law, and also full acquaintance with the
human needs in any age or time.

Imam Must Be Infallible
-----------------------

We believe that an Imam should be free of guilt or sin. As a matter of
fact one who is not infallible, cannot be trusted to teach the realities
of the law and the tenets of a divine religion. It is for his innocence
that we hold an Imam's word or deed as a religious proof.

Imam Is The Guardian of The Law
-------------------------------

We believe that an Imam has to know all about the roots and branches,
and the commandments of Islam. He has to know the full meanings and the
exegesis of Holy Qur’an, and that he takes his knowledge from the
prophet or the previous Imam; and it is such a knowledge which is
trustworthy among our people (the Shi’a).

Imam Must Be Appointed Openly and Clearly By The Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------

We believe that an Imam who is the successor of the prophet must be
clearly and openly appointed by the Messenger of God. An Imam's
appointment also is like that of the prophet and has to be decided by
God Himself .This is because the distinction of piety at the level of
innocence, and such high level of knowledge required in order to allow
someone to be an Imam, is at the power of God and His messenger, and no
one else. We therefore do not know our Imams as those elected by the
vote or choice of people.

The Shi’a Imams Are Appointed by the Prophet Himself
----------------------------------------------------

We believe that the prophet of Islam appointed all the twelve Imams as
his successors, one after the other. In Sahih Muslim (a famous reference
book of the Ahlul Sunnah Muslims), we read: "In a place between Mecca
and Medina which is named Ghadir Khumm, the prophet made a speech to
thousands of Muslims, through which he said: "I am about to leave you
for good. I am leaving two heavy things among you after me: The Holy
Qur’an is the first one in which you may find light and guidance; and my
nearest kins are the second. I advise you all not to forget God in
relation to my Kins. Not to forget God in relation to My Kins.” The
prophet then added: "If you grasp the two heavy things that I leave
among you; you will never go astray.” The same tradition is also written
in Sahih Tirmidhi (another famous reference book of the Ahlul Sunnah
Muslims).[^1]

Therefore, no Muslim can deny this tradition which is related by
successive witnesses and important writers. We rely also on another
famous tradition which is narrated in Sahih Muslim, Sahih Tirmidhi and
Sahih Abi Dawood and other famous books that our prophet has said:
"Islam will stand up to the resurrection day and until twelve Imams all
of whom are from Quraysh rule over you as my successors.” We believe
that there is no acceptable commentaries for such traditions as
mentioned above except that belief which is found among our sect, the
Shi’a.

Imam ‘Ali's Designation by the Prophet
--------------------------------------

We believe that the prophet, in several occasions has introduced and
designated Imam ‘Ali(a.s) as his successor by the decree of God, an
instance of which was in the Ghadir Khomm somewhere near Juhfah. When
the prophet was returning from his last pilgrimage (Hajj) he made a
speech to a great gathering of his companions and followers, saying: "Do
I not have priority over your souls? Yes, of course. They all answered.
Then all of you know that, continued the prophet. Of whomever I am the
Master, ‘Ali shall be his master.”

Here we do not intend to go deep through reasoning to prove our ideas,
we also do not intend to insist upon our assertion. We may only add here
that such an important tradition is not something to be ignored easily,
or changing what it means, as by taking the ‘Master’=’Mawla’ to mean a
friend particularly when we see that the prophet has put so much stress
and emphasis upon the word, so as to make it known to all!

Is this not the same case that; Ibni Asir has brought in his important
history book saying: "At the beginning off his prophetic mission, the
prophet was ordered by God (26:214) to admonish his nearest kindred. He
invited some forty men of them to a dinner, and by a miracle, he fed all
of them from a single portion of food! He then made a speech and finally
said to them: Which of you is willing to give me a truthful hand in this
Divine Mission of mine, and become my brother and successor among all?
No one answered him there, except Imam ‘Ali, who said: I will be your
companion and minister: and the prophet pointed at Imam ‘Ali and said:
He is my brother and my successor among you.”

Thus we see the prophet to have designated his vicegerent and Imam, from
the beginning of his mission. The same case also happened at the end of
his mission when the prophet was at his death bed. He asked those who
were round him to get him a pen and paper to write an order which would
prevent them from going astray. One of them rejected and refused to
provide pen and paper and even accused the prophet of uttering delirious
speech! To repeat again, we hereby only declare our belief in brief and
with little reasoning.

Each Imam Emphasizes His Successor
----------------------------------

We believe that each one of the twelve Imams has been introduced by the
previous ones. The first one of them was Imam ‘Ali the son of Abu Talib,
who was succeeded by Imam Hassan his first born son, and then Imam
Hussain, the Master of Martyrs, his second born son. The third Imam was
‘Ali the son of Imam Hussain, then came his son Muhammad Al-Baqir. Then
Jafar Al-Sadiq and then his son Musa Al-Kazim. Then his son ‘Ali bin
Musa Al-Reza. The ninth of them was Muhammad Al-Taqi, then his son ‘Ali
Al-Naqi. After him, it was his son Imam Hassan Askari, who was the
father of Al-Mahdi, the twelfth and the last of them all, whom we
believe to be already living.

The idea of a ‘saviour’ who has to come to fill the world with justice,
when it has been full of oppressions is accepted almost by all the
Muslims of different sects, and many of the Ahlul Sunnah scholars and
men of knowledge have declared that in their books few years ago. In
answer to a question about the existence of Al-Mahdi, the Islamic World
Relations Society issued a pamphlet to emphasize on the surety that he
will come. In that pamphlet many evidences and documents were presented
to prove that many of the Muslims believe that Al-Mahdi will be born in
future, but the Shi’as believe that he has already been born, and so far
he has lived a long life, and by the decree of God, he shall appear one
day to fill the world with justice.

None of the Prophet's Companions Could Excel Imam ‘Ali
------------------------------------------------------

We believe that none of the prophet's companions did, or could excel
Imam ‘Ali(a.s) in any respect; and that Imam ‘Ali (a.s) was at the
highest religious position other than that of the prophets. Of course we
know it to be unlawful to misrepresent the Imam by overstating him and
by exaggerations.

Those who prove for him the position of deity or something like that are
all heretics in our sight, as are those who undervalue him, and we are
absolutely disgusted with their belief, although they might call
themselves the Shi’a of Imam ‘Ali(a.s) and mingle their names with ours.
The leading Shi’as and the orthodox have always rejected the two groups
who either over or under value the Imam, and have called and taken them
as heretics.

The Prophet's Companions at the Court of Wisdom and History
-----------------------------------------------------------

We believe that there were many great men of devotion and chastity among
the companions of the prophet; but all of them were not so, because the
Holy Qur’an declares many among them as being hypocrites! There were
also men who, after the prophet, broke their allegiance with the
vicegerent of God and made wars and shed the blood of thousands of
Muslims only because they have been with the prophet or they carry the
title of a \`companion' of the prophet. In other word, how can we judge
that both of the two parties who made the battles of Siffin and Jamal
were ‘rightful’ and on the ‘righteous path’? How can both of the two
groups of combatants be honest and truthful?

Some bring forth the foot of religious researches and self-exegesis on
the ground by saying that: \`Surely one of the two parties was wrong and
oppressive, but as they were taking their decisions by their exegesis,
both parties were on righteousness in the sight of God. This, we cannot
accept easily.

How could one with his own exegesis and self-comprehensions break his
allegiance and loyalty to the Vicegerent of God, who is entitled to
obedience, and create such fearful wars between Muslims, grouping them
and shedding streams of their blood. Can this be justified by simply
claiming to follow one’s exegesis and personal advisors? What else then
cannot be justified by such personal comprehensions and
self-commentaries? Let us be more frank, that everyone, even the nearest
companions of the prophet are held in pledge of their deeds and are
responsible for what they have done and have to answer for it:

***"The most honored off you in Allah's sight, is he who is the most
virtuous (chaste) of you.” (Holy Qur’an, 49:13)***

The above holy verse is true for all even for the nearest companions of
the prophet. We therefore have to judge them by their deeds, and we
should have a reasonable definition for them all. Those who were
truthful in the presence of the messenger and in his absence too, did
their best to guard the religion and to observe his commandments. They
remained faithful to their covenant and respected their promises. On the
other hand, those among his companions who were hypocrites and vexed him
did the same after him. Whatever they did was against Islam and Muslims.

***“You shall find no believer in Allah and the last judgment to love
those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even though they be their
father, their sons, their brothers, or their nearest kindred. Allah has
inscribed the faith in their hearts and Has strengthened them with a
spirit of His, God will admit them to the Gardens of Bliss, beneath
which streams flow, wherein they shall live forever. They are the Party
of Allah, and Allah's party shall achieve felicity.” (Holy Qur’an,
58:22)***

We believe that those who harmed the prophet in his presence or absence
are not worthy of admiration. Of course we must not forget that some of
the companions of the prophet showed the utmost truthfulness and
sincerity with the greatest self-sacrifices and have been admired by God
Himself and so were a group who followed them later.

"The vanguard of Islam; the first of those who forsook their homes, and
of those who gave them aid; and also those who followed them in good
deeds:

***“Well pleased is Allah with them and them with Allah. For them
prepared Gardens of Bliss, under which streams flow. They dwell there in
forever. That's the Supreme Felicity.” (Holy Qur’an, 9:100)***

This is our belief about the companions of our prophet.

Imam Takes His Knowledge from the Prophet
-----------------------------------------

According to the order of our prophet: “To observe the Holy Qur’an and
His Nearest Kins” and also to the innocence of the Imams, our
jurisprudence of divine law is also based upon the words, deeds and
consents (doing something in front of them without having their
objection) of the innocent Imams. The three factors, i.e. words, deeds,
and consent of our Imams are accepted proofs for us. We have to note
also that whatever an Imam says; it is a narration of the prophet
through his fathers. This is to say whatever an Imam says, has indeed
been said by the prophet.

Imam Baqir(a.s) told one of his students named Jabir: "That which we
convey to you is what we have taken out of a treasure that belongs to
our prophet Mohammad." Through another tradition from Imam Jafar Sadiq
(a.s) we read: "Someone asked him a question and the Imam answered him.
The man began to dispute about the answer. Imam told him: \`The answer I
gave you was that of the prophet and you have no right to dispute.’"

Another remarkable point to note is about the important books on
collected traditions such as: Kaafi, Tahzib Estebsar and Man La
Yahzarohol Faghih, that we have and we use. Although these books are
much trusted in our view, it does not mean to us that whatever is
written in them is true and acceptable by us. Besides the above
mentioned tradition books, we also have the books of ‘who is who’ about
personalities e.g Al Rijal – The Men. Through such books we investigate
the personalities of the narrators of the tradition and also about their
chains of documents and references so as to make sure that a tradition
is true and correct. Therefore, however important and trustworthy a book
might be, to accept a tradition from it has to convince us that it reads
and is compatible with our standard, or else we shall reject it. Some
Islamic sects have their own collection of traditions (hadith) which
they know to be correct (sahih) .The authors have named their books,
\`The Correct (Sahih)’ and some men of importance might have admitted
that these are correct, but in our sight, a tradition only is correct
when it is reasonably proved to have been said by the prophet.

[^1]: This incident is brought and found in so many famous Islamic books
such as: Sahih Muslim v. 2, p. 1873, Sahih Tirmidhi v. 5, p. 662, Sunan
Darmi v. 2, p. 432, Khasaes Nesaie p. 20 and Musnad Ahmad v. 5, p. 82.


