Chapter 6: Other Subjects
=========================

Besides what was said in the previous chapters about our ‘belief, there
are other specialties in our ideas that will follow in this chapter.

The Rationale Goodness and Badness
----------------------------------

We believe that human wisdom can appreciate many good things to
distinguish from the bad ones, and right from wrong; by his blissful
power of distinction which God has given him. Even before coming of the
prophets with the law, man could rationally distinguish many good and
bad. For instance he could easily understand that justice is good and
oppression is bad.

Man could know that some ethics such as truthfulness, honesty, bravery
and generosity are good deeds; and that, lying; betrayal and jealousy
are bad morals. But as the wisdom is not able to comprehend all that is
good or bad, and his knowledge is limited, the prophets were sent with
book for guidance and the law to improve man's faculty and morals,
helping his wisdom. In that of course we deny not the value of the
independent wisdom which comprehends the facts.

If so, the monotheism, the prophetic missions, and the divine religion,
will all be futile! For all these important tenets are basically proved
by the reasoning of the wisdom. It is evident that the law and the
commandments are only acceptable when the principles which are
monotheism and prophethood have been proved to us through wisdom, and by
the religion itself.

God's Justice
-------------

We do believe in God's justice, and we say it is impossible for God to
oppress any creature of His at the least amount, or to punish His
servants without any reason or to forgive them without a reason. It is
also impossible that God may leave His promises unfulfilled. We also
know it to be impossible that God may abandon His servants without
giving them necessary guidance. Associating such indecent and foul
labels with the Omnipotent God is clearly far from the truth and
reality.

Man's Freedom
-------------

We believe that God has created Man free. He has given us free will and
we have options to do what we may do. If not so, why should He punish a
sinner who is supposed to be compelled to commit sins?

To make it short, rationally distinguishing good and bad as mentioned
above, and independent wisdom are bases for the acceptance of divine
religion, scriptures and the prophets, but not enough, because we have a
limited wisdom, by which we cannot grasp all that we need. So we have to
have divine guidance for improving our wisdom and understanding.

Wisdom Serves as A Reference in our Religious Jurisprudence
-----------------------------------------------------------

Following what we mentioned above, one of the principle references in
Islam is wisdom's reasoning. The wisdom comprehends something definitely
and then judges. For instance; if we find no reason or proof in the book
or in the prophet's methodical way (sunnat) to show us that oppression,
betrayal, lying and committing murder are very bad and unlawful deeds,
we would certainly reject them by the reasoning of our wisdom, and we
make sure that God never likes us to do such things. This is why we
conclude that wisdom too is a divine base of our religious judgments.

The Holy Qur’an is full of verses showing the importance of the wisdom
as a base or reference for the judgments in religious research:

***"In the creation of the heavens, and the earth, and the alternation
of day and night, there are indeed signs for men of wisdom and
understanding." (Holy Qur’an, 3:190)***

Some reveal the aim of sending the scriptures to improve the power of
wisdom and understanding of man:

***"See how have we explained our signs variously so that they may
understand." (Holy Qur’an, 6:65)***

***"We have sent it down as an Arabic Quran, in order that you may use
your wisdom." (Holy Qur’an, 12:2)***

Some of the verses urge people to use their minds so as to distinguish
good from bad:

***"Say can a blind be held equal to one who can see? Why don't you then
think?" (Holy Qur’an, 6:50)***

And the worst of the moving creatures in the sight of God are those who
do not use their common sense so as to understand:

***"For the worst of beasts in the sight of God, are those who are deaf
and dumb, not using their wisdom to understand!" (Holy Qur’an, 8:22)***

So how can we ignore the importance of the wisdom, understanding and
thinking in Islam?

More about God's Justice
------------------------

As we have already mentioned we believe that God is just and He never
oppresses; because cruel acts are indecent and unbecoming to Him:

***"And thy Lord will treat no one with injustice." (Holy Qur’an,
18:49)***

If some people are punished in this world or in the hereafter, it is due
to their own deeds:

***"It is not God who oppresses them, but they wrong their own soul."
(Holy Qur’an, 9:70)***

Not only man, but rather no creature in the world is ever oppressed by
God:

***"Allah wants no injustice to any of His creatures." (Holy Qur’an,
3:108)***

All these verses are somehow a guidance towards making use of our
wisdom.

Rejection of What You Cannot Do
-------------------------------

We believe that God will never oblige a duty to anyone who cannot do it:

***"Allah will not charge a soul with a duty that cannot be fulfilled by
him." (Holy Qur’an, 2:286)***

The Philosophy of the Painful Accidents
---------------------------------------

We believe that the painful accidents that sometimes occur, such as the
earthquakes, calamities and misfortunes, might be that of God's
punishment, as it was with the case of the people of Lot:

***"When our decree was issued, we turned (their cities) upside down,
and rained down on them brimstones, hard as baked clay, spread layer on
layer." (Holy Qur’an, 11:82)***

And about the ungrateful and rebellious people of Saba, God says:

***"But they turned away (from their Lord) and we sent against them the
flood from the Dams." (Holy Qur’an, 34:16)***

Some other painful incidents are to admonish people and to teach them
lessons:

***"Mischief has appeared on land and sea by what the hands of man have
earned, that Allah may give them a taste of some of their deeds, in
order that they may return back from evil.” (Holy Qur’an, 30:41)***

Other pains are what our hands make it and are due to our ignorance and
carelessness:

***"Whatever good happens to you (o man!) is from Allah: but whatever
evil happens to you; is from yourself." (Holy Qur’an, 4:79)***

The Existence i Ruled By The Best of Orders

We believe that the created world, or the world of creation is the
scenery on which the bests of orders act. In other word, the existing
order that controls the world is the best one that can possibly exist.
Here, everything has an account of its own. There is nothing in contrast
to justice and goodness; and if bad is seen, it belongs to people or the
creatures.

We repeat again that God's justice is one of the most important bases of
Islamic insight, without which the tenets such as the monotheism,
prophethood and doomsday will be endangered and misunderstood. We have a
tradition that Imam Sadiq(a.s) has emphasized on monotheism and God's
justice as the main principles of the religion and then he adds:
"Whatever is becoming and fit for you, is not allowable to God. Justice
is that you do not relate something to God, which doing it puts a blame
upon you."

Visiting the Tombs of The Messengers And Imams (Pilgrimage)
-----------------------------------------------------------

We believe that pilgrimages for visiting the tombs of the Messengers and
Imams, as well as the scholars and the martyrs, is a definite religious
precept which has to be observed, although not a must.

In many books of the Ahlul Sunnah scholars, just as those written by
Shi’as, many traditions are narrated from the prophet that he has
recommended the precept or pilgrimage. To collect all such traditions
will make a voluminous book.

Throughout the history of Islam, our great scholars, and all groups of
Muslims have done that with much care, and books are written about the
adventures of their pilgrimages. It is evident that nobody takes his
visit to a tomb for worship; as such worship only belongs to God. The
purpose of visiting the tomb of a great man is to respect him and to pay
regards, meanwhile seeking their intercession. It is also narrated that
even the prophet himself often went to visit the Cemetery of Baqi’ and
saluted the dead in their graves. Therefore no one should doubt the
lawfulness of such pilgrimages in Islam.

The Philosophy of The Mourning Ceremonies
-----------------------------------------

We believe that the mourning ceremonies, for the martyrs, especially the
matyrs of Karbala will serve to maintain the monument of such dear ones,
and keep us aware of their self-sacrifices for the sake of God and Islam
in some occasions, particularly the first ten days of Muharram, the
period in which Imam Hussain(a.s) and his faithful companions were
cruelly martyred, we perform the mourning ceremonies. We explain their
aims, and express our deep regards for them and by that infuse new blood
in our veins.

In the year 61 Hijri, Yazid a sinful man and a stranger with Islam,
succeeded the throne of Islamic caliphate. When he asked Imam Hussain
(a.s) to take the oath of allegiance, Imam refused to swear fealty.
Yazid insisted and Imam rejected and left Mecca for Iraq. In Karbala,
Imam and his seventy two companions and household were surrounded by a
great many troops of Yazid. Imam and his companions defended their
attacks and fought their enemies boldly to their last breath. All the
men, (Imam Hussain (a.s) and his companions) were martyred, and their
women and children were taken captives.

Soon after that the blood of Imam boiled and stirred strange excitements
among his contemporary Muslims. Groups revolted in turn, aiming at
vengeance for the bloodshed. These frequent revolutions gave an end to
the nasty life of the Omayid dynasty. All the revolting groups had but
one slogan "Vengeance for Imam's Bloodshed." Today the rise and
martyrdom of Imam Hussain (a.s) is a pattern and a program in our daily
life to make us stand firmly against any oppression and cruelty.

Some of our slogans that were taken from Imam Hussain's bloody history
like: "far be abjections from us" or "life is faith and endeavor" have
been of immense use in our past and present, urging us not to undergo
any unjustified demand or oppressions.

To brief our word here, paying regards to the reminiscence of the great
martyrs of Karbala, and else, will infuse new blood of valiance, bravery
and self-sacrifice into our veins and will teach us how to live an
honorable and proud life, and this is why we try to revive the
reminiscence of our martyrs by renewing the mourning ceremonies every
year better than the last. Strangers may not know what we do and what we
are aiming at or achieving by doing so. They think of it as a mere
historical incident that must have been forgotten and covered with the
dust of age, but we do know its importance and effect in our past and
present history.

It is written in all the famous Islamic histories that "after the battle
of Uhad the prophet passed near a house from which the sounds of
mourning and wailing for the martyrs were heard the prophet said: "But
no one mourns for Hamzih (The Master of Martyrs).”

Saad Ibn Maaz who was a near companion of the prophet from the group of
Helpers, heard that and ordered their women to go and mourn and lament
for Hamzih, the faithful uncle of the prophet who was mutilated in the
battle field of Uhad. Evidently this lamentation was not something
specialized to Hazarat Hamzih. It rather is a means of infusing new
blood into the veins of Muslims.

Now it is Ashura, the 10th of Muharram 1417 Hijri (1976). A great
emotion and enthusiasm is seen throughout the Shi’a world. Children,
teenagers, young people, adults, man and woman have all dressed in black
and attended the mourning ceremonies of the Martyrs of Karbala. They are
so strangely excited and have changed minds that if they be invited to
fight the enemies of Islam, they all will take arm and rush to the
battlefield and do not avoid any sort of self-sacrifices.

It is just as if the blood of those martyrs flow in their veins, and
that Imam and his companions have been slain just now. They sing epic
songs and poems full of slogans against colonization, and oppression and
in favor of proud and exalted death over an abject life. We hold this
incident as a great moral capital that we have to observe it and keep it
safe.

The Temporary Marriage
----------------------

We believe that the temporary marriage is lawful and in our religious
jurisprudence, it is termed "mut’ah". From this motive, marriage is of
two kinds: the permanent one which is not limited to a time frame and
the temporary marriage which is for a limited period, which the couple
will agree on. In many respects both of the wedlock are the same.

As for the dower, the freedom of the female spouse from any impediments
and rules, and regulations for the children are similar for both these
types of marriages.

There are also some differences between the two wedlock such that the
male spouse does not need to pay the alimony, or that the couple do not
inherit each other (of course their children do inherit their parents).
However we have taken this order out of the Holy Qur’an:

***"All women other than those mentioned here are lawful for you
provided you seek them in marriage with your wealth in a modest conduct
(chastity), and not by fornication give them their dower for the
enjoyment you have had with them, as your duty, but it shall be of no
blame on you to make any agreement among yourselves; and Allah is All
Knowing All Wise" (Holy Qur’an, 4:24)***

Many of the great commentators have explained that the above verse aims
at the temporary marriage.

In Tabary's commentary book it is written that this verse indicates the
temporary marriage and that many of the prophet's companions have
testified to it. In many famous tradition books such as Sahih Bokhari,
Sahih Muslim and Musnad Ahmad, there are traditions about the temporary
marriage declaring it a lawful religious act which used to be done in
the life time of the prophet. There are also some narrations in these
books that deny and reject it.

Some scholars believe that during the life time of the prophet it was
done, but after the prophet it was forbidden by Omar the second Khalif.
In the famous book Sunan of Beihaghi (v7, p206) it is written that Omar
said: "Two Mut’ahs were decreed by the prophet of God: temporary
marriage and Hajj (special rites in pilgrimage) which I declare them
both as unlawful!" So the Ahlul Sunnah scholars have different ideas
about that; some admit and some reject, but the Shi’a scholars take it
to be lawful with unanimous approval.

We believe that if temporary marriage be not misused, it will give an
adequate answer to many questions of the young generation of our time,
who cannot afford a permanent wedlock, or those in long journeys either
for economical or educational purposes. Those who work against the
temporary marriage are cleaning the road to fornication and obscene acts
particularly in our time in which the age of marriage is delayed and
lustful means are abundant. Closing the door of lawful marriages results
in to opening the doors of fornication and evil sexual acts.

Let me repeat once again that we reject all sorts of misuse in this
respect such a making a play toy out of it or turning a woman into a
means for lusts and passions instead of a real wife. On the other hand,
none should leave a good and useful law unattended, because some may use
it in a bad way.

A Brief History of Shi’a
------------------------

We believe that the Shi’a sect was founded in the lifetime of our
prophet, and its name was taken out of his words and we have many clear
reasons to prove that many commentators of the Qur’an believe the
following verse refers to Imam ‘Ali(a.s) and his sectarians (Shi’a):

***"Those who have faith and do righteous deeds, are the best of
creatures." (Holy Qur’an, 98:7)***

Soyuti, the famous commentator has narrated in his Durul Mansur that
Jabir said: "We were in presence of the prophet, when Imam ‘Ali(a.s)
arrived there. As soon as the prophet saw him he said:  
 ‘Upon him, to whose hands lays my life, ‘Ali and his Shi’a (sectarians)
will have salvation on doomsday'. Then the prophet recited the
above-mentioned verse. After that, whenever Imam ‘Ali(a.s) came to a
gathering of the prophet, we used to say: \`the best of god's creatures
has come’." This tradition with a little difference is also narrated by
Ibn Abbas, Abu Barza, Ibn Marduya, and Atiya Ofi.

Therefore the name ‘Shi’a’ was given to the lovers and followers of Imam
‘Ali(a.s) by the prophet himself and not by the Safavies dynasty as some
with very low knowledge have said. We respect and esteem all the other
Islamic sects, and stand in one line of prayer with them, and perform
the rites of pilgrimage as they do, and cooperate with them in all
common Islamic goals and fields. Yet as a Shi’a we do have some
particularities which were noted by our prophet, and this is why we have
chosen this school.

The Legacy of the Prophet's Household
-------------------------------------

The followers of this school (Shi’a) have so many traditions from the
prophet which are conveyed through Imam ‘Ali (a.s) or other Imams. These
have all been collected and classified, and form the main source of
Shi’a’s religious jurisprudence. The most important books among the
collections are four, and are known as Kutub al-Arba’a (Four Books).
These are firstly, Kafi, secondly, Man la Yazaraul Faki, thirdly, Tazeeb
and fourth of all, Estibsar. Not that, all the traditions found in these
four books, or elsewhere are indisputably correct or acceptable.

Each tradition as we said, has a series of documents and narrators that
are to be analyzed and confirmed. If all the documents and narrators
prove to be right and trustworthy, then the tradition may be considered
true and accepted. Such investigations about the traditions are the task
of religious experts and scholars. Therefore the Shi’a's collected works
in the field of tradition differs with that of the Ahlul Sunnah. The way
Bokhari and other Sunni scholars such as Muslim approached such matters
in their collected works differ from that of our authors.

Their criterion of right and wrong is only the author's distinction. So
to understand the belief of a Sunni, it is enough to get access to their
important tradition books, called ‘Sahih’. Contrary to that, Shi’a have
collected all the traditions that they could; narrated by the Imams just
to be investigated, judged, approved, and then be accepted for action.
This is only to be undertaken by learned and trusted authorities and
religious specialists.

The Two Important Books
-----------------------

Among the important sources of Shi’a, there are two very important
books. The first one is known as Nahjul Balagha, a work collected by
Sharif Razi a thousand years ago, consisting of the speeches, letters,
and some quotations of Imam ‘Ali (a.s). The eloquence in the verses is
so great and the meanings so deep, that it makes the work so strangely
attractive to all sorts of minds! We wish not only the Muslims, but the
non-Muslims too could be acquainted with this amazing book, in order to
know what is to be known in the fields of monotheism, resurrection,
ethics, social and political affairs.

The second important book is called Shahifa Sajadiya, a collection of
the best and the most beautiful verses on prayers having the deepest
meaning. It may teach us how to pray to the Lord and to purify our soul
by that prayer. The whole book is the collection of many fervent prayers
in the form of hymns, and narrated by our fourth Imam, ‘Ali Ibn Hussain
(a.s), who is titled ‘Sajad’ (One who Often Bows to God).

The Last Word
-------------

Whatever we wrote in this collection is a summary of the opinion and
belief of the followers of our prophet's household; i.e. the Shi’a sect
of Islam. This is without any change or deviation, confirmed by Holy
Qur’an and to a less extent by traditions. We aimed to write the
subjects in brief and this, we did. It may be concluded here that this
work:

1. Is a trustworthy reference that clearly presents the Shi’a belief and
ideas. Here by all the other Muslims and non-Muslims many have access to
firsthand information about the Shi’a.

2. This work can be reasoning for God, to those who judge us with
inadequate information, or take their information about us, from
doubtful persons or our enemies; or from books of no importance.

3. To study this work will show the reader that the difference between
Shi’a and other Islamic sects is not that much to prevent us from
peacefully living together, and cooperating in important fields and
affairs. Common aspects of our belief are many, our enemies are also
common too.

4. We believe that some mysterious hands are working hard to separate
us, and to create disputes and hatred among Muslims, to kindle the fire
of enmities! These mysterious hands do not want, Islam to play its vital
role after the smash of communism, and to fill the vacancies of
materialism. Muslims should not leave their enemies unattended so that
they may succeed their impure goals. There now exists a good opportunity
for us to present Islam to the world, as it really is.

5. We believe that if all the scholars and the leading men of all sects
sit at a round table to discuss the problems sincerely, with pure hearts
and far from fanaticism and obstinacy; they will surely solve all the
problems they have, and the differences would be reduced if not entirely
erased.

Such a meeting was recently held in Zahidan. Shi’a and Sunnis sat at a
round table. They had several sincere meetings and as a result came to
an end to most of their differences. To end, I pray to our Lord and say:

***"Our lord! Forgive us and our brothers who embraced the faith before
us, and leave not in our hearts any malice (hatred) towards the
faithful. You are compassionate and merciful." (Holy Qur’an, 59:10)***


