Chapter 8: Essence and Existence
================================

Skeptics: Opponents of Realism
------------------------------

### Question

In the history of philosophy there have always been anti-realists who
claim that all our perceptions are illusory. The more radical ones even
doubt their own doubt, thereby rejecting any possibility of real
knowledge. In the sphere of philosophy, they are referred to as
skeptics. Would you please provide a brief but reasoned philosophic
argument against their position?

### Answer

Skeptics are of three persuasions. Some skeptics say that the only
realities whose existence we may ascertain are ourselves and our
thoughts; all else is an illusion. The more extreme skeptics go even
further, claiming that the only reasonable position to hold regarding
knowledge is solipsism: only *I* and *my* thoughts are definitely real.
The most extreme, however, doubt even their own doubt. According to the
latter, knowledge is impossible. The falsity of this position, however,
is definitively demonstrated in epistemology.

We know without doubt and based on our God-given intuition that there is
a reality independent of and external to us. Against the skeptics, we
hold that there are many real objects, each one of which is distinct
from all others and possesses properties peculiar to it.

Each external object can in the mind be described by two concepts:
essence and existence. The absence of either of the two concepts means
that the object in question is illusory. Assuming that John is a real
human being, the concept of John in the mind can be the subject of two
predicates: human being, as its essence, and existence, indicating its
objective reality.

Both of these concepts are critical if we are to believe that John
really exists. Nevertheless, the two concepts are fundamentally
different. *Existence* is the negation of *nonexistence*, and as such
the two cannot concur. The two contradictory concepts may, however, be
alternatively predicated of a thing’s essence (in our case, *human
being* as John’s essence).

Another issue in regard to the two concepts, essence and existence, is
that they cannot both be exemplifiable by objective reality, for if they
were, every object would be in effect two objects—which is absurd. For
this reason, one of the two is truly objective (i.e., it has objective
instances) while the other is applicable to external objects only
through the mediation of the objective one.

In other words, one of the two concepts is a mere abstraction and as
such is exemplifiable owing to its concomitance with the objective
concept. So the question is: which of the two is objective? To answer
this question, it suffices to notice that a thing possesses objective
reality only when existence can be predicated of it; its essence in and
of itself may or may not exist.

Thus, it is *existence* that is objective, not the essence of the object
in question. Based on this argument, the correct philosophic position is
that existence is the objective concept. As such, the other
views—mainly, the opposite view that essence is objective and existences
subjective—are false.

Another issue that merits mention here is the gradational [*tashkiki*]
status of existence. But first let us point out that logicians identify
two types of universals: 1) those that permit of various degrees
[*mushakkik*], 2) those that are not such [*mutawati*]. The universals
that are of the latter type are instantiated by objects that partake of
that universal in question equally.

For instance, *human being*: all human beings are equally human beings,
and if there are any differences between the various individuals of this
class it is due to the extrinsic qualities (e.g., height, weight, age)
that are not contained in the concept of *human being*. On the other
hand, a gradational universal is that whose instances differ in their
exemplification of the universal in question.

Such as light: there are brighter lights and there are less bright
lights; they are all instances of light, but they differ in regard to
intensity, although this difference itself arises from the essence of
light not from any extrinsic quality. The majority of the sensory
qualities are gradational: visual qualities such as light (as was
mentioned), distance, dimension; auditory qualities, that is, the
various sounds; olfactory qualities, that is, the various smells;
gustatory qualities, that is, the various tastes; and finally the
tangible qualities.

The difference that distinguishes the various instances of these
qualities lies in their very essence, not in any extrinsic quality (one
distance is shorter than another; one sound is louder than another; one
smell is more pungent or more pleasant than another; one taste is more
delectable than another; one object is softer or warmer than another).

Of course, on examination one will realize that there is a subtle point
here. The intrinsic difference elaborated above does not arise from the
mental concepts that constitute our thoughts, but rather from their
exemplification that occurs in external objects.

For instance, the color black: the variations in blackness pertain to
the existential instances of the concept, not to the concept itself.
This demonstrates that *tashkik* (intrinsic gradation) actually pertains
to existence, not to essence as such. In this light, we may affirm the
truth of intrinsic gradational variation, although in existence not in
essence.

Furthermore, those who deny the existence of intrinsic gradational
variation based on the reasoning that a single entity cannot at once
satisfy contradictory qualities are wrong in that they are confusing
numeric singularity with generic singularity. Their reasoning is correct
only in relation to numeric singularity, whereas in generic singularity
the simultaneous application of contradictory qualities is possible.

From the foregoing discussion we can conclude that a *mushakkik* is an
entity that allows of intrinsic variation so that the difference that
distinguishes its instances derives from the very reality that unites
them.

After having considered these preliminary points, we can now turn to the
concept of existence. The concept of existence as such can be predicated
of all objects. The reality of the concept of existence, its external
instance, is the locus where objective reality and properties of things
obtain.

The external reality of the concept of existence accommodates a variety
of opposing qualities and states—necessity and contingence, cause and
effect, unity and multiplicity, actuality and potentiality, etc.—and as
such is a gradational entity [*mushakkik*] that subsumes a plurality of
degrees that vary intrinsically in intensity. In this light, it becomes
clear that those who hold the concept of existence to be ambiguous
[*mushtarak lafzi*], reflecting the multiplicity of the essences of
which it is predicated, are wrong. For, an essence is in and of itself
neutral in regard to *existence* and *nonexistence*:

According to the definitive judgment of reason, both *existence* and
*nonexistence* are predicable of an essence. Now, if the concept of
existence were ambiguous, incorporating the meaning of the essence to
which it is attributed (as our opponents claim) then to predicate
nonexistence of an essence should constitute a contradiction—an
obviously unreasonable conclusion. Their mistake arises from confusion
between the properties of mental concepts and external objects, on the
one hand, and from conflating the relation of essence with the reality
of existence and the relation of essence with the mental concept of
existence.

Another opposing view is that the concept of existence has two meanings:
one pertains to the Necessary Existent and the other to contingent
existents. This wrong position also stems from confusing the properties
of concepts with those of external objects. The difference between the
existence of the Necessary [*wajib*] Existent and that of contingent
[*mumkin*] existents is not ideal but ontic.

There is another false view in this regard to the effect that external
objects are fundamentally distinct realities. The problem with this view
is that we meaningfully predicate existence of all objects while it is
impossible to derive a single concept from multiple objects that have
nothing in common.

Another topic pertinent to the discussion at hand is the relation of
existence [*wujud*] to essence [*mahiyyah*]. As was explained above, we
derive two concepts from every external object: one indicates its
essence and the other its existence. Clearly only one of these two is
directly exemplifiable while the other refers to reality through the
mediation of the directly exemplifiable one. Considering that the ontic
properties of an object relate to that aspect of it from which the
concept of existence is derived, we can conclude that *existence* is the
directly exemplifiable of the two concepts, the essence being a purely
abstract concept.

Of course, this should not be construed to imply that a thing’s essence
is an illusion that lacks any reference to objective reality. Rather, in
saying that essence is an abstract concept, we mean that it is not
immediately exemplified by external objects: its applicability to
external objects is by means of existence, for a thing’s essence is its
existential boundary that sets it apart from other objects.

Thus understood, the view that a thing’s essence is real only in the
sense that is has objective instances is invalid. According to this
view, the concept that comes into the mind and which we assume to
portray truly the objective essence is merely an illusion. This line of
reasoning runs in opposition to cogent philosophic arguments that prove
that a thing’s essence that is reflected in the mind is essentially
identical with the ontic essence of the object in question. It is for
this reason that we are able to form true propositions by placing the
essences reflected in the mind as subjects and then describing them.

In addition, if we concede that the essences reflected in the mind are
merely subjective impressions, the hypothetical propositions formulated
in various sciences would be doomed; even worse, any science that posits
universal propositions should, on the basis of this conception, be
discarded as chimerical. The physician would be wrong to assert that
every human being has a heart. One would be justified only in uttering
propositions that are confined to the objects one has directly observed.
This position, however, would mean that all sciences should be forsaken.

Another consequence of this conception is that such logical definitions
as species, differentia, substantial, accidental, etc. that we predicate
of essences would also lose credibility.[^1] Those who thus reject the
validity of essences hold that such concepts are merely images of
external objects similar to a picture one draws of something. The
picture does not in any way define the object in question; it only
reminds us of it. The falsity of this position, however, is very clear.
For, if we have no way to truly perceive the external object, how can we
tell that a certain image depicts the external object in question. Thus,
we can condemn this conception as a blatant form of skepticism.

[^1]: This is a very complicated philosophic discussion whose thorough
examination exceeds the scope of this work. Here ‘Allamah merely alludes
to topic. Those interested may refer to The Elements of Islamic
Metaphysics, Sayyid ‘Ali Quli Qara’i’s translation of ‘Allamah’s Bidayah
al-Hikmah. [trans.]


