Chapter 9: Miscellaneous Questions
==================================

The Question of Imprecation
---------------------------

### Question

In “*Al-Tafsir al-Mizan*” you say that even in this age any believer who
encounters the appropriate situation may perform imprecation
[*mubahalah*]. Can just any believer undertake this grave task?

### Answer

There are indications in the Qur’anic verse in which the issue of
imprecation is mentioned (3:61) from which we may deduce that it is a
general practice, not a one-time event that happened between the Prophet
and the Christians of Najran. Moreover, there are *hadith*s narrated
from the Imams that clearly indicate that all believers may perform
imprecation when the circumstances call for it.

In a debate that Imam al-Baqir had with ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umayr Laythi on
the question of temporary marriage, the Imam invites his opponent, when
neither succeeded in convincing the other, to engage in mutual
imprecation. In another *hadith*, the Imam advises a Shi‘ah, who had
been engaged in theological debates with some Sunni scholars, to call
his opponents to enter upon mutual imprecation. Thus we can conclude
that imprecation is a general solution that God has established in
support of the defenders of truth.

The Inviolability of the Qur’an
-------------------------------

### Question

What is your view on whether the Qur’an has been distorted or not?
Considering the fact that a certain Shi‘ah scholar has written a book,
contending that the Qur’an has been distorted, there are two questions
that I would like you to address. One, what can we say in response to
the Sunnis who condemn us for such issues? Two, how can the *hadith*s
recorded in that book—averring that the Qur’an has been distorted—be
justified?

### Answer

The *hadith*s regarding the distortion of the Qur’an are numerous,
relayed through both the Sunni and Shi‘ah chains of transmission. Some
traditionists [*ahl al-hadith*] have accepted these *hadith*s. The
problem with these *hadith*s, however, is that they are self-defeating:
to accept them would lead to rejecting their validity. For, the
authenticity of *hadith* presupposes that the Imams are valid Islamic
authorities. That in turn depends on the authority of the Prophet’s
words (as we believe that the Prophet appointed the Imams as his
successors).

The authority of the words of the Prophet derives from the Qur’an as the
most fundamental proof of his ministry. Now, to compromise the authority
of the Qur’an by questioning its authenticity based on the possibility
of its being distorted (whether that means extraneous material has been
added to it or that certain parts of it have been deleted) would
undermine the authority of the Prophet, the Imams, and finally the
*hadith*s narrated from them. Thus, such *hadith*s are self-defeating.

The Infallibility of the Prophet
--------------------------------

### Question

A certain contemporary scholar, drawing on the works of Saduq, has
written a treatise on the “Prophet’s mistakes” [*Sahw al-Nabi*]. What is
your opinion concerning this question? Moreover, why are such
unnecessary topics even published?

### Answer

Obviously, the Prophet is the perfect example, both in his speech and
conduct, for every Muslim. For the Prophet to commit a mistake,
considering his position, would be a grave error as it would jeopardize
his mission and undermine his credibility as the guide chosen by God.
This in turn would deprive the Qur’an and the prophetic *hadith*s of
their authority, for there would be no guarantee that he did not err in
relaying the Qur’anic verses nor in his sayings.

The Logic of Istikharah
-----------------------

### Question

Is there a legitimate source on which the practice of *istikharah*
(whether by the Qur’an or by the *subhah* [i.e., *tasbih*]) is based?
Doesn’t this practice degrade the Qur’an to the level of a book of
soothsaying? Or how is it conceivable that the beads of the *subhah*
could determine one’s fate? Furthermore, why do some believers resort to
*istikharah* before consulting with others [*istisharah*]? Would you not
consider the prevalence of this practice a defect of the popular
religious culture?

### Answer

Regarding the practice of *istikharah* there are a number of *hadith*s
related from the Imams. There is no rational or religious reason for
discounting such *hadith*s. Furthermore, the logic of *istikharah* is
very clear. When we decide to take an action, the first step is to
contemplate its pros and cons. If we reach a conclusion, we act
accordingly. But if our thinking doesn’t produce a satisfactory
conclusion, we then turn to others for consultation.

If consultation succeeds, we take the appropriate action. But if even
after consultation, we remain undecided, it is only then that we may
resort to *istikharah*. Holding the Qur’an in our hands, we ask God to
help us. We then open the Qur’an at random and focus on the first verse
that catches our attention. The option that the content of the verse
points to is the one we take up.

This practice is actually a form of reliance on God, which is an
indication of faith. For, from the various alternatives that we have
before us, we choose the one toward which we think God has directed us.
This practice is in no way unorthodox, and it is in no way harmful to
the religious spirit. (This also holds in regard to *istikharah* by
*subhah*.)

The Scripture of Fatimah [Mushaf Fatimah]
-----------------------------------------

### Question

Regarding the putative Scripture of Fatimah some Shi‘ahs have published
material in Kuwait in which the author describes the book as being
several times larger than the Qur’an and in fact on a par with it. This
has angered many Muslims around the world. What is your view concerning
this issue?

### Answer

In the corpus of Shi‘ah *hadith* there is mention of a book which
comprises Fatimah’s sayings recorded by the Master of the Faithful. But
to believe that such a book exists is not an article of the Shi‘ah
faith. It has never been regarded by the Shi‘ahs as one of the religious
sources that might rival the Qur’an and the Sunnah. Neither an Imam nor
a Shi‘ah scholar has ever adduced it in support of a religious position.
According to the related *hadith*s, the book in question tells of the
secrets of the world and foretells future events. As such, to accept the
existence of such a book is an innocuous belief. But it should
definitely be underscored that no one considers this book as a rival of
the Qur’an.

The Impermissibility of Exaggerating the Status of the Imams
------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

According to Shi‘ah jurists, exaggerating the status of the Imams is
heresy and those who hold such beliefs are heretics and thus *najis*
(canonically impure). But what exactly does this ruling mean? How do we
determine what constitutes “exaggerating the status of the Imams”?

### Answer

To perceive the Imams as anything but God’s servants would constitute
exaggeration of their status: to ascribe to them attributes that are
exclusively God’s (such as creation and the governance of or
interference in the existential affairs of the cosmos *independently*).
Such a belief is heretical regardless of any other factor.

The point however that deserves to be emphasized is that it is the
*independence* factor that is problematic. That is, to attribute Divine
qualities to a creature, believing that it possesses them independently
is heretical. However, to consider a creature as possessed of
*existential authority* and thus an intermediary of Divine effusion (as
we all believe that the Angel Mika’il is entrusted with providing
sustenance to creatures, the Angel Jibra’il with the conveyance of
Revelation, and the Angel Izra’il with the task of extracting souls at
death) is another issue that does not constitute exaggeration.

The Occurrence of “Li Allah-I Darr-U Fulan” And “Kana Li Allah-I Rida” In Words of the Commander of the Faithful
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

In a few instances in the “*Nahj al-Balaghah*” we come across such
contradictory phrases as “*li allah-i darr-u fulan*” (“It is upon God to
reward Him”)—which is complimentary—and “*li allah-i bala’-u fulan*”
(“It is upon God to assail him with an affliction”)—which is
condemnatory—in reference to the *khulafa’*.

Further, in a letter to Mu‘awiyah, Imam ‘Ali refers to pledging
allegiance to the *khulafa’* as “*kana li allah-i rida*” (“Therein was
God’s satisfaction”) whereas in other instances, specifically in his
Shaqshaqiyyah speech, he denounces the *khulafa’* as unrightful rulers.
What are we to make of these contradictory statements?

### Answer

First of all, it should be noted that the connotation of “*kana li
allah-i rida*” (“Therein was God’s satisfaction”) is different from that
of the other two statements you have mentioned.[^1] The former can be
interpreted in one of two ways. First, it is possible (since it is in a
letter addressed to Mu‘awiyah) to say that the Imam does not really mean
it; rather, he is saying this in line with the prevalent view of the
day.

Second, it is very likely that it means that although the Imam disagreed
with what took place after the Prophet’s death, but he conceded in order
to preserve the unity of the *ummah*, for otherwise the very existence
of the nascent Islamic state would have been compromised; it was this
unity that God pleased although the usurpation of Imam ‘Ali’s authority
was indubitably in violation of God’s command.

But as for the other two statements—“*li allah-i darr-u fulan*” and “*li
allah-i bala’-u fulan*”—they are clearly in reference to the *khulafa’*
and the rulers appointed by them. As regards the second statement (i.e.,
“It is upon God to assail him with an affliction”), which is
condemnatory, the meaning is evident. But as regards the first statement
(i.e., “It is upon God to reward Him”), which is complimentary, it
should be understood in light of Imam ‘Ali’s effort to maintain unity
and peace in the Muslim *ummah* (for which purpose he abstained from
voicing his opposition and discontent for 25 years), not as a frank
statement of his view. For, according to the thousands of *hadith*s
related from the Imams—one of which is Imam ‘Ali’s Shaqshaqiyyah
speech—the true successor of the Prophet, designated by God, was ‘Ali,
but his position was usurped.

A Call to Unity and Brotherhood
-------------------------------

### Question

It is a historical fact that Imam ‘Ali, in the interests of the Muslim
*ummah*, pledged allegiance to the *khulafa’*. Considering this fact is
it appropriate to curse those who ruled the Islamic state in its
formative period? Is it not being more Catholic than the Pope to feed
the sectarian tension? No doubt, we encourage serious scholarly
discussions on questions of faith, but to maliciously provoke the
religious emotions of our Muslim brothers is not religiously
justifiable.

In fact we have seen the founding of the Center for the Union of the
Islamic Confessions [*Dar al-Taqrib bayn al-Madhahib al-Islamiyyah*] in
Cairo, Egypt, which is supported by such eminent Shi‘ah scholars as
Ayatullah Burujerdi and Ayatullah Kashif al-Ghita’. It has produced
significant results, such as Shaykh Mahmud Shaltut’s[^2] *fatwa*,
recognizing the Shi‘ah confession as one of the orthodox denominations
of Islam.

Would it not be better to pursue this path, holding scholarly
discussions between the highest authorities, rather than to condone the
unchecked activities of radical groups, whether Shi‘ah or Sunni, which
are manipulated by our common foes?

### Answer

Let me first make this point that unity in the sense of neglecting one’s
religious doctrines and erasing the confessional distinctions is
unreasonable. Nevertheless, we must strive to achieve unity on the
common grounds that exist. In the early history of Islam, Muslims
succeeded in pervading a great part of the civilized world in less than
a century after Islam’s inception. But unfortunately that magnificent
power gradually faded as the result of a lack of unity and forgetting
the social aspect of Islam. Of course, the role of the enemies who
relentlessly struggled to create strife between the two main branches of
Islam should not be overlooked.

To regain that power, we should emphasize that the differences that
separate the two confessions are in the minor practices; we all agree on
the main doctrines of faith and the main practices: *salat* (canonical
prayer), fast, *hajj*, *jihad*, etc.; we all pray facing the Ka‘bah and
read the same Qur’an.

It was in this spirit that the Shi‘ahs of the early period of Islam
remained alongside the majority Sunnis, contributing to the common
interests of the Islamic state and giving advice and counsel where
needed. So too today it is incumbent on all Muslims to bear in mind
their common beliefs, realize the oppression to which the imperialist
powers have subjected them, and lay aside their sectarian quarrels, thus
forming a united front against the common foes of Islam.

Fortunately Muslims are awaking. Thus, the idea of Islamic unity was put
forth by the Shi‘ah *maraji‘*[^3]. It was welcomed by a strong support
from the honorable Shaykh of Al-Azhar, who introduced to the world the
fundamental unity of the Shi‘ah and Sunni. We, Shi‘ahs, must be thankful
of him for this great, and no doubt sincere, service.

As you [i.e., the questioner] have also pointed out, scholarly
discussions between Sunni and Shi‘ah scholars are in no way detrimental
to this unity. Such discussions should persist so as to eradicate the
darkness of ignorance and shed light on the truth, such that all would
realize it—this is not dogmatism.

We beseech God that He guide the malevolent characters who strive to
spread corruption and that He aid the Muslims in consorting their
efforts so as to reclaim their past superiority. *“Verily He is
All-hearing, answering those who beseech Him.”*

The Concentration of the Prophets in the Middle East
----------------------------------------------------

### Question

Why are all the prophets from the Middle East region: Arabia, Egypt, and
Shamat? Why there were not prophets in other regions of the world—say,
in Europe or Australia?

### Answer

There is no evidence that could prove that the prophets lived only in
the Middle East region to the exclusion of other parts of the world.
That the twenty-odd prophets mentioned in the Qur’an were in this region
does not mean that other parts of the world did not have prophets. In
fact, verse 24 of *Surah Fatir* affirms that all nations have had their
prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…مِنْ أُمَّةٍ إِلَّا خَلَا فِيهَا نَذِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and there is not a nation but a warner has passed in
it*****.*****”***

Difference in Capabilities
--------------------------

### Question

Creatures differ, from the very start of their existence, in their
capabilities and capacities. For instance, one is blessed with the
capacity to receive the grace of prophethood; another is granted the
privilege of *wilayah*; this, while the majority of creatures lack such
special blessings. What is the reason for these differences?

### Answer

All creatures have some potential, which is realized in a variety of
manifestations depending on the circumstances. Elemental matter has the
potential of becoming vegetative; plants, in turn, have the potential to
bear fruit; fruit possesses the potential to grow and become a
full-grown plant; semen, after resting in the female reproductive organ
of an animal, has the potential to grow and take the form of that
particular animal. Now, as to the agent that affects these potentials,
it is without question an immaterial being.

As to the question posed above regarding the difference in the
potentials of various creatures, that question should be sought in
connection with the topic of final causality. Thus, to state the
question more accurately we must ask, what is the *purpose* for
creatures’ being endowed with different capabilities, thus receiving the
Divine effusion in various degrees?

Why did not God create the world such that His Effusion would encompass
all creatures equally, leaving no room for evil, corruption, and
imperfection? The answer in a word is: the cosmic purpose of the
universe is that the most perfect creature, the human being, should come
into existence.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…It is He who created for you all that is in the earth…”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَخَّرَ لَكُمْ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
مِنْهُ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He has disposed for you whatever is in the heavens and whatever
is in the earth…”***[^5]

Human nature pursues perfection. In order to achieve perfection, he must
undergo many trials and tribulations. This in turn requires that there
be differing potentials in the world, for otherwise there would be no
tribulations.

Some Questions Regarding the Story of Moses and Khidr
-----------------------------------------------------

### Question

The story of Moses and Khidr related in the Qur’an raises several
questions. One, how can Khidr’s destruction of another’s property—where
he made a hole in the bottom of the boat they were traveling in—without
permission be justified? Two, was his slaying of the young boy not an
instance of prosecution before the commission of crime? Three, what was
the treasure buried under the wall? Four, what made Khidr eligible to
act as teacher to Moses, the bearer of prophethood of his time and the
locus of Divine knowledge on earth? (The same question arises with
regard to the story of Rubil the Shepherd’s counsel to Jonah and the
replies of the woodpecker and the ant to Solomon.[^6])

### Answer

Such incidents as death and destruction of property happen regularly in
accordance with God’s decree. These incidents are not crimes when
considered in relation to God. For, He is the owner of the entire
creation and the legislator and as such is not bound by what He
legislates; what He does is certainly out of justice and for good.
Khidr’s statement,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا فَعَلْتُهُ عَنْ أَمْرِي…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…I did not do that out of my own accord…”***[^7]

clearly indicates that his actions, whose purpose he revealed to Moses,
were executed in submission to God’s existential decree, not His
legislative decree, and thus were not subject to religious law.
Furthermore, although Moses was superior to Khidr, there was no wrong in
him learning certain things from Khidr who was inferior to him.

The same case holds true with regard to Rubil the Shepherd’s counsel to
Jonah. As to the woodpecker’s reply, it only suggests that the
woodpecker had directly witnessed the court of Sheba whereas Solomon had
not; there is nothing wrong in that. Finally, the ant’s warning to the
colony was only to save them from being trampled on by Solomon’s army,
and that the ant was blunt was of no harm.

Legislative Authority
---------------------

**Legislative Authority [Al-Wilayah Al-Tashri‘iyyah]**

### Question

What is the legislative authority [*al-wilayah al-tashri‘iyyah*] of the
Prophet and the Imams you mention in “*Tafsir al-Mizan*” in commenting
on verse 55 of *Surah al-Ma’idah*.

### Answer

Legislative authority is the authority to govern human society and
manage the affairs of the Muslim nation in accordance with Islamic law.
In a word, it is the authority to head the Islamic state.

The Meaning of Indhar (Warning) in Reference To Animals
-------------------------------------------------------

### Question

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ
إِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…There is no animal on land, nor a bird that flies with its wings,
but they are communities like yourselves…”***[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ مِنْ أُمَّةٍ إِلَّا خَلَا فِيهَا نَذِيرٌ ….
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And there is not a community but a warner has passed in it…”***[^9]

Considering the above two verses together, one may infer that animals
also have warners and thus are duty-bound [*mukallaf*]. Is this
inference valid?

### Answer

*Indhar* is to warn people against God’s punishment. As such, it is part
and parcel of the heavenly religions ordained by God. However, an
examination of the verses of the Qur’an proves that the verse quoted
above pertains to human beings alone.

Adam’s Deception by Satan
-------------------------

### Question

The following two verses seem to contradict the account of Satan
deceiving Adam:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عِبَادِي لَيْسَ لَكَ عَلَيْهِمْ سُلْطَانٌ إِلَّا مَنِ اتَّبَعَكَ
مِنَ الْغَاوِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed as for My servants you do not have any authority over
them.”***[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed God chose Adam and Noah, and the progeny of Abraham and the
progeny of Imran above all the nations.”***[^11]

How can the content of these verses be reconciled with Adam’s being
deceived into eating from the fruit of the forbidden tree?

### Answer

According to verse 38 of *Surah al-Baqarah*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْنَا اهْبِطُوا مِنْهَا جَمِيعًا ۖ فَإِمَّا يَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ مِنِّي
هُدًى فَمَنْ تَبِعَ هُدَايَ فَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**(*****“We said, ‘Get down from it, all together! Yet, should any
guidance come to you from Me, those who follow My guidance shall have no
fear, nor shall they grieve’.”*****),**

religion was established after the Fall. Also, the special status that
God’s special servants enjoy (in being immune from Satanic temptations)
as described in verse 15:42 pertains to this world. Moreover, according
to verse 122 of *Surah Ta Ha*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ اجْتَبَاهُ رَبُّهُ فَتَابَ عَلَيْهِ وَهَدَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**(*****“Then his Lord chose him, and turned to him clemently, and
guided him.”*****),**

Adam’s promotion to the status of the special servants took place in
this world. So, since religious law was established in this world and
Adam was chosen as one of the special servants again in this world,
there is no inconsistency among the verses cited in the question, for
Adam ate from the fruit of the forbidden tree prior to this world. Based
on this line of reasoning, in eating from the fruit of the forbidden
tree Adam did not disobey God; rather, he neglected God’s advice.

A Question Regarding the Incident of The Moon Splitting In Half
---------------------------------------------------------------

**A Question Regarding the Incident of The Moon Splitting In Half
[*****Shaqq Al-Qamar*****]**

### Question

How can the story of the moon splitting in half at the request of the
Prophet, recounted in both the Qur’an and the Sunnah, be rationally
explained, especially considering the fantastic details related in some
*hadith*s?

### Answer

That such a miracle was performed by the Prophet is beyond doubt as it
is attested by both the Qur’an and the Sunnah. As to the details,
however, the *hadith*s disagree. Since the *hadith*s that recount the
incident are not ascertainable when taken individually, the details
provided therein are dubious. What can be said with certainty is that
the Prophet pointed to the moon, which caused it to split in half. This
much of the story is verified by the Qur’an—

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْتَرَبَتِ السَّاعَةُ وَانْشَقَّ الْقَمَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The hour has drawn near and the moon is split.”***[^12]

—and is thus indubitable. The Prophet executed this miracle in reply to
those who rejected his ministry on the pretext that they needed to see
him perform a miracle. As this miracle is confirmed by the Qur’an it is
beyond doubt. This is as far as this story is concerned.

As to the general topic of miracle, it cannot be refuted by rational
reasoning, though one may be reluctant to accept the possibility of such
phenomena. Miracles are executed through the interference of higher
agents—of which most of us are utterly ignorant—in the normal function
of natural agents.

Some have claimed that the moon’s splitting in half was not a miracle
performed by the Prophet. They claim that the verse refers to an
apocalyptic incident that will occur on the Day of Judgment when God
will destroy the material world. This reading, however, is disproved by
the context. The next verse (*Surah al-Qamar* 54:2) clearly indicates
that the splitting of the moon referred to in the first verse is a
miracle that actually took place during the life of the Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ يَرَوْا آيَةً يُعْرِضُوا وَيَقُولُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرٌّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If they see a sign, they turn away and say, ‘An incessant
magic!’”***

Clearly enough, if the splitting of the moon referred to in the first
verse were to take place on the Day of Judgment, the unbelievers could
not reject it as magic.

Still others contend that the verse in question refers to the
scientifically confirmed phenomenon of the separation of the moon from
the main body of Earth during the primitive stages of its development.
They cite this as proof of Qur’an’s veracity as it, in their view, told
of this phenomenon many centuries before science. This contention,
however, is refuted by a lexical consideration of the verse at issue. To
signify the separation of one object from another—whether by way of
reproduction or detachment—in the Arabic language, the words *ishtiqaq*
and *infisal* are employed, not *inshiqaq*, which signifies specifically
the splitting in half of a single object.

Another objection that has been made against the miracle account is that
if such an extraordinary incident had occurred, non-Muslims would have
also recorded it. This objection neglects the fact that those who record
history do so in accordance with the interests of the powers who
patronize them.

Any incident or event that is against the interests of the powers would
go unrecorded and thus doomed to oblivion. It for this reason that we
find no sign of the story of Abraham, Moses, or Jesus in the
conventional annals of history, although from the religious point of
view there is no doubt in their miracles and accomplishments: Abraham
was catapulted at the behest of Nimrod in an enormous fire without being
harmed; Moses exhibited his miraculous staff and white hand; Jesus
brought the dead back to life. Furthermore, it should be noted that
there is a considerable time difference between Mecca, where the miracle
occurred, and the Western hemisphere. As such, one cannot expect that
this extraordinary lunar event, which appeared for only a very brief
time, should have been descried in such Western countries as Rome and
Athens.

An Unfounded Myth
-----------------

### Question

Is the story of Venus alighting on the roof of the Master of the
Faithful’s house supported by authentic sources?

### Answer

This story is related in a few *hadith*s that are neither
*mutawatir*[^13] nor ascertainable [*qat‘i al-sudur*] and thus are
unreliable.

A Question Regarding the Islamic Penalty of Severing the Hand of the Thief
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Why does Islam order the hand of the thief to be cut?

### Answer

In examining the Islamic penalty for theft, which is to sever four
fingers of the thief’s hand, two aspects should be distinguished: first,
that in committing a wrong the thief deserves to be punished and,
second, that this punishment should be the severing of the hand.
Considering the first aspect, we know that Islamic law is not alone in
setting a penalty for theft.

Human societies, as far back as history sheds light on, have invariably
condemned theft and punished thieves; this includes primitive human
communities, tribal societies, feudal societies, monarchies,
theocracies, and finally democracies. This universal consensus is based
on the belief that the most valuable asset that human beings possess is
life and that the foremost responsibility of the individual is to pursue
a felicitous life.

To this end, people work collectively as a society to acquire wealth and
secure their welfare. In this way, people expend one half of their
life—an invaluable price—to secure the well-being of the other
half.[^14] As the importance of safekeeping a goods increases in
proportion to its value, it should go without saying that to keep our
possessions—for which we have expended one half of our life—safe is of
utmost importance.

Thus, to leave the possessions of the individuals of a society
unprotected is tantamount to destroying one half of the collective life
of that society just as leaving the lives of the constituent individuals
of a society unprotected is tantamount to destroying the entire
collective life of that society:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَّهُ مَنْ قَتَلَ نَفْسًا بِغَيْرِ نَفْسٍ أَوْ فَسَادٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ
فَكَأَنَّمَا قَتَلَ النَّاسَ جَمِيعًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…whoever kills a soul, without its being guilty of manslaughter or
corruption on the earth, is as though he had killed all
mankind…”***[^15]

In this light, thieves as enemies of the financial security of the
society must be dealt a severe punishment that would also serve as a
deterrent.

As to the second aspect of the question, that is, the punishment that
Islam designates for this crime, one can infer on examining the entire
body of the Islamic penal code that the rationale that Islam pursues in
the punishments it establishes is to inflict upon the criminal the like
of which the victim has suffered so that, first, he would receive the
justice he deserves and, second, it would make a lesson for other
potential criminals.

Obviously, it is not possible to recompense for a wrong that ruins one
half of an individual’s productive life by monetary fine, whether small
or large, or imprisonment. The strongest proof for this is the failure
of such measures to achieve their purpose in the so-called advanced
countries. Heeding this realistic analysis, Islam orders the hand of the
thief, which is more or less equal to one half of his life’s work, to be
severed.

Unfortunately, the objections that our so-called enlightened thinkers
make against Islam’s penal code—which have these days become as
ubiquitous and ruinous as theft in our country—shows that they do not
realize this very clear logic. Their argument is, why should a man’s
hand—which God has bestowed to him for the pursuance of his wellbeing
and which he has the right to utilize throughout his life for resolving
his problems—be severed as the result of a mistake he committed under
financial pressure?

What this argument does is in essence to justify the wrong perpetrated
by the thief and then to evoke our sense of pity to feel sorry for him.
The error in this line of reasoning is very clear. Although it is a
virtue in personal issues to be clement and forgiving in treating those
who have wronged us (as Islam strongly encourages the victim to
relinquish his right to punish the offender), to be sentimental in
dealing with social issues is wrong. To be lenient toward criminals is a
ruthless injustice toward the society at large; in leaving the thief
free and respecting his “human rights” we would be harassing and
disrespecting the innocent individuals of the society. In the words of
Rumi:

*“To pity the sharp-toothed leopard is to oppress the sheep.”*

So the issue is that in the legal code, the legislator must ensure the
interests of the society at large, not merely the individual welfare of
the thief or even the victim for that matter.

Let us now turn to another objection that is closely related to what has
thus fur been elucidated. The objection is that there should be a
difference between a thief who is driven to commit a petty theft out of
need and desperation and one who has made this crime his vocation,
continually offending the public, everyday ruining the happiness of a
family.

Why, then, does Islam treat both cases similarly? The answer is, when
Islam establishes a certain punishment for a crime, it is enforceable
when the judicial authority of the Islamic state has confirmed the
commission of the crime. If one commits theft once and is thereafter
apprehended and proven guilty he receives the punishment of the
severance of four fingers of the right hand; one will receive the same
punishment if he is apprehended after having committed theft more than
once without being punished.

Furthermore, the Islamic penal code treats all instances of theft,
whether grand or petit, equally, for both cases are violations against
one of the fundamental elements of the society—namely, financial
security. The conditions and circumstances that lead up to the
commission of theft make no difference in the execution of punishment.

The detractors of Islam’s penal code further argue that by cutting the
four fingers of the thief we render him a public burden as he can no
longer care for himself, not to mention that one potentially productive
member of the society is incapacitated.

These gentlemen should be reminded that in a country with a diverse
population with multifarious needs, there will definitely be work for
someone missing four fingers; he would not constitute a burden for the
society. It is precisely for this reason that the next punishment Islam
assigns for one who repeats the crime of theft is not the severance of
the other hand but the severance of his left foot.

Moreover, assuming that the incapacitation of a thief does constitute a
burden for the society, is this burden not incomparably lighter than the
financial insecurity that his offense brings on the society? What a
ridiculous argument! Is the incapacitation of a thief more burdensome on
the society than leaving him unrestrained or than imposing on the
society the heavy costs of keeping him imprisoned?

Are the ever-increasing number of thieves and burglars in our country
not a public liability? They continue their evil work unrestricted,
preying on the efforts of others. And this is not to mention the murders
and other shameful crimes that they naturally inflict on their victims
in the process of theft, the accounts of which abound in our newspapers.

Thieves caught under the present law are crowded in prisons. Does
imprisonment yield any benefits other than the leisure it affords the
criminals at the expense of the society and the opportunity it provides
for criminals to enhance their expertise in the company of their more
experienced colleagues.

The detractors in turn make the point that such cruel punishments are
incapable of advancing the deterrent function that is expected of them.
This is clearly demonstrated, in their opinion, by the failure of the
American movies depicting the life and fate of criminals in decreasing
the crime rate; such movies have only helped to increase the crime rate.

But how could they expect such exciting and sexually provocative movies,
which more often than not exonerate criminals and portray as libertinism
the happy way of life, to help in reducing the crime rate? The example
of such movies should in no way be compared with the punishments
established by Islam. Sound judgment definitely rules in favor of such
criminal punishments as measures that dissuade those who are tempted to
violate the law. Of course, social factors, like natural factors, are
not absolute. Thus the advocates of the Islamic penal code do not claim
that such punishments would absolutely uproot crime; they would however
reduce crime rate to a minimum.

[^1]: That is, the connotation is not such that it could be examined in
a comparison with the other two statements. [trans.]

[^2]: Dean of the Al-Azhar Islamic University in Cairo.

[^3]: Maraji‘: pl. of marja‘, in the Shi‘ah, the equivalent of the Sunni
mufti. [trans.]

[^4]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:29.

[^5]: Surah al-Jathiyah 45:13.

[^6]: See Surah al-Naml 27:18 and 22.

[^7]: Surah al-Kahf 18:82.

[^8]: Surah al-An‘am 6:38.

[^9]: Surah Fatir 35:24.

[^10]: Surah al-Hijra’ 15:42.

[^11]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:33.

[^12]: Surah al-Qamar 54:1.

[^13]: In the science of hadithology, this term refers to a hadith whose
chains of transmission are so numerous that it is beyond doubt. [trans.]

[^14]: That is, people spend a good part of their life working to
procure the necessities and comforts needed to lead a happy life.
[trans.]

[^15]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:32.


