Chapter 11: Some Objections and the Answers Thereto
===================================================

An Objection to the Definition of Islam
---------------------------------------

### Objection

On page four of “*Shi‘ah dar Islam*”, the following remark is made:
“*Islam* etymologically means surrender and obedience.”[^1] Though this
definition is etymologically correct, in the Islamic culture, *islam*
applies exclusively to the religion preached by the Noble Prophet (“That
which Muhammad brought”).

According to the definition of Islam you offer in that book, we would
not be justified in construing Qur’anic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
وَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Should anyone follow a religion other than Islam, it shall never be
accepted from him…”***[^2]

to mean that Islam is the ultimate religion, for *islam*, according to
your explanation, means obedience, which can take the form of a
multiplicity of religions no one of which would be superior to the
others. Your definition of *islam* disagrees with *hadith*s that confirm
the popular understanding of *islam*. (A number of these *hadith*s is
recorded in the second volume of “*Usul al-Kafi*”.) Furthermore, there
is universal consensus that *islam* is the name of the particular
religion God revealed to Muhammad.[^3]

### Reply

Let me begin by quoting what I have said in “*Shi‘ah dar Islam*”:
“*Islam* etymologically means surrender and obedience. The Holy Qur’an
calls the religion which invited men toward this end “*islam*” since its
general purpose is the surrender of man to the laws governing the
Universe and men, with the result that through this surrender he
worships only the One God and obeys only His commands.”

Where do I say that *islam* has only one meaning and that is its
etymologic meaning or that wherever *islam* appears in the Qur’an or
*hadith*s it denotes solely this meaning? What I have said concerns
solely the question of appellation and nothing more. You also
acknowledge the etymologic meaning of *islam* in your letter: “*Islam*
is absolute submission to God. This, however, does not become manifest
unless one utters the two testifications of faith and abides by Islamic
rules.”

At any rate, *islam* is the name of this sacred religion. This usage of
*islam* as the name of a particular religion does not disown its
etymologic meaning. As a matter of fact, in Islamic sources, the word is
used in both senses. For an example of its usage in its etymologic
meaning, it suffices to note the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ دِينًا مِمَّنْ أَسْلَمَ وَجْهَهُ لِلَّهِ وَهُوَ
مُحْسِنٌ وَاتَّبَعَ مِلَّةَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ حَنِيفًا ۗ وَاتَّخَذَ اللَّهُ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ خَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who has a better religion than him who submits***
**[*****aslama*****: past participle, from** ***islam*****]** ***his
will to God, being virtuous, and follows the creed of Abraham…”***[^4]

This verse indicates that the creed of Abraham was a manifestation of
*islam* in the sense of submission to God. One finds *islam* used in
this sense also in the words of Jacob’s children:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا نَعْبُدُ إِلَٰهَكَ وَإِلَٰهَ آبَائِكَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ
وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ إِلَٰهًا وَاحِدًا وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They said, ‘We will worship your God, and the God of your fathers,
Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac, the One God, and to Him do we
submit’.”***[^5]

You further contend that if *islam* denoted the etymologic meaning of
the word and not the conventional meaning, we would not be justified in
citing verse (3:85) as proof that Islam is the ultimate religion. This
contention however is based on two presuppositions: one, that there is
no reason other than the verse in question for Islam being the final
religion and, two, that in this verse, *islam* denotes the conventional
meaning, not the etymologic meaning. Both of these presuppositions,
however, are false.

You further write, “*Hadith*s confirm the conventional meaning of the
term.” No one denies that there is such a meaning. The point is: the
conventional meaning does not discard the etymologic meaning. Thus, the
*hadith*s in some cases refer to and describe the conventional meaning
and in some cases point to the etymologic meaning (i.e., submission,
obedience), explicating its various degrees.

As to your point that people all around the world know

*  
*

islam

  
as the religion brought by Muhammad, there is no question about that. In
fact, it was Abraham who first introduced this

name:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ ۚ هُوَ سَمَّاكُمُ الْمُسْلِمِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…the faith of your father, Abraham. He named you Muslims***
***before…”***[^6]

Thus, the Qur’an refers to prophets after Abraham and their followers
(e.g., Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, Solomon, Queen of Sheba, Joseph, Jacob’s
sons, Pharaoh’s magicians, and Jesus’ disciples) as those who embraced
Islam. *Islam* was initially used in reference to the religion ordained
by God in allusion to its being submission to Him; it was only in time
that it became a proper noun, even as the Divine Names were first used
as attributes for God in their etymologic sense, but due to repeated
usage over a long period of time they turned into proper nouns for God.
Nevertheless, the etymologic sense of *islam* is still preserved, a fact
attested to by the *al-* that we occasionally attach to
it—*al-islam*.[^7]

Shaykhiyyah and Karimkhaniyyah: Deniers of Corporeal Resurrection
-----------------------------------------------------------------

### Obection

The Shaykhiyyah and the Karimkhaniyyah, two Shi‘ah groups, differ from
the majority Shi‘ah in that they deny the doctrine of corporeal
resurrection—a principle article of faith—and hold certain unorthodox
views concerning Imam al-Zaman. You, however, claim that their
differences are not such that would constitute a division from the
majority Shi‘ah, arguing that their difference lies in certain theoretic
discussions not in the rejection of a principle of faith. This argument
seems invalid in view of their rejection of the doctrine of corporeal
resurrection.

### Reply

Division within a religion or denomination occurs when a group of
adherents renounce one or more of the primary doctrines of the faith.
Now, the two groups in question retain belief in the doctrine of
resurrection—which is a primary doctrine of faith—but interpret it
differently. One who studies the Qur’an and the *hadith*s and concludes
that the resurrection espoused by Islam is an incorporeal one will
obviously reject the corporeal understanding of the doctrine of
resurrection.

He is not however denying a primary doctrine, for according to his
understanding, belief in resurrection, not corporeal resurrection, is an
article of faith. That most people understand the doctrine of
resurrection to indicate a corporeal resurrection does not make
corporeal resurrection a primary doctrine for those who think otherwise.
Some may counter by saying that the consensus among all Muslims that
resurrection is corporeal makes this belief a primary doctrine. They
should however be reminded that assuming that such a consensus does
exist, it does not make this belief a primary doctrine, for consensus is
authoritative only when it concerns the practical rules of Islam, not
theological doctrines.

The Legitimacy of ‘Irfan and Tasawwuf
-------------------------------------

### Objection

In “*Shi‘ah dar Islam*” where you explain the history and development of
*‘irfan* and *tasawwuf*, you clearly approve of these two tendencies.
(The Imams and the *fuqaha’*, however, have declared such tendencies
heretical, and as such they lack any credibility.) You write:

The gnostic is the one who worships God through knowledge and because of
love for Him, not in hope of reward or fear of punishment… Every
revealed religion and even those that appear in the form of idol-worship
have certain followers who march upon the path of gnosis. The
polytheistic religions and Judaism, Christianity, Zoroastrianism and
Islam all have believers who are gnostics. (132-3)

Your words imply that there are polytheists who worship God out of love
for Him. But how can this be right?

### Reply

In writing “*Shi‘ah dar Islam*”, our intention was to elucidate the
Shi‘ah doctrine, the history of its development, and its various
branches and their beliefs. In accordance with this purpose, we
disinterestedly gave some explanation as to the history and development
of *‘irfan*, without granting them any special credit. We explained
reasons, both doctrinal and rational, for their point of view. The
purpose of the book was of course not judgmental, thus we did not engage
in distinguishing the truths in their claims from falsehoods, and it was
for this reason that we did not give a detailed account of the
opposition of the *fuqaha’* to them.

As to our explanation that some polytheists are *‘arif* (gnostic), we
refer to the Brahmins. They undergo severe spiritual exercises to
worship the gods. They believe that through these exercises they achieve
union, first, with the deities and, afterwards, with God. As a detailed
account of their beliefs is beyond the scope of one or two letters, I
suggest you study the Farsi translations of parts of the Vedas and the
Upanishads, “*Furugh Khawar*”, “*Tahqiq ma li al-Hind*”, and Abu
Rayhan’s “*Athar al-Baqiyah*” in order to understand Hindu, Buddhist,
and Sabean gnostacism.

You further claim that I vindicate *‘irfan* and Sufism. Yes, I do
approve of *‘irfan* but not that which is prevalent among some Sunni
Sufi circles (and which has penetrated into some Shi‘ah groups as well)
who preach libertinism, play music, and dance. We mean the *‘irfan* that
derives from the Qur’an and the Sunnah, which is based on sincerity in
obedience and respects all religious rules. (This latter form of
*‘irfan* we have elucidated in “*Tafsir al-Mizan*”.

A question on the will of angels
--------------------------------

### Objection

In volume 17 of “*Tafsir al-Mizan*” you write, “They [i.e., angels] do
not disobey God in what He commands them. Thus, they do not possess an
independent self with an independent will….” This argument seems
fallacious. That they do not disobey God does not imply that they lack
an independent self. The prophets and the Imams are infallible
nevertheless they do possess an independent self and will.

If you mean that they cannot will other than what God wills, that is a
universal law that governs all creatures:

***“But you do not wish unless it is wished by God**…”*[^8]

A couple of paragraphs down you paradoxically state that they are
capable of perfection. How can they perfect themselves when they lack an
independent identity?

### Reply

Below that line you quote, we have clarified what we mean by
“independent self.” We mean the illusion of an independent identity that
most people have. When this illusion is erased, egoism vanishes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَسْبِقُونَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ وَهُمْ بِأَمْرِهِ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They do not venture to speak ahead of Him, and they act by His
command.”***[^9]

Thus, this independent self is what is commonly referred to as *al-nafs
al-ammarah*, of which the prophets and the Imams are also free. As to
your question regarding their perfection, you have misunderstood my
words. The phrase “*min sha’niha al-istikmal al-tadriji*” (“gradual
perfection is of its qualities”) describes physical matter not angels.
In fact, we explain that angels are created in the most perfect state
possible for them and so cannot perfect themselves.

Pharaoh, “The Possessor of Stakes” [Dhu Al-Awtad]
-------------------------------------------------

### Objection

In volume 17 of “*Tafsir al-Mizan*” you mention that some have claimed
that the Qur’an refers to Pharaoh as the “Possessor of Stakes” because
he would impale the criminals with stakes. You discredit this
explanation on the grounds that it is not supported by authentic
sources. But how do you make this claim when Fayd Kashani in his
“*Tafsir al-Safi*” has narrated a *hadith* that confirms this account?

### Reply

The *hadith* you allude to is an *al-khabar al-wahid* (i.e., a *hadith*
with, at best, a few chains of transmission). In the science of *usul
al-fiqh* it is demonstrated that *hadith*s that fall into the category
of *al-khabar al-wahid* are useful only in relation to *ahkam* (Islamic
rules) and not *mawdu‘at* (the application of the rules)—though their
chain of transmission be firmly valid [*sahih a‘la’i*]—unless they
possess certain truth-indicators that definitively affirms their
authenticity (such as if we heard a *hadith* directly from the Imam).

Therefore, we cannot employ *hadith*s such as the one in question for
interpreting the Qur’an. Moreover, it is a matter of fact, considering
the numerous *hadith*s that express the necessity of evaluating
*hadith*s by examining their compatibility with the Qur’an that it would
be circular reasoning to interpret the Qur’an based on *hadith*s such as
the one in question. So, in considering *hadith*s that are *al-khabar
al-wahid*, our intention should be to evaluate their coherence with the
Qur’an, not to interpret the Qur’an in accordance with them.

### Objection

The phrase

***“…For those who do good in this world there will be a good
reward…”***

occurs in *Surah al-Nahl* (16:30) and *Surah al-Zumar* (39:10). Although
in both *surah*s the phrase is exactly the same, you take “*hasanah*” in
*Surah al-Nahl* to mean reward in the Hereafter and the “*hasanah*” in
*Surah al-Zumar* to encompass rewards both of this world and of the
Hereafter. On what basis do you make this distinction?

### Reply

Despite the similarity of expression, the context in which the phrase
appears is different in each *surah*. In *Surah al-Nahl*, the phrase is
uttered by God and is followed by

***“…the abode of the Hereafter is better”*****.**

In *Surah al-Zumar*, on the other hand, the phrase is uttered by the
Prophet and is followed by :

***“Indeed the patient will be paid in full their ajr (reward).”***

In the Qur’anic vocabulary, *ajr* applies to both worldly and
otherworldly rewards.

A Point Concerning Job’s Supplication
-------------------------------------

### Objection

In volume 17 of “*Tafsir al-Mizan*”, you make the following observation
regarding the verse

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ عَبْدَنَا أَيُّوبَ إِذْ نَادَىٰ رَبَّهُ أَنِّي مَسَّنِيَ
الشَّيْطَانُ بِنُصْبٍ وَعَذَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And remember Our servant Job when he called out to his
Lord…”***[^10]**: “**

his calling God by saying ‘my Lord’ is indicative that he called God to
fulfill a need of his.” What appears in the verse in question is “his
Lord” not “my Lord.”

### Reply

When the verse says that he called on “his Lord,” it means that Job
said, “my Lord.”

The Story of Job and the Conflicting Hadiths
--------------------------------------------

### Objection

In your examination of the story of Job in volume 17 of “*Tafsir
al-Mizan*” you quote certain Judaic *hadith*s. Then, you discredit them
by quoting other Judaic *hadith*s, both of which are derived from the
Old Testament. What is your purpose in quoting two contradicting groups
of *hadith* from the Judaic tradition?

In the science of *usul al-fiqh*, one of the determinants for preferring
a *hadith* over another is its being opposed to Sunni viewpoints. The
case at issue, however, involves two conflicting groups of *hadith* that
are both in accordance with Judaic tradition. So, how do you solve this
problem?

### Reply

As expressed above, my intention in considering *hadith*s is not to
interpret the Qur’an based on them; rather, it is to evaluate the
*hadith*s based on the Qur’an. And about your final point regarding the
*hadith*s’ being in accordance with Judaic tradition, it is impertinent.
For, the principle you cite from the science of *usul al-fiqh* relates
to religious rules of practice, not to other areas.

That is, if there are contradicting rulings regarding a certain action,
the one opposed to the Sunni point of view is preferable. The case at
issue, however, pertains to Qur’anic hermeneutics not religious law.

A Point Concerning The Qur’anic Phrase Saying, “It is a great prophecy”
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is a great prophecy…”***[^11]

### Objection

In interpreting this verse in volume 17 of “*Tafsir al-Mizan*” you
reject the possibility of the pronoun *huwa* referring to the Day of
Judgment. But why should this possibility be unlikely when the verses
prior to this one treat of the Day of Judgment, especially since in
*Surah al-Naba’* you explain that *al-naba’ al-‘azim* is the Day of
Judgment?

### Reply

It is true that prior to the verse in question the subject is the Day of
Judgment, but verse 65

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَنَا مُنْذِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**(*****“Say, ‘I am just a warner…’”*****)**

terminates that topic and begins a new one. This reading is corroborated
by the *Surah*’s ending with this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَتَعْلَمُنَّ نَبَأَهُ بَعْدَ حِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And you will surely learn its naba’*** ***(tidings) in due
time;”***[^12]

which is a reference to the Qur’an. Of course, let us point out that
both the Qur’an and the Day of Judgment are “great tidings” and so there
is no contradiction in *al-naba’ al-‘azim* referring to the Qur’an, on
one occasion, and to the Day of Judgment, on another

[^1]: Shi‘ah dar Islam: ‘Allamah’s book on Shi‘ah history and doctrine.
Sayyid Husayn Nasr has translated the work under the title Shi‘ah. The
quotation here is taken from his translation, p. 46. [trans.]

[^2]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:85.

[^3]: This in only a summary of the critic’s letter to ‘Allamah
Tabataba’i.

[^4]: Surah al-Nisa’ 4:125.

[^5]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:133.

[^6]: Surah al-Hajj 22:78.

[^7]: Lit., “the Submission.” In the Arabic language, an al- is
occasionally affixed to a proper noun that originally was not a proper
noun. The function that al- plays in such a cases is referred to as
talmih or allusion; for, it enables the word to allude to the original
meaning of the word while also functioning as a proper noun. [trans.]

[^8]: Surah al-Insan 76:30.

[^9]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:27.

[^10]: Surah Sad 38:41.

[^11]: Surah Sad 38:67.

[^12]: Surah Sad 38:88.


