Chapter 1: The Way of the Primordial Human Nature [Fitrah]
==========================================================

Question
--------

Is it reasonable to believe that Islam can manage the affairs of
humankind and accommodate its needs despite the staggering improvements
and advancements of the modern age? Shouldn’t the modern human being,
who anticipates traveling to the depths of the universe and conquering
other galaxies by means of science, dispose of such antiquated religious
beliefs in favor of a new way of life more befitting his achievements—a
way of life that would enable him to concentrate the power of his mind
and will more fully on adding to his praiseworthy achievements?

Answer
------

Before engaging in the answer to the above question, it should be noted
that although we by nature cherish newness and prefer what is new over
what is old, there are exceptions to this inclination. It cannot, for
instance, be claimed that since “2 + 2 = 4” has been cited by people for
thousands of years it is now outdated and must be dispensed with. Or, it
would be absurd to contend that the social structure of human life,
which has to date preserved the human species, is now too old and that
from now on humans must live individually.

Obedience to civil law, which curtails individual freedoms to a great
extent, cannot be abolished with the excuse that it is old and annoying.
It would be unacceptable if someone claimed that since in the modern age
the human being has embarked on conquering the universe by sailing out
to new galaxies in spaceships, a new route must be pursued in human life
that would free the individual from the burden of law, legislation, and
governments.

The hollowness and absurdity of such assumptions are clear enough. The
question of new and old is meaningful where there is room for evolution,
where the object at issue allows of evolution and change—one day fresh
and new but in time and after encountering the vicissitudes of life
turning to frailty and decline. Thus, in discussions conducted for the
purpose of shedding light on the truth (as opposed to vain
polemics)—when debating natural phenomena, questions relating to the
world of creation, and the laws of nature—such as the discussion at
hand, poetic utterances of the fable of the new and the old have no
place: “Every word behooves a certain place, every point a certain
location.”[^1]

Let us now turn to our question: can Islam manage human society,
considering the circumstances of the modern age? Of course, this
question would seem superfluous once the reality of Islam and the
message of the Qur’an are understood.

For, Islam denotes the path to which human nature and cosmic order
point. Islam conforms to the nature of the human being. As such, it
provides for and satisfies the true human needs, not the illusory
desires or what one’s sentiments dictate. Obviously, so long as the
human being is what he is, his nature will remain the same. Regardless
of the passing of time, the difference in habitat, and the varying
circumstances, human beings share the same nature. This nature calls for
a specific way of life, whether human beings be willing to pursue it or
not.

In this light, the above question can thus be rephrased: would one
attain to happiness and satisfy one’s natural wishes, should he follow
the path that human nature points to? This is similar to asking: would a
tree reach its natural destination, should it grow in its natural manner
with its needs provided for through its inherent natural structure? The
answer to such a question is obvious.

Islam is the path of the primordial human nature. As such, it is always
the correct path for the human being; it remains unchanged in the face
of varying circumstances; it is the solution to our genuine needs. It is
the natural and inherent needs—not the sentimental wishes and delusional
desires—that are one’s true needs. It is the fulfillment of these
inherent needs that begets felicity and happiness. In His Book, God
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set your heart on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of God***[^2] ***according to which He originated
mankind—there is no altering God’s creation…”***[^3]

Let us explicate—albeit briefly—this subject. As is evident, each of the
multitudinous types of creatures that exist in the world of creation
pursues a specific way of life and subsistence and follows a unique path
to its individual destination.[^4] Each creature can attain to felicity
by traversing the path to its distinct destination and avoiding the
obstacles that it may encounter. In other words, felicity is reached by
navigating the path of life and avoiding the potential obstacles with
the help of the innate apparatus with which every creature is equipped.

The grain of wheat, for instance, possesses a unique path. In its
natural structure is embedded a specific mechanism, which is activated
when the conducive circumstances are present. When activated, the
inherent mechanism absorbs the necessary elements and nutrients in
specific proportions needed for the growth and subsistence of the plant
and consumes them so as to steer the plant toward its specific
destination.

The wheat plant cannot alter the internal and external elements involved
in its growth. It cannot, for instance, change its course, all of a
sudden, to transform into an apple tree by growing a trunk, branches,
and leaves and blossoming or turning into a sparrow, growing a beak and
wings. This law holds true for all species, including the human being.

The human being, likewise, has a natural and inherent path for the
pursuance of life, through which he may reach his destination,
perfection, and felicity. Human nature is equipped with the special
apparatus that can direct one on the natural and innate path to
fulfilling one’s true interests; God’s Book affirms this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا قَدْ
أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the soul and Him who fashioned it, and inspired it with
discernment between its virtues and vices: one who purifies it is
certainly felicitous, and one who betrays it certainly fails.”***[^5]

Based on what has so far been said, it becomes clear that the true path
of humanity leading to felicity is that which the primordial human
nature guides to, that which secures the true interests of the human
being, in accordance with the requirements of the human constitution and
the natural world, irrespective of whether we find it palatable or not,
for it is the emotions that must follow the requirements of human
nature, not vice versa. Thus, humankind should build its life upon the
foundation of realism, not on the trembling columns of superstition and
the delusional ideals feigned by human sentiment.

In this truth lies the distinction between Islamic law and other laws.
The prevalent laws governing human societies follow the wishes of the
majority (i.e., 51% of the population), whereas Islamic law conforms to
the guidance of the primordial human nature, which reflects the will of
God, the Exalted. It is for this reason that the Noble Qur’an declares
the enactment of laws as the prerogative of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلَّا لِلَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Judgment belongs only to God…”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَحْسَنُ مِنَ اللَّهِ حُكْمًا لِقَوْمٍ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…But who is better than God in judgment for a people who have
certainty.”***[^7]

The legal systems that dominate secular societies are established either
by the majority or by a dictator, regardless of whether they conform to
the truth and fulfill the collective interests of human society. In the
true Islamic society, however, it is the truth that rules; the wishes of
the individuals defer to it.

Thus, the answer to another criticism—namely, that Islam is in conflict
with the natural trend of modern societies, that today’s societies,
which enjoy absolute freedom and satisfy their every desire, would not
succumb to the numerous restrictions imposed by Islam—is also clarified.

Undoubtedly, in comparing the dark state of the modern human being—with
depravation, wantonness, and oppression pervading all aspects of human
life, threatening its very existence—with the luminous Islam, one would
find absolute disharmony between the two. But when one compares the
Divine primordial human nature with Islam—the primordial religion—one
realizes their perfect harmony. Is it even conceivable that human nature
should be at variance with the path it guides to? Unfortunately,
however, corruption and illusion have defiled the primordial nature of
the modern human being so that he no longer recognizes the path his
nature inherently points to.

The rational solution to this predicament is to struggle to bring about
the desirable state not to despair and succumb. Islam must come to the
forefront and take the place of the other contending ideologies and
worldviews. This will definitely be a strenuous process and would
require much sacrifice.

History testifies that new methods and regimes invariably face fierce
opposition from the status quo. They prevail only after winning
innumerable battles—most of which are bloody. Still when they prevail,
it takes time for effacing the name of the old opponent.

Democracy—which according to its advocates is the method of government
most favorable to human needs—was established only after such bloody
events as the French Revolution and similar incidents in other
countries. Likewise, Communism (which according to its proponents is the
synthesis of humanity’s progressive efforts and history’s most glorious
blessing), in its fledgling state, underwent much bloodletting that cost
of millions of lives in Russia, Asia, Europe, and Latin America until it
finally took root. In this light, the argument that people may find
Islamic strictures unpalatable is not sufficient to prove Islam’s
incompatibility with modern society. Like the other systems, it would
obviously need time to firmly establish itself.

Islam and the True Needs of Every Age
-------------------------------------

Without doubt, the importance and true value of a given scientific
problem introduced for discussion and examination depends on the
importance and value of the truth that is embedded within it and the
results that it affects in its practical application and utilization in
the ebb and flow of human life. A simple a matter as drinking water and
consuming food is equal in value to human life, the most valuable
blessing.

The notion of social life ingrained in the human mind, although a
seemingly simple and mundane concept, is an invaluable one, for it is
the cause of the magnificent world of humanity, in the context of which
millions of actions interact every second to produce innumerable
results, some of which are praiseworthy, appropriate, and beneficial
while others are not.

It should go without saying, then, that the solutions provided in the
pure faith of Islam to satisfy all the needs of people of all ages must
be ranked most significant, for they are equal in value to the very
existence of humankind, the greatest conceivable blessing. Any Muslim,
aware of even the basics of Islam, would acknowledge this truth. This
topic, however (like many other articles of faith established by Islam
and ingrained in the minds of its adherents, being passed down quietly
generation after generation), has not been duly explored, remaining
buried in the believers’ minds without being taken advantage of.

As far back as we, Easterners, can recount of the history of our
ancestors, which goes back thousands of years, the dominant social
institutions governing our affairs have never allowed us freedom of
thought, especially in social matters.

The brief opportunity that was provided us in the beginning years of
Islam and like the bright morning portended a promising future, did not
last long. It was cut short by the dark incidents and turbulence
fomented by a group of egotistic opportunists. Once again, we fell into
captivity and slavery; once again we had to face the force of whips,
swords, and the gallows and the solitude of prison cells—those infernal
tortures and lethal environments—once again we were forced to revert to
the ancient duty of “Yes Sir.”

Under such circumstances, the best a believer could do was to retain his
faith intact. As a matter of fact, that was exactly what the rulers and
governors of the time favored so as to destroy the opportunity for free
discussion. What they desired was that people occupy themselves with
their own personal matters and not interfere with social issues.

Matters of society and politics were confined to the governments and the
governors. The rulers had no fear of the people’s innocuous conviction
to the relatively simple matters of faith. Their concern was that people
should not engage in free and inquisitive discussion, and for the
accomplishment of this end they imposed themselves on the masses as the
collective mind of the society.

For, they had correctly realized that the most effectual factor in
social life was the individual will of the people controlled by their
thoughts. So, by subduing the minds of the masses, the rulers fettered
their wills. Hence, the statesmen’s foremost concern was to control the
minds of their people, which they did by placing themselves as the
collective mind of the society. These are truths that anyone can verify
beyond doubt by studying the annals of history with even the slightest
attention.

And now European “liberty,” after fully satiating the West, has turned
to us Easterners in all its attractiveness. At first, it was portrayed
as a dear guest. In time, however, it turned on its host, imposing
itself as a stalwart landlord. Hailing liberty, Western imperialism
uprooted the system that stifled free thought—providing the best means
and most favorable circumstances for reclaiming that lost treasure and
forging a new life illumined by knowledge—but only to replace it as the
new collective mind of the society.

At first, we failed to realize what was happening. When we did wake up
from our slumber, we noticed that the days we had to yield to the orders
of the old rulers were up—we no longer had to submit to the feudal
lords, to the commands of the all-powerful masters, the “kings of all
universe”—but instead we now had to live as our European benefactors
instructed and follow the path they paved for us.

A thousand years have elapsed since Avicenna treaded this earth; his
philosophic and medical books permeate our libraries and his thoughts
our scholarly conversations—a blessing we have always taken for granted.
We have been living for 700 years with the mathematic books of Khwajah
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi before us. Our only acknowledgment of these great
figures has been the recent conferences held in their 1000th and 700th
anniversaries, and even in that we’re mimicking European scholars.

The philosophic legacy of Mulla Sadra has been with us Iranians for the
past 300 years, serving as a great source of illumination. The
University of Tehran was founded many years ago. Philosophy has been
taught there, with all the accouterments of academia, since its very
beginning. Our philosophic heritage, however, has only received
perfunctory treatment. But this suddenly changed a few years ago when a
European orientalist speaking at a conference at Tehran University
praised Mulla Sadra and his school of philosophy. His acknowledgement
brought unprecedented interest to the study of Mulla Sadra’s personality
and philosophy.

These and other similar instances serve to illustrate our social and
global status, shedding light on the debased state of the intellectual
identity of our learned men. Those, on the other hand, who have
succeeded in retaining a certain degree of intellectual independence,
securing some of their intellectual heritage from being lost altogether,
are gripped by a dual personality: they are infatuated with Western
concepts but are also fond of their own Eastern heritage.

They try in vain to force a marriage between these two mutually
exclusive cultures. One certain learned writer struggles to apply Islam
to the concept of democracy in his book: “Islamic Democracy”; another,
under such titles as “Islamic Communism” and “Islamic Socialism,”
construes Islam in the light of Communism and the abolition of class
differences.

What a strange story. If Islamic realism is truly manifested only when
it conforms itself to democracy or Communism (which have walked into our
lives with their most captivating attractions), why should we not just
dispose of Islam and spare ourselves the trouble of reconciling a bunch
of outdated concepts from 1400 years ago with these “lively” concepts?
However, if Islam is possessed of a distinct and independent
identity—which it is—and offers a living and valuable truth, then what
need is there to shroud its Divine beauty in a borrowed garment and
advertise it in a false appearance?

In recent years—particularly, since the close of World War II—Western
scholars have enthusiastically engaged in discussions and examinations
regarding religion, publishing their studies at an ever-increasing rate.
When taking on a problem, the curious scholar first attempts to construe
it in accordance with the principles he adheres to. Then, he passes
judgment as to the solution of the problem. In this light, Western
scholars view religion as a merely social phenomenon that is the
product, as is the case regarding society itself, of certain natural
factors.

All religions, including Islam, from the point of view of Western
scholars—those of them who hold an optimistic view of religion—are the
fruits of the minds of geniuses who by purity of soul, profundity of
insight, and an indomitable will succeed in formulating regulations for
the purpose of reforming the values and behavior of their societies,
thereby guiding them in the path to felicity.

These regulations, then, evolve in the course of the gradual progress of
societies. Empirical evidence confirms, they contend, that human
civilization is gradually navigating toward perfection, every day taking
a fresh step toward progress.

This conclusion is corroborated by psychological, legal, social, and
even philosophic arguments, especially in reference to dialectical
materialism, which asserts that societies do not remain stagnant, and
that, consequently, social regulations must of necessity change.
Regulations those were able to secure the happiness of prehistoric human
beings, who subsisted on fruit they plucked from trees and resided in
caves, cannot satisfy the innumerous needs of modern society. The age of
nuclear warheads cannot be governed according to regulations of the days
when weaponry consisted of clubs and axes.

The regulations of the days when horses and donkeys were the sole means
of transportation are no longer effective in an age when jets and
nuclear submarines are means of transportation. In one word, the modern
age does not—and should not be expected to—yield to the regulations of
previous ages. The binding regulations of human societies are inevitably
subject to constant alteration in conforming to the developments of
human society. Alteration of laws governing social conduct in turn leads
to change of values, for values are nothing more than habits and
ingrained psychological states, which result from repeated practice.

The simple life of ancient times did not call for the sensitive measures
required to steer life in the tortuous course of modern age. How could
the social women of today practice the chastity of the women of ancient
times?

The laborer and farmer of today’s oppressed classes should not be
expected to show the tolerance that was so characteristic of the
oppressed classes of ancient times. Such threats as solar and lunar
eclipses are no longer effective: the revolutionary minds that have
conquered the outer space cannot be intimidated into believing such
superstitions as trust in God and submission to His will. These examples
illustrate, the proponents of this point of view claim, how societies of
every age require regulations and morals appropriate to the ambiance of
that particular age.

In line with that sense of imitation and submission present in Eastern
intellectual circles, as mentioned above, Muslim thinkers have followed
in the footsteps of their Western peers by applying the same curiosity
to questions relating to the sacred religion of Islam.

The “enlightened” Muslim thinker contends that Islam is in essence the
body of regulations that most effectively guarantees the felicity of
human society. As such, the manifestations of Islam vary depending on
the circumstances of each age. The way of life preached by Prophet
Muhammad was only one of these manifestations. In this light, Islam
applies to the most effective and godly regulations conducive to human
felicity in each age. This is how the Westernized modern thinker
interprets Islam’s timelessness based on the “definitive scientific”
criteria he boasts of.

But now let us turn to the Noble Qur’an—the heavenly book of Islam and
the best speaker for this pure faith—to see what it has to say on this
question. Does it concur with the above point of view or does it set
forth certain doctrines, moral principles, and regulations as immutable
and require humankind to follow them?

If the latter is correct, how does it solve the dilemma of being
applicable to the ever-changing needs of various ages? Does Islam
promote stasis in human society, shutting the door on the progress of
civilizations and putting a stop to the progressive human activity? How
can Islam refuse to conform to the inherent flux of the natural order,
to which the human society is no exception?

The indubitable truth is that the Noble Qur’an, with its profound
language, expounds religious concepts—Islam’s derivation from the Unseen
and relation with the order of creation and the visible and changing
world, the mutability and immutability of religious doctrines, human
virtues, and individual and social felicity—in a manner that is
fundamentally different from the Western mentality. The Noble Qur’an
views these subjects from a perspective that is beyond the purview of
materialistic examination.

The Qur’an describes Islam as the set of doctrines and regulations to
which the order of creation and specifically the evolving and
progressive nature of the human being—as a member of the natural world
which is in constant flux—guide. In other words, Islam, according to the
Qur’anic depiction, comprises a set of regulations that are necessary
requirements of the order of creation. Like their source [i.e., the
order of creation], the regulations of Islamic law [*shari‘ah*] are
immutable, not subject to human caprice.

Islam is the embodiment of truth; it does not change to appease the
whims of tyrants (as is the case in authoritarian states) or to satisfy
the wishes of the majority (as is the case in socialistic and democratic
states). Its regulations follow solely the decrees of the order of
creation, that is, the will of God.

In what way does Islam provide for the needs of every age?
----------------------------------------------------------

In discussions on the subject of society, it has time and again been
reiterated that the human being, due to the critical needs that surround
him and which he cannot individually satisfy, has no choice but to
choose social life, thus becoming inured to a social existence.
Moreover, in discussions of jurisprudence, as we may have all heard many
times, it is elaborated that a society, in order to satisfy the critical
needs of the individuals, must be governed by a set of regulations
appropriate to the needs of the individuals, by means of which each
individual could protect his veritable rights, enjoy the benefits of
social life, and profit from the fruits of social interaction.

As can be deduced from the above two points, the principal and prime
factor in instituting laws for a society is the fulfillment of the
critical human needs, without which life would not endure. The direct
result of forming a society and implementing the established regulations
therein is the fulfillment of the critical human needs.

As such, the term *society* cannot correctly be applied to a crowd of
people who have no meaningful interaction. Furthermore, regulations
whose formulation or implementation does not positively affect the
fulfillment of people’s needs and the procurement of their happiness and
felicity are not true regulations; a regulation is that which fulfills
the needs and protects the rights of the people.

The presence of regulations which, at least partially and imperfectly,
fulfill a society’s needs and are generally consented to by the
individuals is inevitable, even in the most uncivilized and primitive of
societies. However, in uncivilized societies regulations are maintained
in the form of tribal habits and customs, which are the outcome of
desultory interactions materialized over a period of time or of the
coercion of the more powerful elements of the society.

Even in our age, there are tribal communities in various corners of the
globe that continue to prosper by maintaining their habits and customs.
There must, nevertheless, exist regulations, conformed to by all or most
individuals, to serve as the foundation for the society. In a civilized
society, if it be religious, Divine Dispensation would rule, but if not
religious, it would be governed in accordance with regulations born of
the majority will, whether directly or indirectly. The main point,
however, is that there cannot be a society whose people are not bound by
a set of duties and regulations.

The Means for Determining the Social and Human Needs of the Individual
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Now that it has been clarified that the principal factor in the
formulation of regulations is the fulfillment of the needs of the
individuals in a society, we must turn to other related questions: how
may one determine the individual’s social and human needs (of course
they must be, whether immediately or not, recognizable at least to some
extent)? Could the human being err in determining his individual and
social duties, or is whatever he determines conducive to his felicity
and should be endorsed without hesitation (which is to say that one’s
desires are sufficient to legitimize the obligations they point to)?

The majority of the “modern world” acknowledges the will of the populace
as the source of law. However, due to the fact that the concurrence of
the entirety of a nation’s population on an issue is either impossible
or very rare compared to the areas where they disagree, the will of the
absolute majority—51 percent—is granted legitimacy and that of the
minority—49 percent—is rejected, thereby depriving the minority of its
liberty.

Without doubt, there is a direct relation between a population’s wishes
and their living circumstances. An affluent man, who has procured all
the necessities of life, fancies plans that would never occur to someone
destitute. If starving, one would crave for any type of food, whether
delicious or not, without the least concern for scruples (such as if it
belonged to someone else); but when satiated, he only reaches out for
the most delicious of foods.

In times of comfort, the human being cherishes thoughts he would never
consider in times of distress. Based on this reality, the evolution of
human society, satisfying many of the older needs and replacing them
with newer ones, has rendered certain ancient regulations irrelevant,
prompting the human society to replace them with new laws or to modify
them.

Hence, in thriving nations, old laws and regulations are constantly
replaced with new ones. The reason for this process, as mentioned above,
is that the basis of a people’s laws is the collective will of the
majority; it is this element that gives credibility to the laws and
regulations of a nation (even if it be at odds with what is truly in the
interests of that nation).

Nevertheless, we should consider with greater attention the fundamental
factor responsible for the development of social laws: does social
progress bring change to all spheres of human concern? Are there not
common qualities shared by all societies of all ages? Does human nature
(which is necessarily the basis of a portion of human needs, even as
some other needs depend upon varying circumstances, situations, and
environments) evolve? Aren’t the body parts and organs we have the same
as the first humans’, with the same functions?

Were war and peace different from what they are now—killing human beings
and the stop to such bloodshed? Did intoxication feel any different in
Jamshid’s[^8] time? Was the pleasure of listening to the music of Nakisa
and Barbad[^9] fundamentally different from the pleasure that today’s
music produces? Did the natural structure of the ancient human being
differ from today’s human being? Did the internal and external functions
and reactions of the ancient human being differ in any way from those of
the modern human being?

Of course, the answer to all the above questions is clear. It would not
be plausible to claim that humanness has gradually disappeared, being
replaced by something else. Nor is it plausible to hold that the essence
of humanity has faded and been replaced by a different essence. It would
be equally implausible to argue that human nature, that which all human
beings—black and white, old and young, intelligent and ignorant, of the
Polar Regions and the tropical regions, of the past, present and
future—share in common, does not require common needs or that human
beings do not wish to satisfy those essential needs.

Such essential needs do exist, and they necessitate a set of immutable
regulations, not subject to change of any type. When faced with an enemy
that threatens their very existence, nations of all ages would
unquestionably embrace war, if possible, as a means of defense, and if
such an enemy would not be repelled except by bloodletting, they would
consider it justified to employ such an extreme measure. No society may
legitimately prohibit consumption of food, for it is one of the
life-sustaining factors; nor may it prevent the satisfaction of sexual
desire. There are numerous examples of such cases that require immutable
regulations.

The above explanation clarifies the following points:

• The principal factor responsible for the existence of social laws and
regulations is the satisfaction of the individuals’ needs.

• All nations, including the primitive ones, follow laws and regulations
they have established.

• The criterion for determining the true needs of life, according to the
modern world, is the will of the majority.

• The will of the majority does not always concur with reality.

• A portion of human laws and regulations change with the passing of
time and in the course of social progress. These are the ones related to
specific circumstances. However, there are also other human laws and
regulations that pertain to the essence of humanity, which is shared in
common by all human beings of all ages, irrespective of the varying
circumstances and environments.

Let us now see what the Islamic viewpoint is in this regard.

### The Basis of Islamic Doctrine

Islam is a universal and timeless religion. It aims, in its distinct
educational program, at the “natural human being” that is, the object of
its laws is simply the human being, irrespective of all distinctions. It
embraces Arab and non-Arab, white and black, poor and wealthy, strong
and weak, man and woman, young and old, knowledgeable and ignorant
alike. The natural human being is he who has retained the Divine
primordial nature, whose mind and will are pure and unsullied by
falsehood and superstition.

There is no room for doubt in that the distinctive feature of the human
being is his equipment with intellect and the faculty of contemplation,
a Divine blessing of which other animals are deprived. The intelligence
and will of all animals (excepting the human being), which control
animal activity, are subject to their instincts. It is the provocation
of those instincts that propels the animal to make a decision and to
take an action. With this instinctual system, they proceed with their
life-sustaining activities, seeking water, food, and other necessities
of life.

The human being is the only animal that along with his various instincts
and emotions—affection and antipathy, friendship and animosity, fear and
hope, and all the other emotions of attraction and repulsion—is endowed
with a judgmental mechanism responsible for reviewing the conflicting
demands of his emotions and faculties, judging what is truly in his
interests. In some cases, it judges against a certain action despite the
strong appeal of the emotions; at other times, it deems the action
necessary, though it be repulsive to the emotions; and in cases where
the true interests of the individual agree with his emotions, it gives
its consent.

Based on the reality of human nature and the fact that the education and
training of any species consists in cultivating the respective
distinctions and peculiarities of that species, Islam has founded its
educational program on intellection not sentiment. In this vein, Islam
invites humanity to a body of pure doctrines, virtues, and practical
laws, which the untainted and divine human nature would verify and
vindicate of any possibility of falsehood and superstition.

The Cognitions of the Natural Human Being
-----------------------------------------

In the purity of his nature, the natural human being comprehends that
the vast cosmos—its tiniest particles as well as its most gargantuan
galaxies, which journey toward the Unique God by the amazing cosmic
order with the most accurate rules and numberless activities—is His
handiwork. The natural human being understands that the multifarious
parts of the cosmos together form a boundless unit, whose parts are
intricately interconnected and bound by a perfect cohesion.

The various parts of the cosmos went hand in hand in order to bring
forth the world of the human being—this small part of the cosmic body,
an insignificant drop in the shoreless ocean of existence. The human
being is the creation of the entire cosmos, the will of God. As a child
of the world of creation, trained under its guidance, he has been
fashioned into the human form—equipped with various internal and
external faculties—through the operation of innumerable elements. His
various faculties, emotions, intellect, and will constitute the
apparatus by which the order of creation guides him to true felicity.

It is true that the faculties of intellect and free will enable the
human being to distinguish good from evil, benefit from harm, thus being
a free agent. Nevertheless, it must be borne in mind that it is the
order of creation—the will of God—that has furnished his inward and
outward with the faculties that render him a free agent.

Using the intellect with which he has been endowed, the natural human
being realizes beyond doubt that felicity—his true goal in life—can be
achieved only by attaining to the end that the order of creation has
determined for him and toward which it guides him by means of the
various faculties it has equipped him with. That end is what the Unique
God, the Creator, the Trainer of the human being and the universe, has
willed.

On these premises, the natural human being, then, resolves that the only
path to felicity is to constantly monitor his existential orientation;
reminding himself that he is an inseparable part of the order of
creation and is governed by it, that he has been created by God, and as
such must, by reading the book of creation, decipher his duties
vis-à-vis the various situations he encounters. The content of this
book, put in a nutshell, is that one must not demean himself except
before the Unique God and that the demands of one’s emotions and one’s
needs, when approved by the intellect, must be met.

Mutable and Immutable Regulations
---------------------------------

The demands and needs of the human being are commonly incorporated into
bodies of law. Such laws can be distinguished into two categories. One
category comprises those laws which guarantee the wellbeing of the human
being; that is, those laws which pertain to him as a human being living
a social life, regardless of such peculiarities as the particular time
and place he occupies. They include the set of doctrines and regulations
that shape the relationship of humility and servility between the human
being and his Lord (who is beyond change) and the general principles of
human life regarding the need for food, shelter, marriage, and defense
of one’s right to life and social participation.

The second category of laws is those that are transient, regional, or
delimited in some way by particular qualifications, thus being liable to
alteration. Social progress, urbanization, alterations in the forms of
societies, and the dissolution of old ways are among the factors that
may lead to change in laws of this type.

For instance, the days when people traveled on foot, on horseback, or on
other draft animals, rudimentary roads were sufficient, but with the
development of the new baffling means of transportation, thousands of
ground, maritime, and aerial regulations are required to secure safe
transportation.

The primitive human being would satisfy his needs for food, clothing,
shelter, and sex in ways which his primitive means allowed and which
called only for the simplest of regulations, spending most of his time
in trivial toils. Today, he pursues life with a bewildering speed, but
due to the sophistication of vocations, every aspect of life has
developed a technical sphere, demanding specialized fields of knowledge
accompanied by thousands of complicating regulations.

Islam, which aims at the primordial nature of the human being, guides
humanity to the unadulterated natural society, the unadulterated natural
doctrines, the unadulterated natural practices, and finally the
unadulterated natural destination. The pure intellectual conceptions of
the natural human being in doctrine and action constitute the plan that
Islam offers for humankind.

In this light, Islamic regulations are of two types: mutable and
immutable. The latter—consisting of those regulations based on human
nature and his essential qualities—is referred to as the *shari‘ah*
(Divine dispensation), the avenue to human felicity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا ۚ فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ
الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set your heart on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of God according to which He originated mankind; there is no
altering God’s creation; that is the upright religion…”***[^10]

The mutable regulations, which may change due to varying circumstances
of time and place, are left to the discretion of the Prophet, his
successors, and those whom they appoint. These authorities may alter the
mutable regulations in light of the immutable principles and in response
to the differing circumstances of time and place. These regulations are
not technically considered part of the *shari‘ah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَأُولِي الْأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey God and obey the Apostle and those vested
with authority among you…”***[^11]

This is, in summary, Islam’s solution to the varying needs of different
ages. However, the topic calls for a more thorough examination, which we
will subsequently take up.

The Mutable and Immutable Regulations of Islam
----------------------------------------------

In previous chapters, we learned that Islamic law distinguishes between
two types of regulations: immutable and mutable. We will now elaborate
further on this topic.

### Immutable Regulations

The immutable regulations are those that have been established on the
basis of the reality of human nature, which subsumes the urban as well
as the rural, the white as well as the black, the strong as well as the
weak, and individuals of all times and places. As soon as two or more
individuals come together in a community, pledging to cooperate and
support one another, they will inevitably encounter certain needs, which
they have to endeavor to fulfill.

As the essence of their human constitution is identical, being endowed
with similar inward and outward faculties, undoubtedly their needs will
be of the same nature and as such would require a consistent set of
regulations.

All human beings share the same intellectual cognitions. Rational
judgment, unhampered by illusion and superstition, would generate
identical conclusions in every individual. The cognitive faculties of
all human beings alike achieve satisfaction through judgment and belief.
Likewise, the various emotions—affection and antipathy, hope and
fear—and instincts—sexual desire, the inclination to dress, to take
shelter, etc.—are common to all human beings, and thus their dictates in
all individuals must be treated similarly.

Due to the common human nature, it would be unreasonable to claim that
satisfaction of hunger should be permissible in respect to one
individual but impermissible in respect to another, or that one
individual should heed the demands of his conscience but another should
ignore them.

It would be equally absurd (bearing in mind the common human nature
which has endured with the same faculties, emotions, and intellect for
millennia) to assume that some ages require that the human being be
persuaded by those truths which he deems self-evident whereas other ages
require that he disavow them; that in some eras he should lead a social
life but in other eras he should live in isolation; that at times he
should defend his sacred beliefs but at other times he should relinquish
his very existence to the enemy; that during some periods he should
pursue a vocation in order to provide for his life whereas in other
periods he should remain idle and jobless. These examples should suffice
to illustrate that the natural human being, regardless of the changing
times, requires certain immutable regulations.

This is exactly what Islam directs to in its primordial invitation. It
proclaims that only the immutable regulations that derive from the order
of creation, in general, and human nature, in particular, can guarantee
human prosperity. Islam exhorts humankind to heed their Divine
intelligence and conscience; to refrain from licentiousness,
foolishness, and wantonness; and to abide by those principles they deem
right.

To label submission to truths as blind imitation is wrong just as it is
wrong to invoke the pretense of “national pride” or “custom” to
stubbornly adhere to the ways of our ancestors. To attack theism as
outdated while bowing to lustful rulers is not progress.

Islam literally signifies the exclusive worship of God, the Creator of
the awesome order of creation, in line with the true human nature; it is
this truth that it invites humanity to embrace. It is in this vein that
Islam offers a set of doctrines, morals, and practices to humankind,
declaring them truths that must be obeyed, as they constitute the
primordial, unchanging, and heavenly religion. Islam presents its system
of doctrine, morality, and practical law as a coherent unit in harmony
with the system of creation. Of course, the limitations of this work do
not allow us to elaborate on this system. We mainly intend to affirm
that Islam incorporates a set of immutable regulations.

### Mutable Regulations

In addition to the immutable regulations, which correspond to the
immutable and natural needs of the human being, human society requires a
set of changeable and mutable regulations, without which it would
disintegrate. The reason for this is clear; despite the human being’s
immutable nature, the passing of time and regional discrepancies
confront him with changing circumstances to which he must adjust. These
varying circumstances call for disparate regulations. In response to the
need for such transient regulations there exists in Islamic law a
principle to which we will in this discussion refer as the ‘authority of
the ruler’, which accommodates the differing needs of people of various
times and regions without nullifying the immutable laws of Islam.

#### Further Elaboration

In an Islamic society, religious law confers certain rights and freedoms
on the individual in the framework of which he can conduct his affairs
in the family domain as he wishes (of course, observing Islamic law). He
may spend his money to the extent he deems prudent in providing the best
foods, apparel, and furnishings for his family, or he may decide to the
contrary; in the event of an incursion on his rights, he may
legitimately decide to defend his dignity, or, as expedience should
dictate, to concede and compromise on some of his rights; he may work
day and night to accumulate wealth, or he may decide to cease work so as
to attend to other duties.

The powers invested in the Muslim ruler (appointed according to Islamic
law to yield general authority and to function as the intellectual
fountainhead and the center of the collective thought and will of the
Muslim society) for governing the Islamic state are similar in nature to
those of the individual in the family domain.

Observing piety and the immutable laws, the Muslim ruler is authorized
to establish regulations for managing the affairs of the Muslim society
(e.g., maintaining order on roads, in residential neighborhoods, in the
marketplace regarding business transactions, and in the interaction of
the different entities within the society). In case of an attack, he may
order the army to defend the Islamic state (having prepared the army
with the necessary equipment and armaments), or to withhold retaliation
and settle for a ceasefire, in accordance with what he finds expedient.

In facilitating progress in the fields of spirituality and public
welfare, he may enact certain measures to accomplish major reforms. He
may promote certain fields of knowledge and downplay others in
accordance with the interests of the Islamic state. In other words, the
Muslim ruler is empowered to enact any regulation conducive to the
progress of the Islamic society and in the interests of Islam and the
Muslim nation. There are no legal limitations to his power to enact and
enforce such regulations [other than the immutable Islamic law and
morals].

Although such regulations are binding according to Islamic law and the
Muslim ruler—whom Muslims are obliged to obey—is duty-bound to enforce
them, they are not considered part of the *shari‘ah* (the Divine
Dispensation). The legality of such regulations is naturally contingent
on the particular circumstances that necessitate them, and hence as soon
as the circumstances change, the regulations would expire, at which time
the Muslim ruler must inform the public of the expiration and set forth
new regulations to accommodate the new circumstances. However, unlike
the regulations enacted by the Muslim ruler, the contents of the
*shari‘ah* are eternal and immutable. No one, including the Muslim
ruler, has the authority to alter or annul them.

#### Clarifying a Misconception

The summary explanation provided above should suffice to prove the
invalidity of the criticism leveled against Islam in this regard. Those
who claim that social life has so greatly evolved that there are no
common qualities that today’s societies and those of 14 centuries ago
share in; that modern life necessitates numberless regulations which
were unimaginable to the people of the early Islamic era (just the
regulations pertaining to the transportation sector of today’s societies
are far greater than all the regulations of Prophet’s time put
together); that because Islamic law does not include such regulations it
is not fit to govern modern societies—those who make such arguments lack
an accurate understanding of Islam and its mutable regulations. They
presume that Islam only incorporates a set of rigid and inflexible
regulations and that consequently the only way Islam could flourish
would be by Muslims’ wielding swords and obstructing the progress of
human civilization—such ignorance.

Another group of critics, on the other hand, contend that the inevitable
evolution of social life will, no doubt, result in the gradual
alteration of all social regulations. Hence, the immutable Islamic law,
if ever valid, was only relevant to the Prophet’s era, with its peculiar
circumstances and thus is not indefinitely applicable.

These detractors have not paid sufficient attention to jurisprudential
discussions, hence missing the fact that all civil laws prevalent in the
various countries around the globe include certain unalterable elements.
Without doubt, the laws of modern times are not entirely different from
those of ancient times and those of future ages. There are certain
common elements which passing of time never outdates (some examples were
provided above).

Islam’s methodology in establishing regulations (including both the
immutable Divine law, which derives from the wellspring of Revelation,
and the mutable regulations that are based on the ‘authority of the
ruler’, in accordance with which regulations are enacted through council
and enforced by the Muslim ruler), although founded on rationality and
not on the capricious wishes of the majority, is to some extent similar
to modern states.

Most modern states have a constitution, the alteration of which is
beyond the authority of their governments and even parliaments. Their
laws, however, also incorporate other regulations that are enacted
mainly by the parliaments and occasionally by the governments; the
latter are susceptible to alteration in the course of a country’s
development.

To expect Divine Dispensation to include the particulars relating to the
believers’ lives is similar to the expectation that state constitutions
should incorporate the details regarding traffic regulations. The
incorporation of such minute details would subject them to the need for
frequent revision, an unreasonable measure (this is in reference to the
first criticism, which assumes that Islamic law is a set of inflexible
regulations whose date of expiration has passed).

Furthermore, the detractors’ criticism that the *shari‘ah* (Divine
Dispensation), which resembles a constitution in the framework of
Islamic law, should be open to alteration is unacceptable for the same
reason that a modern state’s constitution (which outlines the
fundamental issues, such as the country’s independence, the need for a
president, and the like) may not be altered (this is in reference to the
second criticism). Thus, both the first criticism and the second one are
ill-founded.

There is, however, one other question (an offshoot of the second
criticism) that merits mention: It is true that there are legal elements
not prone to change, however, this does not in itself prove that the
regulations of the *shari‘ah* can guarantee the felicity of humankind
for all time. Can modern civilization continue its progress with such
rituals as the canonical prayer, fast, *hajj*, *zakat*[^12], and the
like? Can Islamic regulations concerning slavery, women, marriage,
commerce, usury, etc., continue to be relevant in the modern world?
These and other related questions call for extensive discussions.

The Question of the Termination of Prophethood
----------------------------------------------

### Question

What would be the appropriate reply if someone claimed that the
Prophet’s declaration that he was the last in the line of Divine
prophets means that humanity’s need to be guided by the wisdom that
transcends human intelligence has been fully satisfied by the Greek,
Roman, Christian, and Islamic civilizations, by the Torah, the Bible,
and the Qur’an. The Prophet’s term was the inauguration of a new age in
which, building on the Divine heritage of God’s prophets, humanity can
continue life and advance toward perfection without the help of new
revelation from God, hence the termination of prophethood?

Those who are of this persuasion maintain that humankind have achieved
the sufficient level of intelligence to be able to manage their affairs,
establish peace, and pursue their felicity on their own. Human beings
are self-sufficient now, mature enough to endure without Divine
guidance. Human intelligence has now superseded Divine revelation. What
should be our stance vis-à-vis such a conception?

### Answer

Let us first rephrase the above argument in order to better understand
it. The human being, like all other creatures, is traversing the path to
perfection. The passing of time and the evolving existential states
effect in the human society new circumstances accompanied by an
increased need for new modes of guidance.

Each new phase of human progress demands a new way of life, a new set of
obligations and regulations appropriate to the special guidance needed
for that particular phase. In this light, no religion or way of life may
legitimately be considered eternal, the *shari‘ah* of Islam being no
exception. Therefore, when the Prophet announced that he was the “Seal
of the Prophets” [*khatam al-nabiyyin*], he meant, these “modernists”
contend, that up to his time, due to the deficiency of human
intelligence, humankind was in need to be guided by Divine wisdom, which
transcends human intelligence.

However, humanity’s maturation facilitated by the advent of Greek,
Roman, and Islamic civilizations and the revelation of the Divine
books—Torah, Bible, Qur’an—(i.e., supra-human guidance) has elevated
them to a new intellectual height, liberating them from the need for
revelatory guidance and enabling them to stand on their own feet. This
is the essence of the argument in question.

There are several flaws in this argument. First, although it is true
that both the human individual and the human society are advancing
toward perfection, nevertheless, the scope of human perfection is finite
in terms of both quality and quantity, for he is a finite creature.
Human perfection, however vast and profound, has its limits, and thus
there must perforce be a stage when the way of life and its regulations
would cease to progress. So, contrary to the abovementioned assumption,
human progress actually indicates that there must be a final and
unchanging religion (as any finite motion has a terminus).

Second, to consider the Greek and Roman civilizations (which were in
fact products of a pluralistic and idolatrous worldview) as Divine and
super-human is to neglect the Qur’an’s explicit condemnation of heathen
civilizations as deviations that entail damnation. The Qur’an asserts
that their ways, though they might appear virtuous, were profane, and
obviously profane methods do not lead to felicity (Qur’anic verses in
this regard are so numerous that there is no need to cite any particular
ones here).

Third, the inauguration of a new religion in the 7th century C.E.
through the ministry of the Noble Prophet itself testifies against the
claim that the post-Islam human being is not in need of Divine
Dispensation, especially considering Qur’an’s assertion that Islam
subsumes the essence of all previous Divine revelations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُوحًا وَالَّذِي أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ وَمَا وَصَّيْنَا بِهِ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ وَعِيسَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Noah and which We have also revealed to you, and which We had
enjoined upon Abraham, Moses and Jesus…”***[^13]

God, the Exalted, underscores this truth further by referring to the
final religion in His Book as *submission*, explaining that this was
also the religion of Abraham and that it is the only acceptable faith,
which no one may reject:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الْإِسْلَامُ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed the only religion before God is Islam [Submission]…”***[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Should anyone follow a religion other than Islam, it shall never be
accepted from him…”***[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا جَعَلَ عَلَيْكُمْ فِي الدِّينِ مِنْ حَرَجٍ ۚ مِلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has…not burdened you with any hardship in the religion, the faith
of your father, Abraham…”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ وَلَا مُؤْمِنَةٍ إِذَا قَضَى اللَّهُ
وَرَسُولُهُ أَمْرًا أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُمُ الْخِيَرَةُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِمْ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A faithful man or woman may not, when God and His Apostle have
decided on a matter, have an option in their matter…”***[^17]

To say that all such exhortations were specifically addressed to the
Prophet and as such do not concern us is to overlook such addresses as
“O people!” “O you who have faith,” which explicitly address humanity or
the community of the faithful at large. Accepting the argument that the
post-Islam human being is not in need of a revealed religion would
render meaningless all the Qur’anic encouragements to the believers and
threats to those who disobey God’s commands.

Could one reasonably contend that the Noble Prophet’s guidance to the
religion he introduced was merely a recommendation and argue that by the
verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِنْ رِجَالِكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Muhammad…is the Apostle of God and the Seal of the
Prophets…”***[^18]**,**

God intended that people were henceforth relieved from the onus of
obedience to Divine Dispensation and free to proceed toward human
perfection in accordance with the judgments of their intellect and that
obedience to Islam was merely an optional matter?

To make such arguments would be to concede to the notion of democracy,
on which basis social regulations derive from the majority will.
However, did the Prophet ever seek to secure the consent of a majority
of the Muslims prior to instituting any of the Islamic rituals—such as,
the canonical prayer, fast, *zakat*, *hajj*, or *jihad*?

There is no evidence in books of history and hagiographies to support
such a point of view. He did request Muslims’ counsel in deciding some
social issues (such as the council he convoked preceding the Uhud Battle
to decide on whether the Muslim army should remain in and defend the
city or leave the city to fight the enemy at a remote location), but
that was only in deciding on what route to take in performing a Divine
duty, not in establishing the duty itself. Obviously, consultation as to
how to perform a duty is not the same as consultation as to whether the
duty should be performed in the first place.

Another possible interpretation of the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِنْ رِجَالِكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Muhammad…is the Apostle of Allah and the Seal of the
Prophets…”***[^19]

is that Islam is truly a Divine religion, but since the line of
prophethood came to an end with the Prophet’s ministry, it would be
permissible, after the Prophet’s time, to modify or supersede, in
accordance with the judgments of “reason,” any article of faith
recognized as inexpedient considering the circumstances. The substance
of this interpretation is that Divine Dispensation that is Islam is,
like any other social law, liable to alteration with the passing of time
and the changing of circumstances.

The early caliphs were of this opinion and actually put it to practice.
They forbade and altered a number of religious practices that had been
established by the Prophet and practiced during his lifetime. It was for
this reason that writing and transmitting the Prophetic sayings was
strictly forbidden in the first century A.H., while writing the Qur’an
was encouraged, with the pretext of securing the honor of the Qur’an.

This point of view (i.e., the changeability of the articles of Islamic
law), although favored by many scholars especially within the Sunni
school of thought, is in stark contrast to the Qur’an’s unequivocal
assertion that the sacred religion of Islam never allows such
alteration. The Qur’an lays emphasis, in agreement with the dictates of
the primordial human nature, on the necessity of abiding by the Truth,
warning that disobedience to the Truth will lead to nothing but
perversion:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَاذَا بَعْدَ الْحَقِّ إِلَّا الضَّلَالُ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So what is there after the truth except error…”***[^20]

In the same vein, the Qur’an avers that Truth is in essence the end to
which Islam guides and as such is inviolable:

> وَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيز {41} لَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ
> يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ {42}

***“Indeed it is an august Book: falsehood cannot approach it, from
before it nor from behind it, a gradually sent down revelation from the
All-wise, the All-laudable.”***[^21]

There is no possibility of alteration in a book whose contents are
immune from error and nullification. Furthermore, the Qur’an explicitly
reserves for God the authority to decree law, categorically shunning the
possibility of anyone else sharing in His authority:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِ الْحُكْمُ إِلَّا لِلَّهِ ۚ أَمَرَ أَلَّا تَعْبُدُوا إِلَّا
إِيَّاهُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ الدِّينُ الْقَيِّمُ وَلَٰكِنَّ أَكْثَرَ النَّاسِ
لَا يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Judgment belongs only to God. He has commanded you to worship none
except Him…”***[^22]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اخْتَلَفْتُمْ فِيهِ مِنْ شَيْءٍ فَحُكْمُهُ إِلَى اللَّهِ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What ever thing you may differ about, its judgment is with
God…”***[^23]

Obviously, when no one other than God has the authority to decree law,
it would be unreasonable to presume that human beings could rely
exclusively on human reason to enact laws, independent of Divine
Dispensation.

It should once again be pointed out that there are regulations in
Islamic law that may be altered. These regulations fall under the
authority of the Islamic ruler. The Islamic ruler may enact regulations
to meet the needs of various circumstances, but only within the
framework of the *shari‘ah*.

The relation of the Islamic ruler with the Muslim society is similar to
that of a legal guardian with the miniature society that is the family.
The guardian may do whatever he deems necessary to secure the interests
of the family. He may issue commands to the members of the family, if
they be to the family’s advantage. If family rights be encroached on,
the guardian may defend the rights of the family, or, if prudence
demands, remain silent. Of course, all his actions and commands must
conform to the Islamic law. He may not perform an action or issue a
command which conflicts with Islam.

The same holds true regarding the Islamic ruler. He is empowered by
Islamic law to call *jihad* to defend the safety of the Muslim nation.
He may sign treaties with other states to ensure peace. Should the
circumstances necessitate, whether due to war or other issues during
peace, he may impose taxes. All such decisions, however, must be in the
framework of Islam and in response to the needs of the times. As soon as
the needs have been satisfied, the respective regulations expire.

To conclude, Islamic law incorporates two types of regulations: mutable
and immutable, the latter constituting the *shari‘ah*:

> وَلَقَدْ آتَيْنَا بَنِي إِسْرَائِيلَ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحُكْمَ
> وَالنُّبُوَّةَ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ
> عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ {16}

> وَآتَيْنَاهُمْ بَيِّنَاتٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ ۖ فَمَا اخْتَلَفُوا إِلَّا
> مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا جَاءَهُمُ الْعِلْمُ بَغْيًا بَيْنَهُمْ ۚ إِنَّ رَبَّكَ
> يَقْضِي بَيْنَهُمْ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ فِيمَا كَانُوا فِيهِ
> يَخْتَلِفُونَ {17}

> ثُمَّ جَعَلْنَاكَ عَلَىٰ شَرِيعَةٍ مِنَ الْأَمْرِ فَاتَّبِعْهَا وَلَا
> تَتَّبِعْ أَهْوَاءَ الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ {18}

> إِنَّهُمْ لَنْ يُغْنُوا عَنْكَ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا ۚ وَإِنَّ
> الظَّالِمِينَ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۖ وَاللَّهُ وَلِيُّ
> الْمُتَّقِينَ {19}

***“Certainly We gave the Children of Israel the Book, judgment and
prophethood and We provided them with all the good things, and We gave
them an advantage over all the nations, and We gave them manifest
precepts. But they did not differ except after knowledge had come to
them, out of envy among themselves. Indeed your Lord will judge between
them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that about which they used to
differ. Then We set you on a clear course of the Law; so follow it, and
do not follow the desires of*** ***those who do not know. Indeed they
will not avail you in any way against God. Indeed the wrongdoers are
allies of one another, but God is the Guardian of the Godwary.”***[^24]

The mutable regulations, which the Islamic ruler enacts to secure the
interests of the Muslim nation, expire when the circumstances that had
necessitated them change.

[^1]: A Farsi proverb underlining the imprudence of making irrelevant
remarks. [trans.]

[^2]: Please note that grammatically “the origination of God” is the
appositive for “the religion”. That is, the true religion is that which
derives from God’s creation; it is not a superimposed law. [trans.]

[^3]: Surah al-Rum 30:30.

[^4]: The following verse attests to this truth: “Our Lord is He who
gave everything its creation and then guided it.” (Surah Ta Ha 20:50)

[^5]: Surah al-Shams 91:7-10.

[^6]: Surah Yusuf 12:40.

[^7]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:50.

[^8]: In Persian mythology, the inventor of wine. [trans.]

[^9]: Two pre-Islamic musicians who flourished during the Sassanid
Dynasty. [trans.]

[^10]: Surah al-Rum 30:30.

[^11]: Surah al-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^12]: A certain religious tax. [trans.]

[^13]: Surah al-Shawra 42:13.

[^14]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:19.

[^15]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:85.

[^16]: Surah al-Hajj 22:78.

[^17]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:36.

[^18]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:40.

[^19]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:40.

[^20]: Surah Yunus 10:32.

[^21]: Surah Fussilat 41:41-42.

[^22]: Surah Yusuf 12:40.

[^23]: Surah al-Shawra 42:10.

[^24]: Surah al-Jathiyah 45:16-19.


