Chapter 2: Some Philosophic and Scientific Problems
===================================================

An Argument for the Temporality (That is, Creation in Time) of the World
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

One of the Imams was once asked, “What proof is there for the
contingency of the world?” The Imam replied, “Behold the egg; it
consists of two liquids from which both male and female chicks of
various types develop. This is proof of the createdness of the
world.”[^1] The reply seems to have convinced the questioner, for he
remained silent. However, how does this reply prove the contingency of
the world?

### Answer

The egg’s composition of two distinct liquids and the generation of male
and female chicks of various types from it indicate a higher cause. One
cannot consider the numerous forms and shapes of this world, which
produce so many tantalizing effects, illusory as the skeptics do. They
are real: realities with distinct essences and properties. The orderly
and intricate system that governs the interrelation of these realities
leaves no doubt that their existence is not fortuitous and without a
higher cause; they are realities contingent on a higher cause.

As the differences between the existents of this world are real, they
cannot be attributed to simple and homogeneous matter. To try to salvage
this hypothesis by proposing that the disparate forms may have come
about by a difference in composition or motion of simple matter is in
vain, for then the question will be, from where did the difference in
composition and motion come? Thus, we have no choice but to conclude
that the inherent dissimilarity of the various forms and shapes is due
to a higher cause that transcends materiality and the material world.

The egg is no exception. Its complex combination and numerous properties
evince its contingency on a higher cause. This truth holds true for all
the existents and phenomena of the world, for they are all shaped out of
prime matter, which is in its essence in need of a form, a shape. Thus,
the entire material world with its expansive system is contingent on a
higher cause.

Prophet Muhammad’s superiority to other Prophets
------------------------------------------------

### Question

Is there any other verse in addition to *Surah al-Ahzab* 33:40 that
expresses the Noble Prophet’s finality and superiority in comparison to
the other prophets?

### Answer

In addition to the verse you have mentioned:

***“…He is the Apostle of God and the Seal of the Prophets…”***[^2]

there are others that proclaim the universality and perpetuality of the
message of Islam. The following are some examples:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ هَٰذَا الْقُرْآنُ لِأُنْذِرَكُمْ بِهِ وَمَنْ بَلَغَ
ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And this Qur’an has been revealed to me that I may warn thereby you
and whomever it may reach…”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ لَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Indeed it is an august Book: falsehood cannot approach it, neither
from before it nor from behind it…”***[^4]

The claim to perpetuality of a religion would be meaningless without the
finality of the bringer of the religion.

Furthermore, the following verses that aver the Qur’an’s superiority to
other revealed books also imply the Noble Prophet’s superiority, for the
Noble Qur’an is the Prophet’s message, and a prophet’s merit is
determined by his message

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَانًا لِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…We have sent down the Book to you as a clarification of all
things…”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآتَيْنَاهُ الْإِنْجِيلَ فِيهِ هُدًى وَنُورٌ وَمُصَدِّقًا لِمَا
بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ مِنَ التَّوْرَاةِ وَهُدًى وَمَوْعِظَةً لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have sent down to you the Book with the truth, confirming what
was before it of the Book and as a guardian over it…”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَرَعَ لَكُمْ مِنَ الدِّينِ مَا وَصَّىٰ بِهِ نُوحًا وَالَّذِي
أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ وَمَا وَصَّيْنَا بِهِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَمُوسَىٰ
وَعِيسَىٰ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He has prescribed for you the religion which He had enjoined upon
Noah and which We have also revealed to you, and which We had enjoined
upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus…”***[^7]

The Intercession of the Fellows of Divine Unity [Ahl Al-Tawhid]
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

In his “*Al-Tawhid*”, Majlisi, describing the qualities of the fellows
of Divine Unity, narrates the following *hadith* from the Noble Prophet:

“And verily the fellows of Divine Unity intercede [on behalf of others],
and their intercession is heeded.”[^8]

Please explain for whom do the fellows of Divine Unity intercede?
Clearly, they do not intercede for the polytheists; the monotheists, as
affirmers of Divine Unity, are themselves fellows of Divine Unity. So
then for whom do they intercede?

### Answer

The above *hadith* may be construed in one of two ways. First, the
“fellows of Divine Unity” may refer exclusively to the highest elite of
the monotheists, the Gnostics.[^9] Second, the phrase may be understood
to include all monotheists. In the latter case, those interceded for
will be the masses of unbelievers (who constitute the majority of
humankind), the “intellectually destitute,” those concerning whom God,
the Exalted, says

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآخَرُونَ مُرْجَوْنَ لِأَمْرِ اللَّهِ إِمَّا يُعَذِّبُهُمْ وَإِمَّا
يَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ عَلِيمٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There are others waiting God’s edict: He shall either punish them or
turn to them clemently…”***[^10]

The question of slavery in Islam
--------------------------------

### Question

In my previous correspondences, I inquired regarding Islam’s approval of
the continuation of the practice of slavery. You had replied in summary
and for a more thorough answer had referred me to volume six of your
“*Al-Tafsir al-Mizan*”. But I did not find my answer there.

Let me repeat my question. In the early years of Islam, due to certain
circumstances, slavery was condoned. But then, considering that the
progress of human reason would one day compel him to renounce the
enslavement of human beings by other human beings as inhuman and
irrational, why was it allowed to endure?

If the reason for sanctioning the subjugation of infidels in captivity
was to reform their souls in the Muslim community, then why were their
children, although Muslim confined to bondage? To reply that Islam had
at the same time established a variety of measures to facilitate their
freedom would not justify its sanctioning of slavery in the first place
and its subjecting many of the slave’s religious matters to his master’s
discretion.

### Answer

You write that you did not find your answer in volume six of “*Al-Tafsir
al-Mizan*”; that the progressive human mind condemns slavery, which is
to rob a human being of freedom; that slavery is not rational; that if
Islam sanctioned the subjugation of the infidels to reform their souls
in the Muslim society, for what sin were their children sentenced to the
same plight in spite of their embracing Islam? To reply that Islam had
established certain measures to facilitate their freedom is
insufficient, for the main problem lies in sanctioning slavery in the
first place. Evidently, the discussion I referred to in “*Al-Tafsir
al-Mizan*” was not read with due attention. Thus, it seems necessary
that I repeat the explanation.

To begin with, the human being, although endowed with the faculty of
volition and thus a free creature, can never pursue his liberty
uninhibited. As a social creature he is at all times bound by laws that
are enacted to ensure the society’s wellbeing and as such he cannot
enjoy unrestrained freedom. Therefore, human liberty is always confined
within the framework of laws and regulations.

In other words, human freedom is partial not absolute. Common people in
a society are not free in abiding by the laws of that society. In
addition to this universal restriction on freedom, there are certain
circumstances that to a large extent curtail personal freedom. The
insane, the mentally incompetent [*safih*], and children may not
exercise even the partial freedom that sane and competent adults enjoy.
In the same vein, a society’s enemies and criminals are perforce
deprived of their liberty.

The next issue to deal with is what bondage denotes, regardless of what
word we may employ in designating it. Bondage denotes depriving an
individual of freedom in making decisions and carrying them out.
Obviously, the will and action of one so bound are considered the
possession of another. This is the meaning of the slave trade that was
so prevalent in previous times.

In pre-Islamic times, an individual could be enthralled in one of four
ways: 1) the guardian of a family was entitled to sell his children into
bondage, 2) a man could give his wife to another man either as a lease
or as a gift, 3) the ruler of a people considered it his right to
enslave at will whomever he desired (it was for this reason that kings
were often referred to as “possessors of slaves”), 4) in times of war,
soldiers of the vanquished army were at the mercy of the victorious
party, who could enslave the enemy combatants, free them, or slay them.

Of the four ways, Islam abolished the first three by delimiting the
rights of the parents and the husband and by advocating the spread of a
just Islamic government. The fourth way, however, it sanctioned, for it
would have been against human nature to do otherwise. No individual in
his right mind would remain silent in facing an enemy intent upon
effacing his identity and desecrating what he holds sacred. Similarly,
he would not, after gaining victory, let his enemy free. He would,
rather, subject his enemy to captivity (another name for bondage) unless
exceptional circumstances or factors call for pardon.

This has been the dictate of human nature from time immemorial and will
remain so as long as human nature remains unchanged. Thus, your claim
that it is against reason for one human being to subjugate another is
only correct in the case of the first three ways of enslavement, as was
just explicated.

You have also said that the modern human mind deplores slavery. This
statement, although you may have not consciously intended so, implies
that the modern world—i.e., the West—condemns undermining individual
liberty, which might be supported by the fact that 80 years ago[^11] and
only after many a struggle a universal abolition of slavery was
proclaimed, thus ostensibly removing this stigma from the face of
humankind.

In doing so, the modern world held all other nations—including the
Muslim nations, whose religion, it perceived, condoned slavery—beholden
to it. One must, however, consider more carefully the extent to which
the “humane” governments of the modern world have actually respected
this universal abolition of slavery in practice.

It is true that the first two forms of slavery (i.e., selling one’s
children or wife), which were prevalent in Africa and some other parts
of the world, have been effectively abolished (of course, 12 centuries
after Islam declared them illegitimate), but have the modern governments
in question put an end to the third form, which Islam abolished along
with the first two? Are not the millions of Asian and African people who
have been suffering under Western imperialism for centuries, robbed of
their independence and the fruits of their toil, in effect slaves of the
modern governments? The only difference is the reluctance to employ the
word ‘slavery’. But in point of fact, the harm pre modern slaveholders
inflicted on individuals, the modern governments inflict on entire
nations.

After the end of World War II, Western imperialist powers slowly granted
liberty and independence to a number of their colonies whom they
patronizingly deemed politically matured. But that only proved that they
claimed liberty their prerogative (to say nothing of the reality of this
ostensible liberty, which was merely a new name for the same bondage
disguised in a different shape, as the brand of servitude with which
these modern states had smeared the face of the oppressed would not
easily be erased, not even if the water of the seven seas were
consumed), depriving of independence the so-called barbarous and
backward nations, treating them as slaves who must, as long as they
exist, serve their masters, the standard-bearers of modern civilization.

Moreover, what path have these modern states pursued vis-à-vis the
fourth form of slavery—to divest of freedom prisoners of war? This
question may be answered by looking at the situation that followed the
Second World War. The Allied Forces, after subduing their enemies and
forcing them into an unconditional surrender, poured into the enemies’
countries, appropriating whatever they deemed useful of the enemies’
heavy industry.

They captured of the enemy all those whom they thought useful and killed
at will those they thought dangerous, enforcing their domination on the
defeated nations in every respect they perceived necessary.

Today, 20 years since the end of the war, there is no indication that
the subdued nations would enjoy total freedom in the near future. The
problem of East Germany still persists, and German scientists are still
being held in the Soviet Union against their will.

The Allied Forces did not limit their retributive measures to the adult
and the able-bodied; they subjected the enemies’ children, including
those born after the war, to the same bondage their parents were made to
suffer. The fact that the adults fought the war did not relieve the
children’s plight.

Their purported logic in such treatment was defending their very
existence and safeguarding their future. The enemy cannot be forgiven
right when it lays down its arms and yields to unconditional surrender,
and its children cannot be exonerated, for subsequent generations are
inextricably tied to their predecessors unless extraordinary
circumstances sever such ties. This logic has been with human societies
since time immemorial. It is the logic that still persists and will
definitely endure, for it is unreasonable to pardon, out of pity, an
enemy intent on one’s destruction.

In this light, Islam has also endorsed this natural human treatment
vis-à-vis prisoner of war, resolving with courtesy, honesty, and
kindness what secular governments achieve ruthlessly and unscrupulously
through political stratagems. Thus, Islam is correct in sanctioning the
captivity of hostile infidels, in its refusal to absolve them on the
basis of their alleged conversion to Islam, and in its subjecting the
children to the status of their parents, while at the same time
providing for their comfort and facilitating their freedom with all
possible means.

Humankind’s Origination from Adam and Eve
-----------------------------------------

### Question

Among the most troubling questions for educated believers is that of
human creation. The Noble Qur’an expressly names Adam as the progenitor
of the human race, emphasizing his creation from clay, whereas
anthropologists, after years of research, have offered a variety of
explanations regarding this question, none of which are compatible with
the Qur’anic theory. The scientists’ views are based on many years of
research on human and animal species. We hope you may enlighten us
regarding this question.

### Answer

Adam and his wife being the progenitors of the existing human race is an
issue stated in the Qur’an in unequivocal terms and as such cannot be
construed in any figurative way unless there be definitive proof to the
contrary.[^12] The scientific views provided in regard to the question
of the origin of the human race (such as human evolution from fish or
monkeys) are merely theories that are meant for scientific purposes.

The most such theories can establish is that the existing human being is
more perfect than his hypothetical origin, but this is alien to the
question of the one’s evolution from the other, which is what the
evolutionary theorists claim.[^13] But let me also add that the
scientific theory that the human species has been around for millions of
years is in no way at odds with the principal tenets of Islam.

Moreover, the fact that certain fossils belonging to millions of years
back resemble the skeleton of the existing human being is no proof that
they both belong to the same race. It is possible that Earth has passed
through many cycles, each cycle having a distinct human race that became
extinct at the end of that specific duration, being replaced after some
time with another race of humanity. This hypothesis is corroborated by
some *hadith*s that indicate that the existing human race constitutes
the eighth human cycle on Earth.

The Difference between the Science of Psychology and Spiritual Self-Knowledge
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Difference between the Science of Psychology [*****‘Ilm
Al-Nafs*****] and Spiritual Self-Knowledge [*****Ma‘Rifah
Al-Nafs*****]**

### Question

Please explain the difference between psychology [*‘ilm al-nafs*] and
spiritual self-knowledge [*ma‘rifat al-nafs*].

### Answer

Psychology is commonly used in reference to the specific science that
deals with the mind, its properties, and its related issues, whereas
self-knowledge refers to actually comprehending the reality of the soul
through immediate spiritual vision. Psychology is rooted in *mental
perception*, self-knowledge in *spiritual witnessing*.

### The Definition of Self-Knowledge

#### Question

Is self-knowledge the spiritual witnessing of the soul divested of
matter and form or does it denote something else? In any case, please
clarify the meaning of “self-knowledge,” which Qur’anic verses and
*hadith*s so often exhort the believers to achieve.

#### Answer

Self-knowledge refers to the spiritual witnessing of the soul divested
of matter, not of matter and form, for the spirit *is* the form. But
ultimately, the purpose of self-knowledge, as mentioned in many
*hadith*s, is to attain knowledge of the Lord.

### The Relation between Self-Knowledge and Knowledge of God

#### Question

Sayyid ‘Abd Allah Shubbar, in his “*Masabih al-Anwar*”, enumerates
twelve different interpretations of the well-known *hadith*, “Whosoever
acquires self-knowledge will indeed know his Lord.”[^14] Can you please
shed light on this topic by explaining the relation between
self-knowledge and knowledge of God?

#### Answer

Of the twelve interpretations you alluded to, none, if I remember
correctly, approach the true meaning of the *hadith*. Only the one that
employs the concept of *existential indigence* may be said to shed light
on the *exoteric* meaning of the *hadith*. From the point of view of
existential indigence, since the soul is an existent whose existential
cause is the Exalted Truth, before Him it can have no claim to any
degree of independence, for whatever it possesses belongs to Him.
Therefore, one cannot look into one’s soul, which so strongly reflects
the image of God and not see Him at the same time.

### The True Meaning of Knowing and Meeting God

#### Question

There are numerous *hadith*s in “*Usul al-Kafi*” and “*Basa’ir
al-Darajat*” regarding the creation of the Pure Imams and their luminous
station. Some of these state that they were the first creatures God
created. Moreover, from a number of other *hadith*s, including
“*Al-Ziyarah al-Jami‘ah*”, one may infer that the Imams are the “Names
of God” [*asma’ Allah*], the “Face of God” [*wajh Allah*], he “Hand of
God” [*yad Allah*], and the “Beside God” [*janb Allah*].

Considering such *hadith*s (especially in light of the Master of the
Faithful’s assertion, “To gain luminous knowledge of me is to gain
knowledge of God”), can it be concluded that the true meaning of knowing
God and meeting Him (topics that recur in the Qur’an and the *hadith*s)
is actually acquiring knowledge of the Infallibles? Please expound how
these *hadith*s may be reconciled with those that explicitly point to
direct knowledge of God?

#### Answer

The Luminous Station of the Imams is their station of perfection, which
is the highest possible state of human perfection. Their being the
“Names of God”, the “Face of God”, the “Hand of God”, and the “Beside
God” is one of the profound mysteries of Divine Unity whose thorough
exposition is beyond the scope of this letter.

What can be said in summary (and only by recourse to philosophical
terminology) is that the Imams are the perfect manifestations of the
Divine Names and Attributes. They are invested with Universal Authority
[*wilayah al-kulliyyah*] and are the conduits of Divine effusion
[*fayd*]. As such, to know them would be to know God, inviolable is His
Name.

### Self-Knowledge: The Key to Knowledge of God

#### Question

In his “*Risalah Liqa’iyyah*” (A Treatise on Meeting God), Mirza Jawad
Aqa Maliki Tabrizi elucidates that contemplation on self-knowledge is
the key to gaining knowledge of the Lord. Taking into account the fact
that the soul is an immaterial being, the question arises, can mental
contemplation fathom immaterial beings? If possible, please explain in
clearer terms what the honorable author of the alluded book intends.

#### Answer

Thought can penetrate the realm of immateriality just as it encompasses
the realm of materiality. You may refer to books of philosophy, the
chapter on immaterial existents, to obtain a fuller understanding of
questions related to the immaterial realm. However, the meaning of
*thought* in this context (i.e., spiritual perfection through
introspection and self-knowledge) differs from the common acceptation.
What is intended here is to retire to a quiet and secluded spot, close
one’s eyes, and focus on one’s form as though looking into a mirror,
dispelling any other thought that may spoil the mind, solely focusing on
one’s form.

### Clarifying Two Points

#### Question

There are two points in “*Risalah Liqa’iyyah*” that I find troubling.
The first is on the subject of contemplation to achieve self-knowledge,
where the honorable author writes, “The contemplator at times engages in
examining his self and at other times the world until it finally dawns
upon him that the world he knows is nothing but himself and that the
world is not an external one; rather, the worlds he is acquainted with
are all united with himself.”[^15] What is the meaning of this passage?
The second question relates to the passage that follows the
abovementioned: “He [i.e., the contemplator] must then dispel any other
thought from his heart and meditate on nothingness.” What do dispelling
all thoughts and reflecting on nothingness actually mean?

#### Answer

The first passage you quoted points to the fact, which is substantiated
by rational proof and which one must constantly remind oneself of, that
what one comprehends of oneself and the world around him, he comprehends
within himself. He does not grasp the external world as such. And to
dispel all imaginary thoughts is to dismiss them in the attempt to
exclusively focus by the eye of one’s heart on one’s form, and to
contemplate nothingness is to remember the unreality, and, in essence,
the nothingness of oneself.

### Attaining to the Station of Self-Knowledge

#### Question

Is it possible for non-Shi‘ahs and, more generally, non-Muslims to
attain to the spiritual station of self-knowledge through acts of
worship and spiritual practices ordained by their respective religions?
If possible, then obviously it would follow that they are also capable
of acquiring true knowledge of God, thereby reaching the final end of
the sacred religion of Islam, namely *tawhid*. This in turn would mean
that one may attain to the final goal of spiritual perfection without
having to traverse the path of Islam. Is this a valid assumption?

#### Answer

Although some scholars hold it possible, it goes against the literal
reading of the Qur’an and the Sunnah[^16], unless one assumes the
spiritual seeker in question as “intellectually destitute” in regard to
the preliminary stages of the spiritual journey.[^17]

### The Meaning of “Remembering God”

#### Question

What is intended by “remembering God,” which the Qur’an so frequently
exhorts the believers to maintain? Is it keeping the friends [*awliya’*]
of God and His blessings in mind? Please clarify this question.

#### Answer

The meaning of remembrance [*dhikr*] is clear, and to remember God is,
at its lowest stage, to have Him in mind in what we decide to do and
decide not to do, thus conforming our behavior to His will. In its
higher meaning, it is to view oneself at all times before God and,
higher still, to see God before oneself, of course in a manner
appropriate to His Sacred Essence.

### “One Cannot Bestow on others what one Lacks.”

#### Question

If the philosophic principle that an object lacking a quality cannot
bestow on others what it lacks be universally and invariably true, then
how does God bestow materiality on objects while He lacks it?

#### Answer

The principle that one cannot bestow on others what one lacks is a
philosophic one, which allows of no exception. According to this
principle, every cause must encompass all the existential qualities of
its effect. However, as is elaborated in books of philosophy in the
chapter on *ja‘l* (causation), it is solely its existence that the
effect receives from its cause, not its essence.

Thus the qualities that the cause bestows on the effect are existential
ones. The effect’s essence, however, the cause does not possess nor is
it anything related to the cause’s existentiation. In this light, what
God—inviolable is His Name—bestows on material existents is their
positive existential qualities. Materiality is an aspect of their
essence, and God is neither limited by any particular essence nor does
He forge essence.[^18]

The World in Flux
-----------------

### Question

Is the world, from the Islamic perspective, in a state of flux?

### Answer

Change and evolution in the elements of this world is obvious and
indubitable. The Qur’an thus expresses this truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَلَقْنَا السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضَ وَمَا بَيْنَهُمَا إِلَّا
بِالْحَقِّ وَأَجَلٍ مُسَمًّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We did not create the heavens and the earth and whatever is between
them except with the truth and for a specified term…”***[^19]

There are numerous verses to the same effect, underscoring the truth
that every phenomenon in this world possesses a distinct set of
qualities and pursues a particular end, which is its perfection, and
that it has a fixed point of termination, the actualization of which
triggers its dissolution and disintegration into its component elements.

Immutable Laws
--------------

### Question

Does change and evolution in this world follow certain immutable
principles? Or are the principles themselves also subject to change?

### Answer

From the Qur’anic point of view, the order that rules the cosmos and the
laws that the elements of creation follow spring from the immutable and
universal Divine Norm:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهَلْ يَنْظُرُونَ إِلَّا سُنَّتَ الْأَوَّلِينَ ۚ فَلَنْ تَجِدَ
لِسُنَّتِ اللَّهِ تَبْدِيلًا ۖ وَلَنْ تَجِدَ لِسُنَّتِ اللَّهِ
تَحْوِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…You will never find any change in God’s Norm, and you will never
find any revision in God’s Norm.”***[^20]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ رَبِّي عَلَىٰ صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed my Lord is on a straight path.”***[^21]

The Cosmic Journey toward Perfection
------------------------------------

### Question

Has the cosmos always proceeded on a path toward perfection? According
to the science of physics, the first atom, a hydrogen atom, was born
around 10 billion years ago. Before that point, the world was a
maelstrom of gas-like material. The elements of the cosmos grew
progressively more complex and dense until galaxies were formed, one of
which included the solar system, which Earth inhabited. Earth has itself
undergone four stages: solidification, emergence of life, evolution of
life-forms, and the advent of the human being.

### Answer

The verses cited in answer to the previous question also hold the answer
to this question. The world has had and will have, as long as it exists,
a special trajectory and a certain order, directing it on its path of
perfection toward its determined end.

However, the assumed figure of cosmic life cannot be accurate, for the
phenomenon of time is a continuous quantity that is a concomitant of
motion. Thus, every motion has its own distinct time. The conventional
time we, the occupants of Earth, are familiar with, is measured by the
length of day and night, for it is a unit noticeable by all people, and
as such we measure according to this unit our particular events.

Priority and posteriority are categories relevant, only, when the parts
of one extension of time are measured in relation to each other and as
such are not applicable to events beyond that particular extension of
time. Therefore, to measure the life of the world in relation to the
cyclic motion of Earth is inaccurate.

Stages of Cosmic Perfection and the New Laws They Require
---------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Does each new stage of cosmic evolution institute new laws that did not
exist previously (such as laws pertaining to chemical substances that
came into existence after the appearance of compound matter or laws
pertaining to life-forms that came into existence after the appearance
of life)?

### Answer

Of course, with every new development new laws emerge that previously
had no application. This, however, does not violate the governing Divine
Norm, as God Himself asserts in His Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا نَنْسَخْ مِنْ آيَةٍ أَوْ نُنْسِهَا نَأْتِ بِخَيْرٍ مِنْهَا أَوْ
مِثْلِهَا ۗ أَلَمْ تَعْلَمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For any sign that We abrogate or remove from memories, We bring
another which is better than it, or similar to it…”***[^22]

And regarding the expansion of the world He says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّمَاءَ بَنَيْنَاهَا بِأَيْدٍ وَإِنَّا لَمُوسِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have built the sky with might, and indeed it is We who are its
expanders.”***[^23]

The Agent of Perfection in the World
------------------------------------

### Question

Is conflict the agent responsible for development in the world,
encompassing the tiny atom and the complex human life alike?

### Answer

What can be deduced from Qur’anic verses that describe the creation of
things is that the agent of development, which permeates all things from
the tiny atom to the complex human being, is the natural and inherent
progressive motion of each creature. Regarding human creation, for
instance, the Qur’an explains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ ۖ وَبَدَأَ خَلْقَ الْإِنْسَانِ
مِنْ طِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ جَعَلَ نَسْلَهُ مِنْ سُلَالَةٍ مِنْ مَاءٍ مَهِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ سَوَّاهُ وَنَفَخَ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِهِ ۖ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ
وَالْأَبْصَارَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَا تَشْكُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[God…] perfected everything that He created, and commenced man’s
creation from clay. Then He made his progeny from an extract of a base
fluid. Then He proportioned him and breathed into him of His Spirit, and
made for you the hearing, the sight, and the hearts…”***[^24]

There are numerous verses in the Qur’an that touch on the topic of
development in relation to human beings and other creatures. And in a
number of verses the ultimate end of this trajectory is identified as
meeting God, the Exalted:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الْإِنْسَانُ إِنَّكَ كَادِحٌ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ كَدْحًا
فَمُلَاقِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O man! You are laboring toward you Lord laboriously, and you will
encounter Him.”***[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ وَإِلَى اللَّهِ
الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“To God belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and toward
God is the destination.”***[^26]

The Qur’an further asserts that the origin of existence is God, and it
is to Him that all creatures return in perfection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ يَبْدَأُ الْخَلْقَ ثُمَّ يُعِيدُهُ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God originates the creation, then He will bring it back, then you
will be brought back to Him.”***[^27]

Human Societies and the Rhythm of Perfection
--------------------------------------------

### Question

What are the main factors responsible for the progress of human
societies?

### Answer

From the Islamic viewpoint, the human being is an immortal creature, not
extinguished by death. His eternal felicity, which is his existential
perfection, rests on faith and righteous conduct. These two constitute
his true growth and spiritual advancement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَتَوَاصَوْا
بِالْحَقِّ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالصَّبْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed man is at a loss, except those who have faith and do
righteous deeds…”***[^28]

In other words, it is the acknowledgment of the true beliefs (which
elevates one nearer to God) and the performance of righteous deeds
(which fortifies one’s beliefs) that are the main factors of human
progress:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَيْهِ يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيِّبُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ
يَرْفَعُهُ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…To Him ascends the good word, and righteous conduct elevates
it…”***[^29]

Human Progress in Science and Other Fields
------------------------------------------

### Question

Is human progress limited to scientific advancement or does it include
other fields as well?

### Answer

From the Islamic viewpoint, the perfection of the perfect human being is
in his very existence. It affects every related field and all his
existential properties, and it is accompanied by knowledge. Qur’anic
verses articulate the highest state of human perfection at length; one
such verse is the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ مَا يَشَاءُونَ فِيهَا وَلَدَيْنَا مَزِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There they will have whatever they wish, and with Us there is yet
more.”***[^30]

The verses we have cited in these discussions should suffice to prove
the point (although my ill health prevented me from expanding on the
meaning of the cited verses). For a better understanding of the
connection of the cited verses you may refer to “*Al-Tafsir al-Mizan*”.

The Arguments for the Existence of Immaterial Beings
----------------------------------------------------

### Question

What rational proof, other than *imkan-i ashraf* (the doctrine of the
possibility of the more noble[^31]), is there for the existence of
immaterial beings?

### Answer

One may consult Avicenna’s books, for he did not espouse this doctrine.
Moreover, there are other possible ways for proving the existence of
immaterial beings (here, immaterial being denotes an existent whose
action as well as essence is immaterial).

For instance, one may argue that the first existent issued from the
Infinite Truth must be immaterial as it is fully actualized in its
perfection, for to have any potential perfection—thus being material and
comprising matter and form—would mean that its parts would be ontically
prior to the whole, and as such its matter and form would be issued
prior to the whole, but this is at odds with the initial assumption that
the existent be the first issued from the Infinite Truth.[^32]

Another way would be to employ the immateriality of the mind’s cognitive
perceptions, which has been philosophically demonstrated, to prove the
immateriality of the soul and in turn the soul’s efficient cause.

A Rational Proof for the Termination of Prophethood
---------------------------------------------------

### Question

Is there any rational proof for the termination of prophethood [khatm
al-nubuwwah]?

### Answer

In logic, in the chapter on rational demonstration [*burhan*], it is
demonstrated that rational reasoning cannot render particular
conclusions. Thus, particular prophethood[^33] cannot be deduced by any
rational reasoning, whereas general prophethood[^34] may be.
Nonetheless, one may reason that since the purpose of prophethood is to
perfect and guide human beings, it takes on different forms (hence, the
plurality of Divine Dispensations) corresponding to the progressive
development of humankind, each successive form presenting a more perfect
degree that supercedes its predecessor.

However, as the human being is obviously not infinite in his capacity to
achieve perfection, no matter how numerous the perfections he is capable
of attaining, there is a point where he will cease to go further.
Naturally, the particular Divine Dispensation that encompasses this
climax of human perfection would be the termination of prophethood and
as such would endure as the binding law of God until the Day of
Judgment.

The Noble Qur’an, the heavenly book of the sacred religion of Islam,
explicitly testifies that Prophet Muhammad is the Seal of the Prophets
and that the Qur’an is the final indissoluble book of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِنْ رِجَالِكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… [Muhammad] is the apostle of God and the Seal of the
Prophets…”***[^35]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّهُ لَكِتَابٌ عَزِيزٌ لَا يَأْتِيهِ الْبَاطِلُ مِنْ بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَلَا مِنْ خَلْفِهِ ۖ تَنْزِيلٌ مِنْ حَكِيمٍ حَمِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Indeed [the Qur’an] is an august book: falsehood cannot approach
it, neither from before it not from behind it, a gradually sent down
revelation from One All-wise, All-laudable.”***[^36]

Hence, Prophet Muhammad being the Seal of the Prophets and the Qur’an
the Seal of all Divine Dispensations is thus demonstrated.

An additional point that the above explanation clarifies is that the
termination of prophethood in no way implies that the human being has
reached a point of intellectual sufficiency where he is no longer in
need of Divine Dispensation, for in such a case the manifold
instructions of Islam would be in vain.

Distinguishing ‘idalah from ‘ismah
----------------------------------

**Distinguishing** ***‘idalah*** **(Uprightness)**[^37] **from**
***‘ismah*** **(Infallibility)**

### Question

What is the distinction between “*idalah”* and “*ismah”* in prophets
who, unlike angels, are susceptible to anger and lust?

### Answer

*‘Idalah* is the state of mind that empowers one to refrain from
committing the major sins and repeating the minor sins but is not strong
enough to prevent the isolated commission of minor sins. *‘Ismah*, on
the other hand, is the state of mind that renders one immune from
committing any sin whatsoever, whether major or minor.

This state of mind, according to Qur’anic verses, is of the nature of
knowledge—the knowledge of the awfulness of sin—the possession of which
makes the commission of sin impossible. It may be likened to one’s
knowledge that a liquid is lethally poisonous, which would definitely
prevent one from drinking that liquid. Thus, with *‘idalah* one may sin
but not with *‘ismah*.

The Impossibility of Violating Ontic Reality [Takwin]
-----------------------------------------------------

### Question

The grounds for the doctrine of the absolute infallibility of prophets,
one of the unquestionable tenets of the Shi‘ah faith, cannot include
such mundane matters as a simple chitchat with one’s wife, for instance.
But assuming that the prophets are inerrant even in such matters, the
state of *‘idalah* would be sufficient to explain it.

Thus, even if there is sufficient evidence for this doctrine, it would
only serve to prove infallibility solely in the scope of the duties that
pertain to the Divine ministry—i.e., being immune from error and
negligence in passing the Divine Dispensation to the people—but not in
regard to other sins. Furthermore, what is the reason for this
insistence on proving this doctrine? Would the prophethood of an
*‘adil*[^38]—but not infallible—prophet entail any adverse consequences?

### Answer

Based on the rational argument that proves the necessity of general
prophethood, the guidance of humankind is part of the order of creation,
of reality. As there is no possibility of error and contravention in
reality, the contents of Revelation, emanating from the wellspring of
Divine Knowledge, reach humankind intact. Hence, the prophet, as the
conduit of Revelation, is immune from error and perfidy in receiving the
Revelation, preserving it, and conveying it to the people. This requires
that he be infallible in his speech and conduct, as conduct is also a
means of guidance.

It can, therefore, be concluded that the prophet is untouched by sin,
whether minor or major, in speech and conduct, prior to and following
his ministry, for each of these states affects the conveyance of the
articles of faith, and as sin is meaningless beyond these states, the
prophet’s infallibility is proven. This topic, however, has other
dimensions for which you may refer to the third volume of “*Al-Tafsir
al-Mizan*”, “*Shi‘ah dar Islam*” [The Shi‘ah in Islam][^39], or
“*Risalah Wahy wa Shu‘ur-i Marmuz*” [A Treatise on Revelation, the
Mysterious Intelligence].

The Meaning of the Prayer “[O God] Elevate His Status” Uttered In Tashahhud
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Islamic philosophers state that the perfect human being is he who has
actualized “all that is generally possible for him.” And all Muslims
unanimously agree that Muhammad was either the only perfect man or in
the ranks of the perfect men. Considering this truth, what could be the
purpose of uttering the prayer “[O God] elevate [Muhammad’s] status” in
*tashahhud*?

### Answer

The above prayer and similarly *salawat*[^40] are prayers to God whose
acceptance by Him is certain. They are actually expressions of one’s
satisfaction at God’s special favor to His messenger and beloved,
Muhammad.

Additional Answers to Previous Questions
----------------------------------------

May God’s peace and blessings be upon you. Your second letter was
received. I must express my most sincere gratitude for your blessings.
In regard to the answers to your questions, you say that they are
incomplete. Apparently, you did not consider the answers duly.

You write, “We desire the proof for immaterial beings for the guidance
of corrupted youths who deny the existence of God and any supernatural
being, whereas the provided answer presupposes God’s existence.”

The Question in hand is a philosophical one that has been demonstrated
in many ways. The answer that I gave in the letter was based on the
immateriality of our mental perceptions, which lack the general
properties of matter—i.e., changeability and subjection to time and
space. The second premise it to demonstrate the immateriality of the
human soul by pointing out that one descries one’s self as an unchanging
entity and that the immaterial mental perceptions come into existence
through the soul.

Once this is proven, we may then continue to prove the immateriality of
the efficient cause of the human soul by arguing that a cause must of
necessity be existentially superior to its effect; material existence is
existentially inferior to immaterial existence. This argument is a sound
rational demonstration, in no way contingent on the presupposition of
God’s existence. However, as you intend the answer for persons without
advance education in philosophy, it must be rendered in an easier
fashion, more acceptable to the general public.

You write, “The rational argument you have offered in the letter for the
termination of prophethood is sufficiently cogent, but the cited
Qur’anic verses are incapable of proving the point, for if there were to
be a final religion after Islam, it would be a truth that would approach
the present religion, whereas the verse in question (41:41-42) indicates
that ‘falsehood cannot approach it’ [which leaves open the possibility
of truth—that is, another Divine religion—approaching it, hence Islam
not being the final Divine Dispensation].” The answer is, “falsehood” in
the verse in question refers to any false statement, incompatible with
the final religion of Islam, that may find its way into the Qur’an, and
as such the verse does not imply, in any way, the possibility of another
true Divine religion.

You write, “*Tashri‘*[^41] requires nothing more than conveying God’s
message without contravention or error, which may be accomplished by
simply an *‘adil* messenger. Thus infallibility is not a necessary
quality for a prophet. What is enweaved in the reality of the cosmic
reality [*takwin*] is the Divine Dispensation and its conveyance, not
the details of life. As such trivialities of life as the Prophet’s
chitchat with his wife do not fall within the scope of Divine
Dispensation; the Prophets’ infallibility in relation to such
trivialities cannot be demonstrated by recourse to the cosmic reality
[*takwin*].”

What is meant by “reality” is the realm of origination [*ijad*] and
ontic existence. To acknowledge that the human being’s existence is
willed by God, one must also accept that his existential
properties—including his cosmic purpose and the way he must traverse to
attain to that purpose (which must be indicated by God Himself, hence
Revelation and prophethood)—are all incorporated by the cosmic reality
[*takwin*].

Thus, it would be unreasonable to claim that Divine Dispensation alone
is part of the cosmic reality, excluding the details of human existence
and the practical need for preaching the Divine Dispensation[^42] from
the matrix of cosmic reality and relegating them to the position of
conventional and contractual issues[^43].

To thus dissociate Divine Dispensation from the practical need to convey
it is analogous to arguing that the human need for food is a reality
while the particular instances of food consumption (e.g., “I need to eat
rice” “Let me have some soup”) are illusions of the human mind. It is
similarly unreasonable to contend that, although a prophet’s speech and
conduct are factors that contribute to guidance, yet the quality of
*‘idalah* is sufficient to render a prophet an exemplar for the guidance
of humankind. For, *‘idalah* leaves open the possibility of committing
minor or even major sins.

You further state, “It would not be injurious to the guidance of
humankind if a prophet, in the secrecy of his home, backbites about
others in chatting with his wife.” This is most astonishing. Is not the
prophet’s wife one of the people whom should be guided? Or, would you
differentiate between a major sin when committed secretly in the
presence of one or two of one’s confidants and when committed publicly?

In a word, to consider the quality of *‘idalah*, in lieu of
infallibility, sufficient for a prophet would be to accept the
possibility that a prophet may commit minor or even major sins in his
speech or conduct, which is to say that he is vulnerable to violating
the sanctity of his ministry in every matter of faith. This is at odds
with the truth that the position of prophethood springs from the very
reality of the cosmic order.

You write, “The prayer ‘[O God] elevate [the Prophet’s] status’ uttered
during *tashahhud* unequivocally indicates the Prophet’s deficiency,
which the prayer is intended to ameliorate. [Thus, the explanation
furnished above to the effect that such prayers are only an expression
of our heartfelt happiness for the Prophet’s spiritual perfection is
unfounded.]” But I again reiterate that God has bestowed on the Noble
Prophet the highest perfection possible for a contingent being [i.e.,
any being other than God]. Nevertheless, this bestowal in no way limits
His omnipotence, for He is capable of taking away, at will, what He has
bestowed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ فَمَنْ يَمْلِكُ مِنَ اللَّهِ شَيْئًا إِنْ أَرَادَ أَنْ يُهْلِكَ
الْمَسِيحَ ابْنَ مَرْيَمَ وَأُمَّهُ وَمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Say, ‘Who can avail anything against God should He wish to destroy
the Messiah, son of Mary, and his mother, and everyone upon the
earth…’”***[^44]

Hence, one may say that the prayer in question is to ask for the
continuation of this Divine effusion. Prayer, even when in relation to a
determined truth, is appropriate. Thus, it is true that the prayer in
question is unequivocal regarding the Prophet’s imperfection;
nevertheless, the imperfection at issue is the existential indigence
inherent in all contingent beings.

The Purpose in Translating Greek Philosophy
-------------------------------------------

### Question

Greek philosophy was introduced to the Muslim World several centuries
after the advent of Islam through Arabic translations. What was the
purpose of this translation campaign? Was it merely to acquaint Muslims
with new sciences or was it a pretext for preventing Muslims from
benefiting from the knowledge of the *Ahl al-Bayt*, the true guardians
of Revelation?

### Answer

Metaphysics was one of the many fields of knowledge—including such other
sciences as logic, natural sciences, mathematics, medicine—that were
introduced to Muslims from the Hellenic World through Arabic
translations of Greek and Syrian works. Thus, whereas in the 1st century
A.H. the caliphs of the time strictly forbade the writing of anything
other than the verses of the Qur’an (including Prophetic *hadith*s and
Qur’anic exposition) in the following centuries, as recorded in books of
history, close to two hundred books, covering every science of the time
were translated into Arabic.

This was done purportedly with the intention of strengthening the Muslim
nation and actualizing the Islamic ideals, in line with the Qur’an’s
emphasis on intellectuality and its encouragement to study all aspects
of God’s creation in the heaven and on the earth, regarding other
animals as well as the human being.

This is not, however, to deny that the contemporary rulers would seize
every opportunity to damage the *Ahl al-Bayt*’s status within the Muslim
nation so as to deprive Muslims of the Divine knowledge of the *Ahl
al-Bayt*. In this light, it may be correct to say that the translation
of Greek philosophy into Arabic was undertaken for the purpose of
isolating the *Ahl al-Bayt*. But does this unjustifiable intention of
the rulers of the time and their exploitation of the translation of
Greek works of philosophy make engagement in metaphysical discussions a
vanity? Is this historical reality a legitimate reason for us to refrain
from dwelling on such discussions?

Philosophy includes a variety of discussions that lead to proving the
existence of the Omnipotent Designer, the Necessary Existent, His Unity,
as well as the other Divine Attributes. It also deals with other such
related topics as the doctrines of prophethood and Resurrection. These
are questions that constitute what we term the “pillars of faith,” which
must be rationally demonstrated in order to secure the credibility of
the contents of the Qur’an and the Sunnah.

Otherwise, to seek to prove the credibility of the Qur’an and the Sunnah
based on their own claims would be erroneous as it would constitute a
circular argument. It is for this reason that where the Qur’an and the
Sunnah deal with the principles of faith—such as God’s existence and His
Unity and Lordship—they furnish rational arguments.

Islamic Doctrine not in Need of Greek Philosophy
------------------------------------------------

### Question

Does Islam (in the broad sense, which encompasses the “*sunnah”* of the
Infallibles) contain what Greek philosophy brought to the Muslim World?
If it does, then what need is there for such a philosophy. If, however,
it does not, then it is an imperfect religion that is in need of Greek
philosophy.

### Answer

Islamic sources—the contents of the Qur’an and the Sunnah—encompass all
the elements necessary for the guidance of humankind, both in doctrine
and in practice. Some of these elements find expression in detail and
some are presented in brief. This is due to the fact that Islam
addresses all people from all walks of life—the scholar and the
layperson, the perceptive and the not-so-perceptive, the city-dweller
and the country-dweller, man and woman. To embrace all people, Islam
employs a language that is comprehensible to all so that all people
could benefit from it in accordance with their varying intellectual
capacities.

To benefit at a higher level from doctrines so presented, so as to
arrive at truths fathomable only to the more elevated minds, one would
obviously have to arrange them in a certain order and to coin terms
critical to this intellectual endeavor. In this light, although the
Qur’an and the Sunnah do provide metaphysical principles, there is still
the need for establishing an independent science that would treat of
these doctrines at a higher level.

This holds true not only in respect to philosophy but also to every
other Islamic science. A good example in this regard is the science of
theology, whose main elements are to be found in the Qur’an and the
Sunnah; nevertheless, it has been arranged as a distinct field of
knowledge.

Moreover, you claim that if the Qur’an and the Sunnah lack some
metaphysical topic, it would mean that Islam is deficient and in need of
Greek philosophy. This, however, is an incorrect assumption. The
incorrectness of this assumption may be demonstrated by considering the
case of logic. Not even a single doctrine can be deduced without the
application of the rules of logic, none of which are to be found in the
Qur’an and the Sunnah.

Also, in regard to the practical rules of faith, not one question may be
dwelt on without recourse to the science of *usul*, although there is no
trace of this vast science in the Qur’an and the Sunnah. The solution to
this problem lies in the fact that the relation of logic to Islamic
doctrine and that of the science of *usul* to questions of jurisprudence
is one of method. To apply a particular method to a body of data is
fundamentally different from adding something to it.

The Consummation of Islamic Philosophy in Mulla Sadra’s Metaphysics
-------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Owing to the persistence of Shi‘ah scholars in furthering the rational
sciences, Islamic philosophy reached its climax in the age of Mulla
Sadra. A question that comes to mind in this regard is, do the concepts
that Mulla Sadra developed in “*Asfar*” and in other books have their
roots in the Qur’an and the Sunnah or are they concepts external to but
concordant with Islam?

### Answer

In saying that Islamic philosophy reached a climax in the thought of
Mulla Sadra, we mean that in comparison to prior developments of
philosophy, it stands out at a much higher level and that it is more
conducive to fathoming the True Knowledge. It should not, however, be
inferred that Sadrian works on metaphysics—“*Asfar*”, “*Manzumah*”, and
the like—reflect the truth flawlessly and without any error. Like any
other book, they may contain errors in their contents. One should at all
times seek sound rational arguments without any concern for famous
names.

The Relation between the Thought of Muslim Philosophers and Sages and Islamic Doctrine
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**The Relation between the Thought of Muslim Philosophers and Sages and
Islamic Doctrine**[^45]

### Question

If philosophy reflects the teachings of the Qur’an and the
*hadith*s—which no doubt surpass the former in soundness and
comprehensiveness—then why seek the teachings of the philosophers and
sages?

### Answer

When we say that there is no difference between philosophy and the
essence of the Qur’an and the Sunnah, we mean that philosophy rephrases
the fundamental doctrines of the Truth—which are expressed in the Qur’an
and the Sunnah in a simple and generally understandable fashion—in the
format of discursive reasoning, employing the specialized vernacular of
philosophers. Hence, what distinguishes the two is that one is generally
comprehensible whereas the other is expressed in a specialized language.

Expounding the Hadiths That Denounce Philosophy
-----------------------------------------------

### Question

There are certain *hadith*s recorded in “*Bihar al-Anwar*” and “*Hadiqah
al-Shi‘ah*” that condemn philosophers, especially those of the “End of
Time”. To whom do such *hadith*s refer, and what do they mean?

### Answer

The *hadith*s in question, which number no more than two or three (whose
authenticity is questionable), denounce philosophers and not philosophy
per se, just as there are similar *hadith*s that condemn Muslim jurists
of the “End of Time,” not the science of jurisprudence as such. There
are also *hadith*s that criticize the Muslims and the readers of the
Qur’an[^46] who will come at the “End of Time” without, obviously,
detracting in any way from the value of Islam and the Qur’an.

Moreover, to consider these *hadith*s directed at philosophy per se
would in effect be an attack on the Qur’an and the Sunnah, for, as
mentioned above, philosophy dwells on the same topics, the only
difference being that it presents them in the form of rational reasoning
and without the burden of obligation. Let me also add that it is
unreasonable to dismiss definitive apodictic reasoning in favor of
dubitable reports?

The Relation of Spiritual Purification with Social Involvement
--------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

In studying the history of Islam, one finds that the followers of Imam
‘Ali were of two temperaments from the point of view of social
involvement. There were those who abandoned the turbulence of social
upheavals to remain in seclusion, dedicating their life solely to
reforming and purifying their soul. *Uways* *al*-*Qarani* and *Kumayl*
were such figures. Of these men, some were martyred at the hands of the
tyrants of the time and some lived a spiritual life until God embraced
them at their natural death.

On the other hand, there were those followers of ‘Ali—prominent among
them Malik al-Ashtar—who took up an active role in the public events of
the time. This difference in attitude has also found manifestation in
recent history. Men like Mulla Husayn Hamadani and his pupils pursued
the first lifestyle, whereas such scholars as Muhammad Husayn Kashif
al-Ghita’ engaged in a more social life. The question that this
comparison raises is: should spiritual purification be sought in the
midst of society or in a reclusive and isolated lifestyle? Which of the
two methods is preferable and more effective in advancing the cause of
Islam?

### Answer

What we can say with certainty based on the Qur’an and the Sunnah is
that the objective of worship in Islam is to advance in the stages of
Divine Knowledge and to attain sincerity in worshipping God. This
journey requires that we sever all attachments except our attachment to
Him—inviolable is His Name. This is the path of perfection that Islam
sets forth. It is so valuable that to succeed in attaining to even the
lowest stages of this journey is a praiseworthy achievement.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ تُقَاتِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Be wary of God with the wariness due to Him…”***[^47]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَفِرُّوا إِلَى اللَّهِ ۖ إِنِّي لَكُمْ مِنْهُ نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So flee toward God. Indeed I am a manifest Warner to you from
Him.”***[^48]

However, it must be pointed out that Islam is a social religion that
rejects monasticism and isolation. It exhorts the believers to engage in
spiritual purification, to strengthen their faith, and to enhance their
knowledge of God, all in the midst of the society, while interacting
with other people.

This was the approach that the devout Muslims of the early period of
Islam—who had the privilege of living at the time of the Noble Imams and
of receiving their guidance—embraced. Salman al-Farsi—who according to
the Master of the Faithful possessed a very high degree of faith—is a
good example; he was the governor of Mada’in for several years. Uways
al-Qarani, the exemplar of Islamic piety, was martyred in the Battle of
Siffin, fighting for the Master of the Faithful.

The Question of the Creation of the Universe
--------------------------------------------

### Question

Considering that God’s existence—Magnificent and Exalted is He—is
infinite and that it pervades all space, even prior to the creation of
the finite universe, how then did the universe come about? Was the
universe created within the limits of God’s existence? That would be
impossible. If, however, the universe was created beyond the limits of
His Most Sacred Existence, it would be detached from Him; this would
also be impossible. Another alternative that may be put forth—in Him do
we seek refuge—is that His Existence is one and the same with other
existents? But this entails the blasphemous theory of *monism*. So, the
question is, how did God create the universe without it coming into
conflict with His Sacred Existence?

### Answer

Well, in the first place, the question is flawed. The question begins by
assuming that God’s infinitude is a matter of space. It must be noted;
however, that prior to creation of matter, there was no space. Second,
the questioner incorrectly interprets God’s infinitude to mean that He
is a limitless body, that He is composed of an infinitely large body
that occupies all space, leaving no room for others. God’s Sacred
Existence, however, transcends corporeality, materiality, and material
dimensions.

Thus, space and time are meaningless in relation to His existence; He
does not have an inside or an outside; neither is He within anything nor
is He external to anything. Such relative concepts are properties of
matter, and hence God’s creatures are not contained within Him, are not
external to Him, and are not identical with Him. He is their Creator,
and they His creatures.

Moreover, in describing God’s existence as infinite, we mean that it is
not contingent on any prior condition. And in saying that He is *with*
His creatures, we mean that His knowledge, power, and will encompass the
cosmos, not that He shares the same space with them.

The Superiority of the Station of Imamate to That of Prophethood
----------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

In the story of Prophet Abraham we are taught that God conferred the
status of imamate on him (who was already a prophet) only after
“completing the terms” and succeeding in all the tests He set before
him. How is the status of imamate superior to prophethood? And granted
that it is superior, then why is there consensus among all Muslims that
the Prophet was more elevated in status than ‘*Ali*?

### Answer

When God said to Abraham,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ إِنِّي جَاعِلُكَ لِلنَّاسِ إِمَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…I am making you the Imam of mankind…”***[^49]

he was already a prophet—one of the “*Ulu* *al*-‘*Azm”*[^50]. He had
brought for humankind a new book and a new Divine Law from God. This
means that when God conferred on him the position of imamate, he had
already been entrusted with the duty of guiding and preaching to
humankind. Moreover, in His Book, God in several instances describes an
“*imam”* as one who is responsible for the guidance of humankind.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَاهُمْ أَئِمَّةً يَهْدُونَ بِأَمْرِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…We made them Imams who guide by Our command…”***[^51]

Juxtaposing the above two points, it becomes clear that the guidance
that an *imam* is responsible for is different from that for which a
prophet is responsible. The guidance that is the responsibility of a
prophet is to preach and to exhort people to embrace the true faith.
That is, it is a prophet’s duty to shed light on the true path of
guidance. The duty of an *imam*, on the other hand, is to shepherd
humankind toward the True Destination.

Thus, in addition to explicating the doctrines and practices of faith,
an *imam* is in charge of correcting the conduct of the believers. He
oversees the spiritual growth of the believers and directs their deeds
in the way of God so that their actions would lead to the desirable end.

This interpretation of an *imam*’s status is supported by a number of
Islamic tenets. Shi‘ahs believe that the record of the conduct of all
believers is submitted to the Imam of the Time on a number of occasions;
that the Imam is present at the death of all people; that the Imams hand
out the records of conduct to people on the Day of Judgment; and that
they are the yardsticks according to which the conduct of all others is
measured.

Moreover, according to Shi‘ah belief, the universe would cease to exist
in the absence of an *imam*. All this proves that the Prophet was also
the *imam* of his time. And as the Prophet was entrusted with three
simultaneous ministries—*nubuwwah*[^52], *risalah*[^53], and
*imamah*—his rank was above that of ‘Ali. This is definitively attested
to by the consensus of all Muslims.

God, the Creator of All Creatures
---------------------------------

### Question

Some say that all creatures derive from the wellspring of God’s
existence, and thus the entirety of the cosmos, viewed in this unitive
light, is God. But how could this be true considering the variety of
creatures we observe?

### Answer

The rational arguments that substantiate the existence of the Creator,
describe the universe as His “action” and Him as the agent of this
action. Without doubt, an action is not identical with its agent;
otherwise, it would require that a thing exist prior to its coming into
existence,[^54] which is impossible. Hence, the universe is distinct
from God, and thus to say “the entirety of the cosmos viewed in this
unitive light is God” is incorrect.

Existents: Merely a Figment of the Imagination?
-----------------------------------------------

### Question

Some are of the opinion that what we see—trees, stones, people, etc.—is
only an illusion. Our existence is also just an illusion. Can you please
address this problem?

### Answer

To say that what we see and hear is an illusion is self-defeating, for
then this proposition would itself be an illusion and thus devoid of any
value. Those who make such claims are either insane or maliciously
spreading corrupt thoughts through deceitful sophistry. No one, in his
right mind, would doubt the reality of the world. Even those who claim
this world an illusion do not abide by their claim in practice; they
pursue orderly lives; when hungry and thirsty, the idea that the world
is an illusion does not dissuade them from seeking water and bread.

### Question

Atheists argue that assuming that this world is in fact real, what place
does God hold? Does He reside in between the objects of this world? What
is your reply to such skepticism?

### Answer

As was explained above, such claims are at odds with rational reasoning
and lack any logical ground.

The Substance of God’s Existence
--------------------------------

### Question

Some say, “We have reached the conclusion that *we* [the things of this
world] are the substance of God’s existence, and thus to say, ‘God has
created us ex nihilo’ is meaningless. He is nothing other than existence
[which takes the shape of the existents that populate our world]. There
is no other meaningful interpretation for the concept of God. The
various and changing forms we see around us constitute God.” What is
your response?

### Answer

What you have quoted is an unfounded claim, an irrational contention.
Whatever they may say is good only for them and must not worry others.
Such baseless claims carry no weight.

The Sufis’ Remark Concerning the Qur’anic Statement “He Is the First and He Is the Last”
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Some Sufis are of the opinion that the pronoun in the verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الْأَوَّلُ وَالْآخِرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is the First and the Last.”***[^55]

refers to ‘Ali. A number of *hadith*s recorded by ‘Allamah Majlisi in
the eighth volume of “*Bihar al-Anwar*” supports this reading. This
complicates the problem, for to repudiate the Sufis’ interpretation
would be to doubt the authenticity of the *hadith*s in question. But the
truth is that there are many similar pronouns in the Qur’an whose
antecedent is undoubtedly God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهُوَ يَهْدِينِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…It is He who guides me.”***[^56]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهُوَ يَشْفِينِ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…It is He who cures me.”***[^57]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي فِي السَّمَاءِ إِلَٰهٌ وَفِي الْأَرْضِ إِلَٰهٌ ۚ وَهُوَ
الْحَكِيمُ الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who is God in the sky, and God on the earth; and He is the
All-wise, the All-knowing.”***[^58]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ اللَّهَ هُوَ الْعَلِيُّ الْكَبِيرُ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…He is the All-exalted, the All-great.”***[^59]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَيِّ الَّذِي لَا يَمُوتُ.…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…The Living One who does not die…”***[^60]

There are many such pronouns in the Qur’an whose context indicates that
they refer to God. So how can we determine whether the antecedent in the
verse the Sufis cite is ‘Ali or God?

### Answer

The *hadith*s that ‘Allamah Majlisi narrates assert that ‘Ali is the
first and the last. What this means is clarified by another *hadith*
that says that ‘Ali was the first person to embrace Muhammad’s faith and
the last to depart him (he buried the Prophet’s sacred body). But
leaving these *hadith*s aside, the verse in question (57:3) seems to be
indicating God, Who has always been and will always be.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكَ الْمُنْتَهَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed toward your Lord is the journey.”***[^61]

The Necessary Existent [Wajib], the Originating Cause of All Contingent Existents [Mumkinat]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Let me, with all due respect, ask you a question that occurred to me
after reading the chapter entitled, “A Philosophic Discussion” that
appears in volume 15 of “*Al-Tafsir al-Mizan*”, pp. 149-150. There you
state that in the creation of contingent beings, God is a “partial
cause.”[^62] But how is this conceivable in light of the Qur’an’s
assertion that

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ كَمِثْلِهِ شَيْءٌ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Nothing is like Him…”***[^63]

### Answer

Your question refers to the philosophic discussion presented in volume
15, pp. 149-150, of “*Al-Tafsir al-Mizan*”, where I have offered two
viewpoints regarding God’s agency in creating contingent beings.
According to the first viewpoint, God is a partial cause, whereas the
second viewpoint acknowledges God as the complete cause. These two
viewpoints are not, as might be assumed, in opposition to one another;
only the second one is more accurate and better formulated.

The first viewpoint observes the phenomena of this world in their
outward appearance. When viewing this world prima facie, there is an
evident multiplicity and separation among phenomena. Of the phenomena of
this world, some are existentially prior to others. This reality is the
foundation of the universal principle of causality.

According to this principle every contingent being is in need of a cause
that, if contingent, in turn needs a higher cause. This chain continues
until it reaches the Essentially Necessary Existent, God, who is
Self-sufficient. He is the source from which all contingent beings
issue, whether directly (in the case of the First Emanation) or
indirectly. From this perspective, God is a partial cause—one component
of the efficient cause—vis-à-vis His indirect effects. This is the
superficial viewpoint.

From the second viewpoint, all contingent beings are bound together by
an ontic dependency that is the result of the principle of causality.
Thus, they form an organic whole, and God is the complete cause of this
whole. This line of reasoning is based on the truth that the creation of
the first contingent being—the First Emanation—is equivalent to the
origination of all contingent beings, as elucidated in “*Al-Tafsir
al-Mizan*”.

Without doubt, the second viewpoint is grounded on a firmer foundation.
Nevertheless, it should be pointed out that to consider God a partial
cause does not contradict the Qur’an’s assertion that *“…Nothing is like
Him…”* for to ascribe causality to contingent beings as conduits for
Divine effusion, which He Himself has established, does not imply that
they are analogous in causality to Him. God’s agency is essential and
independent whereas theirs is accidental and dependent.

This also applies to other attributes of perfection[^64]—e.g., powerful,
living, knowing, hearing, seeing—whose attribution to contingent beings
does not constitute polytheism. The attributes of perfection that exist
within the realm of contingent beings are engendered and effused by the
Necessary Existent and so depend on Him. God, however, possesses the
attributes of perfection as the Essentially Independent and
Self-Sufficient Being.

It may be objected that the ascription of causality to God’s creatures
runs against the Qur’anic verse,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ مِنْ خَالِقٍ غَيْرُ اللَّهِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Is there any creator other than God…”***[^65]

This, however, is not correct. What is intended by this verse is that
God is independent in His creation, creating the world without recourse
to any other agent, whereas other “creators” are in need of Him. This
latter understanding is verified by the Qur’an itself where it confirms
that there are other “creators” beside God. Among the verses to this
effect are the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So blessed is God, the best of creators.”***[^66]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ تَخْلُقُ مِنَ الطِّينِ كَهَيْئَةِ الطَّيْرِ بِإِذْنِي
فَتَنْفُخُ فِيهَا فَتَكُونُ طَيْرًا بِإِذْنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And when you [i.e., Jesus Christ] would create from clay the form
of a bird, with My leave, and you would breathe into it and it would
become a bird, with my leave…”***[^67]

This reading is further corroborated by the Qur’an where it alludes to
the universal principle of causality

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَدَأَ خَلْقَ الْإِنْسَانِ مِنْ طِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ جَعَلَ نَسْلَهُ مِنْ سُلَالَةٍ مِنْ مَاءٍ مَهِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And commenced man’s creation from clay. Then He made his progeny
from an extract of base fluid.”***[^68]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ
مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“… [God] created you from a single soul, and created its mate from
it, and, from the two of them, scattered numerous men and
women…”***[^69]

(It should be noted that the absolute negation of causality from
contingent beings and reserving it exclusively for God is a notion held
by Ash‘ari theologians—a notion they cannot substantiate.)

Origination of Matter Preceded by Temporal Non-Existence
--------------------------------------------------------

**Origination of Matter Preceded by Temporal Non-Existence [*****‘Adam
Zamani*****]**[^70]

Question
--------

On what grounds are matter’s essential eternity [qidam dhati] negated?

### Answer

The term *essential eternity* applies to an existent that is free of the
limitations of a delimited essence. It is impossible for such an
existence to experience nonexistence, and consequently it is not
susceptible to change in its essence, properties, or states. Obviously,
matter does not fit this description. So, apparently your question is
actually regarding temporal eternity [*qidam zamani*] not essential
eternity.[^71] So, the question may be rephrased more accurately in this
way: was there a time when matter (composed of atoms) did not exist? The
answer is positive.

As demonstrated in physics, atom can be transformed into energy and vice
versa.

Atom is composed of concentrated particles of energy, and as such atom
is preceded by nonexistence. Based on this scientific fact, there must
be a common material from which both matter and energy derive, whose
sole property is receptivity to form, which gives it actuality. And
since it is implausible that the form-giver (i.e., the agent that
bestows form and actuality on the common material, that is, prime
matter) be the prime matter in question, there must of necessity be an
existent transcending matter, to which matter is indebted for its form
and actualization. Thus, the sensible world of existence is the activity
of an eternal, immutable, and transcendent agent, that is,
God—inviolable is His Name.[^72]

The Existence of Evil
---------------------

### Question

In the world we inhabit, evil is all-pervasive; the human and the brute
alike oppress the weak to the most extreme limits. We have all witnessed
the awful scene of a weaker animal falling prey to the stronger
predacious animal, which ends the life of the innocent prey in a most
brutal fashion. Moreover, there is the question of those oppressed
without an oppressor, such as children who come to this world with a
congenital disability.

### Answer

Before giving an answer, I would like to draw your attention to an
introductory point. The order of creation has been founded on the
principle of cause and effect; the cosmos is governed by existential
principles—not by sentiment—that allow of no exception. For instance,
the property of fire is that it burns whatever it comes in contact with,
be it the dress of a prophet or the attire of a tyrant. Carnivorous
animals perish if deprived of meat, thus they must prey on other
animals. This is what the order of creation has embedded in their
biological construction, and so they are not guilty on account of this
behavior, just as conscientious human beings eat meat without being
oppressed by any sense of guilt.

As has been elucidated elsewhere, injustice in the sense of encroaching
on the rights of others or of discrimination in enforcing established
rules exists solely in the context of human society. As such, natural
disasters do not constitute *injustice*. They may be referred to as
*adversity* [*sharr*]. It should, however, be borne in mind that a
natural disaster is an adversity in relation to the injured party, but
in relation to the cause of the disaster, it is a good, for it is the
natural effect of its cause. The disability of a six-month-old infant is
an adversity, a deprivation (not injustice) caused by certain natural
factors. The hardship that a dog inflicts on a cat is an inevitable
adversity, not an injustice. Thus, the cat inflicts the same on a mouse.

Injustice is meaningful only in the context of human society. The human
being has innumerable needs (owing to his various natural faculties and
his freewill), many of which he cannot satisfy individually. For this
reason, human beings come together to form societies. But for the
preservation of social life, there must be a body of binding regulations
that would secure, if complied with, the interests of the constituent
individuals. (These interests vary, of course, depending on the social
position of each individual.) In the framework of these regulations
certain inalienable rights are defined for every individual.

These rights must be honored; their violation is by law forbidden. It is
the violation of these contractual rights that constitutes *injustice*.
So injustice is to violate another’s rights: the unpleasant effects of
natural elements—effects that have been arranged by the order of
creation—are adversities not injustice. But in addition to natural
elements, there are also instances in the context of human society that
violation of an individual’s rights is not injustice.

Curtailing an individual’s rights to uphold an important truth is an
adversity for the affected individual but not injustice. Similarly, the
punishment inflicted on a criminal, though unpleasant for him, is just—

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ فَاعْتَدُوا عَلَيْهِ بِمِثْلِ مَا
اعْتَدَىٰ عَلَيْكُمْ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…So should anyone aggress against you, assail him in the manner he
assailed you…”***[^73]

In your letter,[^74] you [i.e., the questioner] write, “A certain
gentleman told me that a smaller animal devoured by a larger animal
actually attains to a higher degree of perfection, for the flesh of the
weaker animal has become part of the stronger animal. But what sort of
perfection does cat meat obtains by becoming dog meat?” The concept you
criticize is based on a legitimate philosophic concept, namely
substantial motion [*harikat jawhari*]. It is, however, a sophisticated
concept whose exposition is beyond the scope of a letter such as this.

You further state, “It is argued that God is the Owner of all things:
all belongs to Him, and He has the right to do with what is His as He
pleases. I realize this as well, but the issue is that the Qur’an
expressly avers that God does not act unjustly.” The correct explanation
of this problem is as follows:

Everything in the world, including all the attributes of perfection,
belongs indisputably to God. All that we enjoy, from the most
insignificant to the most cherished, are blessings He has bestowed on
us. He bestows these blessings without any merit on our part.

There is no greater power that could coerce Him into doing something or
restrain Him from doing something. All the rights we assume for
ourselves have actually been established by God. In this light, God
cannot be held accountable for the adversities that befall His
creatures:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَفْعَلُ اللَّهُ مَا يَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…God does whatever He wishes…”***[^75]

For, these adversities do not constitute injustice in the first place.
(As such, it would be flawed to think that these adversities are unjust,
God being exonerated because of His status.) In other words, the
pleasant things we enjoy are favors He bestows on us out of His mercy
and the hardships we encounter are the suspension of these favors:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يَفْتَحِ اللَّهُ لِلنَّاسِ مِنْ رَحْمَةٍ فَلَا مُمْسِكَ لَهَا ۖ
وَمَا يُمْسِكْ فَلَا مُرْسِلَ لَهُ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whatever mercy God unfolds for the people no one can withhold; and
whatever He withholds no one can release, except Him…”***[^76]

Of course, should He confer a right on a creature, it would be an act of
injustice for Him to deprive that creature of that right without a
legitimate reason, and He, being Immaculate, would not commit such an
injustice. For instance, to make the human being capable of attaining to
felicity as the purpose of his life and existence and to promise him
eternal life in Paradise and then to arbitrarily sentence him to eternal
chastisement would constitute an injustice that God would not commit. In
cases where human beings are condemned to eternal chastisement, it is
due to their own disobedience:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَظْلِمُ النَّاسَ شَيْئًا وَلَٰكِنَّ النَّاسَ
أَنْفُسَهُمْ يَظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed God does not wrong people in the least; rather it is people
who wrong themselves.”***[^77]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْيَوْمَ لَا تُظْلَمُ نَفْسٌ شَيْئًا وَلَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا
كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Today no one will be done any injustice, nor will you be requited
except for what you used to do.”***[^78]

You further state, “They [i.e., the advocates of the doctrine of Divine
justice] argue that it is the people themselves that are to blame, but
what guilt could a six-month-old infant be accountable for? If his
parents are guilty, why should he pay the price? If you counter that the
infant will be compensated in the Hereafter, will there also be
compensation for the bird that a hunter shoots down?”

It is a matter of fact that in certain cases a child is afflicted with
an adversity on account of his parents’ guilt. But in such cases, the
child’s affliction is in effect the manifestation of the parents’ guilt,
not its punishment. As regards compensation to hunted animals, the
Qur’an explicitly states that animals will also be resurrected:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا مِنْ دَابَّةٍ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا طَائِرٍ يَطِيرُ بِجَنَاحَيْهِ
إِلَّا أُمَمٌ أَمْثَالُكُمْ ۚ مَا فَرَّطْنَا فِي الْكِتَابِ مِنْ
شَيْءٍ ۚ ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّهِمْ يُحْشَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no animal on land, nor a bird that flies with its wings,
but they are communities like you. We have not omitted anything from the
Book. Then they will be mustered toward their Lord.”***[^79]

The Qur’an does not provide the details of their resurrection, but some
*hadith*s state that on the Day of Judgment, God will punish horned
animals for harming hornless animals. The conclusion that one draws from
studying the Qur’an and the Sunnah is that there is wisdom in every
phenomenon that occurs in the cosmos, whether we be aware of it or not.

In the end, you say, “The essence of my concern and the cause for my
distress is that there is injustice in this world, which goes largely
without requital. I am afraid that this would continue into the next
world, that harmed animals would not be avenged. More fundamentally, it
is wrong that there is injustice at all.”

First of all, let me reiterate that most of the examples you cite are
adversities not injustice, and requital is meaningful only in reference
to injustice. The adversities that exist in this world have a purpose in
the matrix of the order of creation. This purpose may relate to the
entire system as an organic whole or to a specific part of it. But where
there really is injustice, where a creature’s right is violated, it will
definitely be avenged; if not in this world then, as guaranteed by the
Qur’an, in the Hereafter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا ظُلْمَ الْيَوْمَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…There will be no injustice today…”***[^80]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُخْلِفُ الْمِيعَادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**—*****“…God does not break His promise.”***[^81]

The Question of Human Individuality and its Preservation During the Resurrection
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

From the scientific point of view, there is no doubt that after death
the human body decomposes, through a variety of natural processes, into
nitrate and nitrogen, a part of this material being absorbed into the
soil. These materials are then assimilated by plants, which are in turn
consumed by human beings. The vegetables that people eat are converted
by the body into new cells. The question is, when humans are
resurrected, how will the deficiency of the bodies of former individuals
be restored? If they are to be provided with the material that
originally formed their bodies, then the bodies of the subsequent humans
will be left deficient, and if those materials are to remain in the
bodies of the subsequent individuals, then the bodies of former
individuals will be left deficient.

### Answer

One should take note that science has also proven that the cells of the
human body constantly undergo deterioration and change in the span of
human life. So much so that every few years, the entire cells of the
human body, from head to toe, are renewed, not a single cell remaining
from the previous group. Nonetheless, the human individual remains the
same, not affected in any way by the rapid change his body undergoes.

To put this in clearer terms, a fifty-year-old, for instance, realizes
very clearly that he is the same person as he was as an adolescent and a
child; the same person has aged. The reality to which he refers as “I”
(and which we term “self”) has not changed. It is for this reason that
if one commits a crime at a young age, he may be prosecuted for it in
his later years.

Thus human individuality is actualized by one’s soul, not one’s body.
The loss of a portion of one’s bodily material does not alter one’s
identity. On the Day of Judgment, to whatever body the soul is
reattached (whether it is his own body that has undergone change and
been restored with new material or an entirely different body), it will
be seen exactly as his worldly body, and he will be the same individual.

[^1]: Al-Tafsir li Abi al-Futuh al-Razi, vol. 2, p. 301.

[^2]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:40.

[^3]: Surah al-An‘am 6:19.

[^4]: Surah Fussilat 41:41-42.

[^5]: Surah al-Nahl 16:89.

[^6]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:46.

[^7]: Surah al-Shawra 42:13.

[^8]: Al-Tawhid, p. 29, hadith 31.

[^9]: This reading is supported by the following verses of the Qur’an:
“Those whom they invoke besides Him have no power of intercession,
except those who are witness to the truth and who know.” (Surah
al-Zukhruf 43:86) “…None shall speak except whom the All-beneficent
permits and who says what is right.” (Surah al-Naba’ 78:38)

[^10]: Surah al-Tawbah (or Bara’ah) 9:106.

[^11]: That is, counting back from the date ‘Allamah wrote this article.
[trans.]

[^12]: We have treated this question in “Al-Tafsir al-Mizan”, in
discussing the first verses of Surah al-Nisa’.

[^13]: In other words, the fact that sample B seems more perfect than
sample A does not prove that the more perfect has evolved out of the
less perfect. It only shows that B is more perfect and nothing more.
[trans.]

[^14]: Misbah al-Shari‘ah, no. 13.

[^15]: Risalah Liqa’iyyah, p. 188.

[^16]: Sunnah, with a capitol S, is used here to refer to the second
source of Islamic doctrine alongside the Qur’an, which consists of the
Prophet’s, and, in the case of Shi‘ah Islam, the Imams’ sayings and
conduct as recorded in books of Islamic tradition. [trans.]

[^17]: “Intellectually destitute” or mustad‘af designates those
unbelievers who are free of blame for their unfaith as they never had
the chance to become aware of the truth. Such persons are commonly
believed to be pardoned by God. [trans.]

[^18]: To elaborate on this topic, no doubt a complicated philosophical
one, would not be possible here. You may refer to books on Islamic
philosophy to pursue this discussion further. One book in particular
that may be of help is “The Elements of Islamic Metaphysics”, a
translation by Sayyid ‘Ali Quli Qara’i of the author’s concise book on
Islamic philosophy. [trans.]

[^19]: Surah al-Ahqaf 46:3.

[^20]: Surah Fatir 35:43.

[^21]: Surah Hud 11:56.

[^22]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:106.

[^23]: Surah al-Dhariyat 51:47.

[^24]: Surah al-Sajdah 32:7-9.

[^25]: Surah al-Inshiqaq 84:6.

[^26]: Surah al-Nur 24:42.

[^27]: Surah al-Rum 30:11.

[^28]: Surah al-‘Asr 103:2-3.

[^29]: Surah Fatir 35:10.

[^30]: Surah Qaf 50:35.

[^31]: This metaphysical doctrine is cited in proof of immaterial beings
that intermediate between the Infinite Truth, which is God, and the
world of material existents. It contends—after assuming that material
beings cannot be directly issued from God—that the existence of material
existents indicates that by necessity there must be nobler existents as
the direct efficient causes of the material beings. These nobler
existents by virtue of their existential superiority must be immaterial.
[trans.]

[^32]: It must be noted that an immaterial being is that which is not
composed of matter and form and which is fully actualized. That is, it
is at its highest state of perfection from the very beginning, and as
such it is immutable and not subject to evolvement. [trans.]

[^33]: That is, the Divine ministry of a particular prophet. It is,
however, largely used in reference to that of Prophet Muhammad. [trans.]

[^34]: That is, prophethood in general: the doctrine that God appoints
certain human beings to act as messengers between Him and humankind,
without reference to any particular prophet. [trans.]

[^35]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:40.

[^36]: Surah Fussilat 41:41-42.

[^37]: ‘Idalah is a technical term in Islamic law that indicates the
degree of piety that prevents one from committing the major sins and
repeating the minor sins. [trans.]

[^38]: ‘Adil, subjective form, refers to one who possesses the quality
of ‘idalah. [trans.]

[^39]: Translated into English by Sayyid Husayn Nasr. [trans.]

[^40]: The ritual utterance of blessing on Muhammad and his progeny.
[trans.]

[^41]: In Islamic theology, tashri‘ refers to God’s revelation of Divine
Dispensation to humankind for the purpose of guiding them to the Truth.
As mentioned above, God’s will in guiding humankind (also referred to as
the doctrine of general prophethood) is part of the cosmic reality. That
is, God has embedded in the cosmic order certain signposts in order to
direct humanity to the True Destination, Himself. This is what ‘Allamah
intends when he says that “general prophethood” or tashri‘ is “enweaved
in the reality of the universe.” [trans.]

[^42]: “The details of human existence and the practical need for
preaching the Divine Dispensation”: in this sentence ‘Allamah is
referring to the necessity of infallibility to guard every speech and
action of the Prophet, as they are indispensable factors in the process
of conveying the Divine message and guiding humankind to the true
religion of God. [trans.]

[^43]: That is, things that pertain to human transactions, which would
mean that they are outside the responsibility of the Prophet’s ministry.
[trans.]

[^44]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:17.

[^45]: Doctrine in this context consists of the verses of the Qur’an and
the Tradition [sunnah] of the Infallibles.

[^46]: An example is, “[At the End of Time] from Islam there will remain
only a name and from the Qur’an merely words.” [Bihar al-Anwar 36: 284]

[^47]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:102.

[^48]: Surah al-Dhariyat 51:50.

[^49]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:124.

[^50]: The highest rank of prophethood. It refers to the Divine ministry
of Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, the prophets whom were
entrusted with a Divine Law. [trans.]

[^51]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:73.

[^52]: The lowest rank of prophethood: the holder of this position is
not given a new Divine Law [shari‘ah] and is very limited in the scope
of his ministry. [trans.]

[^53]: The higher rank of prophethood: it subsumes those prophets who
brought a new Divine Dispensation and those who, although not entrusted
with a Divine Dispensation, had more authority than a nabi—the prophet
of the lowest rank who holds the status of nubuwwah. Examples of the
latter class are David and Solomon. [trans.]

[^54]: “A thing exist prior to its coming into existence”: what this
means is that if the agent and the action are identical, then the action
already exists as the agent, and this is obviously impossible, for an
effect is existentially posterior to its cause. [trans.]

[^55]: Surah al-Hadid 57:3.

[^56]: Surah al-Shu‘ara’ 26:78.

[^57]: Surah al-Shu‘ara’ 26:80.

[^58]: Surah al-Zukhruf 43:84.

[^59]: Surah al-Hajj 22:62.

[^60]: Surah al-Furqan 25:58.

[^61]: Surah al-Najm 53:42.

[^62]: This philosophic term refers to a cause that is necessary but not
self-sufficient in actualizing a particular effect. For instance, an
architect is a partial cause, for he is only one of the factors
necessary for constructing a building. Many other factors are required
in order to complete the construction of the building. Partial cause
contrasts with complete cause, a cause that is independent in bringing
about a particular effect, such as God’s agency in engendering the First
Creature. [trans.]

[^63]: Surah al-Shawra’ 42:11.

[^64]: Attributes of perfection are contrasted with negative attributes.
The former are those positive existential qualities whose ascription to
God does not delimit Him in any way. [trans.]

[^65]: Surah Fatir 35:3.

[^66]: Surah al-Mu’minun 23:14.

[^67]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:110.

[^68]: Surah al-Sajdah 32:7-8.

[^69]: Surah al-Nisa’ 4:1.

[^70]: Temporal nonexistence [‘adam zamani] refers to a time when
something did not exist. Here the questioner is essentially asking
whether there was a time when matter did not exist. [trans.]

[^71]: Islamic philosophers distinguish between two types of eternity:
essential eternity [qidam dhati] and temporal eternity [qidam zamani].
The former is used in reference to a necessary being whose nonexistence
is rationally impossible as it is self-sufficient in its existence. The
latter describes a contingent being that is eternal but not by virtue of
its essential self-sufficiency. [trans.]

[^72]: It seems to me that in his reply ‘Allamah has digressed from the
main concern of the questioner and has addressed another question.
Apparently what ‘Allamah intends is that regardless of whether the world
is temporally eternal, it is in need of God. [trans.]

[^73]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:194.

[^74]: Evidently, ‘Allamah is replying to a long letter, which, for the
sake of brevity, has been summarized in the single paragraph expressed
above. [trans.]

[^75]: Surah Ibrahim 14:27.

[^76]: Surah Fatir 35:2.

[^77]: Surah Yunus 10:44.

[^78]: Surah Ya Sin 36:54.

[^79]: Surah al-An‘am 6:38.

[^80]: Surah al-Ghafir (or Mu’min) 40:17.

[^81]: Surah al-Ra‘d 13:31.


