Chapter 3: Creation and Resurrection
====================================

The Purpose of Creation
-----------------------

### Question

Does this world have a Creator? If so, what was His purpose in creating
this world? Are there obligations for which we are accountable? These
are questions that have puzzled the human being since time immemorial.
Obviously, to answer positively to these questions would lead to more
specific ones for which the human mind, due to his innate curiosity,
seeks logical and definite answers. The questions mentioned above are
among the most fundamental ones with which the human mind grapples. One
inherently feels the need to arrive at logical and definite answers to
these questions.

### Answer

The reason why we inquire regarding the purpose of creation is that in
doing all our personal and social activities, we strive to achieve
certain goals and ideals that suit our purpose: we eat in order to
satisfy our hunger; we drink water in order to quench our thirst; we
dress in order to protect ourselves from harsh weather; we speak in
order to convey our intentions. No human being would undertake an
activity consciously without having a purpose, without the possibility
of reaping some profit.

Since this is the case for us, we assume that all other intelligent
creatures must follow the same logic, and thus we ask, “What is God’s
purpose in creation?” But is it legitimate to make this comparison? Is
it always correct to extend a principle that applies to certain cases to
include other cases? The answer is negative.

The only definite way to find a solution to our question would be to
analyze the concept of *purpose*, for we cannot reasonably hope to solve
the question through induction and by examining the innumerable cases
that this question applies to.

Upon analyzing the voluntary actions we routinely perform, it becomes
evident that in every case we act with the *purpose* of gaining some
benefit that fulfills a need within us. In eating, for example, the
purpose is to satisfy one’s hunger, and once the purpose is achieved,
the action is terminated. This is the case for every action we perform
consciously—drinking, sitting, standing, listening, walking, etc. Even
the activities that we do seemingly without any personal interest (such
as the altruistic deeds that we occasionally perform) will on closer
examination prove to be of some benefit, without which we would not have
undertaken the activity: in all such cases we are actually fulfilling
our emotional needs, relieving ourselves, for example, of the painful
pity we feel for the poor.

Based on the above analysis, we may infer that, generally, the purpose
of a conscious action is the drive to achieve a desired end—the
fulfillment of a need—that is attainable through the action in question.

At first glance, it may appear that purposive actions are peculiar to
conscious agents, which are equipped with intelligence and freewill.
Paying closer attention, however, will make clear that the same
properties that govern the actions of conscious agents also pertain to
inanimate agents. An inanimate agent is similarly equipped with certain
faculties that are responsible for satisfying its natural needs. Thus,
just as in the case of the conscious agent, the inanimate agent strives
toward a particular end for the purpose of satisfying an inherent
inclination. The only factor that distinguishes the conscious agent from
the inanimate one is awareness: the conscious agent performs actions
with awareness whereas the inanimate agent abides blindly by the
dictates of its nature.

The Universal Presence of Purpose
---------------------------------

The above elucidation clarifies, then, that purpose pervades all
creatures, for the principle of cause-and-effect, which dominates the
entire creation, precludes the possibility of an agent’s performing an
action without a purpose.

Take any individual from any species: a human being, an insect, an apple
tree, a spike of wheat, a piece of iron, a molecule of oxygen; they are
all similar in that they adjust to their environments and perform
certain actions so as to achieve an end. Once the end is reached and the
agent acquires the gain it sought, the action terminates.

This also applies in more general terms to the species collectively—such
as the human species, the horse species, the apple tree species, and so
on. By their peculiar activities, individuals of all species pursue
certain ends in order to compensate for their inherent deficiencies and
thus secure the survival of their species. And in still more general
terms, this same truth applies to the entire cosmos whose various parts
are, as a matter of fact, linked together in a cosmic nexus.

Generally speaking, every course of activity involves a point of origin
and a point of termination. Action is an intermediary stage during which
a being evolves from one state into another. Action starts when a being
desires the fulfillment of a need. This desire may arise from a purely
physical tendency (as in the case of natural phenomena), an instinctive
drive (as in the case of animals), or a conscious decision (as in the
case of human beings). The action ceases when the need is fulfilled, but
this end may in turn be the starting point for another action that leads
to another end.

The above explanation should suffice to demonstrate that it is
inconceivable that an action should come into existence without being
directed toward a definite end or that its relation with its end be
fortuitous. It is just as inconceivable that an agent should initiate an
action without having a causal relationship with the action and the end
of the action.

Universal principles—one of which is the amazing causal order that
dominates the cosmos—admit of no violation. They regulate the cosmos
uniformly, rendering fortuity impossible.

According to the studies of a knowledgeable scholar, the possibility
that a thing composed only of ten atoms may have come about haphazardly
is one in ten billion. Therefore, to cite chance in explaining the
phenomena of this world is an inane claim. The intellect, which has its
roots in the Divine nature of the human being, clearly denounces such
attempts at negating the necessary relation between an action, its
agent, and its purpose, for such negation would destroy the very
foundations of science and nullify the mind’s self-evident principles.

The Cosmic Purpose
------------------

The components of this expansive universe, from the smallest particles
to the most startlingly gigantic galaxies, are linked together in a true
nexus, forming a uniform whole. This whole, with all its innumerable
properties and modes of existence, is in motion, a general and universal
motion. (This view is corroborated by philosophic arguments and
scientific theories.)

The cosmos, as a uniform whole, pursues a particular goal; it is
navigating toward its destination. Once that destination is reached,
this ever-changing and noisy universe will be transformed into an
immutable and serene world. The future world, in contrast to the present
commotion, will be characterized by stability and harmony, its
imperfections perfected and its potentialities actualized.

The question that this may raise is, will that stability be relative and
in comparison to the present order of things? Or will it be absolute
stability and serenity, free of any degree of change? The truth is that
the future world will enjoy an absolute and true stability, a veritable
state of perfection. The instability that is integral to the world of
today will be sealed and locked away, for the world will have reached
the point where it originally started out, thus completing a perfect
cycle, a point whereat, to employ the “modernist” vernacular,
comprehension will be four dimensional as phenomena will be free of
relative temporal orientation.

What we have said above, though in brief (for, it is a very complicated
subject, which we have condensed into a nutshell), makes clear that the
future world toward which the cosmic caravan is navigating in full speed
will be a place of perfect stability. Obviously, in attempting to digest
this subject, one may encounter numerous questions, which form the
material for some profound and complicated philosophic discussions (we
say complicated because the topics at issue are abstract ones that fall
beyond the ken of sensory perception).

From the instant we open our eyes and view the wanders of this world,
all that we see is in motion, in becoming, first evolving then
disintegrating. All along we have been among the passengers of this
caravan, never hearing from those who leave it—“He who heard the truth
was never again heard of.” As such, the topic at hand is one that can be
resolved solely through meticulous philosophic reasoning based on
apodictic rational arguments derived from valid premises. (It should be
pointed out that this philosophic topic corresponds to the religious
doctrine of Resurrection as preached by Islamic religious authorities.)

God’s Purpose in Creating the World
-----------------------------------

In light of what has been said above, it should be clear, then, that
purpose is meaningful only when two elements are present: an agent
(which strives to achieve the purpose in question in order to fulfill an
inherent need) and an action (the agent’s action in striving towards the
purpose in question). Furthermore, as demonstrated by sound rational
arguments, God is Absolute Perfection, free of any need or imperfection.
The conclusion that results from juxtaposing these two premises is that
one can speak of an *end* with regard to God’s action, but, in reference
to the Divine Essence, it would be incorrect to speak of a purpose.

In other words, the question “What is God’s purpose in creation?” can be
viewed in one of two ways: if by this question, one is inquiring about
the end of God’s action (that is, to what end it is directed), the
answer would be that our imperfect world is progressing toward a more
perfect state. If, however, one means to determine what need God intends
to fulfill or what benefit He desires to secure in creating the world,
the question would be incorrect.[^1] What our religious sources say in
this regard is that God’s purpose in creating the world is to benefit
others not Himself.

The conclusion that results from the above analysis is that purpose is
meaningful when the agent or the action has a deficiency that can be
cured by achieving the purpose. For this reason, purpose, in the common
definition, does not apply to beings that transcend the domain of
materiality—that is, to God and the purely immaterial intellects.

However, philosophers have through meticulous analysis arrived at a more
subtle understanding of purpose. They distinguish two meanings for
purpose. One pertains to the action and designates its fruition; the
other pertains to the agent and indicates the fulfillment of a need. It
is in the first meaning that purpose is correctly applicable to the
actions of immaterial beings. But to understand this, there is need for
further explanation.

Actions of immaterial beings are instantaneous; that is, they do not
involve motion. As such their actions constitute in and of themselves
the actualization of their purpose. The same holds true with regard to
the existential purpose of immaterial beings themselves. As they are
perfect, their existence is in and of itself the actualization of the
purpose of their existence. From this point of view, God’s purpose in
creating the world is solely His Essence, and the purpose of this world
is to develop into the perfect world. The purpose of that perfect world
would be itself: the purpose in the creation of any perfect creature is
itself.

God’s Purpose in Testing Humankind
----------------------------------

### Question

If a potter makes two vases, one with a single handle and the other with
two handles, he cannot disapprove of the single-handled one for having
only one handle, for it is his making. Moreover, if the vases be hidden
from him, he would still know their shape, color, and other
characteristics. In the case of a painter, he is fully aware of a
painting once he has finished his work on it, and it would be absurd if
he later claimed that he wanted to examine it to determine whether it
was good or bad.

Considering these examples, let me raise the following question: God has
created all celestial and terrestrial beings, all spiritual and material
beings. He possesses absolute and eternal knowledge of the world, for He
is the Creator and would be imperfect if He lacked such knowledge, but
His Essence is Absolute Perfection. In this light, why does He need to
try humankind, whom He created and whose destiny lies in His Hands?

### Answer

In the Qur’an, God, the Exalted, approaches the topic of the purpose of
the creation of humankind in two ways. One way is the language of the
common people. In this approach, God reveals Himself as the Absolute
King with absolute sovereignty, declaring that all are His slaves. When
speaking in this language, He portrays this world as the preparatory
stage for the next world, the Eternal World. In this preparatory stage,
His slaves must comply with His commands, for which they will be
rewarded in the Hereafter. In this approach, the life of this world is a
test, a trial in which God is the Examiner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ ذَائِقَةُ الْمَوْتِ ۗ وَنَبْلُوكُمْ بِالشَّرِّ
وَالْخَيْرِ فِتْنَةً ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Every soul shall taste death, and We will bring upon you good and
ill by way of trial…”***[^2]

The second approach is purely intellectual, based on the true knowledge
of the world. In this approach, creation with all its good and evil is
viewed as a painting, a painting that has ugly scenes as well as nice
ones. From this point of view, test is meaningless. There is, however,
one fundamental point that should be heeded: the spots of ink on this
canvas act on their own accord. That is, they have been placed on the
canvas in such a way that allows them some freedom. They should use this
freedom to create pleasant scenes, but they may use it to create
unpleasant ones as well. The drawings that they create will determine
what future is awaiting them.

The Creation of the Heavens and Earth in Six Days
-------------------------------------------------

### Question

God’s will is actualized instantaneously. The moment He wills something,
it comes into existence *ex nihilo*. Based on this truth, the question
is, why did the act of creation span six days?

### Answer

The above question has received sufficient attention in books of
philosophy. But the problem at the heart of the question is more
fundamental than what the question assumes. Material phenomena, in
general, are governed by motion; everything comes about through a course
of motion; creation in material phenomena is a gradual process. But on
the contrary, action in immaterial agents is instantaneous. So the
problem is how to explain the dichotomy between the instantaneity of the
cause (the immaterial agents that affect the material world) and the
gradualness of the effect (the material world).

In traditional books of Islamic philosophy, this problem is referred to
as “the relation of the temporal to the atemporal,” or “the relation of
a temporal effect to a transcendent cause.” It is a very complicated
discussion (you may want to refer to books of philosophy for a thorough
explanation). What can be briefly said in this letter is this: the
concepts of gradualness, change, and time are relative concepts, similar
to the concepts of small and large. These relative concepts are derived
when phenomena of this world are compared to one another. In relation to
God, however, all things are immutable, and such relative concepts lose
their meaning. The following two verses of the Qur’an speak to this
truth:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا أَمْرُهُ إِذَا أَرَادَ شَيْئًا أَنْ يَقُولَ لَهُ كُنْ
فَيَكُونُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All His command, when He wills something, is to say to it “Be,” and
it is…”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَمْرُنَا إِلَّا وَاحِدَةٌ كَلَمْحٍ بِالْبَصَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Our command is but a single word, like the twinkling of an
eye.”***[^4]

According to the former verse, what God does is solely creating [which
is instantaneous], and according to the latter verse the relation of
phenomena to God is beyond the scope of time; in relation to Him, all
things are stable, immutable, and instantaneous.

Divine will is not an attribute of Essence; it is rather an attribute of
Action, and as such is extraneous to God’s Essence. In other words, it
applies only to the domain of Divine Activity. To say that God has
willed something is to say that He has prepared the appropriate
conditions for its development. (For, it must be borne in mind that the
cosmos is governed by the principle of causation.) Hence, as God’s will
is equivalent to what is willed, in reference to instantaneous matters,
the Divine will is instantaneous, and in reference to gradual matters,
it is gradual.

The Effects of Belief in the Resurrection
-----------------------------------------

### Question

What effects can belief in Resurrection have on our character and
conduct? In what ways can it influence our social interactions? What
gives rise to this question is that, as a matter of fact, human society
subsists on the activities of its individuals. Human beings perform
their activities out of an urge to fulfill the needs of their lives. As
the human being is driven by a strong instinct of preservation, he takes
pleasure in achieving whatever may be conducive to this end.

It is the life of this world that invigorates him, giving him the will
to endeavor untiringly. And in this endeavor, the more he achieves his
desired goals, the stronger is his enthusiasm to persist. It is this
that keeps the wheels of society moving, and once it has started on the
road to progress, it constantly accelerates, a newer and more profound
development appearing every day. The thought of death, of the afterlife,
however, brings this progress to a halt, if not paralyzing it
completely.

### Answer

There should be no doubt in that all heavenly religions ground their
call to a great extent on human obligation and the reward of doing good.
Islam, in particular, stands on three pillars, one of which is the
doctrine of Resurrection. It sets this doctrine on a par with the
doctrines of Divine Unity and prophethood, and as such without
acknowledging this doctrine; one is not considered a Muslim. This shows
clearly the importance of the doctrine of Resurrection in the framework
of the Islamic faith.

The goal of Islam is to revive the primordial human nature, to bring out
the pristine human nature in people. From the Islamic viewpoint, belief
in Resurrection is one of the critical elements in the life of the human
being, without which he is a body devoid of spirit and as such unable to
attain to virtue and felicity.

Islamic doctrines and rules are not hollow conventionalities, invented
to keep people busy by blindly conforming to them. They form a coherent
program—composed of doctrinal, spiritual, and practical elements—which
God has formulated in accordance with the inherent needs of human
nature, a truth to which the following Qur’anic verses attest:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَجِيبُوا لِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ
إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ لِمَا يُحْيِيكُمْ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Answer God and the Apostle when he summons you
to that which will give you life…”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا ۚ فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So set your heart on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of God according to which He originated mankind…”***[^6]

Thus, Islamic law is like civil law (which is the law of modern
societies) in that its purpose is to provide instructions that guarantee
the fulfillment of humankind’s social needs as well as the needs that
are critical to individual human life. Nevertheless, what differentiates
the two systems is a fundamental one.

As opposed to secular civil laws, whose purview is limited to the
transient and material life of this world and which are rooted in the
sentiments of the majority, the heavenly faith of Islam takes into
account the eternal life of the human being, which extends beyond death.
In this outlook, one’s felicity and misery in the Hereafter are directly
related to one’s conduct in this world. Thus, Islam offers a program
that is based on intellectuality, not sentimentality.

From the point of view of modern civil law, the will of the majority is
binding. But according to Islam, only those regulations that are true
and verifiable by the intellect are enforceable, irrespective of their
agreement with the sentiments of the majority.

Islam declares that the pristine human being, unadulterated by
superstition and egotism, recognizes through his primordial nature the
reality of Resurrection and, consequently, his eternal life. Unlike the
material human being—who is utterly oblivious of his Origin and End,
blindly follows his brute instincts, and desires only to indulge his
material appetites—the pristine human being acknowledges that he must
live in compliance with his intellect (a special grace conferred
exclusively unto humankind), always cognizant of what it requires of
him.

For the pristine human being, belief in the Day of Judgment and
Resurrection affects every social and individual aspect of life:
intellectual, moral, and spiritual. It affects one’s intellectual life
by shedding light on the true state of the soul and all other phenomena.
In this light, one finds oneself as a limited and insignificant particle
in the universe, which is journeying like a caravan, day and night,
toward the everlasting world.

In other words, one finds oneself relentlessly propelled from one side
by the Hand of Creation (the Efficient Cause) and attracted from the
other side by the End of Creation (the Resurrection). This insight in
one’s intellectual outlook in turn influences one’s moral and spiritual
state. Seeing the true state of things, one then restrains one’s
sentiments and desires so as to traverse this path in a manner
appropriate to the True End.

When the human being considers how his needs make him dependent on the
various parts of this restless world and how he, like a blade of hay, is
thrust to and fro in the turbulent sea of the cosmos, moving ever closer
to the Cosmic End, he will no longer indulge in selfish, pompous, and
ignorant self-displays, he will no longer engage in the futile toils of
this material world—which turn people into machines—more than what is
necessary for a fleeting life. This attitude elevates the human being
beyond the personal and social strife, relieving him of the many
exacting but vain burdens that erode his true life.

One so enlightened knows that, should he relinquish his fleeting life in
the way of virtue, he will have instead an eternal life in felicity,
enjoying the rewards of his good deeds. As such, there is no need to
instill in his mind the various superstitions that are so prevalent
today to persuade him to make sacrifices.

Secular societies, however, resort to illusory ideals in order to compel
their people to make sacrifices. They invoke, say, the “sanctities of
society:” liberty, law, and patriotism. They encourage their people to
secure an honorable name that would go down in history, thus acquiring,
so they say, an “eternal life.” The truth, however, is that if death is
annihilation, as the materialists contend, all these so-called ideals
are vain superstitions.

Among the spiritual advantages of having belief in the Hereafter is that
it constantly invigorates the soul, for one knows that there will be a
day when oppression will be avenged and all rights redeemed, a day when
virtuous deeds will be appreciated—a most lofty appreciation. But its
main effect is the spirit of vigilance it instills in one’s spirit: one
is aware that one’s actions, whether public or private, are being
watched by the All-knowing, the All-seeing God and that there is a day
ahead when He will scrutinize one’s deeds with the greatest attention.
This belief restrains one such that no undercover police could ever
achieve, for police is an outward restraint, whereas this belief is an
inward guard from which nothing can be concealed.

The above explanation makes clear that the allegation that belief in an
afterlife undercuts a society’s motivation for work and progress is
invalid. Motivation is a state of mind engendered by a sense of need,
and belief in the Hereafter only serves to accentuate this sense.

This truth is historically demonstrable. Looking back at the early
period of Islam, when Muslims were more firm in their faith, we see that
social advancement was astonishing; Muslims have never again been able
to regain that vigor. Of course, belief in the Hereafter does reduce
one’s preoccupation with sensuality; it does preclude people from
putting their lives on the line for nonsensical and illusory concerns.

[^1]: For, it presupposes the presence of need in the Divine Essence.
God, however, is Absolute Perfection; He has no need, and there is no
higher perfection possible for Him to desire. [trans.]

[^2]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:35.

[^3]: Surah Ya Sin 36:82.

[^4]: Surah al-Qamar 54:50.

[^5]: Surah al-Anfal 8:24.

[^6]: Surah al-Rum 30:30.


