Chapter 4: Miscellaneous Questions
==================================

The Question of Gender Equality in Islam and Women’s Participation in Politics
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Does Islamic law consider man and woman equal? And does Islam allow
women to engage in politics and governmental affairs on a par with men?

### Answer

Before the advent of Islam, societies took one of two positions
concerning women. Some societies treated women as domestic animals. They
did not count women as members of the society; women were exploited for
the benefit of the society, that is, the men. In the more civilized
societies, women were second-class citizens, comparable to minors and
slaves. In these societies, women had some limited rights that were
strictly controlled by men. But Islam, for the first time in the history
of humankind, acknowledged women’s full membership in the society,
appreciating their efforts as equal to those of men:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنِّي لَا أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِنْكُمْ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنْثَىٰ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…I [God] do not waste the work of any worker among you, whether male
or female…”***[^1]

There are only three areas in which Islam forbids women’s participation:
leadership[^2], judicature, and warfare (i.e., participation in combat;
otherwise, women may engage in other affairs related to war). The logic
behind this difference, to the extent that we can infer from Islamic
sources, is that women are more sentimental than men. The three areas
mentioned above should be handled only with recourse to reason, and as
such men are better qualified in them.

The most persuasive evidence in support of this position is the failure
of the efforts of Western countries—which have advocated similar
education for both genders—to train a substantial number of female
professionals in these three areas. In the record of the prominent
figures in these three areas, women historically hold a negligible share
(as opposed to such areas as nursing, dancing, acting, painting, and
music in which women excel).

The Question of Inheritance
---------------------------

### Question

Why does the woman inherit less than the man in Islamic law?

### Answer

In Islam, the woman takes one-third of the inheritance and the man
two-thirds. The reason for this difference, as stated by a *hadith*, is
that it is the man’s duty to take care of the expenses of the family,
including the woman. The latter rule in turn is based on man’s peculiar
nature, as he is less sentimental than she.

Let me give a more thorough explanation. When one generation passes
away, the wealth is inherited by the next generation. According to
Islamic law, of this wealth, two-thirds goes to men and one-third to
women. The two-thirds portion that men inherit must be spent for the
welfare of the entire family, whereas women have no obligation to share
their one-third.

Consequently, although men are put in charge of two-thirds of the
wealth, it is women who actually enjoy two-thirds of the wealth [by
holding on to their one-third and at the same time benefitting from the
two-thirds that goes to men]. This is the fairest possible distribution
of wealth—not to mention the positive effects that such a distribution
has in maintaining the family unit (as will be elaborated below).

The Question of Divorce
-----------------------

### Question

Why is divorce a prerogative of the man?

### Answer

Once again this seems to be, as can be inferred from Islamic sources,
due to the natural difference between the two genders. Nevertheless,
Islamic law offers the woman the right at the time of marriage to limit
her spouse’s rights and to define for herself certain means to obtain
divorce.

The Woman’s Financial Independence
----------------------------------

### Question

Does Islamic law allow women to engage in financial activities
independently?

### Answer

In Islam women have complete freedom in their financial activities.

The Question of Polygamy in Islam
---------------------------------

### Question

Why does Islam allow men to have more than one spouse?

### Answer

It is common knowledge that Islam does not enforce polygamy; rather, it
only permits a man to marry up to four wives provided he treats all
fairly. There are a number of factors on which this permission is
contingent. One general condition is that polygamy should not lead to
social imbalance by causing a shortage of marriageable women. Moreover,
men are obliged to provide their family with suitable residence and
appropriate clothing and food. Considering the above two qualifications
makes clear that there are only a very small number of men eligible to
have multiple wives.

Of course, it should not escape our attention that normally, due to
various factors, there is a surplus of marriageable women. The normal
life span of women is longer than that of men, and there are normally
more widows than widowers (especially taking into account that fatal
casualties are more frequent in men than in women). Recently newspapers
and magazines reported that German women have been petitioning the
government to implement a marriage law that would allow for men to have
more than one wife. But the government, under pressure from the Vatican,
has so far rejected their petition.

Furthermore, it should be noted that women’s prevalent aversion to
polygamy is not innate, otherwise how could there be so many women from
various cultures who are bound in polygamous marriages and are happy and
satisfied with their life.[^3]

Islam, the Perfect Religion
---------------------------

### Question

It is a matter of fact that Islam has failed to keep up with the times.
This has rendered it incompatible with modern life. I don’t see how
anyone could reasonably deny this truth.

### Answer

To say that Islam is incompatible with modern life is nonsense. The
passing of time does not bring about any substantial change that would
necessitate a fundamental alteration of social law; night and day are
the same; our planet has remained unchanged for millennia. What has
changed is humankind’s increasing expectations and needs as the result
of the rapid progress of technology. The pleasures that kings of the
past could not dream of are being sought by today’s poor. This change in
the social mood is similar to the change of mood that an individual
undergoes in response to varying circumstances.

Let me illustrate this by a simple example. An impoverished person
strives primarily to satisfy his hunger. Once he has enough food, he
starts worrying about his clothing. And when that is solved, he makes
plans to buy a house, marry, and have children. Then, he strives to
increase his wealth, acquire fame, and indulge himself with as many
entertainments as he can manage.

Laws of modern civilized societies are based on (or so it is claimed)
the will of the majority, even when what they will is harmful to them;
the majority disregards the minority will, even if it is in the
interests of the entire society. Islam, however, takes a different
position. In its law, Islam sets the primordial human nature as the
criterion. Islamic law is based on the human being’s peculiar
constitution and the various faculties embedded therein. Thus, Islam
seeks to secure the real interests of humankind, irrespective of the
will of the majority. It is such a law that Islam decrees as the
*shari‘ah*.

The *shari‘ah* is not susceptible to change, for it is based on the
human being’s immutable nature. Of course, in addition to its unchanging
law, the *shari‘ah*, Islam allows for certain temporary regulations to
accommodate the changing conditions of human society.

The relation of these temporary regulations to the *shari‘ah* is
analogous to the relation of statutes established by a state’s
parliament, which can be revoked, to its constitution, which is
permanent and irrevocable. Thus Islamic law authorizes the Islamic head
of state to enact, within the framework of the *shari‘ah*, regulations
necessary for meeting the needs caused by various circumstances. But as
soon as those circumstances change, the regulations decreed to
accommodate them automatically expire, while the *shari‘ah* remains
intact.

Based on the abovementioned, Islamic law has two sets of rules. One set
comprises those rules that are based on the immutable human nature and
is designated as the *shari‘ah*; the other consists of temporary
regulations enacted by the Islamic head of state in response to various
circumstances. An example of the latter is the body of regulations
required to secure safe transportation, regulations that were
unnecessary before modern means of transportation were invented.

Islam’s Agreement with the Primordial Human Nature
--------------------------------------------------

### Question

Wouldn’t you agree that many of the regulations that were established in
the early years of Islam, over 1400 years ago, need to be modified?

### Answer

In this regard see the answer to the previous question. I will once
again underscore that the basis of Islamic law is human nature not the
whim of the majority. God, the Exalted, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفًا ۚ فِطْرَتَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي فَطَرَ
النَّاسَ عَلَيْهَا ۚ لَا تَبْدِيلَ لِخَلْقِ اللَّهِ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Set your heart on the religion as a people of pure faith, the
origination of God, according to which He originated humankind. There is
no alteration in God’s creation.”***[^4]

The Question of Zaynab’s Leadership
-----------------------------------

### Question

Can it not be argued that Zaynab was the crown princess? If so, this is
sufficient evidence that Islam sets no limitation on women’s social
activities, and those of them who are qualified can advance alongside
men.

### Answer

There is no evidence to support this claim. Moreover, there are no such
titles as prince and princess in Islam. If by princess you mean the
successor to the previous *imam*, your assumption is invalid. It is
beyond doubt that based on definitive historical sources, the successor
of the Third Imam was his son, ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, not Lady Zaynab. It
is, however, true that she participated in Imam al-Husayn’s movement in
fighting Yazid’s oppression. Imam al-Husayn entrusted to his sister
heavy obligations that demanded a high level of knowledge and a strong
will. Her success in fulfilling them proved her amazing spiritual
strength.

But let us address the crux of your concern, the question of gender
equality. Fundamentally, Islam acknowledges only two factors for
superiority: knowledge and piety. God, the Exalted, states this in His
Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of God is the most Godwary
among you…”***[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُونَ وَالَّذِينَ لَا يَعْلَمُونَ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Are those who know equal to those who do not know…”***[^6]

Other such factors as gender, wealth, high birth, and popularity, which
other cultures may look upon as tokens of superiority, hold no real
value. Thus, Muslim women can compete with and even surpass men in every
field (bearing in mind, of course, that they cannot serve as head of
state, act as judge, or participate in combat).

The Islamic Perspective on Family
---------------------------------

### Question

What is Islam’s view concerning the institutions of marriage and family?

### Answer

A detailed explanation regarding Islam’s perspective on marriage,
family, and the general principles that govern familial relationships is
beyond the scope of this letter. However, I will very briefly touch on
some of the important topics.

Islam recognizes marriage as the fundamental building block in the
formation and the preservation of society. In order to organize
humankind into societies, the Hand of Creation has split the human
species into two genders, implanting in each gender an instinctive
gravitation toward the other. The lowest manifestation of this mutual
gravitation is the presence of distinctive sexual organs in the two. It
is this mutual gravitation that brings the two genders together to beget
children.

Out of this union a child is born whose substance derives from both
parents. Due to the intense affection the parents feel toward this
creature, they endure the pains of child birth and the hardships
involved in rearing it. These difficulties savored by the accompanying
emotional pleasure only serve to strengthen the emotional bond between
the parents and the child, and this in turn invigorates the parents to
multiply their efforts in training their child. These parental emotions,
in return, attach the child ever more strongly to his parents. Thus, the
family is forged—the building block from which cities and nations are
constructed.

It is obvious that in order to preserve the society, the instinctive
sexual drive must be curbed. The way to achieve this is by confining
each gender’s sexual gratification to its formal partner from the
opposite gender. This will ensure that the father of every child is
identified (the mother, of course, is not in need of such a measure, as
her pregnancy is the clearest mark that she is the mother of the infant
she is bearing). Without such a formal arrangement to curb the sexual
gratification of the two genders, young adults would seldom agree to
suffer the hardships of forming a family. Absence of formal families
would lead to uncertainty in determining the real fathers of children
born into the society.

This uncertainty will in turn weaken the emotional bond between the
parents and the children, which is the fabric that holds the family
together. In time, the prevalence of fornication in society—in addition
to the numerous hygienic, social, and moral problems that such
unrestrained sexual relations engender—will utterly destroy family
affections, a fact already evident in countries where sexual relations
are given free rein—a trend that threatens the survival of humankind. An
article I read some years ago reported that annually three hundred
thousand infants are born to single mothers in the United States as the
result of promiscuous intercourse done in the heat of the moment and
without prior engagement.

Hence, Islam forbids sexual gratification between the two genders
outside the institution of marriage and makes the expenses of rearing
the child a responsibility of the father as the child’s guardian. In
addition, Islam prohibits marriage between family relations who have
frequent contact with one another. Thus, it is considered incestuous for
a man to marry his mother, sister, aunt, or niece. The following are
other females whom a man is prohibited to marry: daughter-in-law,
mother-in-law, stepdaughter (if he has had intercourse with the
stepdaughter’s mother), sister-in-law (as long as her sister is married
to the man in question), and women married to other men. The same rule
applies to the relations-by-suckling.[^7]

(All of the rules mentioned here are derived from the Qur’an and the
tradition of the Noble Prophet and the Imams as recorded in books of
*hadith*.)

The Question of Divorce
-----------------------

### Question

How does Islam view divorce?

### Answer

Islamic law does sanction divorce but only as a last resort for
terminating a miserable conjugal relationship plagued by disagreement.
This is one of the distinctions that prove Islam’s superiority to all
other faiths. Islam sanctioned divorce centuries before Western
“civilized” countries realized its necessity.

Women’s Right in Choosing their Spouse
--------------------------------------

### Question

Does Islam grant women the right to choose their spouse freely?

### Answer

Islamic law requires the wholehearted consent of the woman for the
validity of a marriage contract. Thus according to Islam, women are free
in choosing their spouse.

Children Being in the Custody of Men
------------------------------------

### Question

In the event of a divorce, to which party does Islamic law grant the
custody of children?

### Answer

Divorcees have the right to keep the children up to the age of seven,
but even if the children remain with their mothers, the male guardian is
in charge of paying their expenses. (To explicate the reasoning for this
rule is beyond the scope of this letter; you may refer to the corpus of
Islamic jurisprudence to find the reasoning.)[^8]

A Saying from ‘Ali
------------------

### Question

It is reported that Imam ‘Ali said that parents must train their
children with an eye to the future? If this report is correct, one can
extrapolate that Islamic regulations should also be modified to make
them compatible with the changing circumstances of time and place?

### Answer

First of all, it should be noted that this saying is attributed to Imam
‘Ali in “*Nahj al-Balaghah*” with a discontinuous chain of
transmission.[^9] Assuming that it is authentic, the meaning appears to
be that we should refrain from imposing on our children the habits and
customs with which we were raised, for it will constrain their
imagination and innovativeness, consequently hindering their capacity
for progress. If in our time, horses and donkeys were means of
transportation, we should not force our children to use the same.

The saying, however, is not in reference to Islamic law (whose
irrevocability is explicitly affirmed by the Qur’an and the Sunnah); if
it were, it would be inacceptable as it would contravene the Qur’an,
which affirms the permanence of the *shari‘ah*. (There are numerous
*hadith*s narrated from the Imams that state that *hadith*s must be
dismissed as unauthentic if they contradict the Qur’an.)

The Irrevocability of the Shari‘ah
----------------------------------

### Question

Why have religious authorities of Islam neglected modifying Islamic law
to make it compatible with changing circumstances of the times?

### Answer

Religious authorities have no right to change the Divine law as embodied
by the *shari‘ah*. Their authority is limited to arriving at the
secondary rules of Islam on the basis of the Qur’an and the Sunnah,
similar to the lawyer whose function is merely to infer legal arguments
from his country’s legal code; he does not have the right to alter the
country’s constitution. Likewise, in Islam religious authorities,
including the Imams whom are entrusted with teaching the *shari‘ah*—and
even the Prophet, for that matter—have no right to alter the *shari‘ah*
at their own discretion.

Such questions as the ones posed here stem from the mindset dominant in
Western societies, which depicts Divine prophets merely as gifted
individuals and social reformers who rose up to secure the rights of
their people and to help them advance. Scholars with this mindset
explain that these social reformers had to establish certain rules to
meet the needs of their times.

Thus, they conclude, the rules instituted by these so-called prophets
were the product of their own thought, not divine revelation. But in
order to convince people to follow their instructions, they had to
introduce themselves as prophets sent by God with a revealed book (which
was actually their own work).

If we accept this account, then, we would obviously be obliged to agree
that religious law must change so as to meet the needs of every age.
This account, however, is wrong. Those who put forth such an account
have failed to conduct a thorough study of the teachings of Divine
prophets, grounding their analysis solely on unfounded conjectures. The
Noble Qur’an and the definitive *hadith*s narrated from the Prophet (we
do not take into account the sacred books of previous religions, as they
have been distorted) disprove this account.

I will express a few points very briefly from the Qur’an and the Sunnah:

1. The Qur’an explicitly states that the Prophet has no right to make
changes to the Revelation as he receives it, for he is only a messenger
(see *Surah al-Ma’idah* 5:92 and 99).

2. The Qur’an asserts that Islam is not a product of human intelligence;
it is rather the embodiment of the instructions that God has revealed to
His Prophet (see *Surah al-Haqqah* 69:40-43).

3. In reply to those who accused the Prophet of attributing his own
thoughts to God, the Qur’an affirms that it is the veritable word of
God, and as such its content cannot be the product of the human mind
(see *Surah al-Muddathir* 69:25).

4. The Qur’an expressly announces that Muhammad is the Final Prophet and
the Qur’an the final Revelation, and hence the content of the Qur’an is
valid for all time (see *Surah al-Ahzab* 33:40).

The Question of Islam’s Conflict with Modern Science and Technology
-------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

How can you deny that Islam’s falling into disfavor with the youth is
due to its backward principles, which are incompatible with modern
science and technology?

### Answer

We would have preferred you mentioned a few examples of the “backward
principles” of Islam so that we could have replied with appropriate
arguments. There are no “backward principles” in Islam, though there are
many backward Muslims. Divine religions, in general, and Islam, in
particular, pertain to the eternal life, to humankind’s connection with
the supra-natural. How could this conflict be in any way related to
modern science and technology per se? Modern science and technology deal
with material phenomena and are thus irrelevant to matters that
transcend materiality.

The reason why some Muslim youths turn away from Islam is not a fault on
the part of Islam. This is evidenced by noting that this trend extends
beyond Islam, encompassing even those universal principles that derive
from human conscience and spirituality.

The prevalence of hypocrisy, sexual promiscuity, and libertinism among
educated Muslim youths is proof that they despise truth and virtue
altogether, not only Islam. Nonetheless, there are a good number of
educated Muslim youths who have embellished their souls with virtue and
who remain obedient to the so-called backward Islamic principles. They
see no conflict between Islam and modern science and technology and feel
no dissatisfaction with their lives as believers. Thus, parents and
those responsible for the country’s culture are to blame for the youth’s
discontent with Islam. Islam embodies morality and virtue.

Men’s Deserving Equal Blame for Indecent Acts
---------------------------------------------

### Question

Why is it that in immoral sexual acts, for which the male and the female
parties are equally responsible, women receive a harsher treatment? If
Islam considers men stronger, then they should be better able to rein in
their desires, and so when they violate the bounds of modesty, they
should deserve a more severe punishment.

### Answer

As regards the degree of responsibility in an immoral sexual act, Islam
does not discriminate between the two genders.

A False Contention
------------------

### Question

It is well-known that the Prophet strongly advised foster parents to
treat their adopted children as they treat their real children. Why,
then, did he wish to marry his foster son’s ex-wife?

### Answer

In Islam, the relationship between foster children and foster parents is
not governed by the same regulations that pertain to real children. The
account you mention is historically incorrect. It is a false story
fabricated by Islam’s opponents, especially some Christians of the West.

The Prophet married Zayd’s divorced wife to publically demonstrate the
invalidity of the long-standing pre-Islamic tradition of Arabia,
according to which adopted children were treated as real children. This
tradition had given rise to the practice of trading children among
families. (This issue is mentioned in *Surah al-Ahzab*.)

The Prophet’s Marriage in old Age with Young ‘A’ishah
-----------------------------------------------------

### Question

It is hard to understand why the Prophet, a role model for all humanity,
married, in old age, ‘A’ishah—a girl of nine years.

### Answer

There are two problems that may result from the marriage of an old man
with a young girl. First, the girl may not enjoy having sex with a man
so much older than she. Second, due to the great age difference, the
husband will in all likelihood die before his wife, leaving her widowed.
Although these two problems may render such a marriage undesirable,
there, nevertheless, may exist more important reasons that would make it
viable.

One with a minimum knowledge of Islamic history would agree that the
Prophet was no epicurean. His actions were based on reason, not
sentiment. Thus, this marriage can be construed as the Prophet’s attempt
to demonstrate that age is not a condition in marriage. In addition,
this marriage was advantageous to the Prophet’s ministry.

Let me also add that older men are not necessarily unattractive. A few
years ago, at the time of Eisenhower’s presidency, one of the popular
magazines of the United States conducted a poll, in which single women
were asked to choose their favorite man. Eisenhower turned out to be the
most popular, though he was neither young nor particularly handsome.

Legality of Temporary Marriage in Islam
---------------------------------------

### Question

What is your opinion concerning temporary marriage, which the Sunnis
condemn? Is it not a violation of human rights—objectifying women as
means for the gratification of men?

### Answer

The legality of temporary marriage is affirmed by the *Surah al-Nisa’*
4:24, and thus the Shi‘ahs do not mind the opposition of the Sunnis on
this issue. Temporary marriage is sanctioned by the Qur’an; it was
practiced during the Prophet’s lifetime, the caliphate of the First
Caliph, and part of that of the Second Caliph. The latter, however,
decided to ban temporary marriage. But it should go without saying that
rules established by the Qur’an can be rescinded only by the Qur’an; the
rules of the *shari‘ah* are beyond the authority of the Islamic ruler.

There is, in addition, a different line of reasoning that vindicates
temporary marriage, and it is by heeding the rationale for the legality
of divorce. From a jurisprudential point of view, the legality of
divorce is evidence that marriage can be temporary. (Of course, in
practicing temporary marriage, the parties engaged should be cognizant
of the possible problems that this contract could entail.)

Let me turn to the point about female objectification; this claim is
unfounded. The female party enters into this relationship of her own
accord and enjoys the same benefits and pleasures as the male party; if
it is companionship, pleasure, or having children that they seek, it is
a benefit for both. As such, in this relationship neither party is
victimized.

Moreover, an examination of various societies will show that sexual
relations are not limited to permanent marriage. The reason is that
there are cases where a person’s legitimate sexual needs cannot—for
various reasons—be fulfilled through permanent marriage. And for this
very obvious reason, there is no government that could claim to have
confined sexual relations to temporary marriage and completely
eliminated fornication.

Governments must inevitably accommodate for some sort of temporary
marriage so as to avoid the negative consequences of fornication while
also fully satisfying their constituents’ natural sexual needs. The
Master of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali, once said, “If the Second Caliph had
not banned temporary marriage, only he who is doomed to damnation would
commit fornication.”

I would also like to make a point concerning the questioner’s reference
to “human rights.” My assumption is that the questioner is not alluding
to human rights as treated by the ancient laws of Rome and Hammurabi,
which equated women with animals or, in more humane cases, slaves;
rather, he is referring to the Western “human rights.”

It is unfortunate that we tend to think of the Western society as the
epitome of human civilization and of Western people as perfect examples
of humanity. These societies, which are assumed to be the crown of all
societies, should be examined more closely. What do they practice in
lieu of the “inhuman” temporary marriage? How do men and woman interact
in these “most civilized” societies? How do they confront cases where
permanent marriage is not the solution? For the answer, one only needs
to read the disturbing statistics published in this regard.

Weakness of Muslims not due to Islam
------------------------------------

### Question

Westerners contend that Islam is a religion suitable only to primitive
societies, to rural communities, to nomads, and, generally speaking, to
all those who have failed to keep up with the advanced modern
civilization. As is evident, not a single Muslim nation is among the
technologically advanced. Why is this? Could Islamic principles be
reformed to become acceptable to the intelligentsia and consistent with
modern science?

### Answer

Indeed, Muslim countries are not among the advanced countries. But, the
question is, in which of these countries is Islam really observed?
Carrying the name of Islam is one thing, practicing it another. Other
than a few private rituals that Muslims perform as a habit—prayer,
fasting, and *hajj*—are Islam’s social and legal laws observed? No! So
how can the weakness of Muslims be blamed on Islam?

One may contend that if Islam was a progressive ideology and its
principles conducive to social progress, it would have enjoyed
popularity and would not have been forsaken as it is today. But a look
at the state of liberal democracy will disprove this contention.
Communism has for many years now resisted the incursion of liberal
democracy.

Not only that, it has assailed liberal democracy in its very
stronghold—Europe and America—bringing under its sway nearly half of the
global population. And communism has achieved all this in less than half
a century since its inception. Now, is it legitimate to invoke this
truth to claim that communism is progressive and liberal democracy
backward?[^10]

Furthermore, decadence has beset not only Muslim lands; all Asian and
African countries—whether Hindu, Buddhist, Christian, or Muslim—are in a
similar state of decadence. The fault of Asian and African countries,
which are rich in natural resources, is their being besieged by the
West’s insatiable appetite; they are at once the endless reservoir from
which the West derives its raw materials and the market into which it
pours its myriad products. Their populations, Muslim or otherwise, are
slaves for Western masters, and though they change the pretexts under
which they dominate Eastern countries, they will always view Easterners
as their slaves. And so, as long as Eastern countries remain obedient
slaves to the West, they will never advance.

As regards the second part of your question (could Islamic principles be
reformed to become acceptable to the intelligentsia and consistent with
modern science?), let it be said that Islamic principles, as embodied by
the Qur’an and the Sunnah, are—as these sources themselves
affirm—immutable and unalterable. Islam, as the true religion, is the
straight path, whether the intelligentsia find it palatable or not. It
is they who are in need of embracing the truth; [the truth cannot bend
itself to gratify their vainglory]. God, the Exalted, says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ ۖ قَدْ تَبَيَّنَ الرُّشْدُ مِنَ الْغَيِّ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no compulsion in religion: rectitude has become distinct
from error…”***[^11]

(I would have preferred to hear concrete examples of Islamic principles
that you [the questioner] claim are in conflict with modern science.)

Equal Treatment for All in Islamic Law
--------------------------------------

### Question

The Prophet and Imam ‘Ali both affirmed that a person’s worth is
determined by his conduct, not by family or ethnic ties. Why, then, do
the Shi‘ahs pay special respect to the progeny of ‘Ali and Muhammad?

### Answer

In Islam all are equal before justice, whether king or peasant, rich or
poor, strong or weak, man or woman, white or black; in this respect even
the Prophet and the Imams are equal in relation to all others. Such
biases and privileges should not be grounds to give some more than their
share or deprive others of their rights. This holds even when dealing
with the Prophet’s offspring.

Nonetheless, the Shi‘ahs pay special respect to the Prophet’s progeny in
compliance with the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَىٰ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Say, ‘I do not ask of you any reward…except the affection for the
Relatives’.”***[^12]

The reason why the Qur’an demands that the faithful hold the Prophet’s
household in high esteem became manifest when he passed away. His
children received such cruel treatment as the children of no previous
prophet had ever experienced. For centuries, his children lived under
the harshest circumstances. They were frequently tortured for long
periods in dark dungeons, beheaded, buried alive, and poisoned. After
gaining relative peace and independence, the Shi‘ahs sought to make up
for the cruelties that the Prophet’s progeny had undergone at the hands
of the supposedly Muslim rulers.

The Reason why Consumption of Pork is Prohibited by Islamic Law
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Why does Islam prohibit consumption of pork?

### Answer

It is not only Islam that prohibits eating pork. As the Evangel and the
Torah indicate, eating pork was prohibited in the dietary laws of
previous religions as well. The reason commonly expressed for this
prohibition is that pork is harmful for one’s physical and spiritual
health, for it feeds on canonically unclean materials.

The Reason why Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages is Prohibited by Islam
------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Why does Islam forbid the consumption of alcoholic beverages?

### Answer

Islam considers rationality the differentia that sets humankind above
all other animals and the foundation of knowledge. Obviously,
intoxicants, including alcoholic beverages, undermine this defining
human quality. Alcoholic beverages are responsible, at least partially,
for various crimes, transgressions, and the prevalent immorality. In
addition, alcohol causes physical and mental damage and entails adverse
hereditary effects. This is what the Qur’an says in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِنَّمَا الْخَمْرُ وَالْمَيْسِرُ
وَالْأَنْصَابُ وَالْأَزْلَامُ رِجْسٌ مِنْ عَمَلِ الشَّيْطَانِ
فَاجْتَنِبُوهُ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ الشَّيْطَانُ أَنْ يُوقِعَ بَيْنَكُمُ الْعَدَاوَةَ
وَالْبَغْضَاءَ فِي الْخَمْرِ وَالْمَيْسِرِ وَيَصُدَّكُمْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ
اللَّهِ وَعَنِ الصَّلَاةِ ۖ فَهَلْ أَنْتُمْ مُنْتَهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Indeed wine, gambling, idols, and the divining
arrows are an abomination of Satan’s doing, so avoid them, so that you
may be felicitous. Indeed Satan seeks to cast enmity and hatred among
you through wine and gambling, and to hinder you from the remembrance of
God and from prayer. Will you, then, relinquish?”***[^13]

Islam’s Restrictions on Sexual Relations
----------------------------------------

### Question

How does Islam view love and sexual relations?

### Answer

Intimate relations (intercourse or actions that may lead to that end)
between the two sexes are forbidden outside marriage. The reason for
this prohibition is not the possibility that such extramarital relations
may infringe on the rights of one of the two parties—as is the purported
basis for the limitations established by laws of democratic states.
Indeed, if this was the reason, it could have been argued that mutual
consent of the two parties involved would render such a relationship
legitimate.

This limitation is based on considerations concerning the wellbeing of
the society and the importance of identifying the fathers of children
born into a society. On the basis of these considerations, all types of
fornication are illegitimate. It is on account of these same social
concerns that Islamic law considers homosexuality a crime.[^14]

The Irrevocability of Islamic Law
---------------------------------

### Question

What is your opinion regarding the question of reform in Islamic law? If
you consider reform possible, shouldn’t religious authorities take the
lead? Or are they waiting for the reform to happen and then to passively
acquiesce?

### Answer

I have given a thorough explanation regarding this question in previous
chapters, thus I will only briefly summarize what I have said there. The
*shari‘ah*, the irrevocable law from God, is timeless. Religious
authorities have no right to take the lead or to follow others. In this
regard, God speaks the following words to the Noble Prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلَا أَنْ ثَبَّتْنَاكَ لَقَدْ كِدْتَ تَرْكَنُ إِلَيْهِمْ شَيْئًا
قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذًا لَأَذَقْنَاكَ ضِعْفَ الْحَيَاةِ وَضِعْفَ الْمَمَاتِ ثُمَّ لَا
تَجِدُ لَكَ عَلَيْنَا نَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Had We not fortified you, certainly you might have inclined toward
[the pagans] a bit. Then We would have surely made you taste a double
punishment in this life and a double punishment after death, and then
you would have not found for yourself any helper against Us.”***[^15]

The Qur’an and the Sunnah: The only Sources of Islamic Doctrine
---------------------------------------------------------------

### Question

Do you have absolute faith in every Islamic doctrine and rule? Do you
ever consider the possibility that they may be invalid?

### Answer

Any doctrine or rule that is not derived from the Qur’an or the Sunnah
is unwarranted. The articles of the *shari‘ah*, however, are beyond
doubt. They are based on definitive sources. Thus it is impermissible to
violate them on the pretext of their being doubtful.

Explaining a Saying of Imam ‘Ali
--------------------------------

### Question

There is a saying of Imam ‘Ali to the effect that we should not be
Muslim on account of our parents’ being Muslim. We should believe only
that which we can reasonably accept. Considering this saying, don’t you
think that every individual should be allowed to accept those Islamic
principles that he finds reasonable and put aside those of which he is
not convinced?

### Answer

The saying in question is in reference to the principal religious
doctrines, which one must accept through rational reasoning. It does not
pertain to religious law, which the believer must accept on faith; he
cannot select certain rules and reject others. All legal systems require
this cohesion, and so it is not peculiar to Islam. When an authority
enforces a law, it is taken for granted that all the rules included are
binding. Allowing people to select from the rules those they find
desirable will inevitably lead to the dissolution of law. Thus, even
so-called democratic constitutions do not permit such freedom.

Furthermore, when one affirms Islam’s principal doctrines, one is
implicitly agreeing that all Islamic rules are from God, and He is
unerring. The purpose of the rules He has established is to secure the
true interests of humankind. The acknowledgment of this truth will lead
to unquestioning faith, even in relation to the rules whose logic one is
ignorant of.

Islam, the True Religion from God
---------------------------------

### Question

Following on the previous question, the saying could also be read to
indicate that every individual is free to choose the religion he finds
agreeable?

### Answer

Religion, in general, consists of a belief system regarding the world
and the human being and a set of practices whose function is to ensure
the conformity of the believer’s conduct with the belief system.
Religion is not a diversion that one could choose whimsically. It is,
rather, a truth to which one must conform, though voluntarily. To make
this tangible, let me cite an analogy.

It is a matter of fact that the Sun is the luminous source that
enlightens the day. Are we free to express every illusion that may pass
our mind regarding the Sun as a scientific theory? Obviously, we have no
such liberty. The correct approach is to acknowledge the truth and make
our life conform to it. Thus, if the saying in question, coming from a
religious authority of Islam, really meant that people were free to
choose whichever religion they pleased, it would have been a sign that
Islam was a false religion.

The Qur’an as the authoritative source of Islamic doctrine says the
following in regard to this question:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الدِّينَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ الْإِسْلَامُ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed with God, the [true] religion is Islam…”***[^16]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
وَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Should anyone follow a religion other than Islam, it shall never be
accepted from him, and he will be among the losers in the
Hereafter…”***[^17]

From the various religions that exist around the world, Islam grants
recognition only to three: Christianity, Judaism, and Zoroastrianism.
But what this recognition means—as may be inferred from the Qur’an—is
that their adherents may maintain their religion in an Islamic state
without being forced to convert to Islam, not that these religions are
valid.

The Crescent as the Symbol of Islam
-----------------------------------

### Question

Why does the crescent represent Islam?

### Answer

In Islam there is no such symbol as the crescent. The star and the
crescent came into widespread use as the symbol of Islam following the
Crusades to oppose the Christian symbol of the Cross, and the flags of
most Muslim countries now incorporate this symbol.

Voyage to the Moon from the Perspective of Islam
------------------------------------------------

### Question

What is your opinion concerning the voyage to the moon, which will be
possible for humankind in the near future?

### Answer

There is not a particular Islamic point of view concerning the voyage to
the moon. What can, however, be said in this regard is that in Islam the
planets and stars, with the amazing order that governs their motion, are
viewed as evidence of the One, Wise God, who has created everything
there is in the universe for the sake of the human being.

The Role of Arabic Language in Islamic Culture
----------------------------------------------

### Question

Why has Arabic been placed among the requirements of faith such that
Muslims are obliged to recite the Qur’an, the prayers and other rituals
in Arabic?

### Answer

The reason Muslims are obliged to learn the Qur’an in its original
language is that the Qur’an is a miracle in its literature as well as in
its meaning. Moreover, Islam requires that the words of the prayer be
uttered in Arabic. In addition, the main sources of Islam—the Qur’an and
the *hadith*s passed down from the Prophet and the Imams—are in Arabic.
It is the combination of these factors that give Arabic the special
status it enjoys among Muslims.

The Wretched State of the Jewry
-------------------------------

### Question

In the past, some Muslims were of the opinion that Jews will never have
an independent country of their own. To support this view, they would
cite some *hadith*s recorded in some Islamic sources. The establishment
of the state of Israel, which has in the very short time since its
inception become one of the most advanced Asian countries, proves this
opinion to be incorrect.

Thus, is it not plausible that the *hadith*s in question were fabricated
under the direction of those whose policy was to keep the people of this
part of the world in ignorance by encouraging hypocrisy and animosity?

### Answer

The governments of Great Britain, France, and the United Sates have
occupied Palestine. They have granted a portion of this country to the
illegitimate state of Israel, aiding it in every possible way. They have
prevented Muslim countries from forming a united front against this
false state.

In any event, the notion that some Muslims derived such a view from some
*hadith*s recorded in some Islamic sources is incorrect. This notion is
publicized by imperialist regimes in line with their policies to weaken
people’s faith in Islam. First of all, the view Muslims hold in respect
to the fate of the Jewry is not as stated above, and, second, their view
is derived from the Qur’an, not some *hadith*s.

After recounting the crimes and treacheries committed by Jews and
exhorting Muslims to remain united in preserving the doctrines and
practices of Islam, and warning them against befriending and following
non-Muslims, God, the Exalted, says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الذِّلَّةُ أَيْنَ مَا ثُقِفُوا إِلَّا بِحَبْلٍ
مِنَ اللَّهِ وَحَبْلٍ مِنَ النَّاسِ وَبَاءُوا بِغَضَبٍ مِنَ اللَّهِ
وَضُرِبَتْ عَلَيْهِمُ الْمَسْكَنَةُ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ بِأَنَّهُمْ كَانُوا
يَكْفُرُونَ بِآيَاتِ اللَّهِ وَيَقْتُلُونَ الْأَنْبِيَاءَ بِغَيْرِ
حَقٍّ ۚ ذَٰلِكَ بِمَا عَصَوْا وَكَانُوا يَعْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Abasement has been stamped upon them wherever they are
confronted—except for a relief from God and a relief from the people—and
they earned the wrath of God, and poverty was stamped upon them. That,
because they would defy the signs of God and kill the prophets unjustly;
that, because they would disobey and commit transgression.”***[^18]

The “relief” from God and the people is clarified by the following two
verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ
وَالنَّصَارَىٰ أَوْلِيَاءَ ۘ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ ۚ وَمَنْ
يَتَوَلَّهُمْ مِنْكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Do not take the Jews and the Christians for
friends: they are friends of each other. Any of you who takes them as
friends is indeed one of them. Indeed God does not guide the wrongdoing
lot.”***[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ يَئِسَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا مِنْ دِينِكُمْ فَلَا تَخْشَوْهُمْ
وَاخْشَوْنِ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Today the faithless have despaired of your religion. So do not fear
them, but fear Me…”***[^20]

As you can see, the Qur’an promises the advance of Islam and the defeat
of the Jewry, on the condition that Muslims comply with Islamic law and
maintain unity. The verses, however, warn that should Muslims establish
friendly ties with opponents of Islam, God will reverse the tide against
them: Muslims will lose their prominence and non-Muslims will prevail.

But in spite of what I have said regarding this particular issue, there
is no question that there are unauthentic *hadith*s in the Islamic
corpus. This is a fact on which all Muslim scholars are in agreement.
There is no need to resort to such gratuitous issues to prove the point.
It is an accepted historical fact that after the death of the Prophet,
some hypocrites and Jews, who only pretended to have embraced Islam,
forged many false *hadith*s.

It is for this reason that before accepting a *hadith*, scholars of
Islamic sciences apply a number of technical criteria designed to
distinguish false *hadith*s from authentic ones. It is interesting to
note that the Prophet had actually foretold that this will happen as is
recorded in numerous *hadith*s, one of which is the following:

“If there reaches you [after my death] a saying from me, appraise it
with God’s Book; that which agrees with it, you should accept, and that
which disagrees with it, you should slam to the wall [i.e., discard it
as unauthentic].”[^21]

[^1]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:195.

[^2]: That is, acting as the head of state; but, other governmental
positions are open to women. [trans.]

[^3]: That is, women’s aversion to polygamy, which is more prevalent in
Western countries, is not due to an inherent tendency; it rather results
from certain cultural factors present in some—not all—regions. [trans.]

[^4]: Surah al-Rum 30:30.

[^5]: Surah al-Hujurat 49: 13.

[^6]: Surah al-Zumar 39:9.

[^7]: In Islamic law, when a child is suckled by a woman other than her
mother, the woman is legally her second mother and her children the
siblings of the suckling. As such, the same marriage rules that apply to
one’s real mother and siblings apply to one’s mother- and
siblings-by-suckling. [trans.]

[^8]: I must reexamine what comes before this point (the first part of
this chapter and the previous chapters) to make sure that subjunctives
are used correctly. [note]

[^9]: A discontinuous chain of transmission is one in which one or more
transmitters are lacking. In the science of hadithology [‘ilm
al-dirayah] such a chain of transmission is considered a defect that
reduces the possibility of it’s being authentic. [trans.]

[^10]: Although the example that ‘Allamah cites is no longer existent,
the essence of this comparison is nonetheless true. What ‘Allamah is
arguing for is that the rise and fall in the popularity of an ideology
is no evidence, for or against, its truth. The Earth was round even when
Galileo was persecuted for saying so. As such, even if Islam were
unpopular, that would not make Islam any less true. [trans.]

[^11]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:256.

[^12]: Surah al-Shawra 42:23; “the Relatives”: the Prophet’s household
as clarified by verse 33 of Surah al-Ahzab: إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ
لِيُذْهِبَ عَنْكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ
تَطْهِيرًا “purify Indeed God has willed to purge you, O People of the
Household, of all impurity and to you—a thorough purification.” This
phrase is in reference to ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan, and al-Husayn (“the
Relatives” as mentioned in 42:23). This reading is unambiguously
indicated by the sudden change in tone, which separates this phrase from
what comes before and what follows. In his Qur’anic commentary, Jalal
al-Din al-Suyuti—the highly esteemed Sunni scholar—provides a number of
traditions that confirm the reading presented here of the two verses in
question; see Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Al-Durr al-Manthur (Dar
al-Ma‘rifah: Beirut), vol. 5, pp. 198-9 and vol. 6, p. 7. [trans.]

[^13]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:90-91

[^14]: It should be noted that in this answer, ‘Allamah approaches the
question from a strictly legal standpoint. Otherwise, there are also
moral and spiritual grounds for the restrictions Islam imposes on sexual
relations. [trans.]

[^15]: Surah Isra’ 17:74-75.

[^16]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:19.

[^17]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:85.

[^18]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:112.

[^19]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:51.

[^20]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:3; these two verses express that as long as
Muslims are true to each other, refrain from pursuing friendly ties with
opponents of Islam, and observe Islamic law (“fear Me”), they will enjoy
God’s guidance and, consequently, prominence. Otherwise, they will fail
and others will prevail, thus providing relief to the Jewry to resume
their unjust and domineering ways. How true are the words of God! This
is exactly what plagues Muslims today. (Let me add that what ‘Allamah
states here is not an anti-Semitic expression. By Jewry, he, as the
Qur’an, intends the greater majority of them that unfortunately hold
racist views concerning other people.) [trans.]

[^21]: See Amin al-Islam Abu ‘Ali al-Fadl ibn al-Hasan al-Tabrasi,
Majma‘ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, vol. 1, p. 13, Mu’assisah al-A‘lami
li al-Matbu‘at: Beirut, 1995.


