Chapter 5: Human Origin and End
===============================

Question
--------

About twenty years ago in Tabriz, in a literary circle, one of my
friends mentioned a few points concerning determinism, freedom, and how
human conduct is evaluated. He said that human beings return to the life
of this world many times—between 80 to 100 times. Of course, they return
not in the form of vegetables or animals, as some believers in
reincarnation hold; rather, they return as human beings, and their
affairs in each life is determined by their conduct in the previous
life. It is only this explanation, he insisted, that could account for
the many hardships and difficulties that people experience in this
world.

Adam, for instance, sinned and was expelled to the earth. He died but
was subsequently returned to the earth to receive the treatment he had
earned in his previous life. All people undergo such consecutive lives.
In each life they are different. In one life, they may be scholars, in
others laypeople; in some they may be rulers, in others ordinary
citizens; in some they may be beautiful, in others ugly; and so on and
so forth.

It is only after living many lives and passing many tests that they earn
what they actually deserve. It is based on this truth, he contended,
that the Qur’an asserts that on the Day of Judgment no one will object
to the evaluation of his deeds. This friend argued that if this was not
the case, it would be unjust that one should turn out to be the Prophet
and another Shimr.[^1]

Another point that my friend made was that Adam was not literally an
individual human being as I and you. He was the universal human being,
subsuming in his existence all individual human beings, similar to a
cluster of grape, which encompasses many grapes. As the human beings
collectively sinned they were ousted from Paradise. If Adam was merely
one individual human being who had sinned, why then should other humans
bear the burden of his sin? To support this claim he also cited the
Qur’anic verse that states that humankind made a pledge to God,
indicating that all human beings were present along with Adam.

Another issue raised by this friend, which relates to the first point,
was that if each individual had only one life and then died for good,
the majority of humans would not deserve entrance into Paradise nor
damnation to Hell. They would rather have a middle position, since the
good and bad deeds of most people are equal.

This contradicts the Qur’anic division of humanity into the people of
Paradise and the people of Hell. The only explanation that could account
for such division, according to this friend, is that afforded by
reincarnation [*tanasukh*]. After experiencing life in this world over
and over again, it is then that people attain to what they deserve,
whether it be damnation to Hell or entry into Paradise.

Please respond to these questions.

Answer
------

To answer the questions raised above duly, one would need to provide
detailed explanations. This, however, is not possible for me at present,
for a variety of reasons. Therefore, I will treat these questions in
brief, in the hope that the questioner will find his answer.

The belief that the soul returns to this world after death in another
life is referred to as reincarnation. The advocates of this belief are,
for the main part, idol-worshipers. They are of the opinion that if an
individual succeeds in purifying his soul of all worldly impurities, he
will attain union with God and, consequently, divinity. If, however, he
fails to reach this lofty goal, there are two possibilities.

If he was virtuous in his prior life, he will return to this world in
another body to be rewarded in worldly pleasures. This process will
repeat, and each time he will be compensated in accordance with his
conduct in the prior life. This is if he was virtuous in the previous
life. If, however, he was evil, he will return to this world to be
punished for his wrongs; he may degenerate into a lower form of
existence, even possibly turning into an inanimate object. But,
regardless of the person’s moral state, reincarnation will continue
indefinitely. It is based on this belief that believers in reincarnation
deny a Day of Judgment and claim that the world is eternal.

This friend of yours, however, limits the number of reincarnations to
100. He believes in the Day of Judgment and in Resurrection but does not
accept the idea of an individual progenitor for humankind. He disagrees
with the main advocates of reincarnation in that he accepts the Islamic
notion of receiving reward or punishment in the Hereafter. Thus, his
explanation of reincarnation is that the human being in the course of
multiple lives attains to the status that is appropriate to him, but his
requital will be delivered on the Day of Judgment. His argument for
supporting this belief is grounded on several points.

First, one life is insufficient grounds for determining an individual’s
character. As such, any divine evaluation based on a single life would
be arbitrary. To accept such arbitrary evaluation is tantamount to
acquiescing to the notion of determinism (that human beings have no
choice as to the life they lead, and it is God who predetermines one as
the Prophet and another as Shimr). And the logical conclusion of
determinism is God’s injustice. Thus, if we wish to avoid this
conclusion, we have no choice, this friend argues, but to embrace the
doctrine of reincarnation.

Second, we know by the testimony of the Qur’an that on the Day of
Judgment all creatures will accept God’s evaluation of their conduct.
This acceptance is undoubtedly due to their genuine agreement not out of
fear of God’s wrath, for that would implicate God’s injustice. This
friend claims that the only reasonable explanation for this agreement is
the doctrine of reincarnation: those who receive a negative evaluation
know that they deserve it, for they were given multiple chances, but
they still failed.

Third, a single life is too short to offer all people equal
opportunities. On the Day of Judgment, the thief could argue that he was
penniless and so was forced to steal. One guilty of fornication could
legitimately claim that the circumstances were not right for marriage,
and so fornication was out of necessity. Hence, one life is too limited
a basis for dividing humankind into the righteous, who go to heaven, and
the evil, who end up in Hell.

These are the central points in your friend’s line of reasoning. He is,
however, incorrect on every account. First, his limiting the number of
reincarnations to 80 or 100 is unwarranted. But in spite of that, the
Qur’an—which treats of human life and conduct and eschatology in
numerous verses—makes no mention of reincarnation. On the contrary, it
states that there is only one life in this world:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَيْفَ تَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَكُنْتُمْ أَمْوَاتًا فَأَحْيَاكُمْ ۖ
ثُمَّ يُمِيتُكُمْ ثُمَّ يُحْيِيكُمْ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You were lifeless and He gave you life, then He will make you die,
and then He shall bring you to life, and then you will be brought back
to Him.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا رَبَّنَا أَمَتَّنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ وَأَحْيَيْتَنَا اثْنَتَيْنِ
فَاعْتَرَفْنَا بِذُنُوبِنَا فَهَلْ إِلَىٰ خُرُوجٍ مِنْ سَبِيلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They will say, ‘Our Lord! Twice did You make us die, and twice did
You give us life. We admit our sins. Is there any way out [of this
plight]?”***[^3]

The latter verse quotes those sentenced to Hell and unambiguously points
out that humankind experience two deaths: one to the life of this world
and another to the life of the Intermediate World [*barzakh*].

The first objection that this friend states is the problem of
determinism. But if determinism is to pose a problem, a multiplicity of
lives would not solve it. Suppose a person is reincarnated 100 times,
and each time he commits a sin—say, murder. In such a case, the
determinist will still hold that the punishment that the individual in
question will receive on account of the murder is unjust, as he
committed it involuntarily.

If, however, we side with the proponents of freewill, to which we are
naturally inclined, we will acknowledge that when a sane adult commits a
crime, he deserves due punishment. It is unreasonable to claim that one
must commit a misdeed 100 times, for instance, in order to deserve
retribution. In this light, Shimr’s heinous decision to slay the
grandson of the Prophet was his choice, and thus he alone bears the
burden. God does not dictate anyone’s life.

This friend’s next premise is that people will willingly submit to God’s
judgment. From this, he infers that the human being experiences more
than one life in this world, for otherwise he would be displeased with
God’s judgment. This inference, however, is flawed. Humankind’s
submission to God’s judgment is on account of their awareness that they
had many opportunities in their worldly life to rectify their conduct,
but they failed to take advantage of them.

The shame of their guilt will force them into silence. (In this
relation, it is helpful to consider that all of what we have in this
life, even our very existence, are God’s bounties, which He has bestowed
on us. Our relation to Him is one of absolute indebtedness, and this
makes the burden of our guilt on the Day of Judgment even more onerous.)

This friend further contends that distinguishing righteous people from
evil people is fortuitous unless they live more than one life. Again,
this contention is invalid. Sound reason rules that three factors
suffice in designating an individual as guilty or innocent: adulthood,
sanity, and voluntary performance. When these three factors are present
in an individual and he commits a misdeed, he is guilty, regardless of
any other factor. This is the basis of law in all civilized societies,
and it is also endorsed by Islamic law.

According to the Qur’an, we deserve the reward or punishment of every
single deed we perform. For this reason, it exhorts believers to repent
even if only for a single sin; one need not be an inveterate sinner to
repent. Islamic law defines penalties—including the death penalty—even
for individuals guilty of a single crime.[^4] This is God’s judgment in
this world, and it is unreasonable to assume that it will be different
in the Hereafter.

The above explanation makes clear that for most people one life is
sufficient to determine their fate in the Hereafter. But in cases where
a person’s good and bad deeds are truly balanced, such that neither side
prevails, those entrusted by God with the authority to intercede will
secure his entrance to Heaven.[^5] (Of course, this intervention is not
arbitrary. It is granted to those who have faith in their worldly life
but who commit too many sins to be allowed into Heaven on account of
their conduct.)

Let us now consider more thoroughly Qur’an’s treatment of this subject.
In respect to the final outcome, the Qur’an distinguishes two groups:
those who will attain to felicity in Heaven and those damned to Hell—

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ شَقُوا فَفِي النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الَّذِينَ سُعِدُوا فَفِي الْجَنَّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As for the wretched, they shall be in the Fire… As for the
felicitous, they will be in Paradise.”***[^6]

This is in relation to the final outcome. At the time of reckoning,
however, there will be three groups: the righteous who have earned their
entry into Heaven, the damned who will certainly enter Hell, and the
oppressed [*mustad‘afin*], those whose cases are unsettled. Regarding
the latter group, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآخَرُونَ مُرْجَوْنَ لِأَمْرِ اللَّهِ إِمَّا يُعَذِّبُهُمْ وَإِمَّا
يَتُوبُ عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“[They] are waiting God’s edict: either He shall punish them, or turn
to them clemently…”***[^7]

And in yet another division, the Qur’an points to two groups of
felicitous people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنْتُمْ أَزْوَاجًا ثَلَاثَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“You will be three groups: the People of the Right Hand—and what are
the People of the Right Hand? And the People of the Left Hand—and what
are the People of the Left Hand? And the Foremost Ones are the Foremost
ones.”***[^8]

This friend’s other thesis is that Adam is the universal human being,
not a particular individual. He supports this thesis with two lines of
reasoning. First, the story of Adam’s fall indicates that all human
beings were present at the time. If Adam as a specific human being was
exclusively to blame for the sin, it would be unjust for others to bear
the consequence. We are still suffering from the consequence, and
therefore, we are all guilty of that sin. Conclusion: we were all
present at and complicit in that incident.

Second, the Qur’an states that prior to our existence in this world, God
made us acknowledge that He was our Lord, lest we should claim on the
Day of Judgment that we were ignorant.[^9] This reveals that all human
beings were created before this world and so were present when the
primordial sin was committed.

His line of reasoning, however, is fallacious. We derive the story of
Adam from the Qur’an, not from the Torah or the Evangel or any other
mythic source. The Qur’an very clearly describes Adam as a human
individual and the progenitor of humankind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَأ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ مِنْ
نَفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَخَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَبَثَّ مِنْهُمَا رِجَالًا
كَثِيرًا وَنِسَاءً ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O humankind! Be wary of your Lord who created you from a single
soul, and created its mate from it, and, from the two of them, scattered
numerous men and women…”***[^10]

This verse declares Adam and Eve as the progenitors of humankind.

The other aspect of this thesis is to some degree true. That is, all
human beings have the potential to attain to the status of Divine
vicegerency, and so Adam was, as it were, humankind’s representative: we
are possessed of the same qualities that gave Adam his distinctive
position. This is no indication, however, that human beings were
actually present there.

But as regards Adam’s sin, the popular conception is incorrect. The
Qur’an makes it clear that prior to Adam and Eve’s descent to earth,
religion had not yet been ordained:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْنَا اهْبِطُوا مِنْهَا جَمِيعًا ۖ فَإِمَّا يَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ مِنِّي
هُدًى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We said, ‘Descend together. When guidance comes to you from
Me…’”***[^11]

As such, it is incorrect to speak of sin, for sin is a violation of
religious law. In this light, the prohibition on eating from the
forbidden tree was not binding; it was an advisory warning, which God
made out of His love for Adam.

This friend argues that all human beings were present with Adam and
abetted him in the primordial sin. The reason is that they are also
bearing the burden: expulsion from Paradise and banishment to earth; God
would definitely not commit such an injustice as punishing the innocent.
But this line of reasoning is, once again, false.

The truth is that God meant for humankind to live and procreate on the
earth from the very start. When God intended to create Adam, he thus
addressed the angels:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي الْأَرْضِ خَلِيفَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Indeed I am going to set a vicegerent on the earth…”***[^12]

The angels also knew that the human being was meant to live on the
earth. This is evident from the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتَجْعَلُ فِيهَا مَنْ يُفْسِدُ فِيهَا وَيَسْفِكُ الدِّمَاءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Will You set in [the earth] one who will cause corruption in it,
and shed blood…”***[^13]

Even Satan knew that Adam and Eve’s presence in Paradise was not
permanent and that they had to leave in order to procreate:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ أَرَأَيْتَكَ هَٰذَا الَّذِي كَرَّمْتَ عَلَيَّ لَئِنْ أَخَّرْتَنِ
إِلَىٰ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ لَأَحْتَنِكَنَّ ذُرِّيَّتَهُ إِلَّا
قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Said [Satan], ‘Do You see this one whom You have honored above me?
If You respite me until the Day of Resurrection, I will surely
destroy*** ***his progeny*****,** ***all except a few.”***[^14]

Thus, the stratagem he contrived for deceiving them pertained to their
procreative aspect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَوَسْوَسَ لَهُمَا الشَّيْطَانُ لِيُبْدِيَ لَهُمَا مَا وُورِيَ
عَنْهُمَا مِنْ سَوْآتِهِمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then Satan tempted them to expose to them what was hidden from them
of their nakedness [i.e., their genitalia]…”***[^15]

Thus, the human being’s presence in Paradise was a preparation for his
descent to the earth, for ordainment of religion, and for his
acquaintance with religious discipline. The degree of perfection that
the human being can achieve in the earth with guidance from divine
religion is much higher than what he had in Paradise before coming to
the earth. Though life in the earth is afflicted with hardship (the
Qur’an says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْنَا يَا آدَمُ إِنَّ هَٰذَا عَدُوٌّ لَكَ وَلِزَوْجِكَ فَلَا
يُخْرِجَنَّكُمَا مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ فَتَشْقَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…do not let [Satan] expel you two [Adam and Even] from Paradise, or
you will be miserable…”***[^16]

Also, He said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنْسَانَ فِي كَبَدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We created man in travail.”***[^17]

But it is the prelude to the eternal life of the Hereafter. Life in this
world is a test:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَبْلُوكُمْ بِالشَّرِّ وَالْخَيْرِ فِتْنَةً ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…We will inflict on you good and ill as a test…”***[^18]

Through this test, the human being can achieve such a level of
perfection as would be impossible without it.

[^1]: In the tragedy of Karbala, the officer of Yazid’s army who
beheaded the Prophet’s grandson, al-Husayn. [trans.]

[^2]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:28; according to this verse, the human being is
brought to life, then he passes into the Intermediate World [barzakh],
then he is resurrected on the Day of Judgment, and finally he attains to
the final abode. Thus there is only one life in this world. [trans.]

[^3]: Surah al-Ghafir (or Mu’min) 40:11.

[^4]: Please note that ‘Allamah’s intention here is only to prove that
we are responsible for every action we perform. Otherwise, Islam’s penal
code is very civil. For the execution of any penalty, there are a number
of provisions that must be fulfilled. An extensive treatment of Islam’s
penal code is way beyond the scope of this book. [trans.]

[^5]: The following verse is one instance where the Qur’an mentions the
doctrine of intervention: يَعْلَمُ مَا بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَمَا
خَلْفَهُمْ وَلَا يَشْفَعُونَ إِلَّا لِمَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ وَهُمْ مِنْ
خَشْيَتِهِ مُشْفِقُونَ “He knows that which is before them and that
which is behind them, and they do not intercede except for someone He
approves of…” (Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:28)

[^6]: Surah Hud 11:106-108.

[^7]: Surah al-Tawbah (or Bara’ah) 9:106.

[^8]: Surah al-Waqi‘ah 56:7-11.

[^9]: See Surah al-A‘raf 7:172-3. [trans.]

[^10]: Surah al-Nisa’ 4:1.

[^11]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:38.

[^12]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:30.

[^13]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:30.

[^14]: Surah Isra’ (or Bani Isra’il) 17:62.

[^15]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:20; in the Islamic tradition, the Forbidden Tree
is not a source of knowledge of good and evil as the Judeo-Christian
tradition has it (Genesis 2 and 3) but a source of sensual debauchery.
Thus the Qur’an states that when Adam and Even ate from its fruit, they
saw one another’s private parts, of which they had previously been
unaware. [trans.]

[^16]: Surah Ta Ha 20:117.

[^17]: Surah al-Balad 90:4.

[^18]: Surah al-Anbiya’ 21:35.


