Chapter 80: Renaissance in Indo-Pakistan (Continued): Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan as a Politician, Historian, and Reformist
=====================================================================================================================

A: Introductory
---------------

Born of a distinguished family of Delhi in 1232/1817, Sayyid Ahmad was
brought up under the care of his mother and went through the customary
schooling. He started his literary career in 1273/1856 when he began to
write for his brother’s journal, *Sayyid al-Akhbar*. After the fashion
of the time he took to composing poetry but the hobby did not hold his
interest for long.

The death of his father in 1254/1838 sent him out into the world in
quest of a living. His first occupation was a petty job in a civil court
under the East India Company at Delhi. He earned promotions by sheer
merit and served first at Agra and then at Fatehpur Sikri. In 1263/1846,
he was sent back to Delhi at his own request. Before coming to this
place he had compiled a few tracts on such diverse subjects as history,
science, theology, and civil law, dealing with them each in a distinctly
medieval spirit.

In addition to his official duties at Delhi, he re-read intensively a
number of medieval Muslim classics, sat in the company of prominent
poets and men of letters, practised medicine for some time, and busied
himself with the first round of his researches in history which
culminated in the *Athar al-Sanadid*, a work which would do credit to
any professional historian.

After seven years’ stay at Delhi his employers transferred him to
Bijnaur as a civil judge. The rising known as the Mutiny of 1273-74/1857
broke out while he was stationed there. The rulers foisted the
responsibility for this on the Muslims and singled them out for a fierce
vendetta. The Muslim losses by way of seizures, confiscations, and
malicious persecutions were colossal.

In Sayyid Ahmad’s own words: “Scores of illustrious families were laid
low. Theirs is a harrowing tale. I was heedless of my personal
sufferings, grievous though they were. I was shocked at the afflictions
of my people.... I was seized with despair. I lost all hope of Muslims’
ever rising again and recovering their departed grandeur. I stood aghast
at the tragedy. I could not stand Muslim tribulations. The gnawing agony
aged me prematurely. I wanted to say good-bye to the country of my birth
and settle down in a foreign land. However.... I realized that I should
not desert my post, but stand by my people in their ordeal and sink or
swim with them....”[^1]

Sayyid Ahmad viewed the Mutiny as an outcome of racial misunderstand­ing
and administrative blunders. After the outbreak had been quelled, he
threw himself heart and soul into the task of bringing about a better
under­standing between the British and the Indians, and between the
British and the Muslims. His thought-provoking book on the causes of the
revolt and his com­mentary on the Bible belong to this period.

He anticipated his educational work by setting up two schools in the
cities of Muradabad and Ghazipur. In 1281/1864, he founded the
Scientific Society, almost the first learned body in Northern India. The
periodical of this association, *The Aligarh Institute Gazette*, was
noted for its sober tone, objective reporting, and scrupulous avoidance
of cheap journalistic tricks, qualities rare in early Indian
journal­ism.

Three years later, Sayyid Ahmad found himself involved in an unedifying
wrangle with the protagonists of Hindi who were determined to do away
with Urdu as the language of the law-courts in Upper India. This
together with his visit to England in 1286-87/1869-70 gave a fresh
orientation to his ideas and a new direction to his efforts and he
dedicated himself to the social and intellectual regeneration of the
Indian Muslims.

On his return to India Sayyid Ahmad brought out his magazine, the
*Tahdhib al-Akhlaq*, with the sub-title *Mohammedan Social Reformer*.
This bright periodical had a chequerred career and ultimately its
publication ceased in 1311/1893. Sayyid Abmad himself was its principal
contributor. The essays that he wrote for it are universally
acknowledged among the classics of Urdu literature. They examined the
foundations of Muslim society and subjected Muslim institutions to a
powerful searchlight.

Whereas Bentham inquired into the utilitarian bases of institutions,
Sayyid Ahmad applied to them the test of reason and religious sanction.
The *Tahdhib* gathered round itself a select and highly discriminating
readership that shared Sayyid Ahmad’s zeal for reform. It countered on
the one hand the forces of scepticism and irreligion unleashed by
Western influences, and on the other beat down the firmly entrenched
opposition to Western education.

Towards the end, Sayyid Ahmad devoted himself more and more to the
Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, which was, an imaginative educational
experiment intended to develop into a character-building residential
institution. The College produced a unique community of alumni and in
due season Aligarh became the political and educational capital of
Muslim India.

The cognate organization, the All-India Mohammadan Educational
Conference, founded by Sayyid Ahmad in 1304/1886, became a lively forum
for the discussion of social and educational questions and proved to be
an important factor in promoting Muslim solidarity in the sub-continent.

Sayyid Ahmad resolutely declined to be drawn into politics. “Educate,
educate, educate...” was his watchword. His decision to hold aloof from
the political movement has been often maligned and caricatured as a
counsel of political reactionism. The misunderstanding arises primarily
from an attempt at studying his ideas out of context and disregarding
the circum­stances of the times.

A more realistic appraisal of his political creed in the context of
contemporary events is urgently called for. Be that as it may, Sayyid
Ahmad’s political testament prevented the absorption of the Muslim
community into Hindu nationalism and finally resulted in the partition
of the Indian sub-continent into its Hindu and Muslim zones. He was
knighted in 1305/1888, and after a long intellectual and political
career passed away at Aligarh in 1315/1898 at the ripe age of
eighty-one.

B: The Sayyid as a Historian
----------------------------

Sayyid Ahmad had the intellectual make-up of a true historian and his
entire thinking was coloured with a deep sense of obligation to the
past. But he was seldom obsessed with it, and did not become, like
Burke, one of its unreasoning worshippers. Indeed, he could distinguish
between its healthy and injurious legacies. He viewed political and
social problems in the light of history and his ideas bore a close
resemblance to the findings of the historical school in political
science.

As a historian he was concrete and objective. His monograph on the
history of the Mutiny in the district of Bijnaur, entitled *Tarikh-i
Sarkashi-i Bijnaur*, opens with the following observations about the
responsibility of a historian:

“The contents of this book mostly deal with what I saw with my own eyes
and did with my own hands. I have taken great pains to ascertain the
truth of events and incidents beyond my own experience. Tampering with
historical truth is a fraudulent enterprise. (It damages the truth and)
its evil influence works forever. Thus, the sinful irresponsibility of
the historian be­comes everlasting.”

A *resume* of Sayyid Ahmad’s historical writings must naturally begin
with the *Athar al-Sanadid* that deals with the ancient buildings and
historical monuments of Delhi and its suburbs. The city of Delhi is one
of the oldest capitals and can boast of a hoary antiquity. It is the
graveyard of dynasties and empires. Time has hallowed almost every bit
of its territory.

When Sayyid Ahmad entered the field of historical research he was
fascinated by the wealth of its unexplored archaeological remains. He
personally surveyed some one hundred and thirty sites, measured their
dimensions, transcribed their inscriptions, and reconstructed their
original plans. He experienced con­siderable hardship in getting at the
inscriptions located in different parts of the column of Qutb Minor.

The researcher in him was undeterred by hindrances. He tried heroically
and managed to reach its height by the use of an ingenious but dangerous
device. He also made a careful study of the mass of related historical
materials in print as well as in manuscript and spun the data thus
collected into a lively narrative of an almost encyclopedic range. While
the account of the relics constitute the central theme of the book, some
of its sections deal with the Fort, the aristocratic quarters, shopping
centres, natural springs and the climate of Delhi, and the origin and
evolution of the Urdu language.

The first edition of the *Athar* included the life-sketches of the
celeb­ rities of Delhi, both dead and living, each as the heads of
religious orders, poets, calligraphists, painters, and musicians. This
part was omitted from later editions. The book was translated by a
French Orientalist. The translation introduced Sayyid Ahmad to the
scholars of Oriental history in Europe.

It is interesting to note that this clear narrative was poorly
paragraphed, contained practically no punctuation marks from beginning
to end, and was characterized by a certain lack of restraint in
presentation. The book went through a second edition in 1270/1853, when
its grosser flaws were eliminated. Its language was simplified and new
material introduced. Probably the only extant copy of this edition is to
be found in the Panjab University Library, Lahore.

Sayyid Ahmad next turned his attention to the *Ain-i Akbari*, the
principal source book for the colourful reign of Akbar who presided over
an administra­tion remarkable for its efficiency as well as its
complexity. (The land-revenue system built up under the British was
faithfully raised upon the foundations laid in the reign of this
renowned monarch.) But the available copies of this classic were full of
errors and were positively unserviceable for an under­standing of an
important epoch.

Sayyid Ahmad sought to establish the text of the great work. The job was
undertaken at the request of a merchant prince of Delhi. He collected
all the manuscripts within his reach and prepared his own version. To
this he added a glossary of difficult phrases, unfamiliar names, and
obsolete terms. Legends of the coins of different denominations were
reproduced together with detailed particulars about the utensils,
implements, arms, and jewellery current in Akbar’s time. He also
corrected, wherever he could, the inaccuracies of the author himself.
All this represented an immense improvement upon the utility of the
original work. But unluckily a good part of the manuscript together with
its printed portions was destroyed during the Mutiny.

The reign of Firuz Shah Tughlaq is another brilliant interlude in the
annals of Medieval India. Firuz Shah was the creator of what may be
described as a welfare State, and his fame justly rests on a mild and
humane administration. The record of Firuz Shah’s life and achievements
was preserved by a con­temporary named Dia al-Din Barni.

Sayyid Ahmad prepared a collated manuscript of Barni’s work after
consulting the four available manuscripts, one of which belonged to the
private library of the Mughul royalty and was highly prized for its
authenticity. In the preface of the printed book Sayyid Ahmad gave an
extensive bibliography of the historical literature of the period and
set down all that he had been able to gather about the life of Barni
himself. The monograph, published by the Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal
in 1279/1862, was encumbered with numerous printing errors for which, a
high authority informs us, the responsibility must be fixed on the press
and not on the editor.

Two other pamphlets reminiscent of Sayyid Ahmad’s family affiliations
with the Court of Delhi deserve a passing mention. The first one,
entitled *Jam-i Jam*, was a brief tabulated account of the kings of the
House of Timur, beginning from the founder and ending with Bahadur Shah
II. The reign of each king was described under seventeen columns. It
also carried a bibliography and was noticed in Elliot and Dawson’s
*History of India as Told by Its Own Historians*. The second brochure
catalogued the kings of Delhi from 1400 B.C. listing Queen Victoria as
the 202nd sovereign in the chronological order.

A few years before the Mutiny Sayyid Ahmad offered to compile a history
of the district of Bijnaur, an offer heartily accepted by his official
superiors. The self-imposed obligation led him, after a diligent search
for materials, to the original records on the subject dating from the
times of Akbar and Jahangir. This was an achievement by itself. The work
was duly completed but was lost in the rising of 1273-74/1857, like some
of his other works.

*Jala al-Qulub bi Dhikr al-Mahbub* was a biographical account of the
Prophet (S), old fashioned but based on authentic sources, written to
repair the deficiency of suitable reading texts at the annual birthday
celebrations of the Prophet (S).

*Tarikh-i Sarkashi-i Bijnaur* is a history of the Mutiny in a particular
sector. This is, in fact, an uninterrupted day-to-day diary maintained
by Sayyid Ahmad that goes into great detail about the military and
related events that took place in the district of Bijnaur between May
1857 and April 1858. He recorded all that he witnessed and preserved all
that he wrote amidst the death-dealing conflagration.

The fact that he had numerous enemies about him and lived in hourly
peril of his life and yet kept calm enough to make regular entries in
his journal is significant. One has to be a historian to the marrow of
one’s bone to enter into the stream of history with a stoic indifference
to one’s personal circumstances.

*Risalah Asbab-i Baghawat-i Hind* is an outstanding contribution to
con­temporary history. It has been written with a sense of perspective,
which almost invariably eludes those who chronicle the happenings they
have lived through. The pamphlet represents an important landmark in the
evolution of Sayyid Ahmad’s mind. His former concern with history was in
the nature of a disinterested intellectual and cultural pursuit. But the
horrifying and humiliating consequences of the Mutiny taught him,
consciously or uncon­sciously, to resort to history for more practical
ends. One of these new motiva­tions was to promote accord between the
rulers and the ruled.

The British rule in India has a credit as well as a debit side. However
admir­able the qualities of the British mind, it has been too sensitive
about its own prerogatives and too much off the balance to make a fair
estimate of the inten­sity of Indian feeling and sentiment. No alien
rule can be popular, and even when the British acted with the best of
motives they earned little or no gratitude from the subject populace.

Like all foreign masters they were prone to dwell glibly on the benefits
and blessings of their own domination, but their claims were summarily
dismissed by the Indians as mere hypocrisy. Some members of the ruling
class who thought over the matter felt exasperated at the want of
“appreciation”; others never bothered about questions of human
psychology and declared bluntly, like Sir Micheal O’Dwyer half a century
later, that the dominion in India had been carved by the sword and that
it could not be retained by the faint-hearted.

Sayyid Ahmad knew the British well enough and when he sat down to record
his own views about the causes of the Mutiny, the psychological factor
was uppermost in his mind. But this was not all. In order to provide his
readers with a panoramic view of the catastrophe he gave due weight to
the sociological, economic, and historical factors in formulating his
view. The product exhibits a robust sense of pro­portion and the skill
of a craftsman in making use of the raw materials of history. The book
would show that Sayyid Ahmad had almost an intuitive grasp of the
techniques of scientific history writing that were being de­veloped in
Europe about this time.

In *Risalah Asbab-i Baghawat-i Hind*, Sayyid Ahmad spotlighted the
errors of the administration of the East India Company and brought home
the manifold Indian grievances against foreign rule. He called attention
to the utter futility of a system of law-making which operated, so to
speak, in a vacuum, unconcerned with the state of society; the
unrestrained and irritating proselytizing zeal of the Christian
missionaries who followed in the wake of the conquest; the well-founded
popular suspicion about the Government’s planning a wholesale conversion
of the Indians to Christianity; the mistaken zeal of the Company’s
functionaries in helping missionary propaganda; and the mortal injury
that all this inflicted on the pride of a people deeply attached to
their religious creeds.

In the economic sphere the Company rule had created financial and fiscal
monopolies. The local industries had been crushed out of existence to
create a market for British imports. A high-handed revenue settlement in
Upper India and the escheat of freeholds had caused widespread misery.

The disbandment of princely Courts and armies had restricted the scope
for Indian talent. The officials of the East India Company showed little
sympathy for the people over whom they ruled. They loved to assert their
authority and savagely suppressed all manifestations of discontent.
Sayyid Ahmad explained all this without mincing words and attributed the
outbreak to the ferocity of the British rule. Viewed differently, it was
a powerful plea for humanizing the administration and making it
responsive to the urges of the people.

Vast tracts of the country were subjected to declared or undeclared
martial law in the months following the suppression of the Mutiny.
Ruthlessness of the rulers was proverbial. Freedom of expression and
opinion was unthinkable. It was an act of cold courage to have drawn up
this indictment. Any English­man who read it was likely to brand it
treasonous and inflict the direct chastisement upon its author.

Sayyid Ahmad had the pamphlet printed in a limited number and was on the
point of sending it to the Viceroy and members of the British Parliament
when some of his friends dissuaded him from the course. But Sayyid Ahmad
disregarded the friendly pressure though he experienced some difficulty
afterwards in clearing himself of the charges of disloyalty brought
against him by his British critics.

Dr. Hunter’s *The Indian Musalmans*, published in 1289/1871, was
avowedly intended to pave the way to a better understanding of a
“persistently belli­gerent” class of Asiatic subjects (i.e., the Indian
Muslims), to bridge “the gap between the rulers and the ruled” and,
thus, to safeguard the British power in India against the “chronic
peril” facing it. Basing his assertions on the evidence adduced at
successive State trials, he concluded that there was a close causal
connection between the Wahabi activities and the perennially disturbed
state of the North-Western Frontier.

The underground movement, he went on to say, was skillfully organized,
and its leaders arrogated to them­selves all functions of sovereignty
over their constituents. The ties that bound the members of the secret
order were of extraordinary toughness and endurance. The central office,
located at Patna and controlling the permanent machinery throughout the
rural areas for spreading disaffection, sent out a multitude of lonely,
melancholy, and wandering zealots carefully indoctrinated with treason
and equipped with extensive literature on the duty of waging war against
the British. An uninterrupted stream of money and ardent recruits sworn
to extirpate the infidel flowed towards the frontier.

This vivid portrayal of Wahabi transgressions against law evoked a sharp
protest from Sayyid Ahmad, who characterized the book as mischievous and
unhistorical. In a lengthy review of *The Indian Musalmans,* he pointed
out several inaccuracies in Hunter’s statement of Wahabi tenets, and
critically surveyed the history of the movement from 1239/1823 up to the
publication of this book.

The relentless trans-border hostility to British rule, Sayyid Ahmad
declared, could not be ascribed to Wahabi fomentations. It was largely
prompt­ed by the continued presence on the Frontier of a large,
disloyal, and terror stricken population (both Hindu and Muslim), who
had fled from the British territory after the Mutiny to escape the wrath
of the conqueror, sought asylum with the tribes and started life afresh
amidst unfamiliar surroundings. There was nothing unusual in these
migrants’ receiving visitors and gifts of money from their relations in
India.

Finally, the tribal enmity against the con­stituted authority in the
country to the cast of the river Indus became a recurring phenomenon of
Indian history. The expeditions sent in the past by the Emperors Akbar,
Shah Jahan, and Aurangzib (all Muslims) had failed to subdue the
over-refractory highlanders. Studying *The Indian Musalmans* and its
review by Sayyid Ahmad together, it would appear that he had the better
of the argument and many fair minded Englishmen were convinced of the
invalidity of Dr. Hunter’s deductions.

It has been sometimes suggested that Sayyid Ahmad disengaged himself
from historical studies after the Mutiny and that he was engrossed more
and more in the advancement of social reform and the preaching of
political “quietism.” But that is wide of the mark. It is true that the
results of his later interest in history did not issue in big volumes.
But numerous later articles from his pen deal with historical subjects,
and a subtle sense of history pervades the rest of his writings.

In one of his letters he spoke of the unsavoury fruit of history. The
phrase was interpreted to mean that an excessive contemplation of the
past was likely to act as a dope and lead the people away from the task
of reform and reconstruction. A careful study of the context, however,
makes it clear that this was far from his mind. He only called for a
rational approach to history and a proper evaluation of its bequests.

It would be more appropriate to say that Sayyid Ahmad discovered new
uses of history. He informed one of his friends from abroad that the
vilification of Islam and distortion of its history in the West were
directly responsible for the political adversities of the Indian
Muslims. A more objective approach to the past, he felt, would go a long
way in conquering the deep rooted aversion of the West for Islam and its
followers.

While the nostrum was sorely needed for the West, it was about as
necessary for the Muslims themselves. As a people they had to rediscover
their own identity and their own ideals. What can be done depends much
upon what has been. History, thus, became an instrument of Muslim
renaissance in Sayyid Ahmad’s hands. History, he was careful to
emphasize, was not to be treated as a jumble of useless information
crammed in dusty volumes but as a continuous and meaningful record of
man, living in association with his kind and toiling for the
satisfaction of his material needs.

This could best be brought about by integrating history with sociology.
Therefore, history had to be reapproached, refathomed, and rechronicled.
Sayyid Ahmad was probably the first man of letters in the Indian
sub-continent to make out a case for the reformulation of historical
values. The task has been going on steadily. Still a lot remains to be
accomplished. The same cry is heard from different platforms and
institutions even today.

Sayyid Ahmad had his ideas not only on the content of history but also
about its form. He made a sharp distinction between history and fiction:
the two belonged to different departments of literature, each with a
method of its own. Historical romance was fatal to history and fiction
alike. The mere stylist must never be entrusted with the job of putting
history into shape. He may be tempted to sacrifice accuracy for the sake
of a few smart phrases.

Sayyid Ahmad did not have a high opinion about Macaulay’s talent as a
historian because he (i.e., Sayyid) did not look upon history as an
affair of chiselled idiom. The historiographer, according to him, must
cultivate the art of expressing himself in inornate and exact prose.

Sayyid Ahmad’s own contribution to history was not inconsiderable. But
the inspiration which two prolific yet conscientious historians received
from him is equally important. The first among them was Shibli Numani,
Professor of Oriental Languages at the M.A.O. College, who came into
contact with Sayyid Ahmad while he was yet deeply imbued with the
orthodox tradition. But he gradually outgrew his narrowness of vision
under the liberalizing influence of the Master.

In addition to a comprehensive biography of the Prophet (S), he wrote a
series of works on some of the leading personalities of Muslim history
such as the Caliph Umar, al-Mamun, Rumi, al- Ghazali, and the like, and
set their achievements in a clear light. He had to undertake an
expensive journey to Turkey and other Muslim countries in search of
material for his volumes.

Written in accordance with the principles of historiography laid down by
Sayyid Ahmad, Shibli’s works had a great vogue and constituted an
important force behind the Muslim renaissance in India initiated by the
Aligarh Movement.

The other scholar to imbibe Sayyid Ahmad’s methodology was Professor
Zaka Allah of the Central Muir College, Allahabad, whose greatest
achievement was a voluminous history of India. The preface of this work
reaffirms the validity of Sayyid Ahmad’s thinking and the author hastens
to impress upon his readers that a fruitful study of history should
enable discerning minds to discover the laws of human development.
Maulawi Mehdi Ali, better known as Muhsin al-Mulk, reviewed ibn
Khaldun’s “Pro­legomena” in the *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq* and introduced Urdu
readers to the theories of the medieval savant. This served to induce
realism about the past among later Indian Muslim writers.

C: The Sayyid as a Reformer
---------------------------

The revolutionary changes, social and political, which came over the
sub­continent in the thirteenth/nineteenth century disorganized the
spiritual no less than the mundane life of the Indian Muslims. The
central Muslim problem was one of adjustments to an adamant political
dispensation. The process entailed a fight against the persistent
antagonism between the Christian rulers and their Muslim subjects.

The political rivalry between Islam and Christendom was a legacy of the
past and began as far back as the second/eighth century when Muslim
conquests in Europe and Africa brought the followers of the two faiths
in close geographical proximity. The Crusades deepened the fissure. The
European Powers felt the Turkish conquest of Constantinople as a thorn
in their side.

No wonder that the majority of European scholars looked at Islam through
coloured glasses; they were loth to make a dispassionate study of its
tenets and institutions and were content to repeat popular distortions
about it. Such crudities which represented Muhammad (S) as an idol in
the temple of Mecca and Muslims as bloodthirsty destroyers of the peace
of the world and the cultures of its peoples gained wide credence.

With such preposses­sions, the rulers of the country were suspicious of
Muslim loyalty towards the new order. There was much in Muslim thinking
and conduct to confirm their misgivings. Consequently, the British would
not feel secure unless they liquidated the Muslim menace. The Hindus who
had lived under Muslim rule for many centuries and nursed real or
fancied grievances against their former rulers were attracted by the
opportunities for advancement provided by the change of masters.

The leaders of thought among them discarded their ancient caste scruples
and went forward to meet the British conquerors more than half way. The
alliance was advantageous to both. The Muslims were slowly crushed
between the two pincers. The British ignored the very existence of
Muslims and felt no qualm in sacrificing Muslim rights to advance Hindu
interests. As Hindu subjects drew closer and closer to the British
rulers, the Muslims drifted apart. In course of time the estrangement
was complete and the two found themselves separated by an unbridgeable
gulf.

Sayyid Ahmad was a realist. He had been through the Mutiny and watched
at close quarters the outcome of the conqueror’s unappeasable wrath
against the Muslims. He had witnessed vast sections of Muslim
aristocracy being either obliterated or utterly impoverished. He was
convinced that the British had come to stay in India and that their
supremacy, along with that of the Western way of thinking, could not be
challenged in any foreseeable future.

The Muslims must, therefore, refashion their lives as Muslims. If they
did not, they would go deeper down into the morass of degradation. In
his opinion the Christian-Muslim rancour was based merely upon mutual
ignorance and prejudice. His effort to mediate between the two religions
took the form of an unfinished commentary on the Bible, which, among
other things, sought to establish that both Islam and Christianity were
fed from the same spiritual spring.

The identity of their history and family resemblance between their
doctrines could be readily understood by anyone who studied and compared
their contents. Sayyid Ahmad also allowed, against the accepted Muslim
belief, some sort of integrity to the existing Biblical text and showed
that Christianity was a humanitarian religion that forbade all kinds of
cruelty and all forms of wanton bloodshed. It would be interesting to
note that this was the first commentary on the Bible in any Asian
language. For obvious reasons the exposition found no favour either with
Christians or with Muslims.

The Muslim society in India tabooed social intercourse with Christians
under a mistaken interpretation of religion. In order to remove this
social barrier, Sayyid Ahmad wrote a pamphlet, entitled *Ahkam-iTaam-i
Ahl-i Kitab*, to explain that Muslim Law does not prevent Muslims from
dining with Jews or Christians provided prohibited foods or drinks are
not served.

Periods of transition are inevitably attended by confusion and
perplexities. New education was a powerful ally of all *isms* opposed to
religion and ethics. As Dr. Hunter had put it: “No young man ... passes
through our schools without learning to disbelieve the faith of his
forefathers. The luxuriant religions of Asia shrivel into dry sticks
when brought into contact with the icy realities of Western science.”

There is nothing unusual in a conservative community rejecting all new
ideas that threaten its homogeneity. The older generation among Muslims
had no sense of direction. It scouted all current scientific ideas as
incompatible with religion. While the Hindus took to the new education
avidly, it stuck in Muslim throats. The Muslim child who went to a
West-oriented school was deemed to have crossed the limits of the Holy
Law and placed himself outside the pale of Islam.

This was the way to extinction. With his usual foresight Sayyid Ahmad
grasped the nature of the issue and devised a solution. In the first
place, he attempted a new synthesis of religious thought in Islam the
central doctrine of which was that Islam was not opposed to the study of
science and had nothing to fear from its impact; secondly, he conceived
of a new system of education in which the responsibility for educating
the coming generations would be thrown on the community itself and in
which the scholars would receive instruction in Islam along with a
grounding in Western sciences.

This was the basic principle of Aligarh education that brought
influential elements in the Indian Muslim society into the current of
modernism. If Aligarh did not develop on the lines envisaged by Sayyid
Ahmad, the failure cannot be ascribed to him. Though he said many hard
things about the system of Muslim education received from the Middle
Ages, it is unfair to suggest that he had set his heart on a total
breach with the past.

He advocated, for instance, the retention of self-perpetuating and
inexpensive arrangements for elementary education. In respect of female
education his ideas were not much in advance of his times. He would
first have the men educated and leave the problem of women’s education
to solve itself.

The proselytizing activities of Christian missionaries were giving an
acute cause of anxiety to the Muslim society. The missionaries who had
been allowed to settle down and pursue their vocation in the territorial
possessions of the East India Company by the Charter Act of 1813 enjoyed
Government patronage and used a variety of methods to secure
conversions.

The missionary ingress virtually became an invasion. They spread a
network of schools where the Bible was placed in the hands of young
pupils and its study encouraged by pecuniary rewards. Their hospitals
gave free medicines to visiting patients along with doses of Christian
teaching. The field behaviour of missionaries was arrogant, offensive,
and aggressive. In the course of their preaching they freely entered
into religious and theological disputations and indulged in intemperate
language about founders of other religions and their teachings.

Islam was an unfailing target of their platform invective. It was also
vilified in leaflets and pamphlets. The Muslim youth was confronted with
a mutilated presentation of Muslim history and doctrines to shatter his
faith and breed a sense of inferiority in him. The core of missionary
preaching was that Islam had outlived its day, that it could not stand
scientific and intellectual scrutiny, that its appeal lay to the grosser
impulses of human nature, and that it had kept the Muslim communities
all over the world in a state of chronic back­wardness.

*The Life of Mohammed (S)* written by Sir William Muir, at the instance
of a veteran missionary, amplified this thesis. The book based its
argument on the information collected from a close study of some Muslim
sources and was acclaimed as a great help to the missionary in his
spiritual onslaught on Islam. Sir William had pointed to the
institutions of divorce, polygamy, and slavery with the finger of scorn,
though towards the end he was constrained to admit that Islam had
“banished for ever many of the darker elements of superstition....
Idolatry vanished before the battle cry of Islam; the doctrine of the
Unity and infinite perfections of God ... became a living principle in
the hearts and lives of the followers of Mohammed (S).... Brotherly love
is inculcated ... within the circle of the faith ... orphans to be
protected, and slaves treated with consideration; intoxicating drinks
prohibited, so that Mohammadanism may boast of a degree of temperance
unknown to any other creed.”[^2]

Sayyid Ahmad wrote a refutation of this book under the title *Essays on
the Life of Mohammed (S) and Subjects Subsidiary Thereto*. This was a
scientific historical study characterized by rigorous reasoning and can
be rightly regarded as a specimen of the author’s ripe scholarship. The
materials needed for the work could not be found in India. Sayyid Ahmad
undertook a voyage to Britain where he studied in the British Museum and
the India Office Library, sent for rare works from Turkish and Egyptian
libraries and had numerous passages from the works of European scholars
translated into English for his own use. The work proved costly. He had
to sell his household effects and borrow heavily to meet the expenses of
the publication.

Sayyid Ahmad dug deep into the canonical literature of Islam. But he was
no mere respecter of authority. He freely questioned the credentials of
reputed commentators. In his way of thinking Hadith did not furnish an
adequate basis for the understanding of Islam. He held that the
brilliant allegorical method of the Quran made it plain that every age
had to under­stand the Book in the light of its own requirements.

Religion, Sayyid Ahmad opined, had gathered a good deal of mass in its
sojourn through time. It had been inextricably mixed up with the
judgments of its exponents. It needed to be combed of all exotic ideas
and placed in its proper perspective. In questioning sanctified opinions
Sayyid Ahmad emancipated the Muslim thought in India from the bondage of
prescription and in this lies his monumental achievement.

Sayyid Ahmad can justly be regarded as a maker of Urdu prose and the
first real prose-writer in this language. Born out of the confluence of
Persian and local Indian dialects, Urdu is a cultural heritage of Muslim
rule in India. But it was as yet in a state of comparative infancy. Its
thought had been enriched and mode of expression refined by a long line
of illustrious poets. Its prose, however, was under-developed.

Its intellectual content was small and its vocabulary could grapple only
with a narrow range of subjects, like religion, history, and mysticism.
Written in rhymed prose, the early Urdu books abounded in similes and
metaphors and represented an unscientific and lifeless assemblage of
facts with a strong didactic and otherworldly flavour. Most of the
writers were old-fashioned Arabic scholars whose ponderous Urdu was
beyond the comprehension of those unacquainted with that language. Their
phraseology leaves the modern reader cold and sneering.

Sayyid Ahmad worked a veritable revolution in literature. Primarily a
reformer who wanted to raise his community to the intellectual level of
the more advanced Western peoples, he sought to propagate his ideas
through workmanlike, unvarnished Urdu prose. This purpose could be
served only if the language was stripped of its medieval trappings and
invested with a sufficiently sensitive and expressive vocabulary to
absorb and expound all shades of meaning on different subjects connected
with contemporary life.

He made his first effort in this sphere by founding the Scientific
Society at Muradabad in 1281/1864. The Society was later headquartered
at Aligarh, where it published very readable translations of standard
English works on history, political economy, agriculture, mathematics,
and other useful subjects. The Society also ran a weekly journal, the
*Aligarh Institute Gazette*, in which appeared articles of popular
interest on social, educational, and scientific subjects. The
translations issued by the Scientific Society are far more service­able
than the unreadable laborious work done later under princely auspices
and at fabulous cost.

As a writer Sayyid Ahmad dealt with momentous issues of the day. He
often wrote on controversial and debatable subjects and began them with
a provocative statement. Master of a smooth and matter-of-fact style he
never burdened his writings with unfamiliar terminology. His
romanti­cism was very much subdued and was under the control of a
conscious classicism. He seldom played with the feelings of his readers.
He could enliven almost any subject that he chose for discussion and had
all the qualities of penman­ship that distinguish the true artist from a
mere scribe.

As he wrote he appeared to be engaged in an intimate conversation. By
inimitable inductive methods he built up his arguments bit by bit with
the help of shared experience leading the reader to his own conclusions
and communicating to him his personal enthusiasm for social improvement.
The galaxy of talent that sur­rounded Sayyid Ahmad included renowned
intellectuals who made valuable contributions to the Urdu language in
history, criticism, mathematics, and even science.

Sayyid Ahmad made no direct contribution to poetry. With him, and after
him, prose became a vehicle of awakening and instruction.

To sum up, before Sayyid Ahmad’s day Urdu was not much above the status
of a dialect. It was he who transformed it into a language pulsating
with life and capable of meeting the demands of a complex modern
society.

An idea of Sayyid Ahmad’s notions about the mental and moral equipment
of a social reformer and his duties and obligations can be gained from
the following extracts taken from one of his best known essays:

“Most people believe that they can rid themselves of social evils by
common action.... I do not subscribe to this view. The way to reform
lies through discord and not through unity. Reformist ideals call for
courage and perse­verance of a high order. It is for the reformer boldly
to violate the customs of his group.... In this he will incur a lot of
odium and popular disappro­bation. But ultimately he will succeed and
win converts. Though he provokes opposition in the beginning he is
acknowledged a benefactor in the end.”[^3]

“I wish to point out to my countrymen the futility of condemning and
cursing our social heritage in the privacy of our conclaves. It is vain
to look for friends and supporters in the task of regeneration. One who
wishes well of his people should come out in the open, break his own
chains, and put heart into others to do the same.”[^4]

Sayyid Ahmad himself lived up to these professions. He was fully imbued
with the impatience of a zealot and the fervour of an iconoclast. At
times he was forthright to the point of wounding others’ feelings. In
his reformist programme he included freedom of opinion, a critical
approach to religion, the discarding of social evils imbibed from Hindu
contacts, the elimination of the less desirable traits of human
character such as flattery, insincerity and selfish individualism,
proper observance of the cleanliness of person and environment, reforms
of dress and manners of eating, the recognition of women’s rights and
the simplification of current forms of address in cor­respondence.

D: The Sayyid as a Politician
-----------------------------

Sayyid Ahmad never presented himself as a politician. At the conscious
level his life work was primarily educational and reformative. It is
usual to study his political views within a narrow sector and speak of
them in colourful and hostile adjectives. It is, therefore, necessary to
review his political doctrines in the context of problems facing him.
This alone can make his thought intelli­gible.

For one thing, Sayyid Ahmad was often reticent on politics. But whenever
he spoke he was far from polemical. His opinions were characterized by
the same candour and empirical quality that permeated his discussion on
social and religious questions. A recent Indian publication has
pointedly stated that each one of Sayyid Ahmad’s major projects (i.e.,
the Scientific Society, the M.A.O. College, the commentary on the Bible,
the plea for social reform, the commentary on the Quran) was inspired by
political considerations and was, directly or indirectly, designed to
lead to the political rehabilitation of the Indian Muslims.

This view is correct if the term “politics” is meant to include all that
it conveyed to the ancient Greeks. But if we choose the narrower
meaning, the view, though arguable, is directly disputed by his friend
and biographer, Altaf Husain Hali, who has explained at some length that
Sayyid Ahmad’s love of religion alone supplied the dynamic for all his
activities.

The best theoretical statement on Sayyid Ahmad’s politics is contained
in a communication that he addressed to one of his English friends. He
says, “I am a Musalman domiciled in India. Racially I am a Semite: the
Arab blood still courses in my veins. The religion of Islam in which I
have full and abiding faith preaches radical principles. Thus, both by
blood and faith I am a true radical.... Islam is opposed to all forms of
monarchy, whether hereditary or limited. It approves of the rule of a
popularly elected president; it denounces the concentration of capital
and insists upon the division of properties and possessions among legal
heirs on the demise of their owners.

(In this way) even a mine of wealth would suffer countless subdivisions
in the course of two generations. But the religion that teaches me these
principles also inculcates certain other principles. First, if God wills
our subjection to another race, which grants us religious freedom,
governs us justly, preserves peace, protects our life and belongings, as
the British do in India, we should wish it well and owe it
allegiance….”[^5]

The latter part of this declaration has invited strongly worded and
un­deserved criticism. Some have spoken of it as a new version of the
divine right of rulers. But it should be clear, as we proceed, that the
loyalty of which Sayyid Ahmad spoke was the loyalty of free men and not
of helots. Sayyid Ahmad throughout prided himself on his radicalism.
But, generally speaking, the content of radicalism is relative to time
and place. A radical of yesterday may be the conservative of today. But
Sayyid Ahmad’s liberalism has an objective stamp that will be recognized
by anyone who follows his opinions carefully.

In post-Mutiny India the ruling race, with rare exceptions, displayed
ab­normal racial arrogance. In part this could be attributed to the
Mutiny that furnished a grim background to the era that it opened. Old
memories rankled on both sides. The Indians soon reconciled themselves
to British rule as to a decree of fate. But the British, drunk with the
pride of conquest, were always squaring the past accounts with the
subjugated populace.

They treated their Indian subjects as half-savages and were quick and
demonstrative in heaping indignities on their heads. All Britons deemed
it a national duty to exact all external courtesies from the Indians
they were forced to meet in the ordinary business of life. There were
few points of social contact between the two. The ruling race lived a
life of its own and behaved like an army of occupation.

“Apartheid” was practised by rulers in India in an obnoxious form before
it made its appearance elsewhere. Whatever his rank or birth, no Indian
was allowed to enter restaurants, public parks, or railway compart­ments
frequented by Englishmen. If he did so even unwittingly, he found
himself rudely thrown out. The passage of time did nothing to soften the
haughtiness of the ruling class.

Sayyid Ahmad reminded them of this weak­ness of theirs in 1294/1877 in
these words: “For a whole century and more, you, gentlemen, have lived
in the same country; you have breathed the same air; you have drunk the
same water; you have lived on the same crops that have given nourishment
to the millions of your fellow Indian subjects, yet the absence of
social intercourse, which is implied by the word friendship between the
English and the people of this country has been most deplorable.”[^6]

The controversy which centred round the Ilbert Bill (a legislative
measure which sought to extend the jurisdiction of Indian magistrates
and judges of a certain standing by investing them with the power of
trying European criminals) called forth an aggressive and noisy
agitation from the British community resident in India, who thought that
the world would end if a white man was made to stand in the dock before
a magistrate with a tanned complexion.

Sayyid Ahmad committed an irredeemable sin in their eyes by recording
his vote in favour of the Bill. In the course of his speech before the
Legislature, on the occasion, he made out a weighty case for equality
before law and observed, “I am convinced that laws based on racial
discrimination will pre­vent the growth of friendship and amity between
our two peoples. Pleasant social life and political equality are born
out of subjection to a uniform system of law. It is time that all
subjects of the Crown, Hindus, Muslims, Europeans, Eurasians, should
enjoy the same political and constitutional rights, and be subject to
the same disabilities.”[^7]

Towards the end of his life, Sayyid Ahmad grew pessimistic about the
likeli­hood of Englishmen learning to conduct themselves differently. He
gave ex­pression to his despondency in an article, a part of which runs
as follows:

“In my opinion the time has not yet come, and perhaps will never come,
when our European friends, conquerors of this country... will condescend
to sit on the same bench with a conquered and naturally hated Indian....
If the Indian wants to keep up his self-respect... his life becomes
unbear­able.... If an Indian desires to obey the dictates of his
conscience... he cannot perform his duties.... It is no secret that the
treatment which English people accord to their own countrymen and that
which they accord to Indians are as different from one another as black
is from white.”[^8]

Sayyid Ahmad’s dealings with the British fail to corroborate the legend
of “servility” assiduously circulated by an extremely vocal coterie of
propagandists in the following generation. His opposition to certain
policies of the Govern­ment was constant, consistent, and unsparing. He
never hesitated to cross swords with insolent and ill-mannered
bureaucrats and was impatient with the widespread habit of suffering
official high-handedness meekly.

He advised his countrymen not to put up with injustice and indignity
even if it came straight from Caesar. Said he, “They (the Indians) have
at present little or no voice in the management of the affairs of this
country; and should any measure of the Government prove obnoxious to
them, they brood over it, appearing outwardly satisfied and happy,
whilst discontent is rankling in their hearts. You are in the habit of
inveighing against various acts of Government in your homes, and amongst
your friends, (but) in the course of your visits to (officials), you
repre­sent yourselves as quite satisfied with the justice and wisdom of
the same acts.”[^9] Sayyid Ahmad did not consider such a temper
dignified or helpful.

The part played by the Urdu-Hindi controversy in shaping Hindu-Muslim
relations on the political plane has often been overlooked. Sayyid Ahmad
was the first Muslim to sense the political implications of the
linguistic wrangle. The dispute, the ashes of which have not yet been
buried, forced itself on public attention in 1284/1867.

The Hindus were determined to undo Urdu and have it replaced by Hindi as
the language of the law-courts. They opened the front at Benares.
Gradually, their demand gathered strength and momentum. The methods by
which the friends of Hindi pursued their ends ripped open the wounds of
the past and portended the inevitable conflict.

Sayyid Ahmad abandoned all hope of co-operation between Hindus and
Muslims and read with uncanny sureness the writing on the wall. His
oft-quoted letter, written from London in 1286/1869 in which he talked
of Hindus and Muslims parting company for good, can be read as a
veritable political prophecy about the 1366/1947 partition of the Indian
sub-continent.

In 1295/1878 Sayyid Ahmad was nominated as a member of the Indian
Legislature and sat in this body for a little over four years. As a
legislator he took his duties seriously and spoke practically on every
bill that came up for discussion. He was the first Indian to introduce a
private bill into the Legislature that eventually found place on the
statute book. His speeches displayed a firm understanding of social
questions underlying legal issues. He also interested himself in the
waning fortunes of the once prosperous Muslim families and sought to
arrest by legislation their increasing impoverish­ment. But his draft
bill was not taken up on technical grounds.

The earliest political movements in India were local in character. But
they soon coalesced under the auspices of the Indian National Congress.
This body was actually founded by an Englishman, A.O. Hume, a retired
member of the Bengal Civil Service, with the active encouragement of the
Viceroy, Lord Dufferin. It was almost a Government sponsored body and
its relations with Authority were cordial in the earlier phase of its
stormy career.

The Congress met once a year and its annual festival of speech making
lasted for three days. Year after year, it passed resolutions demanding
the introduction of Western electoral and representative institutions in
India. As time went by, the influential reform movements in Hindu
society were integrated with the political creed of the Indian National
Congress that became the market­place of Hindu ideologies and the forum
of Hindu aspirations.

Sayyid Ahmad counselled Muslims to keep away from the Congress for
several cogent reasons. In education and enlightenment they were sadly
behind the times and were not experienced enough for the game of
politics. They had large gaps to fill and big deficiencies to make up;
politics, at this stage, would prove a distracting pursuit and upset
plans of educational reform and social uplift.

There was nothing baneful in asking an educationally backward and
economically poor people to attend to first things first. He further
argued that no political movement in India could be depended upon to
produce worthwhile results in the face of growing estrangement between
Hindus and Muslims. Fruitful politics could only be raised upon
consensus of opinion.

The conclusion is as valid in the fourteenth/twentieth century as it was
in the thirteenth/nineteenth. Experience has taught the Muslims, if they
are at all prepared to heed its warning, that consensus alone can give
substance and reality to democratic forms and not a mechanical
manipulation of the will of those in majority.

Finally, India’s size and racial and cultural diversities will always
militate against the success of Western democratic institutions. He
expressed this line of thought in one of his articles thus: “I seriously
pondered over the suitability (or otherwise) of the representative
system of government in India long before the Congress took up the
matter. Having carefully gone through the (clearly expressed) opinions
of John Stuart Mill, I am convinced that where majority vote is a
decisive factor in a political system, it is essential for the electors
to be united by ties of race, religion, manners, customs, culture, and
historical traditions. In the presence of these conditions,
representative government is practicable and useful. In their absence it
would only injure the well-being and tranquillity of the land.”[^10]

The Muslim community could not agree to sacrifice its historic identity
on the altar of a nationalism with which it had no affinities. That the
Muslims formed a nation by themselves by virtue of their common adhesion
to the Muslim faith, is the most recurring refrain of Sayyid Ahmad’s
speeches and writings. A typical extract culled at random from an
address to Muslim students at Lahore is as follows:

“I use the word community to include all Musalmans. Faith in God and His
Prophet (S) and proper observance of the precepts of the faith are the
only bonds that hold us together. You are irrevocably lost to us if you
turn your back on religion. We have no part or lot with transgressors
and derelicts even if they shine like the stars of the firmament. I want
you to dive deep into European literature and sciences but at the same
time I expect you to be true to your faith.”[^11]

Bibliography
------------

Altaf Husain Hali, *Hayat-i Jawid*; G.F.I. Graham, *Life and Work of
Syed Ahmed Khan*, London, 1885; W.W. Hunter, *The Indian Musalmans*,
London, 1871; Nur al-Rahman, *Hayat-i Sir Sayyid*, Delhi, 1950; Sayyid
Ahmad Khan, *Majmuah-i Lecture-ha-i* *Dr. Sir Sayyid*, ed. Siraj al-Din,
Sadhora, 1892; *Akhiri Madamin*, Lahore, 1898; *Athar al-Sanadid*,
Cawnpore, 1904; *Tarikh-i Sarkashi-i Bijnaur*, Agra, 1858; *Madamin-i
Tahdhib al-Akhlaq*, Lahore; *Review of Dr. Hunter’s Indian Musalmans*,
Benares, 1872; *Essays on the Life o f Mohammed (S) and Subjects
Subsidiary Thereto*, London, 1870; *Risalah Asbab-i Baghawat-i Hind*,
published as an appendix to *Hayat-i Jawid*.

[^1]: Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Majmuah-i Lectures.

[^2]: Sir William Muir, Life of Mohammad (S), John Grant, Edinburgh,
1912, p. 521.

[^3]: Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Madamin-i Tahdhib al-Akhlaq.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Nur al-Rahman, Hayat-i Sir Sayyid, pp. 123-24.

[^6]: G.F.I. Graham, Life and Work of Syed Ahmed Khan, London, 1885, p.
188.

[^7]: Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Majmuah-i Lectures.

[^8]: Quoted in Eminent Musalmans, G.A. Natesan & Co., Madras, n.d., p.
35.

[^9]: Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Majmuah-i Lectures, pp. 238-39.

[^10]: Idem, Akhiri Madamin, p. 46.

[^11]: Idem, Majmuah-i Lectures, p. 308.


