Chapter 81: Renaissance in Indo-Pakistan (Continued): Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan as a Religio-Philosophical Thinker
==============================================================================================================

It was the experience of the Indian Revolt that made Sayyid Ahmad Khan
what he is for us today. He realized the dangers that were inherent in
the situation for the future welfare of the Muslim community in India,
and decided to take the challenge boldly. He wrote *The Causes of Indian
Revolt* (1276-77/1859) and *The Loyal Mohammedans of India* to
counteract the growing anti-Muslim attitude of the British rulers and
hostile propaganda of the Hindus.

On the positive side he tried to acquaint the Muslims with the wealth
and richness of the new learning of the West. He set up his Scientific
Society in 1281/1864 first at Ghazipur and then at Aligarh with the
purpose of translating English books into Urdu so that the common people
might become aware of the advance in knowledge reached by the West. In
1283/1866 he started a bi-weekly, *The Aligarh Institute Gazette*, to
enlighten the public on the aims of the Scientific Society.

His visit to England in 1286/1869 proved very helpful in convincing him
that the only way to rehabilitate the Muslims was to provide them with
the weapons of Western learning through modern education. But this very
intro­duction of Western learning brought with it the intellectual
ferment which compelled Sayyid Ahmad Khan to address himself to the
reinterpretation of the whole cultural and religious heritage of the
Muslims.

For this purpose he started the famous periodical *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq*,
in the first issue of which he set forth in detail its aims and objects.
“The aim of this periodical is that the Muslims of India should be
persuaded to adopt the best kind of civilization so that the contempt
with which the civilized people look upon the Muslims should be
removed;... it is true that religion plays a great part in making a
people civilized. There are, no doubt, some religions that stand in the
way of progress. It is our aim to judge where Islam stands in this
regard.”[^1]

The spread of Western education among Muslims and the general
enlightenment that the introduction of modern science brought about in
the public was the greatest challenge. In one of his lectures he refers
to the spread of doubt and misgivings in the hearts of the people about
Islam.[^2] Discussing the spread of belief in naturalism, he said,
“Today we are in need of a modern *Ilm al-Kalam* by which we should
refute the doctrines of modern science and undermine their foundations,
or show that they are in conformity with the articles of Islamic faith.
While I am endeavouring to introduce these sciences among the Muslims,
it is my duty to defend the religion of Islam and to reveal its original
bright face.”

But the important question was how to prove the validity of a particular
religion in the face of so many claimants. He came to the conclusion
that “the only touchstone of a true religion can be this: if it is in
conformity with human nature or with nature in general, then it is true.
This would be a clear proof that the religion in question has come from
God, the Author of nature both in man and outside.

I am fully confident that the guidance that He has given us is
absolutely in con­formity with our constitution and our nature and this
is the only touchstone of its truth. It would be clearly absurd to
assert that God’s action is different from His Word. All creation
including man is the work of God and religion is His Word, so there
cannot be any contradiction between the two.”[^3]

What is nature? Sayyid Ahmad Khan interprets it in the sense in which
the thirteenth/nineteenth century scientists interpreted it as a closed
system of the universe which obeys certain laws of mechanics and physics
and which is characterized by a uniformity of behaviour to which there
cannot be any exception. All inorganic, organic, and human behaviour is
subject to these mechanical laws.

In one of his articles, he says, “In the beginning this knowledge of
nature was limited. But with the increase in knowledge, the sphere of
nature has correspondingly increased and, thus, seems to have become
co-extensive with what we find in the universe, what we see or feel, so
much so that the actions and thoughts of man and even his beliefs are
all different chains in the inexorable laws of nature.”[^4]

But this mechanical conception of nature, as James Ward put it, is
totally antagonistic to the spiritual inter­pretation of life, and,
therefore, cannot be upheld by a person who is advocating the truth of
any theistic religion. In the writings of Sayyid Ahmad Khan we meet with
both types of naturalism, mechanistic and antitheistic on the one hand
and teleological and theistic on the other, and he often passes from the
former to the latter without any thought to consistency or logic.

In the same article he says that “just as among us some people are
religious and others irreligious, so among the naturalists there are
several people who begin to think that when we find the laws of nature
permeating every sphere of the universe, then there is nothing but
nature, and so come to deny God. Perhaps such were the people whom our
ancient Muslim thinkers called naturalists (*dahriyyun*).

But there are some people among the modern scien­tists who in their
intensive researches in the laws of nature came to the con­clusion, on
the basis of nature’s magnificent display of design, that there must be
some designer, the Cause of causes, whom we usually call God. These
scientists traversed the same path as the youth of Chaldea, well known
as Abraham, had followed.”

Thus it is clear that Sayyid Ahmad starts with a mechanical and
quantitative conception of nature and passes on to a teleo­logical
interpretation of it without realizing the inconsistency involved. He
interprets the experiences of Moses (as) and Abraham (as) in the same
spirit. “None of the prophets,” he says, “came to realize God except
through this process. Moses (as) expressed his wish to see God; he got
the reply: ‘By no means canst thou see Me but look upon the mount’
(7:143).

What was on the mountain? It was nature, a manifestation of the law of
nature. God could not manifest Himself direct; the way He pointed out
was the way of nature…. When asked, ‘What art Thou?’ He invariably
refers to the laws of nature and implies that it is He who changes night
into day and day into night and gives life to the dead and death to the
living.”

Secondly, he refers to the spiritual experience of Abraham (as) as
recorded in the Quran (3:75-79). “From nature he went to God, from the
uniformity of the laws of the physical universe, he was able to
transcend to the spiritual reality behind. He saw the stars, the moon,
the sun, that appear and disappear, rise and set according to fixed
immutable laws, and was able to penetrate behind the veil of these laws
of nature to their Author. He declared, ‘I have set my face, firmly and
truly, towards Him who created the heavens and the earth.’”[^5]

This identification of Islam with nature implied that true religion
consists in the belief in one God only and that all those people who
accept this doctrine of the unity of God are Muslims, however different
they may be in the rituals and other religious observances. In an
article “Islam is Nature and Nature is Islam,” he says, “Islam is such a
simple and useful religion that even irreligiousness is included in
it.... What minimum beliefs an irreligious person may hold must be the
basic creed of Islam.

Every religion has certain special rituals and creeds on account of
which it is differentiated from others, and anyone who does not believe
in and follow these rituals is called irreligious, though we have no
right to call him so, for religion pure and simple is above all these
rituals and formalities with which it comes unfortunately to be bound
up. He who does not believe in any prophet, avatar, revealed Scripture,
or the ritualistic formalities but believes only in one God is a Muslim
in the true sense of the word.”[^6]

By reason Sayyid Ahmad Khan means the empirical reason, to which the
Quran appeals. He calls it human reason or *aql-i kulli*. “It is that
inherent capacity in man by which he draws conclusions on the basis of
the observation of objective phenomena or mental thinking processes, and
which proceeds from particulars to generalizations and *vice versa*....
It is this capacity of man which has enabled him to invent new things
and led him on to under­stand and control the forces of nature; it is by
this that man is able to know things which are a source of his happiness
and then tries to get as much profit out of, them as possible; it is
this which makes a man ask the whys and the wherefores of different
events around him.”[^7]

In a very illuminating article, “Thoughts of Man,” Sayyid Ahmad Khan
discusses the problem of reason in detail. After defining reason as
above, he says that man is distinguished from animals on account of
rationality, which imposes on him duties and responsibilities far in
excess of those on animals. The main function of reason, according to
him, is to acquire knowledge about the nature and reality of things. But
this knowledge is intimately related with certitude (*yaqin*).

“I fully realized,” he says, “that without certitude know­ledge is
possible neither in the sphere of the world nor in that of religion. But
what kind of certitude do we need? I know, for instance, that ten is
more than three. If someone states to the contrary and in proof of his
statement changes a stick into a snake, I would, no doubt, be utterly
surprised at his strange feat but it would never shake me out of my
belief that ten is more than three. Without a certitude of this kind it
is not possible to proceed further.”

But the important question is how and where to get this kind of
certitude. He examines the beliefs of different people. A Christian, for
instance, believes in the doctrine of the Trinity, because it is claimed
to have been taught by Jesus (as) and Jesus (as) is credited to have
wrought many wonderful miracles. But such beliefs, based as they are on
the authority of a particular individual and supported by the miraculous
performances, cannot stand on any sure ground.

In order to be acceptable they must have the sanction of reason and
common sense. He concludes, “I come to the conclusion that reason alone
is the instrument which can decide the matter, and bring about the
necessary conviction. But is not reason fallible? Yes, it is, and we
cannot help it. As reason is used almost universally, so the reason of
one man can be corrected by that of another and the reason of one age by
that of another age. Without it nothing can be achieved.”[^8]

In the history of Muslim thought and especially among the mystics,
however, reason has often been placed subordinate to intuition or mystic
disclosure (*kashf*). Ghazali, for instance, whose line of argument (as
developed by him in the *Munqidh*), is adopted by Sayyid Ahmad Khan,
holds that there is a higher stage beyond reason where reason appears as
fallible and defective as sense perception is at the bar of reason.

But Sayyid Ahmad is not willing to accept this argument. He says that
supposing such a state exists, how can we judge the validity or
otherwise of the knowledge yielded by it? The contradictions in the
reports of mystic experience are proverbial. What criterion is there by
which we can determine which of them are true and which false?
Naturally, we have nothing else but reason to decide the matter.[^9]

There is, however, no qualitative difference, according to Sayyid Ahmad
Khan, between reason and revelation. He does not admit the usually
accepted distinction of natural and revealed religions, for it would
mean that revealed religion is something different or in certain
respects even antagonistic to the natural and rational demands of man.
He looks at the problem of their re­lationship biologically and makes
inspiration a natural development of man’s instinctive and rational
capacities.

All insects and animals possess instinctive power that the Quran calls
*wahi*, revelation (16:68), and thus makes instinct, reason, and
revelation belong to the same category, though with a difference of
degree at each grade of being. It is as a result of man’s natural
aptitude that he calls *wahi* that people in different ages and regions
have been able to evolve an almost universal standard of moral values.

Those who are endowed with reason to the highest degree are the guides
and leaders of people whom Shah Wali Allah calls the *mufhimun*.
According to Sayyid Ahmad, these guides and leaders appear in all
spheres of human life, secular as well as religious, and they all,
without any distinc­tion, receive divine illumination or *wahi*.

An inventor of a new mechanical device, a discoverer of hitherto unknown
and unexplored regions of the universe, a composer of beautiful
symphony, are all recipients of spiritual revelation in their different
spheres. The difference between the prophets and other geniuses,
according to him, is due to the difference of the spheres in which they
work. The prophets are spiritual healers and their primary and sole
function is to reorientate the spiritual and moral life of the people.

Sayyid Ahmad Khan totally rejects the view of the theologians according
to whom a person attains prophethood merely because God, in the
arbitrary exercise of His power, confers this rank on him. According to
them, there is no difference between the prophets and other mortals
except that the former occupy a particular rank conferred on them by the
favour of God. The relationship between the prophet and his followers is
envisaged as that between a king and his subjects, a difference
depending in most cases merely on the accident of birth.

But, according to Sayyid Ahmad, this relationship can be better
understood in terms of the relation that holds between a shepherd and
his sheep. “Though the prophet and his followers both belong to the
category of humanity, as the shepherd and the sheep belong to that of
animality, yet the possession of prophetic faculty marks off the prophet
from the rest of humanity just as the possession of rationality marks
off the shepherd from the sheep.”[^10]

Thus, according to Sayyid Ahmad Khan, prophethood is a special natural
faculty like other human faculties and capacities which blossoms forth
at the opportune time as flowers and fruit ripen on a tree at a
particular time. There is nothing strange about it. Sometimes a
particular individual comes to possess a certain faculty in such a
perfect form that the people recognize him to be a genius in that
particular branch of art or craft.

A poet, a physician, or a blacksmith can become the master of his art
and craft. One who possesses extraordinary natural powers of healing
spiritual maladies and is thereby able to bring about moral regeneration
of mankind is called a prophet. When these natural aptitudes ripen and
mature at the proper time, he feels called upon to declare to the people
his new mission of moral and spiritual regeneration.

The Sayyid rejects the mechanical interpretation of the way revelation
came to the prophets; it was the logical consequence of his view of
prophet­hood. According to him, there is no intermediary between God and
the prophet. He receives all revelation direct from God. Gabriel is in
reality a symbolical representation of the prophetic faculty.

“His heart is the mirror which reflects the divine illuminations. It is
his heart that carries the message to God and then returns with the
divine message. He is the being from whom the words of God’s speech
emanate, he is the ear which hears the wordless and noiseless speech of
God. From his heart gushes forth, like a fountain, the revelation and
then it descends on him. His spiritual experiences are all the result of
human nature. He hears his spiritual message (*kalam-i nafsi*) by his
physical ears as if somebody else is saying something to him; he sees
himself with his physical eyes as if another person is standing before
him.”[^11]

Thus, according to Sayyid Ahmad Khan, revelation is not something which
comes from outside. It is the divine mind working through human
consciousness. The intensity of the feeling which moves and vibrates the
deepest chords of human personality makes the recipient feel as if he is
re­ceiving something from outside; in fact, revelation is the projection
of his inner consciousness when it is in deep contact with the spiritual
reality in which he lives, moves, and has his being.

The Sayyid derives support for his theory from the fact that the Quran
was revealed to the Prophet (S) not as a whole but piecemeal as and when
occasion demanded. All human faculties come into operation only in
reference to certain situations and practical needs. The human mind is a
storehouse of several ideas, memorized verses and remembered events, but
they all lie dormant in it. When the occasion demands, say, the recall
of a verse, it comes into consciousness and we quote it. The same is the
position of the prophetic faculty. When circumstances demand, the
prophetic consciousness comes into operation and gives expres­sion to
what is needed at the moment by direct revelation from God.[^12]

Sayyid Ahmad Khan believes that the prophetic faculty is present in all
men without distinction, though there may be differences of degree. The
revelations of God are open to all men. The deeper recesses of the human
heart are always susceptible to the spiritual call; it is due to this
that man is able to penetrate through the world of nature to God. What
has come to an end is, according to him, the role of prophethood.[^13]

There was a time when people were not mature rationally and they needed
the guidance of prophets, but with the passage of time and development
of human reason, this guidance was discontinued and, as the last favour
of God, the moral and spiritual values enunciated by Islam were fully
disseminated.

“Therefore, he [Muhammad (S)] is the last of the distributors of these
divine gifts, not only because he came in the last period, not only
because there would come none after him for the distribution of divine
gifts, and both of these meanings form the very connota­tion of
finality, but also because with him these divine gifts were fully
distributed and there was left nothing to be distributed.

As Islam is the most valuable gift of all, its distributor must be
looked upon as the highest of all; and because divine gifts were
distributed in stages and the Prophet Muhammad (S) came to distribute
them the last of all, his prophethood is also the last. So it was
declared in the Quran (5:5): ‘Today I complete for you your religion and
complete My favour to you and have chosen for you your religion,
Islam.’”[^14]

According to Sayyid Ahmad, this finality of prophethood lay in
clarifying the conception of *tauhid* on which alone depends the
ultimate salvation of man.[^15]

But if religion is so natural and simple as Sayyid Ahmad holds, the
question naturally arises: what is the necessity of prophetic guidance?
It is true, he admits, that a man can attain moral truth by a reflective
study of the laws of nature. But this possibility is realizable only
after men have explored these laws of nature in their totality and
unravelled their mystery and secrets.

In spite of spectacular advances in the different fields of science and
technology, modern man still feels that he has not been able to reach
the core of the mystery. It is due to this difficulty in attaining moral
and spiritual truth through a purely scientific understanding of nature
that, according to Sayyid Ahmad Khan, mankind needs the divine guidance
of prophets who, due to their natural aptitude and spiritual vision, are
able to arrive at moral truths which are universally valid. Like
geniuses in other branches, prophets are geniuses in the spiritual field
and mankind has been able to make progress both in the material and in
the spiritual world through the appearance and work of these geniuses.

In conformity with his view of religion as an aspect of nature, Sayyid
Ahmad Khan looked upon God as the Author of nature and as the First
Cause. The relation of God to the universe is analogous to the relation
of the watchmaker to the watch. As the craftsman is responsible for the
peculiar make-up of the machine, the correlation of its parts, and its
overall function, so is God the Creator of the universe. It is He who
gave it the laws according to which it continues to work.

As God is unchangeable, so are the laws that operate in the universe. As
the Quran (48:23) asserts, “No change shall you find in the habit of
God.” Just as the material world works and operates in accordance with
immutable laws, so there is in the moral sphere an absolute law of right
and wrong that knows no exception whatsoever. Pains and pleasures follow
logically the kind of acts performed by men and there is need for divine
interference neither in the physical nor in the moral sphere.

It was as a result of this deistic view of God’s nature and His relation
to the universe that Sayyid Ahmad Khan denied the possibility of
miracles and efficacy of prayer. He could not accept miracles as
violations of the laws of nature for “the law of nature,” according to
him, “is a practical promise of God that something will happen so, and
if we say it can happen otherwise we are accusing Him of going against
His promise and this is inconceivable.”[^16]

He continues, “I do not deny the possibility of miracles because they
are against reason, but because the Quran does not support the
happenings of events or occurrences that are against the laws of nature
or those that violate the usual course of things.”[^17]

In a way, Sayyid Ahmad was correct, for the Quran emphatically and
repeatedly refuses people their request to Muham­mad (S) to show
miracles in proof of his veracity. To all such demands the Quran
replies, “Say: Glory to my Lord! Am I aught but a man, an apostle?”
(17:90-93). But he was wrong in a way, for the Quran is full of the
accounts of miracles of earlier prophets. In order to substantiate his
stand, he made an attempt to explain these miracles by reference to
natural laws, an attempt that was perhaps the only cause why his
*Tafsir* did not gain among the Muslims the popularity it deserved.

By the same line of argument, Sayyid Ahmad Khan denied the efficacy of
prayers (*dua*) as it is usually understood. The laws of nature are
in­violable and nothing can change them; even God cannot go against
them. The utility of prayer should be measured, according to him, not by
its acceptance or non-acceptance by God, for that acceptance is out of
question, but by the psychological effect it has on the individual in
relieving him of the pains and an­xieties attendant upon certain
unfortunate events in his life.

But Sayyid Mahdi Ali made a very penetrating criticism of his views on
God and His relation to nature. He rightly said that if God is the mere
Cause of causes and cannot rise above the laws of nature and the
absolute law of right and wrong, then he is God only in name, a being
devoid of personality and all feelings of love and affection towards
human beings.

“God is really dethroned and all religious life becomes extinct. Prayer
would become a cold attribute of perfunctory worship of a being whose
arm is never stretched out in answer to prayers, whose ear is never open
to the supplications of the penitent.” If such is the case, then man has
no need to look to God in time of suffering; he has only to get as much
detailed knowledge of the laws of nature as possible and then adapt his
life mechanically to the requirements of the external world and, thus,
attain success in life in proportion to his efforts.

This philosophy of life leads not to the broadening of human outlook but
to the spirit of self-sufficiency and self-centredness, which is the
enemy of spiritual life. Sayyid Mahdi refers to verses 25-35 of the
twentieth Surah of the Quran where Moses (as) is said to have prayed to
God for granting some specific requests, and the reply was “Granted is
your prayer, O Moses.” In view of this episode Sayyid Mahdi Ali rightly
infers that Sayyid Ahmad Khan’s conception of God and the function of
prayer (*dua*) does not accord with religious consciousness at all. He
points out that if we accept this position, it will mean that man has no
significant part to play in the world and everything is tied to the
inexorable necessity of mechanical laws.[^18]

Sayyid Ahmad Khan tried to explain the emergence of man on this earth as
a specific event in the long and laborious process of evolution, though,
he adds, the process was originally started by God Himself when He
uttered the creative word “Be.” Man is the result of the chemical
processes that went on in the universe, and at a particular moment he
appeared as a form of animal life.

In order to explain the complex nature of man as he is at present, he
gives his own interpretation of the legend of Adam’s (as) Fall as
related in the Quran. He thinks that its presentation in a dramatic form
is only a literary way of placing before us certain basic truths about
man. It is wrong, he thinks, to take it as a literal account of a
dialogue between angels and Satan on the one hand and God on the other.

The word “angel”, according to him, stands for the limitless power of
God and potentialities of things. The solidity of mountains, the
fluidity of water, the power of growth in vegetation, the power of
attraction and repulsion in electricity, in short, all powers that we
see mani­fested in different things of the universe, are signified by
the word “angel”.[^19]

Similarly, Satan, according to him, is not a being who exists outside
us; it stands for evil forces in the universe. Man is angel and Satan
combined. God’s command to the angels to bow down before Adam (as)
signifies that the angelic or good forces of the universe will be
obedient to man and ever willing to help him.

The same divine order to Satan means that man has the power to control
the evil forces in him but the refusal of Satan in obeying the order of
God signifies that the baser passions of man are not easily susceptible
to control, and, therefore, man has to exert the full force of his
personality to keep them in check.

There are two other things in the legend that need explanation. One is
the reference to the forbidden tree. According to Sayyid Ahmad, this
signifies reason and self-consciousness, which enable man to distinguish
between good and evil. God’s order and man’s disobedience mean that man
is able to make full use of his powers independently of what anybody may
order him to do, even though he may be led astray thereby.

The other thing referred to in the same context is Satan’s stripping
Adam (as) and Eve “of their raiment and exposing the shameful parts of
their bodies” (7:27). The word “raiment,” according to him, means virtue
and the “shameful parts” stand for evil, thus implying that man’s
virtuous acts can cover up the nakedness of man’s evil deeds.[^20]

With regard to the problem of freedom of will, Sayyid Ahmad’s position
is based on his naturalistic study of man. He thinks that man is
determined in his actions partly by external causes such as society,
environment, and training and partly by internal causes such as the
peculiar physiological and psychological structure that he possesses.
But, in spite of this, he holds, man does possess a faculty by which he
can discriminate between good and evil. He calls it “fight of the heart”
or “light of nature” which enables a man to rise above the prejudices of
his age.

This intellectual power of breaking with the past and introducing new
value-judgments is present, according to him, potentially in all men
though it matures and comes into play in the case only of a few gifted
persons who unfold before the people new dimensions of life. It was this
faculty of discriminating between right and wrong which helped Abraham
(as), the youth of Chaldea, as Sayyid Ahmad puts it, to experience and
declare: “I have set my face, firmly and truly, towards Him who created
the heavens and the earth, and never shall I ascribe partners to Him”
(6:89).[^21]

Everybody possesses the capacity to follow the good as well as to do
evil; well-being results when the tendency towards good outweighs the
tendency towards evil. It is possible that in a certain person
inclination towards evil may predominate, yet he need not be condemned,
for if he brings into play the little tendency towards good that he
possesses to counteract the effect of evil deeds, he is sure of
salvation.

Salvation does not depend on the amount of virtuous deeds a person is
able to perform; it rather depends, according to Sayyid Ahmad, on the
honest efforts that he makes to put to full use all the powers that he
is endowed with. What is demanded by God from all of us is the sincere
effort directed towards the realization of well-being and good in
preference to doing evil.

If we continue using this “light of the heart” and look upon evil deeds
as evil and feel repentant of them, then surely a day will come when our
lower impulses will weaken and the tendency towards good will
predominate. There is no sin for man in that over which he has no power;
sin follows only when man does not put the tendency towards good to full
use.[^22]

Man’s freedom follows, as a matter of course, from his very nature,
which, in the words of the Quran, is patterned after the nature of God
Himself. This capacity of man for free spontaneous action does not set
any limitation to the omnipotence of God, for God gave this freedom to
man of His own accord and not under any compulsion.

Sayyid Ahmad Khan also takes up the problem of the reconciliation of
man’s freedom with God’s prescience. Like many thinkers of the past and
of the present, he does not deny the omniscience of God in order to
safeguard the freedom of man. To him there is no incompatibility between
the two.

He gives the example of an astrologer who predicts that a certain man
will die by drowning, and this comes out to be true. Can we say, asks
Sayyid Ahmad Khan, that the astrologer has been the cause of this man’s
death? What is in God’s knowledge, which he called fate (*taqdir*), is
inevitable, and yet it does not involve or impose any restriction on the
freedom of man. Whatever necessity there is it is in the knowledge of
God, in *taqdir*, not in man. In spite of this knowledge, man still
retains his freedom of actions.[^23]

Sayyid Ahmad believes in the existence of the soul, for, according to
him, on no other premise can we explain the existence of reason and will
in men and animals. He does not go into any details about the nature of
the soul, for, according to him, it is not possible for man to unravel
the secret of this mysterious entity. He believes that it is a
self-existing substance of a subtler matter and not a mere attribute.
Qualitatively, the souls of animals and men are alike; differences arise
from the peculiar structure of the bodies that are the instruments of
their souls.

The soul is definitely immortal and does not die with the death of the
body. Sayyid Ahmad Khan derives support for this position from the
scientific doctrine that nothing perishes in the world, the quantity of
matter remains unchanged, and only its form is changed. As to the
Resurrection he refers to many theories but accepts the one according to
which both body and soul will emerge.

The soul at the time of death acquires a certain physical medium
distinct from the present body and so at the Resurrection there will be
no new life but a continuation of the old. He argues that wherever the
Quran refers to the reality of the Resurrection, its real purpose is to
refute the belief of those who deny the existence of the soul and
identify life with life on this earth only. The various analogies
employed by the Quran refer to the fact of the Resurrection; they are
not intended to describe and reveal its nature and character.[^24]

He holds that paradise and hell described in sensuous terms in the Quran
are mere symbolical representations of the psychological states of
individuals in the life after death. The Quran says, “No soul knoweth
what joy of the eyes is reserved for the good, in recompense of their
work” (32:17). It is impossible to express the reality of super-sensuous
things in words, even though those be the words of God.[^25]

The impact of the new learning and the spread of scientific knowledge
created many problems for religious thought not only in Europe but also
in India. The Christian missionaries who had already met the onslaughts
of the challenge of modem science in the West began to approach and
study the religious thought of Muslims in this new context.

The tradition-ridden ‘*ulama*’ who were unfortunately completely unaware
of the new currents of thought released by science and also of the new
moral outlook on life proved incapable of meeting this challenge. Sayyid
Ahmad Khan was, thus, forced to take up this challenge. He had to
rethink the whole cultural heritage of Islam and reinterpret it in the
light of modem developments.

The first main hurdle in his way was the general belief among the
Muslims of the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent that the door of *ijtihad*
had been closed forever. No religion, if it is to be progressive and
dynamic, can ignore the importance of change and development in human
thought and knowledge, and so it is necessary that people in every age
should give all basic moral and spiritual values a new interpretation.

During the creative period Muslim thinkers continued to think and
expound the problems of their religious thought in consonance with the
spirit of the changing times, but after the fall of Baghdad, when
political and social life was disrupted, the doctrine of *taqlid* was
put forth with the intention of arresting any further deterioration and
disintegration. Even Iqbal accepted this plea and in *Rumuz-i Bekhudi*
advocat­ed *taqlid*, blind allegiance to authority, during a period of
decline. Later on, however, he repudiated this stand.

A blind reverence for the past cannot help people overcome their
shortcomings. The only thing that can counteract the forces of
reactionism is the freedom of expression enjoyed by creative
individuals. It was this truth that Sayyid Ahmad Khan realized, and he
strove hard to convince others of it. He advocated that the door of
*ijtihad* should be thrown open and every person who is qualified for it
should be prepared to rethink and reinterpret the problems of life and
religion in accordance with the circum­stances of his age.

In every religion there are certain truths that form the very basis of
spiritual life. Such principles are eternal verities that cannot change
with the change of time and place. Thus the Quran (30:30) says, “Set
your face towards the right religion which is based on the nature of God
on which is patterned the nature of man. There is no change in the
creation of God: this is the right religion.” This verse refers to that
aspect of religious faith that is above spatial and temporal
vicissitudes.

For Sayyid Ahmad Khan the basic aspects of a religion such as Islam are
belief in the unity of God (*tauhid*) and moral behaviour which springs
forth from the depth of one’s heart and the light of which radiates in
all directions. But religion, as usually under­stood, is much more than
this; it includes also what is usually called *Shariah*.

Shah Wali Allah was the first thinker in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent
who realized the necessity of clarifying this important issue.
Discussing the role and function of a prophet, he pointed out that
reforms and social and moral reorien­tation carried out by a prophet
should always be considered in the context of the type of social
atmosphere in which he is born, and the cultural and intellectual stage
of the people among whom he appears. It is not his aim, nor is it
possible for him, to bring about a total change in the social and legal
practices of his people. His main object is to build a society on moral
and spiritual principles and for this purpose he keeps intact almost all
that he finds in his environ­ment except what is inconsistent with his
ideology. He scrupulously tries to maintain whatever is compatible with
moral principles and modifies the rest as little as possible; so as to
avoid introducing unnecessary changes such as his contemporary society
cannot easily assimilate.[^26]

Accepting this explanation of the role of a prophet, Sayyid Ahmad made a
distinction between *Din*, *Shariah*, and worldly affairs. In the first
category he includes belief in God and in His attributes, as well as
acts of worship. In the second category he includes those matters that
deal with moral and spiritual purification of mankind. He denies that a
prophet is concerned at all with matters relating to our daily life.

Din is not subject to change, but our needs and the way we satisfy them
depend on differences of time and place. If we include these things
within the sphere of prophetic function, then with the change of time we
shall need another prophet, which is contrary to the spirit of the
finality of prophethood.

What is claimed to have been perfected and finalized by Islam is *Din*
and not the *Shariah*. If the *Shariah* is not final, it logically
follows that it is the duty of Muslims in every age and every country to
deal with their problems in the light of their needs in accordance with
the basic moral and spiritual tenets of Islam. For this purpose he took
the step that ibn Taimiyyah had taken in the seventh/thirteenth century.
Like him he revolted against the dogma of the finality of the four
schools of jurisprudence and went back to the very source in order to
make a fresh start.

With regard to Tradition, Sayyid Ahmad Khan’s attitude was unequivocal.
When the collections of Hadith were compiled in the second/eighth
century, political and social conditions of the time helped in the
fabrication of in­numerable traditions ascribing them to the Holy
Prophet (S). He was, therefore, not willing to accept Tradition as a
valid source of religious knowledge.

Our traditionists gave all their attention to developing the science of
*rijal* that deals with the biographies of all the various transmitters
of traditions. But the most important work to be done was a critical
appraisal of Traditions with regard to their content, a task that was
unfortunately not undertaken as diligently as it should have been.

According to Sayyid Ahmad, it is the duty of Muslims now to take up this
important work. As the situation stands, he would accept only those
traditions that are compatible with the letter and spirit of the Quran.
He approvingly quotes the statement of ibn Taimiyyah that “the truly
traditional is truly rational.” There is no other way out of this
situation. In case by a critical analysis a tradition is proved to be
true, Sayyid Ahmad would be willing to accept it as a valid basis for
religion. Still he makes a distinction between traditions that deal with
purely religious matters and those that deal with non-religious matters.
The latter, he thinks, we are not bound to follow at all.[^27]

Sayyid Ahmad Khan was not satisfied with the numerous available
com­mentaries of the Quran. According to him, they contained nothing but
fabricated stories and accounts of alleged miracles. Moreover, in the
interpreta­tion of the Quranic verses, they invariably referred to
particular historical events in the context of which alone, it was
claimed, their real meanings could be grasped. The result was that the
universal and eternal significance of the Quranic verses was sacrificed
at the altar of historical erudition.

To him the interpretation of the Quran by a standard (of traditions)
which was itself doubtful could not be the best way of approaching the
study of the Holy Book. He says, “When I am not willing to accept
abrogation (or modi­fication) of one verse of the Quran by another for
the reason of its being against the wisdom or omniscience of God, how
can I accept the abrogation or modifi­cation of the Quranic verses by
any tradition, howsoever trustworthy it may be claimed to be by any
standard? I am not willing to accord to the tradition any right of
abrogation even in the secondary sense, of progressive revelation, which
I have accepted with regard to the verses of the Quran. If there is any
such contradiction, I would reject the tradition outright as
untrue.”[^28]

Sayyid Ahmad Khan critically reviews the work done by the ancient
jurists. In the *Khutubat* his attitude towards their achievements is
appreciative. He explains in details how they derived rules and laws
from the Quran and the Sunnah for the regulation of social, political,
and religious life of the people. In view of the spread, of Islam, it
was necessary that the political and social life of the Muslim community
should have been built up in accordance with the spirit of the Quran and
the example set by the Holy Prophet (S).

This magnificent work was successfully undertaken by our early jurists.
But at present we must distinguish between what the Quran says and the
rules and regulations which the jurists have formulated through
inference. Sayyid Ahmad is of the opinion that howsoever praiseworthy
and commendable the efforts of the jurists may be, we are not bound to
accept their conclusions, for after all these are no more than man-made
regulations which can and must be altered with the change of
circumstances.

In one of his articles, “Uncivilized Countries,” Sayyid Ahmad Khan
rebukes Turkey for her negligence in the matter of legal reform. He
holds that back­wardness and weakness of Turkey in his time were due
solely to the obsolete legal code that was prevalent there. According to
him, it is one of the causes of the decline of the Muslims that they are
still following legal codes that were formulated to satisfy the demands
of a bygone age.

Every age presents new problems; and even though some old problems
recur, yet their form is quite different and, therefore, the solutions
they demand must be totally new. Nothing old can fill the place of the
new without adaptation and proper amendment. The present age demands a
totally new legal system pertaining to social, political, and
administrative affairs.

Unfortunately, the political decline of the Muslims, instead of giving
rise to a spirit of critical appraisal of the situation and a demand for
a dynamic adaptation to the new environment, has produced an attitude of
passive obedience to a static ideal of *taqlid*, i.e., blind allegiance
to an authority which is no longer valid and useful in the new
circumstances. Thus, according to Sayyid Ahmad, the spirit of *taqlid*
in the sphere of jurisprudence produced the following evil consequences:

(1) People wrongly came to believe that all worldly matters were covered
by religion and, therefore, nothing could be done without first
obtaining sanction from the ‘*ulama*’.

(2) The decisions of the jurists gradually came to be identified with
Islam itself. As a matter of fact, they were the expressions of opinion
by different individuals within the context of their own time and place
and were not meant to be applicable to all times. The result of this was
that any attempt to modify them or replace them with better decisions
was looked upon as a revolt against Islam itself.

Sayyid Ahmad thinks that it is the duty of the Muslims to rethink the
whole legal system, civil and criminal, and rewrite their trade and
revenue codes in the light of modern knowledge.[^29]

Like ibn Taimiyyah, Sayyid Ahmad refuses to accept *ijma* as the source
of Islamic Law. According to the former, it was the cause of all
superstition and un-Islamic practices. Sayyid Ahmad’s passion for
*ijtihad* could not brook any limitations imposed by the so-called
unanimity of jurists on certain matters. This unanimity may be the
result of certain peculiar circumstances of a particular period.

With the change of time and circumstances, the validity of such
decisions loses its force. Even the *ijma* of the Companions of the
Prophet (S) does not possess any overriding importance for Sayyid Ahmad.
We can certainly make full use of the decisions of these and other
scholars in the reformulation and reinterpretation of the Islamic legal
code in the modern age, but none of these, according to him, can impose
any limit on the judgments of modern jurists who can arrive at decisions
which they consider to be compatible with the demands of the time and in
consonance with the spirit of Islam and the Quran.[^30]

For this purpose Sayyid Ahmad decided to go back to the Quran as the
only valid and sure ground of all our attempts at modern interpretation
of Islam. In *Khutabat-i Ahmadiyyah*, he developed this view and
supported it by the famous saying of the Caliph Umar that “God’s Book is
sufficient for us.”

He boldly claimed to ignore all the mythical stories that had become
current among the Muslims due to their having been incorporated in the
vast store of commentaries on the Quran and, thus, taken for the
scriptural text, i.e., the very Word of God. It did not mean that he was
breaking with the past, for in his own *Tafsir* he discussed the views
and opinions of almost all-important commentators and accepted and
followed those that he thought were true.

What he wished to emphasize was that the altered conditions of modern
life, the advance in and development of human knowledge, and the
peculiar position in which the Muslims were placed, all demanded an
effort on their part to solve their problems in the light of their own
experiences unhampered by what the ancient doctors and thinkers had
said. In several matters he refused to accept the views commonly held as
true among Muslims because, in his view, they were neither supported by
the Quran nor were practicable in the context of the changed
circumstances.

For instance, he held that *rajm* (stoning to death), the accepted
punishment for fornication, could not be accepted because, first, the
Quran did not mention it, and, secondly, the traditions, on the basis of
which the ancient jurists accepted it, seem to uphold the custom
prevalent among the Arabs of those days in imitation of the Jews.

Again, there was a custom among Arabs to pay ransom money (*dit*) to the
relatives of the deceased in case of murder. This custom is referred to
in the traditions. But Sayyid Ahmad could not accept this as legally
practicable and, therefore, tried to prove that the Quran did not
sanction it.

It is commonly held on the basis of traditions that a will executed in
favour of legal heirs is null and void. But Sayyid Ahmad followed the
Quran in this respect. He strongly advocated that dividing of property
by will is as valid according to the Quran as its distribution by the
law of inheritance.

In one respect Sayyid Ahmad’s work certainly proved epoch-making. Before
him it had been generally held on the basis of the Quran (2:106; 12:39;
16:101) as well as traditions that some of the Quranic verses stood
abrogated. The number of such verses came to hundreds, though Shah Wali
Allah held that they were only five.

Sayyid Ahmad gave a serious thought to this problem and came to the
conclusion that the Quran being the eternal Word of God could not be
looked upon as the notebook of a whimsical poet. He held that the Quran
as actually recited by the Muslims was exactly as it was revealed to the
Holy Prophet (S); not a word or jot of it was omitted and no verse of it
stood abrogated.

For Sayyid Ahmad the abrogation to which the verses of the Quran refer
relate to the laws of the previous prophets like Moses (as) and Jesus
(as). A certain law is said to be abrogated only when, in spite of the
continuity of the circumstances in which it was first promulgated, it is
withdrawn, waived, and replaced by another law.

To Sayyid Ahmad such abrogation was totally foreign to the spirit of the
Quran. The possibility of abrogation would be against the omniscience
and wisdom of God. But if the conditions and circumstances themselves
changed, then the promulgation of a new law instead of an old one would
not be abrogation of the latter at all; it would rather be the sign of
God’s wisdom which expresses itself in progressive revelation.

According to Sayyid Ahmad, what have been abrogated are the laws of
previous pro­phets and those laws of Islam itself that ceased to be
operative on account of change in circumstances and conditions, so that
if these conditions recur, the previous order would automatically become
operative.

The attitude of Sayyid Ahmad was not merely theoretical; he was
principally a man of action and by circumstances he was forced to put
his ideas into practice. Just as he did not rest till he had set up the
college at Aligarh for the education of Muslims, so in religious matters
his purpose could not be fulfilled unless he could give satisfactory
answers to some of the concrete problems of the Muslims in those days.

The Christian polemic had questioned the utility and moral value of such
institutions as polygamy, divorce, and slavery. He tackled each problem
in a scientific way, studied its pros and cons and gave a most judicious
solution. It is important to note that in our own times many follow the
course set up by him in this field. Similarly, with regard to the
problem of inheritance, will, *riba*, and certain penal injunctions, his
solutions are being accepted and advocated by all the progressive and
liberal schools of thought in the Indo-Pakistan sub-continent.

There is no gainsaying the fact that by his scientific and critical
thinking he became the first great thinker whose patterns of thought
proved very fruitful. He was the first Muslim in the Indo-Pakistan
sub-continent who was able to see the potenti­alities of the contact of
Western culture with Islamic way of life and suggested the ways and
means to meet the challenge of modern ideas for the future development
of Muslim thought.

Bibliography
------------

Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan, *Tafsir al-Quran*, Vol. 1, Lahore, 1308/1891,
Vols. 2-6, Lahore, n. d.; *Tahdhib al-Akhlaq*, Vol. 1, Lahore,
1353/1934, Vol. 2, Lahore, 1313/1895; *Majmuah-i Lectures*, Lahore,
1900; *Khutabat-i Ahmadiyyah*, Newal Kishore Steam Press, Lahore;
*Tahdhib al-Akhlaq* (monthly journal), 1879-1880; *Aligarh Magazine*,
Special Number on Sir Sayyid, 1954; B.A. Dar, *Religious Thought of
Sayyid Ahmad Khan*, Lahore, 1957.

[^1]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2, pp. 4-6.

[^2]: Majmuah-i Lectures, pp. 21-22.

[^3]: Ibid., pp. 276-98.

[^4]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 1, p. 336.

[^5]: Ibid., pp. 340-41.

[^6]: Ibid., pp. 41-42.

[^7]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 3, pp. 11-12.

[^8]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2, pp. 18-22.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 1, pp. 34-35.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 32.

[^12]: Ibid., pp. 29-35; Vol. 3, pp. 49-57.

[^13]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2, p. 125.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 290.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 126.

[^16]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 3, p. 28.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 33.

[^18]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 1, pp. 387, 396, 397, 407, 426, 428, 429;
Tafsir al­ Quran, Vol. 1, pp. 12-13.

[^19]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 1, p. 56; see also Vol. 3, pp. 37-38.

[^20]: Ibid., Vol. 1, pp. 52-77; Vol. 3, pp. 75-78; Tahdhib al-Akhlaq,
Vol. 2, pp. 183-200.

[^21]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 1, pp. 19-25.

[^22]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2, pp. 220-21.

[^23]: Tafsir at-Quran, Vol. 6, pp. 140-45; Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2,
p. 219.

[^24]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 3, pp. 84-119.

[^25]: Ibid., Vol. 1, pp. 39-47.

[^26]: Hujjat Allah al-Balighah (Urdu translation, Lahore, 1953), Vol.
1, pp. 521-23.

[^27]: Khutabat, pp. 203-04, 215, 225-26; Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2, pp.
164-69.

[^28]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 1, pp. 162-69.

[^29]: Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2, pp. 141-42.

[^30]: Tafsir al-Quran, Vol. 1, pp. 217-18; Tahdhib al-Akhlaq, Vol. 2,
p. 487.


