Chapter 82: Renaissance in Indo-Pakistan (Continued): Iqbal
===========================================================

Muhammad Iqbal was born, in 1289/1873, at Sialkot. His ancestors were
Kashmiri Brahmans of the Sapru caste. His great-grandfather migrated to
the Punjab sometime in early thirteenth/nineteenth century and settled
down in Sialkot, a historical town that has produced many great
scholars. His father Nur Muhammad was a saintly man for whom religion
was a matter of living experience.

As related by Iqbal himself, he had distinct tendency towards mysticism.
Heredity and parental influence made Iqbal in­herit and imbibe this
tendency that continued to mature throughout his intel­lectual and
spiritual development. The father used to earn his modest living by the
labour and skill of his own hands and originally had the intention of
giving the son some instruction in the mosque and then making him a
helper in his own craft.

It has been reliably stated by many contemporaries of his father that it
was Maulawi Mir Hasan who seeing great promise in this intelligent child
persuaded his father to let him enter an ordinary public school which
followed methods of teaching and curricula introduced by the British
Indian system of education.

A ceremonious initiation into needlework proposed by the father was not
approved by the learned Mir Hasan and the father accepted his advice.
The boy started wielding the pen instead of the needle, a pen destined
to exercise a marvellous creative influence.

Like many a person of sensitive mind and spiritual leanings, the father
had faith in prophetic dreams. He related a dream that he had shortly
before the birth of Iqbal.[^1] He saw that there was a bird of exquisite
plumage flying low in the air and hovering over the heads of a crowd of
people who were jumping up and stretching their arms to catch it. While
he stood looking and admiring the beauty of the bird, it dropped into
his lap of its own accord.

When the genius in Igbal began to sprout forth and receive early
admiration from great scholars and poets, the father was convinced that
it was the spirit of Iqbal that had been symbolized in his dream as a
beautiful bird. We find the same symbolism in the New Testament where it
is related that the Holy Ghost descended in the shape of a dove.

The school that Iqbal attended still exists almost unchanged even after
the lapse of three quarters of a century. Its curriculum consisted
mostly of reading, writing, and arithmetic with an uninspiring emphasis
on cramming, meant for passing examinations and moving from grade to
grade. Shabby surroundings and poorly paid, under-educated teachers
could have only cramping effects on the mental and moral growth of young
pupils.

But Iqbal was rare type, which goes its own way and carves its own
destiny under all systems, good, bad, or indifferent. Mir Hasan, a
scholar of distinction and a man of sterling qualities of personality,
was deeply impressed by the liberal cultural movement of the celebrated
Sayyid Ahmad Khan. He was not a teacher in the school where Iqbal
completed his secondary education, but it appears that Iqbal’s spirit
began to be nourished by him very early and his influence had a long,
lasting effect on him.

When the British Crown proposed to confer Knighthood on Iqbal, he
suggested that Mir Hasan, to whose scholarly influ­ence he owed so much,
had a better right to recognition by a title. For his graduate studies
Iqbal came over to Lahore, which was then developing as a centre of
higher learning. He chose philosophy as his major subject for which he
had a particular bent of mind. He was fortunate in studying philosophy
under Thomas Arnold who was no ordinary teacher. An intimate
teacher-pupil relationship soon developed between the two to which
Iqbal’s poem on Arnold, included in the collection of *Bang-i Dara*,
bears evidence.

Iqbal’s grateful recognition of what he received from Arnold is also
expressed by him in his dedication to him of his book, *The Development
of Metaphysics in Persia*. It runs as follows: “This little book is the
first-fruit of that literary and philosophical training which I have
been receiving from you for the last ten years, and as an expression of
gratitude I beg to dedicate it to your name. You have always judged me
liberally; I hope you will judge these pages in the same spirit.”

Arnold before coming to Lahore had been a Professor at Sir Sayyid Ahmad
Khan’s Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College, Aligarh, where he had written
his famous book, *The Preaching of Islam*. It was Sayyid Ahmad Khan to
whom he owed his keen interest in Islamic studies. On his return to
England he achieved distinction as a great scholar and was knighted.

When Iqbal went to England for higher studies in Western philosophy, he
re-established his contact with him. Iqbal enriched his knowledge of
Western philosophy under McTaggart who was his guide for his research
thesis in philosophy.

Having saturated himself with whatever Western philosophy, past and
present, had to offer, Iqbal went to Germany for a doctorate because the
British universities at that time had nothing higher than Master’s
degree in philosophy. Having received the philosophical lore of the
West, Iqbal decided to repay the debt by acquainting the West with some
currents of philosophical thought in pre-Islamic and post-Islamic
Persia.

Even while Iqbal was completing his formal academic education his genius
had already developed, a creative synthesis of the East and the West.
Before Iqbal went to Europe for higher philosophical studies he had
already become famous as a poet. The literary critics of his nation had
acknowledged him as a new star on the firmament of Urdu poetry.

His poetry from the very beginning was rich in thought. In this respect
among the Urdu poets only Ghalib could be considered to be his
forerunner, but in the choice of themes his predecessors were also Azad
and Hali who had revolted against the degenerate traditional trends and
had introduced into Urdu poetry new forms as well as new content under
the impact of English literature.

Azad had predicted in his book *Nairang-i Khayal* that the future
development of Urdu literature would be brought about by those who would
have in their hands keys of the East as well as of the West. Hali was
also of the same opinion and in his *Muqad­dimah*, a critique of poetry;
he freely borrowed the tenets of literary criticism directly or
indirectly from Western writers, although he took his illustrations also
from Arabic, Persian, and Urdu literature.

The ideal thinker and literary genius that Sayyid Ahmad Khan, Azad, and
Hali had visualized was embodied in Iqbal. The, Sayyid was a liberal
rationalist, influenced by the Western naturalism that held its sway in
the later half of the thirteenth/nineteenth century due to the rise and
achievement of physical sciences. Convinced of the truth of Islam in
embodying eternal verities, he felt no opposition between reason and
revelation or science and religion and he aimed at a synthesis of them
both.

Iqbal was a great admirer of this all-round reformer and in a poem,
which belongs to a very early period of his poetic production, while
paying a heart­felt tribute to him, he makes the spirit of the departed
leader advise the young poet to inspire his nation with broad, liberal,
and rejuvenating ideals, a task which Iqbal adopted as his divinely
ordained mission and fulfilled in a manner that placed him in the galaxy
of the great literary geniuses of all times.

Iqbal was an heir to a very rich literary and philosophical scholarship.
He imbibed and assimilated all that was best in the Islamic and Oriental
thought to which he added his extensive knowledge of Western literature,
philosophy, and culture both of the past and the present. His range of
interests covered religion, philosophy, art, politics, economics,
nationalism, the revival of Muslim life, and the universal brotherhood
of man.

He was capable of writing power­ful prose not only in his own national
language but also in English, which he could wield with a masterly pen;
the language of his two books in English is that of a skilled English
writer. But he continued to use poetry as his medium of expression
because he was a born poet and everything that he thought or felt almost
involuntarily shaped itself into verse.

Many poems flowed from his pen, which a protagonist of “art for art’s
sake” could relish and admire, but he himself was a strong opponent of
those who thought that art could or should be divorced from the stern
realities of life. He traversed the whole gamut of the problems of human
life, and a comprehensive survey of his thoughts, ideals, and sentiments
could fill several volumes.

Books on exposition of his ideas have appeared during the last two
decades and numerous articles in journals have assessed his
contributions. The stream of appreciation and criticism is still flowing
unabated and thesis after thesis is being offered in the universities as
a dissertation for a doctorate degree.

The inspiring message of his poetry, responsible for his extensive and
intensive influence, cannot be trans­lated into a cold prosaic survey.
His poetry throbs with soul stirring life and a prosaic paraphrase has
the same poor relation to this pulsating life as post­mortem has to a
living organism. Goethe said that the tree of life is green but the
theory about it is grey like autumn leaves.

A great Urdu poet, a friend of Iqbal and his co-eval, said that if the
Quran had been revealed in the Urdu language, it would have been poured
in the mould of Iqbal’s poetry. And about the Quran the great Western
scholar of Arabic and Islamic studies, Sir Hamilton Gibb, observes that
translating it into any other language is turning gold into mud.

Iqbal himself says in one of his verses that truth without feeling and
pathos becomes philosophy but when it stirs the heart it becomes poetry;
in this respect he compares a typical representative of the intellect,
ibn Sina (Avicenna), with a typical mystical poet, Rumi, both pursuing a
camel carrying a veiled beauty (the hidden truth); the former is
enveloped and lost in the cloud of sand raised by the speeding camel but
the latter leaps forward with un­calculating courage and unveils the
veiled beauty.

Iqbal has persistently advocated his conviction that intuition is more
basic than intellect, and that the intuitions about life if at all could
be expressed better through arts than through other media. Among the
arts Rumi considered music to be a more adequate medium to touch the
essence of reality, and Schopenhauer is of the same view even though
their conceptions of reality are diametrically opposed.

Iqbal might have endorsed this view of Rumi about music but human souls
require communication not only with the Ultimate Reality but also
between themselves; for this purpose there is no better medium than
language, and language reaches its perfection in poetry which is thought
tinged with emotion.

We have already said that nothing human was foreign to Iqbal; there is
hardly any problem of human life that he did not grapple with to find a
satisfactory solution. Let us pick up a few basic problems of life and
note some of Iqbal’s ruling ideas.

In the early period of his poetic production we find him in general a
free-lance poet, expressing in verse whatever impressed him; he poured
out the stirrings of his heart freely, without concentrating on any
particular mission or message as he did in the later decades of his
life. We find in this early phase stirring poems on territorial
nationalism, and a burning desire for political freedom from the yoke of
British imperialism that was at its height during this period.

He believed at that time that multi-communal and multi-credal
conglomeration of the teeming masses of the Indian sub-continent,
although riddled with caste and religious cleavages, could be welded
into a nation of the Western type; the people could not be freed unless
they felt a psychological unity based on a common love for the
motherland.

He exhorted the polytheistic idolatrous Hindu masses to discard their
old gods and worship the motherland instead, raising new temples wherein
all the worshippers, irrespective of their creeds and castes, could join
in a common worship. This phase of Iqbal ended when he went to Europe
for the study of Western philosophy and culture.

Many a student during this period returned from Europe either completely
denationalized, becoming by blind imitation a travesty of a Westerner,
or fired with the idea of territorial nationalism. They came back
Westernized in their whole mode of living. Overwhelmed by the
achievements of the West in science and technology they belittled even
the good aspects of their own cultural heritage. They desired their
society to become dynamic and pro­gressive, and the only way that they
considered to be effective was to adopt Western attitudes uncritically.

Iqbal was one of those few observers of Western civilization who saw
also the seamy side of it. It was a ruthlessly competitive society split
up into antagonistic nations bent upon exploiting not only their own
working classes, but also making all unorganized, technically backward
people of Asia and Africa victims of economic imperialism.

Iqbal was convinced that Europe was heading towards a catastrophe,
because of its purely materi­alistic outlook divorced from ethical and
spiritual values. Jingoistic territorial nationalism had for long been
hypocritically masquerading as patriotism. National lust for power had
replaced the ethics of Jesus with the machinations of Machiavelli.

The worship of the State to which Hegel had given a philo­sophical
grounding was producing thinkers like Nietzsche and Trotsky for whom the
power of the superman or super-nation had become the ultimate goal of
individuals as well as of nations. Iqbal was disillusioned by a closer
study of the West and some of the poems that he wrote in Europe
expressed dark prophesies about the fate of this hectic civilization.

He said that Western nations were building their nests on very slender
and weak branches and were heading towards mass suicide. Carlyle had
seen it much earlier than Iqbal when he prophesied about half a century
before the First World War that if Britain persisted to move on the path
that she had chosen for herself she was bound to plunge into hell within
fifty years.

The period of Iqbal’s stay in Europe almost coincided with the time when
Spengler, an obscure school­teacher, was quietly engaged in a monumental
historical survey of the rise and fall of cultures through the millennia
of civilized life to establish his thesis of the *Decline of the West*
which was published shortly after the termination of the First World
War.

Iqbal returned to his country in 1327/1908 with a new outlook that was
neither Eastern nor Western. He came to the conclusion that as the
lop­sided material progress of the West was unethical and unspiritual so
the religiosity of the East was a hollow and life-thwarting force. The
realm of the spirit had to be rediscovered by the East as well as by the
West.

A good deal of science and technology of the West was valuable and the
East was to learn it and adopt it to eliminate poverty, squalor, and
disease, but the East must not repeat the mistake of worshipping
material power as an end-in-itself. Physical sciences and the tremendous
forces that they have unleashed must be harnessed to ethical and
spiritual aims.

A religious outlook alone can save humanity but this outlook itself
requires re-examination and reconstruction. Iqbal not only gave up
writing inspiring songs about national­ism and patriotism but began to
denounce these narrow urges of collective egoism that are idealized by
patriotic songs.

He now decided to devote his philosophy and his art primarily to
rejuvenating the dormant Muslim com­munity. Territorial or racial
nationalism is foreign to the spirit of Islam; it originated in the
West. He was convinced now that it would be a tragically retrograde step
if the Muslim world began to try to remedy its frustrations by replacing
the global Islamic sentiment by aggressive nationalism of the Western
type.

He conceived of Islam as a universal religion that envisaged all
humanity as a unity. But the Islam of his time had become narrow, rigid
and static. He conceived of life as evolutionary and dynamic. He came to
the conclusion that a fossilized religious dogmatism could not generate
an outlook that would lead to the self-realization of individuals and
communities.

But it was not only the narrowness of religious dogmatism but also a
mecha­nistic materialism that was responsible for a false view of
reality. Iqbal became an iconoclast, bent upon demolishing all
orthodoxies and idolatries. Religious dogmatism had debased religion,
territorial or racial nationalism had split up humanity into hostile
aggressive groups, and materialistic philosophy had made the spirit an
epiphenomenal and evanescent manifestation of matter.

He continued developing an ideology the basic concepts and corollaries
of which would purify and advance human life in every direction. It
would be difficult to sum up his ideology in any one *ism*.

You could call him a spiritualist because he held the spirit to be the
basic reality or you could call him an idealist. With greater
definiteness one could hold him to be a creative evolutionist. As a
staunch believer in a personal God, he was also a theist. Believing that
all existence is constituted of egos or selves one could class him along
with Rumi and Bergson as a monadologist.

A question is often raised about Iqbal’s originality. Was he merely an
eclectic bringing together various trends of thought without any
successful attempt at harmonizing them into an intellectually consistent
organic system or did he succeed in removing the fragmentariness of
different systems of thought and belief, dissolving half-truths into the
unity of one great truth?

Here we have a thinker who, though a theist, could heartily appreciate a
good deal even in the keen though incoherent utterances of an atheistic
thinker like Nietzsche, about whom he said that he had the heart of a
believer but the head of an infidel. He believes with Nietzsche that
present day humanity must be transcended in a further evolutionary leap;
but Nietzsche’s super­man appeared to him to be only a super beast
because Nietzsche had drawn his speculative conclusions from Darwinian
biology.

The concept of the superman had been developed by Muslim mystical
metaphysicians like ibn Arabi, Rumi, and Jili but from quite different
starting points and on quite different lines. In the development of his
ideology we can see that he is indebted to many a great thinker of the
past and the present but never does he submit wholeheartedly to any one
of them. He goes a part of the way with one or the other but then
suddenly stops and parts company with him.

For instance, he would feel exhilarated by Nietzsche’s notion of power
as an intrinsic value and end-in-itself but he would soon say that
Nietzsche had a poor conception of the infinite potentialities of the
human self, which, having originated in the Cosmic Self, progressively
assimilates divine attributes.

Nor could he agree with Nietzsche in his view of existence as eternal
recurrence. If life were eternally creative, it would never repeat
itself. Nietzsche’s superman is ruthless and loveless, riding roughshod
over all tender emotions in his advance towards greater biological
fitness.

Among his contemporary thinkers Iqbal felt a much keener kinship with
Bergson who successfully demolished mechanistic material­ism and
Darwinian biological philosophy along with intellectualism that
attempted to subject creative life to rigid moulds of syllogistic logic.
Bergson had repudiated not only mechanism but also teleology.

According to Bergson, life does not create according to any eternally
preconceived plan existing in the Cosmic Mind. Iqbal supports Bergson in
this view and thus runs counter to the orthodox Muslim conception of
*taqdir* or destiny, which envisages an eternal pre-ordination of all
happenings in the universe, even to the minutest details.[^2]

According to the orthodox conception, serial time only unfolds what was
eternally present in the mind of God. But after complete agreement with
many parts of Bergsonian philosophy he parts company with him. Berg­son
conceived of reality as creative duration. For him, at the centre of
existence there is nothing that he could call a self.

For Iqbal, life, though not teleological in the sense of being
implemented according to a preconceived plan, is purposive activity. The
concept of self too implies purpos­iveness. In his lecture on “The
Philosophical Test of the Revelations of Religious Experience,” he
criticizes Bergson as follows: “Purposes colour not only our present
states of consciousness, but also reveal its future direction. In fact,
they constitute the forward push of our life, and thus in a way
anti­cipate and influence the states that are yet to be.

To be determined by an end is to be determined by what ought to be. Thus
past and future both operate in the present state of consciousness and
the future is not wholly undetermined as Bergson’s analysis of our
conscious experience shows. A state of attentive consciousness involves
both memory and imagination as operating factors. On the analogy of our
conscious experience, therefore, Reality is not a blind vital impulse
wholly unilluminated by idea. Its nature is through and through
teleological.”[^3]

Iqbal summarizes his criticism of Bergson’s non-purposive clan vital in
a few lines: “In Bergson’s view the forward rush of the vital impulse in
its creative freedom is unilluminated by the light of an immediate or
remote purpose. It is not aiming at a result; it is wholly arbitrary,
undirected, chaotic, and unforeseeable in its behaviour.

It is mainly here that Bergson’s analysis of our conscious experience
reveals its inadequacy. He regards conscious experience as the past
moving along with and operating in the present. He ignores that the
unity of consciousness has a forward aspect also. Life is only a series
of acts of attention and an act of at­tention is inexplicable without
reference to a purpose, conscious or unconscious.

Even our acts of preception are determined by our immediate interests
and purposes. The Persian poet Urfi has given a beautiful expression to
this aspect of human perception (by pointing out that): ‘if your heart
is not deceived by the mirage, be not proud of the sharpness of your
understanding; for your freedom from this optical illusion is due to
your imperfect thirst.’”[^4]

Iqbal conceived of God or the Cosmic Self primarily as Creator and of
the egos or the selves that He has created or that have emerged out of
His eternally creative activity as potentially creative at various
levels of con­sciousness. Even the poorest potter or craftsman is a
creator but if he is shaping his material only according to a set plan
or pattern his creativeness is of the lowest order.

The best example of a creative genius is the musical composer or the
poet. When a Beethoven or a Mozart composes a symphony he has no chart
before him; the creative urge or emotion creates its own body as it
proceeds and the musical genius views his own creation objectively after
it has assumed a visible or audible shape.

Others who play that symphony try to create that emotion by
reproduction; they are not creating but re-creat­ing. Iqbal was an
extremely gifted poetic genius; he knew not how and from which source a
great poem emerged. The poet cannot himself know in advance the words
that his inspiration brings forth. He often wonders at the unforeseen
beauty of his own creation.

In the book of *Genesis* in the Bible it is said that God after having
created saw and appreciated His own creation. Iqbal could not attribute
to the Cosmic Creative Genius anything less than what he had experienced
in the process of his own poetic creation. The embodi­ment of a genuine
creative urge or inspiration must be unpredictable.

There are no eternal patterns or archetypal ideas such as we find in
Plato’s meta­physics. Plato’s creator god, the Demiurge, is not a real
creator; he materializes only the forms or ideas that were never created
and were meant only to be imitated or partially assimilated. Iqbal could
have considered Bergsonian ontology and epistemology a great and
revolutionary advance on Plato’s conception of a static Ultimate
Reality.

Plato relegated all movement and change to the unholy alliance of Being
with Non-Being. According to him, the Real does not move or create;
movement results only from the effort of Non-Being at imperfect
participation in the reality of eternally static arche­types.

Aristotle too likens God to a beautiful statue to which the appreciating
people are drawn; there is no movement or volition in the statue itself.
The first great revolt in Western philosophy against this classical and
Greek con­ception of Ultimate Reality was Hegel’s dialectic wherein
nothing remains itself and every thing or process is moved by implicit
and internal contradic­tion into its opposite to achieve a synthesis
with it, which synthesis also cannot rest in itself but becomes in its
turn a thesis which begins to develop an antithesis already inherent in
it.

But Hegel’s Absolute too is eternally what it is and is not a free
creator in the sense in which theism conceives a Creator God. Hegel’s
Absolute is not a creative, purposive self, engaged in actualizing Its
infinite potentialities. Hegel’s dynamic dialectic also follows an
eternal pattern that is being unfolded in time.

This conception of God and the universe does not appeal to Iqbal. He
does not follow either Plato or Hegel or Bergson. As William James,
another great philosopher of creative life, said, the universe in which
we live is not a block universe; reality is itself in the making and the
truth about reality too must constantly conform to new manifestations of
the reality that follows no logic.

Iqbal believed that the Quran supported him in this dynamic view of
reality “To my mind,” said he, “nothing is more alien to the Quranic
outlook than the idea that the universe is the temporal working out of a
pre-conceived plan…. The universe, according to the Quran, is liable to
increase. It is a growing universe and not an already completed product
which left the hand of its maker ages ago, and is now lying stretched in
space as a dead mass of matter to which time does nothing, and
consequently is nothing.”[^5]

If Iqbal had produced only philosophical poetry, it would have been a
very difficult task to collect his scattered thoughts and weave them
into a self-consistent philosophy. Fortunately, he undertook to perform
that task him­self in his lectures on the *Reconstruction of Religious
Thought in Islam*. In these lectures he has done intensely concentrated
thinking. These lectures are themselves a summary, and the attempt to
summarize them further would leave out much that is essential for an
intelligible exposition. But, however inadequately, the attempt has to
be made.

His first lecture deals with knowledge and religious experience. Iqbal
is a poet as well as a philosopher, but temperamentally he is a
religious man for whom religion is a vital experience as well as an
intellectually establishable reality.

He holds that in human life religion is more central and vital than
philosophy because, in the words of a great modern philosopher,
Whitehead, whom Iqbal has quoted more than once in his support, religion
is a system of general truths which have the effect of transforming
character when they are sincerely held and vividly apprehended.

But man being a rational creature cannot be satisfied with faith unless
he finds reason also to be in agreement with it. In view of its function
religion is in greater need of a rational foundation than even the
dogmas of science. Reconciliation of the oppositions of experience is an
inescapable necessity for a man who is religious as well as rational.

Thought and intuition (or faith) need each other for mutual
rejuvenation. Bergson, a great protagonist of intuition as more basic
than intellect, has, nevertheless, expressed the view that intuition
also is a higher kind of intellect.

The Greeks deified the logical intellect, despising the study of reason
in nature. On the other hand, religions before Islam rooted themselves
in faith not demanding its conformity with the logical intellect or
reason in nature. Islam preached the basic conformity of reason and
revelation.

Reason as informing the phenomena of physical nature as well as the mind
of man has been presented by the Quran to be in complete agreement with
faith in God. The Quran uses the same word for revelation granted to
saints and prophets and the instincts of animals whose unconscious
rationality appears to be miracu­lous; it sees in the humble bee a
recipient of divine revelation and constantly calls upon the reader to
observe the perpetual change of the winds, the alternation of day and
night, the clouds, the starry heavens, and the planets swimming through
infinite space.

Why should the intuitions of a prophet and a saint be less related to
reality than the instincts of lower animals? Iqbal sees no unbridgeable
gulf between intellectual knowledge and religious experience. Plato had
despised sense-experience as a source of knowledge; the modern
irrationalist has looked down upon the intellect as an instrument for
the knowledge of reality.

Iqbal’s view is integrative, considering sense perception, intellect,
and intuition to be different modes of apprehension of the same reality.
His outlook is unmistakably Quranic, not only appealing to reason in
support of revelation and faith but also regarding hearing and sight as
the most valuable divine gifts and declaring them to be accountable to
God.

Iqbal accuses the early Muslim scholastics of having missed the spirit
of the Quran under the spell of Greek speculation. Ghazali revolted
against Greek intellectualism and moved to mystic experience as the sole
avenue for the knowledge of Ultimate Reality. In spite of his deep
appreciation of Ghazali, Iqbal disagrees with him about the relation of
thought and intuition and says that Ghazali “failed to see that thought
and intuition are organically related and that thought must necessarily
simulate finitude and inconclusive­ness because of its alliance with
serial time.”[^6]

Kant, who did splendid work in analysing the logical and scientific
intellect establishing its limitations, could not rest in its
inadequacies and was compelled to postulate reason as standing above the
categories of understanding, pointing towards ultra logical realities
like God and free will.

Long before Kant, Rumi had reached a similar conclusion in repudiating
the claims of the logical intellect and spatio-temporal categories to be
the sole determinants of reality. What Kant termed the intellect, Rumi
called “particular reason” which he contrasted with universal reason,
which latter is one with the intuition of total reality.

Iqbal’s view coincides entirely with Rumi’s. He recognizes the
inadequacy of the logical understanding; it finds a multiplicity of
mutually exclusive par­ticulars with no prospect of their ultimate
reduction to a unity and this makes him sceptical about the
conclusiveness of thought. He is fully aware of the fact that the
logical understanding is incapable of seeing this multiplicity as a
coherent universe.

The generalizations of inductive logic are fictitious unities that do
not affect the reality of concrete things. But human reason is not
confined merely to discursive thinking and is not wholly exhausted by
its processes of induction and deduction. “In its deeper movement
thought is capable of reaching an immanent Infinite in whose
self-unfolding movement the various finite concepts are only moments.”

Thought is potentially infinite and contains infinitude as the seed
carries within itself the organic unity of the tree as a present fact.
Thinking would not point towards its own limitations and inadequacies if
it were not haunted by infinity, with which it implicitly compares every
finite percept and concept. “It is the presence of the total infinite in
the movement of knowledge that makes finite thinking possible.”

Iqbal says that “both Kant and Ghazali failed to see that thought, in
the very act of knowledge, passes beyond its own finitude.”[^7] Many
creeds and philosophies created a cleavage between the ideal and the
real and could not see the bridge that unites the two. The ideal and the
real are as much inter­penetrating as the finite and the infinite.

“It is the mysterious touch of the ideal that animates and sustains the
real.... The life of the ideal consists, not in a total breach with the
real, which would tend to shatter the organic wholeness of life in
painful oppositions, but in the perpetual endeavour of the ideal to
appropriate the real with a view eventually to absorb it, to convert it
into itself and to illuminate its whole being.”[^8]

Iqbal has an organic view of life and existence in which heaven embraces
earth, intuition and faith are reconciled with universal reason, science
ceases to be antagonistic to religion, and infinity informs and animates
finitude. His view of existence is based on a conception of the unity
and continuity of all aspects of Being with no breaks, gulfs, or gaps.

He tries to point to the organic unity of all aspects of Being which
creeds, philosophies, and sciences have sundered by analytic thinking.
One can sum up his whole philosophy as a philosophy of universal
integration. The Ultimate Reality reveals its symbols both within and
with­out. The empirical, no less than the rational attitude, is an
indispensable stage in the spiritual life of humanity.

Iqbal gets solid support from the Quranic verses for his philosophy of
integration wherein senses, reasons, and intuition springing from what
the Quran calls *fuad* or the heart, all offer valid and legitimate
approaches to the Ultimate Reality which, being a self-consistent unity
underlying all diversity, relates organically the findings of all the
three sources of knowledge.

“‘God hath made everything which He hath created most good; and began
the creation of man with clay; then ordained his progeny from germs of
life, from sorry water; then shaped him (in due proportion), and
breathed of His spirit unto him, gave you hearing and seeing and
*heart*: what little thanks do ye return?’ (32:6-8).”[^9]

Quoting Rumi, Iqbal says the “heart” is a kind of intuition or insight
that feeds on the rays of a super-sensuous sun, and brings us into
contact with aspects of reality other than those open to
sense-perception or ratiocina­tion. Primitive gropings of religious
consciousness are as little indicative of the unreality of religions
consciousness in its higher and purer forms as primitive views about the
phenomena of physical nature are in proving the invalidity of all
scientific thought.

Iqbal’s conception of God is a corollary of his view of the nature of
the Ultimate Reality because he identifies God with the Ultimate
Reality. But he is a theist and not a monist of any of the different
types or a pantheist. It is not only God who is real but the egos
created by God are also real and they share both the essence and the
creative urge of the Cosmic Creator.

God is the Perfect Ego, the Perfect Self, or the Perfect Individual; for
all created egos, individuality is an aim to be progressively realized.
He agrees with Bergson that individuality is a matter of degrees and is
not fully realized even in the case of an apparently closed-off unity as
that of the human self.

The tendency to individuate is present everywhere in the organized world
but it is always opposed by the tendency towards reproduction by which
detached parts of the organism begin to live separately and
independently. Says Bergson, “In this way individuality harbours its own
enemy at home.”

Iqbal derives his conception of God from the Quran wherein God is
immanent as well as transcendent, personal as well as impersonal. There
are verses in the Quran which apparently lend support to a pantheistic
view of reality; pantheistic Sufism has raised a magnificent
superstructure on these foundations. For instance, it is said, “He is
the beginning and He is the end, He is without and He is within.”[^10]

In the famous Sarah *a­l-Nur* it is said that “God is the light of the
heavens and the earth.”[^11] This simile is developed further and it is
said that this light emanates from a lamp in a niche and the lamp is
encased in a glass as if it were a star that is self­luminous. The lamp
is fed from the oil of a tree that is neither in the East nor in the
West.

Iqbal says that the Quranic simile is meant to convey the idea that God
is a spiritual reality which is not spatial and yet it is not a vague,
undetermined infinite suffused in all existence as a selfless impersonal
entity. The enclosed lamp in a niche is meant to point to God as an
individual self.

God, the Ultimate Ego, is infinite but His infinitude is not temporal or
spatial but consists in the infinite inner possibilities of His creative
activity, of which the universe, as known to us, is only a partial
expression. God’s infinity is intensive and not extensive; it involves
an infinite series but is not that series.

Iqbal does not conceive of the world to have been created at a point of
time, lying in infinite space outside the being of God as a
manu­factured article. It is in the nature of God to be eternally
creative; the universe does not confront God as His “other”. Space,
time, and matter are inter­pretations which thought puts on the free
creative activity of God.

The relation of God to His creation, if conceived under these
categories, would lead to antinomies compelling the mind to accept both
affirmations and denials, and be content with contradictions in the
matter of faith about God and His relation to the creation, as was
forcibly pointed out by Kant. If Iqbal refuses to accept the naive
orthodox theistic view of creation in time, he, at the same time, cannot
accept that the world of matter is co-eternal with God, operated upon by
Him, as it were, from a distance.

With respect to God’s knowledge, Iqbal says that human thought is
dis­cursive but knowledge in the sense of discursive knowledge, however
infinite, cannot be predicated of God because His knowledge is also
creative of the objects that He knows. Iqbal does not conceive of God’s
knowledge as omniscience in the sense of an immediate awareness of the
entire sweep of history, past, present and future, regarded as an order
of specific events in an eternal ever-present “now”.

It was thus that Jalal al-Din Dawwani, Iraqi, and Josiah Royce conceived
God’s knowledge. Iqbal does not agree with them in this view. To him it
appears that it suggests a closed universe, a fixed futurity, a
predetermined, unalterable order of specific events, which, like a
superior fate, has once and for all determined the direction of God’s
creative activity. Iqbal is not a believer in the correspondence theory
of knowledge for which truth is nothing but an exact mirroring of
reality.

A thinker for whom the Ultimate Reality, which is phenomenal as well as
noumenal, is a Creative Self, perpetually creating and objectifying
ever-new possibilities, could not conceive of God, the Perfect Ego, as
omniscient, as one that knows in details not only the past and the
present but also the not-yet-happened future events. Such a static view
of reality would nullify God’s creative activity that would no longer be
conceived of as free but as eternally determined.

God’s knowledge is not a sort of mirror passively reflecting the details
of an already finished structure of things that the finite consciousness
reflects in fragments only. God’s foreknowledge as conceived in orthodox
theology could be conceded only by sacrificing His freedom.

We may repeat here that Iqbal, in thinking of God as an ego or self, has
conceived of Him on the analogy of a creative human self, creative
either in the realm of intellect or in that of aesthetics. He says that
a fruitful idea pregnant with great wealth of its possible applications
emerges in consciousness all at once but the intellectual working out of
its numerous bearings is a process in time.

Sometimes it takes many generations before the possibilities that were
inherent in it from the very beginning actualize themselves completely.
The same is the case with poetry or musical composition; the pattern of
verses or tones implicit in the creative genius becomes explicit by
unfolding itself. For Iqbal God is an infinitely creative genius
creating novelties at every moment.

The problem of free will in man offers no great difficulties to Iqbal.
The difficulties are created by mathematically determined, mechanistic
determinism that Iqbal repudiates, seeking support from the view of
matter and material causation presented by philosophers of science like
Einstein and Eddington.

Determinism has been advocated not only by mechanistic material­ists but
also by the theistic theologians. Further, the modern age has produced
theories of physiological and psychological determinism. Theistic
theology has not been able to reconcile God’s infinite freedom and
foreknowledge with human freedom. Iqbal solves the problem by denying
foreknowledge to God and by making God grant freedom to human egos who
are to share His creative activity.

He admits that the emergence of egos endowed with the power of
spontaneous and hence unforeseeable action is in a sense a limitation of
the freedom of the all-inclusive Ego, but this limitation is not
externally imposed. It is born of God’s own creative freedom whereby He
has chosen finite egos to be participators in His life, power, and
freedom.

Iqbal considers the prevalent idea of God’s absolute omnipotence to be a
misconception. According to him, all activity, creational or otherwise,
is a kind of limitation without which it is impossible to conceive of
God as a concrete operative Ego. Omni­potence, abstractly conceived, is
a blind capricious power without limits. Omnipotence so conceived would
make it impossible to think of God as possessing the attributes of
reason, love, or justice.

As a theist, Iqbal has also to deal with the problem of evil. He
realizes that if the rationally directed divine will is good, a serious
problem arises, unless we close our eyes to the presence of physical and
moral evil. We have before our eyes the tragic spectacle of universal
suffering and wrongdoing. Pain is an inevitable concomitant not only of
wrong actions but even of attempts to do what is right.

The course of evolution has involved endless ruthlessness. Iqbal is not
an optimist of the type that says “whatever is, is right” and that from
a cosmic viewpoint all is well with the world. Nor is he a pessimist of
the Schopenhaurean type who, like many Indian philosophers, views life
to be essentially an evil that must be ended because it cannot be
mended.

God does not create evil; in the words of the Quran, “He holds all
goodness in His hand.” Existence or life could not be possible if it did
not meet resistance, but the goodness of God lies in the fact that
existence contains forces that can overcome evil. No evil is absolute;
the alchemy of life is capable of converting evil into good. If the
character of the ego can develop only by struggle against thwarting
forces, the presence of resistance to the realization of goodness cannot
be deplored.

Iqbal agrees with Fichte that life creates resistances in the interest
of its own development. Whoever asks why there is evil in life wrongly
imagines that there could have been life without pain and evil,
resistance and frustration. If moral and spiritual development is good,
how could anyone achieve it if there were no internal or external
opposi­tion to its realization?

Those who want life without its hurdles are, according to a simile used
by Kant, like birds that would resent the resistance of the air as if
they could fly in a vacuum. Flight is the result of the effort of the
wings to overcome the resistance of the air. Iqbal is neither an
optimist nor a pessimist of any extreme type; he is a meliorist.

It may be asked if Iqbal believes in an eventual victory of good over
evil at any point of time in the future course of evolution. Consistent
with his view of life as a perpetually creative activity his vision of
life after death, even for the blessed, is not a paradise where all
unfulfilled desires are eternally fulfilled.

For him the reward of goodness is not an epicurean paradise where all
motivation for further development ceases in a bliss of eternal
satisfaction. The reward of life is a higher life with higher
actualities and deeper potentialities, and yet, according to his
conception of life, the ego must meet resistance at every level and,
therefore, pain must remain an eternal element of life.

Iqbal has produced very intriguing and exhilarating poems in praise of
Satan, the personification of evil and resistance. In a dialogue between
Satan and the archangel Gabriel, he seems to be the advocate of the
former. In a verse he exhorts lovers of life not to aspire for life on
any plane of existence where Satan, the principle of resistance, does
not exist.

Life cannot rest in any of its achievements; every goal is the starting
point of a new venture. He would have greatly appreciated the sentiment
of Lessing which the latter expressed by saying that if God offered him
truth in one hand, and search for truth in the other, he would accept
the eternal search, saying, “O Lord, keep the truth for Thyself because
only Thou canst have the truth and live; as for myself, only seeking can
keep me alive.”

Iqbal’s paradise is neither the one from which Adam and Eve were driven
out for an act of disobedience nor the vision of unfulfilled earthly
desires. He gives his own interpretation of the legend of the Fall of
Man that he believes to be the true meaning of the Quranic version of
this legend. He says, “The Quranic legend of the Fall has nothing to do
with the first appearance of man on this planet. Its purpose is rather
to indicate man’s rise from a primitive state of instinctive appetite to
the conscious possession of a free self, capable of doubt and
dis­obedience.

The Fall does not mean any moral depravity; it is man’s transition from
simple consciousness to the first flash of self-consciousness, a kind of
waking from the dream of nature with a throb of personal causality in
one’s own being.”[^12] There was a paradise that humanity left behind on
its course of evolution and there is a paradise that awaits it which
will unfold further possibilities in other dimensions of being, but at
every stage it will be aspiration more than fulfilment; life is a
perpetual revelation of the infinite possibilities of existence. Iqbal
has no desire to come to a state of rest by merging the self in a static
Absolute, because for him the static Absolute does not exist.

Summing Up
----------

There is no doubt that Iqbal is the most versatile genius that the
modern Muslim world has produced. He is a well-cut diamond whose many
facets reflect rays of truth from all directions. It will be difficult
to find many who are his equals as poets in any language of the East or
the West. He did not build any great system of philosophy like Kant or
Hegel but his philosophic thinking was extensive as well as intensive.

He felt his kinship with some great geniuses of the past and the
present. In one of his poems he compared himself with Goethe and
deplored that he himself was sprung from an almost defunct culture, a
solitary plant growing, as it were, by fluke from a dead earth, while
Goethe was born in a nation pulsating with the throbs of a new life.

As his inner life was enriched by increasing knowledge and deepening
intuition he began to feel, with ample justification, his kinship with
Rumi, the creative evolutionist mystic poet of the seventh/thirteenth
century. As Rumi’s religious consciousness was paralleled with
intellectual consciousness so was the case with Iqbal; both preached the
gospel of a rich integrated life embracing matter, life, mind, and
spirit, a life in which not only the individual and social selves are
harmonized but in which the developing ego also makes an attempt to
attune its finitude with the Cosmic Infinite Spirit.

For both of them the *elan vital* is essentially the urge of love that
spreads in concentric circles to that Ultimate Reality which is the
centre as well as the circumference of all existence. Rumi took up the
Hellenistic instruments of intellectualism and wielded them to support
an outlook that transcended all Hellenism.

Iqbal did the same with the rich heritage of ancient and modern
philosophy. Many modern thinkers have been moving in the same direction,
so we often find him in company with Kant, Fichte, Hegel, Nietzsche,
Bergson, William James, Whitehead, and Eddington; but these tributary
streams seem to have converged in his genius in a deep and broad river.

Malak al-Shuara Bahar, the great poet-laureate of modern Iran, said of
Iqbal’s poetry that it was the fruit of eight centuries of the
development of Persian poetry and cultural heritage. During the last
decade of his life Iqbal refused to be classed among the poets. He felt
that he was using poetry only as a medium and a vehicle for a message.

He had become a teacher, a preacher, a critic of life, and a reformer
with a vision of a new renaissance. This message was addressed directly
to the Muslim nation, but what he conveyed was a matter of universal
import. The broad universal religious outlook that he presented in his
poetry as well as philosophical writing was meant for the whole of
humanity. He made an attempt to revive the entire Muslim world by a
liberal and dynamic view of Islam.

He deplored the geographical and racial divisions of humanity and
attacked bitterly the jingoistic nationalism that had resulted in the
suicide of a whole civilization. He was an enemy of Western economic and
political imperialism and colonialism and a bitter critic of Western
materialism and naturalism, which, overwhelmed by the achievement of
physical science, has lost faith in the reality of the spirit.

He was equally critical of the religiosity of the East which has become
rigid and empty and is worshipping the dead past. He wanted to give an
ethical and spiritual basis to politics and economics that, left to
themselves, become destructive forces. He preached the gospel of
self-realization, but his concept of the self was no mystically
transcendent con­cept.

His ideal man was a man of intuition as well as of intellect, wedding
reason to revelation. If he had written philosophy like a professional
philosopher only, as he was impelled to do in his *Reconstruction of
Religious Thought in Islam*, he could not have stirred the souls of his
readers to the extent that he has done by using poetry as his medium.

His critics are still disputing whether he was primarily a poet or a
philosopher, a mystic, a preacher, or a reformer. But the fact is that
he was an uncommon synthesis of all these. He was no mere eclectic. All
the various trends were organically related in his rich per­sonality;
they did not lie in his mind unrelated in unharmonized juxtaposition. He
sang of cosmic creative love that transcends and resolves the
contra­dictions of natural and personal life. He was a genius of life
and love and recognized no boundaries and considered no oppositions to
be final. His message was a rich integrated life constantly actualizing
its immense potentialities.

Most of Iqbal’s thoughts and sentiments are expressed within the
frame­work of Islam, and a substantial portion of his message is
directly addressed to the Muslims, to whose regeneration and awakening
he had dedicated his life. But there is nothing sectarian or parochial
in his broad and liberal ideology. As Plato and Socrates, though dealing
primarily with the intellectual, moral, and social problems of Athenian
and Greek life, spread messages of universal import, so does Iqbal.

His *Javid Nameh*, in which in the realm beyond he meets the glorious
and the inglorious souls of the departed who had influenced humanity for
good or for evil, is certainly richer than Dante’s *Divine Comedy* which
reflects only medieval thoughts, beliefs, and prejudices. His criterion
of judgment and criticism remains constant whether he is discussing
meta­physics or religion, science or art, economics or politics.

He stands for the dignity of life and its perpetual creativeness and
richness. Whatever strengthens and advances life in its various aspects
is appreciated and whatever impover­ishes or negates it is to be
rejected. Throughout his thought and poetry there runs a mystic strain,
but his mysticism is not quietistic and otherworldly.

Like the ethical monism of Fichte, his mysticism is dynamic. Long before
Bergson came to this conclusion Iqbal had identified the creative urge
of life with love, which is a matter of intuition and ruling passion
with saints and prophets. He was a great artist, yet he did not believe
in art for art’s sake, nor did he believe in knowledge for the sake of
knowledge like the great Greek philosophers for whom the contemplation
of eternally static ideas was the acme of well­being, making God Himself
a Self-thinking Thought.

His basic conception is life, not thought; thought is only one of the
many useful instruments of life, and as such must never be segregated
from the life it is meant to serve and advance. There is more healthy
dynamism in his thought and poetry than could be found in any poet of
the past or the present. Whenever he talks of self-abnegation it is
always in the interest of a richer self-realization. His deepest
thoughts and intuitions are of immortal significance; he belongs to all
times and to the entire humanity, because he imbibed the best that
humanity could offer and pointed to goals towards which all creation
moves.

Below is given a free rendering in English of some of the poems of
Iqbal.

### Reason and Heart: A Dialogue

“Once Reason made this claim before the Heart: ‘I am a guide for those
who have lost their way. Though working on this lowly earth, all heavens
do I survey. Look, how far-reaching is my vision. Guidance is my mission
like that of *Khidr* (the Prophet Elias), the immortal sage. I write a
com­mentary on the Book of Life, and the glory of Love do I manifest.
Thou art only a drop of blood, but priceless diamonds envy my
effulgence.’

“The Heart replied, ‘Thy claim I don’t contest but look more closely
into my nature too. Thou probest by thought the mystery of existence,
but I *see* directly what thou only *knowest*; is not seeing more
revealing than mere knowing? In the realm of appearances dost thou roam,
but I contact the reality behind. Thou art only a seeker of God, but I
reveal Him. Mine is knowledge *of* reality, thine is only knowledge
*about* it. Thy knowledge ends only in restlessness; for this malaise I
am the sovereign cure. If thou lightest the hall of truth, I am the
illumination of Eternal Beauty. Thou beatest thy wings like a captive
bird against the cage of space and time, but my flight in eternity is
free and unrestrained. I am the Exalted Throne of the Glorious Lord,
placed above all creation.’”[^13]

### The Odyssey of Man

“Forgetting my eternal covenant with my Lord I wandered away from Him.
The heady wine of consciousness made me restless even in the Garden of
Eden and drove me away from that abode of bliss. Heaven-surveying
thought urged me to pry into the secret of existence. My lore of change
afforded me no rest in any state. I filled the temples with idols of
gods of my own creation, but then in disgust ousted them from the Kabah,
the place of worship of the Only God.

Desirous of conversing with Him, face to face, I ascended Mount Sinai;
and the hand illumined with light divine I hid in my sleeve. My fellow
beings nailed me on the cross; so leaving the ungrate­ful world I went
to heaven again. Coming down I hid myself for years in the cave of Hira
till I was commissioned to deliver a final message to mankind. Sometimes
a song celestial did I chant in the land of Hind and I also resorted to
wisdom-loving Greece. When Hind paid no heed to my message I was
welcomed in China and Japan.

Contrary to the spirit of all true religions, I also ventured to
construct a universe with mindless atoms. I take the blame of starting a
ruthless strife between reason and faith reddening the earth with the
blood of humanity. I spent many sleepless nights as a stargazer to wrest
from the shining orbs the secret of existence.

The sword of the Church militant could not make one desist from teaching
that the earth moves round the sun. My telescopic reason discerned the
Law of Uni­versal Gravitation. I captured rays of light and waves of
magnetism making impetuous lightning an obedient slave; I converted the
earth into a paradise by controlling the powers of nature. But alas!
Though I had subdued the world of nature, nothing could reveal the
meaning of existence to me.

“Finally returning into myself and turning my eyes inward I found Him
there in the sanctuary of my own heart, Him who is the Source and
Meaning of all that exists.”[^14]

### The Nature of Life

“The motionless bank of the river said, ‘In my long existence I have
con­templated much to know what I am, but the meaning of my existence
has not been revealed to me.’ Hearing this the fast-moving and tumbling
wave replied, ‘The secret of life and the essence of it is movement; I
exist so long as I move; when I cease to move I shall cease to
be.’”[^15]

“The love that paints with charming colours the leaves of the tulip
creates a painful turmoil in my heart; even in the veins of this pale
earth, the red life-blood of love doth flow.”[^16]

“Man is an instrument for the melodies of love; God created the world
and man improves on it. Is not man, then, a partner in creation?”[^17]

“If the heart too had been only clever like reason, no spark would have
been kindled in our clay; and in the tavern of life deadly silence would
have reigned if love had not been there with its turmoil.”[^18]

“It is the fire of pathos that lights my heart; the tears of blood in
the eyes make their sight keen to survey existence; he who calls Love
madness, remains estranged from the secret of life.”[^19]

“In the garden, breezes in spring are the gifts of love; and in the
fields, love brings up buds like stars. The rays of love’s light
penetrate the deep sea and make the fish see their way in the
dark.”[^20]

### The Birth of Man

“Love exclaimed, ‘Lo! The lover is there who will welcome my painful
shafts,’ and a tremor passed through Beauty that a great appreciator is
born. In the closed sanctuary of the mysteries of being, the warning
went round that eternal secrets are going to be unveiled. Nature got
perturbed that the dust of an unfree world has brought forth a being who
shall freely make and break himself, a self-knowing and self-determining
being. The unconscious urge that slept in the lap of life has opened its
eyes thereby heading to a new vista of existence. Life said, ‘Long was I
immured in a closed dome of clay, restless to venture out; but now I see
the door that offers a chance to escape.’”[^21]

“Our body is an old vessel of clay but is brimful of the wine of life;
life pulsates secretly even in what seems to be death. When, in autumn,
leaves from the branches fall, it is like the dropping of toys from the
grip of infant hands loosened by sweet and restful sleep.”[^22]

Bibliography
------------

A. R. Ghani and Kh. Nur Ilahi, *An Iqbal Bibliography*, Bazm-i Iqbal,
Lahore, 1954; Khalifah Abd al-Hakim, *Fikr-i-Iqbal*, Bazm-i Iqbal,
Lahore; A. J. Arberry, *The Mysteries of Selflessness* (English
translation of Iqbal’s *Rumuz-i Bekhudi*), John Murray, London, 1953;
*Persian Psalms* (English translation of Iqbal’s *Zabur-i Ajam*), Sh.
Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1949; *Tulip of Sinai* (English translation of
Iqbal’s *Lalah-i Tur*), Royal India Society, London, 1947; Ata Allah,
*Iqbal Namah*, 2 Vols., Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1944, 1951; Atiya
Begum, *Iqbal*, Academy of Islam Publications, Bombay, 1947; H. H.
Bilgrami, *Glimpses of Iqbal’s Mind and Thought*, Orientalia, Lahore,
1954; B. A. Dar, *Iqbal and Post-Kantian Voluntarism*, Bazm-i Iqbal,
Lahore, 1956; *Study in Iqbal’s Philosophy*, Sh. Muham­mad Ashraf,
Lahore, 1944; I. H. Enver, *The Metaphysics of Iqbal*, Sh. Muhammad
Ashraf, Lahore, 1944; M. Iqbal, *Armughan-i Hijaz*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali,
Lahore, 1938; *Asrar-i Khudi*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali, Lahore, 1936; *Bang-i
Dara*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali, Lahore, 1924; *Darb-i Kalim*, Shaikh Ghulam
Ali, Lahore, 1936; *Bal-i Jibril*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali, Lahore; *Payam-i
Mashriq*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali, Lahore; *The Develop­ment of Metaphysics in
Persia*, Bazm-i Iqbal, Lahore; *Javid Nameh*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali, Lahore,
1932; *The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam*, Sh. Muhammad
Ashraf, Lahore, 1944; *Zabur-i Ajam*, Shaikh Ghulam Ali, Lahore, 1927;
M. Ashraf, *Devil’s Conference* (English translation of Iqbal’s *Iblis
ki Majlis-i Shura*), Urdu House, Gujrat, 1951; *Iqbal as a Thinker*,
published by Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore, 1944; V. G. Kiernan, *Poems
from Iqbal*, translated into English, Kutub, Bombay, 1947; Sir Zulfiqar
Ali Khan, *Voice from the East*, Mercantile Press, Lahore, 1922;
Mazheruddin Siddiqi, *The Image of the West in Iqbal*, Bazm-i Iqbal,
Lahore, 1956; R. A. Nicholson, *Secrets of the Self* (English
translation of Iqbal’s *Asrar-i Khudi*), Macmillan & Co., London, 1920;
K. G. Saiyidain, *Iqbal, The Man and His Message*, London, 1949;
*Iqbal’s Educational Philosophy*, 3rd rev. ed., Sh. Muhammad Ashraf,
Lahore, 1954; M. M. Sharif (Ed.), *Iqbal* (a quarterly journal), Vols. 1
to 10, Bazm-i Iqbal, Lahore, 1952-1960; “Iqbal’s Concept of God,”
Islamic Culture, Hyderabad, India, Vol. 16, No. 3, July 1942; S. Sinha,
Iqbal, The Poet and His Message, Ram Narain Lal, Allahabad, India, 1947;
S. A. Vahid, *Iqbal: His Art and Thought*, Sh. Muhammad Ashraf, Lahore,
1944; *Introduction to Iqbal*, Pakistan Publications, Karachi, n.d.;
Yusuf Husain Khan, *Ruh-i Iqbal*, Idara-i Ishaat-i Urdu, Hyderabad,
India.

[^1]: Khalifah Abdul Hakim states that Iqbal’s father personally related
this dream to him.

[^2]: The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam, Sh. Muhammad
Ashraf, Lahore, 1958, p. 49.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 53.

[^4]: Ibid., pp. 52-53.

[^5]: Ibid., p. 55.

[^6]: Ibid., pp. 5-6.

[^7]: Ibid., pp. 6-7.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 9.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 15.

[^10]: Quran (57:3).

[^11]: Ibid., (24:35).

[^12]: Iqbal, op. cit., p. 35.

[^13]: Bang-i Dara, Lahore, 1949, p. 28.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 80.

[^15]: Ibid., p. 150.

[^16]: Ibid., p. 13.

[^17]: Ibid., p. 16.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 20.

[^19]: Ibid., p. 12.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ibid., p. 97.

[^22]: Ibid., p. 165.


