Chapter 83: Renaissance in Indonesia
====================================

A: Introductory
---------------

The three centuries during which it was ruled by the Portuguese, the
Spaniards, and the Dutch form the dark age of Indonesia’s history. All
the energies of the Indonesian leaders were concentrated during these
years on the problems of political emancipation on one side and social
and religious reform on the other. This account of the modern
renaissance in Indonesia is, therefore, an account of the political
renaissance of that country and of the modernist movements, which
indirectly influenced the course of that long­ drawn and bitter
struggle.

The memories of that conflict and the experience gained during this
period influenced the present generation in its religious and cultural
outlook and its approach to social and economic problems. As religion
played an important part in the movement for political emancipation,
reference will also be made here and there to religious reforms.

At present ninety per cent of the population of Indonesia professes the
religion of Islam but it took several centuries for Islam to become the
main religion in that country. As it has been shown in an earlier
chapter, the credit for the spread and popularization of Islam in
Indonesia goes to the Sufis of various orders.[^1]

The Sufi interpretation of Islam very well suited the cultural
background of the Indonesians in whose life and thought the deep
influences of Hinduism and Buddhism, which had at one time been the
principal spiritual forces in Indonesian society, were deeply embedded.

The commercial intercourse between Indonesia and other Islamic
countries, particularly India, Arabia, and Egypt, led to a closer
cultural collaboration with the Muslims in other parts of the world.
Many Indonesians went to holy places for the annual pilgrimage and some
of them stayed there to complete their studies or to settle down there
permanently.

It was these Indonesians who imbibed deeply the tenets of Islamic
religion and later on tried to combat the un-Islamic practices that had
crept into Islam in their home country. This led to a purist movement in
the country insisting on a closer conformity with Islam. “Mecca,” says
Snouck Hurgronje, “has been well said to have more influence on the
religious life of these islands than on Turkey, India, or Bukhara.”[^2]

How deeply attached to their old customs and traditions even the modern
educated Indonesians are is well illustrated by the statement of a
prominent Indonesian lady who, while addressing the members of the
British Women Association, remarked “that the Indonesians were indeed
proud of their old customs and traditions and wished to preserve them in
spite of their Islamic religion adopted about seven centuries ago.”[^3]

The Indonesian national movement is of recent origin. Before the
beginning of the fourteenth/twentieth century, there had been isolated
and sporadic outbursts of armed resistance to the rapacious exploitation
of the Indonesians by the Portuguese, the Dutch, and the British, such
as those of Dipa Nagara, in the province of Djocjkarta,[^4] Tenku
Umar,[^5] Imam Bondjol,[^6] etc.

The first organized political movement started in the first decade of
this century. There were many factors responsible for the development of
Indonesian nationalism and political consciousness which materially
affected the course of the Indonesians’ struggle as also the political
structure of Indonesia after it had been won.

Of the modern Islamic reform movements in other countries that of
Muham­mad Abduh in Egypt had a very deep influence on Indonesian thought
and way of life. The Dutch tried to prevent the inflow of books and
newspapers published in Egypt and other Arab countries, as they were
afraid of the “dangerous pan-Islamic ideas” which these writings
contained.

In spite of their vigilance the Egyptian periodicals *al-Manar*,
*al-Urwat al-Wuthqa*, *al-Muyyad*, *al-Siyasah*, *al-Liwa*, and *al-Adl*
were smuggled into Indonesia and were widely read. Scholars like Imam
Bondjol, H. Jalal al-Din Tayyib, Mukhtar Lutfi, H. H. Amarullah brought
back with them modern Islamic ideas current in Islamic lands and
particularly those introduced by Muhammad Abduh and Jamal al-Din Afghani
in Cairo. Indian modernist writings were equally welcome and widely
read.[^7]

The main aim of the Indonesian Muslims who were caught up in the current
of modern reformist movements in Islamic countries was to purify
Indonesian Muslim society from the indigenous unorthodox practices. They
had to combat at the same time the Dutch educated intelligentsia who
were gradually becoming indifferent towards religion, and regarded Islam
“as a religious and cultural anachronism and an obstacle to progress.”

The Christian missionary activities and the large number of missionary
schools subsidized by the Dutch posed another difficult problem for the
Indonesian religious and educational reformers. “Every new period in the
history of civilization obliges a religious community to undertake a
general revision of the contents of its treasury,” remarks Snouck
Hurgronje, “and the situation in Indonesia called for the establishment
of religious, social, and political organizations to rehabili­tate Islam
and combat the contaminating influences of Western impact.”

The “pesantran” or *madrasah* which followed the traditional Muslim
pattern of education played a very important role in building up the
Islamic character of the Indonesian Muslims, while the Western system of
education which touched only the upper stratum of Indonesian society did
much to broaden their outlook, rationalize their thought, and prepare
them morally and intel­lectually to fight for the liberation of their
country from centuries of colonial exploitation.

One of the most active and popular organizations for socio-religious
reform was Muhammadiyyah founded by Kiaja Haji Ahmad Dachlan in November
1912 at Jogjakarta, which met with a relatively wide response. It
rapidly grew in popularity as is shown by the large number of its
branches in various parts of the country.

The objectives of the organization were similar to those of the
Salafiyyah in Egypt - the purification of Islam as practised in
Indonesia of the customs, rituals, and beliefs which were derived from
the Hindu and Buddhistic religions and also from the debased Sufi
doctrines; a rationalized interpretation of orthodox Islamic doctrines;
the reformation of Muslim educational system; and the defence of Islam
against external attacks.

This movement aiming at a rationalist interpretation of orthodox Islamic
doctrine built up a network of schools. The organization later included
a wide range of social services; free clinics, relief for the poor,
orphanages, and publication of the Quran. The organization, as a matter
of policy, did not take active part in the political problems with which
the Indonesians were faced.

In practice, however, “the progressive Muslim social concepts which it
sought to advance could not be divested of the political consciousness
of its members and of the pupils taught in its many schools. It was a
still, but deep, tributary of the stream of political nationalism and
quietly but substantially nourished and strengthened that stream.”[^8]

B: National Movement in Indonesia
---------------------------------

The degree of religious homogeneity in Indonesia that Islam had brought
about was an important factor in the growth of national movement. Islam
served both as a symbol of social unity and as an ingroup solidarity
against imperialistic foreign aggressors in a country where, in spite of
diversity of race, language, and religion, the national feeling was
strong.

While the Dutch Govern­ment and the Christian organizations in Holland
gave moral and material assistance to the Christian missions established
in Indonesia, the Government did not allow the purely Muslim societies
or organizations to propagate freely the principles of Islam. Besides
the Muslims, there are in Indonesia about two million Chinese Buddhists,
two million Christians, one million Hindus especially in the Island of
Bali, and a large number of animists.

According to Wertheim, “it was possible to sustain the paradox that the
extension of Islam in Indonesian Archipelago was due to the Westerners.
The arrival of Portuguese power in the area made the princes embrace
Islamic faith as a political move to counter Christian penetration.”[^9]

Islamic modernist movements, especially in Cairo, as already mentioned,
found ready response in Indonesia. In 1329/1911 the Indonesians studying
in the international Islamic *milieu* of Mecca and Cairo came back
saturated with pan-Islamic ideas that made them ill-disposed towards the
European administrative system and the European way of life.

The Dutch Government, too late in the day, decided to give the
Indonesians the benefit of Western education and greater association
with the government of the country in the hope of neutralizing the
influence of Islamic revivalist movements. By giving the Indonesian
population, at least its elite, a Western education, it was hoped, the
new generation would turn away from Islam towards cultural association
with the Dutch. It was hoped that “the pan-Islamic idea which has not
yet taken a great hold on the native aristocracy of Java and the other
islands will lose all the chance of existence within this *milieu* when
those who compose it have become the free associates of our
civilization.”[^10]

The struggle of the Philipinos, the success of Kemal Ataturk in Turkey
against Western military powers, the activity of the Congress party in
India, the rising tide of anti-Western Chinese nationalism represented
by Dr. Sun Yet Sen, the industrialization of Japan and that country’s
victory over Russia in 1323/1905, all combined to quicken the rising
tide of national movement in Indonesia.

Indonesian students studying in the Netherlands in particular and in
Europe in general were strongly impressed by Dutch political ideas of
civil liberties and the democratic flavour of the government there. The
writings of Bukharin, Karl Marx, Hegel, and Stalin influenced the
handful of Indonesian students studying in continental Europe. The
American Revolution of 1192/1778, the French Revolution of 1204/1789,
and the Russian Revolution of 1336/1917 had a profound effect on the
Indonesian people and shook them out of their apathy and complacency.

C: Effect of the First World War on Indonesia
---------------------------------------------

The First World War considerably strengthened national consciousness in
Indonesia. Numerous national organizations and parties throughout the
country took a leading part in giving shape to their latent aspirations
and canalizing the pent-up discontent in a nation-wide struggle for
freedom.

The organizations included the Budi Utomo (1326/1908), Minahasa
Association (1330/1912), Nena Muria Organization (1331/1913),
Muhammadiyyah Move­ment (1337/1918), National Indies Party (1338/1919),
Indonesian Social Democratic Association or N.I.V.B. (1335/1916),
Sumatra Association (1337/1918), Society of Students (1338/1919), the
Christian Ethical Party of Miai (1341/1922), and the Nationalist Party
of Indonesia (1346/1927).

The Jambi revolution of 1345/1926, the Padang Congress of 1341/1922, the
Pan-Islamic Congress of 1344/1925 at Bandung, the Budi Utomo Congress of
30th July 1924, and the Indonesian Students’ Association in the
Netherlands, all struggled for national emancipation. Freedom from
economic stranglehold of the colonial government was the common
objective of most of these organi­zations.

The war led to the loosening of the ties that had formerly bound
Indonesia to Europe and consequently Indonesia formed mercantile
connections with other countries round the Pacific Ocean.

Even before and during the war, demand for political freedom of
Indonesia was openly voiced by the Indonesian leader, Tjokroaminoto, at
the first National Congress of 1335/1916. The war compelled the Dutch
Government to change its policy towards Indonesia. In 1335/1916, the
Netherlands Parliament passed a bill for the institution of the
Volksraad at Jakarta.

In May 1918, van L. Stirum remarked, “…the road has been taken, never to
be abandoned, toward the goal of responsible government in Indonesia
itself which, in concert with the Volksraad, shall have the right to
take final decisions in all matters which are not of general imperial
(State) concern. In proper time and degree, so far as is compatible with
due appreciation of the consequences of each new step, we must proceed
directly toward this end.”

The National Indonesian Party and the Budi Utomo demanded the
con­vocation of a provisional parliament to frame a new democratic
constitution. For this purpose, the Revision Commission was appointed by
the Government on 17th December 1918. In June 1920, the Commission
submitted its report to the Government and the following main proposals
were made to be included in the Constitution of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands:

(1) Recognition of Indonesia as an independent part of the kingdom, the
centre of gravity of the government being shifted to Indonesia itself.

(2) Elevation of the Volksraad to the status of a general co-legislative
representative body to be constituted by election.

In the military field, the World War had increased the importance of the
defence problem in Indonesia. Compulsory military service was introduced
in Indonesia in 1339/1920, but, by the regulations of 1341-42/1922-23,
it was imposed only upon Europeans and not upon natives or foreign
Orientals. As a result of the war, an energetic propaganda for an
Indonesian army was carried on by an Indonesian Commitee of Defence.

Economically, the war had far-reaching consequences in the economic life
of the country. In Indonesia the price of foodstuffs rose and this made
the Government intervene to prevent the rising spiral of prices.

D: Factors Promoting National Sentiments
----------------------------------------

The adoption of Malay as the national language was another important
factor in the development of national movement. The extensive use of the
Indonesian language as the medium of expression throughout Indonesia was
made pro­gressively. Kia Hadjar Dewantoro, the founder of Taman Siswa,
introduced it first in his school curriculum.

In 1347/1928, the Indonesian youth at their Congress swore to have one
country, Indonesia; one nation, the Indonesian; and one national
language, the Indonesian language. In 1344/1925, the Indo­nesian members
of the Volksraad demanded the recognition of Indonesian as the official
language of the country. In October 1942, an Indonesian Language
Commission headed by Dr. Muhammad Hatta, was founded by the Japanese. In
August 1945, the Indonesian language was formally declared the State
language.[^11] The national Red and White flag of Indonesia became the
symbol of the patriotic liberation movement.[^12] The Indonesian Raya
(Indonesian National Anthem) acted as an inspiring and unifying factor.

The proclamation of the Republic of Indonesia in 1364/1945 was made an
official national movement and its visible symbols, the national flag
and the national anthem, helped to join the Archipelago’s many local
patriotisms together into an all-embracing patriotism.

The discriminatory policy employed by the Dutch in the political,
economic, social, and cultural fields and the consequent resentment
against colonialism fanned the flames of discontent.[^13] Discrimination
in the economic sphere was even more galling and filtered down to the
masses. The economic exploitation of the national wealth of the country
by the Dutch capitalists and the in­creased poverty of the vast
population living on rich soil provided another source of discontent.

In education, the Indonesians were provided with far fewer facilities
than European children, for in the quick growth of Western education
amongst the masses the Dutch saw a potential danger to the continuance
of their dominant position.

The nationalistic educational institution, commonly known as Taman Siswa
(Children’s Garden School) established by Kia Hadjar Dewantara on 3rd
July 1922, served as the training ground for the ideological preparation
for the popularization of the Indonesian national movement. Kia Hadjar
Dewantara maintained that the culture of a nation could be bent but
could never be broken.

Wisdom, beauty, art, and science from abroad were welcome. Everybody, he
said, who learns a foreign language gains access to a new world, but
foreign elements should be absorbed into native life, enriching the
already existing treasures of national civilization. He built up at
least 250 schools all over Indonesia without any government or foreign
help.

Muhammadiyyah institutions developed the political consciousness of its
members and its pupils. The Muhammadiyyah movement, founded by H. Ahmad
Dahlan on 18th November 1912, had established 29 branches with 4,000
members and built about 55 schools in 1925; 150 branches with 10,320
members in 1928; 209 with 17,550 members in 1929; 267 with 24,383
members in 1931; and 750 (316 in Java, 326 in Sumatra, 79 in Celebes and
29 in Borneo) with 43,000 members in 1935.

It had set up 126 schools and as many clinics in Java which treated
81,000 patients in 1929. In 1930, there were considerable Muhammadiyyah
schools and colleges in Sumatra. The Dutch colonial govern­ment tried to
hamper the development of national educational institutions by issuing
an Ordinance in 1342/1923 under which the Government assumed control of
all privately owned schools, numbering about 2,000 - 2,500 in 1357/1938
with 100,000 to 500,000 pupils.

The Dutch administration had deliberately starved the educational
system. “This tended,” says John Gunther, “to keep the people in
subjection, and to prevent the normal growth of political aspirations.
Dutch policy, it has been said, was ‘to keep the bellies of the people
full, their minds empty.’ Indeed, the record of the Dutch in education
was indifferent, and illiteracy reached ninety-five per cent.”[^14]

The growth of the national press and radio was the chief means for the
propagation of the ideals of nationalistic struggle for freedom and
emanci­pation of the fatherland.

The appearance of the newspaper *Madan Pryayi* (Civil Servants’ Paper)
at Bandung was indicative of the desire of the Indonesians to have their
own periodicals and dailies as vehicles of expression of their desire
for independence.

In 1340/1921, when the National Movement made itself felt in Sumatra
(west coast), appeared the newspapers *Banih Merdeka* (The Seed of
Freedom) at Medan, and *Sinar Merdeka* (The Ray of Freedom) at Padang
Sidenpuan. The *Apirakjat* (The Fire of the People), *Sinar Hindia* (The
Ray of Indonesia), the *Api* (Fire), the *Njala* (Flame), and several
other newspapers made their appearance. The very names of these papers
were symbolic of the passionate and all-absorbing desire for freedom.

The Indonesian journalists like R. M. Titoadisuyo, right down to young
journalists like Hatta, Subardjo, Nazir Pamontjak, Mustafa, were
pioneers in the fight for national emancipation and independence.
Articles on the Indonesian struggle for independence were published by
them in European newspapers and magazines, while the Indonesians abroad
served as foreign correspondents of Indonesian newspapers.

During the Japanese occupation (1361/1942 - 1364/1945) the national
press was involved in the Japanese pro­paganda machine. It played an
important role during the national revolution against Dutch imperialism
and inspired the masses with the spirit of self ­determination and
national self respect.

The development of transport, communication, and the increased
geo­graphical mobility of the people as well as ideas of modern economic
organi­zation in Indonesia were equally helpful in the spreading of the
national movement. Frequent contacts with the nationalist leaders of
different countries in international conferences and the League of
Nations had stimulating effects in promoting discontent among Indonesian
intelligentsia and patriots. In 1341/1922, the Sarekat Islam (S.I.) led
by Abd al-Muiz and H. Salim established close relations with the Indian
National Congress and adopted the policy of non-cooperation. The S.I.
also sent delegations to the World Islamic Conference at Mecca in
1343/1924 and at Cairo in 1345/1926.[^15]

E: The Role of National Parties (1345/1926 - 1361/1942)
-------------------------------------------------------

### Nationalist Party of Indonesia

The Persatuan National Indonesia (P.N.I.) was founded in July 1927 by
Dr. Soekarno at Bandung. This party was essentially nationalistic, with
a definite aim, *Indonesia Merdeka*, that is, the liberation of
Indonesia from the colonial yoke through a popular movement deriving its
strength from indigenous force and ability.

The moving spirits behind the P.N.I. were the repatriated members of the
Perhimpoenan Indonesia (Indonesian Union)[^16] in Holland and other
members of General Study Club at Bandung. Soekarno was the leader of the
propaganda activities of the party and he soon made his mark not only as
a great orator but also as the natural leader of the masses.

In 1347/1928, the propaganda activities of the P.N.I. were extended to
cover small towns and villages, and leaders were sent out to remote
places to meet and talk with the masses at their native haunts. For this
purpose, the P.N.I. set up a sort of People’s University, in which
members were given courses in propaganda work. Within one year the party
had as many as 600 members.

The P.N.I. leaders now stressed the idea of Indonesian unity in their
speeches, using the Indonesian language and adopted for their party the
white and red flag with the symbol of a bull’s head on it.

The P.N.I. endeavoured to form a national front. For this purpose, they
took the initiative in the organization of a federation of nationalist
societies, composed of political parties, in December 1927, in order to
unify and co­ordinate the activities of the member societies. The
Indonesian Association in Holland was meanwhile appointed as their
advance post for foreign pro­paganda.

In May 1928, in his speech before the Volksraad, the Governor-General
alluded to the propaganda carried on by the P.N.I., calling it “a
revolutionary nationalistic propaganda,” and hinting that its
revolutionary nature would hurt its own cause. In December 1929, the
Government searched the houses and offices of the P.N.I. leaders. Eight
persons were arrested, four of whom including Soekarno were later
prosecuted.

The members of the P.N.I. split up into two groups after the official
dissolu­tion of the party. Those rallying around Sartono organized a new
party called the Partai Indonesia (Partindo) at the end of April 1931.
The Partindo had the same aim as the dissolved P.N.I., that is, to
strive for a free Indonesia.

Other members formed the Indonesian National Education Party (New
P.N.I.) in November 1931, under the leadership of Muhammad Hatta. Soetan
Sjahrir joined the party in 1351/1932. Early in 1357/1938, Soekarno was
re­arrested and interned, and this was followed by the arrest of both
Hatta and Sjahrir.

### Communist Party of Indonesia (P.K.I.)

After the failure of the Sarekat Islam (S.I.) to accept the extreme
proposals of Semaun’s faction, he and other leaders of the Social
Democratic Association converted their organization into the Communist
Party of Indonesia in May 1920.

The P.K.I. developed a close relationship with the Commintern that it
joined at the end of 1339/1920. In August 1923, Semaun was arrested and
forced to leave the country or face exile to Timor. By the end of the
year all Dutch leaders of the party had also been forced to leave.
According to Semaun, the departure of the Dutch leaders from the party
raised the prestige of the party in the eyes of the masses, because of
the popular prejudice against the Dutch, whatever their attitude towards
colonialism.

Due to his failure to wrest control of the organization from the S.I.,
Semaun was successful in setting up a rival association of the trade
unions, the Revolutionary Trade Union Central, in June 1921. Within four
years the communists could control most of the local branches of the
S.I., but most of their large peasant member­ship melted away. This was
due to two reasons: (i) the Government’s effective barring of contact
between the leaders and peasantry and (ii) the communists’ alienating of
the peasant members by violating their religious sensitivities.

During 1344/1925, the extreme elements within the Indonesian Communist
Party came under the control of Dahalan Sukara. The leaders of this
party refused to take orders from the regular party leadership and
continually agitated for revolution. They resorted to terroristic
methods in order to dominate the party.

The failure of the communist revolutionary effort was due mostly to the
great schism in the ranks of the Indonesians. Tan Malaka, a prominent
mem­ber of the party, founded a new organization, Partai Indonesia. The
Republic Party (Indonesian Republic Party) was established by him and
his two lieutenants, Tamin and Subakat, in Bangkok in 1346/1927.
Partai’s immediate objective was the training of Indonesian underground
workers in Bangkok, who were to return to Indonesia and there train more
members and build up underground cadres.

The Communist Party was forced by the vigilance of the Government to
operate more and more underground, while it was deprived of its ablest
leaders.

During the first ten month of 1345/1926, more and more of the communist
leaders were arrested. Intra-organizational contact was progressively
disrupted, as was attested by uncoordinated sporadic outbreaks of
violence at widely isolated places throughout Java.

With the failure of the revolutions of 1345-46/1926-27 the communist
organization was crushed, as a large number of communist, nationalist,
and religious leaders were arrested and deported to a concentration camp
in New Guinea. After their arrest the power of the communists was broken
for the remainder of the period of Dutch rule.

### Partai Indonesia Raja (P.I.R.) (The People’s Party of Indonesia)

The Indonesian Study Club, formed by Dr. Sutomo in October 1930 at
Surabaya, was changed to the Persatuan Bangsa Indonesia or P.B.I.
(Indonesia Association) in January 1931. At its congress of April 18-21,
1935, at Surabaya, the P.B.I. decided to form the Budi Utomo. As a
result of the Solo Confer­ence, Partai Indonesia Raja or P.I.R. (Greater
Indonesia Party) came into being on December 26, 1935, at Surabaya,
under the presidentship of Sutomo. The P.R.I. was founded by Tabrani in
September 1930 at Jakarta, aiming to achieve the independence of
Indonesia through a parliamentary system and dominion status for her.

### Sarekat Islam

The name of the Islamic Chamber of Commerce (S.D.I.), founded in
1329/1911 by H. Samanhudi, was changed into the Sarekat Islam in
1330/1912 under the leadership of H. Umar Said Tjokroaminoto. In the
years 1331/1913 and 1332/1914, the people joined *en masse* this party
based purely on Islamic principles.

By 1333/1915 it had established fifty branches and later, by June 1916,
it claimed eighty branches with 360,000 members. In 1334/1916, it became
a fully-fledged political party struggling for free Indonesia (dominion
status) and adopted a policy of co-operation with the colonial
government.

In order to achieve Muslim unity, a pan-Islamic movement, al-Islam, was
organized by H. A. Salim. The second congress which al-Islam held from
May 19 to 21, 1924, at Carut, was attended by most of the Muslim leaders
of Islamic organizations, except the Nahdat al-‘Ulama’.

The S.I. formed a Majlis ‘Ulama’-i Indonesia in January 1928 which in
1929 was changed into Partai Sarekat Islam Indonesia or P.S.I.I.
(Indonesian Islamic Party).

On account of disagreement with Dr. Sukinan’s group at the Jakarta
Con­gress, Partai Islam Indonesia (P.I.I.) was founded in December 1928
at Solo under the presidentship of K. M. Misono.

The Muslim Union of Indonesia (Parmi) was founded in 1349/1930 in
central Sumatra on the initiative of Mukhtar Lutfi Jalal al-Din Tayyib;
it was based on Islam and nationalism with the ultimate object of
achieving independence for Indonesia.

### The Nahdat al-‘Ulama’

The Nahdat al-‘Ulama’ (Islamic Conservative Party) was formed in January
1926 at Surabaya. It organized its first Congress in October 1928 at
Surabaya and was opposed to the modernist movement. The Congress of
1359/1940 set up a Women Organization (Nahdat al-‘Ulama’-i Muslimat or
N.U.M.) and a Youth Movement (Ansar) in 1354/1935, under the leadership
of Tohir Bokri. Among the most outstanding leaders of the N.U. were
Hasjim Asjari, Abd al-Wahhab, Mahfuz Siddiq, and Wahid Hasjim.

### Budi Utomo (High Endeavour)

The Budi Utomo formed in 1326/1908 had established forty branches with
10,000 members by 1332/1914 and held a congress in August 1915.

### Indonesian Youth Movement

The formation of the Student Association in 1330/1912 was followed by
Tri Koro Darmo (Student Movement) in March 1915 based on “strength,
character, and service.” In 1337/1918, its name was changed to the
“Young Java” under the presidentship of R. Satiman Wiryoso­joyo. Its
objective was to promote solidarity among the students.

The third Indonesian Youth Congress of December 1939 decided to pursue a
literacy campaign with a view to helping the farmers, fighting youth
un­employment, and promoting rural uplift and reconstruction.

### Indonesian Women Movement

The first women’s organization was started by R. A. Kartini in
1319/1901. The first school for women was founded in 1319-20/1901-02 and
another in 1321/1903. R. A. Kartini became the pioneer of female
education, and though she died young her influence has lived after her.
This school was followed by Puteri Merdeke (1330/1912) and Keutamaan
Isteri Minagkabau (1330/1912).

A Women’s Congress, the first of its kind, was held from December 22 to
25, 1928, at Jakarta. The Congress was attended by thirty Indonesian
women’s organizations. The main aim of the Congress was to coordinate
the working of several Indonesian women’s associations and promote the
interests of the Indonesian women.

### Cooperation and Non-Cooperation Movements

The year 1349/1930 marks the lowest ebb of national movement in
Indonesia, as expressed in a general mood of depression both in economic
and in social life. The communist revolution of 1345-46/1926-27, made
the Government adopt repressive measures that forced the Indonesian
political movements to go underground; prominent leaders were either
imprisoned, interned, or exiled.

The demand for responsible government and for parliamentary
self-government for Indo­nesia had been the main demand of the political
leaders. On 15th July 1936, Mr. Sutardjo along with many other
representatives of the Volksraad asked for an Imperial Conference to
discuss the best method by which self-govern­ment for Indonesia within
the limit of Article I of the Netherlands Constitution of 1341/1922
could be realized and to fix a time limit within which this self
government could become effective.

When the Nazi armies invaded the Netherlands on 10th May 1940, the Dutch
Government fled to England and the States General ceased to function.
The exiled Government continued to direct the international relations of
Indonesia from London. All power in Indonesia was vested in the hands of
a Governor General, who carried on the government in a despotic fashion.

During this international crisis, the Dutch Government promised to
consider constitutional changes in Indonesia at the end of the war on
the ground that the situation in the world was undergoing a change and
the shape democracy would take after the war was not known. Further,
there had to be introduced changes in the law of the Netherlands in
order to alter the constitution in Indonesia.

F: The Japanese Occupation
--------------------------

The Second World War marks a turning point in the history of Indonesia.
As in other belligerent countries it brought great misery and suffering
to the people but at the same time it loosened the colonial grip and
ushered in a new era of revolutionary struggle for freedom.

Soon after the capitulation of the Dutch in March 1942, the Japanese
military authority was established in Indonesia. The Japanese were
anxious to completely eradicate the Dutch influence in Indonesia and to
win over public opinion in Indonesia in order to utilize its manpower
for forced labour as well as for food supplies for their armies.

Political concessions to the nationalists were, therefore, regarded by
the Japanese as the means to achieve the main economic goal and to
enlist popular support for total economic mobilization. The prin­cipal
leaders who were either in exile or had been interned were given
con­siderable freedom of movement, but all political parties and
political meetings and propaganda were banned by the Japanese authority.

The Japanese realized, however, that an outlet must be created for
absorbing the political tensions and passions. Within two months after
all political activity had been prohibited, a Peoples Movement was
initiated on 29th April 1942. This was intended to unite all political
forces into one powerful move­ment, directed towards the elimination of
the pernicious Western influences which had corrupted the Eastern soul
and also towards the indoctrination of the entire population of the
Archipelago with the slogans: “Asia for the Asiatics” and “Japan as the
mother of Asia.” They, however, proceeded cautiously and avoided giving
rise to any premature independence movement. They wanted to Japanize
Indonesia under the slogan: “Japan the leader of Asia, Japan the
protector of Asia, Japan the light for Asia, and Asia for the Asiatics.”

In order to influence the Indonesian people, the Japanese made a
friendly approach to the “four-leaved clover” of the Indonesian leaders:
Soekarno, Hatta, Dewantara, and Mansur. These four men accepted the new
role, as, in the words of Sjahrir, “it gives the nationalist struggle a
broader legal scope and presses the Japanese for political
concessions.”[^17]

The Pusat Tenage Rakjat or Putera was organized by the Japanese in March
1943. Dr. Soekarno was made president of the new organization (Central
People’s Power). The Japanese policy, thus, indirectly encouraged
contact between nationalist leaders and the masses, which the repressive
government of the Dutch regime had so severely limited.

In September 1943, a volunteer army of “Defenders of the Fatherland,” a
Japanese trained but Indonesian officered military organization, was
created to help the Japanese defend Indonesia against the Allied
invasion. By the middle of 1364/1945, it numbered about 120,000-armed
men. This was the “Peta” which was to become the backbone of the
Indonesian Republic’s army. By 1363/1944, the average “Peta” member was
consciously a strong nationalist, anti-Japanese, and anti-Dutch, but for
the most part favourably disposed towards the other allies, particularly
the United States.

The Japanese also established several youth organizations. They were
given political indoctrination and some military training. The first of
them, the “Seinendan,” was established at the end of 1361/1942, as a
mass youth orga­nization based particularly on the village.

The Japanese military command dissolved the “Putera” and replaced it
with a new organization called Djawa Hokakai (People’s Loyalty
Organization) on 1st March 1944. To help neutralize and limit the force
of the nationalists the Japanese insisted that it should represent the
Chinese, Arab, and Eurasian community as well as the Indonesians, and
forced it to submit to a much closer supervision and control than had
been the case with the “Putera.”

The Japanese attempted simultaneously to win the support of Indonesian
Islamic leaders. They established towards the end of 1362/1943 a large
Islamic organization subsuming all the existing ones of a non-political
nature, including Muhammadiyyah, Nahdat al-‘Ulam’ and M.I.A.I. (Council
of Indonesian Muslim Association). Thus, they welded the Indonesian
Muslims into a greater unity, bringing the Muhammadiyyah and the Nahdat
al-‘Ulama’ into a single Muslim mass organization, Masjumi.

At the same time they sharpened the long-standing divisions between the
active Muslim community and the less positively Muslim social groups who
found political leadership in aristocratic and secular nationalist
elements. But soon the ‘Ulama’ refused to lend them­selves as
instruments of Japanese aims, frightened as they were by the clumsy
handling of religion by the Japanese. The Japanese order to the
Indonesians to bow towards Tokyo rather than Mecca and to exalt the
Emperor to a religious plane were particularly odious to them.

In June 1943, Tojo, the Japanese Premier, in a speech to the Diet,
promised to allow the people greater participation in their government.
The first concrete steps to carry out this promise were announced in
Java on 5th September 1943. An advisory system was introduced whereby
Indonesians were appointed as advisers to the various departments of the
Government, advisory councils were established and Vice-Governors
appointed in eight of the provinces.

Under increasing pressure both from the Indonesian national­ists and
deteriorating military situation in the Pacific, the Japanese made the
first formal promise of independence to the Indonesians in September
1944.

In March 1945, the Japanese, realizing the urgency of a compromise with
the leading national organizations in order to stabilize their rule in
Indonesia and mobilize the rich resources of the country for their war
effort against the Allies, appointed a committee representing various
political and ethnic groups for political and economic organization of
an independent Indonesia.

Soekarno was the leading exponent of the hopes and aspirations of his
country­men. By careful enunciation of his own “ideological synthesis”
he succeeded in bringing about a measure of agreement amongst the
various groups, parti­cularly the leaders of the doctrinaire Islamic
group. His principles of Pantjasila were accepted as the official
Indonesian national philosophy. The five principles were, “Nationalism,
internationalism (or humanitarianism), representative government, social
justice, and belief in God in the context of religious free­dom.”

On 7th July 1945, the Japanese military administration announced the
decision of the Supreme War Council to the effect that the Indonesians
should be given their independence as soon as possible. Soekarno, Hatta,
and Wedio­diningrat were flown to Tarauchi headquarters to receive the
Imperial decree directly.

On 7th August 1945, the Japanese appointed an All-Indonesia Independence
Preparatory Committee with Soekarno as Chairman and Muhammad Hatta as
Vice-Chairman to make preparations for the transfer of government
authority to the Indonesians. When the Japanese finally decided to
surrender, Soekarno and Hatta proclaimed Indonesia’s independence on
17th August 1945. The Indonesians proudly and justly claimed that the
Republic was neither a gift from Japan nor from any other foreign
country. “It is the reward,” it was claimed, “of the great sacrifices in
blood and material suffered by the Indonesians before and during the
Second World War.”[^18]

### Effects of the Japanese Occupation

The Japanese interlude ended as abruptly as it had begun. The harsh and
arbitrary rule of the Japanese and their crude attempts at conciliation
affected almost the entire population. It aroused a consciousness of
common suffering and humiliation and a common resentment against the
Japanese. Further, it enormously strengthened the already existing
national consciousness of the Indonesians.

As Soetan Sjahriar observed: “During the three and a half years of
Japanese occupation, the foundation of rural society was shaken and
undermined by forced regulations, kidnapping from homes for conscription
as labourers abroad or as soldiers, compulsory surrender of harvest
crops, compulsory planting of designed crops, all imposed with limited
arbitrariness.”

As a reaction of and in order to resist the heavy demands of the
Japanese, the peasantry became much more politically conscious than it
had ever previously been.

The Indonesians gained experience in administration during the
occupation. Dr. Hatta correctly pointed out that “while under the
Japanese, we laid plans for achieving our independence and when, on 17th
August, the last Japanese surrendered and were unable to act
effectively, we declared our independence.”

The Japanese established special schools for the training of political
leaders from among whom were to be recruited native officials for
political affairs. A training institute was set up at Jakarta to give
three week courses to the “Kias” and the ‘Ulama’ in order to enable the
Japanese to choose those who were willing to cooperate with them and
were also promising propagandists.

In 1363/1944, shock brigades, the Hizb Allah, numbering 50,000 were
organized from amongst the Muslim youth (ranging between 17 and 25 years
in age). The purpose of the Hizb Allah was two fold. “It was a military
organization, training reserves for the home defence army and it was
also a religious vanguard to propagate Muhammadan doctrine.”

The policy of Japan in Indonesia affected the educated youth. The
intro­duction of the Japanese language coupled with their harsh and
autocratic administration of the schools antagonized the students.
Takdir Alishahban observed: “Because the Japanese were determined to
enlist the energies of the entire Indonesian population in the war
efforts, they (the students) penetrated into the villages in the
remotest backwater of the islands, using the Indonesian language as they
went.

Thus the language flourished and imbued the people with a feeling new to
most of them. As more and more of them learnt to speak it freely, they
became aware of a communal unity in opposition to the effort of the
Japanese ultimately to implant their own language and culture. By the
time, therefore, of the Japanese surrender, the position of the
Indonesian language had improved enormously, both in strength and in
prestige, over not only Dutch but also over the various regional
languages of the Archipelago which had no opportunity to develop during
the occupation.”[^19]

The increased use of mass communication media by the Japanese
contributed to the progress and development of Indonesian language. The
disappearance of the Dutch Press led to a sharp rise in the circulation
of the Indonesian newspapers.[^20]

The Japanese developed a policy of decentralized administration based on
the so-called historical and cultural differences of the Indonesian
society. They did away with the provincial isolation and traditional
ways of life of the Indonesian people. The severance of economic
relations between the islands and outside brought suffering to all
sections of communities and hence led to the breakdown of provincialism
and sectarianism.

The effect of the army as a unifying agent by providing a common
experience to different social groups was described as follows by a
Japanese training officer assigned to it: “Since the army is made up of
volunteers from all walks of life, it had resulted in the unification of
the Indonesian social strata towards the realization of its ideals.

In fact, the Indonesian race had never seen such a huge comprehensive
system to promote its own racial well-being.” He added that the promise
of independence had inspired the members of a fully-fledged modern,
independent Indonesian army.

The Japanese had intended to make a nationwide purge of the Indonesian
political, social, and religious leaders in order to make Indonesia a
second Korea. They prepared a plan, known as “black fan” and “black
list, in which were written the names of all the Indonesian leaders who
were to be massacred immediately.

Van Mook, the former Dutch Governor General in Indonesia, summarized the
effects of the Japanese occupation in the following words: “The official
and civil servants mostly swallowed their discontent. They were more and
more impoverished by inflation; they were pushed back to lower posts by
an increasing number of Japanese officials. Many of them were genuinely
concerned about the slow ruination of their once excellent services;
others gave up and retired till better days. Quite a number of
incompetent upstarts filled their places.”

Sultan Shahriar, in his political Manifesto issued in 1364/1945,
observed as follows: “When the Netherlands Indies Government surrendered
to the Japanese in Bandung in March 1942, our unarmed population fell
prey to the harshness and cruelty of Japanese militarism. For three
years and a half our people were bent under a cruelty that they had
never before experienced through­out the last several decades of
Netherlands colonial rule.

Our people were treated as worthless material to be wasted in the
process of war. From the lowly stations of those who were forced to
accept compulsory labour and slavery and whose crops were stolen, to the
intellectuals who were forced to prepare lies, the grip of Japanese
militarism was universally felt.

For this Dutch imperialism is responsible in that it left our 70,000,000
people to the mercies of Japanese militarism without any means of
protecting themselves since they had never been entrusted with firearms,
or with the education necessary to use them.”

“A new realization was born in our people, a national feeling that was
sharper than ever before. This feeling was also sharpened by the
Japanese propaganda for pan-Asianism. Later attempts by the Japanese to
supersede the nationalist movement were of no avail.”

The Netherlands Government in exile in London directed Indonesian
inter­national relations and planned the political future of Indonesia.
The plan provided for the formation of a Netherlands Commonwealth,
consisting of the kingdom of the Netherlands and Indonesia as well as
the Dutch West Indies, based on absolute equality, fraternity, mutual
co-operation, and mutual understanding and goodwill.

As soon as the southern part of the Netherlands was liberated in
September-October 1944, a call was issued for volunteers to serve in the
armed forces. In order to restore Dutch imperialism and colonialism in
Indonesia, on 24th August 1945, the British and the United States
Governments concluded the Civil Affairs Agreement with the Dutch
Government.

The Nazi aggression in Europe and the Japanese fascist invasion of China
found an immediate reaction in Indonesia. The whole Indonesian national
movement became anti-fascist. The leftists especially were clear in
their political attitude. The anti-Japanese attitude of the Surabaya
section of the Gerindo, formed in 1356/1937 in Jakarta under the
leadership of Amir Sjarif­oeddin, former Prime Minister of Indonesia,
and Dr. A. K. Gani, attracted much attention.

Dr. Soekarno along with other colleagues and leaders chose to cooperate
with the Japanese only to turn the battle against them because he very
well knew that the Japanese imperialism was no better than that of the
Dutch.

The Dutch colonial power accused Soekarno of being an unprincipled
pro­Japanese collaborator.[^21] Regarding Soekarno, van Mook stated in
1367/1948, from documents later discovered, “it is very clear that in
all his objectionable activities he (Soekarno) was always governed by
the objective of an indepen­dent Indonesia.”

Shahriar, who was anti-Japanese, regarded the Japanese as pure fascists
and felt that the Indonesians must use the most subtle counter methods
to get round them. Both Soekarno and Hatta, he continued, agreed to do
every­thing legally possible to give the nationalist struggle a broader
legal scope and at the same time secretly support the revolutionary
resistance.

Through two exceptionally skillful underground workers at first Djohan
Sjaruzah and later Abd al-Halim, Hatta was able, throughout the Japanese
occupation, to keep in contact with principal Indonesian underground
organizations.[^22]

Most of the underground leaders agreed with Shahriar that Indonesia’s
bargaining position with the Allies for her independence would be
strengthened if there were a powerful Indonesian uprising against the
Japanese coincident with the Allies’ landings.

G: The Revolutionary Struggle (1364/1945 - 1368/1949)
-----------------------------------------------------

Just after the capitulation of the Japanese to Allied forces in
1364/1945, the independence of Indonesia was proclaimed, as already
observed, by Soekarno­-Hatta on 17th August 1945. The proclamation was
supported by all youth organizations, underground movements, former
civil servants, police, army (except the Royal Amboynese), and the vast
mass of the population.

The Japanese ordered the disbandment of the Peta, and all other armed
Indonesian organizations. The Peta units in Java resisted the Japanese
orders to disarm, kept their arms, clashed with the Japanese, made them
surrender their arms, and proceeded to control government buildings,
post and telegraph offices, airfields, and harbours. The Indonesian flag
was flown from all public buildings. The cry *merdeka* (freedom), the
words *bung* and *saudara* (brother) were heard as symbols of national
revolution and fraternal love all over the country.

In Borneo, Celebes, and the lesser Sundas, where the Peta had not been
properly organized, the Allies reinstalled Dutch civil administration
without much difficulty. The British in Java and Sumatra were faced with
a difficult situation. Without heavy reinforcements in men and material,
for which the Home authorities were not prepared, the British troops
could not reinstate the Dutch in authority.

They proceeded to deal with the Republic of Indonesia as a *de facto*
government and insisted on the Dutch doing the same. The latter under
pressure of events entered into an agreement, the Lingaadjati
Agree­ment, with the Indonesian Republic. The ultimate object of the
Dutch imperial policy was not the grant of complete independence to
Indonesia but to work for a Netherlands-Indonesian Union.

The agreement was only a makeshift arrangement to form an interim
working plan with the Indonesian Republic and to utilize the time to
crush the national movement by a policy of divide and rule, as military
victory was beyond their means. The Indonesians offered to give complete
cooperation to the Allied forces provided they were prepared to leave
Indonesia when their work was done. Soekarno advised his exuberant
compatriots through his radio broadcasts not to shoot now and not to
waste their bullets on the British.

The Dutch broke the agreement and overran the richest districts in Java
and Sumatra. The intervention of U.N. resulted in stopping hostilities,
and a new agreement, the Renville Agreement, was signed in January 1947.
The Dutch violated this agreement also, and the failure of the United
States and the European democracies to force the Dutch to carry out the
terms of the agreement considerably strengthened certain elements in
Indonesia and made them break into open rebellion against the Republic.

The Dutch, taking advantage of the difficult and explosive domestic
situation, launched an all-out military campaign against the Republic.
The Indonesians resisted with stubbornness, and backed as they were by
world opinion in favour of their righteous cause and the pressure
exerted by the U.S.A. they forced the Dutch to accept the realities of
the situation.

At the Round Table Con­ference, held at the Hague in 1368/1949, the
Dutch accepted Indonesia’s claim to independence. “In essence the Dutch
exchanged their claim to sovereignty all over Indonesia except Western
New Guinea… for the preservation of their economic stakes in
Indonesia.”[^23]

Out of the four years’ revolutionary struggle against the Dutch, the
Indo­nesians emerged victorious. The struggle, long and bitter,
demonstrated the necessity of a close unity of interests and concerted
action amongst various political parties and ethnic groups, and
inculcated the habit of making sacrifices for the national cause.

The struggle materially effected the development of political
institutions and political integration. The fact that they had won their
freedom without the assistance of any foreign power strengthened the
Indonesians’ confidence in their own ability to manage their house and
also their determination to follow an international policy without
aligning themselves with any power group.

The Independence Preparatory Committee at its first meeting on 18th
August 1945 elected Soekarno and Hatta as President and Vice President
respectively and appointed a Commission of Seven to make a final draft
of the national Constitution. The new Constitution was promulgated
within a week and, though considered provisional, was not replaced till
the end of 1949.

According to the new Constitution, the power in the State was vested in
the President, the Consultative Assembly, and the Chamber of
Representatives. As the last two bodies were not elected, all power was
concentrated in the hands of the Pre­sident. On 29th August, Soekarno
replaced the Independence Preparatory Com­mittee by the Central
Indonesian National Committee (K.N.I.P.).

As a result of the growing resentment against the concentration of power
in the hands of the President, the retention of the officers appointed
by the Japanese in key posts in the Government, and the pressure of the
armed youth organization and the K.N.I.P., the President was compelled
to agree to sharing his legislative power with the K.N.I.P. which body
delegated its power to the newly consti­tuted Working Committee with
Sjahrir and Sjarifoeddin as Chairman and Vice Chairman respectively.

A further loss of authority by the President came as the result of an
insistent demand by the party of Sjahrir who, dissatisfied with the
“fascist and opportunistic mentality of many members of the
Govern­ment,” demanded the introduction of the principle of Cabinet
responsibility to Parliament.

The President accepted the demand and established on 14th November 1945
a new Cabinet headed by Shahriar responsible to the represen­tative body
of the Government. The new Cabinet proceeded to encourage the creation
of political parties representing diverse groups “to obviate the
possible growth of a totalitarian political order” and the rise of a
“monolithic” political organization, for it was felt that “if democratic
principles are to be observed it is not permissible that only one party
should be allowed to function.”

In spite of the restrictions gradually placed on the independent
exercise of authority by the President, violent conflicts either with
the Working Committee or with the K.N.I.P. were avoided by the tactful
handling of difficult problems by Soekarno and the good sense of the
members of the above body.

President Soekarno explained his position to Kahin thus: “Theoretically
I can veto any law of the Parliament. However, I have never done so,
because my system was to keep in very close contact with Assaat
(chairman of both the Working Committee and the K.N.I.P.) and to
influence the Working Com­mittee. Agreements were worked out ahead of
time, and thus collisions between the Presidency and the Working
Committee were avoided.”[^24]

The efficiency and comparative stability of the Indonesian Government
during the difficult revolutionary years was mainly the result of the
habit and practice that had developed because of close collaboration
between different groups and the feeling of solidarity and community of
interests it had developed; the Working Committee, a small compact body
consisting of some of the ablest and most trusted men together with the
attitude of the President and the Vice President, afforded a quick
agency for taking decisions and assuring the smooth working of the
political machine.

These conditions were not to be found during the post-revolutionary
period (1368/1949). The growing sense of national solidarity and
national identity and the universally felt hatred of colonial rule were
the factors assuring the success of the Revolu­tionary Government.

The memories of the Japanese occupation and the revolutionary struggle
for final freedom from colonial rule tremendously increased the
political con­sciousness of the Indonesian people and their passionate
desire to guard their newly won freedom jealously.

The post revolutionary period has created new problems and posed new
challenges, but the natural resilience of the people and their
determination and eagerness to face these problems with courage and
equanimity after having buffeted many storms have been the secret of
their success during this difficult period.

The Hague Agreement of 4th May 1949 provided for the establishment of an
independent, sovereign, and legal democratic federal State known as the
United States of Indonesia.

The official flag of the R.I.S. (Republic of Indonesia) was to be *sang
merah putih* (red and white); the Indonesia Raya, the national anthem;
and Jakarta, the capital of the State. The State was free to decide its
own official emblem.

A great majority of Indonesians, both in the old republic of Indonesia
and in all the fifteen Dutch created States, were profoundly
dissatisfied with the federal system of government.

After several weeks of negotiations between the leaders of the R.U.I.S.
(Republic of the United States of Indonesia) and the Government of
Indonesia, an agreement on the formation of a Unitarian State was
finally reached on 19th May 1950. The country, after years of
experimentation in the field of constitution making, has reverted to the
constitution of 1364/1945 still clinging to the Pantjasila enunciated by
Soekarno in 1364/1945 in a speech which will go down in history as “one
of the great pronouncements of democratic prin­ciples” and which the
Indonesians cherish as their Bill of Rights.

The Pantjasila has become a national document in the sense that it is
quoted as the authority for the principles behind action and is
pictorialized in the Indonesian coat of arms. “Indonesians understand
their coat of arms; it came into being out of the experience of living
men; it links their past with their present; and to hear any school boy
describe it is to realize that it also speaks out their hope for the
future.

The bearer of the coat of arms is a mythological eagle, the *garuda*;
its flight feathers are seventeen and its tail feathers eight,
signifying the date of Indonesian independence, the seventeenth of the
eighth month. The shield portrays the five principles of the Pantjasila:
the central field with the star stands for faith in God; the head of the
native bull for the principle of sove­reignty; the banyan tree for
nationalism; the sprays of rice and cotton for social justice; the
linked chain for humanitarianism; while the black line across the centre
represents the equator; and the device bears the old Javanese words
meaning unity in diversity.”

From the above account it will be clear that Indonesia has been, right
down to the recent past, struggling for political independence and that
from the time she succeeded in achieving it, she has been going through
the traumatic experience of her own rebirth. It is for this reason that
philosophical and scientific thought has hardly had any chance for
development. It is only now that the country is showing signs of
settling down and attending to her social and intellectual renaissance.

Bibliography
------------

R. A. Kartini, *Letters of a Javanese Princess*, New York, 1920; C. S.
Hurgronje, *The Atjenese*, 2 Vols., London, 1906; W. M. Mansvelt, *A
Brief History of the Nether­lands Trading Society 1834-1924*, The Hague,
1924; B. Haar, *Adat Law in Indonesia*, Institute of Pacific Relations,
New York, 1948; W. Machohan Ball, *Nationalism and Communism in East*,
Melbourne University Press, and I. P. R., 1952; I. Chau­dry, *The
Indonesian Struggle*, Ferozsons, Lahore, 1950; Cora Dubois, *Social
Forces in South-East Asia*, Minneapolis, 1949; Erich H. Jocoby,
*Agrarian Unrest in S. E. A.*; Raymond Kennedy, *Bibliography of
Indonesian Peoples and Cultures*, Yale University Press, 1945; Paul M.
Kattenburg, *A Central Javanese Village in 1950*, Cornell University
Press, New York, 1951; K. M. Pannikar, *Asia and Western Dominance*,
Allen & Unwin, London, 1952; H. J. van Mook, *The Netherlands Indies and
Japan*, Allen & Unwin, London, 1944; *The State of Democracy in
South-East Asia*, New York, 1950; Harry Hopkings, *New World Arising*,
Hamish Hamilton, 1952;

J. Radhakrishna, *Indonesia at a Glance*, New Delhi, 1955; M. A. Aziz,
*Japan’s Colonialism and Indonesia*, The Hague, 1955; F. C. Jones,
*Japan’s New Order in East Asia, Its Rise and Fall, 1939-1945*, Oxford
University Press, London, 1954; J. S. Furnivall, *Netherlands India*,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1944; *Colonial Policy and
Practice*, New York, 1956; Charles Fisher, “The Eurasian Question in
Indonesia,” *International Affairs*, October 1947; H. M. Vlekke Bernard,
*Nusantara, A History of the East Indian Archipelago*, Massachusetts,
1943; W. Preger, *Dutch Administration in the Nether­lands Indies*,
Melbourne, 1944; Marris, *South Asia in the World Today*, Chicago, 1949;
Wright Cooke, *There Is No Asia*, New York, 1954; H. R. Isaacs, *No
Peace for Asia*, New York, 1947;

Deveral, *Asia and Democratic Revolution*, Tokyo, 1952; John M. Ward,
*British Policy in the South Pacific*, Sydney, 1947; Bart Landheer, *The
Netherlands in Changing World*, London, 1947; *The Netherlands*, 1942;
J. H. C. Alting and W. de Cock Buning, *The Netherlands and the World
War*, 3 Vols., New Haven, 1928; Tibor Mende, *South Asia Between Two
Worlds*, London, 1955; Karl Eskelund, *Indonesian Adventure*, London,
1954; Arnold Toynbee and Frank T. Ashton, *Survey of International
Affairs 1939-1946*, London, 1952; Virgina Thomp­son, *The Left Wing in
S. E. A.*, New York, 1950; Reginald Le May, *The Culture of South-East
Asia*, London, 1945; Edward S. de Klerck, *History of the Netherlands
East Indies*, 2 Vols., W. L. & J. Brusse, Rotterdam, 1938; A. Arthur
Sheller, *The Formation of Federal Indonesia*, 1945-1949, New York,
1955; Soekarno, *Indonesia in Brief*, Jakarta, 1955; B. Schrieke,
*Indonesian Sociological Studies*, The Hague and Bandung, 1955;

Supert Emerson, *Reflections on the Indonesian Case*, New Haven, October
1948; O. K. Ubani and Muin, *Indonesian Struggle for Independence*;
Semaun, *International Communism and the Communist Party in Indonesia*,
1926; S. Sahriar, *Out of Exile*, translation by Charles Wolf, Jr., New
York, 1949; George Mct Kahin, *Nationalism and Revolution in Indonesia*,
Cornell University Press, New York, 1952; David Wehl, *The Birth of
Indonesia*, London, 1948; W. F. Wertheim, *Indonesian Society in
Transition*, The Hague and Bandung, 1956; *The Truth About West Irian*,
published by the Ministry of Infor­mation, R. I., Jakarta; A.
Vandenbosch and R. A. Butwell, *South-East Asia Among the World Powers*,
University of Kentucky Press, Lexington, 1957; James A. Michener,
*Voices of Asia*, London, 1949; Charles Wolf, Jr., *The Indonesian
Story*, Now York, 1948; William L. Holland, *Asian Nationalism and the
West*, London, 1950; Ali Satroamidjojo and Robert Delson, “The Status of
the Republic of Indo­nesia in International Law,” *Columbia Law Review*,
Vol. 49, March 1949, pp. 344-61.

[^1]: For the role of tariqahs in general, see H.A.R. Gibb, An
Interpretation of Islamic History, p. 11; Muslim World, Vol. 14, No. 2,
January 1955, p. 130.

[^2]: Arnold, The Preaching of Islam, Shirkat-i-Qualam, Lahore, p. 407.

[^3]: Indonesia Today, Vol. 2, No. 6, Nov.-Dec. 1959, p. 19.

[^4]: For details, see Vlekke Nusantara, A History of the East Indian
Archipelago, pp. 1, 265-69, 281.

[^5]: Nur Ahmad Qadri, Tamaddun-i Indonesia, Vol. I, pp. 464-68.

[^6]: Ibid., pp. 449-52.

[^7]: Concerning the influence of the West upon Indonesian Islam, see C.
C. Berg, “Indonesia” in H. A. R. Gibb, Whither Islam?, London, 1939;
Harvey S. Benda, The Crescent and the Rising Sun, Cornell University
Press, 1955; W. F. Wertheim, Effect of Western Civilization on
Indonesian Society, Institute of Pacific Relations, New York, 1950, and
also his Indonesian Society in Transition.

[^8]: G. M. Kahin, Nationalism and Revolution in Indonesia, Cornell
University Press, New York, pp. 87-88. See also Bousquet, A French View
of the Netherlands Indies, pp. 2-5.

[^9]: Quoted by M. Eostein, Statesman’s Year Book, 1937, p. 1176.

[^10]: G. M. Kahin, op. cit.

[^11]: Ubani, “On Indonesian Language,” Merdeka, No. 17, I. S. I., New
Delhi, 12th November 1947, p. 8.

[^12]: The hoisting of the Red and White Flag was prohibited by the
Dutch, but it was flown publicly in Jakarta in October 1928 during the
Indonesian Youth Congress.

[^13]: In 1939, there were 400 Indonesians and 100 Dutch who took the
examination for entrance to the Government School of Civil Service: 23
Dutch and 3 Indonesians were accepted.

[^14]: John Gunther, Inside Asia, 1942, p. 349.

[^15]: Members of the Communist Party attended the Pan-Pacific Labour
Conference under the Commintern auspices at Canton in June 1924. The
Indonesian nation­alists were represented at the Conference of the
League against imperialism in Brussels in February 1927. It coincided
with large-scale arrests and deportations of the nationalist leaders of
the revolution in 1926-27 in Java and Sumatra.

[^16]: G. M. Kahin, op. cit., pp. 88-89.

[^17]: Sultan Shahriar, Out of Exile, Jakarta, 1936, p. 88.

[^18]: Letter to the British Foreign Secretary by the Indonesian
Association for Independence, quoted by Kaushak, The Indonesian
Question, Thacker & Company, Bombay.

[^19]: Takdir Alishahban, “The Indonesian Language - By-Product of
Nation­alism,” Pacific Affairs, Vol. 22, No. 4, Dec. 1949.

[^20]: “The Press Under the Japanese,” Merdeka, 15th May 1947.

[^21]: In 1943, Soekarno went to Tokyo to offer thanks at the Yusukuni
Shrine to the spirits of the Japanese who fell in the course of
Indonesia’s liberation. He was decorated by Hirohito.

[^22]: Hatta, because of his relationship with the underground leaders,
had come to be considered dangerous by the Japanese authorities in Java.

[^23]: G. M. Kahin, Major Governments of Asia, p. 501.

[^24]: Ibid., p. 508.


