Chapter 72: Renaissance in Arabia, Yemen, Iraq, Syria and Lebanon
=================================================================

Muhammad Bin Abd Al-Wahhab and His Movement
-------------------------------------------

### A

The continuity of efforts for revival amongst the Muslims is a subject
of profound interest. During the very early years of the period of
decadence two leaders of thought rose to combat the forces of ignorance
(*jahiliyyah*) and tried their best to bring back the Muslims to the
fountainhead of Islam. The first of these was Muhammad bin Abd al-Wahhab
of Arabia whose spiritual influence spread far and wide in the Islamic
world, particularly in the Arab countries: Yemen, Iraq, Syria, and
Lebanon.

### B

Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab was born about 1111/1700 in the heart of the
Arabian Desert, the region known as Najd. This puritan reformer kindled
a fire that soon spread to the remotest corners of the Muslim world,
purging it of its sloth and reviving the fervour of the olden days. As a
religious reformer, as a standard-bearer of freedom, as an orator, he
not only won and retained undisputed eminence but also left in all these
fields a deep and lasting imprint of his pioneering individuality.

There was none amongst his con-temporaries in Arabia who could lash and
sooth, plead and urge, preach and move from pulpit and platform with the
same fire and eloquence as he had perennially at his command.

The Shaikh studied at Madinah, travelled as far as Persia, and
ultimately settled in his native place in the Najd. Amongst his teachers
Shaikh Abd Allah bin Ibrahim Najdi, Shaikh Muhammad Hayat Sindhi, and
Shaikh Muhammad Majmui are well known.

The Shaikh displayed from his childhood a studious and religious bent of
mind and thus acquired a reputation for his learning and piety even at
the threshold of his life. During his period of study he developed
intense love for the Quran and the Sunnah, and decided that he should
strain every nerve to bring his people back to the pristine glory of
Islam.

For the attainment of this objective he wandered up and down Arabia and
raised the slogan “Back to Islam.” His utterances, characterized by
directness and candour brought fresh life and courage wherever he went
and as such served a much-needed tonic to the people disgusted with sham
and cant. He persuaded them to abandon all such practices as were
antagonistic to the spirit of Islam.

After some time it dawned upon him that mere persuasion unaided by
political power might prove effective in the case of an individual, but
it was difficult to bring about any radical change in a people's outlook
without the backing of a political force. He, therefore, decided to
rally under one banner, the different tribes of Arabia.

For the achievement of this objective he ap­proached, through Uthman bin
Hamad bin Mamar, the Amir of Uvainah. The Amir at the very outset
responded enthusiastically to the call of the Shaikh, but did not keep
his word.[^1] The Shaikh left Uvainah and proceeded to Dariyyah where he
continued his preaching despite opposition from the ignorant '*ulama*'.

In the long run, he not only succeeded in converting the people to his
point of view, but also won the heart of Muhammad, the head of the great
clan of Saud and the most powerful chieftain in the whole of the Najd.
Thus, the moral prestige and material strength of the Shaikh were
considerably enhanced.

“Gradually the desert Arabs were wedded into politico-religious unity
like that effected by the Prophet of Islam. Muhammad bin Abd al-Wahhab
was, in truth, a faithful counterpart of the first two Caliphs, abu Bakr
and Umar. When he died in 1201/1787, his disciple Saud proved a worthy
successor. The new Wahhabi State was a close counterpart of the Meccan
Caliphate.”[^2]

A great change was brought about in the political and administrative
set-up of the country. “Though possessing great military power, Saud
always con­sidered himself responsible to public opinion and never
encroached upon the legitimate freedom of his subjects. His government,
though stern, was able and just. The Wahhabi judges were competent and
honest. Robbery became almost unknown, so well was the public peace
maintained.”[^3]

Having consolidated the Najd politically, Saud was ready to undertake
the greater task of purifying Islam from all those un-Islamic influences
that had been slowly creeping into it for the last few centuries. A
campaign was thus set on foot to eradicate from the society all those
superstitious practices that had been eating into the vitals of the
faith. An honest attempt was made to return to pure Islam.

All later accretions-monstrous, many-sided edifices of scholastic
interpretations of the medieval theologians, and ceremonial or mystical
innovations like saint-worship-in short, all those practices which have
no sanction from Islam were condemned and the masses were exhorted to
abandon them. The austere monotheism of the Prophet was preached in all
its uncompromising simplicity and the Quran and the Sunnah were taken to
be the sole guide for human action. The doctrinal simplification was
ac­companied by a most rigid code of morals.

Many critics of Muhammad bin Abd al-Wahhab condemn this movement as
retrogressive. But this is an absolutely baseless charge. Muhammad bin
Abd al-Wahhab stood up with determination to bring his people back to
true Islam. He, therefore, tried to purge Muslim life of all innovations
and declared a “holy war” against them.

The feeling that he voiced was rather one of rationalistic
dissatisfaction with the outworn palimpsest of cults than of the
destruction of everything that he found before him. He wanted to
separate grain from chaff and this work he performed with admirable
courage and alertness of mind. He tried to demolish all those things
that he found alien to the spirit of Islam and weeded out all those
practices from Muslim society that he considered antagonistic to the
spirit of the faith.

He rightly believed that a certain amount of change is always essential
in a living civilization, but the change should be organic, that is to
say, it should come from within that civilization in response to the
genuine needs of the society which claims to own it and should not be a
mere imitation of another civilization. Imitation of another
civilization implies the surrender of all creative powers that are
essential for the life of a progressive society. The Shaikh was,
therefore, very cautious about his decisions. He persuaded the people to
discard only those things that he found un-Islamic, while he readily
accepted the ideas and practices that could be fitted into the structure
of Islam.

The Wahhabi movement is, therefore, not essentially retrograde and
con­servative in its nature. It is progressive in the sense that it not
only awakened the Arabs to the most urgent need of heart-searching and
broke the com­placency to which they had been accustomed for years, but
also gave the reformers a definite line of action.

It taught them that for the revival of Islam it was necessary to give up
reliance on second-hand formulas and sterile conventions, and that it
was equally essential to come back to the realities of Islam and build
only on the bases of these solid rocks new modes of thought and action.
An attempt to slip away from the cultural forms and aims connected with
Islam, and to accept aims of non-Islamic (often anti-Islamic) social
organizations, would not spell regeneration but degenera­tion for
Islamic culture.

In order to set his movement on the right lines and to perpetuate the
in­fluence of his teaching on future generations, the Shaikh made an
elaborate programme of fostering education amongst the masses. As a
result of his efforts every oasis was given its own *maktab*, and
teachers who could both teach and preach were sent to the Bedouin
tribes.

The disciples of the Shaikh pursued learning with great ardour. Ibn
Bashr says that so many were the students attracted to his classes that
if somebody were to attempt to give their number nobody would believe
him. All his sons, Husain, Abd Allah, Ali, and Ibrahim, had their own
*maktabs* in their houses where students from distant places came to
master Islamic learning. Their expenses were borne by the Bait
al-Maal.[^4]

Although the Shaikh was a follower of the Hanbalite school of *Fiqh*,
yet he did not follow it rigidly. In his book *Hadyat al-Saniyyah*, he
makes a frank confession of this. “Imam ibn Qayyim and his illustrious
teacher ibn Taimiyyah,” observes he, “were both righteous leaders
according to the Sunni school of thought and their writings are dear to
my heart, but I do not follow them rigidly in all matters.”

As a matter of fact, the puritan beginnings of Islamic revival were
combined with an elaborate programme of mass education and a reaction
against *taqlid* (blind following) broadened along more constructive
lines. The teachings of Mutazilism that had long faded away were revived
and the liberal-minded reformers were delighted to find such striking
confirmation of their ideas, both in the writings of the Mutazilite
doctors and in the sacred texts them­selves.

The principle that reason and not blind prescription was to be the test
of truth opened the door to the possibility of reforms that they had
most at heart.[^5] They embarked on a process of introspection and
self-examination.

These are the main characteristics of the Islamic revival in Arabia as
every­where in the world.

The leaders of thought began to sift the whole of Islamic literature
handed down to them by their ancestors and with admirable skill purified
Islam of all those un-Islamic practices which had nothing to do with the
teachings of Islam but had unfortunately become parts of Islamic
culture. Thus, as a result of the efforts of Muhammad bin Abd al-Wahhab
a critical attitude was developed amongst Muslim scholars; they would
not accept anything that came down from the past without testing its
validity on the basis of the Quran and the Sunnah.

Thus, the first change that was visible in society was an urge for
stock­taking of *Fiqh*. It was felt that the pristine simplicity and
reasonableness of the *Shariah* had almost been buried in a forest of
subjective deductions propounded by scholars several years ago. These
deductions, however valuable, could not be held final for all times.

New problems bad cropped up with the march of time, and these demanded
new solutions in the light of the Quran and the Sunnah. Thus, with the
development of the critical attitude, which in itself was the direct
result of Islamic revival, the gates of *ijtihad* sealed for six hundred
years were opened again. The whole of Muslim society was awaken­ed to
the need of a fresh approach towards *Fiqh*.

There was a general feeling of unrest towards everything that did not
have the sanction of the Quran and the Sunnah, and the educated people
began to feel that no finality and definiteness could be legitimately
attributed to any interpretation or con­clusion regarding any problem
not justified by the *nass* of either of the two sources. In other
words, they began to believe that the *ijtihad* of even the greatest
Muslim scholar could not be binding on them.

It was the logical consequence of this critical attitude that the
commenta­tors of Hadith like Hafiz ibn Hajar, Dar Qutni, Imam Nawawi,
Imam Dhahabi, Imam Shaukani became popular with the people. Their
writings attracted the attention of scholars and they began to devote
themselves to the study of the Quran and the Sunnah. The emphasis was,
thus, shifted from *Fiqh* and logic to the study of the two main sources
of Islamic teachings.

This change can also be observed in the attitude of Muslim scholars
towards social philosophers. Al-Farabi (d. 339/950) who had derived his
theory of the State from abstract philosophical speculation was
relegated to the background and scholars began to be attracted by the
writings of ibn Khaldun who based his theory of State on demonstrable
facts and laid the foundations of a scientific theory of history.

It was the study of ibn Khaldun’s writings that paved the way for
pan-­Islamism. He had argued that since the power of the Quraish had
gone, there was no other alternative but to accept the most powerful man
in the country as Imam. “Thus Ibn Khaldun,” observes Iqbal, “realizing
that hard logic of the facts, suggests a view which may be regarded as
the first dim vision of an international Islam fairly in sight
today.”[^6]

Such is the attitude of the modern Arab inspired as he is by the
realities of experience, and not by the scholastic reasoning of jurists
who lived and thought under different conditions.

The dazzling achievements of the West in the realm of science and the
material benefits which the Western people have derived from them have
also moved the people of Arabia freely to participate in them. They are
trying to achieve this end by adjusting their own pattern of life to
that of the West and adopting some of its outer forms.

But they are also anxiously jealous to guard their cherished customs and
values inherent in their own cultural pattern. Although there are
visible changes in their political and social struc­tures, yet the speed
of change is extremely slow at the present time. The spread of the
liberal principles and the Western means of progress go side by side
with conservative forces. It can be said that of all the Muslim
countries Arabia is the greatest country that is anchored in the
traditional pattern of her past.

### C

#### Role of the Arab Academy of Damascus in Syria

In 1336/1918, Muhammad Kurd Ali (1293/1876-1372/1953), a devoted
scholar, founded the Arab Academy in Damascus (*al-Majma al-Ilm
al-Arabi*). The Academy was endowed by King Faisal. It assumed charge of
al-Zahiriyyah Library with 3,000 works, for the most part manuscripts.
The Academy consisted of:

(a) A literary linguistic committee (*lajnah lughawiyyah*) in charge of
investigating linguistic problems, literature, and the ways and means of
improving the Arabic language in order to make it an effective
instrument for the expression of modern thought

(b) A scientific committee (*lajnah ilmiyyah fanniyyah*) in charge of
enriching the language and broadening its scope for the expression of
the various branches of science.[^7]

In 1339/1921, the Academy started the publication of the journal
*Majallah al-Majma al-Ilm al-Arabi*, which welcomed contributions from
Eastern and Western writers. The most important task that the Academy
undertook at the outset was to establish a linguistic academy and
initiate the compilation of an up-to-date dictionary after the pattern
of the La Rousse or the Oxford dictionary.

It continued its work with great vigour and zeal, surmounting various
obstacles, and has achieved a good deal of success in the problems of
language. The Syrian Government has always relied on the Academy for
coining equivalents to foreign technical terms. Agricultural, medical,
philo­sophical, and scientific terms have been coined, and published in
the above journal.[^8]

#### American University of Beirut

The nationalist movement of the Arabs received its strongest impulse
from the literary revivalism which was itself the result of so many
forces. The impact of the French and the Americans enthused the younger
generation of the Arab lands to take stock of their literary treasures
and enrich them so as to suit modern conditions.

“The Presbyterian College in Beirut (established in 1283/1866) which
eventually became the American University was the first modern
educational centre in the Near East where young Arabs could gain a
scholarly knowledge of their great cultural and national past.[^9]

Thus, out of these many and variegated threads: the spread of Western
ideas, the rediscovery and publication of the Arab classics by the
Orientalists, the introduction of the printing press, and the
establishment of newspapers and periodicals, was woven the
rainbow-colored web of literary revivalism in Arab lands.

This movement implied a revolution against the artificial poetic diction
of the twelfth/eighteenth cen­tury. In the literary field, the artist
began to strengthen and reassert his individuality. It was thought that
there was no artistic tradition to which he was forced to submit except
one of his own choosing. All the canons of art, established by the
generations of predecessors, existed only to guide him, not to enslave
him or impose a check upon his genius. This implied an interest in the
artist's own self and in the natural emotional environment in which he
had his being.

At the same time another group, similar to the Beirut group in many
ways, was being created in Cairo by means of schools, educational
missions, and translations initiated or encouraged by Muhammad Ali and
his successors. This group differed from the former in its greater
concern with the question of Islam and modern civilization, and its
greater caution in accepting ideas and innovations from Europe. These
two groups, and similar but less important groups in other towns, laid
the foundations of a new Arabic literature.[^10]

As a result of the efforts of these groups, the scope of Arabic language
has been broadened. Western ideas have been popularized through
translations and new literary forms; the poetic drama, the novel, the
romantic autobiography, have been introduced. At the same time old
literature is also being revived. The Arab children are now asked to
memorize al-Mutanabbi. The books of ibn Rushd and ibn Sina are again
becoming popular in colleges, and ideas put forward by ibn Khaldun and
al-Fakhri on the problems of culture and State are being popularized.

The speeches of Tariq ibn Ziyad and other generals of Arabia are
repeated on the platform in order to infuse the spirit of nationalism
amongst the younger generation. The recent celebrations of the
millenaries of the great figures of the past indicate the zeal for
revivalism. The glorious past of the Arabs is used as a stimulus for the
present revival, and the achievements of the present are utilized to
promote future development.

As a consequence there have arisen on the horizon of Arab lands some of
the best brains, for example, the religious thinker Muhammad Abduh, the
social reformer Qasim Amin, the essayists Muhammad Husain Haikal and
al-Manfaluti, the poets Ahmad Shauqi and Hafiz Ibrahim, the playwright
and novelist Taufiq al-Hakim, and the scholar Taha Husain.

All these are Egyptian names. But there have also been very important
Syrian and Lebanese writers, many of whom worked for most of their life
in Egypt, while others remained in their own country. They include the
scholars and poets of Bustani and Yaziji families; the religious
reformer Rashid Rida, the learned disciple of Muhammad Abduh; the
leaders of Arabic journalism, Shidiaq, Nimr, Sarruf, Zaidan, and Taqla;
the poet Khalil Matran; the best of women writers in Arabic, May Ziadah;
the traveller Amin Raihani; and the mystic Khalil Jibran.[^11]

Since the rapid progress of the literary movement during the past few
years one has been impressed by the practical results of the efforts of
Arab writers in adapting the classical Arabic language to the conditions
of modern life, creating scientific terminology, and producing
scientific works in Arabic, e.g., the various lexica of technical terms
published by modern scholars, like Muhammad Sharaf, Ahmad Isa Bey, Maluf
Pasha, Mazhar Said, and the scientific works of Yaqub Sarruf, Fuad
Sarruf, al-Ghamrawaih, Musharrafah, etc.[^12]

#### Role of the Arab League in Unifying the Arab World

The most recent attempt to consolidate the Arab world and give its
endeavour concentration and direction was that of the Arab League. It
was on March 22, 1945, that seven independent Arab States signed the
pact of the Arab League.

“Unity and independence had from the first been the double aim of the
Arab national movement. The two are inseparable in the mind of the Arab
nationalist. Developments at first took another course when, after World
War I, Arabia was split up into a number of States. But the farther the
national idea spread among the peoples of these States, the stronger
became their effort for unity. Arab nationalism never accepted the fact
of partition. It was inevitable that within the independent Arab
countries special interests of dynastic, economic, or of some other
nature should develop and gain strength-interests with which the public
movement for unity has to reckon.”[^13]

Regional particularism and dynastic jealousies were indeed there. But
despite these, there was a general desire amongst the Arabs to form a
union of their countries. It was in response to this general need that
Egypt, Libya, the Sudan, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and the Yemen
joined their hands together. The formation of the League was then
considered to be a major and positive step towards the fulfil­ment of
Arab hopes and aspirations.[^14]

In many respects the League was one of the most eloquent expressions of
the spirit of pan-Arabism. It was acclaimed a good beginning, even
though it was established on shaky foundations, and weakened by the
half-hearted attitude and mental reservations of some of its members.

The role of the Arab League was further enhanced by the concerted
par­ticipation of the Arab States in the United Nations as a “Political
Block” and by their express and written pledges to defend Palestine at
all cost. Pales­tine soon proved to be an acid test for the Arab States,
the result of which was disheartening to all concerned. The defeat in
Palestine not only meant the loss of a good part of Palestine, but was
also the greatest blow within living memory to Arab unity, Arab pride,
and Arab life.

This created a feeling of general dissatisfaction amongst the Arabs
about the leadership of the League. More­over, with the failure of Arab
League on the Palestine question, the parti­cularizing aims and
interests of its member States began to counteract its unifying trends
and tendencies. Even attempts at co-ordination of their efforts in the
economic and cultural spheres, in spite of some slight success, were
overpowered by the stronger centrifugal forces of their political
aspira­tions.

The Arab League had united the Arabs in their fight against Western
domination; it had been called into play whenever a constellation of
power politics threatened some vital interests of all or some of the
Arab States. But negative attitudes and impulses proved uncreative, even
destructive. Signifi­cantly, the Arab League was declared all but dead
by the Arabs themselves in March 1956, when its member States again
rallied to an Arab cause in the Suez crisis-once more against a threat
from without, not for a constructive purpose within.

The recent unification of Egypt and Syria and the federation between
Iraq and Jordan in 1377/1958 were also defensive reactions against
political pressures. Neither their effect on the movement towards Arab
unity, be it favourable or adverse, nor their impact on the development
of Islam can as yet be assessed.[^15]

What does the future hold for the Arab movement? Its future depends on
the dissemination on a large scale of some factors of unity. The factors
of language, history, geography, similarity of problems, the zeal for
the maintenance of independence and sovereignty, quest for a respectable
place among the comity of nations, common interests and aspira­tions are
solid bases for Arab co-operation, if not for Arab unity.

There have been many failings on the part of the Arab League. But, in
spite of all in­adequacies, in spite of all disappointments and
frustrated hopes due to inde­cision and indiscipline, Arab nationalism
is entitled to recognition for its stimulation of a general intellectual
and political renaissance. Its work is not yet complete; the last word
has not been spoken about the new Arab world, because the Arab peoples
and States are still in the midst of a transition.[^16]

### D

1. In general all movements mentioned in the preceding sections show a
deep influence of Western liberalism, as a result of which there has
been a continuous attempt to interpret Islam “freely.”

2. In general, again all these movements share a common feature not
purely religious. Because of the dual nature of Islam as a religion and
State, and because of the pressure to which Muslim society has been
subjected in almost every field, these movements resent and resist
Western penetration and influence, with methods almost modern.

3. Impressive strides have been taken throughout the Arab world towards
Muslim revival. “The rapid multiplication of newspapers, periodicals,
books and pamphlets, the great increase in the number of literary
societies and intellectual organizations along modern lines, the
exchange of academic visits of professors and students, as well as of
scientific research missions, are phenomena that are witnessed today in
Arab countries.

The appointment of Egyptian teachers and experts in educational centres
of Iraq, Arabia, the Yemen; the exchange of students; the organization
of universities and the increase of new colleges; the dissemination of
the wireless and its utilization for the propagation of cultural
activities; the rising and surging tide of new thought; the flourishing
movement of translation of foreign literature, all indicate a noble
intellectual awakening.”[^17]

4. Intellectual renaissance in these countries is going hand in hand
with national awakening and interest in language. Thus, for more than
fifty years, Arab intellectuals have viewed intellectual revival and
national consciousness from the standpoint of language and historical
traditions. As a result, there is an agreement amounting to consensus
that Arabic is not only the faithful register of Arab cultural
achievements, but the pillar of politico-intellectual revival throughout
the length and breadth of the Arab world. This awareness of the
importance of language has been practically universal in most Arab
countries.

Father Kirmili (d. 1366/1947) of Iraq, who had a passion for Arabic from
his early youth, devoted most of his energy to linguistic problems. He,
on the strength of very strong arguments, proved that Arabic has a
unique gift of adaptability and adjustment to new situations; it has the
power to assimilate new words and phrases and coin its own when the need
arises. But he at the same time warned the Arabic-speaking world against
the danger of the un­limited use of foreign words since this would lead
to the abandonment of Arabism and the loss of nationalism.

Salim al-Jundi (1297/1880-1374/1955), while discussing the importance of
Arabic language, said, “Language is the model that represents the
long-standing nobility of a community. It is the guide that points to
the extent of its civilization and progress.”[^18]

Similarly, Munir al-Ajilani of Iraq in one of his addresses remarks that
Arabic is the earth; in it we have eternal poetry, eternal prose, and
the Quran. It is like the flag behind which soldiers (the Arabs) march.

To the great majority of Arab writers on nationalism, Arabic is the
life­blood and soul of the community, it is the strongest bond of unity;
the main­stay and the strongest pillar of Arab nationalism, the main
deterrent against internal and external dividing forces, the instrument
of thought and emotions, and a link between the past and the present. It
is the faithful guardian of Arab cultural heritage, the register of the
Arabs' deeds and accomplishments, and of their triumphs and pitfalls,
and is the most important factor in their unity.[^19]

As a matter of fact, the Arabic language has marvellously developed in
the hands of modern Arab writers. It has been proved that this flexible
and expressively powerful language is capable of depicting every
manifes­tation of modern life without recourse to loanwords.

5. Industrialization is advancing in these countries at a notable speed
and the standard of living of the people is slowly and steadily rising.
The old prejudices against technical knowledge and scientific inventions
are gradually withering away. The industrialization of the Arab
countries has led to the transformation of labour that is being
organized along modern lines; this is likely to have its effect in the
whole Arab East, and even beyond. In the field of agriculture too
“evolution in the Near East is witnessing a new state of affairs, by the
gradual transformation from nomadism into sedentarism.”

In this respect, the improvement and multiplication of means of
communica­tion in their modern form have made a large contribution. The
major and pressing problems of combating illiteracy and infant
mortality, improving sanitation and applying the principles of
preventive medicine, and educating women are being given serious
attention.

6. Another feature of this movement is that the effervescent young men
and the enlightened women are playing an important part everywhere. As a
consequence of internal evolution in the realm of family life, the
Oriental youth has become, within a remarkably short time, the hope of
the old genera­tion which has neither the possibilities of organizing a
State, nor the scientific and administrative knowledge necessary for the
comprehension and conduct of modern political movements.[^20]

7. There is going on everywhere a movement for the reconstruction of
Islamic philosophy and theology to satisfy the reflective and
inquisitive minds of those trained in the philosophical traditions of
Plato and Aristotle. Thus, an Islamic system of thought is being created
which can adequately meet the intellectual doubts to which the modern
world is prone.

The leaders of Islamic renaissance have fully realized the need of an
affirma­tion of Islam against the onslaught of modern scepticism that
has come in the wake of modern science. This is how the door of
*ijtihad*, sealed for centuries, has been re-opened. In their efforts to
harmonize the scientific and social discoveries of the modern age with
the teachings of the Quran and the Sunnah, they sometimes make a
departure even from the funda­mentals of Islam. Such a trend is rightly
considered dangerous by the *ulama* and the masses.

Bibliography
------------

Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, *Kitab al-Tauhid; al-Usul al-Thalathah wal­
Qawaid al-Arbaah; Shurut al-Salat wa Arkaniha; Fadl al-Islam; Kitab
al-Kabair; Nasihat al-Muslimin; Sittatu Mawadi min al-Sirah; Tafsir
al-Fatihah; Masail al-Jahiliyyah; Tafsir Kalimah al-Tauhid; Kitab
al-Sirah (Khulasah Sirat Ibn Hisham); al-Huda wa huwa Mukhtsar Zad
al-Maad li al-Hafiz Ibn Qayyim; Kitab Majmu al-Hadith ala Abwab al-Figh;
al-Hadyat al-Saniyyah wa Tahagquq al-Wah­habiyyah al-Najdiyyah,* ed.
Sulaiman bin Sahman.

Amir Shakib Arsalan, *Hadar al-Alam al-Islam,* 4 Vols.; Uthman bin
Bashar al-Najdi, *Unwan al-Majd fi Tarikh al-Najd;* al-Husri*, Ara wa
Ahadith fi al Wataniyyah wal Qaumiyyah;* Hasan al-Banna, *Mushkilat un
fi Dau al-Nizam al-Islami*.

P. K. Hitti, *History of the Arabs*, London, 1949; George Antonious,
*The Arab Awakening*; Sir M. Iqbal, *The Reconstruction of Religious
Thought in Islam*, Lahore, 1954; Halide Edib, *Conflict of East and West
in Turkey*; Lothrop Stoddard, *The New World of Islam*, New York, 1925;
Ilse Lichtenstandter, *Islam and the Modern Age*, Vision Press, London;
F. W. Fernau, *Moslems on the March*, London, 1955; A. H. Hourani*,
Syria and Lebanon*, London, 1946; R. Landau, *Islam and the Arabs*,
George Allen & Unwin, London, 1958; Zaki Ali, *Islam in the World*,
Lahore, 1938; Friedmann, *An Introduction to World Politics*; H. A. R.
Gibb, *Modern Trends in Islam*; K. S. Twitchell, *Saudi Arabia*, New
York, 1947; H. V. Morten, *Middle East*, New York, 1943; George E. Kirk,
*A Short History of the Middle East*, London, 1957; Ian Thomson, *The
Rise of Modern Asia*, London, 1957; Gerald de Gaury, *The Rulers of
Mecca*, London, 1951; Stephen Hemslay Longrigg, *Iraq 1900 to 1950*,
London, 1953; Henry A. Foster, *The Making of Modern Iraq*, Oklahoma
University Press, Oklahoma, 1935.

[^1]: Uthman bin Bashar al-Najdi, Unwan al-Majd fi Tarikh al-Najd, p. 9.

[^2]: Lothrop Stoddard, The New World of Islam, New York, 1925, p. 28.

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Uthman bin Bashar, op. cit., p. 93.

[^5]: Lothrop Stoddard, op. cit., p. 32.

[^6]: Sir M. Iqbal, The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam, p.
158.

[^7]: Majallah al-Majma al-Ilm al-Arabi, 1921, Vol. 1, pp. 2-4.

[^8]: Ibid., pp. 223.

[^9]: R. Landau, Islam and the Arabs, George Allen & Unwin, London,
1958, p. 256.

[^10]: A. H. Hourani, Syria and Lebanon, London, 1946, pp. 36-37.

[^11]: Ibid., p. 37.

[^12]: Zaki Ali, Islam in the World, Lahore, 1938, p. 236.

[^13]: F. W. Fernau, Moslems on the March, London, 1955, p. 153.

[^14]: See C. A. Hourani, “The Arab League in Perspective,” The Middle
East Journal, 1947, Vol. I, No. 2, pp. 125-26.

[^15]: I. Lichtenstandter, Islam and the Modern Age, Vision Press,
London, p. 167.

[^16]: F. W. Fernau, op. cit., p. 159.

[^17]: Zaki Ali, op. cit., p. 230.

[^18]: Majallah Majma al-Ilm al-Arabi, 1922, Vol. II, pp. 283-84.

[^19]: See al-Husri, “Wataniyyah,” Wahdat al-Ummah.

[^20]: Zaki Ali, op. cit., p. 251.


