Chapter 73: Renaissance in North Africa: The Sanusiyyah Movement
================================================================

A: Rise of the Sanusiyyah Order
-------------------------------

The rise of the Sanusiyyah Order is closely bound up with that of other
revivalist movements in Islam during the thirteenth/nineteenth century.
For this reason it is not possible nor indeed advisable to discuss the
rise and impact of this Order without first touching upon the nature of
the events preceding and accompanying it; consideration must also be
given to the forces which played a considerable role in preparing the
way for shaping and directing the trend of thought and action of the
Sanusiyyah movement.

The second half of the twelfth/eighteenth century was a period of
dormancy in the history of modern Islam, and the beginning of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century proved to be a grave time for the Muslim
peoples. The Ottoman Empire, once an edifice of glory and achievement,
began to weaken both politically and spiritually. The world of Islam, to
which the Ottomans had for centuries stood as guardians and to which
they had claimed the right of primacy, started to disintegrate.

Soon, therefore, the call for political and spiritual reforms began to
be heard; attempts were now being actively made to resuscitate the
Empire and to turn it once more into a vigorous and superior institution
along the lines of the advancing European nations.

In the spiritual field the need was particularly felt for a rejuvenation
of the Islamic faith, the source of inspiration and the very backbone of
the Islamo­-Arab Empire from the first/seventh to the seventh/thirteenth
century. By the beginning of the twelfth/eighteenth century Islam had
been practically forgotten, and a great many alien ideas and practices
had crept into it. The original purity of the doctrine of Islam was to
be found nowhere; abuse of its rites was increasing day by day.

The feeling that reform was necessary was, thus, a natural phenomenon of
the time. And when the Ottoman Sultan, who was also the Caliph of Islam
and, therefore, the *de facto* ruler of the three holy cities of Islam,
could no longer command the confidence and allegiance of the Muslims and
demonstrate his willingness and ability to restore to Islam its purity
and its vigour, his position as protector and defender of the faith
weakened. Opposition to his authority began to rear its head.

Besides this internal strain in the Ottoman Empire itself, there was the
external threat, both political and economic. By the turn of the
thirteenth/ nineteenth century the leading European powers had started
coveting the lucrative territories of the Ottoman Empire both in Asia
and in Africa. Accordingly, it was these two motive forces combined; the
desire to amelio­rate the condition of the Muslims and the determination
to resist foreign danger, which led Muslim thinkers and leaders at that
time to rise and call for reforms in the Muslim world, and later to make
plans for overcoming the obstacles in the way of an Islamic renaissance.

It was against this background that the Sanusiyyah Order was founded and
began to grow. Its rise was indeed a reaction to both the spiritual
dis­integration of and the external political threat to the very
existence of Islam. Its aim was three fold: first, to work for the
restoration of the original purity of Islam and the advancement of
Islamic society; secondly, to bring about the solidarity and unity of
the Muslim countries and, thus, revive the “com­munity of Islam”; and,
thirdly, to combat the growing encroachments of European imperialism
upon the Muslim homeland.

The founder of the Sanusiyyah Order, Sayyid Muhammad bin Ali al­ Sanusi
(known as the Grand Sanusi), was born in 1202/1787[^1] in the village of
al-Wasita, near Mustaghanem, in Algeria. Politically, socially, and
econo­mically, this was a time of great instability and discontent in
Algeria. The Ottoman governors, the *beys*, as they were called, had
misruled the country and inflicted so many hardships on the people that
resentment had reached a high degree, and the very authority of the
Sultan had become exceedingly unpopular in the country.

By the time Sayyid Muhammad bin Ali reached his twentieth year and was
able to think rationally and to analyse the state of affairs into which
the Algerians had drifted, he became exceedingly bitter about the
disintegration of Algerian society as well as about the oppressive rule
of the Ottoman gover­nors.

Indeed, in his earlier years, while still receiving instruction at the
hands of Muslim Shaikhs in Algeria, he showed a keen interest in the
welfare of the Algerian Muslims as well as enthusiasm for the unity of
Muslim territories all over the world. From the trade caravans that used
to pass frequently through Algeria, he used to hear about the
backwardness of Muslims in other Muslim lands.

Once he told his father, expressing his feelings about the debacle of
Muslims at the time, “[the Muslims] are vanquished everywhere; [Muslim]
territories and policies are being abandoned by the Muslims constantly
and with the speed of lightning, and Islam is, thus, in a state of
fearful decline. This is [indeed] what I am thinking of, 0 father!”[^2]

The Grand Sanusi received his early education from a number of Shaikhs
in Algeria, at Mustaghanem and later at Mazun. His instructors included
abu Talib al-Mazuni, abu al-Mahl, ibn al-Qanduz al-Mustaghanemi, abu Ras
al-Muaskari, ibn Ajibah, and Muhammad bin Abd al-Qadir abu Ruwainah.
Under these Shaikhs he studied the Quran, the Hadith, and Muslim
juris­prudence in general.

Then he moved to Fez, where for eight years he studied in its grand
mosque school, generally known as *Jami al-Qurawiyyin*, to which
innumerable students of Muslim theology used to come from all parts of
North Africa. There he studied under a number of learned Shaikhs,
including Hammud bin al-Hajj, Sidi al-Tayyib al-Kirani, Sidi Muhammad
bin Amir al-Miwani, Sidi abu Bakr al-Idrisi, and Sidi al-Arabi bin Abmad
al-Dirqawi.[^3]

But he did not seem to have been happy in Fez. This was not only because
of the pathetic state of morals and the lack of security and stability
in the place, but also on account of the discouraging attitude which
seems to have been taken by the authorities towards his teachings.[^4]

Accordingly, while still in his early thirties, he left Fez for Egypt.
There he studied under Shaikhs al-Mili al-Tunisiyy, Thuailib, al-Sawi,
al-Attar, al-Quwaisini, and al-Najjar. From there he went to the Hijaz,
where he studied under Shaikhs Sulaiman al-Ajami, abu Hafs bin Abd
al-Karim al-Attar, and Imam abu al-Abbas Abmad bin Abd Allah bin Idris.

While studying under all these Shaikhs, Sayyid Muhammad bin Ali seems to
have fallen under the influence of their Sufi teachings, particularly
those of the Tijaniyyah Order in Morocco. Later, however, he became a
member of other Sufi Orders, including the Shadhiliyyah, Nasiriyyah and
Qadiriyyah. But he does not seem to have been wholeheartedly in favour
of their teachings.[^5]

His purpose in joining them appears, as we shall see later, to be to
make himself acquainted with their rites and teachings and to choose the
best from every order so as to be able later to combine them in a new
Order which would, thus, be “the crown of Sufi thought and
practice.”[^6]

In pursuing his studies in Algeria, Morocco, and Egypt, Sayyid Muhammad
had ample opportunity to examine the state of affairs into which the
Muslims had drifted, particularly the state of decadence prevailing in
North Africa at the time. Comparison between the glorious past of the
Muslims and their condition in his time seems to have occupied his mind
greatly, and the thought that the Muslims were in a state of material
and spiritual degeneracy haunted him constantly.[^7]

In trying to discover the cause of this backwardness and find the remedy
for it, he came to the conclusion that only by the restoration of the
original purity of Islam and the unity of the Muslims the world over,
could the future of Islam be made secure. This he now made the mission
of his life and the object of all his efforts and preaching.

And, in order to obtain further spiritual strength, he decided to pay a
visit to the Hijaz, the birthplace of the Prophet Muhammad and the
original springboard of the Muslims in the establishment of their empire
in the first/seventh and second/eighth centuries. The ostensible reason
for his journey was to perform the pilgrimage, but his actual motive was
much more than that, namely, to invigorate his yearning spirit by the
additional spiritual stamina which he wished to obtain during his visit
to the holy cities of Islam.

Moreover, there seems to have been a political reason for his departure.
While teaching at Fez, he appears to have shown a critical attitude
towards the Ottoman authorities there, in a manner now mild and
admonitory, now severe and remonstrative; he drew their attention to
their maladministration and to the sorry conditions then prevail­ing in
Fez.

As a consequence, his presence in Morocco was considered dangerous; the
authorities considered him a threat to their prestige, fearing that his
religious teachings would develop into a political challenge and, thus,
lead to the end of the Ottoman rule in Morocco. In order, therefore, to
avoid further friction with the authorities, Sayyid Muhammad decided to
leave for Laghouat, in Algeria. This place lay in a highly strategic
situation for the purpose of trade caravans to and from the Sudan in
addition to holding a key position in the Atlas Sahara.[^8]

One of Sayyid Muhammad's main objectives in his choice of Laghouat was
his desire to preach his ideas in that area and to carry on with his
preaching for the reform of Islam and the unity of the Muslim world.
Soon, however, he realized he could not accomplish this to the full, for
he found himself shut away in the Sahara, far from all useful activity.

He, therefore, left for Gabis in Tunisia, and then went on to Tripoli,
Misurata and Benghazi in Libya, as well as to Egypt and the Hijaz. It
was indeed at this stage of his life that he began to exercise his
influence successfully on the people of North Africa, preparing thereby
the way for the founding of the Sanusiyyah Order.

He had already succeeded in converting to his viewpoint a considerable
number of Algerians and other “Brethren” (*Ikhwan*). These were now his
disciples, and a few of them accompanied him on his journey eastward
through Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, and the Hijaz, and helped him in the
dissemination of his teachings.

Sayyid Muhammad's stay in Tunisia and Libya was relatively short, but
even during this short period he remained actively engaged in the
preaching of his ideas. Similarly, his stay in Egypt was brief, lasting
only for a few weeks. He had originally intended to study at al-Azhar
University in Cairo in order to improve his education, but he was soon
defeated in his plans.

The Shaikhs of al-Azhar decided to combat his influence, perhaps out of
jealousy of the success of his movement, or perhaps genuinely thinking
that his teachings were not in accordance with the prevailing docile
attitude taken by them towards the authoritarian rule of Muhammad Ali,
then Governor of Egypt. In addition, seeing that the Sayyid and his
followers viewed his autocratic rule with more than suspicion, if not
actual hostility, Governor Muhammad Ali decided for his part to stifle
the rapid advance of the Sanusi teachings.

He is, in fact, said to have suggested to the Shaikhs of al-Azhar to
oppose the very presence in Cairo of the Sayyid and his disciples and
even encouraged them to do so. This hostile attitude of the Shaikhs of
al-Azhar and the authorities in Egypt, coupled with the persistent
desire of the Sayyid to perform the pilgrimage, soon made him leave
Egypt for the Hijaz.[^9]

But his studies in Egypt left a deep impression on his mind. There
Muhammad Ali had succeeded in shaking the authority of the Ottoman
Sultan and establishing his own rule instead. Accordingly, Egypt,
although nominally a vassal State and subject to Turkish suzerainty, had
in fact declared its independence of the Turkish Sultan and was
beginning to emerge as an autonomous entity among the States of the
world.

Already the inability of the Ottoman Empire to repulse the French
invasion of his own country, Algeria, had pointed to the weakness of
that Empire. To the Sayyid all this provided a concrete example of the
growing decadence of the Ottoman Empire and of the actual feasibility of
a rising in the face of the Sultan. It was, indeed, an incentive to him
to redouble his efforts in order to end the pathetic state of affairs
into which the Muslims had drifted.

And yet the Sayyid felt he was hardly ready for such a move. Although he
was encouraged by the example of Muhammad Ali, he seems to have felt
that the kind of political triumph of the latter over the authority of
the Sultan was not the real victory he would wish for himself. He wanted
political victory to be coupled with a real movement for reform and
advance­ment.

He, thus, concluded that his aim might be better served by his own
superior education, by his striving to combat the influence of
sectarianism and authoritarian regimes, and by the dissemination of
knowledge that would include the teaching of technical subjects to all
classes of Muslims. Moreover, he advocated the popularization of sports,
particularly the use of arms and horsemanship, and resolved, above all,
to realize these aims without delay.[^10]

It was with this in mind that the Sayyid set out for the Hijaz. There he
stayed for six years, mostly at Makkah, where he resumed his studies and
preaching. He developed close relations with many prominent Shaikhs in
the Hijaz, but was particularly influenced by Shaikh Ahmad bin Idris
al-Fasi, the fourth head of the Moroccan Order of the Qadiriyyah
dervishes and later the founder of the Idrisiyyah or
Qadiriyyah-Idrisiyyah Order.[^11]

In addition, through his contacts with the pilgrims, flocking in
thousands to Makkah and al-Madinah every year, he made a deeper study of
the condition of Muslims in other Muslim lands.

Having thus fortified his theological and other studies, acquiring in
this way a much broader knowledge of the Islamic world, he began to feel
he was in a position to start his own Order.

Upon the death of Sayyid Ahmad bin Idris in the Yemen (where he had gone
into exile following the hostility of the Maliki Shaikhs at Makkah),
Sayyid Muhammad al-Sanusi proceeded in 1253/1837 to establish a new
Order, which was actually a sub-Order of the Idrisiyyah, and chose as
its seat Mt. Abu Qubais, near Makkah.[^12]

Here he made great progress, particularly among the Bedouin tribes of
the Hijaz, chief among which was the Harb tribe between Makkah and
al-Madinah.[^13] This success among the Hijazi tribes aroused the
jealousy of the various authorities in Makkah, and they proceeded to
provoke opposition to his movement, as they had previously opposed that
of Muhammad bin Abd al-Wahhab.

In this they found great support in the attitude of the *‘ulama’* and
the Sharifs of Makkah and the Turkish administra­tion.[^14] This was
apparently because the Order seems to have threatened the prestige and
privileges of these authorities. Objection was also made to the manner
in which the Order “lowered Sufi standards to accommodate itself to
Bedouin laxity in religious matters, and that it verged on heresy.”[^15]

The Sayyid now decided to leave the Hijaz, in the same way as he had
previously been compelled to leave Egypt. But he was faced with the
difficult task of choosing a new seat for his movement. First, he knew
his movement had very little, if any, chance of success in the Arabian
Peninsula, particularly in view of the opposition to his movement by the
Turkish authorities and the Sharifs and Shaikhs of Makkah. Secondly, he
was bound to encounter the same opposition as he had already experienced
in Egypt before his departure for the Hijaz.

Thirdly, he could not very well make his own country, Algeria, the
centre of his movement, since the French had already occupied it in
1246/1830. Fourthly, such a new place had to be centrally situated in
the Islamic world, a seat where the movement could flourish without at
the same time attracting the attention of the ruling authorities.

In 1257/1841, he left the Hijaz, accompanied by a large number of his
disciples and followers, and headed for Algeria. After a few months’
stay in Cairo, during which the Shaikhs of al-Azhar renewed their
hostility to his person and movement, he continued his journey westward
through Libya to Tunisia. Here he learnt of the recent French advances
in Algeria, and, being fearful of their designs (he was apprehensive
lest the French authorities should be planning to arrest him or in any
case to crush his movement), he hurried back to Libya,[^16] now the only
place to which he could go and where he could settle and extend his
movement without arousing the jealousy and open hostility of the
authorities.

In a way, therefore, his choice of Libya was rather accidental, but in
any case that country seemed to meet all the con­ditions he had
conceived of for a new centre for his Order.[^17] It was remote from the
seat of Government in Istanbul, and was also relatively neglected. The
Ottoman officials in it were few in number and were for the most part
confined to the coastal towns, while the tribes were left to themselves
and rarely disturbed by the authorities so long as they paid the taxes
and kept the peace.[^18]

Even the Turkish troops seldom exceeded a thousand, and the semblance of
a police force was not introduced until shortly before the Italian
occupation in 1329/1911.[^19] Moreover, the Libyan population was on the
whole backward and in great need of religious orientation. Libya's human
soil was, so to speak, ready for the reception of the Sayyid’s
teachings, a fact that no doubt made his task all the easier and thus
speeded up his progress.

In 1259/1843, with the help of the Awaqir and Barasa tribes, Sayyid
Muhammad al-Sanusi founded his first lodge *(zawiyah)* near Sidi Rafi on
the central Cyrenaican plateau *(al-Jabal al-A khdar)*.[^20] This first
lodge came to be known as the White Lodge *(al-Zawiyah al-Baida)*, and
it was from here that the Sayyid began to direct his teaching and
propagandistic activities for the first few years after the
establishment of his new seat.

In 1263/1846, however, he returned to Makkah, where he stayed for seven
years, while his disciples carried on his teaching and preaching in his
absence. In 1270/1853, he returned to Cyrenaica, and three years later
he moved his seat to Jaghbub, about one hundred and fifty kilometres
south-east of Sidi Rafi, and made it now the centre of his Order. His
purpose in this was to direct his activities southward, particularly in
the pagan and semi-pagan countries of the Sahara and Equatorial Africa
and beyond.

He was now out of reach of the Turkish, French, and Egyptian
Governments, as well as on the main pilgrimage route from North­ West
Africa through Egypt to Makkah; at Jaghbub itself, this route bisected
one of the trade routes from the coast to the Sahara and the Sudan.
Jaghbub was also centrally located for the purpose of his movement,
lying as it was at fairly equal distances from his lodges in Cyrenaica,
Tripolitania, the Western Desert of Egypt, and the Sudan.[^21]

Actually, Sayyid Muhammad al-Sanusi’s transfer of the seat of his Order
to Jaghbub heralded a new stage in the history of the development of the
Order. Whereas previously the Order had confined itself to being mainly
an internal movement aiming at the rejuvenation and reform of Islam as a
faith, it now began to disseminate Islamic teachings and to extend the
in­fluence of Islam.[^22]

Sayyid Muhammad must have been alarmed by the Chris­tian missionary work
in the Sudan, and he seems to have wanted to combat their activities. In
this he was encouraged by the success that his movement had already
scored in the coastal regions and the successful establishment of so
many Sanusi lodges in North Africa.[^23]

Jaghbub soon became not only a centre for the Sanusi movement, but also
a seat for an Islamic university which brought under its fold a total of
some three hundred learned teachers and students in a community of some
one thousand Sanusis and “Brethren”.[^24] This community included the
Algerians, Tunisians, Moroccans, Libyans, and others.

As time went on, the University of Jaghbub, with its team of scholars,
poets, theologians, and others played an important role in the
revivalist movement of Islam and its expansion in Africa during the
thirteenth/nine­teenth century. It was at this university that the
future leaders of the Sanusi Order were trained, and it was from here
that Sayyid Muhammad bin Ali, his followers, and successors directed
their missionary activities in Libya, the Sahara, and the Sudan .[^25]

When the Sayyid died in 1276/1859, he had already founded twenty-one
lodges in Cyrenaica alone.[^26] In addition, his Order had spread so
widely in Cyrenaica and Tripolitania-and elsewhere-that the Ottoman
Government was compelled to take his influence and prestige seriously
into account; it, thus, wanted to win his friendship and support in
order to use his prestige for improving the then deteriorating
Turco-Arab relations and to quell the risings which were taking place in
Tripolitania.

It is even reported that one of the Turkish governors in Tripolitania at
the time *(Ashqar Pasha)* became a member of the Sanusi Order.[^27] In
accordance with this courteous attitude of the Ottoman Government
towards the Sanusiyyah Order, Sultan Abd al­ Majid I issued in 1273/1856
a *firman* exempting Sanusi properties from taxation and permitting the
Order to collect a religious tithe from its followers.[^28]

The Grand Sanusi was succeeded in 1276/1859 by his elder son, Sayyid
Muhammad al-Mahdi, as head of the Order,[^29] following a short period
of regency. During Sayyid al-Mahdi's tenure the Order expanded
considerably with twenty-two new lodges founded in Cyrenaica, apart from
those in Tripolitania and Central Africa: In fact, so influential did
the Order become that not only the Turkish Government but also the
leading European Powers of the time sought its friendship and support.

Sultan Abd al-Aziz (1278/1861-1293/1876) issued a *firman* confirming
the privileges granted by the earlier *firman* of Sultan Abd al-Majid
(1273/1856) and further recognized the right of sanctuary within the
confines of the Sanusi lodges.[^30] Yet, in spite of these flattering
advances made by the Ottoman Government towards them the Sanusiyyah
leaders refused to take any part in Turkish political entanglements
abroad.

In 1294/1877, thus, they refused to accede to the Sultan's request that
they should send troops to fight for him in the Russo-Turkish war.
Moreover, in 1301/1883 they denounced the rising of the Mahdi in the
Sudan and refused to give him help in his movement against the British.
The head of the Sanusi Order seems to have taken this attitude as a
matter of principle, particularly in view of what he considered to be
the “false pretensions” of the Sudanese Mahdi.[^31]

In 1304/1886 the Ottoman Sultan sent General Sadiq Pasha to Jaghbub with
presents for Sayyid al-Mahdi (al-Sanusi). Ten years later, Rashid Pasha,
Governor of Cyrenaica, dressed in civilian clothes and unarmed, visited
the Sayyid and paid him homage.[^32]

Sanusi relations with the European Powers were on the whole conducted
with great caution and circumspection. In 1289/1872, Germany
unsuccessfully tried to enlist the support of Sayyid al-Mahdi and to
rouse him to rebel against the French in both North Africa and French
West Africa. In 1299/1881, the Sanusis remained unresponsive to Italian
presents and flattery.

One year later they refused to give support to Arabi Pasha’s rising in
Egypt, although at the time there were some who thought that Arabi was a
mere tool in the hands of the Sanusis and that he had risen in revolt
under their influence.[^33]

In 1313/1895 Sayyid al-Mahdi moved the seat of the Order to Kufra, a
hitherto insignificant oasis, about one hundred and fifty kilometres
south of Jaghbub. This may have been done to be out of the reach of the
Turkish authorities.[^34] It may also have been instigated a reaction to
the attitude of Sultan Abd al-Hamid II who, it is alleged, arranged with
the ‘ulama’ of al-Azhar University in Cairo to issue a *fatwa*
discrediting the Order by condemning Sanusi practices which they
considered to be innovations in the rules of prayer.[^35]

Following this transfer of the seat of the Order to Kufra, the affairs
of the Order continued to prosper. Economically, the Order profited
greatly from customs dues as well as from directly engaging in trade.
Kufra now became a relatively important commercial centre through which
caravans were con­stantly passing.[^36] In the political and religious
fields the Order extended its influence to the then independent
Sultanates in the Sahara: Kawar, Tibesti, Borku, Ennedi, Darfur, Wadai,
Kanem, Chad, the Azgar, the Air, and Baghirmi. It also reached the
Sudan.[^37]

In fact, contact with some of these Sultanates had already been made by
the Grand Sanusi shortly after his move to Jaghbub in 1273/1856. But it
was not until Sayyid al-Mahdi’s tenure that the Order began to
infiltrate into the Sahara and the Sudan. This not only brought the
various Sultanates in the area under Sanusi influence and led to the
foundation of new lodges in their territories, but also swelled the
revenues of the Order as a result of improvement in the security of the
desert­ routes and the consequent prosperity of trade activities in the
region.[^38]

This advance of the Sanusiyyah into the Sahara and the Central Sudan
brought the Order face to face with the French, and Franco-Sanusi
relations henceforward became greatly strained. In 1317/1899, therefore,
Sayyid al­-Mahdi moved the seat of the Order from Kufra to Qiru, in
Kanem, in order to organize resistance to the French, to administer the
vast regions recently won by the Order, and to direct the propaganda
activities of the Order in a more effective manner in the region.[^39]

Between 1317/1899 (the date of the Anglo-French Declaration concerning
disputed frontiers in the area) and 1320/1902, a number of armed clashes
took place between the French garrisons and the Sanusi forces in the
area, with results alternating between Sanusi victory and French
ascendancy.[^40]

With the death of Sayyid al-Mahdi at Qiru in the summer of 1320/1902,
however, the Order suffered a great blow and its resistance against the
French began to crumble. Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif, the successor of Sayyid
al-Mahdi­, apprehensive of French advance and of the designs on Africa
harboured by the other leading European Powers, was careful to avoid any
friction with any of these powers.[^41]

Being a well read Shaikh and scholar, he preferred the mosque and
religious instruction to the sword and the field. He, thus, moved the
seat of the Order back to Kufra. It was in fact because of this that the
fortunes of the Order began to suffer. The political, religious, and
economic progress achieved by the Order during Sayyid al-Mahdi's tenure
began now to diminish. In addition, personal rivalries among members of
the Sanusi family, after Sayyid al-Mahdi's death, helped to further
weaken the solidarity and strength of the Order and to halt the
extension of its influence.[^42] By the time the Italian invasion of
Libya began in 1329/1911, the Order was already on the decline.

B: Teachings and Philosophy of the Sanussiyyah Order
----------------------------------------------------

It has already been stated that the main objective of the Sanusiyyah
movement, when it first began to take shape, was to purify the religion
of Islam from the heresies and alien beliefs and practices which had in
the course of centuries crept into it. It was, thus, a puritan and
reformist movement, the chief purpose of which was to restore the
original purity of Islam and to guide the Muslims to a better
understanding of their religion.

It continued to be an internal reformist movement until its founder, the
Grand Sanusi, moved the seat of the Order in 1273/1856 to Jaghbub. It
was at this stage of the development of the Order that it embarked on a
new course, i.e., that of preaching and extending the teachings and
influence of Islam to wider regions. But even in this it did not confine
itself to being a religious and missionary movement.

It soon began to be a political movement, concerning itself essentially
with political matters. Its development from the purely spiritual level
to the political one as well, together with the ground it covered and
the problems it encountered in these two fields, must, therefore, be
discussed at some length.

In its nature the Sanusiyyah Order was a strictly Sufi Order calling for
puritanism and a return to the true tenets and rites of Islam. This it
strove to reach through what it considered the achievement of the purity
of the soul that would ultimately lead to communion with God.

The process of accomplishing this “salvation” is described by the Grand
Sanusi himself in three of his nine books: *al-Salsabil al-Main fi
al-Taraiq al-Arbain* (The Sweet Spring of the Forty Orders), wherein he
describes seven stages through which the soul has to pass in order to
become purified and united with God; *Kitab al-Masail al-Ashr,
al-Musamma Bughyat al-Maqasid fi Khulasat al-­Marasid* (The Book of the
Ten Problems, Called the Purpose of Desires and the Summary of
Intentions), in which he discusses ten of the problems which the Muslims
encounter in their daily prayers), and *Iqad al-Wasnan fi al-Amal bi
al-Hadith wal-Quran* (Awakening the Slumberer through Observance of the
Hadith and the Quran), in which, in an effort to extol the virtue of
following the Prophet's (S) sayings and practices, he deals with the
various ways and means followed by the Muslim ‘ulama’ for understanding
the Hadith.[^43]

But the Sanusiyyah Order differed in many respects from other Sufi
Orders. These other Sufi Orders believed in and encouraged meditation,
liturgical recitations, and the practice of the familiar bodily
exertions (particularly, the rhythmic movements of the body together
with music playing, singing, dancing, drumbeating, and taking out of
processions) which were supposed to enable the Sufi to rid himself of
his physical self and attain spiritual union with God.

In opposition to this, the Sanusiyyah leaders declared themselves in
favour of the rational approach to religion and the reform and guidance
of Muslims.[^44]

This was not only the attitude of the founder of the Sanusiyyah Order
and his immediate successors, but is also that of the present leader of
the Order (Sayyid Idris) who, shortly after his proclamation as the
first king of indepen­dent Libya, issued orders to his followers not to
resort to what he called anti­quated physical practices.[^45]

A basic feature of Sanusi philosophy is its attempt to combine and
reconcile the two methods familiar to Islamic religious thought: that of
the ‘ulama’ who adhere to the Shariah and that of the Sufis. In this he
tried to follow the example of al-Ghazali. But the Grand Sannsi, in
trying to follow the path of the ‘ulama’, admired and was greatly
influenced by ibn Taimiyyah, though he differed with him in his attitude
towards Sufism, for ibn Taimiyyah had evinced open hostility to all Sufi
teachings and methods, while the Grand Sanusi (and his successors)
showed tolerance towards these Orders.

It has already been stated that the Grand Sanusi carefully studied the
teachings of a number of Sufi Orders (all of which were Sunni Orders)
before he decided to establish his own, and that he made it a point to
choose from each of these Orders those principles which he considered
most suited for incorporation into a new Order. His book *al-Salsabil
al-Main* contains an account of the chief Orders which he had studied
including the Muhammadiy­yah; the Siddiqiyyah, the Uwaisiyyah, the
Qadiriyyah, the Rifaiyyah, the Suhrawardiyyah, the Ahmadiyyah, and the
Shadhiliyyah.[^46]

But although he studied all these Orders and was influenced by them, his
own Order was not, as has been sometimes claimed, a mere conglomeration
of them. On the contrary, it was a “consistent and carefully thought out
way of life.”[^47] Nor is his Order a mere offshoot of the Shadhiliyyah
Order.[^48] What he in fact seems to have intended was to bring together
and unite the various Islamic Orders and so, eventually, to unite all
Muslims.[^49]

In its teachings the Sanusiyyah Order did not make an *intrinsically*
new contribution to Islam; it did not introduce any essentially original
principles or ideas. It was only a modern revivalist movement derived
from the Sunni sect, and is in fact considered to be one of the most
orthodox Orders.[^50]

It followed the Maliki school of Muslim thought which was and still is
prevalent in North Africa. The Grand Sanusi placed great emphasis on the
Sunnah which, together with the Quran, he regarded as the basic source
of Islamic Law. Though he also attached a certain degree of importance
to *qiyas* (analogy) and *ijma* (consensus of opinion) as the sources of
law in Islam he considered these to be of secondary importance.[^51]

But the most courageous stand that the Grand Sanusi took in this
connection was his recognition of *ijtihad* (independent reasoning) as a
method for understanding and developing Islam. It was in fact this
doctrine which evoked the hostility of the ‘*ulama’* of the time in
Egypt and the Hijaz and made him stand at variance with them; for many
centuries before, it was considered that the door of *ijtihad* had been
closed, and the ‘*ulama’*, there­fore, held that the advocacy of this
method was likely to lead to innovations in Islam.[^52]

C: Achievements: An Evaluation
------------------------------

The success of the Sanusiyyah Order was spectacular in more ways than
one. The rapid progress that it scored among the tribes of Cyrenaica,
Tri­politania, and the Fezzan, together with the extension of its
influence to other countries, particularly Tunisia, Egypt, the Hijaz,
and Central Africa, has been especially conspicuous in three main
fields.

In the religious field, the movement found ready acceptance wherever it
went. By 1335/1916, when Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif relinquished the
head­ship of the Order in favour of Sayyid Idris, one hundred and
forty-six lodges had been founded in Cyrenaica, Tripolitania, the
Fezzan, Egypt, Arabia, Central Africa, and the Sudan.[^53]

The success of the movement was, at least partly, due as much to the
devotion of its leaders as to the simplicity and originality of its
teachings. Its original purpose, as we have noted earlier in this
chapter, was to reform Islam by combating alien beliefs and practices
that had been creeping into Islam throughout the centuries. This
purpose, which is actually the avowed purpose of all modern Islamic
revivalist movements, was all the easier to realize since it came at a
time when Muslims all over the world began to feel the need for the
rejuvenation and reinvigoration of their faith.

What served to help the Order in this respect was the fact that when it
emerged the Muslims in the countries to which it addressed its call were
in a state of abject poverty and backwardness; they were, indeed,
ignorant of their religion and in dire need for some spiritual
orientation, particularly when Sanusi teachings took as their basis the
true and original tenets and rites of Islam. This, no doubt, made the
Sanusiyyah teachings readily acceptable to these people, since it not
only gave them the spiritual stamina they had needed, but also
*reassurance and confidence in their own values by acknowledging and in
fact reinforcing the true principles and rites of their own religion.*

On the other hand, the poverty, backwardness, and ignorance of the
Muslim peoples at the time must not be carried too far as an explanation
for the rapid progress that the Sanusiyyah Order achieved. For, then,
the success of the Order would (unjustifiably) be attributed rather to
the naïveté of these people than to the rational appreciation on their
part of the intrinsic values of its teachings.

Nor should the Sanusiyyah Order be misunderstood, as it has been by
several writers and thinkers, to be a purely reactionary and fanatical
movement, seeking self-gratification through a negative attitude not
only towards other religions but also towards life in general. The
Sanusiyyah Order is indeed a constructive movement which aims primarily
at intro­ducing a positive element into the *Ummat al-Islam* (the
Islamic community) which it tried to recreate and transform into a
healthy and progressive society.

The methods which it employed to realize this end were peaceful; it did
not advocate violence or aggression and would not agree to incite
rebellion even in territories falling under colonial regimes, unless
provoked to do so by the attitude of these regimes; it professedly and
openly declared that its foremost weapons were “guidance and
persuasion.”[^54]

Considered in this light, the Sanusiyyah Order is far from deserving the
accusations of extreme puritanism and fanaticism which H. Duveyrier[^55]
levelled against it. He asserted that the Sanusiyyah prohibition of
drinking and smoking is a reflection of this fanaticism. He even went to
the extreme of saying that assassinations of Europeans in North and
Central Africa at that time could have been committed by none other than
the Sanusi agents, and even considered that the Sanusiyyah propaganda
was in fact at the root of every misfortune which befell the French
interests.[^56]

Similarly, Professor Arnold J. Toynbee[^57] has accused the Sanusiyyah
of “Zealotism,” that is, “archaism evoked by foreign pressure” seeking,
in self-defence when encountering Western civilization, to take refuge
from the unknown into the familiar. In his opinion when it joins battle
with a stranger who practises superior tactics and employs formidable
new-fangled weapons, it finds itself getting the worst of the encounter,
and, therefore, responds by practising its own traditional art of war
with abnormally scrupulous exactitude.

These and many other similar accusations are as unfounded as they are
misleading; they lack evidence to substantiate their assertions.

This constructive aspect of the Sanasiyyah Order has been manifested by
Sanusi leaders and their teachings in several ways. It will suffice to
mention in this connection that the Order showed a most tolerant
attitude towards other reformist movements as well as towards the cult
of saints which was so com­mon and widespread throughout North
Africa.[^58]

This tolerance may be attributed to the broadmindedness and complacent
disposition of the Sanusi leaders themselves, and the high degree of
learning and accomplishment they had attained. It may also be because
the Sanusiyyah Order itself partook of and was influenced by many Sufi
Orders that had been in existence before it came to flourish.

We have already noted that the founder of the Order him­self had
deliberately studied the tenets and rites of these various Orders and
had chosen the best of each for incorporation into the Order that he was
going to establish in his own name. In any case, as the Sanusiyyah Order
was, *par excellence*, a movement calling for a return to true Islam and
the actual implementation of its principles, it was inevitably natural
and logical that it should show tolerance, which is one of the chief
characteristics of Islam itself, not only towards other Sufi orders and
cults, but also towards other religions and indeed towards humanity as a
whole. Admittedly, the Sanusiyyah Order was a conservative movement, but
the claim that it was reactionary and fanatical is a completely
different thing.

In the political field too the Sanusiyyah Order scored considerable
success. Although starting originally as a purely “religious” movement,
the Order soon found itself entangled in political matters, both
internal and external.

This was inevitable in view of the Grand Sanusi's keen interest in the
welfare of the Muslims in general and his early anxiety about the fate
of the Ottoman Empire as the protector and defender of the faith. The
“political” conditions of the Muslims and their endangered situation,
particularly in the face of the growing threat of European imperialism
in Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, and Morocco, made a deep impression on the
Sanusi leaders, and they, therefore, strove for the political
advancement and liberation of Muslim lands.

In addi­tion, Islam being by its very nature both a code of ethics and a
way of life, not recognizing any real distinction between what are
commonly known as “political” matters and purely “religious” matters, it
was inevitable and indeed natural that any approach by the Sanusiyyah
Order to the religious affairs of Muslims should have also touched upon
their political affairs.

The attitude of the Sanusiyyah Order towards the position of the Ottoman
Sultan as the Caliph of all Muslims is of great interest here and
should, there­fore, be noted. It has already been mentioned that the
Grand Sanusi and his successors wanted to maintain cordial relations
with the Ottoman Sultan, that the Ottoman Government for its part tried
to cultivate friendship with them, and that it was on that basis that
the Ottoman Government accorded its recognition to the Sanusiyyah Order.

What actually happened in this respect is that the Sanusi leaders were
ever ready to support the Ottoman Sultan as the Caliph of all Muslims,
provided that his Government did not in any way encroach upon their
much-cherished autonomy. It was in fact on that basis that they also
accepted the secular authority of the Sultan as the political head of
the Ottoman Empire.

But it is doubtful whether they were profoundly and wholeheartedly in
favour of the Turks as such. However, when the Sanusis saw that they,
equally with the Turks, were being threatened by common foreign enemies,
particularly France and Italy, they hastened to rally around the Sultan.
This, as we shall see later in this chapter, became all the more evident
when Italy proceeded to occupy Libya, thereby provoking the Sanusi
leaders, together with other prominent figures in Libya, to rise on the
side of the Turks and declare a war of jihad against the Italians.

What is of particular interest at this juncture is to note how the
Sanusiyyah Order developed from being a purely spiritual movement into
one also political.

One important factor which helped the Sanusi leaders to score political
influence in Libya was that the Order did not confine itself to purely
preaching activities, but soon grew into a coherent movement with a
common direction and developed into an organization of its own,
identifying itself with the tribal system of the Bedouins of Libya.

The Grand Sanusi and his successors came, thus, to be regarded not only
as holy men who had come to preach, in the way it had been done by
others before them, but also as national leaders who exercised great
political and religious influence and commanded not only the respect and
affection of the tribes but also their allegiance.[^59]

It was actually in the economic and social fields that the Sanusiyyah
Order made its greatest contribution to Libyan life, and it was this
role that helped to make its impact on Libyan life durable and more
conspicuous. Although the Order rallied around it the tribal people of
Cyrenaica, Tripolitania, and the Fezzan, as well as a limited number of
the townsmen of these territories, and although it educated these people
in the matter of their religious duties, its effect on their life proved
to be much more lasting and conspicuous than any other reformist
movement which had influenced the Bedouins of Libya.

As noted earlier in this chapter, the Sanusiyyah Order won much more
than a personal and local following among the Libyan populace; its
founder and his successors were able to establish themselves as leaders
of a national movement which has continued to affect and indeed direct
the destinies of the country up to the present day. The secret of this
lies, not only in the cap­able, devoted, and commanding personality of
the Sanusi leaders themselves, not only in the social, economic, and
political conditions under which the Libyans had been living before the
advent of the Sanusiyyah movement and which made the teachings of the
movement more readily acceptable, but also in the type of organization
which the Sanusi leaders were able to give the country and which aimed
at creating people who were “healthy in body and mind.”[^60]

It has been already noted that it was the avowed purpose of the Sanusi
leaders to associate their movement with the tribes themselves. This is
why the vast majority of the Sanusi lodges were founded in tribal
centres and not in towns, and the distribution of the lodges also
followed tribal divisions.[^61]

The distribution of the lodges was carefully planned by the Sanusi
leaders. They were designed to comprehend the principal tribal
groupings, the more important lodges being built at the centres of
tribal life, while most of the other lodges were placed on important
caravan-routes. Professor E. E. Evans-­Pritchard, while commenting on
the wisdom of the Sanusi leaders for con­structing their lodges on
Graeco-Roman foundations in conformity with a “politico-economic plan,”
remarks that “where the Greek and Romans and Turks found it convenient
or essential to build villages and posts was where the Sanusiyyah
established its lodges.”[^62]

In fact, it was the tribes themselves that established the lodges which
came, thus, to be regarded as tribal institutions. This was usually done
following the grant of permission by the head of the Sanusiyyah Order
each time a lodge was to be established. The head of the Order would,
thus, send the tribe concerned a Shaikh from among his followers at the
seat of the Order. This Shaikh was called the *muqaddam* and acted as a
custodian of the lodge; he was helped in the performance of his duties
by another Shaikh called the *wakil* who was primarily responsible for
the financial and economic affairs of the lodge.[^63]

The lodges were, thus, administered by the principal Shaikhs, each of
whom represented the head of the Order in his particular lodge. The
functions of each of these Shaikhs covered the settlement of disputes
between members of the tribe; leading the tribesmen in *jihad* (the holy
war); looking after security matters in the area covered by the lodge;
acting as intermediary between the tribe and the Turkish administration;
receiving foreigners and offering them hospitality; supervising the
collection of tithe; directing the cultivation of grain and care of
stock; dispatching surplus revenues to the seat of the Order; acting as
Imam on Fridays; and assisting in preaching and teaching.[^64]

Every lodge, small or large, usually contained a mosque, schoolrooms,
guest-rooms, living quarters for teachers and pupils, and houses for the
*Ikhwan* (Brethren - those Shaikhs who accompanied the principal Shaikh
of the lodge to help him run it), clients and servants and their
families. Some of the lodges had small gardens, and the local cemetery
was usually close to the lodge.[^65]

The various tribal sections would donate to the lodge the lands
adjoining it. Often other donations were also made, such as wells,
springs, date palms, flocks, crops, and camels. The total lands of the
Order amounted to 200,000 hectares in Cyrenaica alone, while the
endowments of the Order totaled some 50,000 hectares.[^66] Most of the
work needed at the lodge was usually carried out by the lodge community
itself, though often the tribesmen helped the Shaikh of the lodge in the
cultivation of the lands.

The lands attached to the lodges belonged to the various lodges to which
they were given and not to the Shaikhs of the lodges or even to the
Sanusi leaders themselves. They were considered *waqf* properties, and
the Shaikhs of the lodges were only the legal representatives of the
properties of these lodges. In this way, the revenues of one lodge could
not be used for the maintenance of another lodge.

Even the head of the Order possessed no authority to interfere directly
in the administration of the estates of the lodges. Members of the
Sanusi family and the teachers and administrative officials of the Order
usually lived at Jaghbub and Kufra, and the lodges used to supply them
regularly with gifts of various products, local or imported, such as
skin, wool, grain, butter, honey, meat, rice, tea, sugar, and
cloth.[^67]

In fact, the relations between the seat of the Order and the various
lodges became very strong and regular, particularly during the tenure of
Sayyid al-Mahdi. For this purpose, a postal system was established, and
horses were for the most part used to carry correspondence from the seat
of the Order to the various lodges and vice versa. In this way, Jaghbub
was closely connected with Egypt, Tripolitania, the Fezzan, Wadai, and
the rest of Cyrenaica.[^68]

Later, however, during the life-time of Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif, abuse of
the affairs of the lodges became common; it became now the practice to
earmark the surplus revenues of particular lodges for particular members
of the Sanusi family, and these members came to be regarded as patrons
of the lodges which supplied them their needs and were under their
supervision.[^69]

In addition, although, as stated above, the estates of the lodges did
not belong to the head of the Order or to the Shaikhs of the lodges, the
hereditary system of Shaikhdom soon became an established practice in
many of the lodges. In the early days of the Order, it was the practice
that once the head of the Order sent a Shaikh to found a new lodge and
once that lodge was established, that particular Shaikh was transferred
to another lodge.

Later on it became the practice to leave a Shaikh in charge of a lodge
till his death and then nominate his successor from among his nearest
relatives, with the consent of the tribe and on the advice of the
Shaikhs of the neighbouring lodges. In most cases this happened
following a request by the members of the tribe concerned for the
appointment of the son or brother of the deceased Shaikh as director of
their lodge, upon which the head of the Order sanctioned their
nomination. In course of time the families of these Shaikhs came to
regard themselves as having a hereditary title to their lodges and also
a pre-emptive claim to their administration and to the enjoyment of
their revenues.[^70]

The importance of the Sanusi lodges in the history of Libya and, indeed,
of every other country to which the Sanusiyyah order extended its
influence, does not lie in the religious and missionary field only. It
lies also, and in a particularly conspicuous manner, in the economic and
social progress attained by the Order in these countries.

The lodges were, of course, places of worship and centres for teaching
the principles and rites of Islam. They also served to extend the
influence of Islam into hitherto pagan or semi-pagan lands. But the
lodges were not convents paying no attention to the course of worldly
events and developments, nor were they places for mystical meditation
and exercises.

On the contrary, they were (in addition to being centres for religious
instruction and missionary propaganda) community centres bustling with
great educational, economic, and agricultural activities. The Sanusi
lodges provided the countries in which they were founded with a unique
educational machinery which served to instruct both tribesmen and
townsmen (but more the former) in their language, history, and religion,
as well as to teach them purely secular subjects, including mathematics,
chemistry, agriculture, and the use of weapons.[^71]

The Sanusi leaders are, in fact, known for insisting that their
followers should work hard and avoid accustoming themselves to a lazy
and leisurely life. Agriculture and commerce, thus, progressed, and
Libya in particular experienced a degree of material progress that it
had not known for centuries.

Sanusi influence in Libya, as indeed in the other countries to which the
Sanusiyyah Order addressed itself, was, thus, two-fold: spiritual which
consisted of the religious instruction and the missionary work carried
on in the various territories falling within the orbit of the Order's
activities; and material consisting of the social and economic progress
attained by the Sanusi lodges in these territories.

D: Decline and Recovery
-----------------------

By the turn of the fourteenth/twentieth century the “Sick Man of Europe”
had become, as one might say, so sick that there was very little
prospect of his recovery or improvement. By this time, too, the
importance of the Mediter­ranean, for a long time the centre of
political and economic interests of Europe, had doubly increased,
particularly in view of the opening of the Suez Canal.

The Mediterranean now became the scene of conflict and a bone of
contention among the leading Powers of Europe. Great Britain, France,
Germany, Spain, and Italy were keenly interested, for various motives,
in the welfare of that sea. The race for the acquisition of oversea
territories was now in great progress. As it happened, Italy was left
more or less free to annex Libya.[^72]

By this time the Sanusis had succeeded in establishing in Libya a
position almost independent of the Turkish administration, recognizing
only the *de facto* authority of the Turkish Sultan, which in practice
amounted to no more than a nominal acknowledgment of his already
enfeebled representation in the territory.

At the same time, however, Italy was busy securing the diplo­matic
support of the leading powers of Europe for the occupation of Libya.
Pending the arrival of the right opportunity for her to launch her
offensive against Libya, she had proceeded to penetrate that country
peacefully, par­ticularly in the economic and commercial fields.

By 1326/1908, when the Young Turks came to power, Turco-Italian
relations had reached a critical stage. Italian public opinion was
greatly alarmed at the mistrust in Italian projects shown by the Turkish
administration in Libya. The mood of the Italian official and
semi-official circles was hostile, and it was becoming clearer every day
that Italy was busy trying to provoke Turkey into war over the mastery
of Libya.[^73] Eventually, on September 29, 1911, the Italian Government
proceeded to declare war on Turkey.

The Italians had estimated that the Arab inhabitants of Libya would take
the only course open to them, namely, complete surrender and the
acceptance of the Italian rule. However, as events proved, the Italians
had miscalculated the feelings of the Arabs about the Italian adventure,
for as soon as hostilities began, the Libyans, Cyrenaicans,
Tripolitanians, and Fezzanese hastened to join the Turkish force, rising
as one man in an effort to repulse and drive out the invading gentiles.

In Cyrenaica, the resistance movement was led by Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif,
leader of the Sanusi Order, who was then at Kufra. Immediately on
learning of the Italian invasion, Sayyid Ahmad issued a call to *jihad*.
A large number of tribal chiefs and tribesmen, roused by the call,
hastened to rally around the Sanusi flag. In the Fezzan, the call to
jihad sent out by Sayyid Ahmad met a similarly favourable response. And
in Tripolitania, steps were taken for the co-ordination of Arab
resistance throughout the whole of Libya.

For some time Arab resistance against Italy's invasion continued to be
tough. But Turco-Arab forces were soon compelled to retreat to the
interior. Eventually, the Turks, harassed by a number of complications
at home and abroad and losing hope of any victory over the Italians in
Libya, agreed in October 1912 to sign a peace treaty (Treaty of Ouchy)
with Italy, by which Italy acquired *de facto* control, though not
sovereignty, over Libya, while the Ottoman Sultan reserved for himself a
number of rights which he insisted on exercising in Libya. But shortly
before signing the Treaty, the Sultan issued a *firman* granting the
Libyans self-government, thereby making Libya a semi-independent State.

But the Libyan leaders, including Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif al-Sanusi,
dis­claimed the Treaty of Ouchy and decided to continue the war against
Italy.[^74]

Actually, the Turks wanted to encourage Libyan resistance against the
Italians, and they soon nominated Sayyid Ahmad as the leader of the new
Libyan State.[^75]

The designation of Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif as the leader of the future
Libyan State meant that the unchallenged Sanusi rule in the country now
received final and definite recognition on the part of the Turkish
Government.

Turco-Sanusi relations remained cordial all the time. And Libyan
resistance continued until 1335/1916, when a serious difference of
opinion arose between Sayyid Ahmad and his cousin, Sayyid Idris
al-Sanusi, over the alignments of the Sanusiyyah in the War. Sayyid
Ahmad wanted to join Turkey and Germany against Italy, while Sayyid
Idris, who was known for his affection for the British and who seems to
have been impressed by the understanding reached at the time between the
Arabs and the British Government,[^76] pre­ferred to join Britain
against Turkey and, thus, reach an understanding with the Italians.[^77]

By March 1916 the Turks and Libyans were in retreat. By this time, too,
the differences of opinion between Sayyid Ahmad and Sayyid Idris had
become too great to be in any way bridged.[^78] This was all the more
evident since these differences were of a basic nature and reflected the
difference in outlook and in the basic philosophy with which each of the
two Sayyids looked upon the task of continuing the war against Turkey.

In view of the openly professed colonial and religious considerations
underlying and motivating Italy's invasion of Libya, Sayyid Ahmad
considered the continuation of Libyan resistance to be both a religious
duty and a matter of necessity. On the other hand, Sayyid Idris seems to
have looked upon the Italian occupation of Libya as an inevitable evil,
and thought it was no use continuing the struggle against such a
formidable enemy.

It was, thus, natural that some decisive measure should have been taken
to call a halt to the duel that was going on between the two Sanusi
Sayyids. In this it was Sayyid Idris who took the initiative. He now
wanted to take over the leadership of the Sanusi Order himself. He
considered that leader­ship of the Order had devolved upon Sayyid Ahmad
following the death of Sayyid al-Mahdi (1320/1902) only because he,
Sayyid Idris, as the elder son of Sayyid al-Mahdi, was then too young to
succeed his father.

Now, however, he argued, matters had changed, and he had become old
enough (twenty­ seven) to take over the command. Eventually, Sayyid
Ahmad, looking with grief at this attitude of his cousin and in view of
the failure of his own plans to continue the resistance movement against
Italy, decided to hand over political and military authority to Sayyid
Idris. According to this arrange­ment, a number of leading Sanusis were
to share with the new head the management of Sanusi affairs in Cyrenaica
and the Fezzan. At the same time, Sayyid Ahmad was to remain the
religious head of the Sanusi Order, while Sayyid Idris himself agreed to
designate Sayyid al-Arabi (Sayyid Ahmad's eldest son) as his successor
as the head of that Order.[^79]

Following this, Sayyid Ahmad retired to Jaghbub, but was soon forced to
leave it under British threat to destroy that place and demolish the
tomb of Grand Sanusi. From there he went to the Oases of Aujla and
Marada and then to Jufra, with the intention of proceeding from there to
the Fezzan and, if need be, to the Sudan.

Upon the insistence of Nuri Bey, however, he had to go to Aqaila, some
250 kilometres southwest of Benghazi, in order to continue the struggle
against Italy. There he remained until August 1918, when he left for
Istanbul at the invitation of the Turkish Government. He was received as
a great hero and came to be treated with the utmost courtesy. In
1337/1918, when Wahid al-Din came to the throne of the Ottoman Empire,
the ceremony of “coronation,” which had hitherto been performed by the
head of the Maulawi Dervishes, was carried out by Sayyid Ahmad
al-Sharif. “It was,” remarks Sir Harry Luke, “probably in order to
stimulate sympathy for the Sultan in Islamic circles that [Sayyid Ahmad]
was invited to officiate.”[^80]

In April 1921, the Turkish Parliament nominated him as King of Iraq. He
proved to be a staunch supporter of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk and later
tried to work for the restoration of the *Khilafat* to Istanbul. He went
after­wards to Damascus in order to bring about a reconciliation between
Syria and Turkey, but was forced by the French authorities to leave
Syria in 1343/1924. From there he went to the Hijaz, where he was well
received by King ibn Saud, and remained there until his death at Madinah
in 1352/1933.[^81]

Sayyid Idris took over control of Sanusi affairs at a very critical
time. The Sanusis under the leadership of his predecessor had suffered a
catastrophic defeat at the hands of the British forces in Egypt.
Moreover, a devastat­ing drought had overcome the country in 1333/1915.
It was followed the next year by large swarms of locusts, and the year
after by a general famine and epidemic throughout the country.

Sayyid Idris, therefore, decided (with the approval of Sayyid Ahmad who
was still in Cyrenaica) to enter into negotiations with the British and
Italian authorities with a view to reaching a *modus* *vivendi* with the
latter. This was indeed Sayyid Idris’s long-awaited opportunity for
establishing himself not only as the political leader of the Sanusi
movement, but also as its spiritual head.

However, although an agreement (Akrama Agreement of April 1917) was
reached between Sayyid Idris and the Italians (with the help of the
British) whereby a truce was established, the Italians soon violated the
agreement by insisting on the acquisition of sovereign rights over
Libya, a course to which Sayyid Idris could not agree without meeting
the opposition of the Sanusi leaders.[^82]

Eventually, in 1339/1920, another agreement (Agreement of al-Rajma) was
concluded between Sayyid Idris and the Italians. According to the terms
of this agreement, the Italian Government agreed to grant the Sanusi
Order a limited degree of self-government within specified areas. Sayyid
Idris was designated as the hereditary chief of this “Sanusi Government”
with the title of Amir. The Sanusi lodges were exempt from taxation, and
a parliament was to be set up on the basis of proportional
representation from the oases under the Amir’s jurisdiction.

The Italian Government, moreover, promised to respect Arab lands and
properties including those of the Sanusi lodges. Among other things, the
Amir promised to put an end, within eight months of the signing of the
agreement, to all the Sanusi military camps and other military
forma­tions within his area.[^83]

In the meantime, the Tripolitanian leaders who had been anxious from the
start of the resistance to co-ordinate their policies with those of the
Sanusi leaders in Cyrenaica and the Fezzan, eventually met at Gharyan in
Tripolitania, proclaimed a “Tripolitanian Republic” in 1340/1921, and
decided to invite Sayyid Idris to be its head.[^84]

Following this, in 1341/1922, a Tripolitanian delegation left for
Ajadabiyah, seat of the Sanusiyyah Government since 1339/1920, in order
to lay before and explain to the members of that Govern­ment the
resolutions adopted at the Congress of Gharyan. On November 22, 1922,
Amir Idris formally accepted the Tripolitanian offer.

The Tripolitanian *baiah* to Amir Idris stands as a landmark in the
history of Libya for being particularly one of the most important formal
bases on which Libyan unity has come to be erected in recent times. It
is all the more remark­able since, in spite of the differences which had
earlier existed between the Sanusi leaders and the Tripolitanians, it
made it possible for the latter to accept Sanusi hegemony.

This *baiah*, in fact, proved to be a deadly blow to Italy's prestige
and chances in Libya. It was now obvious that Italy's position in
Tripolitania had become greatly jeopardized.[^85] Even Amir Idris, under
pressure from the Cyrenaican tribes, could not suppress the military
camps and other formations within eight months in accordance with the
Agreement of al-Rajma.

This in fact proved to be of great annoyance and displeasure to the
Italian authorities who were ever-apprehensive of the establishment of a
unified and strong Libya. They always felt that they had come to terms
with the Libyans as a result of the pressure of their own political and
military circumstances.

With the rise of the Fascists and their assumption of power in Italy in
October 1922 matters came to a head. Determined to uphold Italy's name
and prestige in Libya and to reassert the acquisition of Italian
sovereignty over that country, the Fascist regime proceeded to launch a
new offensive on Libya.

On April 21, 1923, the Italian forces occupied Ajadabiyah, the seat of
the Sanusi Government, and three days later the Italian Governor
de­clared the unilateral abrogation of all the agreements concluded
between the Sanusiyyah Order and the Italian Government.[^86]

Libyan resistance was once again weakening. By the end of 1342/1923
resistance in Tripolitania had collapsed, and the Italians had
established themselves firmly in that territory. In December 1922, Amir
Idris fled secretly to Egypt. Before leaving the country, however, he
appointed his younger brother, Sayyid al-Rida, as spiritual head of the
Sanusiyyah Order in Cyrenaica and Umar al-Mukhtar as political and
military leader of the territory.

Cyre­naican resistance continued until the end of 1350/1931, when Umar
al-Mukhtar, at the time eighty years of age, was caught and executed by
the Italians. With this the resistance movement in Cyrenaica completely
collapsed. A new phase in Italy's occupation of the country thus
started. It now became possible for the Italians to carry out their
plans for the colonization of the country and the settlement therein of
Italian farmers and other colonists.

Italy's occupation of Libya lasted until 1362/1943 and formally ended
with the conclusion of the Italian peace treaty in February 1947. During
the thirty years of Italian rule in Libya, Sanusi fortunes suffered
terribly; almost all the Sanusi leaders were forced to leave the country
and live in the neighbour­ing Arab lands, particularly in Egypt.

On December 22, 1930, a Royal Decree was issued, whereby the various
pacts between the Italians and the Sanusis were formally revoked and the
lodges were closed. The sequestration of the estates and goods of these
lodges was ordered. By this Decree all movable and immovable property of
the lodges was confiscated and transferred to the patrimony of the
“Colony” (i.e., Libya). The Decree even expressly forbade any recourse
to the courts against seizures thus made by the Italian ad­ministration.

The Sanusiyyah Order itself was considered by the Italians to be an
illegal association.[^87] By the outbreak of the Second World War the
Order had been finally crippled both as a spiritual and as a political
force. It was not until August 1939 that the Sanusi leaders again began
to recover their lost position as liberators and leaders of Libya. And
it was not until December 1951, following many internal and external
developments, that Libya emerged as an independent and sovereign State
under the political and, to a much lesser extent, spiritual leadership
of the Sanusiyyah Order.

Bibliography
------------

Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif al-Sanusi, *al-Anwar al-Qudsiyyah fi Muqaddamat
al­-Tariqat al-Sanusiyyah*; Evans-Pritchard, *The Sanusi of Cyrenaica*,
Oxford Uni­versity Press, London, 1946; *The Place of Sanusiyya Order in
the History of Islam*; M. Fuad Shukri, *al-Sanusiyyah Din wa Daulah*,
Cairo, 1948; Salim bin Amir, “*al-Sanusiyyun fi Barqa*,” *Majallat Umar
al-Mukhtar*, Benghazi, 1943; Mustafa Bayyu, *Dirdsah fi al-Tarikh
al-Lubiyy*, Alexandria, 1953; D. C. Cumming, *Hand­book of Cyrenaica*,
Part V; A. J. Cachia, *Libya under the Second Ottoman Occupation
(1835-1911),* Goverment Press, Tripoli, 1945; M. Tayyib al-Ashhab,
*al-Mahdi al-Sanusi*, Tripoli, 1952; *Barqa al-Arabiyyah Ams w-al-Yaum*,
Cairo, 1945; M. M. Merene, *Brevi Nozioni d’Islam*, 1927; *Barqa
al-Jadidah*, Benghazi, June 28, 1953; Carlo Giglio, *La Confraternia
Senussita dalle sue Origine ad Oggi*, Padova, 1932; Nicola A. Ziadeh,
*Sanusiyyah: A Study of a Revivalist Movement in Islam*, Leiden, 1958;
H. Duveyrier, *La Confrerie Musulmane de Sidi Mohammed ben Ali es
Senousi et son Domaine geographique en l’Annee 1300 de l’Hegrie-1883 de
notre ere*, Paris, 1884; Louis Rinn, *Marabout et Khouan*, Alger, 1884;
A. J. Toynbee, *Civilization on Trial*, Oxford University Press, London,
1949; Kund Holmboe, *Desert Encounter*, London, 1936; W. C. Askew,
*Europe and Italy’s Acquisition of Libya*, Duke Uni­versity Press, 1942;
Roberto Cantalugo, *L’Italia Musulmana*, Rome, 1929; L. Vil­lari,
*Expansion of Italy*, London, 1930; A. Ravizza, *La Libya nel suo
Ordinamento Giuridico*, Padova, 1931; George Antonius, *The Arab
Awakening*, London, 1946; Sir Henry Luke, *The Old Turkey and the New*,
London, 1955.

[^1]: This is the date given by Sayyid Ahmad al-Sharif al-Sanusi in his
book, al-Anwar al-Qudsiyyah fi Muqaddamat al-Tariqat al-Sanusiyyah, and
also by E. E. Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, Oxford
University Press, London, 1946, p. 11, and by M. Fuad Shukri,
al-Sanusiyyah Din wa Daulah (The Sanusiyyah as a Religion and as a
State), Cairo, 1948, p. 11. Other authorities, however, mention other
dates: 1206/1791, 1207/1792, 1211/1796, and 1218/1803.

[^2]: Salim bin Amir, “al-Sanusiyyun fi Barqa” (The Sanusis in
Cyrenaica), Majallat Umar al-Mukhtar, Benghazi, Vol. I (September 1943),
p. 6. See also Shukri, op. cit., p. 13.

[^3]: Salim bin Amir, op. cit., p. 5.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 12.

[^5]: Ibid., pp. 5-6.

[^6]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 12.

[^7]: Mustafa Bayyu, Dirasah fi al-Tarikh al-Lubiyy (Studies in Libyan
History), Alexandria, 1953, p. 23.

[^8]: Salim bin Amir, op. cit., p. 12.

[^9]: Bayyu, op. cit., p. 24.

[^10]: Salim bin Amir, op. cit., p. 2.

[^11]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 12.

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: Bayyu, op. cit., p. 27.

[^14]: Ibid.

[^15]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 13.

[^16]: Salim bin Amir, op. cit., p. 3.

[^17]: Bayyu, op. cit., pp. 28-35.

[^18]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., pp. 93-98.

[^19]: D. C. Cumming, Handbook of Cyrenaica, Part V, p. 12. See also A.
J. Cachia, Libya under the Second Ottoman Occupation (1835-1911),
Government Press, Tripoli, 1945, pp. 29-42.

[^20]: Salim bin Amir, op. cit., p. 3. See also Evans-Pritchard, op.
cit., p. 14.

[^21]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., pp. 14-16.

[^22]: Bayyu, op. cit., p. 45.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 53.

[^24]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 17.

[^25]: Ibid., pp. 17-18.

[^26]: Ibid., p. 70.

[^27]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 30.

[^28]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 91.

[^29]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 55.

[^30]: A summary of this firman is given by Salim bin Amir, op. cit.,
Vol. II (May), pp. 5-6. The issue of this firman seems to have been
necessary because the Turkish administration appears to have considered
the earlier firman to be covering only the Sanusi lodges in Cyrenaica; a
new firman was to cover the Tripolitanian lodges as well as those to be
established in future by Sayyid al-Mahdi. See M. Tayyib al-Ashhab,
al-Mahdi al-Sanusi, Tripoli, 1952, pp. 149, 157.

[^31]: Shukri, op. cit., pp. 70-73.

[^32]: Cumming, op. cit., p. 22.

[^33]: Ibid. See also Shukri, op, cit., pp. 69-70.

[^34]: See Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 21.

[^35]: Cumming, op. cit., p. 22.

[^36]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 21.

[^37]: Ibid., pp. 21-22.

[^38]: Cumming, op. cit., pp. 23-25.

[^39]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 22.

[^40]: Cumming, op. cit., p. 24. See also Shukri, op. cit., pp. 63-66.

[^41]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 23.

[^42]: Ibid., p. 26.

[^43]: For a brief summary of the contents of these books, consult
Shukri, op. cit., pp. 41-44.

[^44]: See M. M. Merene, Brevi Nozioni d’Islam, 1927, p. 58.

[^45]: See Barqa al-Jadidah, Benghazi, June 28, 1953.

[^46]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 44.

[^47]: Carlo Giglio, La Confraternia Senussita dalle sue Origine ad
Oggi, Padova, 1932, p. 17, cited by Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., p. 13.

[^48]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 44.

[^49]: M. al-Tayyib al-Ashbab, Barqa al-Arabiyyah Ams wal Yaum (Arab
Cyrenaica Yesterday and Today), Cairo, 1945, p. 187.

[^50]: Evans-Pritchard, The Place of the Sanusiya Order in the History
of Islam, p. 13.

[^51]: Nicola A. Ziadeh makes the sweeping statement that the Grand
Sanusi “rejected both ijma (agreement or consensus of opinion) and qiyas
(analogy).” See his book, Sanusiyah: A Study of a Revivalist Movement in
Islam, Leiden, 1958, p. 87. However, this book which actually no more
than a restatement, in some­what varied phraseology, of what other
writers have written before, should be read with more than the usual
caution, particularly in view of the many sweeping generalizations and
the factual errors found in it. But consult Evans-Pritchard, The Place
of the Sanusiya Order in the History of Islam, and also Bayyu, op. cit.,
pp. 38-39.

[^52]: See in this connection Bayyu, op. cit., pp. 38-39.

[^53]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 24-25.

[^54]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 54.

[^55]: H. Duveyrier, La Confrerie Musulmane de Sidi Mohammed ben Ali es
Senousi et son Domaine geographique en l’Annee 1300 de l’Hegrie - 1883
de notre ere, Paris, 1884.

[^56]: See the defence of the Sanusiyyah Order on this point by
Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 6-7. Also in this
connection, see Louis Rinn, Marabout et Khouan, Alger, 1884, passim.

[^57]: Arnold J. Toynbee, Civilization on Trial, Oxford University
Press, London, 1949, pp. 188-89.

[^58]: Evans-Pritchard, op. cit., pp. 8-9.

[^59]: Ibid., pp. 10-11, 84-89.

[^60]: Knud Holmboe, Desert Encounter, London, 1936, p. 275, citing
Sayyid Muhammad Idris al-Sanusi (present King of Libya). See also
Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 10-11.

[^61]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 71-73.

[^62]: Ibid., p. 78.

[^63]: Shukri op. cit., p. 49.

[^64]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, p. 80. See also Shukri,
op. cit., pp. 48-49.

[^65]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 73-74.

[^66]: Ibid., pp. 77-78.

[^67]: Ibid., pp. 76-77.

[^68]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 61.

[^69]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, p. 77.

[^70]: Ibid., p. 80-88.

[^71]: Shukri, op. cit., pp. 58-61.

[^72]: For a detailed account of Europe's, particularly Italy's, designs
over Libya, see W. C. Askew, Europe and Italy's Acquisition of Libya,
Duke University Press,. See also Roberto Cantalugo, L'Italia Musulmana,
Rome, 1929.

[^73]: See on this point L. Villari, Expansion of Italy, London, 1930,
pp. 71-72. See also A. Ravizza, La Libia nel suo Ordinamento Giuridico,
Padova, 1931, p. 7. See further Askew, op. cit., passim.

[^74]: See Shukri, op. cit., pp. 146-48.

[^75]: Ibid., p. 146.

[^76]: Reference is made here to the Husain-McMahon negotiations for
Arab partici­pation in the First World War against Turkey and on the
side of the Allies, in return for British recognition of Arab unity and
independence at the end of the War. Consult on this point George
Antonius, The Arab Awakening, London, 1946, passim.

[^77]: See Shukri, op. cit., p. 165

[^78]: Ibid., pp. 165-82.

[^79]: Consult in this connection the “Memoirs” of Sayyid (King) Idris,
published in Arabic in al-Zaman, Benghazi, January 26, 1955. See also
Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, p. 128, and Shukri, op. cit.,
pp. 186-87.

[^80]: Sir Harry Luke, The Old Turkey and the New, London, 1955, p. 163.

[^81]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 132-33.

[^82]: See ibid., pp. 135-46. See also Shukri, op. cit., pp. 194-201.

[^83]: Evans-Pritchard, The Sanusi of Cyrenaica, pp. 148-49.

[^84]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 254.

[^85]: See Ravizza, op. cit., p. 12.

[^86]: Shukri, op. cit., p. 273.

[^87]: For a brief but able exposition of the legal aspects of Italy's
treatment of the Sanusiyyah Order, including the sequestration of its
estates, see Evans-Pritchard, “Italy and the Sanusiyyah Order in
Cyrenaica,” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies,
University of London, Vol. XI, Part 4, pp. 843-53.


