Chapter 75: Renaissance in Egypt: Muhammad Abduh and His School
===============================================================

A: Life
-------

Nobody has contributed to the renaissance of Muslim thought in modern
Egypt more than Muhammad Abduh. He was a great Egyptian philosopher,
sociologist, and reformer, and is ranked as one of the most remarkable
figures in the modern Muslim world. On his death in 1323/1905 he left
numerous disciples and many works of real interest and inestimable
value. He was, and still is, commonly given the superb title “al-Ustadh
al-Imam” (The Master and Guide); this title alone shows the influence
that he had upon his contemporaries.

A young Egyptian writer, Kamil al-Shinnawi, recently described Abduh’s
life as a “combination of the life of a prophet and that of a hero.”
However, he remained little known: on the one hand, the passion for
factions and schools of thought had for over half a century distorted
his true personality; on the other hand, a superficial knowledge of his
teachings had given rise to erroneous interpretations which everything
in the Master’s writings combined to contradict, as everything in his
life tended to refute.

We know the essential facts of Muhammad Abduh’s life, thanks to a source
which is excellent because authentic. It is a form of autobiography that
the Egyptian philosopher himself composed towards the end of his life,
by way of replies to questions put to him by his disciple, Rashid Rida.
We also possess, written by the hand of the Master, a number of very
interesting documents about his family and his early education.

Muhammad Abduh was the son of an Egyptian farmer. He was born in
1266/1849 at Mahallat Nasr, a little village of Beheira Province, where
his father enjoyed a high reputation as a man of integrity whose growing
prosperity did not mar his altruism and willingness to make sacrifices
for the cause of justice; Abduh’s mother was a gentle soul, respected
for her piety and charity.

He studied first at Tanta, at the Mosque of al-Ahmadi, where he became
so discouraged by the teaching method of his time, with its suppression
of intelligent inquiry, that he would undoubtedly have turned away from
his schooling altogether had it not been for the beneficial influence of
his uncle, Shaikh Darwish, who was able to awaken in his nephew the
feeling and taste for study and meditation.

“I had no one to guide me,” wrote Abduh later, “but Shaikh Darwish, who
first liberated me from the prison of ignorance in opening to me the
doors of knowledge. He broke for me the chains which had bound us when
we repeated blindly all that we were told, and brought me back to true
religion.” Shaikh Darwish remained for Abduh, for the rest of his life,
a spiritual guide and the director of his conscience.

The great event of the youth of Muhammad Abduh was his entry, in
1283/1866, into the University of al-Azhar, the traditional centre of
Islamic studies. However, the young Abduh spent two years there without
deriving much profit from the courses that he attended, which
circumstance was surely due to the altogether antiquated and stale
methods of instruction then employed.

In his book, *The Egyptian Empire under Ismail*, Dr. Muhammad Sabri
observed: “They overloaded the memories of the pupils with a welter of
grammatical knowledge and theological subtleties designed to narrow the
mind and prevent its development.” While at al-Azhar, Abduh went through
an inner crisis; he was then to be seen indulging in ascetic exercises
and even trying to isolate himself and shun the world. But again the
wise counsel of Shaikh Darwish aided him to emerge from this mystical
crisis.

Yet another great personality was to exercise on Abduh a profound
in­fluence, and to show him the road that he had to follow. This was
Jamal al-Din al-Aghfani, already famous as the courageous champion of
religious and political freedom for Oriental peoples. Jamal al-Din, on
arriving in Egypt, drew many disciples around himself, notably Muhammad
Abduh. It was the spiritual direction of Jamal al-Din that made decisive
Abduh’s turning away from ascetic practices in favour of an active life.

Abduh gradually broke away from religious traditionalism and studied
philosophy, mathematics, morals, and politics, all outside the al-Azhar
curriculum. To Jamal al-Din he owed a new vision in the comprehension of
classical Arabic works, and equally a taste for Western works translated
into Arabic, but above all he owed to Jamal al-Din the awakening of
national feeling, the love of liberty, and the idea of a constitutional
regime.

Abduh showed his enthusiasm for Jamal al-Din in his first work, *Risalat
al-Waridat* (1291/1874). At the same time, Abduh actively interested
himself in the political relations between the East and the West, and he
admitted the necessity for a complete modification of the political and
social life of the East. In 1293/1876 he began writing for journals
articles on various subjects of general culture, but he still seemed to
have difficulty in breaking loose from the technique and spirit then
pre­valent in the Azharite circles.

In 1294/1877 Abduh obtained the *al-Alimiyyah* diploma which conferred
upon him the title of *Alim* (learned man in the theological sense) and
the right to teach in the various branches of Islamic science. He first
earned his living by giving private lessons, and then by giving
discourses at al-Azhar on theology, logic, and morals. These courses
were distinguished by a new method that attracted a great number of
students to him.

Having become a teacher, this man of inquisitive mind did not cease to
study and to instruct himself. He applied himself to the general
sciences called “modern” because they did not figure in the programme of
instruction at the Islamic University. In 1296/1879 he was nominated
Professor of History at the college of *Dar al-Ulum* and Professor of
Literature at the School of Languages; he fulfilled his new functions
still continuing his courses at al-Azhar.

At the same time Abduh devoted himself to the journalistic activity
which Jamal al-Din had already recommended. Since its origin, the Arabic
Press has been mainly centred in Egypt. At the beginning of the reign of
the Khedive Tewfik, Abduh was made an editor of “The Official Journal.”
He soon became its chief editor, and, by the impetus given by him, this
publication acquired a new significance. It was in this journal that
there appeared the orientation and effort towards religious and moral
reform that character­ized the work of Muhammad Abduh.

Then occurred the *coup d’etat* of 1296/1879, which precipitated the
fall of the cabinet of Nubar Pasha, and some European ministers, the
first consequence of the nationalist movement that was beginning to
develop. Another, more serious, consequence was the revolt of the
Egyptian army under Urabi against the Turko-Circassian officers; it
developed into a revolution that resulted in the occupation of Egypt by
the British troops in 1300/1882.

After Urabi’s failure, Muhammad Abduh, accused of conspiring with the
revolutionaries, was condemned to three years’ exile. For, although he
had not at first been a partisan of Urabi whom he considered to be the
mouth­piece of purely military ideas, Abduh with the further development
of events, came wholeheartedly to support his cause and became one of
the chief voices of the revolutionist government, fighting energetically
for the liberty and independence of the Egyptian people.

As an exile he first settled in Syria, but not for long; his spiritual
guide, al-Afghani, having returned from India, invited him to join him
in Paris. Abduh accordingly joined Afghani in Paris the following year;
there they founded a society and started *al-Urwat al-Wuthqa* (The
Indissoluble Link), a political weekly given to the cause of
Pan-Islamism and the defence of the Orientals against foreign domination
and internal despotism, and notably against the occupation of Egypt by
the British.

*Al-Urwah* was the first Arabic journal to appear in Europe which was
conscious of such a mission and which defended it energetically and with
eloquence. At the beginning of the summer of 1302/1884, Muhammad Abduh
left for England as a representative of his Review. His friend Wilfried
Blunt gave him his valuable assistance in winning over public opinion
through the English Press and making it interested in the Egyptian
cause. He introduced Abduh to a large number of English politicians;
among others to Randolph Churchill, the father of Winston Churchill.

Muhammad Abduh next returned to Paris to resume his work. But the
banning of his Review in Islamic countries, as a result of English
machinations, made his field of activity restricted, and the Review
ceased to appear. In its short life this Review had a decisive influence
on the development of nationalism and Pan-Islamism, but, in fact, it
little suited the spirit of the Egyptian Shaikh, which leaned more
towards education and gradual reform.

In 1303/1885, Muhammad Abduh returned to Beirut. There he was appointed
teacher in the Sultaniyyah School, and gave his famous course of
lectures on theology which served as a basis for his future treatise on
Monotheism (*Risalat al-Tauhid*). His activity as a professor was
particularly fruitful, but he did not occupy himself with instruction
alone; he founded, with the aid of some others, an association which had
one of its aims the bringing together of the three great religions:
Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. But it seems that his activity in this
connection having been interpreted in Turkey in a political sense
unfavourable to the interests of the Ottoman Caliphate, Sultan Abd
al­-Hamid moved against it and took steps to persuade the British
Government to ask the Egyptian Shaikh to leave Syria as soon as
possible.

It is thus that Muhammad Abduh returned to Egypt in 1306/1888. He was
appointed, a Judge in the Native Tribunal and then a Counsellor at the
Court of Appeal. As a magistrate he was well known for his sense of
equity and independence of his spirit that were never encumbered with
the forms of judicial procedure. He now concentrated his efforts on the
awakening of Egypt by the spreading of knowledge, by moral education,
and by the adaptation of the traditional social institutions to the
demands of contempo­rary life.

Nominated as a member of the Administrative Council of al-Azhar
University, Muhammad Abduh threw himself into an indefatigable activity
in order to renew and raise the material, cultural, and moral standards
of this old Islamic University. The influence of the liberal doctrines
he professed was readily felt. He instituted courses in the secular
sciences such as history, geography, natural history, mathematics, and
philosophy, sciences that had not previously appeared in the curricula
of this University.

Nominated in 1307/1899 as Grand Mufti of Egypt, Muhammad Abduh gave this
religious post a hitherto unknown prestige. It was in this capacity that
his modernizing influence had its far-reaching effects. He himself gave
a course of lectures consisting of commentary on the Quran, a course
animated from beginning to end by a new spirit.

As Grand Mufti, Muhammad Abduh took three religious decisions (*fatawa*)
that clearly showed his tolerance towards other religions. The first of
these authorized the Muslims to receive interest and dividends; the
second authorized them, while living in non-Muslim countries, to eat the
meat of animals slaughtered by non-Muslims; and the third permitted
them, if the occasion arose, to wear clothes other than their
traditional costume.

It is not difficult to imagine why these decisions aroused so many
controversies and even let loose the old Muslim faction and brought down
on the Grand Mufti no small number of calumnies of which the motives
were not purely religious. During the same years, he was made a member
of the Legislative Council.

Muhammad Abduh was one of the founders of the “Islamic Benevolent
Society” which aimed at spreading education among and giving moral and
material aid to the poorer classes. He also founded a “Society for the
Renais­sance of Arabic Books,” i.e., for the publication of the
masterpieces of classical authors.

In another sphere, he worked for the reform of the religious courts
(*mahakim Shariah*); his report on this became well known, and remained
a basis for the reform of the judicial procedure in the personal statute
tribunals. The principal idea developed by Muhammad Abduh in the report
had, as its point of departure, the elementary realization of the
importance to the State of raising the intellectual and moral standard
of future judges by improving their material conditions, and
reorganizing their recruitment on a better basis. The idea of creating a
School for Religious Judges (*al-Qada al-Shari*) was also initiated by
him.

In 1320/1902, Muhammad Abduh was engaged in a controversy with Gabriel
Hanotaux, the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, following the
publication by the latter of an article entitled “Confronting the Muslim
Question.” The Grand Mufti pointed out to the French historian how false
was the idea held in France of Islam.

In another polemic on the philosophy of ibn Rushd, Muhammad Abduh
defended a thesis dear to him, that the fatalism with which Islam is
reproached is only a distortion of the Muslim religion, a distor­tion
due to the misunderstanding of the very fundamentals of the faith. On
another occasion, an article on ibn Rushd published by the Christian
editor of the review *al-Jamiah* drew a reply from Muhammad Abduh which,
published at first in a series of articles in the *Manar*, then
collected in one volume, *al-Islam wal-Nasraniyyah* (Islam and
Christianity), constitutes a piece of the modern Muslim apologetics of
great value.

The Grand Mufti was a man of frank and keen intelligence, holding
precise ideas on men’s conduct and their ability to evaluate events. He
was conversant with the principal works of European thinkers, and
enriched his wide scholar­ship with many journeys through Africa and
Europe. He often said that he needed these journeys “to renew himself.”
He had numerous Occidental and Oriental friends, and entered into
correspondence with European thinkers, among whom were W. S. Blunt,
Gustave le Bon, Herbert Spencer, and Tolstoy.

It must be remembered that Muhammad Abduh played an important part in
the creation of the Egyptian University, a part too often forgotten in
Egypt.

Loyalty, courage, generosity, love of good, and patriotism were the
principal traits of his character. In the prison to which he was
condemned for his liberal ideas and enlightened support during the
Urabist revolution, Abduh wrote a letter which, in spite of the
defection of certain of his friends who, under threats, had come to
denounce him before the English and, thus, to betray his confidence,
shows him a magnanimous and loyal associate. He was courageous in
opposing the Khedive on an occasion when the favourit­ism of the latter
proposed the awarding of an Azharite distinction to a special Imam
unworthy of it.

His gentle quality of kindness found expression in more ways than mere
words after the fire of Mit-Ghamr, when he applied himself to the task,
a thankless one in Egypt, of exhorting the rich to make donations to the
victims of the disaster. After a tour of Egyptian towns and villages,
sparing neither time nor effort, Muhammad Abduh succeeded in obtaining
the sum of twelve thousand pounds. It is also known that the Mufti
distributed his own *waqf* salary among the needy families.

Abduh possessed in his character and conduct many of the mystical traits
that he had acquired in the early stages of his education. But it was
due to the influence of Jamal al-Din that he developed within him that
happy balance between an altogether inner mysticism and an overwhelming
need for action.

Muhammad Abduh died on 11th July 1905, in the midst of his work, without
having had yet accomplished all his projects of reform. The Egyptian
people and Government took the funeral of the Grand Mufti as an occasion
of public mourning. He was buried in the cemetery of al-Afifi at Cairo
and on his tomb was engraved the famous verse of an Arab poet:

For greatness we have made a resting-place
And we have interred together religion and the world.

B: His Philosophy
-----------------

In his philosophy, Muhammad Abduh soon emerged from the Azharite
scholastic position and developed pragmatic and humanistic views that
made his influence felt and pointed the way to reforms. He was well
aware that philosophical reflection cannot always remain speculative or
contempla­tive. To endow our existence with complete consciousness and
full experience, it must engage us in the activities of the world,
command us to take all our responsibilities, and urge us not to seek a
form of refuge in solitary meditation.

Abduh’s views even on the science of logic seem to characterize his
whole belief in the dynamic relation between true thinking and good
action. In his view, logic and the general scientific temper of thought
must assume a highly moral character and role. In the beginning of the
year 1283/1866, when the young Abduh entered the old theological
University of al-Azhar, Islamic philosophy was in so backward a state
that it was almost a negation of philosophy.

The only manuals of logic and Muslim rationalistic theology (*Kalam*),
which were tolerated at the University, were those that had been
composed in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries of the Christian
era. It was al-Afghani who, the first in the whole Islamic Orient, drew
the attention of the young people around him to the necessity of
studying classics and, in a general way, promoted the renaissance of
Muslim philosophy, encouraging the direct study of original works rather
than the customary study of the rather sterile commentaries and
super-commentaries.

Al-Afghani himself turned to the study of ibn Sina, the ever-fresh
source of inspiration unspoilt by centuries of neglect. According to
Muhammad Abduh, this standpoint of al-Afghani was received by the
orthodox and by the Azharites as a heresy of an un­precendented
audacity. From 1292/1875 on, the young Abduh applied himself to the
study of treatises on classical logic, of which many were then only in
manuscript form.

Two years later, while still a student at al-Azhar, he wrote an article
in which he resolutely defended logic and *Kalam* in view of certain
prejudices and certain popular and even Azharite suspicions about them.
He pointed out that faith could be strengthened, not weakened, by
rational proofs, and that a sound appreciation of logic, the art and
science of thinking, was essential to Muslim theology.

During his exile in Beirut, Abduh discovered al-Sawi’s treatise on
logic, *al-Basair al-Nasiriyyah*, which he later edited with scholarly
annotations and enlightening clarifications. His course of lectures on
logic at al-Azhar was marked by the same thoroughness and erudition.
Muhammad Abduh’s own system of logic showed the influences of Aristotle,
ibn Rushd, ibn Sina, and, to a lesser degree, of certain Western,
particularly French, authors.

He regarded logic not as an academic exercise, but as a positive
instrument for true and constructive thinking that led to action. This
view rendered the pursuit of logic obligatory for one’s moral life.
Shaikh Abduh, however, repeatedly expressed the opinion that, to
liberate oneself from vulgar prejudices and idols, to be in a position
to cultivate a science, in brief to be able usefully to seek the true
and the good, force of the intellect in itself is insufficient.
Necessary also, and above all, are moral quali­ties, principally
courage, the will for action, integrity, and the love of truth.

Hence Muhammad Abduh constantly upheld the principle of *ijtihad*, that
is, the right of unfettered personal inquiry, of thought free from all
fetters, and did not cease to fight against *taqlid*, that is, the
passive acceptance of dogmas from religious authorities without asking
for proof, and without thinking of the rights of free examination and
personal initiative.

In fact, he stigmatized the imitator (*muqallid*) to the point of
likening him at times to an infidel. The gates of *ijtihad*, said Abduh,
far from being closed once for all, as some wrongly pretend, are wide
open to meet all the questions raised by the new conditions of life; the
last word must no longer belong to the old works or to the authorities
long dead, but must be the result of the modernist spirit and the due
consideration of the common good. He argued that Islam is essentially a
rationalistic religion. “Islam,” he said, “has liberated man from the
authority of the clergy; it has brought him face to face with God and
has taught him not to rely on any intercession.”

His philosophy of the history of religion envisages this rationalism in
Islam as a final stage in religious evolution. His view shows the
progressive stages by which humanity has arrived at last at the perfect
religion, which is Islam. The earlier religions imposed stringent and
rigorous rules and, appealing to the senses, pointed to the impressive
miracles wrought by the prophets.

When human society had passed this primitive stage, there came the
religion which appealed to the heart and spoke the language of
sentiments and inner mysteries; but though it preached to its followers
rigorous asceticism and contempt for this world, the people did not take
long to corrupt its teaching to accommodate it to human needs and
interests.

Finally, appealing to the intellectually mature, came the religion of
Islam. Addressing itself to reason that it associated with feeling and
sense, Islam reconciled reason with nature, and, recognizing neither
master nor mysteries, freed minds from the tutelage of authority and
brought man through his highest faculties closer to God.

The Egyptian philosopher approaches the problem of free will in a
clearly pragmatic way. He is opposed to abstract speculation no less
than William James or F. C. S. Schiller. He considers that the theory of
predestination “results in negation pure and simple of the divine Law,
in the suppression of all responsibility, and in the rejection of the
evidence of reason which is the basis of faith.”

Abduh, in the second phase of his intellectual activity, pre­occupied
more with ethics than with pure metaphysics, rapidly passes over a
thousand and one controversies raised by the question of free-will
which, in Islam, has set the partisans of free-will (the Qadarites) and
the partisans of predestination (the Jabrites) one against the other.

The system of the Asharites (the dogmatic theologians of Islam) was
based on the idea of necessity. Follow­ing their metaphysics, if one
should admit this necessity, then no morality would be possible. As Kant
has said, there is no morality without freedom. Faced with this
contradiction between ethics and ontology, Abduh, as a pragmatist, opts
for the former.

Concerning divine prescience, Muhammad Abduh says: “The omniscience of
God embraces that which man will accomplish by his own will; it embraces
the fact that at such a moment a man will do such an action which will
be good and for which he will be rewarded, or such another which will be
bad and for which he will be punished.” According to Abduh, this
prescience does not prevent man from being free to a certain extent:
“Nothing in the omniscience of God prevents man from choosing, and
acting according to his choice.”

From the point of view of reason, the foreknowledge of what will happen
can be regarded neither a curb nor an impulsion for action. To establish
and define the freedom of man, Muham­mad Abduh, like Descartes, almost
always appeals to the testimony of con­science. Again, he points to the
testimony of common sense that in everyday life attributes to each
person the actions he performs.

Further, the divine commandments would have no meaning without free
will. “All the commandments in religious Law are based on the principle
that man is responsible for what he does. If man’s actions were not his
own, the notion of responsibility would be annihilated and it would then
be unreasonable to demand of the individual what exceeds his power or to
hold him responsible for what is not the effect of his will.”

But there is no question of inferring complete freedom from this:
freedom is absolute for God, but limited for men. “Appeal to your
experience,” says Muhammad Abduh. “It is a well­ known experience to
‘will’ to accomplish something and yet not to be able to do it, or even
to realize the existence of a greater power which directs the world.”
The Islamic term *qada*, taken by the Jabrites to mean predestination,
is interpreted by Abduh as the principle of causation in nature, which
makes ample allowance for freedom of will.

In other words, “necessity” applies to the natural and even to the
social sciences, but leaves a wide range within which the human will,
guided by reason, may act. According to his inter­pretation, Islam is
not, as has often been supposed, a religion of “fatalism.” On the
contrary, “Islam,” says Abduh, “is the negation of fatalism. In
forty-six verses of the Quran free will is maintained explicitly and
unequivocally. If there are other verses liable to suggest the idea of
constraint, these are only to establish the general divine laws of the
universe.”

He points out that the Prophet and his Companions were men of action
whose lives expressed an unshakable faith in the freedom of the human
will. In fact, “fatalism” associated with Islam was a later distortion
which well served those rulers whose interest lay in exploiting the
Muslim peoples. The evil effects of that enervating doctrine were only
too visible in Abduh’s own time, and supplied a living argument in
favour of his pragmatic appeal to return to the vitality and freedom of
the original faith.

Consistent with his attitude to free will is Muhammad Abduh’s theory of
good and evil. In his *Risalat al-Tauhid* he devotes several pages to
this problem and its relation to dogma and reason. First, he tries to
establish a sort of parallelism between the moral and aesthetic points
of view, a parallelism which seems to be imposed by the Arabic language
in which the term *husn* denotes both “beauty” and “good,” and *qubh*,
both “ugliness” and “evil.” He deals with beauty, first in the sensible
realm, and then in that of the intelli­gible, and in this latter respect
compares beauty as conceived in the different domains of art, science,
and morals.

This parallelism of values is established by Abduh, as by the Muslim
rationalists (the Mutazilah), in a way which is now familiar to us,
thanks to the teaching of Andre Lalande and to the writings of F. C. S.
Schiller and also of so many other contemporary philoso­phers. “It is
our conscience,” says Abduh, “which provides us with the principle by
which we distinguish between beautiful and ugly things.” Individual
tastes differ, but humanity nevertheless has a sort of general
criterion, an innate sense of beauty and harmony.

Muhammad Abduh established a third parallelism between beings
(*al-akwan*) and human actions (*al-afal*): “The impression made on our
soul by these actions is analogous to that made on it by objects and
beings.” Then Abduh seems to use the term *husn* (good) in the three
fundamental senses of the Muslim theologians (*Mutakallimin*), giving,
in addition, a finer and more psychological analysis.

First, good is *perfection*, evil imperfection, whether it is found in
the moral or in the intellectual order; secondly, good equally
designates a relationship of *fitness* (*mulaamah*), in which two
subdivisions must be made: of fitness to our nature, meaning the
*agreeable*, a distinction hardly differing from that made by the
superior animals, and of fitness for the ends which reason pursues,
meaning the *useful* in a wide sense, which prevails over the agreeable
as one rises in the hierarchy of beings, and is directed by utility,
whether for oneself or for society, taking precedence over agreeableness
even if it involves temporary revulsion or pain; thirdly, the good
comprises the *praiseworthy*, the evil the blameworthy.

The Asharites and the Mutazilites recognized that the good in the first
two senses is perceived by reason, but it is with regard to the third
sense that disagreement between the two groups of the Mutakallimin
arises. According to the Asharite theologians, *husn* and *qubh*,
neither by their essence nor by the qualities inherent in the things,
are such as should make them appear good or evil, beautiful or ugly.

Quite on the contrary, it is the religious Law, the divine decree, which
confers on actions their character of being good or evil which we
recognize in them. A reversal of values thus remains conceivable, if the
will of the divine legislator (*al-Shari*) is pleased to reverse the
order and criterion of his judgments and to arrange that good shall
become evil and vice versa, as it happens, for example, in the
abrogation (*naskh*) of a prohibition (*hurmah*) to make it an
obligation (*wujub*).

And so, in the Asharite doctrine, the divine decree, envisaged in its
absolute character, appears to conscience something so arbitrary that it
could easily be confused with implacable fate. We consequently
understand why the moralist that Muhammad Abduh was could not subscribe
to a thesis of which the consequences seemed to him to be irremediably
compromising the freedom that he had so strongly defended.

It is, thus, deliberately but without ever departing from his customary
good sense that Muhammad Abduh ranges himself, on this point, on the
side of the Mutazilah, of al-Farabi, and of ibn Rushd, who were
certainly aware of a similar difficulty. All of them perceived that the
distinction between good and evil was natural and that it was perceived
by our common sense. Abduh adds that man finds this distinction by
conscience itself.

The sense and natural reason of man are capable of making this
distinction in every instance without awaiting the decision of an
authority or guidance of revelation. This can be realized from
observation of the way in which very young children grasp the meaning of
the religious Law, or from the evidence of the history of primitive
societies.

The distinction between good and evil is thus, according to Abduh, made
by reason without the aid of dogma. Once the principle has been stated,
Abduh is not afraid to draw conclusions from it. If, therefore, he says,
a person arrives, solely by reasoning, at the affirmation of the
existence of God and His attributes, if he deduces from this rationally
acquired knowledge the idea of the immortality of the soul and the joys
or torments it may have in the other life, briefly, if a thinker, basing
his arguments solely on reason, arrives at the discovery or construction
of a completely natural morality, nothing can prevent him from putting
forward rules which would be as valid as the rules imposed by dogma.

And Abduh manifestly considers that reason can take him a long way on
this path. “Natural morality,” he says, “is not only possible in theory,
but it has been applied by certain individuals of the *elite*.”
Unfortunately, not all humanity is constituted of sages. Man is not a
simple creature, and his needs are not as limited as those of animals.
Moreover, humanity does not always allow itself to be guided by reason
alone; there are other faculties, other factors which exert an influence
no less great on the conduct and judgments of men; from them comes the
possibility of error and evil; and, besides, reason alone, with rare
exceptions, is not suffi­cient to lead to happiness.

To attain this happiness, most men need a surer guide, a prophet. On the
great mass of humanity is, thus, imposed religious morality of which the
need is demonstrated by the history of human society. It is thus that
revelation has been introduced into morality. Religious morality,
abstracting from it the certitude with which it is presented because of
its having a divine source, does not fundamentally constitute a teaching
entirely different from that of natural morality.

“The sacred Law,” writes Muhammad Abduh in his *Risalat al-Tauhid*,
“came simply to show us what existed in reality; it was not this Law
which created either the good or the evil.... At the same time as the
sacred Law imposes certain beliefs on us, it makes their beauty
accessible to reason.”

The question which has raised many contro­versies among Muslim
philosophers, that of the *elite* (*al-khassah*) and the common man
(*al-kaffah*), seems to be settled by Muhammad Abduh in the same manner
as was done by ibn Rushd by differentiating between two kinds of
knowledge, one that of the philosopher and the other that of the common
believer.

“Prophecy,” says Abduh, “indicates to the elite how they may rise above
the common level, but it makes obligatory only that which is accessible
to all.” Nevertheless, the Egyptian philosopher is convinced that no
man, whoever he may be, can do without the natural gift, the instinctive
feeling, we have for good and evil. There are certain principles of good
on which all human beings are agreed, but this does not mean that a
thing is good because God has commanded it; on the contrary, God has
commanded it because it is good. To use the Kantian terminology, in the
judgment of good and evil it is reason which gives us the categorical
imperative.

If, in this theory of good, Abduh speaks so insistently of the essential
role of reason, it is because in his eyes such an attitude entails
important practical consequences in the moral and social orders. By this
decision in favour of the renaissance of Mutazilite rationalism, the
Egyptian reformer undoubtedly hoped to contribute to the restoration in
the Muslim world of the principle of *ijtihad* and of the freedom of
research on every subject.

It is thus, he thought, that the *fuqaha* (the Muslim jurists), for
example, would come to treat the religious Law with greater independence
and personal initiative, so that when they come to determine the licit
and the illicit, to put forward prescriptions and prohibitions, they
would be able to judge the spirit of the Law according to reason and not
stop as they did in the past at the letter; and rather than restrict
themselves to the usage of the single principle of arguing by analogy
(*qiyas*), they would be able to examine new facts liberally and to
apply to them solutions which would be more suited to the spirit and
exigencies of the modern age.

In brief, by this rational­ism, Abduh hoped to realize the ideal of
emancipating minds from routine, imitation, and intellectual stagnation
that had marked the past few centuries of Islam.

As good and evil have a social significance, Muhammad Abduh was drawn at
an early stage towards the study of human society. Muhammad Sabri, one
of the historians of modern Egypt, speaks of Muhammad Abduh as “the
greatest Egyptian reformer and sociologist” who “possessed to the
highest point the sense of evolution.”

In 1295/1878, Abduh gave at the college of *Dar al-Ulum*, a course of
lectures on the “Prolegomena” of ibn Khaldun, which was as remarkable
for its method and novelty as for the wealth of its ideas. These
lectures probably served as the basis of a work that Muhammad Abduh,
according to Rashid Rida, wrote in the same year, namely, “The
Philosophy of Society and History.

“As the manuscript of this last of Abduh’s work was unfortunately lost
during the events of 1296/1879, we are obliged, in order to learn about
the sociological theory of Muhammad Abduh, to have recourse to the more
or less detailed accounts contained in his various writings. He appears
to share the ideas of ibn Khaldun, the great Muslim sociologist and the
precursor of Auguste Comte.

Like ibn Khaldun, Abduh conceives history as a veritable science, and it
is for him a discipline indispensable to philosophical studies. His
evolutionary approach is evident in his *Risalat al-Tauhid* and his
commentary on the Quranic verse: “Men form a single nation.”

According to his conception of history, humanity is led by God
progressively to realize a certain world-view. Abduh perhaps also
belongs to that class of thinkers who see in history a sort of morality
in action that must be studied by statesmen and venerated by the people.
He is strongly aware of man’s natural and necessary orientation towards
social integration, a physical, intellectual, and moral need which makes
it difficult for men to live in this world without feeling reciprocal
sympathies and without giving one another mutual aid.

Conscious of this need for solidarity, Abduh, in his commentary on the
Quran, condemns the indifferent state of mind of certain members of the
social group towards others, an attitude which, in his opinion, must
lead to the dissolution of social ties. But social solidarity for
Muhammad Abduh is not something purely speculative.

The Egyptian sociologist worked all his life for the common good and
always set an example of active co-operation, as a result of which he
realized numerous social ends. In societies like ours, this sentiment of
solidarity is not perfect. Abduh hopes that it is possible to lead minds
to union and agreement by resorting to a new moral education, more
effective than the laws imposed by the State.

“Union,” he says in an introductory article, “is the fruit of the tree
of virtue.” No morality is possible without union and without love. The
new education must, therefore, be essentially altruistic. But this
education must begin with the family. “We hope,” he says, “to give our
daughters an education worthy of those who will be called on to take
responsibilities equal to those of men.” And again, “It is an
unpardonable crime to leave women in a state of ignorance and
mediocrity.”

Besides, thanks to his experience as a judge, Muhammad Abduh ascertains
that seventy-five per cent of lawsuits are those between relatives.
Their causes generally are feelings of hatred and antipathy existing
between members of the same family, feelings that, according to him,
must be attributed to the lack of social instruction and education in
social matters. The same remarks can be ex­tended to a wider society.
God, in His mercy, has sent men messengers (*rusul*), who are to the
human race what intelligence is to the individual.

To Abduh, the evolution of human society has known three stages. The
first stage is the age of the senses, when preoccupations of men
scarcely rise above physical cares and their beliefs are animistic. The
second stage is the age of prophecy, in which men have already been
prepared by the experience of the preceding age to gain some
understanding of the laws of nature and of the constitution of society.
Corresponding to these stages, the first step in the education of
society is the experience that it progressively acquires, and the second
is the teaching of the prophets who serve as guides to society and adapt
their missions to its conditions.

Christ, for example, could accomplish his mission only in the epoch in
which he lived, an epoch in which victims of violence and cruelty cried
out for mercy and love. Muhammad (S) brought a vital and unifying
message to revive men in an epoch of lethargy and of evasion of real
spiritual issues in futile quibbling. The third stage, which is still
with us, brings the era of error.

As we become distant from the prophets, hearts become hardened and
passions predominate; society moves away from sound reasoning and moral
principles; theologians falsify the divine teaching and use sacred texts
in such a way that religion loses all influence on the souls of men;
politics becomes mingled with religion; and discord and
misunder­standing reign supreme resulting in error and war.

Muhammad Abduh does not, however, stop at this pessimistic note. He
thinks the solution to lie in the awakening of a sort of universal
conscience and thereby in the discovery of the right path that society
must follow. Reason and morality are essential to this end.

Muhammad Abduh bases this optimism on a general view of humanity, very
close to that of Socrates and the Stoics of antiquity, and to that of
Rousseau in modern times. He believes that man is not intentionally
wicked, and that he has a nature inclined towards good and love for
peace. How can it be otherwise, he says, when God has given him a nature
superior to that of the animals and “has endowed him with reason by
which he has made himself master of the terrestrial world and has been
able to have glimpses of the secret of the celestial world?”

Then God has not made the evil more con­genial to our souls than the
good. The good is so innate in the nature of man that we need only a
simple piece of advice or a reminder to realize this good in action. It
is thus that “the light which God sends to men through the mediacy of
the prophets demands no effort to fix it in their souls and hearts, but
it is a reminder to those who are not conscious of what God has already
put in their nature.”

To affirm this instinct for good in man, Muhammad Abduh goes so far as
to profess the human universalism of the Stoics, a universalism which
tends to establish a community between men, in spite of the diversity of
countries, religions, languages, and races; for, he says, they are all
equal by their reason and their origin. This explains why men tend to
associate with one another and to unite and live in harmony. If we
regard men thus, we shall see that all humanity is like a single family
living on the surface of the same earth and linked by the same morals,
relationships, and habits.

“This state of affairs has so influenced the majority of reasonable men
that they have tended to serve humanity without attaching themselves
fanatically to one race, or one religion, or one doctrine.” If humanity
conducted itself by following its nature, and in recalling the good that
is innate in it, it would possess the social virtues such as strengthen
in people’s minds the conscious­ness of their original identity, which
consciousness would inculcate in them the spirit of concord, sympathy,
and peace. Muhammad Abduh even declared in *al-Urwah* in 1302/1884 that
virtues in the human race are common; they preserve human society and
protect it from dissolution.

Nearly all the biographers of Muhammad Abduh have pointed out that the
principal task of his life was the religious reform of Islamic society.
This opinion is right to a certain extent. But if we study the
activities of Muhammad Abduh carefully and if we consider the import of
his teaching, we shall perceive that there are, above all, reasons of
ethical order, which explain the basic attitudes of the Egyptian
reformer.

More than one theological or philo­sophical problem is, for him,
dominated by moral considerations, and his every effort tends to moral
action. If he fights against certain manners and customs and certain
popular religious beliefs, if he denounces injustice and social and
political abuses, if he strives to modify the teaching methods of
al-Azhar, it is always in order to bring about a moral reform in Muslim
society.

We can safely say that the movement of religious reform with which
Abduh’s name is associated in the Muslim world was only, in the mind of
the reformer, a means for the realization of an end, which was moral
reform. The Grand Mufti said it expressly: “The aim of religious reform
is to direct the belief of the Muslims in such a way as to make them
better morally and also to improve their social condition. To set
religious beliefs right, to put an end to errors, conse­quent upon
misunderstanding religious texts, so well that, once the beliefs are
fortified, actions will be more in conformity with morality; such is the
task of the Muslim reformer.”

Religion is thus, for Abduh, the most effective means of realizing this
moral reform. Minds not being mature enough to replace precise dogmas by
abstract principles, it is the religious conceptions that we must begin
to reform. “If the reformer,” he says, “appeals directly to a morality
or to a wisdom deprived of all religious character, be will have to
build a new edifice for which there is neither material nor labour. But
if religion is able to raise the level of morality, give actions a solid
foundation, and urge people to seek happiness by the most appropriate
means, if the adepts in religion are much attached to it, and if finally
one has less difficulty in bringing people back to religion than in
creating something new which they cannot clearly understand, then why
not have recourse to religion and why seek other less effective means?”

The aim of Abduh’s reform is, thus, certainly not, as has been wrongly
believed, the realization of the political unity of the Muslim
countries, and still less the “Holy War” against the non-Muslims. He
expressly refrained from holding pan-Islamic ideas, which he considered
to be chimerical and existing merely in the imagination of certain
dreamers, Europeans and others.

Hence his concentration on moral and educational reform after the
disappearance of *al-Urwat al-Wuthqa*. For him, theory and practice were
always intimately related, and it was only arbitrarily that one could
separate one’s ideas from one’s actions. Abduh was, in fact, a born
moralist, and he wished to act directly on people’s conscience rather
than to isolate himself to construct a more or less coherent theological
system.

Like Plato, Abduh, it seems, con­sidered that only direct contact could
light the flame in others. Abduh was above all a creative force; his
teachings and his actions had a profound moral influence. More than one
theological or philosophical problem was for him dominated by moral
conditions, for example, the problems of the attributes of God,
prophecy, and free-will.

He applied himself early to the work of reform in education, a condition
indispensable in his eyes to the recovery of Islamic morality. He felt
the results obtained by this means to be deeper and surer, even if
slower than those obtained by a revolution, considering that “only
pro­gressive and methodical reforms are able to give the required
results.” The educative and moral aspects of Muhammad Abduh’s reform
explain in fact the profound and lasting influence he has had,
particularly in Egypt and in the entire Muslim world in general.

This predominance of morality appears particularly in his commentary
(*tafsir*) on the Quran. This commentary aims at explaining the Quran as
a scripture containing moral guidance (*al-hidayah*) on which rests
human happiness in this life and the next. The understanding of the
Quran is a duty incumbent on all Muslims without distinction of race or
culture.

As the only question for Muhammad Abduh is to explain the spirit and
general sense of the Quranic verses without keeping too closely to the
letter, he is careful, from the beginning, to discard as unwelcome the
purely philological and grammatical considerations with which a great
number of Quranic commentators have been conversant.

Abduh, moreover, criticizes the attitude of the Arabic authors who, due
to an exaggerated admiration for ancient Arabic poetry, make it the
basis of grammar and then find numerous gram­matical difficulties in the
text of the Qui an. For Abduh, it is necessary, on the contrary, to make
the Quran the criterion for the rules of grammar.

Equally unwelcome to him is the method of pure erudition dear to certain
commentators, which consists in amassing, without any discrimination,
all that may have been said by others about such and such a chapter, or
such and such a verse, or such and such a word. “God,” said Abduh, “will
not ask us, on the Day of Judgment, what people may have said or
understood, but He will ask us if we ourselves have understood His Book
and if we have followed its di­rection.”

For him, then, an exegesis drawn from all sources would very likely
mislead the believers and make them stray away from the true aim of the
Quran that is, above all, the guidance of conduct. The understanding
urged by Abduh is thus that which rises in the depths of a sensitive and
circumspect conscience, and is the fruit of meditation on the Book
itself. The effort of Muhammad Abduh tends to eliminate from his to/sir
all the questions giving rise to differences between the commentators.

And he insisted upon taking the Quran as a whole and not interpreting it
in fragments; only thus may we redis­cover under the apparent diversity
the unity of the original inspiration. Abduh sometimes seems to apply to
the Book the Cartesian rule of evidence. He often advises us to give
credit only to what is related in a clear and explicit manner and never
to abandon a categorical report in favour of a mere hypothetical one,
that is, to rely only on traditions the transmission of which appears to
be free of disagreement or collusion to fabricate.

Abduh is always opposed to the interpretation of the Zahiriyyah and the
anthropomorphists, who explain the religious texts literally and without
recourse to reason. For example, in explaining the *Surah al-Kauthar*,
certain commentators pretended that the Kauthar was the name of a river
in paradise that God had given to the Prophet. According to Abduh, there
is no such thing; the Kauthar here simply means the great gift that God
has conferred on humanity in the sending of prophets.

The condition for the veracity of a religious assertion, he says, is the
fact of including nothing in it that can offend *tanzih*, i.e., the
transcendence of God over creatures. If we come across a text of which
the apparent meaning would imply a certain anthropomorphism, it is
necessary for us to interpret it so as to reject the apparent meaning.

Rationalism, combined with marked pragmatic tendencies, seems to render
the *tafsir* of Muhammad Abduh a justification of the principle
according to which “a religion full of legends and stupid superstitions
cannot live in the same mind with an enlightened reason.” It is, thus,
impossible that things of the former kind may really be found in the
Quran.

Islam is in harmony with enlightened reason; one must, there­fore, make
a sound and right interpretation that takes account only of categorical
proof, or of sure tradition, and not of personal opinions and subjective
impressions. Abduh rejects many of the long stories and anecdotes that a
good number of commentators have been pleased to invent.

And, contrary to the practice of commentators, who sought to specify
precisely the nature of certain places or persons mentioned in the
Quranic text but left rather vague, Abduh observes that his method is to
abstain from going in the details beyond the positive content of the
sacred text, particularly because such efforts of the commentators have
not brought any light to bear on the understanding of the text.

For example, in commenting on verse 58 of Sarah 2, which begins “Enter
this village...,” Abduh does not wish to specify precisely to which
village it refers, but prefers to stress the fact that the children of
Israel received the order to enter various countries with the sentiment
of humility and obedience to the divine order.

It is the same with the verse which follows immediately: “To the unjust
We have brought down torment from heaven,” where Abduh, in accordance
with his method, abstains from determining the nature of the torment;
that, he would have said, has no practical importance. The *tafsir* of
Muhammad Abduh shows a constant concern for affirming the universal
message of the Quran, while always fitting this belief into an
evolutionistic and progressive conception.

The old commentators often had a tendency to interpret certain Quranic
verses by giving them a particular meaning, or relating them to local
events which occurred at the time of the Prophet or before him. It is
thus that some of them pretended that Sarah 102, for example, alluded to
two tribes of the Ansars of Medina who boasted of the large number of
their members, to the extent that one of them, feeling itself inferior
to its rival in the number of those alive, went to visit the tombs of
those who were dead.

For Abduh the verses of this Sarah, like those of so many others, must
not be interpreted in so particularized and narrow a manner; the Quran
is not addressed to an individual or to a group of individuals. On the
contrary, it is to mankind that it is addressed, and it aims at what is
most permanent in the beliefs, customs, and practices of peoples. The
school of Muhammad Abduh starts with the principle that Islam is a
universal religion, suited to all people, to all times, and to all
states of culture.

Thus, one of the important traits of his work on exegesis is its
spiritualism modified by a kind of pragmatism. The *tafsir* of Muhammad
Abduh has largely contributed to the purification of religious belief,
as much among the mass of Muslims as among the *‘ulama’* and
theologians, by freeing the minds of the believers from certain legends
and ideas that are too materialistic and anthropomorphic. His *tafsir*,
as Rashid Rida has put it, tends to offer an interpretation of the Quran
in a spiritual sense conforming to reason.

In religious and social life, Muhammad Abduh takes the position of a
critic and puts on trial the ideas, morals, and customs that he
condemns, whether they are current among the masses or among the
educated men of his time. He reproaches the Muslims for having falsified
the teachings of their religion.

The ‘*ulama*’ and the representatives of Islam in general, he reproaches
either for a rigorous formalism and unhealthy anxiety to observe in the
minutest detail such practical rituals as ablution and fasting, or for
the use of religious knowledge for lucrative ends. Religion, thus,
furnishes them only with some sort of profession.

As for the popular conceptions, they contain, in his eyes, nothing
religious except the name; they are all for the most part survivals of
fatalistic beliefs. Abduh made the liveliest criticism of the *bidah*,
that is, the false innovations introduced into the religious practices
of the Muslims in later times. The ‘*ulama*’ in particular, he said,
were completely indifferent to the superior interests of their country.
Except the commentaries and super commentaries on old texts, which they
understood badly and explained even more badly, they occupied themselves
with nothing.

Ignorant of the needs and aspirations of their time, they lived almost
on the fringe of society. Hence he urged his countrymen to realize their
social responsibility towards their country, instead of waiting till
reform came to them; he further urged them to build up their culture
progressively upon their own institutions rather than blindly imitate
Western ideas and customs in a superficial manner. He wanted a real
reform from within, rather than the outward show thereof.

C: The School of Muhammad Abduh in Egypt
----------------------------------------

In July 1935, on the thirtieth anniversary of the death of Muhammad
Abduh, “The Society of Muslim Youth” of Cairo held a public meeting to
honour the memory of him who had justly been called *al-Ustadh al-Imam*
(The Master and Guide). Testimony of Muhammad Abduh’s former colleagues,
and of his old students, who have now in their turn become masters,
demon­strated the extent of the influence exercised by his thought.

In the beginning of the present century, Muhammad Abduh promoted, in
Egypt, the cause of science, religion, and patriotism. All the noble and
generous sentiments of the Egyptian elite found their source of
inspiration in him. When, in 1318/1900, the younger generation sought a
guide to lead them out of their confusion, they addressed themselves to
him.

One of the characteristic traits of Muhammad Abduh was the profound
influence that he exerted upon the people. The words of M. Bougle about
the philosopher Frederic Hauh (*Les Maitres de la Philosophie
Universitaire en France*, 1938) might equally well have been applied to
Muhammad Abduh: “A fisher of souls..., converter, the least dogmatic of
all, but the most pressing, the most able to change men, the most
capable of preparing and firing young people with the personal effort of
inner renewal.” In his courses of lectures, virtually prolonged
conversations, he seemed to apply himself to an examination of
conscience, revealing a restless soul indignant at hypocrisy, bigotry,
and indolence.

While having thrown himself into teaching and work of reform, Abduh was
yet able to leave for us books which show the development of his thought
and which have perpetuated his name. But in fact the reading of his
works is not in itself sufficient to give one an idea of the profound
influence that he had upon his contemporaries.

There were, in Egypt, many disciples of Muhammad Abduh other than those
in the Azharite circles. It is noteworthy that it is among laymen, and
particularly among those who had received European education, that the
true disciples of Muhammad Abduh are to be found. First, the personality
and the writings of Muhammad Abduh lent valuable support to social,
religious, and philosophical reformers, represented by Qasim Amin,
Rashid Rida, and Mustafa Abd al-Raziq.

Thanks to the authority of the Master's name, wrote Husain Haikal Pasha,
his disciples were able to make the people accept principles that they
had never before recognized. Then Abduh tried to reconcile the
traditional Islamic method of teaching with the new methods borrowed
from the West.

Between these two opposite schools, the modernist and the
traditionalist, there was formed a third school mainly recruited from
the most important writers of our time, all of whom, in different ways,
were disciples of Muhammad Abduh. Egyptian thinkers before Abduh’s time
were in fact not inspired by any well-defined ideal. And there is good
reason to say that Muhammad Abduh gave unity and precision to Egyptian
thought.

Henri Bergson wrote: “One measures the significance of a philosophical
doctrine by the variety of ideas into which it flowers and the
simplicity of the principle into which it is gathered.” This is true of
the doctrine of Muham­mad Abduh which, in spite of the simplicity of its
principle, has led to reform, at least in Egypt, in three different
ways: social, religious, and philosophical.

1. *The Social School: Qasim Amin* - One of the ideas dear to Muhammad
Abduh was that of the instruction and education of Muslim women, with
all that this implies concerning social reform of the conditions and
customs affecting their lives in the Muslim world. True Islam, affirmed
the Grand Mufti, gives woman perfect equality of rights with man. It is
only because the original intention of the Law has been ignored that all
kinds of abuses have crept in to harm the moral and social position of
women in the Muslim world.

Polygamy, for example, although allowed by the Quran, is basically no
more than a concession to certain historical necessities which no longer
exist. In any case this concession, properly understood, is equivalent
to a refusal and a negation, given the practical difficulty in which one
finds oneself the moment one wishes exactly to fulfill the conditions
laid down by the religious Law concerning polygamy.

This shows to those who take the trouble of thinking and of penetrating
into the deeper meaning of the Law that the intention of Islam remains
in favour of the principle of monogamy, and that it justly considers it
to be the most perfect ideal of marriage. The law of inheritance also
testifies to this spirit. It is, thus, important that the social
condition of the woman should be raised without delay and, if necessary,
by appropriate modifications in the actual canonical Law of Islam and by
all possible means providing women with better opportunities of
education and instruction. It is, he considered, an unpardonable crime
to leave Muslim women in ignorance and mediocrity, since they are to
carry the heaviest responsi­bility in national life: the bringing up of
children.

If Abduh was not able to see the realization of the social reforms that
he ardently wished, it was left for one of his colleagues and friends,
Qasim Amin, to distinguish himself by tireless activity in the domain of
the defence of feminism in Egypt.

Like Muhammad Abduh, Qasim Amin was above all opposed to the great mass
of the conservatives to whom every innovator appeared as a heretic. He
showed that Islam, far from degrading woman, as was commonly believed,
does, on the contrary, favour her, and that the responsibility for
placing her at a disadvantage lay, not with Islam, but with the Muslims
of later epochs.

Meditating upon the evils from which Egyptian society suffered, he
perceived that half the nation was gripped by a general paralysis of
social life, a paralysis the cause of which was the ignorance and
mediocrity in which women were kept in the country.

The reform that Qasim Amin wished to introduce in the problems of the
Muslim woman can be summarized under two heads. The first concerns the
manner of treating woman and her education; the second is an appeal to
the Muslim theologians and jurists to become aware of the needs and
exigencies of the modern age and, therefore, cease to cling in the
application of the laws to the advice of one religious authority more
than to that of another; the only valid advice indeed is that which,
while arising from the spirit and essential principles of the Islamic
law, is in conformity with the interests of the nation and with the new
conditions of its evolution.

However, the voice of Qasim Amin, which, during his life, was not well
heard, began after his death to be singularly amplified. It was not long
before women in Egypt took up journalism. Men appeared who took the
reform of women’s position as the basis of every true renaissance. Some
of them produced a journal named *al-Sufur* (The Unveiled), which had as
its aims the preaching of feminism, and insistence on the necessity of
the education and liberation of women, as well as on their equality with
men.

Thus we see, in 1337/1918, the Egyptian women, in some of the
demonstrations, marching before men to vindicate the rights of the
nation. Safiya Zaghlul, the wife of the national leader, was venerated
by all the people, and was called “The Mother of the Egyptians.”

2. *The Religious School: Rashid Rida* - Rashid Rida is considered to be
the interpreter of the religious school of Muhammad Abduh. Of all the
disciples of Muhammad Abduh he exerted himself most to keep the master’s
memory alive by recording his thoughts and the history of his life.

He was born in the village of Qalamoun in Syria. On completing his
Islamic studies according to the method of instruction followed in the
schools of his country, he turned towards religious and literary
studies. He devoted himself, at first, to mysticism, but the review
*al-Urwat al-Wuthqa* of al-Afghani and Abduh exercised great influence
on him and urged him to follow a new path.

In 1315/1897, he migrated to Egypt, moved by the conviction that there
he would be able to serve his religion and his people, an end which
conditions in Syria prevented him from accomplishing. “I decided,” he
said, “to join Jamal al-Din in order that I might perfect myself,
through philosophy and personal effort, to serve the faith.

On the death of al-Afghani, when it became well known that it was the
politics of Abd al-Hamid that ruined him, I felt myself suffocated in
the Ottoman Empire and decided to leave for Egypt because of the liberty
of thought which existed there; what I most hoped to acquire in Egypt
was to profit from the wisdom, the experience, and the spirit of reform
which Muhammad Abduh represented in that country.” Thus wrote Rashid
Rida in his *Tarikh*.

Rashid Rida contacted Muhammad Abduh as soon as he arrived in Cairo. He
followed the Master, he said, like his shadow. In March 1898, he founded
the review *al-Manar* that aimed at arousing the desire for education
and at reforming textbooks and teaching methods, besides denouncing the
innova­tions that had been introduced in religious beliefs and
criticizing customs and practices foreign to the spirit of Islam.

Following the Master, Rashid Rida did not cease to declare that one
could work for effective reform only through the direction of the Book
and the Sunnah which are in harmony with human interests in every
country and at all times. From the moment of the foundation of
*al-Manar* he indefatigably put forth the idea that neither in the
dogmas nor in the rites of Islam is it held that the Muslim should
imitate any particular Imam.

In following the path traced by Muhammad Abduh, Rashid Rida was simply
continuing the liberal modernism of his Egyptian Master. Nevertheless,
because of a reaction against the growing European influence, Rashid
Rida, according to Laoust, “became more and more conservative.”

There are other things in which the disciple departs from the Master’s
path. Muhammad Abduh was always, to quote Lord Cromer (Egypt, 1906), “a
genuine Egyptian patriot.” That is to say, the Master played a role in
the awakening of the Egyptian national spirit, which fact is far from
being con­tested. Rashid Rida for himself was an anti-nationalist, an
ardent defender of pan-Islamism, and he well nigh regarded nationalism
as a principle strange to Islam.

In opposing the development of secular tendencies in Egyptian
lite­rature, in denouncing the heterodoxy of the thesis of Ali Abd
al-Raziq on the Caliphate and that of Taha Husain’s on pre-Islamic
literature, Rashid Rida, without being fully aware of it, departs from
the line of thought of the Master. In any case, the conservative
modernism of Rashid Rida has, at the present time, been superseded by a
secular modernism of Western inspiration conforming to the ideas of
Muhammad Abduh.

3. *The Philosophical School: Mustafa Abd al-Raziq* - Having graduated
from al-Azhar in 1326/1908 at the age of twenty-three, Mustafa Abd
al-Raziq continued his studies in France. He studied first at the
Sorbonne, where, among other courses, he followed that of Emile Drukheim
on sociology; he completed his education at Lyons, at the same time
lecturing on Islamic Law and on Arabic literature at that University.

On his return to Egypt he became Secretary General of al-Azhar
University, and took active part in its evolution along the lines
inspired by Muhammad Abduh. While nominated as inspector of the
religious tribunals he also worked, with the collaboration of Egyptians
and foreigners, for the realization of a popular university and arranged
during the First World War a series of remarkable lectures on cultural
subjects. Shaikh Abd al-Raziq himself gave a valuable course of lectures
on Muhammad Abduh.

When the Egyptian University was officially founded in 1344/1925,
Mustafa Abd al-Raziq was called upon to teach there. He became the first
Professor of Islamic Philosophy in that University. In his lectures at
the Faculty of Arts, later published under the modest title of
“Prolegomena to the Study of Islamic Philosophy,” he traced the main
trends of Muslim philosophy; while throwing light on the various aspects
of the principal problems, he met, with calm and serenity, the attacks
of certain Orientalists who had denied the originality of Muslim
thought.

He perceived that while the Muslims had admitted into their conception
of the world elements borrowed from Greek thought, they had their own
method and their own culture. And the real Islamic thought is to be
found not so much in the philosophy of al-Farabi and ibn Sina as in the
theological speculations of *Kalam* and the principles of Muslim
jurisprudence.

Besides his functions in the Universities of al-Azhar and Cairo, Mustafa
Abd al-Raziq was a member of the Egyptian Institute and a member of the
Egyptian Academy for the Arabic Language. He was many times Minister of
Trusts (*Auqaf*), and in the Chamber of Deputies he was President of the
Commission of *Auqaf* and Religious Institutes.

In 1365/1945, he was elected Honorary President of the Egyptian
Philosophical Society. The crowning point of his career was his
nomination, in succession to Shaikh al-Maraghi, as Rector of the
University of al-Azhar. In this exceptional position of Shaikh al-Islam
he showed initiative and breadth of vision: he introduced the study of
foreign languages at al-Azhar, encouraged educational missions abroad,
sent Azharite scholars to France and England to prepare themselves for
the teaching of languages at the University, sent Muslim missionaries to
Uganda, and, lastly, sent a group of research scholars to the Hijaz to
study the faith at the sacred places of Islam.

Shaikh Abd al-Raziq was the author of a number of works on Muslim
philosophy. His own philosophy was essentially moral and altruistic,
filled with generosity, tolerance, and love of his fellow men. He often
said that a great philosophy has existed since the dawn of human thought
and has survived the vicissitudes of history: it is the heroic
philosophy, the philosophy of those who live for others and not only for
themselves, of those who are in unison with the fundamental note of the
universe, which, to him, was a note of generosity and love.

Originally practised by the Oriental pro­phets, this philosophy, he
said, was then spread by the great thinkers who, from Socrates to Plato
and Aristotle, from Aristotle to the Stoics and Plotinus, from Plotinus
to al-Farabi and Descartes, from Descartes to Kant and Gandhi, fall in a
single great line. Many by glimpsing the essence of religion, some by
deepening it through their meditations, arrive at a philosophy which
they practise and live, the philosophy of generosity, which sees love to
be a virtue which consists in always giving and giving without
calculation.

Mustafa Abd al-Raziq believed, further, that this love is fundamental to
each of us, that it is natural, that we have not to create it, that it
will blossom on its own when we remove the obstacle which our egoism and
our passions place in its way. With all the great philosophers he said
that we are part of a whole, that the duty of the part is to act for the
sake of the whole, and that the whole of which we are the part is
humanity.

He wished our education to be oriented to an awareness of these
potentialities - an education truly liberal that would make us conscious
of our belonging to the same great family. Likewise, he saw the remedy
for our social evils to lie in a moral reform that would extend our
powers of sympathy with our fellow men. In that direction lie social
harmony and solidarity.

This philosophy, so much of the heart, demanded the self-mastery of the
sage. Mustafa Abd al-Raziq practised what he preached, recognizing
wisdom in the constancy of conduct which guards against the instability
of emotions. Muhammad Abduh glimpsed these qualities in the young Abd
al-Raziq, whose faithfulness to his Master was to survive him. Abd
al-Raziq aroused in his pupils at the University the desire to learn
more of the doctrine of Muhammad Abduh, besides writing upon him and
translating into French his *Risalat al-Tauhid*. Thus he sought to keep
alive the spiritual flame kindled by the reformer, Abduh.

Bibliography
------------

Muhammad Abduh, *Risalat al-Waridat* (Treatise on Mystic Inspirations),
Cairo, 1874; *Hashiyah ala Sharh al-Aqaid al-Adudiyyah* (Gloss on the
Commentary of *al-Aqaid*), Cairo, 1876; *Risalat al-Tauhid* (Treatise on
Monotheism), Cairo, 1897; *Sharh Kitab al-Basair al-Nasiriyyah fi Ilm
al-Mantiq* (Commentary on the Book of al-Sawi on Logic), Cairo, 1898;
*Taqrir fi Islah al-Mahakim al- Shariah* (Report on the Reform of the
*Shariah* Courts), Cairo, 1900; *al-Islam wal-Nasraniyyah ma al-Ilm
wal-Madaniyyah* (Islam and Christianity and their respective attitudes
towards Science and Civilization), Cairo, 1902; *Tafsir Surat al-Asr*
(Commentary on chapter 103 of the Quran), Cairo, 1903; *Tafsir Surat
al-Fatihah* (Commentary on the opening chapter of the Quran), Cairo,
1905; *Tafsir Juz Amma* (Commentary on the last 37 chapters of the
Quran), Cairo, 1904; *Tarikh al-Ustadh al-Imam* (History of the Master
and Guide), 2 Vols., Cairo, 1908, Vol. I, Vol. II, 1931 (containing
articles and essays by Abduh).

Max Horten, “Mohammed Abduh, sein Leben und seine
theologisch-philoso­phische Gedankenwelt,” in *Beitrage zur Kenntnis des
Orients*, t. 13 and 14, Halle, 1916; Goldziher, *Richtungen der
islamischen Koranauslegung*, Leiden, 1920; Bernard Michel and Cheikh
Moustapha Abdel Razik, *Cheikh Mohammed Abdou*, *Rissalat al-Tauhid*,
Paris, 1925; Ahmad al- Shayeb, *Muhammad Abduh*, Alexandria, 1929;
Charles Admas, *Islam and Modernism in Egypt*, London, 1933; J. Schacht,
“Muhammad Abduh” in *Encyclopaedia of Islam*, Vol. III; Muhammad
al-Bahay, *Muhammad Abduh, Erziehungsmethode zum Nationalbewusstsein*,
Hamburg, 1936; *al-Fikr al-Islami*, Cairo, 1957; Osman Amin, *Muhammad
Abduh, Essai sur ses idees philosophiques et religieuses,* Cairo, 1944;
Muhammad Abduh, Cairo, 1945; *Raid al-Fikr al-Misri*, Cairo, 1955;
Mustafa Abd al-Raziq, *Muhammad Abduh*, Cairo, 1946; *Tamhid li Tarikh
al-Falsafah al-Islamiyyah*, Cairo, 1944; *al-Imam al-Shafii*, Cairo,
1945; *Failasuf al-Arab wal-Muallim al-Thani*, Cairo, 1945; *al-Din
wal-Wahi wal-Islam*, Cairo, 1945; *Min Athar Mustafa Abd al-Raziq*
(Posthumous collected essays, published with an introduction by Ali Abd
al-Raziq), Cairo, 1957; Kadri Kalajy, *Muhammad Abduh Batal al-Thaurah
al-­Fikriyyah fi al-Islam*, Beirut, 1948; Ali Sami al-Nashar, *Nuzhat
al-Fikr al-Islami*, Cairo, 1954; Qasim Amin, *Tahrir al-Marah*, Cairo,
1902; *Les Egyptiens*, Cairo, 1894; *al-Marat al-Jadidah*, Cairo, 1904;
Ahmad Khaki, *Qasim Amin*, Cairo, 1956; Laoust, *L’evolution de la
condition sociale de la femme musulmane en Egypte, et en Afrique
Francaise*, No. 3, 1935; *Le Califat dans la Doctrine de Rashid Rida*,
Beirut, 1938; Jomier, *Le Commentaire Coranique du Manar*, Paris, 1954;
Rashid Rida, *al-Khilafah*, Cairo, 1922; *al-Manar* (a monthly journal),
Cairo, 1898; *Tafsir al­-Manar*, Cairo, 1900.


