Chapter 76: Renaissance in Turkey: Zia Gokalp and His School
============================================================

In this chapter we shall discuss the role of philosophy in the rebirth
of Turkey. It would be useful to clarify first the sense in which the
term “philosophy” has been used here as a yardstick for identifying
movements of thought. “Philosophy” denotes the intellectual efforts to
understand and explain, in terms of rational and secular thinking, the
problems relating to man, society, and the universe that have been
presented to people when they felt unsatisfied by the interpretations
given by religions or by the sciences.

The foremost prerequisite for the rise of philosophical thinking is the
libera­tion of the mind from traditional modes of thinking. Secondly, it
rests on a certain level of scientific advancement and begins when
ultimate questions relating to man, society, and universe compel men to
go beyond the realm of science. Philosophy arises when the traditional
mode of thinking based on fixed values breaks down and when scientific
knowledge opens new horizons, ­both of which compel men to rational
speculation. The establishment of a tradition of philosophical thinking
is the third important factor in the history of philosophy in a country.

When we survey the development and present-day status of philosophy in
Turkey, we find the first prerequisite amply whereas the other two exist
only partially and imperfectly. During the last two centuries, modern
Turkey has been in a process of gradual (at times violent) cultural
trans­formation.

This transformation had two features that were decisive in determining
the rise of philosophy and the direction it took. One was its
secularizing feature and the other was its westernizing direction. With
the breakdown of the traditional Islamic thinking, there appeared
attempts to in­terpret phenomena in a very different way from that
indicated by tradition. In these, however, Western European thinking
served as a model.

As this transfor­mation is still going on and the two features mentioned
above have not yet obtained an all-encompassing hold over the society
and the individual, the state and the tradition of philosophical
thinking in Turkey cannot be expected to be comparable to what they are
in the West. Nonetheless, as several other Muslim nations are facing or
are going to face the same conditions that gave rise to modern
philosophical thinking in Turkey, it can be instructive to study that
thinking.

The beginnings of the intellectual transformation in Turkey go so far
back as the early part of the twelfth/eighteenth century. Philosophy had
ceased to be taught in the *madrasahs* that were the highest schools of
learning in Turkey even in the eleventh/seventeenth century. Hajji
Khalifah (known in Turkish as Katib Chelebi), the unique liberal mind of
that century, describes the deplorable condition of the philosophical
and scientific teaching in the *madrasahs*. There was not only neglect
of the sciences, but even hostility towards them for their being
conducive to philosophizing.

Thus, the three bases of philosophy, the spirit of free inquiry,
scientific investigation, and philo­sophical tradition, were destroyed
by a growing religious traditionalism. This is an excellent example of
the disappearance of philosophy whenever the value of free inquiry is
denied and the progress of science halted.

From the early part of the twelfth/eighteenth century on, intellectual
awakening in Turkey showed its first stirrings. The printing press was
intro­duced, a new interest in modern sciences arose, and the minds
began to think about some political and social questions in a new way.
Except for the emergence of some rudimentary philosophical inquiry, a
century and a half had to pass before the Turkish thinkers could become
acquainted with the European thought.

It is true that intellectual contacts with the modern European sciences
had begun earlier than that. These contacts were especially in the
fields of mathematics, physical sciences, and medicine. But the level
reached by them was not yet conducive to philosophy. The intellectuals
were still in the stage of acquiring the fundamentals of these sciences,
and interest in them was purely a practical one and had not yet reached
a theoretical level.

As a result of an intense desire to acquire European science and
technology there arose a firm belief that reason and its product,
science, were the prime factors of progress and therefore, capable of
performing wonders in the progress of humanity. This belief contained in
itself three germinal ideas (the power of science, progress, and the
evolution of humanity) that were bound to lead to philosophical thinking
sooner or later.

In fact, we find the first manifestations of an interest in
philosophical thinking in literary publications in the middle of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century. These were occasioned by the acquaintance
of the Turkish intellectuals with the European philosophy of
Enlightenment. Thinkers like Fenelon, Bayle, Newton, d’Alembert,
Voltaire, Diderot, Rousseau, Montesquieu, and Volney became known, and
full or partial translations of their works began to be made.

The philosophical manifestation of the new mode of thinking and
con­tacts with the European philosophy were seen in the rise of interest
in two philosophical tendencies. One was scientism and materialism, the
other the philosophy of natural rights and social contract. We find the
first expressed by a former member of the ‘*ulama*’ corps, Tahsin Hoca,
and the second by Namik Kemal, one of the leaders of the constitutional
movement in Turkey.

Neither, however, can be called genuine philosophy. The first was a kind
of creed, an expression of revolt against old ideas. Its exponents, far
from being the founders of a philosophical tradition, were viewed as
eccentrics or atheists. The second served as an ideological instrument
in proving the necessity of a constitutional government in Islam.
However, even that meant great progress and an unmistakable sign of the
liberation of mind from tradition.

A severe reaction against both came with the establishment of what was
known as Abd al-Hamid’s regime. Both materialism and the theory of
natural rights and social contract were declared incompatible with Islam
and dangerous to morality, and were severely suppressed. Jamal al-Din
al-Afghani's *Refuta­tion of the Materialists* did a great service in
the suppression of these ideas under the Hamidian regime.

Presented personally by the author to Abd al-Hamid, this work served as
a model for several books written to refute the naturalists,
materialists, constitutionalists - in short, all the manifestations of
philosophical revolt against traditional obscurantism. Neither Afghani
nor his Turkish imitators, however, left any philosophical tradition of
their own to take the place of those rejected.

Furthermore, the suppression of Western materialism failed to stop the
infil­tration of European philosophical thinking, this time in a
subversive manner. Not only did the range of the then known and read
European philosophers widen to include such thinkers as Schopenhauer,
Nietzsche, and Spencer, but materialistic philosophy with its Buchners
and Haeckels also pressed harder across the border.

The naturalism of Zola and others became known through literature. The
best exponent of naturalism was Besir Fuad, a gifted young man who found
himself compelled to commit suicide that he did in a manner conducive to
scientific knowledge. Although his writings were few, they exerted a
great influence upon the younger generations, upon those who were going
to emerge into full light with the fall of the Hamidian regime.

When the Constitutional Revolution of 1326/1908 came, the Turkish
intel­lectuals appeared with a vision of European philosophy
incomparably keener and broader than that of the pre-Hamidian Turkish
intellectuals. From the philosophies they discussed and also from the
movements with which they began to align themselves we can guess what
they had been reading and learning under Abd al- Hamid’s very nose.

An intense interest in philosophy appeared with the coming of the
Con­stitutional era. This time, those who were engaged in philosophical
thinking were not looked upon as eccentrics or *dahriyyun*. The first
philosophical review, *Yeni Felsefe Mecmuasi*, began to appear at this
time.

This review is itself the best example of the craving, now established,
for a new philosophical orientation. Its pages were not reserved for the
exposition of any particular philosophy. It was an excursion into all
the various European philosophical ventures in search of ideas that
might satisfy the needs of the Turkish thinkers. This review discussed
and gave a panorama of the philosophies represented by Kant, Hegel,
Comte, Spencer, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Mill, Marx, and a number of
other Western thinkers.

This philosophical review died without establishing its own
philosophical tradition. Its death, however, was not caused by any
dearth of interest in philosophy as such. On the contrary, it was caused
by its too much rami­fication. The review disappeared by giving rise to
a number of different schools of philosophy. The subsequent years
constituted a very active period for philosophy; but, if one considers
the very calamitous political events, eco­nomic distress, and social
upheaval through which Turkey had to pass during these years, one can
understand why this active and variegated philosophical period did not
flower into valuable and lasting works.

The principal field of interest was social and political philosophy. We
find the emergence and differentiation of positivism, Spencerian
evolutionism, materialism, and idealism. All except the last appealed
greatly to individual intellectuals; still they remained matters of
intellectual embellishment and snobbery, in spite of the popularity of
their exponents such as Riza Tevfik who became known even among the
common people as the “Philosopher.”

Only idealism took root and played an important role in the intellectual
life of Turkey through the hands of its exponent Zia Gokalp. This
thinker, who cannot be called a philosopher in the narrow and technical
sense of the term, can be called the real founder of a tradition of
philosophical thinking in Turkey.

Gokalp’s idealism was a reaction against Spencerianism and
utilitarianism as well as against materialism. It was not, however, the
product of a theory of knowledge investigating the basis and nature of
mind before it does so with regard to the nature of physical reality. It
was rather an ideological premise to work out a moral philosophy upon
which Turkish nationalism could be built.

Hence, Gokalp gave to his philosophy the appellation of “social
idealism.” It was a spiritualistic as contrasted with the materialistic
interpre­tation of history. It reduced reality, the physical as well as
the social, to ideas; it rejected the individualistic philosophies of
society and placed society, as a primordial and transcendental whole,
above the individual. It suffered, however, from an internal strain due
to its emphasis on the positivistic view of causation and the role of
science in human conduct.

In spite of its serious defects as a system of philosophy, Gokalp’s
idealism exercised tremendous influence over Turkish thinking. Part of
this influence has been to the advantage of philosophy itself because
Gokalp for the first time gave the courage as well as the taste for
philosophical thinking independent of tradition and Western
philosophies.

His was a daring experiment, to work out a philosophical view, not by
the mere repetition of the Muslim or Western philosophies or by a
juxtaposition of both in a syncretistic manner, but by blending them
together through a creative synthesis. In spite of the fact that his
philosophy aimed at teaching certain definite beliefs and value
­judgments derived from his own philosophical speculation, it did great
service to philosophical thinking by stimulating the rise of rival
philosophies.

Gokalp’s intellectual integrity and personality played a decisive role
in his contribution to thought. His great respect for philosophy, his
emphasis on independent thinking, and his freedom from philosophical
fanaticism prevented the utilization of his philosophy as an instrument
for the suppres­sion and persecution of the rival philosophies. In
reality, all the subsequent philosophical trends took their initial
clues from Gokalp’s thinking or were direct continuations of some
aspects of his analysis. Another contribution of Gokalp’s personality to
the Turkish mind was the road he prepared for closer contacts with
Western philosophy.

As Zia Gokalp has done more to promote philosophy than expound his own
philosophical views, it will be of interest to those concerned with the
growth of philosophical thinking in the contemporary Muslim countries to
dwell a little more on this aspect of his influence.

Prior to Gokalp’s time, philosophy was not taught in its modern form in
the institutions of learning. Philosophy was only a private pursuit, an
amateurish preoccupation. Its importance in the cultural formation of a
nation as well as in the intellectual growth of the enlightened minds
was not recognized.

On the contrary, philosophy was looked upon either with suspicion or
with derision. Neither the conservatives who abhorred intellectual
deviation from established dogmas nor the progressives who believed in
the utility of action had a favour­able view of philosophy. It was
either a heresy or an idle phantasy.

Zia Gokalp has been the chief instrument in discrediting both of these
views about philosophy and in giving it an academic and educational
prestige. Through his influence, courses of lectures on philosophy,
logic, ethics, psy­chology, and sociology were introduced in the syllabi
for undergraduates.

While teachers for these courses were sent to study in European
universities, a de­partment of philosophy was opened with an entirely
modern programme in the University of Istanbul. This programme was based
primarily upon the tradition for teaching philosophy of the French
universities.

A course on the history of philosophy from the early Greek period down
to the contemporary Western philosophy was introduced in this department
for the first time. A separate course was introduced on the history of
philosophy in Muslim countries with a view to teaching the subject with
a scientific approach. The latter course was introduced also in the
Faculty of Theology. In addition to specialized courses dealing with
Greek, medieval, Islamic, and modern Western philo­sophies, courses were
given in systematic philosophy, metaphysics, logic, ethics, and
aesthetics as branches of philosophical inquiry.

Gokalp himself taught none of these, he was a Professor of Sociology,
but he was the patron behind all, even though the men who taught these
were his philosophical adversaries. A further step was taken in the
modernization of philosophical teaching during World War I with the
appointment of German professors. Although these German professors of
philosophy contributed nothing to the content of philosophical thinking
in Turkey, they were useful in introducing the scientific treatment of
the history of philosophy for which the Germans are reputed.

Gokalp’s social idealism was a synthesis of Islamic and Western
philosophical traditions with the aim of deriving a theoretical basis
for Turkish nationalism. For him, therefore, teaching Muslim or Western
philosophies was not enough. His greatest contribution, perhaps, lay in
his emphasis on bringing home knowledge of these philosophies so as to
make them the data by which Turkish thinking would free itself from the
bondage of the old and of the foreign.

In other words, he wanted to promote it as an intellectual guide for an
under­standing of the world confronting the Turkish mind. It was, thus,
above all a cultural matter rather than a matter of mere speculative
curiosity or a continuation of scientific inquiry. In spite of the fact
that this understanding of the role of philosophy is not in accordance
with that dominant in the West and that it may tend to obscure the
universal humanistic character of philosophy, it has left a tradition in
Turkey that is worthy of attention.

Philosophy is conceived in Turkey to be very closely related to culture
and society. The teaching of philosophy is believed to be of supreme
cultural and pedagogical importance, particularly in a nation that is
undergoing a total cultural transformation.

This understanding was inevitable in a country like Turkey where the
other two prerequisites for philosophy, advanced science and a tradition
of philosophy, did not exist. Both of these were necessary parts of
Turkey’s civilizational transformation for which philosophy was viewed
as a guide. Gokalp’s emphasis on social philosophy as against the theory
of knowledge and scientific philosophy and his obsession for regarding
philosophy as a preoccupation with eminently cultural function had at
least the virtue of giving a philosophical tinge to all the educational,
political, economic, religious, and moral aspects of Turkey’s supreme
problems.

This view of philosophical occupation showed itself in two other
respects that, in our view, are extremely important for nations in a
position similar to that of Turkey with regard to philosophy. Both were
of vital importance in establishing a congenial milieu as well as a
vehicle of communication in the realization of a philosophical
tradition.

The first was the translation of the great philosophical works, Eastern
and Western, into the Turkish language. The other was the stabilization
and enrichment of a uniform terminology for expressing philosophical
concepts.

The first was not merely a matter of practical facility for those who
did not know Greek, Arabic, or modern European languages. A serious
student of philosophy is supposed to be acquainted with at least some of
these languages and, in fact, these are taught today to students of
philosophy.

The problem was to use translations for developing the Turkish language
to the degree of becoming capable of expressing philosophical thought. A
nation that does not have a language to express abstract ideas is bound
to remain foreign to philoso­phy or fail to understand philosophy when
expressed in a foreign language.

As Latin in the West, so Arabic in all Muslim countries was the
universal medium in the past for expressing philosophical thought.
Significantly, the rise of modern European philosophies, several times
richer than those in Latin, coincided with the flourishing of modern
national languages.

When Turkish came into contact with modern philosophical thinking, it
was utterly incapable of expressing philosophical thought without the
aid of Arabic or of some foreign language (French). Arabic had ceased to
be a medium of philosophical thought that had been killed in the hands
of those who used that language. It was, therefore, necessary to improve
Turkish as a vehicle of expression for the cultural experiences of a
modern nation.

This task had already been faced in the natural sciences and in
literature just before the middle of the thirteenth/nineteenth century.
A new vocabulary had developed in mathematics, the physical sciences,
and medicine on the basis of Arabic. In the field of philosophical
sciences, however, the situation was highly inadequate, confused, and
unstable until Gokalp’s time. It was impossible to understand a
philosophical text without constantly using French terms and
expressions.

Gokalp’s contribution in improving this situation was great. He attached
so much importance to the question of uniformity in scientific and
philo­sophical terminology that he suggested the holding of an
international confer­ence among the Muslim nations to develop modern
concepts derived from Arabic. As this never became possible, he worked
for the development of a philosophical language in Turkish. He not only
standardized the use of the already existing Arabic terms but also
coined new terms by derivations from Arabic roots; some of these survive
even today.

The establishment of a modernized teaching of philosophy, the
translations and adaptations from the world philosophical classics, and
the impetus given to the development of Turkish as a means of
communicating philosophical thought contributed towards the
establishment of a philosophical tradition in Turkey.

Gokalp’s idealism and collectivism gave rise to a variety of reactions.
On the whole, however, we may identify two major lines of thought, each
being a reaction to one of the two aspects of his philosophy. One was
individualism, and the other materialism.

The first reaction was inspired by the study of psychology, especially
the Freudian psychology. It was best represented by Mustafa Sekip Tunc,
a professor of psychology but an artist at heart. His greatest merit
was, perhaps, his contribution to the development of a superior literary
style of philosophi­cal writing; he showed skill both in translation and
in original composition. In this he was perhaps influenced by his major
inspirer, Henri Bergson.

Tunc’s scope of philosophical interest was much wider than that of
Gokalp. He avoided the conceptual and doctrinal rigidity of Gokalp. He
was influential as a teacher, as an inspirer, and as a man of intuitive
thinking, rather than as a systematizer. His individualistic approach to
philosophy was not the one in vogue in the thirteenth/nineteenth
century.

It was rather a revolt against rationalism and intellectualism; it
emphasized the non-rational aspects of the human mind. Useful though it
was in giving philosophical thinking greater depth and subtlety, its
cultural implications remained complex and elusive. It varied from
providing inspiration to liberal progres­sive leanings to supporting
fascist anti-intellectualism. The saddest manifes­tation of this was
Tunc’s preoccupation with spiritism, psychic phenomena, and occult
sciences at the end of his life. His was a restless soul and, despite
his great efforts to the contrary, his thinking amounted to nothing but
a kind of mysticism.

Another successor of Gokalp in cultivating philosophy was Mehmed Izzet.
If Tunc’s was an anti-intellectualistic reaction to Gokalp, Izzet’s was
a sceptic’s reaction. Much better organized, subtler, and far more
systemati­cally versed in both Eastern and Western philosophies, Izzet
was a careful thinker and an excellent teacher. He was in search of a
moral philosophy, basically idealistic, oriented to a humanistic view of
freedom. With his untimely death in 1349/1930 however, terminated
conscientious, thoughtful work.

Both Tunc and Izzet were expressions of an attempt to break with
Gokalp’s nationalism in order to widen the horizons of philosophical
thinking. Another reaction in this direction came with the rebirth of
materialism, this time in the form of historical materialism. It is
hardly possible to speak of this as a philosophical movement. It had
neither a philosophical exponent of even mediocre stature nor any
following in the academic circles. Its importance lay in its
diffusedness and in its infiltration in bits, not as a system, into the
intellectual make-up of the generations that sought liberation from
Gokalp’s idealism.

The same may be said of another philosophy of action: pragmatism.
Although pragmatism never had a systematic presenta­tion in the hands of
a thinker comparable to Gokalp, it penetrated into the several facets of
the Turkish mind and provided another diffused form of escape from
Gokalp’s influence.

All of these were expressions of a challenge to philosophy by the
radical reforms carried out under Kemal Ataturk. All these were mere
experiments in discovering new values compatible with those that were
supposed to reign in modern civilization. Remembering the philosophical
chaos reigning in the Western mind, one may excuse the Turkish thinkers
for failing in their philo­sophical ventures.

Once plunged into the dazzling stage of the contemporary Western
philosophy, the attempts of a number of Turkish thinkers, whose names
would be too numerous to mention, became once again restless, searching
for au orientation. None of these had the chance or capacity to select,
digest, and systematize something that would take root as a
philo­sophical movement.

The instability just illustrated was an inevitable consequence of the
Turkish thinkers’ plunge into the world of Western philosophy supported
by a long tradition as well as by a constantly changing cultural and
scientific background. It has shown that Turkey has not yet reached the
stage of having genuine philosophical schools and representatives and
that there is still a long road to travel.

Quite naturally, one reaction to this philosophical flux has been a
growing distrust of philosophizing. A group of German scientists and
philosophers, who, expelled from Germany, taught in the Turkish
universities, have con­tributed to this trend. Not by any coincidence,
most of them were inter­nationally known representatives of logical
positivism. Hardly a trace of their philosophy has remained behind them
in Turkey, but they left a deep impres­sion by making the Turkish
students of philosophy see what great and difficult tasks they have
before them.

Discouraging though it may seem, philosophy at present is only a matter
of disciplined academic teaching. The emphasis is upon the history of
philo­sophy. The University of Istanbul, in particular, can boast of
having a present­able staff of professors of philosophy. The history of
Islamic philosophy is gaining special interest. More value is being
given to research, especially historical, than to attempts at original
thinking. This, perhaps, is the right path.

After about one century of crawling, flying, and falling, a tradition is
growing. The Turkish language has a rich literature in the world’s
philosophy available to Turkish students. A stage of careful learning
and research has come. The longer this stage lasts, the more likely will
it be possible one day to speak of the existence of a genuine
philosophical tradition in Turkey.

Bibliographical Note
--------------------

The following is not an exhaustive bibliography of the publications of
philo­sophical nature. It does not include publications of the following
categories: (a) philosophical works translated from European languages;
(b) philosophical classics translated from non-Turkish languages; (c)
works of Muslim philo­sophers of the past; (d) philosophical
dictionaries; and (e) text-books on philo­sophical disciplines. The
great majority of the philosophical publications in modern Turkey fall
under the above categories.

The following contains writings concerning the philosophical trends and
problems relating to the role of philosophy in the social and cultural
transformation of modem Turkey.

1. *Pre-Nineteenth Century* - Some of the *madrasahs* of the capital of
the Ottoman Empire were institutions of higher learning. In the early
stage of the history of this Empire teaching in them was more legal and
scientific than philosophical in tenor. In course of time, these
institutions lost their interest in science and confined themselves to
the study of law, with the so-called “religious sciences” as subsidiary
disciplines. What we might call “philosophy” was connected with
*tasawwuf* that was cultivated outside the *madrasahs*. Ibn al-Arabi and
Rumi were the thinkers having the greatest influence on the educated
classes. See Katib Chelebi (Hajji Khalifah), *Mizan al-Haqq fi Ikhtiyar
al-Ahaqq*, translated by G. L. Lewis as *The Balance of Truth*, London,
1957; A. Adnan Adivar, *Osmanli Turklerinde Ilim*, Istanbul, 1943,
particularly pp. 105-06. There arose during the eleventh/seven­teenth
century a strong fundamentalist opposition to philosophy and mysticism
both of which were branded as *ilhad*. This was followed in the
twelfth/eighteenth century by the trends of scepticism, deism, and even
atheism, perhaps as a reaction. No study of these is available.

2. *The Earliest Phase of the Modern Era* - The earliest manifestations
of a modern philosophical tendency arose in the middle of the
thirteenth/nineteenth century and were a reflection of the European
Enlightenment. Some acquaintance with the modem European thinking,
notably with Voltaire, goes back to the late twelfth/eighteenth century
in which the introduction of the European natural sciences and medicine
played an important role. See Cevdet Pasha, *Tarih*, Vol. VIII,
Istanbul, 1303 A. H., pp. 212-14, and Vol. XII, Istanbul, 1301 A. H., p.
212. The first translation from European philosophy appeared in
1276/1859 in a collec­tion of selections entitled *Muhaverat-i Hikemiye*
(Philosophical Dialogues) by Tahir Munif (later Pasha). This contained
selections from the writings of Voltaire, Fenelon, and Fontenelle.
During the Tanzimat period (1838-1916), the Turkish thinkers were
interested mostly in the ideas of John Locke, Montesquieu, Rousseau,
Diderot, d’Holbach, Helvetius, and Cabanis. The influence of
material­ism, especially that of Ludwig Buchner, was represented by
Tahsin who was the first director of the *Dar al-Funun* and a friend of
Jamal al-Din Afghani. The philosophy of natural rights and social
contract was reflected in the writings of Namik Kemal. See Serif Hulusi,
“Namik Kemal ‘in Eserleri,” in *Namik Kemal* *Hakkinda*, Istanbul, 1942,
pp. 395-401; M. Kaplan, *Namik Kemal*, Istanbul, 1948, p.31; C. 0.
Tutengil, *Montesquieu ‘nun Siyasi ve Iktisadi Fikirleri*, Istanbul,
1956, Chap. IV, pp. 53-73; Kamiran Birand, “18 inci Asir Fransiz
Tefekkuru ve Namik Kemal,” in Felsefe Arkivi, Istanbul, 1945, Vol. 1,
No. 1, pp. 90-140; and *Aydinlanma Devri Devlet Felsefesinin Tanzimata
Tesirleri*, Ankara, 1955.

3. *Period of Reaction* *(1295/1878-1326/1908)* - No progress in the
development of philosophical thinking was recorded during this period.
The period was dominated by writings inspired by Afghani and Ahmed
Midhat, the famous publicists of the period, dedicated to the refutation
of materialistic systems. Despite this, natural­istic trends of the
European thought continued their penetration and were, furthermore,
strengthened by the coming of the ideas of evolution. Towards the end of
the period, the writers became more acquainted with Western
philosophers, particularly with the ideas of Darwin, Haeckel, Spencer,
and Auguste Comte, but these remained implicit and were never expressed
in writings until the coming of the *Mesrutiyet* (Constitutional)
period. No monographic study is avail­able about this period. In
general, see H. Z. Ulken, “Tanzimattan Sonra Fikir Hareketleri,” in
*Tanzimat*, Istanbul, 1940, pp. 757-75.

4. *The Constitutional Period* - After 1908, various philosophical
tendencies came to light. Two philosophico-sociological reviews were
published: *Yeni Felsefe* *Mecmuasi*, Salonika, and *Ulum-u Ictimaiye ve
Iktisadiye* *Mecmuasi*, Istanbul. The major trends were (a)
evolutionism, (b) positivism, and (c) idealism. There was also a weak
and vague interest in socialism. See H. Z. Ulken, “Bizde Fikir
Cereyanlari,” in *Felsefe ve Ictimaiyat Mecmuasi*, Istanbul, 1927, Vol.
I, No. 4, pp. 311-14; “Turkiyede Positivism Temayulu,” in *Insan*,
Istanbul, 1939, No. 11, pp. 849-53; “Turkiyede Idealism Temayulu,”
*ibid.*, Istanbul, 1939, No. 12, pp. 929-38; C. 0. Tutengil, *Prens
Sabahaddin*, Istanbul, 1954. The works produced by writers and
translators such as Baha Tevfik, Ahmed Nebil, Haydar Rifat, Subhi Edhem,
Mustafa Subhi, Edhem Necdet, and others were not original but
transmitted mostly Western philosophical ideas. The idealistic trend was
ushered in by Zia Gokalp; see his *Turkish Nationalism* and Western
Civilization, translated and edited by N. Berkes, London and New York,
1959, pp. 46ff.

5. *The Republican Period* - The study of philosophy in the form of
teaching, writing, or translation began in this period in the real
sense. Translations from Western philosophers such as Bergson, James,
and Dewey, and, later, Russell and the logical positivists,
phenomenologists, and, finally, the existentialists became more
extensive. This is the period of a definitive turn to Western
philosophy. During the 1930’s the translation of philosophical classics,
ranging from Plato to Russell, began. Scores of major philosophical
works were published under the Ministry of Education. The translation
work is still in progress. The philosophical reviews of the period were
*Felsefe ve Ictimaiyat Mecmuasi*, Istanbul, 1927-1930, edited by Mehmed
Servet; *Felsefe Yillig*, Istanbul, 1931-1932, edited by H. Z. Ulken;
*Is*, Istanbul, 1934, edited by F. Findikoglu; *Edebiyat Fakultesi
Mecmuasi*, Istanbul, 1916-1917 and 1922-1938; *Felsefe Arkivi*,
Istanbul, 1948. A Philosophical Society was founded in Istanbul in 1928.
About the problems of philosophy and the major trends of thought in
general, see the following: Mustafa Sekip, Tunc, “Turk Inkilabinin
Felsefeye Tesiri,” in *Hayat*, Ankara, 1927, No. 9, pp. 164-65;
*Memleketimizde Felsefenin Inkisafi Icin Lazim Gelen Sartlar*, Ankara,
1938; Mehmed Izzet, “Dar-ul-Fununda Felsefe Dersleri,” in *Edebiyat
Fakultesi Mecmuasi*, Istanbul, 1925, Vol. IV, No. 2, pp. 121-32; Mehmed
Servet, “Fikir Hayatimizda Bir Muhasebe,” in *Hayat*, Ankara, 1929, Vol.
V, Nos. 116-31-this is the best survey of the trends before 1929; H. Z.
Ulken, “Turk Felsefe Dilinin Gelismesi,” in *Felsefe Tercumerleri
Dergisi*, Vol. 1, No. 1, Istanbul, 1947, pp. 135-43. The following may
be listed among the works containing some contribution to original
thinking and also as a sample of the range of the philosophical interest
during the last three decades: Mehmed Izzet, *Milliyet Nazariyeleri ve
Milli Hayat*, Istanbul, 1925; “Buyuk Insanlar ve Musir Hayat,” in
*Edebiyat Fakultesi Mecmuasi*, Istanbul, 1923, Vol. III, No. 1, pp.
51-61, Nos. 2-3, pp. 91-102; Mustafa Sekip (Tunc), *Terakki Fikrinin
Mense ve Tekamulu*, Istanbul, 1928; *Bir Din Felsefesine* *Dogru*,
Istanbul, 1959; Hilmi Ziya Ulken, *Ask Ahlaki*, Istanbul, 1931 (the
latter has been the most prolific author of the period; he has written
practically on every branch of philosophy, but the above seems to be his
most original work); A. Adnan-Adivar, *Tarih Boyunca Ilim ve Din*, 2
Vols., Istanbul, 1944; Macit Gokberk, *Kant ile Herder’in Tarih
Anlyislari*, Istanbul, 1948; Kamiran Birand, *Dilthey ve Rickert’te
Manevi Ilimlerin Temellendi-rilmesi*, Ankara, 1954; Nermi Uygur, *Edmund
Husserl’de Baskasinin Ben’i Problemi*, Istanbul, 1958.


