Chapter 78: Renasissance in Iran: Haji Mulla Hadi Sabziwari
===========================================================

A: Life and Works
-----------------

After the death of Mulla Sadra, the school established by him found its
most famous interpreter and expositor in Haji Mulla Hadi Sabziwari who
was the greatest of the Hakims of the Qajar period in Persia. After a
period of turmoil caused by the Afghan invasion, in which the spiritual
as well as the political life of Persia was temporarily disturbed,
traditional learning became once again established under the Qajars, and
in the hands of Haji Mulla Hadi and his students the wisdom of Mulla
Sadra began once again to flourish through the Shiah world. This sage
from Sabziwar gained so much fame that soon he became endowed with the
simple title of Haji by which he is still known in the traditional
*madrasahs*,[^1] and his *Sharh-i Manzumah* became the most widely used
book on *Hikmat* in Persia and has remained so until today.

Haji Mulla Hadi was born in 1212/1797-98 at Sabziwar in Khurasan, a city
well known for its Sufis and also for Shiah tendencies even before the
Safawid period, where he completed his early education in Arabic grammar
and language.[^2] At the age of ten he went to Meshed where he continued
his studies in jurisprudence (*Fiqh*), logic, mathematics, and *Hikmat*
for another ten years.

By now, his love for the intellectual sciences had become so great that
the Haji left Meshed as well and journeyed to Ispahan, as Mulla Sadra
had done two hundred and fifty years before him, to meet the greatest
authorities of the day in *Hikmat*. Ispahan in that period was still the
major centre of learning, especially in *Hikmat*. Haji spent eight years
in this city studying under Mulla Ismail Ispahani and Mulla Ali Nuri
both of whom were the leading authorities in the school of Akhund.

Haji Mulla Hadi, having completed his formal education, left Isahpan
once again for Khurasan from where after five years of teaching he went
on a pilgrimage to Mecca. Upon returning to Persia after three years of
absence, he spent a year in Kirman where he married and then settled
down in Sabziwar where he established a school of his own. His fame had
by then become so great that disciples from all over Persia as well as
from India and the Arab countries came to the small city of Sabziwar to
benefit from his personal contact and to attend his classes.

Nasir al-Din Shah in his visit to Meshed in 1274/1857-58 came especially
to the city of Haji in order to meet him in person. In Sabziwar, away
from the turmoil of the capital, Haji spent forty years in teaching,
writing, and training disciples, of whom over a thousand completed the
course on *Hikmat* under his direction.

Haji’s life was extremely simple and his spirituality resembled more
that of a Sufi master than just of a learned Hakim. It is said that
along with regular students whom he instructed in the *madrasah* he had
also special disciples whom he taught the mysteries of Sufism and
initiated into the Path.[^3]

He was not only called the “Plato of his time” and the “seal of the
Hukama”' (*khatam al-Hukama*), but was also considered by his
contemporaries to possess the power of performing miracles of which many
have been attributed to him in the various traditional sources. By the
time lie passed away in 1289/1878, Haji had become the most famous and
exalted spiritual and intellectual figure in Persia and has ever since
been considered one of the dominant figures in the intellectual life of
the Shiah world.

Unlike Mulla Sadra all of whose writings with one exception were in
Arabic, Haji wrote in Persian as well as in Arabic. Moreover, he
composed a great deal of poetry collected in his *Diwan*, which consists
of poems in Persian of gnostic inspiration and poems in Arabic on
*Hikmat* and logic.

The writings of Haji, of which a complete list is available, are as
follows: *Al-Laali*, Arabic poem on logic; *Ghurar al-Faraid* or the
*Sharh-i Manzumah*, Arabic poem with commentary on *Hikmat*; *Diwan* in
Persian written under the pen name Asrar; commentary upon the prayer
Dua-i Kabir;[^4] commentary upon the prayer *Dua-i Sabah*; *Asrar
al-Hikam*, written at the request of Nasir al-Din Shah, on *Hikmat*;
commentaries upon the *Asfar*, the *Mafatih al-Ghaib*, *al-Mabda
wal-Maad*, and *al-Shawahid al-Rububiyyah* of Mulla Sadra; glosses upon
the commentary of Suyuti upon the *Alfiyyah* of ibn Malik, on grammar;
commentary upon the *Mathnawi* of Jalal al-Din Rumi; commentary upon the
*Nibras*, on the mysteries of worship; commentary upon the divine names;
glosses upon the *Sharh-i Tajrid* of Lahiji; *Rah Qarah* and *Rahiq* in
rhetoric; *Hidayat al-Talibin*, as yet an unpublished treatise in
Persian on prophethood and the imamate; questions and answers regarding
gnosis; and a treatise on the debate between Mulla Muhsin Faid and
Shaikh Ahmad Ahsai.[^5]

Of these writings the most famous is the *Sharh-i Manzumah*, which,
along with the *Asfar* of Mulla Sadra, the *Shifa* of ibn Sina, and the
*Sharh al-Isharat* of Nasir al-Din Tusi, is the basic text on *Hikmat*.
This work consists of a series of poems on the essential questions of
*Hikmat* composed in 1239/1823 on which Haji himself wrote a commentary
along with glosses in 1260/1844. The book contains a complete summary of
*Hikmat* in precise and orderly form.

This work has been so popular that during the hundred years that have
passed since its composition many commentaries have been written upon it
including those of Muhammad Hidaji and the late Mirza Mehdi Ashtiyani as
well as that of Muhammad Taqi Amuli whose commentary called the *Durar
al-Fawaid* is perhaps the most comprehensive of all. The other writings
of Haji, especially the *Asrar al-Hikam* which is of special interest
because, as Haji himself writes in the introduction, it is a book
concerned with the *Hikmat* derived from the Islamic revelation
(*hikmat-i imani*) and not just with Greek philosophy (*hikmat-i
yunani*), and the commentary upon the *Mathnawi* are also of much
importance, but the fame of Haji is due primarily to his *Sharh-i
Manzumah*.

B: Sources of Haji’s Doctrines and the Characteristics of His Approach
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Haji cannot be considered to be the founder of a new school; rather, lie
expanded and clarified the teachings of Mulla Sadra without departing
from the basic features of Akhund’s doctrines. The sources of Haji’s
writings are, therefore, the same as those enumerated in our study of
Mulla Sadra, viz., gnostic doctrines drawn mostly from the teachings of
ibn Arabi, the teachings of the Shiah Imams, *ishraqi* theosophy, and
Peripatetic philosophy.

In his writings the sage from Sabziwar drew mostly on the *Asfar* of
Mulla Sadra, the *Qabasat* of Mir Damad, the commentary upon the *Hikmat
al-lshraq* of Suhrawardi by Qutb al-Din Shirazi, the *Sharh al-Isharat*
of Nasir al-Din Tusi, and the *Shawariq* of Lahiji.

In general, Haji did not rely so much upon reading various texts as he
did upon meditating and contemplating on the essential aspects of
metaphysics. The major source of his knowledge, as with Mulla Sadra, was
his inner imam or the guardian angel through whom he was illuminated
with the knowledge of the intelligible world. As to the formal sources
of his doctrines, one must first of all mention Akhund and, secondly,
Akhund’s teachers and students some of whom have already been
mentioned.[^6]

Haji, following the path trod by Mulla Sadra, sought to combine gnosis,
philosophy, and formal revelation; throughout his writings these three
are present in a harmonious blend. He differed from Akhund in that he
was able to expound the gnostic elements of his doctrines much more
explicitly than Akhund and that he was not as much molested by the
critics as the latter was.

It was due to this fact that he was highly respected by the Qajars and
the ‘*ulama*’; the Qajars were indeed not so opposed to Sufism and
*Hikmat* as the Safawids were. Possessed with the gift for poetry and
eloquence and great intellectual intuition which sometimes even in the
middle of a treatise on logic would draw him towards metaphysical
expositions, Haji wrote openly on Sufism and appears more as a Sufi well
versed in philosophy and theosophy than a Hakim interested in gnostic
doctrines. He was, like Mulla Sadra, among the few sages who were
masters of both esoteric and exoteric doctrines, and of philosophy and
gnosis.[^7]

C: Teachings
------------

As already mentioned, Haji’s doctrines are in reality those of Mulla
Sadra’s condensed and systematized into a more orderly form. Haji
follows his master in all the essential elements of his teaching such as
the unity and gradation of Being, substantial motion, the union of the
knower and the known.

There are only two points on which Haji criticizes his master: first, on
the nature of knowledge which in some of his writings Akhund considers a
quality of the human soul while Haji considers it to belong to its
essence, like Being itself, above all the Aristotelian categories such
as quality, quantity, etc.; and secondly, on Mulla Sadra’s doctrine of
the union of the intellect and the intelligible which Haji accepts,
criticizing, however, his method of demonstrating its validity.
Otherwise, the principles of the teachings of Haji in *Hikmat* are
already to be found in the writings of Akhund.

It must not be thought, however, that Haji Mulla Hadi simply repeated
the teachings of his predecessor verbatim. It is enough to glance at the
volu­minous writings of Mulla Sadra, in which one would surely be lost
without a capable guide, and compare them with the precise form of
*Sharh-i Manzumah* to see what service Haji rendered to *Hikmat* in
general and to Mulla Sadra’s school in particular. Haji prepared the way
for the study of Mulla Sadra, and his writings may be considered to be
an excellent introduction to the doctrines of his master.

The *Sharh-i Manzumah* depicts a complete cycle of *Hikmat*, containing
in summary form all the basic elements of Mulla Sadra’s teachings on the
subject. In discussing its contents, therefore, one becomes better
acquainted with Mulla Sadra as well as with Haji himself, and one gains
a glimpse of traditional philo­sophy as it is taught in the Shiah
*madrasahs* today.

The *Sharh-i Manzumah*, excluding the part on logic, is divided into
seven books each of which is divided into several chapters, and each
chapter in turn into several sections. The seven books deal with Being
and Non-Being, substance and accidents, theodicy, natural philosophy,
prophecy and dreams, eschatology, and ethics respectively.

The first book that is in a sense the basis of the whole work and is on
general principles (*al-umur al-ammah)* treats of the various aspects of
Being, its positive and negative qualities, its unity and gradation,
necessity and possibility, time and eternity, actuality and
potentiality, quiddities, unity and multiplicity, and causality.

The second book treats of the definition of sub­stance and accidents,
and the third, which is called *al-ilahiyat bi al-maani al-akhass*, of
the divine essence, the divine qualities and attributes, and the divine
acts. The fourth book contains a summary discussion of natural
philo­sophy (*tabiiyat*), including the meaning of body (*jism*),
motion, time and space-astronomy, physics (in the Aristotelian sense),
psychology, and the science of heavenly souls.

The fifth book treats of the cause of the truth and falsehood of dreams,
the principles of miracles, the cause for strange happen­ings, and
prophecy; and the sixth book of the resurrection of the soul and the
body and questions pertaining to the Last Day. Finally, the last book
treats of faith and infidelity and the various spiritual virtues such as
repentance, truthfulness, surrender to the divine will, etc., which are
usually discussed in the books on Sufi ethics such as the *Kitab
al-Luma* of abu Nasr al-Sarraj.

Haji divides reality into three categories: the divine essence which is
at once above all determinations including Being and is also the
principle of all manifestations of Being Itself; extended being (*wujud
al-munbasat*) which is the first act or word or determination of the
divine essence and is identified with light; and particular beings which
are the degrees and grades of extended being and from which the
quiddities are abstracted.[^8] All these stages of reality are unified
so that one can say that reality is an absolute unity with gradations,
of which the most intelligible symbol is light.

The first feature of Being which Haji discusses is that it is
self-evident and indefinable. There is no concept more evident than
Being, because all things, by virtue of their existence, are drowned in
the ocean of Being.[^9] Moreover, the definition of a species in logic
involves its genus and specific difference, but there is no genus of
which Being is the species. Therefore, from a logical point of view
there is no definition of Being; Being is the most universal con­cept
since the divine ipseity of which It is the first determination is,
strictly speaking, above all conception.

Though the concept of Being is the most obvious of all concepts, yet the
knowledge of the root or truth of Being, i.e., as It is in Itself and
not in Its manifestation, is the most difficult to attain. Existence,
which is the extension or manifestation of Being, is principial with
respect to the quiddities. This view, which we have already mentioned in
previous chapters, is one of the major points of contention among Muslim
Hakims.

The Peripatetics gave priority to existence or Being over the
quid­dities, considering each being to be in essence different and
distinct from other beings. Although Suhrawardi Maqtul never speaks of
the principiality of the quiddities as understood by the later Hakims,
he can be interpreted to consider existence to have no reality
independent of the quiddities.

It was Mir Damad who re-examined this whole question and reached the
conclusion that either the quiddities or existence would have to be
principial, and divided the philosophers before him into the followers
either of the principiality of existence or Being (*isalat-i wujud*), or
of the principiality of the quiddities (*isalat-i mahiyyah*) while he
himself sided with the latter group.[^10]

Mulla Sadra in turn accepted his teacher’s classification but sided with
the followers of the principiality of existence. Haji, likewise, follows
Akhund in accepting the principiality of Being which he considers to be
the source of all effects partaking of gradations.

Another question that arises concerning the concept of Being is whether
It is just a verbal expression shared by particular beings or a reality
that particular beings have in common. It is known that the Asharites
considered the term “being” to be merely a verbal expression used for
both the Creator and the creatures; otherwise, according to them, there
would be an aspect common to both which is opposed to the idea of divine
transcendence.

Haji, like the other Hakims, rejects this reasoning and argues that in
the statement “God is,” by “is” we mean either non-being in which case
we have denied God or something other than what we mean in the statement
“man is” in which case we have denied our intelligence the ability to
attain a knowledge of God. Since both of these conclusions are
untenable, “is” in the case of God must share a meaning in common with
“is” in the case of this or that creature.[^11] The truth is that Being
is one reality with degrees of intensity and not many realities from
which the mind abstracts the concept of Being.[^12]

Another point on which Haji criticizes the Asharites is that of the
existence of the images of things in the mind that is one of the
important aspects of his doctrines. The Asharites believe that in the
mind the quiddity and existence of an object are one and the same; when
we think of man, the quiddity of the conception of man in our mind is
the same as its existence in our mind.

Haji opposes this view and distinguishes between quiddity and existence
even in the mind. The world of the mind is the same as the external
world with the same quiddity in each case. The difference between the
two comes in their existence; each has an existence proper to itself. If
external existence becomes mental existence, then the object as it
exists externally becomes the image of that object in the mind.

For example, when we think of fire, the concept of fire exists in our
mind. It is the same quiddity as the objective fire that burns but its
mode of existence differs. It has a mental existence that, although
deprived of the power that makes fire burn and give off heat, is
nevertheless a being.[^13]

Reality, then, is a unity comprising stages or grades of intensity[^14]
the source of which is the divine essence that we may consider to be
Pure Being without quiddity if by quiddity we mean the answer to the
question *quid est - ­*“what is it?” or identical with its quiddity if
by quiddity we understand that by which a thing is what it is.

Being has certain negative and positive qualities, the first such as the
qualities of being neither substance nor accident, having no opposite,
having no like, not being a compound and having no genus, species, and
specific difference, etc.; and the second, the attributes of power,
will, knowledge, and the like.

The quiddities, which accompany all stages of universal existence below
Pure Being Itself, are abstracted by the mind from particular beings and
are in fact the limitations of Being in each state of manifestation in
all the vertical (*tuli*) and horizontal (*ardi*) stages in which Being
manifests Itself. It is, therefore, by the quiddities that we can
distinguish between various beings and different levels of existence.

Haji divides the quiddities according to their association with matter
or potentiality. Quiddities are either free from matter in which case
they are called the world of the spirits, or combined with matter and
are then called the world of bodies. In the world of spirits, if the
quiddities are by essence and in actuality free from all matter, they
are the intelligences (*uqul*), and if they are free but have need of
matter to become actualized, they are the souls (*nufus*).

And in the world of bodies, if the quid­dities possess a subtle form of
matter, they belong to the world of inverted forms (*alam al-mithal*),
which is the same as that of cosmic imagination, and if they possess a
gross form of matter, they belong to the world of nature. All of these
worlds are distinguished in this manner by their quiddities, but all of
them are in reality stages of the same Being which manifests Itself in
different manners according to the conditions at each stage of
manifestation.

After a discussion of the various aspects of Being and the quiddities,
Haji turns to a study of substance and accidents.[^15] There are three
substances, the intelligences, souls, and bodies, and the nine
categories of accidents as outlined by Aristotle and Porphyry. Of
special interest in this discussion is the category of quality (*kaif*)
that is closely connected with that of know­ledge.

Dawwani, the ninth/fifteenth century philosopher and jurist, had
con­sidered knowledge (*ilm*) to be in essence of the category of the
known (*malum*) and in accident of the category of the quality of the
soul. Mulla Sadra, on the contrary, believed that knowledge belongs in
essence to the category of quality and in accident to that of the known.
Haji adds and modifies these views, considering knowledge to be an
accident of the category of the known as well as that of quality but in
essence beyond all categories like Being Itself.[^16]

The third chapter of the *Sharh-i Manzumah* concerns theodicy, i.e.,
what pertains to the Divine Being, His names, attributes, and acts.[^17]
Haji, after emphasizing the transcendence, unity, and simplicity of the
divine essence, begins his discussion about the divine qualities and
attributes, which are mentioned in the Quran, and interprets each
following the tradition of the Hakims and Sufis before him.

Of special interest is his account of the epithet “Knower” (*al-Alim*)
in which Haji discusses divine knowledge mentioning that knowledge is in
the essence of God and God is in essence the Knower of all things. He
knows all things by knowing His own essence.[^18]

The knowledge of God consists of knowledge of beings at several stages
which Haji enumerates as follows:[^19] *ilm-i anani*, the heavenly
science, which is the knowledge of God that creatures have no being of
their own; *ilm-i qalami*, the science of the Pen, the knowledge that
God has of all beings in the world of multiplicity before their
manifestation;[^20] *ilm-i lauhi*, the science of the Tablet, which
consists of the knowledge of the universals as they are issued forth
from the first intellect or the Pen; *ilm-i qadai*, the science of
pre­destination, which is the knowledge of the archetypes or masters of
species of the realities of this world; and, finally, *ilm-i qadari*,
the science of fate which consists of the knowledge of particulars
whether they be of the world of cosmic imagination or the psyche or of
the world of the elements which is the physical world. God, therefore,
has knowledge of all things, and all degrees of existence are included
in His knowledge.

Following the study of God’s essence and His attributes, Haji turns to
His acts[^21] which in reality mean the stages of Being in which God’s
signs are made manifest. God’s acts are of many kinds and from them the
hierarchy of creatures comes into being. This hierarchy consists of
seven stages: the longitudinal intelligences, horizontal intelligences
which are the same as the celestial archetypes,[^22] the universal soul
and the soul of the heavenly spheres, the inverted forms of the world of
imagination, nature, form, and matter.

These stages, although distinct from one another, do not destroy the
unity of God’s acts. God’s essence, attributes, and acts all possess
unity, each in its own degree. The lowest stage of unity is the unity of
the acts and the highest that of the essence, the realization of which
comes at the end of the spiritual journey.

In the chapter on natural philosophy, Haji briefly outlines the physics
of the Muslim Peripatetics as contained in detail in the *Shifa* of ibn
Sina and other similar texts, and the Ptolemaic astronomy of epicycles
as perfected by Muslim astronomers with the modifications made in it by
Mulla Sadra and the other later Hakims.

The most important of these modifications is the introduction of the
idea of substantial motion according to which the whole of the cosmic
substance is in a state of becoming and the quantity of change is
comprised in the measure of time. Haji also displays the tendency to
interpret various aspects of the natural and mathematical sciences
symboli­cally; for instance, the water of Thales which he, like Mulla
Sadra, identifies with the breath of the Compassionate (*nafas
al-Rahman*) or the *tetractys* of Pythagoras which he regards as the
symbol for the four principial stages of Being, intellect, soul, and
nature.

After the discussion of natural philosophy, Haji turns to the soul and
its faculties and stages of development. There are three types of souls:
vegetative, animal, and rational, the last of which comprises the human
soul as well as the soul of the heavenly spheres. The vegetative soul
has the three faculties of feeding, growth, and reproduction; and the
animal soul, the five external senses, the five internal senses, and the
power of motion.[^23]

In man all of these faculties are developed to their fullness, but they
are no more than the tools and instruments of the human soul that Haji
calls the *ispahbad* light[^24] and which is of the family of the lights
of heaven.

The perfection of the soul is attained by treading the stages of the
intellect and finally unifying itself with God. The soul is given
essentially two powers, theoretical and practical, for each of which
there are four degrees of per­fection. The theoretical intellect is
comprised of the potential intellect that has the capacity merely of
receiving knowledge, the habitual intellect by which acquaintance is
made with simple truth, the active intellect by which know­ledge is
gained without the aid of the senses, and finally the acquired intellect
by which the spiritual essences can be contemplated directly.[^25]

As for the practical intellect, it too consists of four stages:
*tajliyyah*, which consists in following the divine Laws revealed
through the prophets; *takhliyyah*, purifying the soul of evil traits;
*tahliyyah*, embellishing the soul with spiritual virtues, and, finally,
*fana* or annihilation, which has the three degrees: annihilation in the
divine acts, in the divine attributes, and finally in the divine
essence.[^26]

In the chapter on prophecy[^27] Haji discusses the qualifications and
character­istics that distinguish a prophet from ordinary men. The
prophet is the intermediary between this world and the next, between the
world of the senses and the spiritual essences, so that his being is
necessary to maintain the hierarchy of Being. The prophet is
distinguished by the fact that he has knowledge of all things which he
has acquired by the grace of God and not through human instruction, by
his power of action which is such that the matter of this world obeys
him as if it were his body, and by his senses which are such that he
sees and hears through them what is hidden to others. He is also marked
by his immunity from sin and error (*ismah*) in all his acts and deeds.

Sainthood (*wilayah*) is in one aspect similar to prophecy in that the
saint, like the prophet, has knowledge of the spiritual world. Yet every
pro­phet is a saint while every saint is not a prophet. The prophet, in
addition to his aspect of sainthood, has the duty of establishing laws
in society and guiding the social, moral, and religious life of the
people to whom he is sent.

Among the prophets themselves, a distinction is to be made between the
*nabi* and the *rasul*, the latter being distinguished by the fact that
he possesses a divine Book in addition to his prophetic mission. Among
those who are called *rasul* there is a further distinction to be made
between the *ulu al-azm*, i.e., those who’s *Shariah* abrogates the
*Shariah* before theirs, and those with whom this is not the case.[^28]
Finally, there is the Seal of the Prophets (*khatam al-anbiya*) the
Prophet who envelops all these stages within himself.[^29]

The mission of the Prophet Muhammad (S), upon whom be peace-by virtue of
his being the Seal of Prophets is the summation of all previous
prophetic missions; his spirit is the universal intellect which is the
first theophany of the divine essence and which made the body of the
Prophet (S) so subtle that he was able to make the Nocturnal Ascent
(*miraj*) to the highest heaven. That is why his light filled all
directions and also that to whatever direction he turned he had no
shadow.

The direction of prayer (*qiblah*) of Moses (as) was in the west or in
the world of multiplicity and that of Jesus (as) in the east or the
world of unity. The *qiblah* of the Prophet Muhammad (s), on the other
hand, is neither in the east nor in the west,[^30] but between them
because, being the centre as well as the totality of existence, he
brought a prophetic message based upon unity in multiplicity and
multiplicity in unity.[^31]

As a Shiah, Haji was greatly concerned with the question of the Imamate
in addition to that of prophecy and, therefore, discusses the political
and re­ligious differences which distinguish the Shiah conception of the
Imamate from that of the Sunnis’. For the Shiahs, as Haji writes, the
spirit of Ali (as) is in essence one with that of the Prophet (S). It is
the universal soul as the spirit of the Pro­phet is the universal
intellect. Moreover, the light of Ali (as) is passed on to his
descendants until the last and twelfth Imam (as) who is the invisible
guardian and protector of the world and without whom all religion and
social as well as cosmic order will be disturbed.

Just as there are twelve signs of the Zodiac, so are there twelve Imams
of whom the last is like *Pisces* for all the stars of the Imamate and
sainthood.[^32] The Last Day which means the end of the longitudinal
hierarchy of existence is also the day of the manifestation of the
twelfth Imam (as) who is himself the last stage of the hierarchy which
extends upwards to the divine essence or Light of lights (*nur
al-anwar*).

On the question of eschatology,[^33] Haji follows closely the teachings
of Mulla Sadra in considering the soul to have come into being with the
body but to have a life independent of the body after death. He also
rejects the argument of earlier philosophers against bodily resurrection
and defends the idea of the resurrection of the soul and the body
together on the Last Day.

There are two resurrections, the first at death, which is the minor, and
the other on the Last Day, which is the major resurrection. In the first
case all the faculties of the soul are absorbed in the *ispahbad* light
and in the second all the lights of the universe are absorbed in the
divine source of all being or the Light of all lights.

Haji discusses also the traditional belief about the events which are to
take place at the time of resurrection and discusses the symbolic as
well as the literal meaning of the Scale (*mizan*), the Bridge
(*sirat*), and the Account-taking (*hisab*) of good and evil. The
physical *sirat* is that which, as the Quran mentions, covers the chasm
over the inferno, but the spiritual *sirat* is the path which the
universal man treads towards the Truth (*Haqq*) and which connects him
with the Truth.

In the final chapter on ethics Haji outlines the degrees of faith
(*iman*) from simple acceptance to demonstration and from that to
spiritual vision. This last degree can be reached only through the
purification of the soul and the acquisition of spiritual virtues such
as purity, truthfulness, reliance upon God, surrender to the divine
will, etc. When man acquires all of these virtues his soul becomes
simple and pure; he then becomes the receptor of the divine theophanies
that illuminate his being and finally unify him with the centre, which
is at once his own source of being and the origin of cosmic existence.

D: Post-Sabziwarian Hikmat
--------------------------

The doctrines of Haji that we have outlined and his influence are still
very much alive in Persia. The school of those whose teachers learnt the
mysteries of *Hikmat* from Haji Sabziwari himself and narrated stories
about his life to them has been able to preserve itself in Persia,
despite the anti­contemplative attitude encouraged by the spirit of
excessive modernism, chiefly because of the life which Haji and to a
certain extent some of the other Qajar Hakims infused into it.[^34]

Of the famous masters of *Hikmat* in Persia during the last century, we
may name abu al-Hasan Jilwah, Muhammad Rida Qumshii, Jahangir Khan
Qashqai, Mulla Ali Zunuzi, the author of *Badayi al-Hikam*, and Mirza
Tahir Tunikabuni, all of whom were contemporaries of Haji, and those of
a later date like the late Mirza Mehdi Ashtiyani, the author of *Asas
al-Tauhid*, who passed away only recently.

Of the masters living today there are several who are worthy of special
attention like Sayyid Muhammad Kazim Assar,[^35] Hajj Muhammad Husain
Tabatabai, the most prolific writer among the present Hakims of
Persia,[^36] and Sayyid abu al-Hasan Rafii Qazwini, a man who is a true
master of all the traditional sciences and perhaps the greatest living
authority on *Hikmat* and who lives in Qazwin in meditation and training
of a few disciples away from the turmoils of modern life.

One should also mention Muhyi al-Din Qumshii, the author of *Hikmat-i
Ilahi* and a large *Diwan* of Sufi poetry and the holder of the chair of
Mulla Sadra in the Theological Faculty of Teheran University; Mirza
Rahim Arbab who lives in Ispahan, the old centre of *Hikmat* in Persia;
Hairi Mazandarani, now residing in Simnan, the author of *Hikmat-i bu
Ali* and one of the most erudite of the living Hakims; Jawad Muslih, the
author of a commentary upon the *Asfar* and its translator into Persian;
Murtida Mutahhari, Muhammad Ali Hakim, Husain Ali Rashid, and Mahmud
Shibahi, all with the exception of Mirza Rahim Arbab and Hairi
Mazandarani being Professors at the Theological Faculty of Teheran
University; Ahmad Ashtiyani, the author of several works on *Hikmat* and
gnosis; Fadil-i Tuni, the commentator of the *Fusus al-Hikam* of ibn
Arabi and many other treatises and a Professor at the Faculty of Letters
of Teheran University; and Muhammad Taqi Amuli, the author of the
commentary *Durar al-Fawaid* upon the *Sharh-i Manzumah*.

One cannot discuss the intellectual history of Islam justly without
taking into account this long tradition the roots of which go back to
the early civiliza­tions of the Middle East and which has been preserved
in Persia and in the bosom of Shiism to this day.[^37] The outstanding
figure of Haji Mulla Hadi was able to revive and strengthen this
tradition in the Qajar period as Mulla Sadra had done two centuries
before him, and to make this wisdom to continue as a living spiritual
and intellectual tradition till today.

Bibliography
------------

Muhammad Taqi Amuli, *Durar al-Fawaid*, 2 Vols., Mustafawi Press,
Teheran, 1377-78/1957-58; E. G. Browne, *A Year Among the Persians*,
Adam & Charles Black, London, 1950; Comte de Gobineau, *Les religions et
les philosophies dans l’Asie centrale*, G. Gres et Cie, Paris, 1923;
Haji Mulla Hadi Sabziwari, *Asrar al-Hikam*, Teheran, lithographed
edition, 1286/1869; *Diwan-i Asrar*, Teheran, litho­graphed edition,
Teheran, 1300/1882; *Sharh-i Dua-i Jaushan-i Kabir wa Sabah*,
lithographed edition, 1267/1850; *Sharh-i Manzumah*, Teheran,
lithographed edition, 1298/1880 and many later editions; *Sharh-i
Mathnawi*, Teheran, lithographed edition, 1285/1868; Muhammad Iqbal,
*The Development of Metaphysics in Persia*, Luzac & Co., London, 1908;
Murtida Mudarrisi Chahardihi, *Life and Philosophy of Haji Mulla Hadi
Sabziwari*, Tahuri Bookshop, Teheran, 1955; *Tarikh-i Falasifih-i
Islam*, 2 Vols., Ilmi Press, Teheran 1336-37 Solar; Muhammad Rida Salihi
Kir­mani, *Wujud az Nazar-i Falasifih-i Islam*, Piruz Press, Qum, 1336,
Solar; A. M. A. Shushtery, *Outlines of Islamic Culture*, 2 Vols.,
Bangalore, 1938.

[^1]: Only the most eminent figures in the intellectual life of Islam
have come to receive such simple designations. In Persia one can name
only a few such luminaries, ibn Sina being called Shaikh; Nasir al-Din
Tusi, Khwajah; Jalal al-Din Rumi, Mulla; ibn Arabi, Shaikh al-Akbar; and
Mulla Sadra, Akhund. In view of these designations it is easy to see
what an exalted position has been accorded to Haji in Persia.

[^2]: There is an account of the life of Haji by himself on which we
have drawn much for our information. See M. Mudarrisi Chahardihi,
Tarikh-i Falasifih-i Islam, Ilmi Press, Teheran, 1336-37 Solar, Vol. 2,
pp. 131ff.; and also by the same author Life and Philosophy of Haji
Mulla Hddi Sabziwari, Tahuri Bookshop, Teheran, 1955. The story of the
life of Haji as related by his son as well as a sum­mary of some of
Haji’s doctrines not all of which, however, can be considered to be
authentic is given by E. G. Browne, in his A Year Amongst the Persians,
Adam & Charles Black, London, 1950, pp. 143-58. Accounts of his life are
also found in the usual sources like the Qisas al-Ulama, Matla al-Shams,
and Riyad al-Arifin. When Gobineau visited Persia, Haji was alive and at
the height of his fame; he is mentioned with great respect in Gohineau’s
writings; see Comte de Gobineau, Les religions et les philosophies dans
l’Asie centrale, G. Gres et Cie, Paris, 1923, pp. 113-16. There are also
references to Haji in A. M. A. Shushtery, Outlines of Islamic Culture,
Bangalore, 1938, Vol. 2, pp. 452-54; and in M. Iqbal, The De­velopment
of Metaphysics in Persia, Luzac & Co., London, 1908, pp. 175ff.

[^3]: Among his special disciples one may name Sultan Ali Shah Gunabadi
who later became the founder of the Gunabadi brotherhood of Sufis that
is one of the most widely expanded brotherhoods in Persia today. For the
stages through which Haji’s students had to pass before being able to
participate in his courses on Hikmat, see E. G. Browne, op. cit., pp.
147-48.

[^4]: There are many prayers composed by the various Shiah Imams,
especially the fourth Imam Zain al-Abidin (as), like the Dua-i Kubra,
Misbah, and the Sahifih-i Sajjadiyyah (Sajjad being the title of the
fourth Imam) which are read and chanted throughout the year, especially
during Ramadan, as devotional prayers. Many of them, however, are not
simply prayers of devotion but are replete with gnostic and metaphysical
doctrines of highest inspiration and have been, therefore, commented
upon by many of the Hukama and gnostics, who, like Haji, have drawn out
their inner meaning by the light of their own inspiration.

[^5]: See M. Mudarrisi Chahardihi, op. cit., pp. 63ff.

[^6]: It is difficult to understand Iqbal’s statement made in his
Development of Metaphysics in Persia that with Sabziwari Persian thought
went back to pure Platonism and abandoned the Neo-Platonic theory of
emanation. Actually, Haji, like other Muslim Hakims before him, accepts
the multiple states of Being each of which has issued forth from the
state above through effusion or theophany. It is true that Plato was a
definite source of Haji’s doctrines as he himself was for nearly all the
later Persian Hakims after Suhrawardi, but this is not to deny Haji’s
affinity to the doctrines of Plotinus and his commentators, especially
concerning the hierarchy of the intelligences.

[^7]: See the chapter on Suhrawardi Maqtul.

[^8]: The relation of particular beings to extended being is like that
of knots to the chord in which they are tied. See Sharh-i Manzumah,
Teheran, lithographed edition, 1298/1880, section on Ilahiyat, pp. 1ff.;
and M. R. Salihi Kirmani, Wujud az Nazar-i Falasifih-i Islam, Piruz
Press, Qum, 1336/1917, pp. 55ff.

[^9]: See Seyyed Hossein Nasr, “The Polarisation of Being,” Pakistan
Philosophical Journal, Vol. 3, No. 2, Oct. 1959, pp. 8-13.

[^10]: We can, therefore, justly say that this issue as understood by
the later Hakims is one of the distinguishing features of Hikmat in the
Safawid period and that the earlier schools, the Peripatetics as well as
the Illuminationists, did not interpret this question in the same manner
as the later Hakims.

[^11]: The whole discussion concerning Being occupies the first section
of the Ilahiyat of Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 1-131.

[^12]: The theologians (Mutikallimun) believed that each creature in the
objective world is a quiddity including the divine essence that is an
unknowable quiddity. Although this view is diametrically opposed to the
view of the Hakims, in certain passages Haji interprets the view of the
theologians symbolically to mean the same as the view of the
Illuminationists and, therefore, defends them even though attacking them
for their literalism.

[^13]: For this view Haji is indebted partly to Mulla Sadra and partly
to Jalal al-Din Dawwani.

[^14]: In his commentary upon the Mathnawi, Teheran, lithographed
edition, 1285/1868, p. 8, Haji names these stages as the divine essence
or ipseity; its first determination; the archetypes (al-ayan
al-thabitah); the world of the spirits (arwah); the world of inverted
forms or similitudes (amthal); the world of bodies (ajsam); and,
finally, the stage which is the summation of all those before it, i.e.,
the stage of the perfect man (al-insan al-kamil). In other places Haji
considers the seven stages of universal existence to be the divine
essence that is the Principle, the world of divinity, of the
intelligences, of the angels, of the archetypes, of forms, and of
matter. This descending hierarchy is also mentioned in E. G. Browne, op.
cit., p. 150; A. M. A. Shushtery, op. cit., p. 454.

[^15]: Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 131-40.

[^16]: Mulla Ali Zunuzi, a contemporary of the sage of Sabziwar, in his
Badayi al-Hikam criticizes Haji’s view and defends Mulla Sadra against
his criticism. The view of Mulla Sadra as mentioned above appears in
some of his works, while in others he also considers knowledge to be,
like Being, above the categories.

[^17]: Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 140-51.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 157. M. T. Amuli, Durar al-Fawaid, Mustafawi Press,
Teheran, Vol. 1, pp. 480ff. It is in this discussion that Haji
criticizes Mulla Sadra for having proved the identity of the knower and
the known in the Mashair through the argument of relation (tadayuf) that
Haji considers to be insufficient.

[^19]: Asrar al-Hikam, Teheran, lithographed edition, 1286/1869, pp.
83ff.

[^20]: This knowledge, Haji compares to the point of the Pen before
writing which contains all the letters of the alphabet before they
become distinct on paper. The Pen is the same as the reality of Muhammad
(al-haqiqat al-Muhammadiyyah) and the first victorial light (nur
al-qahir) of the Illuminationists.

[^21]: Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 183-84.

[^22]: Refer to the chapter on Suhrawardi Maqtul. This seven-fold
hierarchy is essentially the same as mentioned above with only a change
in terminology that occurs often among the Hakims.

[^23]: Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 284ff.; Asrar al-Hikam, pp. 152ff. These
faculties arc also outlined in Iqbal, op. cit., and Browne, op. cit., p.
157.

[^24]: For the meaning of this expression that is taken from the
terminology of the Illuminationists, see the chapter on Suhrawardi
Maqtul.

[^25]: See Iqbal, op. cit., pp. 185-86.

[^26]: These stages have already been discussed in the chapter on Mulla
Sadra whose terminology Haji has adopted directly. See also A. M. A.,
Shushtary, op. cit., p. 454.

[^27]: Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 318-29; also Asrar al-Hikam, pp. 307ff.

[^28]: Regarding the question of the relation of Islam to previous
religions and abrogation of older religions, see F. Schuon, Transcendent
Unity of Religions, Pantheon Co., New York, 1953, Chaps. 5 to 7.

[^29]: Haji considers the greatest miracle of the Prophet Muhammad (S),
who is the Seal of Prophecy, to be the Quran, which in the beauty of
language has no match in Arabic literature. He adds that in each period
God gives those miracles to His prophets that conform to the mentality
of the people of that age. That is why the miracle of the Quran lies in
its language as the Arabs considered eloquence to be of such great
importance; likewise, in the case of Moses (as) his miracle was in magic
which was at his time one of the basic arts, and in the case of Christ
(as) raising the dead to life because medicine occupied at that time an
exalted position among the sciences.

[^30]: This is with reference to the verse of Light in the Quran
(24:35), in which the olive tree, from the oil of which the divine light
emanates, is said to be neither of the east nor of the west.

[^31]: By this symbolism Haji implies that the message of Moses (as) was
essentially the exoteric aspect of the Abrahamic tradition, and the
message of Jesus (as) its esoteric aspect, while Islam, being a
totality, is the summation of the two, at once esoteric and exoteric.
See also F. Schuon, op. cit., Chap. 6.

[^32]: Asrar al-Hikam, p. 369.

[^33]: Sharh-i Manzumah, pp. 329ff.; Asrar al-Hikam, pp. 261ff.

[^34]: A list of some of these Hakims is given by Gobineau, op. cit.,
pp. 116-20. See also Itimad al-Saltanih Muhammad Husain Khan, Kitab
al-Maathir wal­-Athar, Teheran, lithographed edition, 1306/1888, pp.
131-226.

[^35]: This great authority on Hikmat and gnosis has trained a
generation of students in Teheran University and the Sepahsalar madrasah
but has not written ex­tensively on these subjects.

[^36]: This sage whom we mentioned in the chapter on Mulla Sadra is the
author of many important works in Arabic and Persian including the
commentary al-Mizan, Usul-i Falsafih wa Rawish-i Realism with commentary
by Murtida Mutahhari, a book on the principles of Shiism which came as
answers to a set of questions posed by Henri Corbin and published as the
Salanih-i Maktab-i Tashayyu, No. 2; commentary upon the Asfar, etc.
Tabatabai has revived the study of Hikmat in Qum, which is the most
important centre of Shiah studies today and has produced many scholars
who have themselves become authorities on the intellectual sciences.

[^37]: It is for this reason that with great obstinacy and despite some
awkwardness we have refused to translate Hikmat and Hakim simply as
philosophy and philo­sopher even if in Persia too Hikmat is often called
falsafah. Philosophy in Western languages is almost synonymous with one
form or another of rationalism, and recently irrationalism has been
divorced from sapientia which Hikmat and even falsafah imply in Arabic
and Persian.


