Publisher’s Preface
===================

In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful

The precious legacy left behind by the Holy Prophet’s Household [ahl
al-bayt] (may peace be upon them all) and their followers’ preservation
of this legacy from the menace of extinction is a perfect example of the
all-encompassing school [madrasah] that embraces all the different
branches of Islamic knowledge.

This school has been able to train many talented personalities by
quenching them with this gushing fountain. This school has given
scholars to the Muslim ummah who, by following the Holy Prophet’s
Household (a.s), have done their best in order to clear up the doubts
and skepticisms put forth by various creeds and intellectual currents
both inside and outside the Muslim society. Throughout the past
centuries, they have presented the firmest answers and solutions to
these doubts.

Anchored to the responsibilities upon its shoulders, the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) World Assembly has embarked on defending the sanctity of risalah
[message] and its authentic beliefs which have always been opposed by
the chiefs and leaders of anti-Islamic sects, religions and trends.

In this sacred path, the Assembly regards itself as a follower of the
upright pupils of the School of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s)—those who have
always been ready to refute those accusations and calumnies and have
tried to be always in the frontline of this struggle on the basis of the
expediencies of time and space.

The experiences in this field, contained in the books of the scholars
belong to the School of the Ahl al-Bayt (a.s), are unique in their own
right. It is because these experiences are based upon knowledge and
preeminence of intellect and reasoning, and because they are devoid of
blind fanaticism or whims and caprices. These experiences address
experts, scholars and thinkers in a manner that appeals to healthy minds
and pure human natural disposition [fitrah].

In a bid to assist those who are in quest of truth, the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) World Assembly has endeavored to enter a new phase of these worthy
experiences by doing researches and translating the works of
contemporary Shi\`ah writers or those who, through divine guidance, have
embraced this noble school.

The Assembly is also engaged in the study and publication of the
valuable works of pious predecessors and outstanding Shi\`ah
personalities so that those who search for the truth may quench their
thirst from this palatable fountain where they find the truth which the
School of the Prophet’s Household (a.s) offers to the entire world.

It is hoped that the dear readers will not deprive the Ahl al-Bayt
(a.s) World Assembly of their valuable opinions, suggestions, and
constructive criticisms in this arena.

We also invite scholars, translators and other institutions to assist
us in propagating the pure Muhammadan Islam.

We ask God, the Exalted, to accept this humble effort and give us
success to enhance it under the auspices of His vicegerent on earth,
al-Mahdi (may Allah, the Exalted, expedite his glorious advent).

It is appropriate here to express our utmost gratitude to Mr. Mahdi
Pishva'i for writing the book, to Dr. Farrukh Pey for translating it, to
Badr Shahin for editing the translation. We should also like to thank
colleagues who took part in accomplishing this task especially the staff
of the Translation Office for fulfilling their responsibility.


Cultural Affairs Department
The Ahl al-Bayt (a.s) World Assembly


