Ssction Three : From Prophethood To Migration
=============================================

Chapter One :Prophethood and promulgation of the Religion

**On the Threshold of Prophethood**

The Holy Prophet’s ancestors were all monotheists and his household was
pure. Beside the sincerity and purity of his ancestors and household, he
enjoyed pure and high education and always stayed away from the
unseemliness and abomination of idolatry practiced by the Meccan
people.[^1] Referring to the period of the Holy Prophet’s training and
education, Imam \`Ali (a.s) states:

From the time of Muhammad's nursing days, God provided him with His
most elegant angels to guide him towards the most appropriate
virtues.[^2]

Imam al-Baqir (s) has said, From the time the Holy Prophet stopped
suckling, God appointed him an elegant angel to teach and train him good
manners and appropriate behavior. It was the same angel who, prior to
his prophethood, called him saying “Blessings be to you, Prophet
Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah.” However, the Holy Prophet thought
that the voice was coming from the stones and the ground; and the more
he paid attention the less he could observe anything.[^3]

Approaching his prophethood, Muhammad (s) had reached the highest point
in rational thinking; he could not tolerate corrupted surroundings
anymore and preferred seclusion.[^4]

From the time he was thirty-seven years old, he was dominated by some
specific spiritual conditions. He felt there was a window open to him
from the unknown world. Whatever he had heard from Bahira, Nustur and
others was taking place, because he was observing a new light and
exposed to some secrets:

he repeatedly received some messages from Gabriel, but he could not
identify the sender.[^5] For a time during his sleep, he was addressed as
the Prophet. Once, in the desert surrounding Mecca, he heard someone
calling him Messenger of Allah. He asked, “Who are you?” The answer was,
“I am Gabriel; God has sent me to tell you that you are His Messenger.”
When he told his wife of the content of the message, she became
delighted, saying, “I hope it is true.”[^6]

During this time, Muhammad (s) used to resort to Hara’ Mount to pray
God[^7] in seclusion.[^8] It was a common practice among the Qurayshi
monotheists to stay at Hara’ and worship God.[^9] The first person to
carry out such a practice was \`Abd al-Muttalib, the Holy Prophet's
grandfather, who used to go to Hara’ during the months of Ramazan. He
used to feed the needy in this month.[^10]

**The Start of Prophethood**

When Muhammad (s) was at the age of forty, he still attended the Hara’
Mount to pray to God where he received the first verses of the Holy
Qur’an as the first revelations:[^11]

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Read in name of
your Lord who created. He created man from a clot. Read and your Lord is
most honorable, who taught to write with the pen, taught man what he
knew not. (96:1-5)[^12]

In two places of the Holy Qur’an, God has referred to the meeting of
Muhammad (s) with Gabriel.

I swear by the star when it goes down; Your companion (i.e. Muhammad)
does not err, nor does he go astray; nor does he speak out of desire. It
is naught but revelation that is revealed; the Lord of Mighty Powers has
taught him, the Lord of strength; so he attained completion, and he
(i.e. the angel) is in the highest part of the horizon. Then he drew
near (to Muhammad) then he bowed so he was the measure of two bows or
closer still. And He revealed to His servant what he revealed. The heart
(of Muhammad) was not untrue, making him see what he saw.
(53:1-12)[^13]

I swear by the stars, that run their course and hide themselves, and
the night when it departs, And the morning when it brightens, Most
surely it is the Word of an honored messenger, The possessor of
strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of the Dominion, One
to abide, and faithful in trust. And Your companion (Muhammad) has not
gone mad. And of a truth, he saw himself on the clear horizon. Nor of
the unseen has he tenacious concealed. Nor is it the word of the cursed
Shaitan, Wither then will you go? (81:15-25)

**An Untrue Account of the Start of the Revelation**

In some historical books, there is an erroneous and mystical account of
the prophethood of Muhammad (s). This account is widespread; it has
found its way into some Persian books as well; therefore, it is better
for us to evaluate it critically.

\`a’ishah reports: When revelation occurred to Muhammad (s), its
content was right. Any dream that he had previously had come true. Then,
he became fond of seclusion; he took refuge in Hara’ cave. He used to
stay there praying God, then he would return to his family and receive
some food from Khadijah to return to the cave. When the angel came to
him, he was staying at the cave. The angel said, “Read.” The Prophet
answered, “I do not know how to read.

” The angel took and squeezed him so much that he lost his temper!
Then, the angel let go of him, saying, “Read.” The Prophet, once more,
answered, “I do not know how to read.” The angel again squeezed and
ordered him to read. Once again, the Prophet replied that he could not
read. On the third time, the pressure was so great on the Prophet’s body
that he could tolerate no more. Then, the angel said, “Read in the name
of your Lord Who created.” The Prophet returned home trembling all over.
Going directly to Khadijah, he asked her to cover him. As she did, his
fear and anxiety went away.

The Prophet then told Khadijah about what had happened and about his
anxiety. At that time, she tried to ease him, saying, “I swear to God
that He would never humiliate you since you have been kind to everybody;
you have been helping the needy and hosting the guests.” Then, Khadijah
accompanied him to her cousin, Waraqah ibn Nawfal.

He was a blind elderly man who had converted to Christianity and
translated the Gospel into Hebrew. Khadijah said, “It is prophethood,
cousin! Listen to what he will tell you.” Waraqah asked Muhammad (s),
“What do you see, my nephew?” The Prophet told him what had happened.
Waraqah then said, “This is the same angel who had revealed to Moses. I
wish I were young now. I wish I would be alive when your people would
expel you.”[^14]

**Criticism**

As we have already said, this narration in this form is not acceptable.
The following reasons show that it lacks the required authenticity:

(1) The narrator is \`a’ishah who was born in the fourth (or fifth)
year after prophethood.[^15] Therefore, she was not mature enough at that
time to have reported this account and since she does not mention the
name of the original narrator, her reporting lacks the required
authenticity.

(2) According to this narration, the angel of revelation forced
Muhammad (s) to read while he was illiterate! If we assume that Muhammad
(s) had to read God's verses, a written plate, it is neither natural nor
logical, since God and the angel knew that he was illiterate and he did
not have the skill of reading. If it is meant that the Prophet had to
repeat the verses after the angel, this should not have been very
difficult for Muhammad (s) who was mentally mature and advanced at that
age.

(3) What is meant by the angel's persistence in putting pressure on the
Prophet? This is absurd when we realize that learning is a mental act;
therefore, bodily pressure would not have any effect on it. If we assume
that the Prophet could have suddenly become capable of reading through
God's Power, God's determination would have sufficed and these
arrangements would have looked absurd.

Even if we assumed that the source of this bodily pressure had been due
to Muhammad's relationship to the unknown world and the source of
creation (This is because he, with all his grandeur, was earthly and had
an earthly and mundane origin), this assumption would be hard to
justify. This is because, according to the Holy Qur’an, the revelation
of God’s word to the Prophets happens in the following ways:

pa) Direct connection and the receipt of the Divine Revelation without
any intermediary,

b) Through hearing the voice without observing the owner of the voice,
and
c) Through Gabriel or the Angel of Revelation.[^16]

The Holy Prophet suffered a lot of pressures only when he was receiving
the revelations; in accordance with some narrations, he suffered such
tremendous amount of pressures that he would lose the color of his face
and perspire a great deal so much so that the drops of sweat would fall
from his complexion.[^17] However, if he received the revelations
indirectly through the angel, he would not undergo any drastic bodily
changes. This state is reported by Imam al-sadiq (s) who said,

Whenever the revelation came through Gabriel; he said so and so;
however, if he received the revelation directly, he would show the
pressures he was under and sometimes he would become unconscious.[^18]

Meeting with Gabriel did not produce any special emotional reaction in
the Holy Prophet and Gabriel would never enter his presence without
permission. He would sit in front of him quite politely.[^19]

Historians unanimously contend that since the first verses of the Holy
Qur’an were revealed in the Hara’ cave by Gabriel, the Holy Prophet did
not suffer any unusual pressure. Of course, this does not negate the
worry which the Holy Prophet had vis-à-vis the idolaters and their
animosities.

(4) Taking into consideration the fact that the Holy Prophet received
the revelations continuously, there is no need to assume that he would
be taken by surprise or have been perplexed. Besides, in most records,
Gabriel attended the Holy Prophet’s presence for the first time on
Saturday night, Sunday night and Monday night to ascend revelations to
him.[^20]

So, Gabriel’s visit in Hara’ was not the first so that he might have
been perplexed. Generally, it is the case that a person would not
receive God's revelation unless he was quite prepared for such a huge
position.

(5) How could it happen for Khadijah to have known more than the Holy
Prophet and to have comforted him when she had seen him anxious?

(6) The worst part of the above fable is the assumption that the Holy
Prophet had been raised to this position of prophethood without previous
knowledge; and that he had not recognized Gabriel and could not have
recognized him or his Message until an old Christian confirmed; and
Muhammad (s) had relied on his prediction and had been assured of his
prophethood and had become quiet! We do not need to elaborate on this
story because it is so absurd that it would not need to be criticized.

(7) It is noteworthy that such unfounded myths have never been
presented for the prophethood of the previous prophets.

(8) This myth is incompatible with what the Holy Qur’an states about
the Holy Prophet:

The heart was not untrue making him see what he saw. (53:11)

tabirsi, well-known Shi\`ite scholar and interpreter of the Holy
Qur'an, writes:

God would not reveal anything to His Prophet unless His revelations are
accompanied by some vivid reasons and unless He assures to the Prophet
that what is revealed unto him is from God. The Prophet would not need
anything more and he does not need to be worried.[^21]

When Imam al-sadiq (s) was asked by one of his followers, “Why didn't
the Holy Prophet assume that the revelation could have been nothing but
Satan’s temptations when he received them?” The Imam answered, “When God
appoints a servant of His as a prophet, He would give him the required
assurances in such a way that he would vividly observe what is revealed
unto him.”[^22]

Although they are distinguished scholars, the interpreters of sahih
al-Bukhari and sahih Muslim (in which \`a’ishah’s account appears) have
taken the narration as authentic and then tried to explain it, but they
resorted to spurious reasoning which at times seems irrational.[^23]

Similar narrations have been reported by narrators such as \`Abdullah
ibn Shaddad, \`Ubayd ibn \`Umayr, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas and \`Urwah ibn
al-Zubayr. However, since their accounts are baseless and invented, we
will not deal with them.[^24] These spurious and unfounded accounts have
penetrated into some Christian sources and misused against the Holy
Prophet.[^25] This critique of ours would make them useless.

**Secret Invitation to the New Religion**

For three years, the Holy Prophet invited people to the new religion
secretly, because the circumstances at Mecca were not yet ready for an
open invitation. During these three years, he secretly met people whom
he thought mentally ready to accept the new religion.[^26] He invited
them to accept the uniqueness of Allah and his prophethood. Meanwhile,
Quraysh became aware of his claims; whenever they saw him on the roads
and streets, they used to remark, “The young man of Banu-\`Abd
al-Muttalib talks about the heavens.”[^27] However, they were not aware
of the content of his invitations since he did not proclaim his
ideology. Therefore, they would not react harshly.

During this time, some people became Muslims. Then, one of these newly
converted, named Arqam, offered his house which was at the foot of safa
Mount to be used by the Prophet.

Up to the time when he initiated his open invitation, the Holy Prophet
and Muslims would gather at this house, which had become a center for
the religious propaganda, and prayed therein.[^28]

**The First Muslim Woman and Man**

In accordance with the unanimous view of Muslim historians, Khadijah
was the first woman to accept Islam. Among men, \`Ali[^29] was the first
man to accept Islam.[^30] This is because it was natural for the Prophet
to inform Khadijah, his wife, and \`Ali, who was a member of his
household and was educated and nourished by him, of his ideology as soon
as he returned home from Hara’. Those two who were familiar with
Muhammad's sincerity, confirmed him immediately. It would not be
difficult to prove this issue even in the absence of valid historical
documents. However, there are ample documents, some of which we will
address here:

**The Reasons Behind \`Ali's Taking the Lead**

(1) The Holy Prophet explicitly referred to \`Ali's pioneering in
accepting Islam. At the presence of a group of Muslims, he declared:

The first person among you who will meet me at the side of the heavenly
fountain [Kawthar], on the Resurrection day, will be \`Ali, who is the
first among you who accepted Islam.[^31]

(2) Great and well-known narrators report that Muhammad (s) became a
prophet on Monday and \`Ali prayed with him on Tuesday.[^32]

(3) Imam \`Ali (s), concerning this issue, remarks:

On that day, Islam had not yet entered the house of the Holy Prophet
and Khadijah: I was the third one after them. I could vividly see the
light of prophethood and smell its fragrance.[^33]

(4) Elsewhere, Imam \`Ali (s) refers to his pioneering in Islam:

O God, I am the only person who answered the Prophet's call and turned
to You. Except for the Prophet, nobody else prayed You before me.[^34]

(5) Imam \`Ali (s) says elsewhere:

I am God's servant and the brother of the trustworthy Prophet. I prayed
with him seven years prior to the others. Nobody may deny it except for
a wicked liar.[^35]

(6) \`Ufayf ibn Qays al-Kindi says:

During the Ignorance Era, I used to be a trader of perfumes. On one of
my journeys, I entered Mecca and visited \`Abbas, one of the Meccan
merchants and the Prophet's uncle, on an extremely hot day. A young man
whose face was as bright as the moon came. He looked up at the sky,
stood in the direction of the Kaaba and started praying.

After a short time, another good-looking young man arrived, stood next
to him and started praying. Then a veiled woman arrived, stood behind
them and started praying. I was astonished to see three persons praying
at the center of the idolaters. I turned my face toward \`Abbas and
exclaimed, “What restful scenery!” He repeated my sentence and added,
“Do you recognize these three?” I replied, No, I do not.” He said, “The
first person was my nephew, Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah; the second was my
other nephew, \`Ali ibn Abi-talib; the third was Muhammad's wife.
Muhammad claims that his religion has come from Allah. Now, these are
the only believers in this religion on the entire earth.”[^36]

This issue vividly shows that at the beginning of the spread of Islam,
it was Imam \`Ali who joined the Prophet after Khadijah. Pioneering in
the acceptance of Islam is a value which the Holy Qur’an has highly
stressed:

And the foremost are the foremost; these are they who are drawn near to
Allah. (56:10-11)

The Holy Qur’an also considers of great value the conversion to Islam
of those who, prior to the conquest of Mecca, sacrificed their lives and
wealth for God’s sake and accepted the new religion:

…not alike; among you are those who spent before the victory and
fought. They are more exalted in rank than those who spent and fought
afterwards; and Allah has promised good to all; and Allah is aware of
what you do. (57:10)

The significance of conversions to Islam prior to the conquest of Mecca
(which occurred at the eighth year AH) lies in the fact that they
accepted Islam at a time when it was not yet powerful and when Mecca was
still the stronghold for the idolaters and Muslims' lives and wealth
were at risk from permanent danger.

Of course, Muslims achieved some security after their migration to
Medina and the acceptance of Islam by the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj
and the other neighboring tribes; in later military conflicts, Muslims
were triumphant. However, the environment was still dangerous. For these
reasons, the acceptance of Islam under those perilous and turbulent
times was quite significant. Such early acceptance of Islam was a great
honor for the Prophet's close followers. Having this in mind, we will
realize how important Imam \`Ali's early acceptance could have been.


