The Pioneer Groups in Acceptance of Islam
=========================================

Among the social groups of those days, two groups pioneered in
accepting Islam:

**A) The youth**

A cursory look at the list of the early Muslims indicates that most of
them were youth. Elderly people were conservative; idolatry was deeply
rooted in them. Due to their bright minds, the youth were more ready to
accept the new faith—a fact applying to religious revelations.

On the basis of a historical report, during the early days of the
secret invitation to Islam, there were groups of youth and destitute
people who joined Islam.[^37] When the Holy Prophet started his public
invitation and when his followers increased in number, people of Quraysh
complained to Abu-talib about Muhammad, saying, “We have come to you
several times to ask you to ask your nephew to stop cursing our
ancestors and idols and seducing our children, men, women, and servants
into the new faith...”[^38]

On the Holy Prophet's journey to ta’if for the propagation of Islam,
the noblemen refused to accept Islam for fear that their youth might
follow Muhammad.[^39] After the migration to Abyssinia, representatives
of Quraysh went to the royal court of the Abyssinian king, al-Najashi,
to force these Muslims to return home. In that court, there were some
complaints regarding the spread of Islam among the youth of Mecca.[^40]

A man from the Hudhayl tribe entered Mecca and the Holy Prophet invited
him to Islam. Abu-Jahl warned him, saying, “Never listen to Muhammad;
this man considers us stupid and says that our dead parents would go to
hell. Besides, he utters nonsense.” The man asked, “How come you don’t
expel him from your city?” Abu-Jahl replied, “If he is expelled, our
youth will go after him and listen to his flowery speech and then they
will attack us.”[^41]

\`Utbah, a dignitary of Quraysh, complained to Asad ibn Zurarah, a
nobleman from the Khazraj tribe in Yathrib, about the inclinations of
the youth towards the Holy Prophet.[^42]

An investigation of the list of the early Muslims shows that most of
them were under thirty years of age. For instance, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas
was either seventeen[^43] or nineteen[^44] years old; al-Zubayr ibn
al-\`Awwam was fifteen[^45] or sixteen;[^46] \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf was
thirty; he was born ten years after the Elephant Year.[^47] Mus\`ab ibn
\`Umayr was nearly twenty-five years old; at the time of his martyrdom
at the Battle of Uhud that took place at the third year after Hegira, he
was nearly forty years old.[^48] Arqam, who submitted his house to the
Prophet, was between twenty and thirty years old; when he died in 55 AH,
he was eighty years old.[^49]

**B) The Deprived and the Oppressed**

By these two expressions, so prevalent in the Islamic sources, is meant
the freed slaved who, despite superficial freedom, had some
relationships with their previous owners. They were called mawla meaning
made free. Another group of these oppressed ones was the strangers who
had come to Mecca from other places to live. Since they lacked tribal
associations, they had to be under the protection of a certain tribe in
order for them to be secured. They did not enjoy the same rights that
members of Quraysh had. They were socially disadvantaged.

This group, who had no tribe in Mecca to be affiliated with and who
lacked power, represented the pioneers in the acceptance of Islam.[^50]
Their conversion to Islam was not tolerated by the infidels, according
to a narration; whenever the Holy Prophet (s) sat in the Holy Precinct
with his oppressed followers—such as \`Ammar ibn Yasir, Khabbab ibn
al-Aratt, suhayb ibn Sinan, Bilal, Abu-Fukayhah and Amir ibn
Fuhayrah—they were ridiculed by people of Quraysh who sarcastically
remarked, “Look at his companions! God has chosen from among us these
bare-footed individuals who have adopted Islam!”[^51]

The chiefs of Quraysh, once, passed by a gathering which the Holy
Prophet had held with suhayb, Khabbab, Bilal, \`Ammar and some others.
Observing this, they addressed the Holy Prophet, saying, “Muhammad! Have
you selected only this few from among your nation and you are happy with
them? Should we follow this group? Has God only guided this group? If
you dismiss this group, we might then be your followers.” At this time,
the following Qur'anic verses were revealed:

And do not drive away those who call upon their Lord in the morning and
the evening, they desire only His favor; neither are you answerable for
any reckoning of theirs, nor are they answerable for any reckoning of
yours, so that you should drive them away and thus be of the unjust.

And thus, so We try some of them by others so that they say: Are these
they upon whom Allah has conferred benefit from among us? Does not Allah
best know the grateful? (6:52-53)

During the first years of his mission, people of Quraysh dispatched
some representatives to ask about the Holy Prophet. They went to the
Jews: “We have come here to seek your advice regarding the event that is
taking place in our town. A young orphan thinks that he has been sent by
Rahman (the All-beneficent God); and we do not know any person by this
name except for one living in Yamamah.” The Jew asked for the
characteristics of the Holy Prophet: “Who are his followers?” They
replied, “The lowliest persons!” The great Jewish scholar replied
smilingly, “This is the same Prophet whose signs are predicted in our
Holy Book. His nation will be his worst enemies.”[^52]

Of course, the rapid inclinations of the oppressed towards Islam did
not mean securing the interests or benefits of special social classes;
rather, they implied the negation of the worldly domination of man over
man; they implied the adoption of Allah's government and domination—an
immediate threat to the power of the aggressors and oppressors that
excited their severe opposition. This matter had happened with the
previous prophets as well:

But the chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people said: We
consider you but a mortal like ourselves, and we do not see who have
followed you but those who are the meanest of us at first thought and we
do not see in you any excellence over us; nay, we deem you liars.
(11:27)

The chief of those who behaved proudly among his people said to those
considered weak to those who believed from among them: Do you know that
salih is sent by his Lord? They said: Surely, we are believers in what
he has been sent with. (7:75-76)

**Inviting His Relatives to the New Religion**

After three years of his mission, the Holy Prophet received an order
from Allah to invite his relatives to his faith:

And warn your nearest relations, and be kind to him who follows you of
the believers. But if they disobey you, then say: Surely, I am clear of
what you do. (26:214-216)

Having received this revelation, the Holy Prophet ordered Imam \`Ali to
prepare some food and invite the sons of \`Abd al-Muttalib to hear God's
revelation. Imam \`Ali (s) carried out the order. Nearly forty people
showed up. Among them were Abu-talib, Hamzah and Abu-Lahab. The food
seemed insufficiently little; however, every body was able to eat their
fill.

Abu-Lahab declared, “This man has hypnotized you.” This statement
caused the Holy Prophet to abandon his propagation of the faith on that
day and the meeting came to an end with no result. Next day, \`Ali (s)
once again prepared some food and invited the same group. This time, the
Holy Prophet, after dinner remarked, I do not know of anybody among
Arabs who has brought to his people anything better than what I am
bringing to you. I am bringing to you the good of this world and the
Other World. God has ordered me to guide you all to Him. Now, who is
ready among you to help me and he will be my brother and
successor?”[^53]

Nobody answered. \`Ali (s), who was the youngest among them, said, “O
Messenger of God; I will help you.” Then, the Holy Prophet replied,
“This is my brother, my representative and my successor. Listen to obey
him.”

p This event leads us to the basic fact that the issues of prophethood
and Imamate are inseparable; during the first years of his prophethood
and on the first day of his mission, the Holy Prophet brought up the
topic of Imamate and the future leadership of Muslims.

On the other hand, it should not be assumed that the Holy Prophet, up
to his death and during the event of Ghadir Khumm, brought up \`Ali's
Imamate. Later on, he brought up the same issue on other occasions, such
as in the famous hadith al-manzilah (Narration of Position).[^54]
However, the event of Ghadir Khumm was the most significant for the
announcement of \`Ali's successorship due to the fact that there were so
many witnesses present.

With regards to the sequence of the surahs (chapters of the Holy
Qur'an), it could be understood that the invitation of the relatives
could have happened prior to the public invitation to the new
faith.[^55]


**Chapter Two : The Public Propagation and the Start of Oppositions**

**The Start of the Public Invitation**

Having made the public invitation for some time, the Holy Prophet
received an order from God to make his propagation public and not to be
afraid of the infidels:

Therefore, declare openly what you are bidden and turn aside from the
polytheists. Surely, We will suffice you against the scoffers.
(15:94-95)

Having received this revelation, the Holy Prophet rose up in the
Abtah[^56] and declared:

I am God's apostle. I invite you to my new faith to worship the One and
Only God. Stop worshipping idols which are neither useful nor can they
create, nor provide you with sustenance, nor give you life, nor cause
you to die.[^57]

From then on, the Prophet's invitation entered a new stage as he was
engaged in the propagation of his faith in social gatherings, at the
Hajj ceremonies, at Mina, and among the tribes living in the outskirts
of Mecca.

**Struggle with Quraysh**

People of Quraysh did not show any severe reactions during the early
stages of the propagation for Islam. However, as soon as the Holy
Prophet started explicitly negating their idols, calling them senseless
and useless entities, they became exasperated; they started animosity
against him.[^58] With regards to the tribal system which existed in
Mecca, attacking Muhammad (s) would entail revenge-taking of
Banu-Hashim.

Therefore, the chiefs of Quraysh, after much deliberation, came to the
conclusion that they would better make use of his uncle, Abu-talib, and
talk to him is such a way so that he could discourage his nephew from
the way he was following. To this end, they arranged for several
meetings with Abu-talib during which they reminded him of his dignity
and high social status.

They asked him to discourage his nephew from cursing their idols,
humiliating their customs and belittling their ancestors. They used
threats at times and tried to bribe him by offering wealth and social
ranks. Receiving no positive feedback from him, they offered to exchange
Muhammad with \`Imarah ibn al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah, the young,
powerful, and handsome poet. Abu-talib did not accept either. Once, when
Abu-talib and his nephew were threatened with death, the Holy Prophet
had the following reaction:

“If they put the sun in my right hand and the moon in the left, I would
not stop my way. I have two options, either God will help me or I will
be destroyed.”[^59]

**Abu-talib's Announcement of Assistance**

Upon these threats, Abu-talib announced his support to Muhammad (s) and
mobilized the members of Banu-Hashim, both Muslims and non-Muslims, to
protect Muhammad (s). He warned the chiefs of Quraysh against a bloody
revenge by Banu-Hashim in case anything would happen to his nephew.[^60]
Since tribal wars were hazardous and their consequences unpredictable;
and due to the fact that the chiefs of Quraysh lacked the capacity for
such a war, they could not carry out their threats; rather, they became
disillusioned. Out of Banu-Hashim, only Abu-Lahab joined the enemy
front.

**Motives of Quraysh's Oppositions**

A question is raised here as to why the Quraysh did not show animosity
toward Muhammad (s) in the first years of his propagations during which
not many verses of the Holy Qur'an were revealed to him yet. What kind
of threats did they feel in the first verses revealed during the early
days of prophethood? Did they oppose him because of their insistence on
their idolatry or were there other reasons?

Of course, we are talking about the motives of the chiefs of Quraysh,
because the general publics were simple and naive followers of those
chiefs; and to mobilize them against the new religion was not a hard
job. This is because they were not strong believers of their sect and
customs anyhow.

Considering Quraysh's influence and high social status in Mecca, we
could easily find the reasons behind their opposition. This is because,
as we have seen above, Quraysh had monopolized some social privileges
related to Mecca, such as social and economic power; they would not
tolerate any rival. They used to receive tribute and toll from other
tribes by force and imposed their own policies over other tribes related
to the pilgrims.

Thus, it was natural for them not to tolerate Muhammad (s), because
they found out very early in Muhammad's propagations that the new faith
was in conflict with their ideology. They could also anticipate that one
day, the Holy Prophet would become famous and this was in conflict with
their pride.

However, an investigation of the content of some surahs and verses
revealed to the Holy Prophet at Mecca, we could pinpoint some of the
most significant motives for the opposition of Quraysh to the Holy
Prophet during the first years of propagations:

**(1) Worry over the disintegration of the social order**

Concerning the tribal system dominating the social order in Mecca and
due to Quraysh’s special prerogatives, a form of aristocratic government
was prevailing there. The chiefs of Quraysh were accustomed to this
system; they did not expect any blow to be leveled against it. This was
the social condition while the first followers of Muhammad (s) were the
youths, the impoverished, the deprived and the slaves. Muhammad (s) did
not belong to the nobility. From his childhood, he was an orphan; and
during his youth, he was poor belonging to the second class inside
Quraysh. His uncle, Abu-talib, despite his ancestral prestige and
dignity, was insolvent.

All these were warnings to the tribal system of Quraysh that the very
basis of their social order would be shaken. Having noticed that, they
worried about the youth and the deprived for their inclinations towards
the new faith. The envoy of Quraysh to Abyssinia to bring back the
Muslim migrants introduced themselves to the king as the special envoy
of the Meccan nobility.

The Holy Qur'an reveals the Quraysh's aristocratic attitude in their
objection to the idea of prophethood not being offered to one of the
noblemen of either Mecca or ta’if:

And they say: Why has not the Qur'an been revealed to a man of
importance in the two towns? (43:31)

According to an interpretation, by men of importance is meant Walid Ibn
Mughirah, the head of Banu-Makhzum in Mecca, and \`Urwah ibn Mas\`ud
al-Thaqafi, the well-known wealthy man of ta’if.[^61] The reason behind
the revelation of this verse is said to be the following event:

Once, Walid said, “Why should the Qur'an be revealed to Muhammad and
not to me while I am the head of Quraysh?”[^62] Thus, the Quraysh showed
their animosity to Muhammad (s) because his faith was a real threat to
their social order.

**(2) Economic Worries**

Some recent researchers have considered the economic factor among the
motives for Quraysh’s opposition to Islam. This is because a series of
Meccan verses of the Holy Qur'an[^63] severely reprimand the hoarders and
money-mongers of those days. The great Meccan wealthy men, who had
earned their huge wealth in the trades and through the supervision over
the Kaaba, felt a great danger when they heard these verses. The
progress of Islam would jeopardize their benefits badly. Here are some
samples of such verses:

Leave Me and him whom I created alone, and give him vast riches, and
sons dwelling in his presence, And I adjusted affairs for him
adjustably; and yet he desires that I should add more, By no means!
Surely, he offers opposition to our communications. (74:11-16)

I will cast him into hell. And what will make you realize what hell is?
It leaves naught nor does spare naught. It scorches the mortal.
(74:26)[^64]

Perdition overtake both hands of Abu-Lahab, and he will perish. Neither
his wealth nor what he earns will avail him. He shall soon burn in fire
that flames, and his wife, the bearer of fuel. (111:1-4)[^65]

Woe to every slanderer, defamer, who amasses wealth and considers it a
provision against mishap; He thinks that his wealth will make him
immortal. Nay! He shall most certainly be hurled into the crushing
disaster, and what will make you realize what the crushing disaster is?
It is the fire kindled by Allah, which rises above the hearts. Surely,
it shall be closed over upon them, in extended columns. (104:1-7)

Then as for him who gives away and guards against evil, and accepts the
best, We will facilitate for him the easy end. And as for him who is
niggardly and considers himself from need of Allah, and rejects the
best, we will facilitate for him the difficult end. And his wealth will
not avail him when he perishes. (92:4:11)[^66]

A careful observation of the content of these surahs reveals that they
were revealed to the Holy Prophet after Quraysh’s opposition. The
increase in number of opponents might have been the reason for the
revelation of these verses. However, the toughest opponents of the Holy
Prophet were the traders and the wealthy.

In accordance with a historical report, when the Messenger of God
started guiding his people towards the light of the Religion, they at
first did not go away from him; rather, they were about to accept his
ideology. Then he started insulting their idols and the wealthy people
from ta’if.[^67] These people did not like his statements; they began
struggling against him and invoking their followers against him. Then,
the mass offended and deserted him.[^68]

**(3) Fear of the Neighboring Power**

The Holy Qur'an refers to their fear of the neighboring states and
powers and finds this worry baseless:

And they say: If we follow the guidance with you, we shall be carried
off from our country. What! Have We not settled them in a safe, sacred
territory to which fruits of every kind shall be drawn? Sustenance from
Us; but most of them do not know. (28:57)

Once, Harith ibn Nawfal ibn \`Abd-Manaf said to the Holy Prophet, “We
know that what you say is right; but if we believe in you, we fear that
the Arabs might throw us out of our land and we are not strong enough to
confront them.[^69]

From their statements, worry could be observed and fear of the Iranian
kings and Roman emperors[^70] could be identified; this was the Arabs’
weak point towards the neighboring political powers.

This fear could be seen in the following event: The Holy Prophet had
invited some of the great Arab personalities and read them some of the
verses of the Holy Qur'an which dealt with ethical training. All of them
were highly impressed and each one of them started admiring them.
However, their leader, Muthanna, said, “We are caught between two
waters:

on one side are the Arab waters and shores, and on the other side there
lie Iran and Khosrow rivers. Khosrow has ordered us not to use any
turmoil and not to shelter any wrongdoer. The acceptance of your faith
by us is not palatable for the kings. If we do anything wrong here in
our land, it might be excused. However, such an error around Iran is not
pardonable by their king.”[^71]

**(4) Tribal Competition and Jealousy**

Tribal competitions and false pride were prevalent among the Arab
tribes and communities. Since the Holy Prophet belonged to Banu-Hashim,
the chiefs of the other tribes—due to their jealousy—could not accept
his faith, which was in the long run a sign of dignity for Banu-Hashim.
Abu-Jahl, who was from Banu-Makhzum tribe and one of the most
influential and wealthy people of Quraysh, frankly revealed his secret,
“We struggled against the children of \`Abd-Manaf over the attainment of
dignity. They fed the needy; so did we.

They gave horses to the needy; so did we. They provided the needy with
money; so did we. Then we were neck to neck. But, then, they say that
they have a prophet among themselves who gets revelation from God. Now
how can we ever get equal to them? By God, we shall never believe in
what he says nor shall we ever confirm him.”[^72]

Umayyah ibn Abi-salt, a nobleman and great poet of ta’if, did not
believe in Islam for the same reason. For years, he waited for the
arrival of the Promised Prophet and at the same time, he wished that he
himself would be that Prophet. When he heard about the prophethood of
Muhammad (s), he abstained from following him and the reason he offered
for his denial was the following:

“How could I tell the women of ta’if that another person had obtained
the status of prophethood? I have always told them that I would be the
promised prophet. Now how could I endure this shame on my side to follow
the young man of \`Abd-Manaf?”[^73]


