The Prophet's Wives
===================

While Khadijah was alive, the Holy Prophet did not marry any lady.[^131]
After her death, he married several women all of whom, except for
\`a’ishah, were widows. The first was Sawdah. Her husband was Sakran ibn
\`Amr; one of the emigrants to Abyssinia who had died there leaving his
wife without sponsor.

Orientalists have used the Holy Prophet's marriages as an excuse to
level inhuman accusations against him. They have referred to his
marriages as indulgence in pleasure and lusts.[^132] A careful and
impartial judgment, however, will reveal the fact that behind these
marriages, there lay some political and social motives and some gains
and common good for Islam;

some of those women lost any sponsor or protector; therefore, the Holy
Prophet wanted to guide and protect them under the cover of marriage.
Some others belonged to great households and the Holy Prophet wanted to
have their protections. At some other time, the purpose was to fight
against some wrong customs of the Ignorance Era. Here are some
evidences:

(1) The Holy Prophet married Khadijah when he was twenty-five years old
and at the zenith of youthful zeal and passion whereas she had lost the
passion of youth when she married him. She lived with him for
twenty-five years.

(2) The Holy Prophet did not marry any other woman as long as Khadijah
was alive, while polygamy was prevalent in Arabia at that time.

(3) The other marriages of the Holy Prophet took place after the age of
fifty, before or after Hegira, when he was in the center of political,
social and military turmoil. Could a person get into pleasure seeking
activities under such circumstances? Could the Holy Prophet, while
living in Medina, find a chance to be involved in lust and whims?

(4) Was life easy and smooth with different wives, each of whom had a
special set of likes and dislikes and a series of womanly jealousies;
wives who had hurt the Holy Prophet on various occasions?[^133] Is such a
life compatible with pleasure-seeking?

(5) Each one of the Holy Prophet's wives belonged to a different tribe;
they were not relatives. Was such a marriage accidental and haphazard?

(6) After the Holy Prophet's emigration to Yathrib and the expansion of
Islam and an increase in his spiritual influence, his social and
political power had greatly risen and the Arab leaders would take pride
in having their daughters married to the Holy Prophet. However, most of
the women that he married were widows or elderly women lacking any
protector, while he encouraged men to marry young girls.

Let us introduce some of the Holy Prophet's wives:

**(1) Ummu-Habibah**

The daughter of Abu-Sufyan, the bitter enemy of Islam, Ummu-Habibah
emigrated with her husband, \`Ubaydullah ibn Jahsh, the Holy Prophet’s
cousin. When \`Ubaydullah reached that land, he apostatized Islam. Due
to excessive wine drinking, he died there.[^134] When the Holy Prophet
knew about this, he sent \`Amr ibn Umayyah al-®amari[^135] to al-Najashi
asking him to give Ummu-Habibah in marriage to him. That was in the
sixth year after the Hegira, and al-Najashi did. She stayed in Abyssinia
for one more year and then returned to Medina with the last group.[^136]
She was between thirty and forty years old.[^137]

It is clear that this marriage took place to pacify this Muslim woman
not to be carried away through worries and grief. This is because she
had cut relations with her unbelieving relatives, including her parents,
and had gone to Abyssinia with her husband. Now, in a foreign land, she
had lost her husband. What other action could be better than having the
privilege of getting married to the Holy Prophet?

**Ummu-Salamah**

Ummu-Salamah (Hind) was the daughter of Abi-Umayyah Makhzumi; her
ex-husband was Abu-Salamah (\`Abdullah) Makhzumi,[^138] one of the Holy
Prophet’s cousins.[^139] They had four children one of whom was
Salamah.[^140]

Abu-Salamah was wounded in the Battle of Uhud and then passed away in
Jumada II, in the third year of Hegira.[^141] Most probably, there was no
relative of Ummu-Salamah in Medina, because she is reported to have
said, “When Abu-Salamah died, I became very depressed; I said to myself,
‘Now that I am lonely, I will weep so much that I become well-known as a
great weeper!’”[^142] The Holy Prophet married her in the 4th year of
Hegira.[^143] At that time, she had become old.[^144]

It is clear that the purpose of this marriage was to sponsor her orphan
children. Was it not a hard job for the Holy Prophet to sponsor four
orphan children?

After Khadijah, Ummu-Salamah ranked high in sincerity, virtue and
spirituality. She was second to Khadijah in these human traits.[^145] She
had a special bond with the Household of the Holy Prophet. Most of the
time, she kept the secrets of the Divinely leadership of the Holy
Prophet’s Household.[^146]

**Zaynab bint Jahsh**

A close relative of the Holy Prophet, Zaynab was married to Zayd ibn
Harithah, the Holy Prophet's stepchild.[^147] She married the Holy
Prophet after her separation from Zayd.

Zayd had been the slave of Khadijah before he was freed and adopted by
the Holy Prophet. From then on, he was called Zayd son of
Muhammad.[^148]

After the prophethood, God made the adoption of sons illegal:

Allah has not made for any man two hearts within him; nor has He made
your wives whose backs you liken to the backs of your mothers as your
mothers, nor has He made those whom you assert to be your sons your real
sons; these are the words of your mouths; And Allah speaks the truth and
He guides to the way. Assert their relationship to their fathers; this
is more equitable with Allah, but if you do not know their fathers, then
they are your brethren in faith and your friends; and there is no blame
on you concerning that in which you made a mistake, but concerning that
which your hearts do purposely blame may rest on you, and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful. (33:4-5)

Upon receiving these revelations, the Holy Prophet said to Zayd, “You
are Zayd son of Harithah.” From then on, he was nicknamed freed by the
Holy Prophet.[^149]

The Holy Prophet proposed Zaynab for himself. However, since she was
one of the granddaughters of \`Abd al-Muttalib and she belonged to a
well-known tribe, she refused to accept such a proposal in the
beginning, because Zayd was not from a Quraysh family; rather, he was
freed slave. However, the Holy Prophet insisted; and Zaynab agreed. This
marriage was the annihilation of racial and class privileges, which were
so emphatically approved of. The Prophet's insistence on such a marriage
was aimed at removing such unfounded principles.

Due to some ethical maladjustment, the marriage of Zaynab and Zayd
became vulnerable; it was on the threshold of being cut. Several times,
Zayd decided to divorce her, but the Holy Prophet called them for more
perseverance by saying, “Keep your spouse.”[^150] Finally, Zayd divorced
her. After their divorce,

the Holy Prophet received direction from God to marry Zaynab so that
the marriage of an adopted son's divorcee would not create a problem for
Muslims. In this way, a wrong custom was broken, because an adopted son
was considered real son. For this reason, marrying the wife of such a
person was not allowed. The Holy Qur'an describes the aim of this
marriage in the following manner:

And when you said to him to whom Allah had shown favor and to whom you
had shown a favor: Keep your wife to yourself and be careful of your
duty to Allah; and you concealed in your soul what Allah would bring to
light, and you feared men, and Allah had a greater right that you should
fear Him. But when Zayd had accomplished his want of her, We gave her to
you as a wife, so that there should be no difficulty for the believers
in respect of the wives of their adopted sons, when they have
accomplished their want of them; and Allah's command shall be performed.
(33:37)

The unbelievers found an excuse in this marriage to level some
accusations against the Holy Prophet: they accused him of marrying the
wife of his son![^151] Then God revealed to the Holy Prophet:

Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is the Apostle of
Allah and the last of the Holy Prophets; and Allah is Cognizant of all
things. (33:40)

Some Christian Orientalists have changed this event into a romance and
have added unfounded details to it,[^152] but this accusation does not
comply with the Holy Prophet’s traits. Besides, we have seen that the
issue was something else and this is vividly explained in the Holy
Qur'an.

The aforementioned accounts of the Holy Prophet’s wives are enough for
an explanation of the real motives behind his polygamy. The other wives
of the Holy Prophet had more or less similar traits.

**The Holy Prophet's Journey to ta’if**

Seventy-two kilometers away from Mecca, ta’if is a countryside with
mild weather. It was known for its vineyards in those days.[^153] Some of
Quraysh’s noblemen had gardens and pastures there. The citizens of ta’if
were wealthy; they were famous usurers. It was the resort of the strong
tribe of Thaqif.

After the death of Khadijah and Abu-talib, the tormenting of the Holy
Prophet by Quraysh increased and propagating the religion became
difficult. However, the invitation to Islam could not be stopped.
Therefore, the Holy Prophet decided to journey to ta’if in order to
invite its people to his religion. He hoped to find some protectors
there. On this journey, Zayd ibn Harithah[^154] and Imam \`Ali[^155]
accompanied him.

The Holy Prophet met three brothers of the noblemen of Thaqif; the wife
of one of these three was from a branch of Quraysh, called
Banu-Jumah.[^156] He invited them to Islam and asked them for help.
However, they refused and used strong words in reply. He also asked them
to keep his journey secret so that the chiefs of Quraysh might not be
annoyed. But they did not pay attention to what he said.

The Holy Prophet visited other leaders of ta’if as well, but they
rejected his invitation and feared that their youth might be inclined
towards Islam.[^157] The leaders of ta’if provoked the rogues, the
destitute, and their slaves to curse, humiliate and throw stones at him.
In this conflict, some parts of the Holy Prophet's legs were badly hurt
and Zayd's head was wounded.

The Holy Prophet headed for a vineyard which belonged to \`Utbah and
Shaybah, two chiefs of Quraysh, and rested in the shade of a vine,
praying to God.

\`Utbah and Shaybah, who had been watching the tormenting of the Holy
Prophet, sympathized with him; they sent him some grapes through their
Christian servant, \`Addas, who was from Nineveh. While eating the
grapes, the Holy Prophet said, “In the Name of Allah.” This statement
roused \`Addas's curiosity. After some conversation through which the
Holy Prophet told \`Addas about his Divine mission, \`Addas threw
himself at the Holy Prophet's feet, kissed his hands and feet,[^158] and
became Muslim.[^159] Having stayed in ta’if[^160] for ten days and
discouraged by the refusal of the Thaqif tribe, he returned to Mecca.

**Did the Holy Prophet seek Refuge?**

It is said that the Holy Prophet, upon his return to Mecca, asked
Mut’im ibn \`Adi to give him refuge; he then entered Mecca under his
protection. However, with regards to a series of evidence, this seems
highly improbable:

(1) How could the Holy Prophet, after ten years of hard struggles and
severe confrontations with the idolaters, have accepted the humiliation
of asking an idol-worshipper for refuge and asylum while this
humiliation he never accepted during his whole life?

(2) Despite the death of Abu-talib at that time, the rest of
Banu-Hashim were still on the scene; among them, there were brave
individuals like Hamzah whom Quraysh feared very much as is shown in
their attempts to unite several tribes to murder the Holy Prophet at the
night of his emigration to Yathrib.

(3) According to some historical documents, Zayd and Imam \`Ali
accompanied him. So, they were a group of three persons who could depend
on themselves and needed no assistance.

(4) The Holy Prophet was one of the bravest Arabs; weakness has never
seen on him. Recalling the Holy Prophet's bravery in battles, Imam \`Ali
(a.s) remarks:

When the fire of war was severely kindled, we used to resort to the
Holy Prophet; under those circumstances, there was nobody closer to the
enemy than he was.[^161]

(5) The Holy Prophet severely struggled against the system of tribalism
which was the source of his calamity. How could he approve of the
tradition of taking refuge which was an offshoot of tribalism? How could
he confirm it?

(6) As is reported by Buladhari and Ibn Sa\`d, the Holy Prophet's
journey to ta’if took place at the end of month Shawwal. If we accept
this report as valid, it means that his stay in ta’if and his return to
Mecca could have occurred within the sacred month in which bloodshed and
molestation are suspended. Thus, there was no danger against the Holy
Prophet's life and consequently he did not need any protection.

With regards to these documents, we may infer that the Holy Prophet, on
his return from ta’if, had entered Wadi Nakhlah before he entered Mecca.
On his return, he spent a night there[^162] when a group of jinn[^163]
heard the verses of the Holy Qur'an.[^164]

**Attraction of the Holy Qur'an**

Inviting people to his religion, the Holy Prophet rarely spoke of
himself; rather, he made use of the best means available to him, i.e.
the verses of the Holy Qur'an which had enchanting effects on the Arab's
ears. The Holy Qur'an is the Holy Prophet's great miracle—a miracle of
eloquence. The lexicon and the lexical items, the structure of the
verses, and the melody of the Qur'anic verses are so attractive that
nobody could ever be able to produce anything even similar to them. For
this reason, the Holy Qur'an invites the unbelievers to produce anything
like its chapters. (2:23)

The Arabs of Hijaz who were mostly poets and experts in poetry were
absorbed in and enchanted by the grace and eloquence of the sacred
verses of the Holy Qur'an. The words of revelation appeared to them most
graceful and elegant. At times, they would be mesmerized and motionless
for a long time.

One night, some chiefs of Quraysh, such as Abu-Sufyan and Abu-Jahl hid
behind the door of the Holy Prophet's house and listened to the verses
that he was uttering. On their return in the morning, they saw one
another and started blaming each other by saying, “Let us not do this
again, because if people see us, they would think otherwise. They might
think that we have become Muslims.” However, for the coming nights, they
did it again, each time promising not to do it again. (2:23)

**Accusation of Magic**

The ceremony of Hajj was the best time for the Holy Prophet to carry
out his propagation, because the different Arab tribes came to Mecca
then. In those days, the Holy Prophet had a chance to let people hear
the call for monotheism. For this reason, the chiefs of Quraysh feared
the Hajj time the most.

At the time of Hajj ceremony, a group of noblemen of Quraysh went to
visit Walid ibn Mughirah, an elderly man and the head of Banu-Makhzum,
who said, “It is the Hajj time, people come to your city from
everywhere; they have heard Muhammad's story. Let us talk about him in a
single fashion and not try to contradict one another.” They replied,
“Whatever you say, we will follow you. We will say that he is a Jewish
priest.” He said, “No, By God. He is not a Jewish priest;

we have seen such priests before. He neither hums like such priests nor
does he use rhymed speech.” One of them suggested, “Let us say that he
is a lunatic.” Walid answered, “No! He could not be a lunatic. We have
seen lunatic people and we know how they behave. Neither do any of his
limbs shake, nor is he tempted by some devil.” They said, “Let us say
that he is a poet.” Walid answered, “He cannot be a poet either. We know
all kinds of poetry. What he says is not poems.

” They further suggested, “We shall say that he is a magician.” Walid
answered, “This is not accurate either. We have seen the magician's
incantations and charms. His work is not sorcery.” They asked, “Then,
what shall we say?” He remarked, “By God, his speech is delicious; its
roots are vigorous and branches are fruitful. Whatever of these
categories you say about him will turn out to be wrong. The best thing
for you is to say that he is a magician because through his words he is
able to separate children from their parents, brothers from brothers,
wives from husbands and tribe members from one another.”[^165]

Having arrived at this decision, the Arab leaders spread. From then on,
they would provoke the Hajj pilgrims not to be carried away by the
indoctrinations of the Holy Prophet.[^166]

What the higher council of Quraysh called magic and attributed to the
Holy Prophet was in fact an attribute for the attractive verses of the
Holy Qur'an which hypnotized everyone who listened to them. The
sanctions against the listening to the Qur'anic verses reached such a
point that the chiefs of Quraysh recommended that a great person such as
As\`ad ibn Zurarah should insert cotton in his ears in order to be safe
against Muhammad's magic!”[^167]

**Inviting the Arab Tribes to Islam**

The Holy Prophet carried out his invitation to people in Mecca and
elsewhere. For instance, he went to the following tribes: Kindah, Kalb,
Banu-Hanifah and Banu-Amir ibn sa\`sa\`ah to invite them to the new
religion. However, Abu-Lahab used to follow him and discourage people
from accepting his religion.[^168]

In his dialogues with Banu-\`amir, the Holy Prophet was told by one of
the elderly chiefs of that tribe, named Bayharah ibn Firas, “If we swear
allegiance to you and God makes you victorious over your opponents, will
you promise your succession to us?” The Holy Prophet replied, “That is
God's affair, not mine. God will nominate anybody He wishes.”
Aggressively, the man replied, “You want us to stand against the Arabs
for your sake and defend you; and upon your victory, somebody else gets
the initiatives? We do not need your religion.”[^169]

It is narrated that the same issue was brought up by the elders of the
Kindah tribe to whom the Holy Prophet gave the same reaction.[^170] This
kind of reply and taking position on the part of the Holy Prophet is
significant in two ways:

First: He emphasized that the issue of succession is God's affair. This
confirms the issue that he has been appointed by God; i.e. his position
is a Divine selection and this adoption takes place by God, not through
people.

Second: The Holy Prophet, contrary to other statesmen who do everything
in order to obtain their objectives, did not make use of unethical
instruments. Although the adoption of Islam by the members of a large
tribe was of utmost significance and value in those days, the Holy
Prophet did not promise anything which he could not keep.

During the Hajj and \`Umrah ceremonies in which security prevailed due
to the sacredness of those months and during which a great number of
people could come from different areas to Mecca and Mina or the markets
outside Mecca, such as the seasonal markets of \`Ukaz, al-Majannah and
Dhi’l-Majaz,[^171] the Holy Prophet extended his invitation and visited
the elderly chiefs of the tribes. Even if the pilgrims themselves did
not accept Islam, they spread the news of the Holy Prophet's prophethood
in their cities and towns; and this was a step ahead towards victory and
success.

[^1] Al-Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 1:199-204; Ibn al-Athir, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 1:250.
[^2] Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No 192.
[^3] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 13:207.
[^4] Ibn Kathir, op cit, 1:389.
[^5] Halabi, op cit, 1:380-381; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
1:250; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 2:203-204; Ibn Shahrashub,
Manaqib 1:43; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:84,193; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi
2:17.
[^6] Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, 1:44; al-Majlisi, op cit, 18:194; tabarsi,
I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 36.

Concerning these records and documents, Shaykh al-Kulayni states the
Muhammad was a prophet but he had not yet been Messenger of God. Al-Usul
min al-Kafi 1:176.

[^7] Mount Hara' is situated northeast of Mecca. Because it was the
place where the Divine Revelation came to the Holy Prophet for the first
time, it was called jabal al-nur (Mountain of Light). Until several
years ago, this mountain was far away from the city of Mecca. However,
the city skirts have now reached the foot of this mountain due to modern
construction. Because of its situation inside a series of interrelated
mountains, Mount Hara' is the most handsome and most distinguished.

The Hara' Cave, which is high in the mountain, is not a cave in
reality; rather, it is a huge rock over two other huge rocks, creating a
space of one and a half meters high. The entrance is wide enough for
people to enter. However, the inner half of it is narrower. Sunlight can
penetrate only half of the cave.

[^8] Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 193; Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:25.

[^9] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:251; tabari, op cit, 2:206; Ibn al-Athir, op
cit, 1:390; al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:105.

[^10] Halabi, op cit, pp. 382.

[^11] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 249; tabari, op cit, pp. 209;
al-Buladhari, op cit, pp 114-115; Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:190;
Mas\`udi, al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 198; Halabi, op cit, pp. 363;
al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 204.

[^12] tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan 10:514; Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab
2:276.

[^13] Muslim scholars ascribe these verses to the prophethood of
Muhammad. There are some pieces of evidence which confirm this issue.
See al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:246; Muhammad Hadi Ma\`rifat,
al-Tamhid fi \`Ulum al-Qur'an 1:35; al-Qastalani, al-Mawahib
al-Ludaniyyah 3:88-89. According to other exegeses, these verses are
related to the Night Ascension (Mi\`raj).

[^14] sahih al-Bukhari 1:59-60; sahih Muslim 2:197-204.

[^15] Al-\`Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-sahabah 4:359.

[^16] Bihar al-Anwar 18:246, 254, 257.

[^17] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:197; Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib, op cit, 1:43;
al-Majlisi, op cit, 18:271.

[^18] al-Majlisi, op cit, pp 268, 271; saduq, al-Tawhid, pp. 115.

[^19] saduq, Kamal al-Din 1:85; \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` 7:7.

[^20] tabari, op cit, 2:207; al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:105; Mas\`udi,
Muruj al-Dhahab 2:276; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:17.

[^21] Majma\` al-Bayan 10:384.

[^22] al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:262; Muhammad Hadi Ma\`rifat,
al-Tamhid fi \`Ulum al-Qur'an 1:49.

[^23] As far as we know, the first person who realized the lack of
authenticity of this narration was Sayyid \`Abd al-Husayn Sharaf al-Din
al-Musawi (1390-1377 AH), one of the distinguished Shi\`ite scholars of
Jabal \`amil, who discussed and criticized it in his epistle to the Arab
Scientific Congress in Damascus, and in his book al-Nass wa’l-Ijtihad,
pp 319-322. Then other scholars, such as \`Ali Dawani, criticized this
narration in the following sources: The Rays of revelation over Mount
Hara', pp 70-108; the history of Islam from the start up to the
prophet's Migration, pp 98-110;

the role of the Imams In the revival of the religion 4:6-44; al-sahih
min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam 1:216-232, Treason in the historical
accounts 2:3-23; al-Tamhid 1:52-56; Some Analytical Lessons From The
History Of Islam 2:196-236.

[^24] Murtaza \`amili, The role of the Imams In the revival of the
religion 4:12.

[^25] Islamic Encyclopedia 3:398. Montgomery Watt, the head of the
Arabic department of Edinburgh University, is one of those who
insinuates against Islam. He writes, “It is amazing for a man who used
to live in a far-away city, like Mecca in the seventh century AD, to
have been appointed as a prophet by God. Therefore, we are not amazed
when we hear that Muhammad was frightened and worried when he became
aware of this issue. Regarding this, there are some hints and documents
in the Qur'an and in other narrations related to his life. It is not
clear at what time he realized that God had not forgotten him.

His other fear was the fear of mental breakdown; this is because in
those days Arabs assumed that persons like him were under the domination
of jinn or spirits. Some Meccan Arabs interpreted Muhammad's revelations
in this way and he himself at times doubted whether people were right or
wrong in their assumptions.” See Muhammad, the prophet and the
politician, pp 26-27.

[^26] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:280; tabari, op cit, 2:216; Mas\`udi, Muruj
al-Dhahab 2:275-276; al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:116; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi
2:19; Halabi, op cit, 1:456; tusi, al-Ghaybah, pp. 202.

[^27] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:19; Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:199;
al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:115.

[^28] Halabi, op cit, 1:456-457.

[^29] Ibn Husham mentions the names of the first eight Muslims as
follows: \`Ali, Zayd ibn Harith, Abu-Bakr, \`Uthman ibn \`Affan,
al-Zubayr ibn al-\`Awwam, \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf, Sa\`d ibn
Abi-Waqqas, and talhah ibn \`Ubaydullah. See al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
1:262-364.

[^30] Imam \`Ali was monotheist even at his early age; he never served
idols. Thus, his becoming a Muslim does not imply that he stopped
worshipping idols like the other companions of the Holy Prophet. Imam
\`Ali accepted Islam that is based on the Divine principle of
monotheism. Concerning this, Dahlan wrote, “\`Ali never practiced
idolatry. He followed the Holy Prophet closely. It is narrated that
three persons were never involved in idolatry; the Faithful of al-Yasin,
\`Ali ibn Abi-talib, and asiyah, Pharaoh’s wife.

” See al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:92. Concerning Imam \`Ali, Ibn Sa\`d
narrates that he never worshipped any idol because he was too young! See
Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 3:21. Ibn Hajar (974 AH), quoting Ibn Sa\`d’s
previous statement, states, “For this reason, \`Ali is mentioned with
the statement of ‘karrama allahu wajhahu (May Allah honor his face)’.
See al-sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah, pp. 120.

Regarding \`Ali's age when he accepted Islam, see Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah, 13:234-235.

[^31] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 3:28; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit,
13:229; al-Hakim al-Naysaburi, al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-sahihayn 2:81,
Halabi, op cit, 1:432. In some narrations, we read, “The first to join
the Divine Pond (on the Resurrection Day) will be the first to accept
Islam; namely, \`Ali ibn Abi-talib.” See Halabi, op cit, pp. 432.

[^32] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, op cit, pp. 32; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 2:57. Al-Hakim al-Naysaburi (al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-sahihayn
3:112) has recorded this narration in two ways, “Allah’s Messenger
received prophethood…” and “Allah’s Messenger received the Divine
Revelation on Monday.” In some narrations, we will read, “The Prophet
received prophethood on Monday, and \`Ali accepted Islam on Tuesday.”
See, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, pp. 229; al-Juwayni, Fara'id al-Simtayn.
Emphasizing the same issue, Imam \`Ali used to remark, “Allah’s
Messenger received the Divine Message on Monday, and I accepted Islam on
Tuesday.” See al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa', pp. 166; Muhammad
al-sabban, Is\`af al-Raghibin, pp. 148; Ibn Hajar, al-sawa\`iq
al-Muhriqah.

[^33] Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 192.

[^34] Ibid, Sermon 131.

[^35] tabari, op cit, 2:212; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh.

The same issue is brought up in al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-sahihayn 3:112;
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 13:200, 228; Ibn Mardawayh,
Manaqib \`Ali ibn Abi-talib, pp 47-48.

[^36] tabari, op cit, 2:212; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, 13:226. Ibn
Abi’l-Hadid has reported the same from \`Abdullah ibn Mas\`ud. Ibn \`Abd
al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 3:165; Ibn Ishaq, al-Siyar wa’l-Maghazi, pp.
137-138; al-Karajaki, Kanz al-Fawa'id 1:262. For further information
concerning Ali's pioneering in the acceptance of Islam, see al-Ghadir
2:214, 3:220-224.

[^37] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:199.

[^38] al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:299; Bihar al-Anwar 18:185.

[^39] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 212.

[^40] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:358; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 44; Sibt
ibn al-Jawzi, Tadhkirat al-Khawass, pp. 186.

[^41] al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 128.

[^42] tabarsi, op cit, pp. 56.

[^43] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 3:139.

[^44] Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 1:446.

[^45] Halabi, op cit, 1:434.

[^46] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 3:102.

[^47] op cit, pp. 124.

[^48] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 3:222.

[^49] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 3:244. \`Abd al-Muta\`al al-sa\`idi al-Misri
has written a book entitled Youth of Quraysh in the Beginning of Islam
(pp. 33-34) in which he has introduced forty young men from Quraysh who
had pioneered in accepting Islam. In his list, Imam \`Ali is the
first.

[^50] al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:156, pp. 181, see Al-tabaqat al-Kubra
3:248.

[^51] Op cit.

[^52] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:164; Halabi, op cit, 1:499.

[^53] Muslim scholars name this issue as bid' al-da\`wah (The Beginning
of the Promulgation), yawm al-dar (The Day of the House), and yawm
al-indhar (The Day of Warning). It is reported in the following
reference books with some difference: Tarikh al-tabari 2:217; Ibn Athir,
al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:63; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah
13:211; al-Bayhaqi, Dala'il al-Nubuwwah 1:278; tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan
7:206; Shaykh Mufid, al-Irshad, pp. 29; tawus, al-tara’if 1:20; Halabi,
al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 1:461;

al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:78, 181, 191, 214; \`Allamah Amini,
al-Ghadir 2:278-279; Murtaza \`Askari, the role of the Imams in the
revival of the Religion 2:86, 6:17-18; Musnad Ahmad 1:159. It is worthy
noting that among historians, tabari has distorted the Holy Prophet's
statement drastically in his interpretation: he has changed
representative and successor into so and so. Ibn Kathir, too, has
distorted the truth in his three books in his three books (Tafsir 3:351,
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 3:40, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:459). Considering
the attitude of these two, it is not difficult to recognize their motive
for this dramatic distortion.

[^54] Hadith al-Manzilah reads: “O \`Ali, your position to me is the
same as Prophet Aaron’s position to Prophet Moses except that there
shall be no prophet after me.”

[^55] Surah al-Shu\`ara' was revealed to the Holy Prophet after Surah
al-Waqi\`ah. The following are the Surahs that were revealed after that:
al-Naml, al-Qasas, al-Isra', Yunus, Hud, Yusuf and then al-Hijr in which
the order for the public invitation was given. See Muhammad Hadi
Ma\`rifat, al-Tamhid fi \`Ulum al-Qur'an 1:105.

[^56] Abtuh is a valley near Mina. See Yaqut al-Hamawi, Mu\`jam
al-Buldan. 1:74. This event probably took place at the time of Hajj when
pilgrims had gathered at Mina.

[^57] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 1:19. There are other reports on the Holy
Prophet’s first open declaration of his faith. Most probably, he invited
the idolaters within short time intervals through the same statements.
See Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi, pp. 19; tabari, op cit, 2:21; al-Buladhari,
Ansab al-Ashraf 1:121; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, 1:279; tabarsi, I\`lam
al-Wara, pp. 39; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:185; Halabi, op cit,
1:461.

[^58] tabari, op cit, 2:218; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:282;
Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:199; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh
2:63.

[^59] tabari, op cit, 2:218-220; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 282-287, 313,
316; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, 1:282; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:202-203;
al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:231-232; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh
2:63-65; Halabi, op cit, 1:462-463; Ibn Kathir, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah.
1:479; al-Majlisi, op cit, 18:185.

[^60] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 287; tabari, op cit, pp. 220; Ibn
Shahrashub, al-Manaqib 1:59; Ibn al-Athir, op cit, pp. 65; Ibn Kathir,
op cit, pp. 477, Halabi, op cit, pp. 463.

[^61] tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan 9:46.

[^62] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:387; Ibn Shahrashub,
al-Manaqib 1:50.

[^63] The Holy Qur'an’s chapters (i.e. Surahs) are divided according to
their revelation into Meccan and Medinan.

[^64] This holy Surah is the fourth in revelation. See al-Tamhid fi
\`Ulum al-Qur'an 1:104.

[^65] This Surah is the sixth.

[^66] This Surah is the ninth.

[^67] These people, most probably, had invested their money in a Mecca
economic center.

[^68] tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 2:221.

Those who look at man from a material prospect only concentrate all
their attentions to the economic motive and base all other motives to
it. The analysis of Petroshfsky, a famous Russian analyst of Islam and
Iran and a professor of Oriental Studies Department at the University of
Leningrad writes, “Meccan chiefs were among the traders and usurers.
They opposed Muhammad openly. We could not say that the cause of this
opposition was religious dogmatism; rather, the Prophet's propagation
against their idolatry was the real motive of their opposition because
their trade and political supremacy was greatly jeopardized.

They assumed that his religious propagation would cause the fall of the
Kaaba and the worship of their idols. This might result in fewer
pilgrims to visit the Kaaba and a financial loss for them. In this way,
the Kaaba might lose its political supremacy. For this reason, the
Meccan chiefs interpreted Muhammad's religious propaganda as a direct
threat to their own interests. They hated him for these reasons. See
Islam in Iran, pp. 26. In view of our previous discussions, we do not
have to say how baseless the statement of this professor is.

[^69] tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan 7:260; Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib 1:51.

[^70] Manaqib 1:59.

[^71] Qisas al-\`Arab 2:258; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah
3:144.

[^72] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:337; Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib 1:50; Ibn
Kathir, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:506-507.

[^73] Ibn Kathir, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:130.

[^74] Tarikh al-tabari 2:221.

[^75] al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:197; Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 2:66.

[^76] al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 156-196; Ibn al-Athir, op cit,
2:66-70.

[^77] Ibn Husham, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk 2:222; Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:76.

[^78] tabari, op cit, pp. 221.

[^79] \`Umar Farrukh, Tarikh sadr al-Islam wa’l-Dawlah al-Umawiyyah, pp.
54; \`Abbas Ziryab, Sirat Rasulillah, pp. 169.

[^80] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 204; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 344; tabari,
op cit, pp. 221-222.

[^81] al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 227.

[^82] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 207. The number of emigrants is recorded
even less. But the number of their names, recorded in books of history,
is the same as the above. See Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 346-353; Dr.
Muhammad Ibrahim ayati, The History of The Prophet of Islam, pp.
122-132.

[^83] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:357; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:418.

tabarsi has recorded that Abu-talib wrote the following poetic verses
in his letter:

King of Abyssinia, be it known to you that Muhammad, just like Moses
and Jesus son of Mary, is a Prophet.

He came with the true guidance with which they had come; and all of
them guide to God’s commission and seek His protection.

Verily, you are uttering his name in your Book through authentic, not
fabricated, report.

So, do not associate others with God and follow Islam, for the path of
the Right can never be darkened.

[^84] tabarsi, op cit, pp. 43-44, Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 356-360; Ibn
al-Athir, op cit, 2:79-81.

[^85] It is reported that Ja\`far ibn Abi-talib was escorted by seventy
Abyssinians on his way back to Mecca. All of these, converted to Islam
after they had had a conversation with the Holy Prophet. See Majma\`\`
al-Bayan 3:234.

[^86] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 208.

[^87] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 8:97; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 238; Ibn Kathir,
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 4:143; ayati, op cit, pp. 132.

[^88] al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 43:7.

The majority of Sunni scholars believe that Lady Fatimah was born five
years after prophethood. See Sayyid Ja\`far Shahidi, Life of Fatimah.

[^89] Tafsir al-Burhan 2:400.

[^90] Majma\` al-Bayan 6:395.

[^91] al-Majlisi, op cit,; 18, pp. 290; Tafsir Nemuneh 12:17. A
physics-based explanation of the Night Ascension can be seen in Tafsir
Nemuneh 12:17-20 and Furugh Abadiyyat 2:393.

[^92] Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Furu\` min al-Kafi 3:482-487; Ibn Sa\`d,
al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:213; sahih al-Bukhari; al-Hurr al-\`amili, Wasa'il
al-Shi\`ah 3:76; al-Majlisi, op cit, 18:238; Tafsir al-Burhan 2:933.

[^93] Allamah Amini, al-Ghadir 3:242.

[^94] Ibn Husham, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:375; tabari, op cit, 2:225;
al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:234.

[^95] al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:234; Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:209;
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 4:58.

[^96] al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 230; Is op cit, 1:63; Ibn Ishaq,
al-Siyar wal-Maghazi, pp. 159; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 19:18.

[^97] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 14:64; al-Fattal
al-Naysaburi, Rawzat al-Wa\`izin, pp. 63.

[^98] Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, 1:63; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 49.

[^99] Al-Fattal al-Naysaburi, Rawzat al-Wa\`izin, pp. 64; Ibn
Shahrashub, op cit, pp. 64; tabarsi, op cit, pp. 50; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op
cit, 14:64; see Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 160.

[^100] Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, pp. 65; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 209;
al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 234; Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 159.

[^101] tabarsi, op cit, pp. 50.

[^102] al-Majlisi, op cit, 19; Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 159.

[^103] Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, pp. 65; tabarsi, op cit, pp. 51.

[^104] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 161; Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:379;
al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 235; al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 19.

[^105] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 13:254.

[^106] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:25; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp.
50.

[^107] tabarsi, op cit, pp. 50; Is op cit, 1:65.

[^108] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 161; al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:234, Ibn
Sa\`d, op cit, 1:210; Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, 1:65.

[^109] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 162, 165, 166; al-Buladhari, op cit, p236;
Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, 14:59; Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:88;
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 19:19.

[^110] That took place on the tenth year of Hegira. See Ibn Sa\`d, op
cit, 1:210; al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:236.

[^111] tabarsi, op cit, pp. 51-52.

[^112] Nahj al-Balaghah, letter 9.

[^113] al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:236; Ibn al-Athir, op cit, 2:90.

[^114] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:29; the Holy Prophet called that
year “Year of Sadness”. See Bihar al-Anwar 19:25.

[^115] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 243; Ibn Husham, op cit, 2:57; tabarsi,
I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 53.

[^116] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 243; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 57.

[^117] Amir Muhanna al-Khayyami, pp. 62-63; Al-Dulabi, al-Dhurriyyah
al-tahirah, pp. 63-64.

[^118] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 4:287; Dulabi, op cit, pp. 51.

[^119] Al-Kulayni, al-Usul min al-Kafi 1:449; \`Allamah Amini, al-Ghadir
7:393; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 18:187; al-Ghadir 7:259, 388, 393;
Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:20.

[^120] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:211; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk (Tarikh al-tabari) 2:229; al-Bayhaqi, Dala'il al-Nubuwwah
2:80; Ibn al-Athir, op cit 2:91.

[^121] Ibn Ishaq, al-Siyar wal-Maghazi, pp. 239; Ibn Husham, op cit,
2:58; tabari, op cit, pp. 229; Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib 1:67; Ibn
al-Athir, op cit, pp. 91; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, pp. 80; Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi,
Tadhkirat al-Khawass, pp. 9.

[^122] Shaykh Mufid, Awa’il al-Maqalat, pp. 13; al-Fattal al-Naysaburi,
op cit, pp. 155; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 14:65; tabarsi,
Majma\` al-Bayan 3:287; Ibn tawus; al-tara’if, pp. 298.

[^123] tabarsi, op cit, 7:260.

[^124] Shaykh al-Kulayni, op cit, 1:448; saduq, al-Amali, pp. 366;
al-Fattal al-Naysaburi, op cit, pp. 156; Allamah Amini, al-Ghadir 7:390;
Mufid, al-Ikhtisas, pp. 241.

[^125] The poems of Abu-talib has been collected by Abu-Na\`im \`Ali ibn
Hamzah al-Basri al-Tamimi, the linguist (375 AD). Shaykh agha Buzurg
Tehrani saw a copy of this book in the Library of Sayyid \`«sa
al-\`Attar in Baghdad. This book comprised more than five thousand
poetic verses and was published in al-Najaf in AH 1356.

Imam \`Ali liked to see his father’s poems being collected. He used to
remark, “Learn these poems and teach them to your children. Abu-talib
was a follower of God's religion and his poems contain a lot of
knowledge.” al-Ghadir 7:393.

[^126] tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 45; Majma\` al-Bayan 4:288; Allamah
Amini, al-Ghadir 7:331.

[^127] Shaykh al-Kulayni, op cit, pp. 449. tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan
4:4, 287; Ibn Husham, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:277; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op
cit, 14:72; al-Karajaki, Kanz al-Fawa'id 1:181; Amini, al-Ghadir
7:332.

[^128] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, pp. 55; Amini, op cit, p334; \`Asqalani,
al-Isabah 4, pp. 116. Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 3:42.

[^129] Many books have been written on Abu-talib's Faith. Some are
referred to in agha Buzurg’s al-Dhari\`ah 2:510-514. Allamah Amini in,
al-Ghadir 7:330-403, deals with this issue in some details. He refers to
nineteen books written by great Muslim scholars on Abu-talib’s belief in
Islam. He cites forty narrations proving this fact. At the beginning of
the eighth volume, he answers the questions of the opponents regarding
Abu-talib's belief in Islam.

[^130] \`Abbas Ziryab, Sirat Rasulillah, pp. 178-179.

[^131] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 4:282; sahih Muslim 15:201.

[^132] Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal, Hayat Muhammad, pp. 315-316, 325.

[^133] For further information, see commentaries on Surah al-Tahrim,
verses 1-5.

[^134] Muhammad Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 7:97, Shaykh \`Abbas
al-Qummi, Safinat al-Bihar 1:204.

[^135] Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:458; Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab
2:289; Hamdullah Mustafawi, Tarikh Gozideh, pp. 161.

[^136] Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 4:144; Hamdullah Mustafawi,
Tarikh Gozideh, pp. 161.

[^137] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 99; \`Abbas al-Qummi, op cit, pp. 204.

[^138] \`Asqalani, al-Isabah 4:458; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:588.

[^139] Ibn al-Athir, op cit, pp. 218.

[^140] op cit, pp. 588; Ibn Husham, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:294, Ibn
Sa\`d, op cit, 8:87.

[^141] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 4:82.

[^142] Al-Khayyami, Zawjat al-Nabi wa-Awladuhu, pp. 199.

[^143] Ibn Hajar, op cit, pp. 458; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 8:87.

[^144] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 90-91; Muhammad Ibn Habib, al-Muhabbar,
pp. 84.

[^145] Mamuqani, Tanqih al-Maqal 3:72.

[^146] Mamuqani, op cit, Al-Tustari, Qamus al-Rijal 10:396.

[^147] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 8:101; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 2:226; Ibn
Hajar, al-Isabah 4:564.

[^148] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit; Ibn al-Athir, op cit, 2:224; Ibn Hajar, op
cit, pp. 563.

[^149] al-alusi, Tafsir Ruh al-Ma\`ani 21:147.

[^150] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 8:103.

[^151] Ibn al-Athir, op cit, 7:494; tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan 8:337;
Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ludaniyyah 2:87.

[^152] Islamic Encyclopedia; Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal, Hayat Muhammad,
pp. 316, 323.

According to Orientalists, Muhammad passed by Zayd's house and
accidentally saw his wife, Zaynab. He fell in love with her!! When Zayd
noticed this, he divorced Zaynab who was one of the Prophet's relatives
and was not unknown to the Prophet since, in those days, women’s veil
was not yet common!!

To refute this fable, members of a family must know who is beautiful
and who is not among them. We should add here that these Orientalists
have got this fable from some baseless narrations recorded in some
reference books, such as Tarikh tabari 3:42; Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 8:101.
Some other writers, too, have unknowingly adopted these sources.
However, the Holy Qur’an has vividly revealed the truth. Of course, some
Muslim scholars have proved the forgery of this story.

One of these is Sayyid Murtaza \`Alam al-Huda, a well-known Shi\`ite
scholar (436 AH). He has described such reports as dirty and ugly. See
Tanzih al-Anbiya', pp. 114. Al-alusi considers the issue as a myth
uttered by story-tellers. He says, “We should acquit the Prophet from
such accusations.” See Tafsir Ruh al-Ma\`ani 22:24-25.

[^153] Yaqut al-Hamawi, Mu\`jam al-Buldan 4:9.

[^154] tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 2:230; al-Buladhari, Ansab
al-Ashraf 1:237.

[^155] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 14:97 and 4:127-128.

[^156] tabari, op cit, pp. 230; Ibn Husham, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
2:60.

[^157] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 212.

[^158] tabari, op cit, 2:230; Ibn Husham, op cit, 2:62.

[^159] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:30.

[^160] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:212; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, 14:91;
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 19:22. It is also reported that the Holy
Prophet stayed at aa’if more than this period.

[^161]Nahj al-Balaghah, pp. 530.

[^162] This incident took place at a place between ta’if and Mecca. See
al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 3:63.

[^163] tabari, op cit, pp. 231; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 63.

[^164] Al-sahih min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam 2:167-168.

[^165] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 288-289.

[^166] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 288-289.

[^167] tabari, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 56.

[^168] Ibn Husham, op cit, 2:65-66; tabari, Tarikh 2:232-233;
al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:237-238; Ibn Ishaq, al-Siyar
wa’l-Maghazi, pp. 232.

He invited the following tribes to Islam one by one: Banu-Fazarah,
Ghassan, Banu-Murrah, Banu-Sulaym, Banu-\`Abs, Banu-Harith,
Banu-\`Udhrah, al-Hazarimah, Banu-Nasr, and Banu-Buka'. However, none of
them accepted his religion. See Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra
1:216-217.

[^169] Ibn Husham, op cit, 2:66; Zayni Dahlan, Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
1:145; Murtaza al-\`amili, al-sahih min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam
2:157-176.

[^170] Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 3:140.

[^171] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:216.


