Section Four : From Hegira To the Universal Invitation
======================================================

Chapter One : Emigration to Yathrib

**The Basis of Islam's Influences in Yathrib**

Wadi al-Qura is a long valley along with the trade route from Yemen to
Damascus. Along this valley, which runs from the north to the south,
there were numerous oases surrounded by grass and pastures.[^1] The
caravans made use of them on their trips along this valley. On one of
these oases, five hundred kilometers north of Mecca, there was the old
city of Yathrib which was later called Madinat al-Rasul (the city of the
Messenger) after the Holy Prophet's emigration to it and then al-Madinah
(Medina).

The structure and social conditions of Yathrib was quite different from
those of Mecca whose people were engaged in agriculture and orchard
keeping. There lived in this city three great Jewish tribes of
Banu’l-Nazir, Banu-Qaynuqa\` and Banu-Qurayzah.

The two famous tribes of Aws and Khazraj are originally from the Yemen
(i.e. descendants of Qahtan); but after the destruction of the Ma'rib
Dam, they migrated from the south to live in Yathrib along with the
Jewish inhabitants.

During the years of the Holy Prophet’s promulgation of Islam in Mecca,
some events occurred in Yathrib which paved the way for his emigration.
These events had made this city the center for the propagation of Islam.
Among these events were the following:

The Jews had owned the fertile lands around the city; they had created
numerous palm groves, enjoyed wealth and excelled all others
economically.[^2] Once in a while, some quarrels occurred between them
and the tribes of Aws and Khazraj. The Jews used to threaten them,
saying, “In the near future, there shall come a new prophet whom we will
follow and with his help we will root you out, just like the peoples of
\`ad and Iram.”[^3]

Because the Jews enjoyed a higher cultural status and they were
respected by the idolaters, who believed in whatever the Jews would tell
them, the issue of prophethood had rooted in the minds of the tribes of
Aws and Khazraj.

Since older times, wars and bloodshed took place between the tribes of
Aws and Khazraj. The last of these conflicts was the war of Bu\`ath.
These conflicts had resulted in a lot of casualties and damages on both
sides who, because they had suffered greatly, looked forward to
ceasefire and compromise.

However, there was no impartial person to carry out such a mission.
\`Abdullah Ibn Ubayy, who was not of the elderly chiefs of Khazraj, had
announced his impartiality during the battle of Bu\`ath and desired for
a ceasefire and reconciliation so that he might govern both of them. He
had prepared for the coronation ceremonies.[^4] However, the encounters
of Aws and Khazraj with the Holy Prophet in Mecca changed the direction
of events dramatically and \`Abdullah Ibn Ubayy lost his chance.

**The First Muslim Group of Yathrib**

Through their pilgrimages to Mecca, the people of Yathrib had known
about the Holy Prophet's mission since the early years of his open
invitations to Islam. Some of them had met him in Mecca and become
Muslims; but later on, they had either died or been killed.[^5] They had
never been able to invite anybody into Islam. In the eleventh year of
prophethood, the Holy Prophet met six of the elderly chiefs of Khazraj
during the season of Hajj and invited them to Islam.

They told each other, “Be aware; this is the same prophet predicted by
the Jews. Now we should not fall behind them in accepting his religion.”
Then, they accepted Islam by telling the Holy Prophet, “We have left our
people in the worst form of enmity. We hope that God will make them
conciliate through you. Now, we will return to Yathrib and start
inviting them to Islam. If they accept this religion, there will be
nobody dearer to us than you.”

Upon their return to Yathrib, this group invited people to Islam. Not
long after, the name of Islam was heard in every house of Yathrib and
the Holy Prophet's name was uttered by everybody.[^6]

**The First Treaty of \`Aqabah**

By the twelfth year of the prophethood, twelve people of Yathrib swore
allegiance to the Holy Prophet at the foot of the \`Aqabah of Mina[^7] at
the time of Hajj.[^8] Among this group, ten people were from Khazraj and
two others from Aws. This showed that these two groups had set their
quarrel aside and showed interest in coming under the banner of Islam.
They swore that they would not associate anybody with God, steal, engage
themselves in adultery, kill their own children, accuse one another, and
they would obey the Holy Prophet in performing good deeds.[^9]

The Holy Prophet promised them heaven as a reward for their keeping
this treaty.[^10] After the Hajj ceremony, they returned to Yathrib and
asked the Holy Prophet to appoint a teacher to teach them the Holy
Qur'an and the principles of Islam. The Holy Prophet sent Mus\`ab ibn
\`Umayr to them.[^11] Due to his hard work in propagation, a great number
of people accepted the Islamic faith.

In Mecca, the chiefs opposed Islam; but the youth and the deprived ones
accepted it as religion. However, in Yathrib, it was the other way
round; the chiefs pioneered to adopt Islam and people naturally followed
their suit. This was one of the factors for the spread of Islam in this
city.

**The Second Treaty of \`Aqabah**

In the thirteenth year of prophethood and at the Hajj ceremony, a group
of seventy-five people, eleven of whom were from Aws and two women,
entered Mecca.

On the twelfth of Dhu’l-Hijjah, the second treaty of \`Aqabah was
concluded with a lot of precautions. The signers pledged that if the
Holy Prophet emigrated to their city, they would protect him like their
own relatives and children and fight anybody who would fight against
him. For this reason, this treaty came to be called bay\`at al-harb (the
pledge of war). At the end of this meeting, the signers elected twelve
representatives to manage their affairs upon their return to
Yathrib.[^12]

**The initial Stages of emigration to Yathrib**

Despite all the precautions that the Holy Prophet and the people of
Yathrib had taken, Quraysh found out the secrets behind this treaty.

Consequently, they endeavored to arrest the treaty signers. Since those
who paid homage to the Holy Prophet had left Mecca in time, they could
flee to safety except for one who was arrested.

After the departure of the people of Yathrib, Quraysh increased their
pressure on Muslims, because they realized that the Holy Prophet had
safeguarded a stronghold in Yathrib; they therefore increased their
pressures on Muslims. Once again, life in Mecca had become
intolerable.[^13] For this reason, the Holy Prophet ordered Muslims to
emigrate to Yathrib, telling them, “Go to Yathrib; God will provide you
with brethren and a safe place.

”[^14] For two and a half months, (i.e. from the middle of Dhu’l-Hijjah
up to the end of safar)[^15] Muslims gradually headed for Yathrib despite
all hardships that Quraysh put in their way. Hence, no Muslim remained
in Mecca except for the Holy Prophet, Imam \`Ali, Abu-Bakr and some
others. In the history of Islam, those Muslims who emigrated to Yathrib
are called muhajirun (Emigrants) and those who helped out the Holy
Prophet in Yathrib are called ansar.

**Conspiracy of murdering the Holy Prophet**

After the settlement in Yathrib of Meccan Muslims, the chiefs of
Quraysh realized that Yathrib had turned into a strong shelter for the
Holy Prophet and his followers, and that people of Yathrib were ready to
fight for their faith. For this reason, they feared the Holy Prophet's
emigration. This matter caused the Quraysh to face several problems:

(1) Muslims were no longer under their domination and control, because
Yathrib was an independent city and Quraysh had no power there.
(2) Since people of Yathrib had convened a war treaty with the Holy
Prophet, he might then start a siege on Mecca for revenge.[^16]
(3) Even without a probable war, Quraysh were still at a loss, because
Yathrib was a lucrative market for their merchants and they would face
economic disasters through losing control over this city.
(4) Yathrib was on the trade route from Mecca to Damascus and Muslims
could easily make this route unsafe and vulnerable; they might also
jeopardize trade as a whole.

These worries forced the chiefs of Quraysh to gather at Dar al-Nidwah
(the consular center) for further consultation and deliberations. Some
proposed that the Holy Prophet be exiled or imprisoned. However, these
two proposals were rejected for certain reasons. Finally, they decided
to murder him although such an act would not look very simple, because
Banu-Hashim would seek revenge. To avoid such expected vengeance, they
decided to appoint one young man from every tribe so that they could
murder him in his bed.

In this way, Banu-Hashim could not rise to avenge because the
assassination would have taken place with several men from different
tribes; and Banu-Hashim could not fight all these tribes; so, they would
have to receive ransom and blood-money and the story would come to an
end. To carry out their plot, chiefs of Quraysh selected the first night
of Rabi\` al-Awwal. God refers to their conspiracy with the following
words:

And when those who disbelieved devised plans against you that they
might confine you, slay you, or drive you away; and they devised plans
and Allah too had arranged a plan; and Allah is the best of planners.
(8:30)

**The Prophet's Migration**

Through Divine revelation, the Holy Prophet knew about the conspiracy
of Dar al-Nidwah; he was then ordered by God to leave Mecca. He informed
Imam \`Ali (a.s) about his plan and ordered him to replace him in bed
that night and cover himself with his bedspread. Imam \`Ali (a.s)
immediately accepted this mission.

Accompanied by Abu- Bakr, the Holy Prophet headed for Thawr Cave to the
south of Mecca that night and stayed there for three days until chiefs
of Quraysh despaired of finding him. He wanted to find a safe time to
continue his migration. God, in the Holy Qur'an, refers to the Holy
Prophet's loneliness and to the worries of his companion. Despite all
precautious actions that the chiefs of Quraysh had taken, they could not
locate the Holy Prophet:

If you will not aid him, Allah certainly being the second of the two,
when they were both in the cave, when he said to his companion: Grieve
not, surely Allah is with us, So Allah sent down His tranquility upon
him and strengthened him with hosts which you did not see, and made
lowest the word of those who disbelieved; and the word of Allah that is
the highest; and Allah is Mighty, Wise. (9:40)

**A Great Sacrifice**

That night, Imam \`Ali (a.s) replaced the Holy Prophet in bed. The
armed forces of Quraysh besieged the Holy Prophet's house. In the
morning, they drew their swords and entered the house in a rampage, but
they found Imam \`Ali, not the Holy Prophet, in the bed. Realizing that
they had been betrayed, they charged against \`Ali. Drawing his sword,
he stood opposite against and refused to tell them where the Holy
Prophet was.[^17]

Anybody who would replace the Holy Prophet in bed had little chance to
survive. However, \`Ali, who had replaced the Holy Prophet in bed many
times before that event, such as he had done when they were besieged in
Abu-talib Col, in purpose of securing his safety, sacrificed his life to
protect the Holy Prophet's. Referring to this bravery and sacrifice of
Imam \`Ali, Almighty God says:

And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants. (2:207)

Exegetes of the Holy Qur'an agree that this verse was revealed on
account of the sacrifice and bravery of \`Ali at that night, which is
called laylat al-mabit.[^18]

Referring to the conspiracy of Quraysh during that dangerous night,
Imam \`Ali, in one of his sermons, describes his mental condition as
follows:

The Prophet ordered me to spend that night on his bed (while he would
be leaving for Medina) and use my life as a shield for the protection of
his life. I accepted it on the spot. I would be glad to die for him. The
Prophet left me and I slept on his bed. The Quraysh armed forces
entered, hoping to murder him. When they charged at the room where I was
staying, I stood up, drew my sword and protected myself. This is the
issue of which God is aware and people know.”[^19]

**The Prophet's Arrival at Quba**

Prior to his departure from Mecca, the Holy Prophet asked Imam \`Ali to
give back people's deposits[^20] and prepare for the departure of his
daughter, Fatimah, and some other men and women from Banu-Hashim, who
had not yet departed Mecca.[^21]

On the fourth of Rabi\` al-Awwal (the 14th year after prophethood), the
Holy Prophet left Thawr Cave for Yathrib.[^22] Eight days after that, he
arrived at the district of Quba, on the outskirts of Yathrib, where the
tribe Banu-\`Amr ibn \`Awf lived.[^23] He waited there for a few days,
waiting for \`Ali's arrival. During this time, he established a mosque
there.[^24]

After the Holy Prophet's migration, \`Ali (a.s) stayed for three days
in Mecca and carried out his obligations and tasks.[^25] He then
accompanied his mother Fatimah bint Asad and Fatimah daughter of the
Holy Prophet and Fatimah daughter of al-Zubayr ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib and
two others to Quba where they joined the Holy Prophet.[^26]

**Arrival at Yathrib**

Upon the arrival of \`Ali at Quba, the Holy Prophet headed for Yathrib
with a group of Banu’l-Najjar (his maternal uncles). On their way, he
performed the first Friday Prayer at the resort of Banu-Salim ibn \`Awf.
Upon their arrival at Yathrib, they were passionately welcomed by
people. The heads and chiefs of the tribes took the rein of the Holy
Prophet's palfrey and begged him to stay with them. He answered, “Let
the camel proceed; it has a mission to perform; wherever it sleeps, I
will stay.”

By this decision, the Holy Prophet most probably wanted not to give the
honor of being the host to any special group so that he could avoid
future conflicts. His discretion was similar to one concerning the place
of the installation of the Black Stone of the Kaaba.

Finally, the camel came to rest in the district of Banu’l-Najjar, on a
piece of land belonging to the two orphans, close to the house of
Abu-Ayyub Ansari (Khalid ibn Zayd Khazraji). All people were now
crowding around the Holy Prophet; they asked him to give them the honor
to be their guest. Abu-Ayyub took the Holy Prophet's baggage to his own
home and the Holy Prophet followed. He stayed there until the Masjid
al-Nabi (The Prophet’s Mosque) was established and there was a room
built next to it for the Holy Prophet to live in.[^27]

**The Start of the Hijri Calendar**

The Prophet's migration was the basis of a great change; it was a focal
point in the progress of Islam. Due to this historic event, Muslims were
free from shackles and they could live freely and run gatherings. This
was of utmost significance at that time. If this migration had not
occurred, Islam would have been strangled in Mecca and it would have
never had any chance to grow. After the migration, Muslims could
establish their political and military organization and Islam grew in
the Arabian Peninsula.

However, the following two questions require answer: Who established
this calendar for the first time? Since when was it put into effect?
Muslim historians unanimously agree that this feat was done by \`Umar
ibn al-Khattab after consultation and deliberations with the Holy
Prophet's grand companions.[^28] However, another research indicates that
the initiator for this feat was the Holy Prophet himself.

Some great Muslim historians have written that the Holy Prophet, after
his migration to Yathrib in Rabi\` al-Awwal, ordered that events should
be referred in relation to this day.[^29] The documents for this claim
are some of the Holy Prophet's letters, documents and communications
which are handed down to us and dated from the above date. There are two
samples here:

(1) The Holy Prophet signed a treaty with the Jews of Muqna ending with
the following statement: Written by \`Ali ibn Abi-talib in the ninth
year of Hegira.[^30]

(2) In a treaty with the Christians of Najran, we read the following:
The Holy Prophet ordered \`Ali to write down: This treaty is signed in
the fifth year of Hegira.[^31]

Based on some documents, the recording of events and affairs up to the
fifth year of Hegira took place on the basis of months alone. Here are
some such documents:

Abu-Sa\`id Khidri says: Fasting during the month of Ramazan was enacted
as obligatory one month after the change of the kiblah (i.e. the
direction faced in prayers) during the eighteenth month of Hegira.[^32]

\`Abdullah Ibn Unays, the commander of the army sent to war against
Sufyan ibn Khalid writes: I left Medina on Monday, the fifth of
Muharram; the fiftieth month of Hegira.”[^33]

Muhammad ibn Maslamah, recounting the campaign against the tribe of
Qurta,[^34] writes: I left Medina on the tenth of Muharram and returned
on the last night of Muharram, the fiftieth month after Hegira, after a
leave of nineteen days.”[^35]

For these reasons, the founder of the Hijri calendar was the Holy
Prophet;[^36] and since, in the reign of \`Umar, there appeared some
disagreements on the exact dates of some historical events,[^37] he
formalized this calendar on the sixteenth year of Hegira, and in place
of Rabi\` al-Awwal—the month in which the Holy Prophet arrived in
Medina—he appointed Muharram as the starting point of the Hijri
calendar.[^38]


