Chapter Four : Establishment of Muslim Military Forces
======================================================

**Formation of the Islamic Army**

During his stay in Mecca and propagation of Islam, the Holy Prophet
acted only as a Divinely commissioned leader. His activities were
restricted to guiding people and struggling against the idolaters.
However, after he settled in Yathrib, his function included both
religious and political leadership, because the social conditions had
drastically changed in Medina and the Holy Prophet was taking great
steps in founding a new society based on Islamic instructions.

For this reason, he could clearly envisage the probable hardships and
obstacles. As a farsighted political figure, he was constantly searching
for proper political solutions. His convention of a brotherly treaty
between two groups of Muslims; the initiation and completion of a
general treaty; and the convening of a nonaggression pact with the
Jews—all these were within his precautionary activities.

The Qur'anic texts carrying political and social orders that were
revealed in Medina were all appropriate guidelines for the Holy
Prophet's proceedings. Then, he was ordered to prepare for war and
defense.[^83] Consequently, he decided to form a defense force. The
establishment of such a force was significant because the Meccan
unbelievers, who could no longer torture Muslims after the Holy
Prophet's Hegira, might probably plot a military strike at the very
center of Islam (i.e. Medina).

For this reason, the Holy Prophet planned initial stages for the
formation of an Islamic army so as to encounter any such probabilities.
This army was initially very limited in human sources and military
equipment.

However, within a short time, it developed in both aspects. At the
beginning of this army’s formation, garrisons dispatched for military
operations or surveillance did not exceed sixty; and this number did not
exceed two hundred at most.[^84] In the second year and the Battle of
Badr, the number was a little more than three hundred. However, in the
eighth year and during the Meccan siege, the number of the Islam's
soldiers was nearly ten thousand well-equipped soldiers.

Thus, the trend of events showed that the Holy Prophet's predictions
came true. Beginning with the second year, there were numerous conflicts
and confrontations between the believers and the unbelievers. If Muslims
had lacked the required military forces, they would have been completely
wiped out by their enemies.[^85]

**Military Maneuvers**

With the small number of the armed forces which the Holy Prophet had at
his disposal, he prepared for a series of military operations which
could not be considered full-fledged wars. In none of these maneuvers
did any military confrontation occur. Examples of such expeditions were
the following:

The 30-man strong expedition called Hamzah ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib in the
eighth month of Hegira chased the caravan of Quraysh on their return to
Mecca.

The 60-man strong expedition called \`Ubaydah ibn al-Harith in the
eighth month of Hegira prosecuted Abu-Sufyan.

The 20-man strong expedition called Sa\`d Ibn Abi-Waqqas in the ninth
month of Hegira prosecuted the caravan of Quraysh but did not reach
it.[^86] In the eleventh month of Hegira, the Holy Prophet, accompanied
by a group of Muslims, chased the caravan of Quraysh up to the land of
Abwa but no confrontation took place. During this expedition, he
convened a treaty with the tribe of Banu-®amrah according to which they
promised to remain impartial and not to cooperate with the enemies of
Islam.

In Rabi\` al-Awwal (the twelfth month), the Holy Prophet chased Kurz
ibn Jabir al-Fahri, who had plundered a Medinan flock, up to the land of
Badr but missed him. In the month of Jumada al-akhir, the Holy Prophet,
accompanied by one hundred and fifty (or two hundred) troops, chased the
trade caravan of Quraysh, headed by Abu-Sufyan on his journey to
Damascus, but this time, he could not reach the caravan. However, during
this time, he convened a treaty with the tribe Banu-Mudlij and returned
to Medina.[^87] These kinds of small military operations could be called
military maneuvers and strength show, but not real wars.

**The Prophet's Objectives of Military Maneuvers**

According to several documents and pieces of evidence, the Holy
Prophet's purpose behind these wars was neither plundering the enemies
nor creating wars and conflicts, because, as we have already seen, the
number of the Islamic troops was small if compared with the enemies. In
some of these wars, Ansar took part although they had promised, in the
course of the treaty of the second \`Aqabah, to protect the Holy Prophet
at Medina and not to be involved in wars outside it.

Furthermore, the citizens of Medina were farmers and gardeners; they
were not in the habit of plundering as the nomad tribes were. The
conflicts between Aws and Khazraj were local conflicts and it was the
Jews who ignited the fire of difference between these two tribes. They
had never plundered any tribe. Furthermore, when confronted by enemies,
Muslims never showed any inclination to war. Hamzah, for example,
avoided engaging himself in war when an impartial person acted as an
intermediary to stop it.[^88] Considering all these factors, the Holy
Prophet carried out all those military maneuvers for specific
objectives. The following were among his aims:

(1) The Holy Prophet aimed at threatening the trade route from Quraysh
to Damascus. The Meccan trade caravans used to move between Medina and
the shores of the Red Sea as they could not go more than 130 kilometers
away from the city.[^89] Through his maneuvers, the Holy Prophet wished
to let Quraysh know that if they wanted to hinder the Muslims' free
actions in Medina, their trade routes would be endangered and their
goods could be confiscated by Muslims.[^90] This threat was definitely a
warning for the Meccan unbelievers for whom trade was of vital
significance. This treaty forced them to review their strategies against
Muslims.

No doubt, Muslims were right in confiscating the Meccan goods and
properties since they had forced Muhajirun out of their homes in Mecca
and had confiscated their belongings.[^91] It should be noted that the
conflicts were not personal anymore; rather, these conflicts had turned
into conflicts between two powers each of which did its best to weaken
the other. Later on, this threat became real and Quraysh, having been
worried about the cutting off of the trade route to Damascus, tried to
find another route.

From Muslims' point of view, the economic damage to the enemy and the
creation of worry and anxiety to them seemed more significant than the
booties they could collect. This could be seen in Muslims' not receiving
any wealth from the unbelievers at the expeditions of \`Abdullah Ibn
Jahsh and Badr.

(2) These maneuvers were a show of Muslims' military force and a
warning to the Meccan unbelievers not to think of military expeditions
against them. It was also aimed at showing the unbelievers that Muslims
were strong enough to defend themselves. While the Holy Prophet was in
Mecca and the number of Muslims was small, chiefs of Quraysh could
easily envisage their economic fall. Now that the city of Medina had
turned into a stronghold for Islam, how could the money- minded Meccan
people ever feel safe? For this reason, Muslims had to be prompt so that
they could discourage the unbelievers from planning anything hostile
against this city.

(3) Most probably, these military actions were meant to warn the Jews
of Medina as well, who had revealed their enmity, so that they might
stop their conspiracies and military operations.[^92]

**The Expedition of \`Abdullah Ibn Jahsh**

In the month of Rajab of the second year, the Holy Prophet sent
\`Abdullah Ibn Jahsh and eight others on a reconnaissance mission. The
Holy Prophet gave him a sealed letter and asked him to open it after two
days of walking and do as he is directed to do and not to force any one
of his followers to follow him. Having walked for two days, he opened
the letter in which the following was written: “If you read my letter,
continue with your journey and stand on the land of Nakhlah between
Mecca and ta’if. There, waylay the movements of Quraysh and inform us of
the result.”

\`Abdullah told his followers that he would follow the orders. He also
told them that if they were ready to be martyred, they could stay lest
they were free to leave him. All of them showed readiness. They
therefore stayed at Nakhlah. There was a Quraysh caravan, headed by
\`Amr al-Hazrami, returning to Mecca from ta’if. \`Abdullah and his
followers wished to attack the caravan but it was the last day of Rajab.
They told each other that if Quraysh entered Mecca, they could not
attack them; and if they attacked them there, they would disobey and
violate the prohibition of war during the sacred months.

Finally, they attacked the caravan, killing \`Amr and taking two
prisoners. Then, they returned to Medina with the booties and the
prisoners. However, the Holy Prophet was angry with them for their act.
He even refused to receive the prisoners or the booties, saying, “I had
already warned you not to fight during the sacred months.”

This event had drastic consequences; Muslims did not appreciate this
bloodshed during the sacred months and reprimanded \`Abdullah for his
action. On the other hand, Quraysh used this event as a pretext to
defame the Holy Prophet by accusing him of involvement in bloodshed
during the sacred months. The Jews, too, started poisoning the
environment by saying that Muslims were losers. At this time, the angel
of revelation appeared to the Holy Prophet, conveying the following:

They ask you concerning the sacred month about fighting in it. Say:
Fighting in it is a grave matter, and hindering men from Allah's way and
denying Him, and hindering men from the sacred mosque and turning its
people out of it are still graver with Allah, and persecution is graver
than slaughter; and they will not cease fighting with you until they
turn you back from your religion, if they can. (2:217)

With the revelation of these holy verses, which implicitly exonerated
\`Abdullah, Quraysh was introduced as the agent of sedition and trouble
and their sins were considered greater than the involvement in war and
bloodshed during the sacred months. Upon the Quraysh representatives’
request, the Holy Prophet released the prisoners one of whom became
Muslim.[^93]

**The Battle of Badr**

This event, which took place following the Prophet’s military maneuvers
and the threat against the Quraysh trade route, was the first complete
war between Muslims and the unbelievers. As we have seen, in the month
of Jumada al-akhir, the Holy Prophet chased Quraysh’s caravan—headed by
Abu-Sufyan—which was heading towards Damascus up to the land of Dhat
al-\`Ushayrah but he could not catch them.

By sending spies to the district of Damascus, he knew about the
caravan's return.[^94] From an economic point of view, this is said to be
one thousand and the worth of the merchandise is estimated as high as
fifty-thousand Dinars. All Quraysh people had their shares in this
investment.[^95]

The natural route of the caravan crossed the district of Badr.[^96] In
order to confiscate the goods,[^97] the Holy Prophet had three hundred
and thirteen troops.[^98] With the minimum amount of ammunition,[^99] he
headed for Badr. On his way back from Damascus, Abu-Sufyan became aware
of the Holy Prophet's decision and sent a messenger to Mecca asking for
help.[^100]

He changed his direction to the shores of the Red Sea and speedily got
the caravan out of the danger zone.[^101] Upon Abu-Sufyan's call, nine
hundred and fifty soldiers[^102] left Mecca towards Medina to help the
caravan. Abu-Sufyan's obstinacy led his troops to the battle.

While Muslims were looking for the signs of the Quraysh caravan, the
Holy Prophet became aware of the caravan's arrival at Badr. They had to
decide on the spot. This decision was hard to make because Muslims had
time to confiscate the caravan, not to be involved in a war the troops
of which were three times more numerous than theirs.

If they decided to go back, they would lose the effects of their
military maneuvers and the enemy would chase them and attack Medina. So,
a military council was held in which the Holy Prophet sought consult of
Muslims in general and Ansar in particular. Miqdad's zealous speech and
Sa\`d ibn \`Abadah’s enthusiastic encouragements brought forth the
decision to fight.[^103]

The war started on the seventeenth of Ramazan.[^104] At first, Hamzah,
\`Ubaydah and \`Ali killed Shaybah, \`Utbah and Walid Ibn \`Utbah.[^105]
This was a hard blow over the chiefs of Quraysh.[^106] Then, war broke
out. The troops of Islam overcame and by noon, the battle ended with the
defeat and retreat of the enemy troops. Out of the unbelievers’ troops,
seventy were killed[^107] and another seventy were taken as
prisoners.[^108] From the Muslim troops, only fourteen were
martyred.[^109]

Then, with the permission of the Holy Prophet, the prisoners were freed
upon the payment of ransoms. Prisoners who were moneyless but literate
were forced to teach ten Muslim individuals reading and writing to earn
their freedom.[^110] Later, the rest of the prisoners were freed thanks
to the Holy Prophet's generosity.[^111]

**Factors of Victory**

The Muslims' unprecedented victory broke the Quraysh’s dignity in their
first military confrontation. They were completely overwhelmed and taken
by surprise. The defeat of Quraysh’s troops was so sudden that when the
Holy Prophet's envoy entered Medina to announce victory, Muslims could
not believe what they heard and assumed that the envoy was a defeated
soldier who had fled the battlefield.[^112] However, it was not long
before the prisoners of war were taken into the city.

The aftermath of this victory reached even the king of Abyssinia,
al-Najashi, who became extremely delighted; therefore, he summoned the
Muslim migrants to tell them the good news.[^113] The Holy Prophet
said:

The Battle of Badr was the first encounter in which God endeared Islam
and humiliated the unbelievers.[^114]

On the day of the Battle of Badr, Satan was extremely
humiliated.[^115]

The factors which contributed to this outstanding victory could be
summed up as follows:

(1) This battle was excellently managed by the Holy Prophet who showed
unmatched bravery.[^116] Remembering this war, Imam \`Ali said, When the
fire of war was kindled, we would resort to the Holy Prophet; and in
those moments, he was the closest to the enemy.[^117]

(2) Imam \`Ali showed outstanding bravery, killing half of the slain
ones.[^118] Naming thirty-five of the dead ones in Badr, Shaykh al-Mufid
writes down:

Narrators unanimously agree that \`Ali ibn Abi-talib killed this group
except for those whose slayers are not pinpointed.[^119]

(3) In spite of the fact that some Muslims, while leaving Medina,
showed reluctance to take part in the war (Qur'an, 8:5-6) and some
leading personalities of Muhajirun surfaced their fear and worry at the
military councils,[^120] uttering despairing words, the majority of
Muslim warriors showed great strength in their souls and fought
bravely.

(4) Divine contributions (Qur’an 3:123) took place in different ways:

a) Raining at the night before the battle helped Muslims in
water-supply and hardened the ground on which they could easily move.
(Qur’an 3:123)

b) At that night, Muslims could sleep with tranquility (Qur’an
8:11);[^121] the Holy Prophet alone was wakeful until morning, praying
for victory.[^122]

c) Angels participated in that battle. (Qur’an 8:9)[^123]

d) The hearts of the unbelievers were filled with fear. (Qur’an 8:12)

**Results of Muslims' Victory**

The victory of the Islamic troops has certain consequences some of
which will be dealt with hereinafter:

(1) God has previously promised Muslims victory over the Meccan troops
(Qur’an 8:7) and the Holy Prophet informed them about this promise at
the end of their military discussions.[^124] With this victory, Muslims
relied more on God's assistance and became stronger in their faith.

(2) Both the hypocrites and the Jews of Medina became upset and
humiliated by this victory. When the Holy Prophet's envoy reached Medina
to announce the Muslims' victory, the Hypocrites spread the rumor that
Muhammad was killed and Muslims were defeated and spread apart.[^125]

The Jews surfaced their hatred.[^126] Ka\`b al-Ashraf, one of the
leaders of Jews, said, “Those who are said to be killed were among the
noblemen. If this news is correct, then to die is preferred to living on
the earth.[^127]

(3) The tribes living around Medina reckoned this victory as a sign of
the truthfulness of Islam and showed inclinations to it. Ya\`qubi
writes:

“After God granted His Prophet victory in the Battle of Badr and killed
many of troops of Quraysh, the Arab tribes showed inclinations to Islam
and sent their representatives to the Holy Prophet. Four or five months
after the Battle of Badr, the tribe of Rabi\`ah, at the district of
Dhiqar, fought with Khosrow. They told one another that they should
raise the slogan of tihami (Muhammad) in the battlefield. Then, they
would utter, O Muhammad, Oh Muhammad. Following this, they won over
their enemies.”[^128]

(4) Quraysh realized they had made mistakes in estimating Muhammad's
power; they had never imagined that they could be beaten so easily by a
group of escapees and farmers! They thus concluded that their trade was
endangered and that they could never rely on the Mecca-Damascus trade
route which crossed Badr. In a gathering, safwan ibn Umayyah said:

“Muhammad and his followers have endangered our trade. We do not know
what to do with them. They would not abandon the shores as long as the
shore-dwellers have united with them. We do not know where to go. Our
life subsistence in this city is provided by our summer trip to Damascus
and winter trip to Abyssinia. If we are stuck in this city, we have to
consume our capital and lose our income and wealth.”

Quraysh, then, decided to make their trade trip to Damascus via Iraq.
safwan headed a caravan towards Damascus through Iraq. His share of the
merchandize was three hundred thousand Dinars. When the Holy Prophet
knew about this, he sent a one-hundred strong troop under the leadership
of Zayd ibn Harithah to confiscate the goods. That was in Jumada
al-akhir, the third year of Hegira. The caravan men fled and the goods
were confiscated by the Muslim troops. Moreover, one or two prisoners
were taken to Medina.[^129] This mission is referred to, in books of
history,[^130] as Sariyyat al-Qaradah.[^131]

**Breach of Banu-Qaynuqa\` Treaty**

Banu-Qaynuqa\` was the first Jewish tribe that violated the
nonaggression pact. This was because Muslims' victory was bitter for
both the Jews and the infidels. After the Battle of Badr and the victory
of Muslims, both the Jews and the hypocrites became so furious. The
first group that started incurring animosity of Islam was Banu-Qaynuqa\`
although the Holy Prophet had warned them against so and advised them to
learn a lesson from the defeat of Quraysh and to be Muslims. He told
them they had learned about his traits in their Book.[^132]

Their reply was, “Your victory over Quraysh has made you proud. Quraysh
were a trade group. If you ever fight us, you will know how real
warriors look like!”

Stricken by false pride, they did not take the Holy Prophet's warnings
seriously; rather, they continued in aggression. Once, one of these Jews
insulted the wife of one of Ansar in the mart of this tribe outside
Medina, creating turmoil. The woman called for help and a Muslim killed
that intruder.

Then, the Jews collectively killed that Muslim. Although two persons
were killed, they could have stopped the situation at this point.
However, they returned to their castles and readied themselves to
attack. The Holy Prophet ordered their castle to be besieged. After
fifteen days of siege, the Holy Prophet accepted the intermediation of
\`Abdullah Ibn Ubayy, who had been already an ally of them, and
permitted them to leave Medina after submitting their weapons.

They migrated to a place called Adhru\`at, in Damascus. This event
occurred in the month of Shawwal of the second year of Hegira.[^133]

Having been the bravest Jews,[^134] Banu-Qaynuqa\` used to take pride in
their power. They relied on their allies from Khazraj and
Banu-\`Awf.[^135] However, Khazraj could not save them from
banishment.[^136] \`Abadah ibn samit al-\`Awfi gave them up.[^137] The two
Jewish tribes of Banu’l-Nazir and Banu-Qurayzah, who were the previous
allies of Aws, could not help them either. Sa\`d ibn Mu\`adh, the chief
of Aws, did not have any role in preventing their interferences in this
crisis.

Thus, the banishment of this tribe from Medina benefited Muslims in the
sense that the power of these three tribes was disintegrated. It was
also a warning to the other Jews of Medina not to commit the same
mistake.

**The Marriage of Imam \`Ali and Lady Fatimah**

Upon the victory in the Battle of Badr that added to the Muslim’s
dignity, another auspicious event took place; it was the marriage of
Imam \`Ali and Fatimah that was held at the Holy Prophet’s house.[^138]
Due to her father’s special charisma and high social status in addition
to her own supreme personality, Lady Fatimah had numerous suitors some
of whom were wealthy. However, the Holy Prophet would not consent[^139]
saying, “I am waiting for the Divine decision.”[^140] Then, they provoked
\`Ali who was extremely poor to ask her father to marry her to him. Imam
\`Ali did. Upon consulting with Fatimah, the Holy Prophet informed Imam
\`Ali of her consent.[^141] He said to his daughter,

“I consent to your marriage with a man who is most advanced in moral
aspects and adoption of Islam.”[^142]

Then the Holy Prophet said to Imam \`Ali,

“There are several men of Quraysh who were offended because I could not
agree with any one of them to marry Fatimah, telling them that I was
awaiting a Divine decision, because I was certain that nobody deserved
being Fatimah’s spouse other than \`Ali.”[^143]

This marriage, which took place in the simplest ceremony and with the
least amount of dowry[^144] and trousseau,[^145] is one the most obvious
manifestations of the spiritual value of the bond of marriage in
Islam.

**The Battle of Uhud**

After the Battle of Badr, Quraysh who had earned a great income through
the safe return of their trade caravan prepared themselves to avenge
their defeat.[^146] Having been ensured the cooperation of some tribes,
Quraysh left Mecca with ample supplies[^147] taking a group of women to
encourage the soldiers in the battlefield.[^148] The Holy Prophet,
through secret information received from his uncle \`Abbas at Mecca,
knew about their plan.[^149] He discussed the matter with his military
consultants as how to confront the enemy.

\`Abdullah ibn Ubayy and some merchants from Ansar, as well as some
individuals from Muhajirun such as Hamzah, preferred that the
confrontation would take place outside the city borders because they
believed that if Muslims remained in town, the enemy would become more
daring and would consider it weak point.[^150] Ultimately, the Holy
Prophet accepted the proposal of this brave group of consultants and
left the town for Mount Uhud[^151] with a thousand troops.[^152]

On the way, \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy returned with his troops of three
hundred to Medina defying the Holy Prophet’s plan, because he had
accepted the plans of the younger consultants[^153] and he assumed that
no war would take place (Qur’an 3:167).[^154] The Holy Prophet stationed
the troop which had decreased to the number of seven hundred at the
outskirts of Mount Uhud, which became behind the Muslims while Mount
\`Aynayn was on the left side.[^155] Muslim troops faced the west and the
enemy faced the east.[^156] Looking at the battlefield militarily,

the Holy Prophet noticed the significance of Mount \`Aynayn since the
enemy might invade the Muslims while the fight was going on; therefore,
he appointed an officer called \`Abdullah ibn Jubayr to defend that
location with fifty archers, declaring, “Whether we win or lose, you
must stay here to defend us against the enemy’s attack.”[^157]

Abu-Sufyan, too, engaged himself in the adoption of standard-bearers.
In those days, the role of standard-bearers was of crucial importance;
only the brave ones could carry the standard. The strength and stamina
of a standard-bearer was a source of encouragement for the troops. On
the other hand, his fall would lead to the soldier’s discouragement.
Having selected the standard-bearer from among the tribe of Banu-\`Abd
al-Dar who were famous for their courage, Abu-Sufyan told them, “We all
are sure that you, Banu-\`Abd al-Dar are the worthiest of carrying the
standards. Keep hold of the standards and make us feel secure in that
issue; a troop falls as soon as its standards fall.”[^158]

**Muslims’ victory at the intial stage ot the battle**

The war flared up on the fifteenth of Shawwal, the third year of
Hegira.[^159] In a short time, Muslims were victorious and the enemy
troops absconded. Their defeat was not due to the great number of
casualties, which, according to the most reliable sources, did not
exceed fifty;[^160] rather, it was the fall of nine standard-bearers who
had been destroyed by Imam \`Ali,[^161] causing damage to their
spirituality.[^162]

On various occasions after the Battle of Uhud, Imam \`Ali used to put
stress on this event. In the six-member council which was held after the
assassination of \`Umar ibn al-Khattab to elect the next caliph, Imam
\`Ali referred to this event as a point of honor and the members of that
committee could not deny.[^163]

Upon the destruction of the standard-bearers of Quraysh, there was
confusion among the enemy’s troops who chose to take flight. Upon their
retreat, Muslims started collecting the booty. Most of the archers left
their strongholds, assuming that the battle was over. Thus, they did not
listen to the warnings of \`Abdullah ibn Jubayr concerning the Holy
Prophet’s orders. (Qur'an, 3:152)

**The Enemy’s Victory**

The archers’ mistake and miscalculation had a tremendous effect on the
battle, because Khalid ibn al-Walid attacked that position with two
hundred troops and killed \`Abdullah ibn Jubayr with ten others. He then
attacked other Muslims from behind. On the other side, \`Amrah bint
\`Alqamah, together with other women from Quraysh, took up the standards
and waved them in the air;[^164] so, the battle started over again.[^165]
Muslims suffered a great blow this time because there was no
coordination between the troops and their commanders. There were
secondary factors which contributed to this defeat:

(1) A rumor had it that the Holy Prophet was killed.[^166]

(2) In those days, the two parties of the military conflict did not
have a uniform distinguishing them from the other party. At the
battlefield, they were recognized only through slogans. The Muslim
troops did not recognize one another; they therefore started drawing
swords against one another.[^167] For instance, Husayl ibn Jabir, a
Muslim warrior, was killed by his party.[^168] However, as soon as
Muslims became aware of the situation and started uttering slogans, the
conditions changed drastically.[^169]

(3) Another factor was the direction of the wind which was blowing from
the west, making it hard for Muslims to carry on with the war.[^170]

At any rate, much confusion occurred to the Muslim troops most of whom
fled the battlefield or climbed the mountain, leaving the Holy Prophet
in the battlefield defending Muslims and asking the escapees to stay
firm.[^171]

Imam \`Ali and a few warriors resisted the enemies in the
battlefield.[^172] He fought bravely next to the Holy Prophet, defending
him several times.[^173]

With his unique perseverance, a Divine call echoed in the sky of Uhud,
“There is no sword beyond Dhu’l-Faqar (Imam \`Ali’s sword) and there is
no combatant save \`Ali.”[^174]

In order to weaken the morale of Muslims, Abu-Sufyan started
psychological warfare by uttering the slogan, “Be proud Hubal! Be proud
Hubal.” Answering him, the Holy Prophet ordered his men to cry out,
“Allah is Greater and more Majestic.” Then Abu-Sufyan said, “We have
\`Uzza and you have none.” The Holy Prophet asked a Muslim to reply, “We
have Allah as our Master; and you have none.”[^175]

It is reported that in that battle, seventy Muslims, including
Hamzah—the Holy Prophet’s uncle—and Mus\`ab ibn \`Umayr, were
martyred.

Although Muslims were defeated[^176] and the troops of Quraysh were
intact, the chiefs of Quraysh who were worried about its
consequences[^177] preferred to leave Medina and go back to Mecca. They
were merely happy that they had avenged their previous losses. All this
happened with no damage done to either Medina or the Damascus trade
route.

In order to demonstrate that Muslims were still firm and invincible,
the Holy Prophet chased the enemy to the land of Hamra' al-Asad in order
to prevent them from attacking Medina.[^178]

**Consequences of the defeat at Uhud**

(1) Although Muslims were militarily defeated in this battle, they
learned not to disregard the Holy Prophet’s orders. Such disobediences
never happened in the following wars.

(2) The hypocrites started all sorts of conspiracies; they rejoiced on
the Muslims’ defeat and blamed them.[^179]

(3) The Jews, too, surfaced their hatred, saying, “No prophet has been
defeated to this degree!”[^180]

(4) The enemies of Islam around Medina were emboldened to initiate
conspiracies. Banu-Asad, for instance, attempted to attack Medina. Other
events the most famous of which were known as al-Raji\` and Bi’r
Ma\`unah took place as a result of the Muslims’ defeat at the Battle of
Uhud.

(5) Upon the return of Muslims to Medina, the shadow of grief and
despair prevailed over the city. Conspiracies of the hypocrites and the
Jews worsened the situation. God removed these signs of despair and
strengthened the Muslims’ morale through a revelation of some verses.
According to Ibn Ishaq, sixty verses were revealed about the Battle of
Uhud.[^181]

God, in these verses, mentions the mysteries behind the Muslims’
failure and warns them not to despair even if they suffer a defeat. God
the Almighty adds that the very reason for Muslims’ zeal was their
seeking of worldly material. Muslims were victorious in the Battle of
Badr, because they fought for the sake of God only. However, in the
Battle of Uhud, they were after booties:

And Allah did certainly assist you at Badr when you were weak; be
careful of your duty to Allah then, that you may give thanks.

And be not infirm, and be not grieving, and you shall have the upper
hand if you are believers.

If a wound has afflicted you at Uhud, a wound like it has also
afflicted the unbelieving people; and We bring these days to men by
turns, and that Allah may know those who believe and take witness from
among you; and Allah does not love the unjust.

Do you think that you will enter the garden while Allah has not yet
known those who strive hard from among you, and He has not known the
patient.

And certainly, you desired death before you met it; so indeed you may
have seen it and looked at it.

And certainly Allah made good to you His promise, when you slew them by
His permission, until when you became weak- hearted and disputed about
the affair and disobeyed after He had shown you that which you loved; of
you were some who desired this world and of you were some who desired
the hereafter; then He turned you away from them that He might try you;
and He has certainly pardoned you, and Allah is Gracious to the
believers.

What! When a misfortune befell you, and you had certainly afflicted the
unbelievers with twice as much, you began to say: Whence is this? Say:
it is from yourselves; surely, Allah has power over all things.[^182]

The defeat and failure in the Battle of Uhud damaged the Muslims’
military credentials badly and caused the infidels and hypocrites to
indulge in conspiracies against them. Choosing this very time to attack
Muslims was due to Muslims’ weak points.[^183] Here are some examples of
their conspiracies:

**The Unsuccessful Attack of Banu-Asad**

The Holy Prophet was informed of Banu-Asad’s intention to attack
Medina. He dispatched Abu-Salamah with one hundred and fifty troops and
ordered them to attack the enemy before they would have any chance. The
troops arrived at the place of Banu-Asad with tremendous speed. The
tribesmen became overwhelmed and fled the scene. Abu-Salamah returned to
Medina with some prisoners and booties.[^184]

This victory boosted the Muslims’ military credentials to some degree.
The hypocrites, Jews and the tribes living around Medina realized that
Muslims were not truly defeated.

**The Event of Bi’r Ma\`unah**


This event was even more disastrous than the event of Raji\`. It took
place in safar, the 4th year of Hegira. Abu-Bara', the chief of
Banu-\`amir, came to see the Holy Prophet in Medina. Showing no
inclination to Islam, he made the proposal that the Holy Prophet would
send a group of his followers to Najd to invite people to Islam. The
Holy Prophet replied, “I fear that the Najd people might hurt Muslims.”
Abu-Bara' said, “I will protect them.

” The Holy Prophet, then, dispatched seventy[^185] of the Qur'an
instructors and true companions. Arriving at Bi’r Ma\`unah, this group
sent a letter to \`amir ibn tufayl, who killed the messenger without
even looking at the letter. Then, he asked Banu-\`amir to kill the Holy
Prophet’s envoy. They refused to do so thanks to Abu-Bara’s promise of
protection.

\`amir ibn tufayl, together with some branches of Banu-Sulaym, charged
at the Holy Prophet’s envoy who, in return, had to defend themselves and
all were martyred except for Ka\`b ibn Zayd and \`Amr ibn Umayyah
al-®amari[^186] who had fallen captive to the enemy and then set free. On
his return to Medina, he killed two members of Banu-\`amir, without
knowing that they had been on a contract with the Holy Prophet.[^187]

**Campaign against Banu Nazir**

Following the murder of two members of Banu-\`amir,[^188] the Holy
Prophet expressed his condolences and grief. He said, “I have to pay
their blood-money.”[^189] Banu-\`amir sent a letter to the Holy Prophet
demanding with blood-money.[^190] Because Banu-\`amir had a peace treaty
with Banu’l-Nazir, the Holy Prophet, along with some Ansar, went to
their castle around Medina in order to ask for help in paying the
blood-money. The chiefs of Banu’l-Nazir superficially agreed to the Holy
Prophet’s proposal but secretly had appointed a man to throw a stone on
his head to kill him. Through Divine information, the Holy Prophet
became aware of this conspiracy.[^191]

He suddenly left for Medina, ordering them to leave it and allowing
them to keep their own possessions. Being frightened, they intended to
leave that place forever; but \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy seduced them to
resist promising that he would assist them if a war broke out. He told
them that if they were expelled from Medina, he would leave
there.[^192]

Some historical accounts report that prior to this event, Quraysh had
provoked Banu’l-Nazir to fight against Muslims.[^193] These provocations
were influential in the outcomes of this event.

Having been misled by \`Abdullah’s false promises, Banu’l-Nazir
preferred to stay. By the command of the Holy Prophet, the Muslim troops
surrounded their castle for fifteen days during which there was no sign
of supporting troops! Banu’l-Nazir had to surrender and take their
possessions on camels; some going to Damascus and others to Khaybar,
including their chief Huyay ibn Akhtab. They were welcomed by the people
of Khaybar who showed obedience to their chief.[^194]

Since Banu’l-Nazir surrendered with no fight, their possessions were at
the disposal of the Holy Prophet. After obtaining the consent of Ansar,
the Holy Prophet divided these possessions among the emigrants.[^195]

God, in the Holy Qur'an, mentions the treason of Banu’l-Nazir and their
fate with the following words:

He it is Who caused those who disbelieved of the followers of the Book
to go forth from their homes at the first banishment; you did not think
that they would go forth, while they were certain that their fortresses
would defend them against Allah; but Allah came to them when they did
not expect, and cast terror into their own hands and the hands of the
believers; therefore take a lesson, O you who have eyes.

And had it not been that Allah had decreed for them the exile, He would
certainly have punished them in this world, and in the Hereafter, they
shall have chastisement of the fire.

That is because they acted in opposition to Allah and His Apostle, and
whoever acts in opposition to Allah, then surely, Allah is severe in
requiting evil.[^196]


