Section Five : From the Universal Invitation To the Depature of the Holy Prophet
================================================================================

Chapter One : Universal Invitation to Islam

**The Holy Prophet’s Universal Mission**

Although the faith of Islam appeared in the Arabian peninsula among the
Arab nation and the Holy Prophet was an Arab, Islam was not a local
faith that is restricted to the Arab nation.

To prove, the Holy Qur'an addressed neither Quraysh nor the Arab
nation; Rather, it addresses all people. In some verses that order
Muslims to perform certain tasks and responsibilities, the Holy Qur'an
addresses them as believers. From the very beginning of his mission
throughout his invitation to Islam in Mecca, the Holy Prophet declared
that his mission was a universal issue. Besides, the Holy Qur'an is
dealing with universal issues on many occasions, such as the
following:

Say: O people! Surly I am the Apostle of Allah to you all. (7:158)

And We have not sent you but to all the men as a bearer of good news.
(34:28)

And it is naught but a reminder to the nations. (68:52)

It is nothing but a reminder and a plain Qur'an that it may warn him
who is alive. (36:69-70)

He it is Who sent His Apostle with guidance and the religion of truth,
that he might cause it to prevail over all religions. (9:33)

And We have not sent you but as a mercy to the worlds. (21:107)

All these holy verses were revealed in Mecca; a fact demonstrating that
the general invitation to Islam took place from the very initial stages.
However, despite these authentic reasons, some European scholars, such
as Goldziher, have claimed that Muhammad’s widespread faith only took
place later on and that his very initial instructions did not go farther
than the needs of the ignorant Arabs of his time.[^1] This claim is too
worthless to require evidence.

**The Start of the Universal Invitation**

If the Holy Prophet did not take any step for the spread of Islam
outside the Arabian Peninsula during his stay in Mecca and several years
after his Hegira, this was due to the enmity and aggression leveled at
him by Meccan unbelievers, the Jews and other enemies. However, after
the convention of Hudaybiyah Truce that brought about a temporary relief
from the aggressions of Quraysh and a relative calm over Mecca, the Holy
Prophet wrote several letters to the kings and governors of different
countries inviting them to his Faith.

In one day only, he wrote six letters to al-Najashi, the king of
Abyssinia, Caesar of Rome; Khosrow Parviz of Iran, al-Muqawqas of Egypt,
Harith ibn Abi-Shimr al-Ghassani of Damascus, and Hawdhah Ibn \`Ali of
Yamamah, as well as many other kings and governors.[^2] These letters
were written in Dhu’l-Hijjah of the sixth year of Hegira or Muharram of
the seventh.

Of course, this was just the beginning of the universal invitation to
Islam. Moreover, from that day on and up to his last day of life, the
Holy Prophet continued writing letters to the different countries of the
world.[^3] The content of all these letters was identical and all of them
were written in a simple, explicit and decisive style. However,
reactions of the world leaders were not identical.

**Conquest of Khaybar**

Khaybar consisted of several castles. Its people were engaged in
agriculture and animal husbandry. Due to its good agricultural
capacities, it was referred to as the wheat store of Hijaz.[^4] Its
people also enjoyed good economic prosperity. The great goods and
ammunitions which fell in the hands of Muslims after the collapse of the
castles witness to this issue. The very structure of the castles was
strong and enduring and the number of their troops was in thousands.[^5]
For this reason, they considered themselves strong enough to stop the
attacks of Muslims.[^6]

The Jews of Khaybar made use of any chance available to try to destroy
the newly built Islamic government as their city was turned into a
permanent center for conspiracies against Islam. Having been defeated in
Medina, the chiefs of Banu’l-Nazir joined Khaybar to cooperate with them
against Islam.

In the sixth year of Hegira, Sallam ibn Abi’l-Huqayq, one of
Banu’l-Nazir's chiefs who had obtained the leadership of the Jews of
Khaybar through cooperation with the tribe of Ghatafan and other infidel
tribes, gathered a great troop to fight against Muslims. After he was
killed by Muslims due to plotting conspiracies against them, people of
Khaybar appointed Usayr ibn Zarim as their leader.[^7] This man, too,
engaged himself in aggression and provocation of tribes against
Muslims.[^8]

To eradicate the previous signs of enmity, the Holy Prophet dispatched
a group under the supervision of \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah to the newly
appointed leader to secure his consent for peace. The new leader,
together with \`Abdullah and a group of Jews, was on his way to Medina
to talk to the Holy Prophet. However, on the way, he changed his mind
and tried to kill \`Abdullah. Due to this confrontation, he and his
company all were killed.[^9] In this way, the Holy Prophet’s peaceful
plans became null and void.

A contemporary historian states that in addition to these conspiracies,
Muslims anticipated that the Jews of Khaybar who had already incurred
the hostility of Muslims might be used by the Iranian or Roman empires
to prepare for an attack against Islam as a compensation for the defeat
and failure of Banu-Qaynuqa\`, Banu’l-Nazir, and Banu-Qurayzah.[^10]

After the convention of the Hudaybiyah Truce through which the Holy
Prophet was at ease regarding the dangers from the south, he, together
with fourteen Muslim warriors, headed to the north to disarm the Jews of
Khaybar. That was in the beginning of the seventh year of Hegira. He
chose such a direction for his involvement as to cut the relations of
Ghatafan, the powerful ally of Khaybar, with the people of Khaybar
depriving them of any cooperation with each other.[^11] Using the tactic
of surprise, all the castles and strongholds of Khaybar fell to Muslims
and the Jewish chiefs presumed predicament with dawn.

The encounter was unequal; warriors of Khaybar were in their
stronghold, they had the doors firmly closed and through their guards on
the towers and high walls hindered any Muslim approach. In one attack,
fifty Muslim warriors were wounded.[^12]

Besides, the warriors of Khaybar had sufficient supplies, but Muslims
felt short of supplies as the war continued. Finally, with great
hardships on the part of Muslims, the castes fell one after another.
However, the last castle, called Qamus, which was supervised by the
famous Jewish hero named Marhab, continued to defend itself and Muslim
warriors were unable to capture.

One day, the Holy Prophet gave the banner to Abu-Bakr and the next day
to \`Umar with some troops to attack the castle, but they both
failed.[^13] Seeing this, the Holy Prophet declared:

“Tomorrow, I will hand this banner to one who, with God's support, will
capture this castle; one who is loved by God and His Apostle and God and
His Apostle love; he is not a quitter.”

That night, every Muslim desired that he would be given the banner.
When dawn came, the Holy Prophet asked, “Where is \`Ali?” They replied,
“He is suffering a severe eye-ache and he is now at rest.” The Holy
Prophet summoned \`Ali and cured his eyes. Submitting the banner to
\`Ali, the Holy Prophet ordered him,

“Move towards them; as soon as you arrive at their castle, invite them
to Islam and remind them of their rights. I swear to God that to conduct
one person to the truth is better for you than having red-haired
camels.”[^14]

Imam \`Ali headed for the mission; he could kill Marhab through a
heroic encounter in which Imam \`Ali showed a unique bravery. He then
could conquer that castle.

Attacking the castles of Khaybar, which were centers of conspiracy
against Islam, shows a number of important matters some of which are as
follows:

(1) This shows that the Holy Prophet enjoyed an effective management
when he chose the quite suitable person to this mission.

(2) He used effective military tactics, such as the principle of
surprise and the gathering of information.

(3) Imam \`Ali showed such a unique bravery that none else had.

Imam \`Ali's self-sacrifice and bravery in this war was so great that
the Holy Prophet appreciated it and praised him for his vigor and
stamina, declaring his precedence before all other Muslims.

Muslims also remembered this praise on many occasions. For instance,
when he came to power, Mu\`awiyah ordered everybody to curse Imam \`Ali
openly. Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas abstain from carrying out this order. When
Mu\`awiyah asked for the reason, Sa\`d answered,

“I will never curse him, because I remember that the Holy Prophet
mentioned three of his virtues, which I wished I could have only one of
them. (1) In one of the wars [i.e. Tabuk], the Holy Prophet appointed
him as his successor in Medina. \`Ali asked, ‘Do you leave me with women
and children in town?’

The Prophet answered, ‘Do you not like to be my successor in the same
way as (Prophet) Aaron was the successor of (Prophet) Moses, except that
there will be no prophet after me?’ (2) In the war of Khaybar, the
Prophet declared, ‘I will submit the banner to a person who loves God
and His Apostle and God and His Apostle love him.’ On that day, every
one of us wished to gain such a prestige. The Prophet then ordered his
men to summon \`Ali.

\`Ali came, while he was suffering from a bad eye-ache. The Prophet
rubbed his eyes with his own saliva. Suddenly, \`Ali's pain drove off
and he received the banner from the Holy Prophet. God caused the castle
to be conquered through \`Ali. (3) When it was arranged for the Holy
Prophet to enter into Mubahalah [mutual cursing] with the Christian
priests of Najran, this verse was revealed to him: ‘Say: Let us call our
sons and your sons and our women and your women. (3:61)’ The prophet
thus called \`Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn and declared, ‘O God, these
are my Household.’”[^15]

Referring to that epoch-making war, Imam \`Ali says,

“We were faced with a mountain of men and military ammunitions; their
castles were invincible and their number was huge. Their heroes left the
castles each day, asking for warriors. Any one of us who arrived at the
battlefield was killed. When the fire of war was blazing and the enemy
was asking for warriors to duel with; and when our troops were suffering
from fright and fear; and they were looking at one another in a timid
way, I was asked to go on the scene. The Prophet asked me to rise and
attack the castle.

I went forward and confronted their hero, killing him on the spot; I
did the same thing with others. I made many of them retreat. Then, like
a lion chasing the prey, I followed them until they took shelter inside
the castle. Then they closed down the gates. I tore off the gate and
entered the castle alone… I had nobody to help except for God…”[^16]

The people of Khaybar surrendered after the fall of the last castle and
the war terminated. The casualties of the troops of Khaybar reportedly
were forty-three[^17] and the number of the martyrs was
twenty-eight.[^18]

**The Fate of the Jews of Khaybar**

Upon their surrender, the Jews of Khaybar asked the Holy Prophet to
permit them to stay on their lands for cultivation. He agreed on
condition that they should yield half of their yearly produce to the
Islamic government[^19] and that they should leave when the Holy Prophet
wished so.[^20] This treaty was in effect until the reign of \`Umar when
they took part in some conspiracies against Muslims. For this reason,
\`Umar banished them to Damascus.[^21]

**Fadak**

After the fall of Khaybar, the Jews of Fadak surrendered with no
resistance and entered into a treaty with the Holy Prophet like the one
with Khaybar. Since Fadak was captured with no fight, half of its
revenue went to the Holy Prophet.[^22]


