Chapter Two : the Spread of Islam
=================================

**The war of Mu’tah**

After the Hudaybiyah Truce, the Holy Prophet started his universal
mission and invited the heads of governments of the world to his faith.
Among the countries of those days, the Roman Empire and the Iranian
Empire enjoyed high standards of living.

Having acquired some information regarding the Prophet’s mission,
Caesar of Rome had the will to accept Islam; but when he revealed his
intentions, he was resisted by the Christians and the Roman army;
therefore, he had to withdraw his decision.[^23] This shows that the
commanders of the Roman army had a hostile attitude towards Islam. We
could find the root of the Mu’tah war with this view.

In order to spread his faith outside the Arabian Peninsula, the Holy
Prophet dispatched Harith Ibn \`Umayr al-Azdi to carry a letter to the
King of Busra (Damascus).[^24] That was in Jumada al-¬la, the eighth year
of Hegira.

Shurahbil ibn \`Amr al-Ghassani, the governor of Damascus appointed by
the Roman emperor,[^25] arrested the Holy Prophet’s courier and, having
known the nature of his mission, killed him at the village of Mu’tah.
This event saddened the Holy Prophet greatly.[^26]

Although the murder of one person could not be considered good reason
to start war, the murder of the Holy Prophet’s representative, which was
against ethical codes, was in fact a sort of military threat on the part
of the governor of Damascus vis-à-vis the peaceful invitation to the
Holy Prophet’s faith. He therefore decided to send a troop over there.
This movement could be interpreted as a sign of military power.

Based on these facts, the Holy Prophet dispatched to Mu’tah an army of
three thousand troops under the commandership of Ja\`far ibn
Abi-talib,[^27] Zayd ibn Harithah and \`Abdullah ibn Rawahah
respectively.[^28]

The Islamic troops faced the one hundred thousand troops of Rome near
the village of Mu’tah. The three Muslim commanders bore the banner in
turn and they all were martyred. Then, the Muslim troops elected Khalid
ibn Walid as the commander-in-chief. Using special tactics, he
frightened the enemy and then issued the command to retreat to
Medina.[^29]

Al-Waqidi records that the martyrs of this war were eight[^30] but Ibn
Husham records them as twelve.[^31] In some contemporary records, it is
written that they were seventeen.[^32] The tombs of these martyrs rest
next to the city of Mu’tah;[^33] each one of the commanders has a
magnificent shrine with a dome. Next to the tomb of Ja\`far, there is
built a handsome mosque.[^34]

**The conquest of Mecca**

One of the articles of the Hudaybiyah Truce was ceasefire between the
infidels and Muslims. The Holy Prophet made use of the tranquility and
took big strides: he sent different missionaries to all countries of the
world and enacted his universal mission; he either disarmed the enemies
residing around Medina or convened treaties with them. In the meantime,
Khaybar, which was the center of conspiracies, collapsed altogether.

**The Quraysh breach of truce**

After two years, the Hudaybiyah Truce was broken by Quraysh. According
to the fourth paragraph, any tribe was free to join either the Muslims
or Quraysh. At that time, Khuza\`ah made a treaty with Muslims and
Banu-Bakr allied with Quraysh.[^35]

In the eighth year of Hegira, Banu-Bakr attacked Banu-Khuza\`ah at
nighttime. In this confrontation Quraysh allied with Banu-Bakr, killing
a group of the soldiers of Khuza\`ah. This was a breach of the
Hudaybiyah Truce.[^36] Following the chief of Khuza\`ah’s request for
assistance, the Holy Prophet announced a general mobilization[^37] and
decided to attack Mecca.

In order for Quraysh not to know the Muslims’ plan and to surprise them
in an attack so that Mecca could be captured with no bloodshed, the Holy
Prophet concealed his destination[^38] and ordered his men to watch the
Meccan roads[^39] asking God to keep Quraysh unaware of his plan.[^40]

The Holy Prophet, with an army of ten thousand soldiers, headed for
Mecca.[^41] His tactic was successful. The spies of Quraysh were kept in
the dark up to the moment when Muslim troops were stationed at the gates
of Mecca.

\`Abbas, the Holy Prophet’s uncle, lived in Mecca up to that year. As
he was heading for Medina, the Islamic troops were heading for Mecca. He
met the Holy Prophet at al-Juhafah and returned to Mecca with him. At
the last night of the stationing of the Muslim troops outside the gates
of Mecca, \`Abbas saw Abu-Sufyan outside the city and took him to meet
the Holy Prophet.

[^42] Observing the Islamic troops, Abu-Sufyan became frightened. The
Holy Prophet pardoned him and declared, “Anybody who takes sanctuary in
the Kaaba, stays at home or takes shelter at Abu-Sufyan’s house is
unharmed.”

Prior to the arrival of the Islamic troops in Mecca, Abu-Sufyan
informed the people of the Holy Prophet’s amnesty. This plan helped the
lack of bloodshed and the surrender of the city; so, Mecca collapsed.
Only in one section of the city where some obstinate people continued
resisting were some people killed.[^43]

Arriving at Mecca, the Holy Prophet circumambulated the Kaaba while he
was riding on a camel and hitting with his cane the idols which had been
fastened to the Kaaba with tins, saying,

The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely, falsehood is
a vanishing thing. (17:81)

It is well-known for historians and narrators, Imam \`Ali then climbed
upon the Holy Prophet’s shoulder and destroyed the big idols.[^44] Imam
al-sadiq states that the idol which Imam \`Ali destroyed was Hubal. On
the Holy Prophet’s order, this idol was buried under the Banu-Shaybah
Gate, one of the entrances to the Kaaba. Therefore, it is recommended
that people enter the Kaaba from this gate.[^45]

**The Prophet’s General Amnesty**

Although Quraysh and other infidels did not stop hostile attitudes
towards Muslims since the advent of Islam as they plotted all sorts of
disagreements, pressure, aggression and wrongdoing; and although the
Holy Prophet, being in full command, could have taken revenge, he
declared a general amnesty,[^46] saying, “I am repeating the statement of
my brother, (Prophet) Joseph: There shall be no proof against you this
day, Allah may forgive you, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful.
(the Holy Qur'an 12:92) Go, you are free now.[^47]

Having surrendered with humiliation and expecting a severe revenge by
the Holy Prophet, the unbelievers of Quraysh were highly moved by this
great pardon of the Holy Prophet. Next to the Kaaba, he addressed
people, saying,

“God has consecrated Mecca from the very beginning of creation. This
place shall remain holy and sacred until the Resurrection Day. No Muslim
is allowed to cause bloodshed on this land nor is he or she allowed to
cut a tree from this place. No one is allowed to do a wrong thing to it
now or from now on. Let those who are present tell those who are
absent…[^48]

Upon the conquest of Mecca, the Holy Prophet convened a contract with
Meccan women with the following stipulations:

“Do not associate aught with Allah, do not steal, do not commit
fornication, do not kill your children, and do not bring a calumny which
you have forged of yourselves and do not disobey the Holy Prophet.[^49]
Some well-known figures, who later gained high positions, accepted
Islam during the conquest of Mecca. Among them were Abu-Sufyan and his
son Mu\`awiyah.

Due to the hard living conditions of people, God ascribes a moral
superiority to Muslims prior to the conquest of Mecca:

And what reason do you have that you should not spend in Allah’s way?
And Allah’s is the inheritance of the heavens and the earth; not alike
among you are those who spent before the victory and fought and those
who did not: they are more exalted in rank than those who spent and
fought afterwards, and Allah has promised good to all; and Allah is
aware of what you do.

**The Outcomes of the conquest of Mecca**

Mecca was the center of plotting conspiracies against Islam. For this
reason, its collapse was the start of a great movement in the history of
Islam. This event put an end to idolatry. The different Arab tribes were
waiting for the conquest of Mecca and the conversion of Quraysh to
Islam. When Mecca collapsed and Quraysh accepted Islam, the
representatives of different Arab tribes came to the Holy Prophet
accepting Islam.[^50] Except for two tribes, namely Hawazin and Thaqif,
all other tribes accepted Islam.[^51]

Among these tribes that accepted Islam were Qushayr ibn Ka\`b[^52],
Bahilah,[^53] Tha\`labiyyah,[^54] suda',[^55] Banu- Asad[^56], Baliy,[^57]
\`Udhrah,[^58] Thumalah[^59] and Huddan[^60] all of whom came to meet the
Holy Prophet, announcing their acceptance of Islam. After a war between
Hawazin and ta’if that took place after the conquest of Mecca,

the representatives of the strong tribe of Thaqif who were equal to
Quraysh in military strength came to see the Holy Prophet and put
forward some pre-conditions for their conversion to Islam. Although the
Holy Prophet rejected their preconditions, they accepted Islam
unconditionally.[^61]

**The War of Hunayn**

After the conquest of Mecca that took place in Ramazan,[^62] the Holy
Prophet stayed in this city for two weeks[^63] arranging its affairs. He
ordered people to break their idols that they kept at their houses.[^64]
He dispatched some agents to destroy the idol-houses around Mecca.[^65]
During this time, he was informed that Hawazin,

supported by the tribes of Thaqif, Nasr, Jusham, and Sa\`d ibn Bakr
together with a group of Banu-Hilal under the command of Malik ibn \`Awf
al-Nasri were planning to attack Mecca.[^66] They gathered at a place
called Awtas. Having made sure of this information, the Holy Prophet
sent a spy to study the situation. It was clear that the army of Hawazin
was on its way to Mecca.[^67]

At this time, the Holy Prophet decided to use his usual military
tactics in taking the initiatives and depriving the enemy of any chance
to attack. For this purpose, he appointed \`Attab ibn Usayd as the
governor of Mecca[^68] and he left to face the enemy with twelve thousand
soldiers, ten thousand of whom were previously with him and two thousand
of the newly converted Muslims.[^69] He put Banu-Sulaym in front of the
army.[^70] On the way, some Muslim troops, due to their great number,
became haughty, declaring that they would never be defeated.[^71]
However, the result was the reverse and, as God has mentioned in the
Holy Qur'an (9:25), the great number did not produce any result.

Under the darkness of dawn, the Muslim army headed for Hunayn[^72] but
the warriors of Hawazin who had hidden behind cliffs and in the valleys
of Hunayn suddenly charged at the Muslims.[^73] This sudden attack
bewildered the Muslims. First, Banu-Sulaym retreated and fled the
scene.[^74] Following them, others escaped. Only Imam \`Ali and a few
others remained beside the Prophet and fought bravely.[^75]

According to Shaykh al-Mufid, only nine individuals of Banu-Hashim, one
of whom was Imam \`Ali, stood next to the Holy Prophet. \`Abbas ibn
\`Abd al-Muttalib stood to the Holy Prophet’s right, al-Fazl ibn \`Abbas
to the left and Imam \`Ali in front of the Holy Prophet unsheathing his
sword and fighting bravely.[^76]

Having noticed the flight of Muslims, the Holy Prophet, who had always
been a symbol of patience, endurance, perseverance and bravery, did not
show any sign of weakness; he stood steadfastly in the battlefield.
Addressing the escapees, he said, “O people! Where are you fleeing? Come
back; I am the Prophet of God; I am Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah.” He then
asked \`Abbas to call at people and remind them of their pledges. With a
loud tone, \`Abbas cried out, “O people of the Tree Pledge; O people of
Surah al-Baqarah; to where are you escaping? Remember your allegiance
with the Holy Prophet.”[^77]

Due to the Holy Prophet’s perseverance and calling at the escapees to
return, Muslims gradually returned, gathered around the Holy Prophet and
resisted the enemy. In a short time, the banner-bearer of the enemy was
killed by \`Ali and through Divine assistance, the army of Hawazin was
severely damaged. Four thousand captives, twelve thousand camels and a
lot of booties were soon in the hands of Muslims. After the war, the
Holy Prophet freed the captives on the request of the chiefs of the
defeated tribes who embraced. This war caused the Muslims four
martyrs.

Referring to the initial failure of Muslims and their victory in the
light of Divine assistance, the Holy Qur'an says,

Certainly Allah helped you in many battle fields and on the day of
Hunayn, when your great numbers made you vain, but they availed you
nothing and the earth became strait to you not withstanding its
spaciousness, then you turned back retreating. Then Allah sent down His
tranquility upon His Apostle and upon the believers, and sent down hosts
which you did not see, and chastised those who disbelieved, and that is
the reward of the believers. (9:25-26)

**The War of Tabuk**

Although the two super powers of those days, i.e. the Roman Empire and
Iran were in continuous conflict with each other, they could not
tolerate the emergence of a third power; that is Islam. It was natural
for the Romans to be unhappy with the Muslims’ victory in Mecca and the
Hawazin’s defeat at Hunayn.[^78] Taking these factors into consideration
and with regards to the victory of the Romans in Mu’tah, the expectation
of a Roman military movement against Muslims was real.

In the ninth year of Hegira, the traders who crossed the route between
Medina and Damascus informed the Holy Prophet that Hercules, the Roman
Emperor, was preparing an army to attack Medina.[^79] The Holy Prophet
took it seriously.

Because of its military supremacy, the Roman Empire was the most
pernicious enemy of Islam.[^80] According to a report, Hercules had
allied with some Arab tribes like Lakhm, Judham, \`amilah and Ghassan,
his military pioneers had advanced as far as Balqa',[^81] and the emperor
himself resided in Homs.[^82]

This report reached the Holy Prophet at a time when it was extremely
hot[^83] and it was the harvest season. People were lived under harsh
conditions and life became unbearable.[^84] The Holy Prophet called for
general mobilization and asked people of Mecca and the nomads for
financial assistance.[^85] Contrary to his previous military expeditions
which were kept secret to the last moment, this time the Holy Prophet
announced his military target to be Tabuk[^86] so that the troops could
prepare themselves for the hardships of the journey.[^87]

Despite their hard conditions, Muslims gave generously[^88] and thirty
thousand troops,[^89] together with ten thousand horses[^90] and twelve
thousand camels,[^91] were ready to move. However, the hypocrites not
only refrained from taking part in the battle with no valid reasons[^92]
but also discouraged people to go claiming that it was so hot.[^93]

A verse was revealed to the Holy Prophet reprimanding their situation.
(the Holy Qur'an 9:81) Other Muslims unjustifiably did not join the
Muslim troops and the Holy Qur'an called them those who left behind and
blamed them. (the Holy Qur'an 9:81) Others, too, were deprived of taking
part in the battle due to their lack of ammunitions. (the Holy Qur'an
9:87, 93)


