Chapter Three : the Farewell Pilgrimage and the Demise of the Prophet
=====================================================================

**The Farewell Pilgrimage**

The founder of Hajj, the most prominent politico-religious ceremony,
was Prophet Abraham. In the second chapter of this book, we discussed
the chaotic status of religion and the power and influences of Quraysh
prior to the rise of Islam. We also mentioned that until the appearance
of Islam, Quraysh and all unbelievers performed Hajj and \`Umrah
ceremonies. However, it was not Hajj in the true sense of the word. They
had altered the Abrahamic Hajj and performed it in a defective form
mingled with superstitions.

We should mention here that Quraysh called themselves the true dwellers
of God's shrine[^127] and since Mount \`Arafat territory is located
outside the shrine, Quraysh, contrary to all unbelievers, would not go
to \`Arafat in the Hajj seasons; rather, they would stay at
al-Muzdalifah[^128] from where they headed for Mina.

On the other hand, the people of Yathrib used to put on the Hajj
uniform (ihram) next to the idol Manat, which was on the Mecca-Yathrib
route at the seashore[^129] and those who put the Hajj form on from there
would not cross the distance between safa and Marwah, which they had to
cross seven times.[^130] The unbelievers, contrary to the Abrahamic
traditions, moved to al-Muzdalifah from \`Arafat prior to sunset.[^131]

All these had contributed to the deformation of the true features of
the Abrahamic Hajj and to its mixing with all sorts of superstitions.

With the revelation of the verse on the obligation of Hajj (22:27), the
Holy Prophet informed the Muslims in advance and headed towards Hajj
with great numbers of the people of Medina and nomads.[^132] He taught
the Muslims the genuine Abrahamic Hajj for the first time. He insisted
that Muslims should learn the ceremony very carefully.[^133] He used to
say, “Take good care of all the rituals of Hajj because they are handed
down to us by Prophet Abraham.”[^134]

During this journey, the Holy Prophet could abolish all the innovations
of the unbelievers, especially those of Quraysh. Despite the fact that
he himself was from Quraysh, he stayed at \`Arafat and then moved to
al-Muzdalifah.[^135] This was an order issued by Allah, stating,

Then, hasten on from the place from which the people hasten on and ask
the forgiveness of Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (2:199)

After sunset, the Holy Prophet left \`Arafat.[^136]

Due to its different aspects of significance, this pilgrimage is called
by different titles: Farewell Pilgrimage (Hijjat al-Wada\`), the Islamic
Hajj (Hijjat al-Islam) and the Conveyance Pilgrimage (Hijjat
al-Balagh).[^137]

**The Prophet's Historical Sermon**

During his farewell pilgrimage on the day of \`Arafah, on the desert of
\`Arafat, and among all pilgrims, the Holy Prophet delivered a very
significant and historical sermon in which he spoke about important
issues and declared specific recommendations. As the attendants
testified to the sacredness of that month (Dhu’l-Hijjah) and the
sacredness of that day (Yawm \`Arafah), the Holy Prophet declared:

O people! Up to the day on which you will meet God, your blood and
property are as sacred as this month and this day; making aggression
against them is forbidden. The bloodshed at the era of negligence and
ignorance could not be prosecuted at this time; furthermore, usury is
forbidden now.

The Holy Prophet then considered as blasphemy the changing and delaying
of the Forbidden Months.

Concerning women's rights, he emphatically said,

Act kindly to women since they are God's assets in your hands and are
made legal for you through Divine laws.

Let those who are present inform others that there shall be no prophet
after me and there shall be no ummah after you, Muslims.

Towards the end of his speech, the Holy Prophet declared null and void
the customs and ceremonies of the Ignorance Era.[^138]

**A great virtue**

Great scholars have pointed out that it was a great point of honor for
these four persons; namely, \`Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn to take
part in that Mubahalah together with the Holy Prophet. This is because
this event showed that Hasan and Husayn are the sons of the Holy Prophet
and they, together with Imam \`Ali, are his true life. Fatimah, his
daughter, was the only woman who had taken part in the ceremony of
Mubahalah and the word nisa' could only refer to her.

\`a'ishah is reported to have said that on the day of Mubahalah, the
Holy Prophet asked these four persons to gather under his black clock.
He then reciting this verse of the Holy Qur'an:

Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanness from you, O people of
the house, and to purify you a thorough purifying. (33:33)[^139]

Both Sunni and Shi\`ite scholars unanimously agree that these four
persons took part in Mubahalah together with the Holy Prophet.[^140]
Emphasized this great virtue, Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas is reported to have
said, “When the verse of Mubahalah was revealed to the Holy Prophet, he
called \`Ali, Fatimah, Hasan and Husayn, saying “O God, these are my
Household.”[^141]

Having reported the issue of Mubahalah and \`a’ishah's narration,
al-Zamakhshari says, “This issue is the most rationale for the virtue
and righteousness of the Holy Prophet's Household.”[^142]

After narrating the event of Mubahalah, al-Bayzawi, says, “This
indicates the righteousness of the Holy Prophet and the virtue of his
Household.”[^143]

In his book entitled Sa\`d al-Su\`ud, Sayyid Ibn tawus writes,
“Muhammad ibn al-\`Abbas ibn Marwan, in his book of Ma Nazala min
al-Qur'an fi al-Nabi wa Ahli Baytihi, has narrated the event of
Mubahalah on the authority of fifty-one reporters among whom were grand
companions of the Holy Prophet.”[^144]

At the end of this article, it is worth mentioning that there are
disagreements concerning the year, month and day of the
Mubahalah.[^145]

**The Event of Ghadir and the introducing of the future leader**

On his return from the Farewell Pilgrimage on the eighteenth of
Dhu’l-Hijjah, and on the land of Ghadir Khumm[^146] which is three miles
away from al-Juhafah, the following verse was revealed to Holy
Prophet:

“O Apostle! Deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message (5:67)”

He therefore ordered the caravan of one hundred thousand pilgrims to
stop on that arid land and in that extremely hot weather. Having
performed the Noon Prayer, he climbed a high location and delivered a
sermon in which he informed of his near death. Then, he asked the
Muslims' views on his prophethood. Every one confirmed that he had
perfectly conveyed the Divine Message.

He then put stress on the Holy Book and his Household, recommending
Muslims not to leave these two lest they would be misled. These two, he
added, shall never depart one another until they join him on the
Resurrection Day; therefore, Muslims should follow them closely.

Then, he took \`Ali's hand, raised it and introducing him as the future
leader of Muslims, saying:

“God is my Master and I am the master of the believers; so, anybody
whose master is I, \`Ali is now his master. O God, love and care for
those who love and care for \`Ali and be an enemy of those who are
\`Ali's enemies. O God, assist the friends of \`Ali and make miserable
the foes of \`Ali. O God, let \`Ali be in the pivotal center of
righteousness.”

At this time, the following verse was revealed:

This day have I perfected for you your religion and completed My favor
on you and chosen for you Islam as a religion. (5:3)

The perfection of religion has been thus declared through the
appointment of \`Ali as the successor of the Holy Prophet. After that,
the Holy Prophet's companions congratulated \`Ali for this sublime
position.[^147]

This was a sketch of the significant and famous event at Ghadir Khumm
which has been discussed in reference books from different dimensions.

\`Allamah Amini, in his worthy book of al-Ghadir, has thoroughly dealt
with this historic event. Here, we shall mention a few points:

(1) The event of Ghadir is the most significant document for Imam
\`Ali's Divinely commissioned leadership and succession to the Holy
Prophet (Wilayah) although it was not the only document. In this book,
we have alluded to the fact that the Holy Prophet, since the early days
of his prophethood and on various occasions such as the event of calling
his close relatives to the new faith, referred to Imam \`Ali's Wilayah,
because of the importance of leadership to the people's fate.

Because the succession to the Holy Prophet is a matter defined by none
but God, we have seen that during the first years of his general and
open invitation to Islam and at the time introducing Islam to the tribes
and in an answer to the proposal made by the chief of Banu-\`amir ibn
Sa\`idah, the Holy Prophet declared,

“My successor is decided by God alone. God will appoint anyone for this
position that He desires.”

For many years, the Holy Prophet always laid emphasis on the question
of his succession. He used to bring to light a certain personality,
making sacrifices for Islam the criterion in selecting his successor.
All these factors entail one conclusion, which is that Imam \`Ali was
such a unique person that he deserved to be the Holy Prophet’s
successor. If truth be told, none of the Holy Prophet’s companions
preceded Imam \`Ali in virtuous features that prepare him to be the one
and only successor of the Holy Prophet.

(2) The authenticity of the announcement of Imam \`Ali’s next
leadership at Ghadir Khumm is undeniable; therefore, some Sunni scholars
confess to this issue.[^148]

As \`Allamah Amini has proved in al-Ghadir, this historic event was
reported by one hundred and ten companions of the Holy Prophet,
eighty-four others, and three hundred and sixty Sunni narrators and
scholars who recorded it in their books and confessed to its
authenticity.[^149] As a matter of fact, the event Ghadir Khumm is the
most famous and authentic of all events that took place during the Holy
Prophet’s lifetime.

Narrators have reported the event of Ghadir Khumm and historians seem
to have censored these narrators. Among historians, Ya\`qubi has dealt
with this event with a short description following the event of the
Farewell Pilgrimage.[^150] Although this event is not mentioned in Tarikh
al-tabari, which is supposed to have dealt with all historical events of
Islam, the author has written a book on the verification of the event of
Ghadir Khumm in a book entitled Kitab al-Wilayah.[^151] This book existed
up to eighth century—a fact confirmed by al-Najashi (450 AH)[^152] and
Shaykh al-tusi (385-460 AH).[^153]

Stating that the event of Ghadir Khumm too soon after the Farewell
Pilgrimage, Ibn Kathir (774 AH) adds, “Abu Ja\`far Muhammad ibn Jarir
tabari, the historian, has shown interest in this hadith and collected
its wordings in a two-volume book.”[^154] He then mentions some ways of
narrating this event as recorded by tabari.

He elsewhere writes, “The book of tabari which I saw is of two big
volumes comprising the narrations related to the event of Ghadir
Khumm.[^155]

Ibn Shahrashub (588 AH) writes, “tabari wrote the book of Ghadir Khumm,
in which he described this event; he gave it the title of Kitab
al-Wilayah.[^156]

Counting the number of narrators who reported the event of Ghadir
Khumm, Ibn tawus says, “Muhammad ibn Jarir, the historian, narrates the
hadith of Ghadir in seventy-five different ways. He wrote a separate
book entitled hadith al-Wilayah.[^157]

Yahya ibn Hasan, known as Ibn al-Bitriq (523-600 AH) writes, “Muhammad
ibn Jarir tabari, the author of Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk, has described
the event of Ghadir Khumm through seventy-five sources. He devoted an
entire book to it entitled Kitab al-Wilayah.

The aforementioned scholars and historians have given us only a short
report on Kitab al-Wilayah by tabari. Others, such as Ibn Kathir, have
only referred to some narrations mentioned therein. Al-Qazi al-Nu\`man
al-Maghribi al-Misri (363 AH) is the only historian who has collected
more than seventy-five of tabari's narrations on Imam \`Ali's virtues in
a book he entitled Sharh al-Akhbar fi Faza'il al-A'immah al-Athar.
Through this way, he presented tabari’s narrations to the next
generations.[^158] He writes:

“This is an interesting book in which tabari describes \`Ali's virtues
in detail.”[^159]

Mentioning tabari's motive in writing this book,[^160] al-Nu\`man
adds:

In this book, tabari has devoted one chapter to \`Ali's successorship
to the Holy Prophet. In this chapter, he mentions a hadith that the Holy
Prophet repeated before and after the Farewell Pilgrimage:

“\`Ali is now the master of him who has considered me as his master. O
Allah, be the confidant of him who confides with \`Ali; and be the enemy
of him who incurs the hostility of \`Ali; and support him who supports
\`Ali; and disappoint him who disappoints \`Ali.”

“\`Ali is the commander of the believers.”
“\`Ali is my brother.”
“\`Ali is my vicegerent.”
“\`Ali is my successor.”
“\`Ali is my representative on my nation after me.”
“\`Ali is superior in leadership over people after me.”

All these instructions and their likes clearly prove that \`Ali would
be the successor of the Holy Prophet.[^161]

(3) The only spurious argument that some Sunni scholars have aroused
against this issue mentionable doubt which is used concerning this issue
is the purport of these prophetic instructions.

For instance, al-Fakhr al-Razi and al-Qazi \`Azud «ji have claimed the
Arabic word mawla that the Holy Prophet used to refer to Imam \`Ali
might have indicated friendship and help, but not leadership of the
Muslim nation and succession to the Holy Prophet! In other words, by all
these statements, the Holy Prophet only wanted to say that \`Ali is his
friend! They further claim that the word mawla is different in meaning
from awla, which means superior.[^162]

\`Allamah Amini, with a thorough research employing ample Qur'anic
witnesses and making use of morphological data and philological bases,
has proven the futility of such a statement and has shown that it is
very common in Arabic to use the word mawla in the sense of awla,
meaning superior. For instance, in the following holy verses, the
lexical item mawla cannot have any other sense except that of wali; that
is successor and man of authority:

So, today ransom shall not be accepted from you nor from those who
disbelieved; your abode is the fire; it is your friend, and evil is the
resort. (57:15)

Therefore keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate and hold fast by Allah;
He is your Guardian; how excellent the Guardian and how excellent the
Helper. (22:78)

That is because Allah is the protector of those who believe, and
because the unbelievers shall have no protector for them. (47:11)

Nay! Allah is your patron and He is the best of the helpers. (3:150)

Say: Nothing will afflict us save what Allah has ordained for us; He is
our patron. (9:51)

He calls upon him whose harm is nearer than his profit; evil certainly
is the guardian and evil certainly is the associate. (22:13)

In the aforementioned verses, the word mawla is taken to be guardian.
Likewise, all traditionists and scholars of Muslim jurisprudence have
unanimously agreed that the word mawla has been mentioned in definite
hadiths to denote guardian.[^163]

\`Allamah Amini has found twenty-seven different meanings for the word
mawla proving that this word may be used to denote lie, blasphemy or
indecency.[^164] He then presents the claims and reasoning of fourteen
distinguished Sunni scholars who have not taken the true sense of this
word as used by the Holy Prophet in the sermon at Ghadir Khumm. For
example, Shams al-Din Abu’l-Muzaffar Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi Hanafi (511-654
AH) writes:

“Biographers unanimously believe that the event of Ghadir Khumm took
place on the Holy Prophet's return from the Farewell pilgrimage on the
eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah in the presence of one hundred and twenty
thousand companions during which the Holy Prophet declared, ‘\`Ali is
now the master of him who has considered me as his master.’

He then mentions ten probable meaning for mawla nine of which he
discards and only one he accepts citing as proof a verse in Surah
al-Hadid in which the word mawla is used in a sense proving the Imamate
of and acceptance of obedience to Imam \`Ali. Moreover, Arab poets, such
as Hassan ibn Thabit, have used this word to denote the same meaning
involved.

**Witnesses and signs**

The Holy Prophet’s sermon at Ghadir Khumm comprises a number of signs
and witnesses confirming that the word mawla has not been used to
exclusively indicate befriending with Imam \`Ali.

(1) The order of halting at that place and in that extremely hot
weather, which was issued to one hundred thousand Muslims, is not
appropriate for the announcement of an insignificant issue like
recommending them to love Imam \`Ali. As a matter of fact, brotherly
terms among Muslims and caring for one another had now become so common
among Muslims that the Holy Prophet did not need to announce it under
such circumstances.

(2) As an introduction to his sermon, the Holy Prophet foretold the
imminence of his passing away. This issue is strongly connected to the
issue of the next leadership and succession to him. Besides, it has
nothing to do with the recommendation of bearing love for \`Ali ibn
Abi-talib.

(3) The Holy Prophet asked the attendants to witness that he was closer
to them than their own selves; and they did. Immediately after that, he
declared that \`Ali would be closer to them than their own selves. This
shows that he wanted to confirm a special position for \`Ali; that is
\`Ali being his successor.[^165]

(4) After the sermon, the attendants congratulated Imam \`Ali. Of
course, such congratulation could not be for any reason except
appointing \`Ali as the next leader and the successor to the Holy
Prophet.

(5) After the Holy Prophet’s announcement of the next leader, the Holy
Qur'an proclaimed the perfection of religion and the completion of the
Divine Grace. Of course, these two things have nothing to do with the
recommendation of bearing love for \`Ali ibn Abi-talib.

(6) Hassan ibn Thabit, the Holy Prophet’s poet and a famous literary
personality of those days, was present at Ghadir Khumm. After he had
been permitted by the Holy Prophet, Hassan composed a poem in which he
used the same statements of the Holy Prophet’s sermon. He thus used the
word mawla to express Imam \`Ali’s Imamate and next leadership.

In one of his letters to Mu\`awiyah, Imam \`Ali demonstrated that he
was appointed as the mawla of Muslims by the Holy Prophet during the
event of Ghadir Khumm.[^166]

(7) Connecting the Holy Prophet’s announcement of Ghadir Khumm to Imam
\`Ali’s journey to Yemen prior to the Farewell pilgrimage, Ibn Kathir
claims that \`Ali, during that journey, stopped his companions to divide
the booties among themselves prior to giving them to the Holy Prophet.
This incident, Ibn Kathir claims, made his friends feel that they were
offended.[^167] For this reason,

the Holy Prophet, at Ghadir Khumm, praised \`Ali for his loyalty and
justice and showed how much respect he had for him. In this way, Ibn
Kathir contends, the Holy Prophet eradicated people's bad feelings
towards \`Ali!

This reasoning, however, does not have any firm basis, because in the
event of \`Ali's journey to Yemen, the Holy Prophet, on his first visit
to those who were with \`Ali, answered their criticism against \`Ali by
saying,

“Do not complain against \`Ali. By God I swear, \`Ali is firm in the
way of obeying God; he is brave and audacious in this regard.”[^168]

With the firm and decisive statement, the case was over for those who
listened to the Holy Prophet. It is therefore nonsense to think that
three hundred[^169] of those people were still at odds with \`Ali and the
Holy Prophet had to repeat it once more in front of one hundred thousand
Muslims.

(8) Another doubt is aroused in the following way: If the Holy Prophet
had appointed \`Ali at Ghadir Khumm as his successor, the Companions
would not have opposed to \`Ali's manners and statements. This is
because, the discussion goes on, the Holy Prophet's companions were
sincere people; they had always been ready to sacrifice for Islam. It
should be mentioned that the Holy Prophet's demise took place nearly
seventy days after the announcement of Ghadir; thus, they say, the
memories were still fresh.

To answer, we should be aware that a research of the events at the time
of the Holy Prophet clearly shows that even some of the Holy Prophet's
grand companions at times disobeyed him; so, disobedience to \`Ali was
justified. Whenever the Holy Prophet's commands contrasted their
personal wishes or tribal and political inclinations, the companions
tried to stop him from carrying out that decision. Sometimes, they
refused to carry out these commands; and very often, they made
oppositions.

They objected to the Holy Prophet when he agreed to the Hudaybiyah
Truce. They objected and disobeyed his order of dispatching the troops
of Usamah. They disobeyed him in the final hours of his blessed life
when he ordered them to bring him a pen and an inkpot. Besides too many
other objections and disobedience to the Holy Prophet’s acts and
ordered, books of history of Islam are full of such events.

Sayyid Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi has gathered all these cases in a book
he entitled al-Nas wa’l-Ijtihad.

In addition, several verses of the Holy Qur'an emphasize obedience to
the commands of the Holy Prophet, considering it part of faith. Others
warn people against disobeying him. These verses prove that such cases
of disobedience had actually taken place:

Therefore, let those beware who go against his order lest a trial
afflict them or there befall them a painful chastisement. (24:63)

O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Apostle, and be careful of your duty to Allah; surely Allah is Hearing,
Knowing. (49:1)

And know that among you is Allah's Apostle: should he obey you in many
a matter, you would surely fall into distress. (49:7)

And it behooves not a believing man and a believing woman that they
should have any choice in their matter when Allah and His Apostle have
decided a matter; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Apostle, he surely
strays off a manifest straying. (33:36)

And We did not send any apostle but that he should be obeyed by Allah's
permission' and had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to
you and asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had also asked
forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah oft returning to
mercy, Merciful. But no! By your lord! They do not believe in reality
until they make a judge of that which has become a matter of
disagreement among them, and then do not find any resistance in their
hearts as to what you have decided and submit with entire
submission.(4:64-65)

O you who believe! Obey Allah and His Apostle and do not turn back from
Him while you hear. (5:20)

Although the Holy Prophet tried hard to remove the evil aspects of
tribal prejudices and rivalries which were the source of all kinds of
calamities during the Ignorance Era, the cultural aspects of the tribes
still prevailed in society, demonstrating occasionally. As an example,
as soon as the Holy Prophet passed away, the people of Aws and Khazraj
enlivened their tribal inclinations.[^170] Thus, it was clear that some
political figures of Quraysh would be rivals to Banu-Hashim and they
would never tolerate a government headed by Banu-Hashim.

There are disagreements among scholars concerning the time of the
revelation of the holy verses appertained to the Holy Prophet’s
declaring Imam \`Ali’s Imamate and succession to him. However, several
documents prove the revelation of these two verses at Ghadir
Khumm.[^171]

The contents of these two verses show that they should have been
revealed for an important topic, such as the succession to the
prophethood. For instance, verse No. 3 of Surah al-Ma'idah puts emphasis
on four topics, which are only related to the issue of Imamate:

a) The infidels who wrongly assumed that Islam was dependant on the
Holy Prophet only and by his demise, it would come to an end are now
despairing. However, with the adoption of a strong, just and
distinguished man such as \`Ali, it was clear that Islam would be
ever-lasting.

b) Islam has been ultimately perfected. It could not have reached such
perfection without the continuation of leadership.

c) The asset of guidance has been completed through the continuation of
leadership.

d) God has accepted Islam as the perfect religion.[^172]

**The Brigade of Usamah**

Zayd ibn Harithah was one of the three commanders of the Muslim troops
that fought in the Battle of Mu'tah in which the Muslim army was
defeated by the Romans and three commanders together with some soldiers
were martyred.

A year after that, the Muslim army went forward as far as the land of
Tabuk, but no armed conflict took place. As a result of these
consequences, the Holy Prophet always worried about a war with the
Romans who were aggressive and powerful.

Upon his return from the Farewell Pilgrimage and arrival at Medina, the
Holy Prophet ordered an army headed by Usamah, son of Zayd ibn Harithah,
to advance as far as the land of Ubna,[^173] where his father had been
martyred, and to fight the Romans. He then gave the banner to Usamah
along with orders and instruction.

Usamah betook himself al-Jurf[^174] as headquarter at which troops would
gather.[^175] Chief personalities of Muhajirun and Ansar, including
Abu-Bakr, \`Umar, Abu-\`Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah, Sa\`d ibn
Abi-Waqqas,[^176] \`Abd al-Rahman ibn \`Awf, talhah, al-Zubayr, Usayd ibn
Huzayr, Bashir ibn Sa\`d,[^177] Sa\`id ibn Zayd,[^178] Qatadah ibn
al-Nu\`man and Salamah ibn Aslam were among these troops.[^179]

When the Holy Prophet was dispatching the army, he was in good health.
However, the next day, he came down with fever which culminated in his
death. On his death-bed, the Holy Prophet was informed that some of the
troops did not accept Usamah's commandership claiming that he was too
young. While he was completely weakened by illness, the Holy Prophet
came to the mosque to encourage people to join Usamah, saying:

What is that I hear about your objection to Usamah's commandership? You
are objecting to his commandership in the same way you did to his
father. I swear to God, Zayd deserved commandership and so is his
son.[^180]

In his final days, the Holy Prophet was in a distressing position. Most
of the time, he was unconscious. When he regained consciousness, he
asked about Usamah's army. He was told that the troops were readying
themselves to move. The Holy Prophet said,

“Help Usamah's army. May God curse those who lag behind this
army.”[^181]

His ailment lasted for two weeks;[^182] yet, this army did not move.
This event is a clear indication of the cases of disobedience manifested
by some Muslims to the Holy Prophet's distinct orders.

**The Prophet's Supreme Objective**

Concerning the Holy Prophet's trial to dispatch Usamah’s troops, there
are important points to consider:

(1) In the mobilization of this army, the leadership was given to a
young man who was less than twenty years old to fight against the most
powerful army of those days away from the center of the Islamic
government.

(2) In this army, senior commanders and grand Companions were put under
the command of Usamah, the young. They considered themselves prestigious
and expected greater ranks in that army.

(3) Although the Holy Prophet knew about his imminent death, as he had
referred to this issue in the sermon of Ghadir, and that the dark, heavy
clouds of disastrous events were hovering over the heads of Muslims, he
sent the Muslim army to a far land and asked the grand personalities of
Muhajirun and Ansar to join it on this mission. Considering the
excellent managerial capacities of the Holy Prophet, we can never doubt
that he had a great objective in mind to achieve.

Taking these notes into consideration, we can conclude that, in
addition to carrying out military actions against the Romans to remove
their danger, the Holy Prophet aimed at following two other
objectives:

a) By appointing Usamah as the head of the army, the Holy Prophet
wanted to make Muslims realize that the most important point in
management and leadership is the leader's expertise and merits, but not
his age. Hence, age has nothing to do with merits and capacities. For
this reason, he replied to their objections by saying, “Zayd was a good
leader, so is his son.”

Through this formal position, the Holy Prophet confirmed Usamah's
merits and objected to the proposals of those who wanted to take age and
racial issues into consideration. Wasn't this insistence on the Holy
Prophet's side done to pave the way for \`Ali's succession?

b) The Holy Prophet wanted \`Ali's rivals to be away from Medina at the
time of his demise. For this very reason, he ordered the chief
personalities of Muhajirun and Ansar to join that army and leave Medina.
He wanted \`Ali to have control over things in the absence of his rivals
who would not be able to do anything when they would see \`Ali in
power.[^183] For this reason, some personalities delayed the movement of
the army waiting for the Holy Prophet’s demise.

**The Unrecorded Will**

On Thursday (four days prior to his demise), the Holy Prophet who was
bedridden ordered,

“Bring me paper and pen so that I will write something saving you from
going astray forever.”

One of the attendants said, “He is under severe pain; he is
hallucinating! We have Qur'an; it suffices us.” Disagreement took place
among the attendants; some accepted the statement of this person and
others wanted to carry out the Holy Prophet's orders. There was now
commotion. Then they asked the Holy Prophet, “Should we carry out your
intentions?” he replied,

“After what has been done? Leave me alone; my pain is better than what
you ascribe to me. Leave me alone.”

Narrators have reported this catastrophic event with little
differences; yet, the sequence of the events is the same.[^184]

We can now understand what the Holy Prophet had in mind. He wanted to
appoint \`Ali as his successor in a written form so that Muslims would
not encounter any hardships after his demise. Some of the attendants had
already concluded the matter; therefore, they exerted all possible
efforts to prevent the Holy Prophet from writing down that document and
from declaring his final will.

Considering this event with much pain, \`Abdullah ibn \`Abbas used to
say: “How disastrous that Thursday was! The Prophet asked for pen and
paper to write something saving Muslims from going astray, but those
present ones did not listen.”

This issue is one of the principles of the history of Islam; it was
told and retold several times in the past; therefore, we shall not say
anything more; rather, we ask the gentle reader to refer to the
reference books mentioned in the footnotes.[^185]

**The Demise of the Great Leader of Islam**

After twenty-three years of spreading the Divine Mission, and after
tremendous amount of hardships and insurmountable obstacles, the Holy
Prophet passed away on Monday the twenty-eighth safar, in the eleventh
year of Hegira[^186] after fourteen days of ailment.[^187] He was buried
in his small residing-place next to the mosque that he had established.
Later on, when the mosque was rebuilt by some caliphs, his sacred shrine
was located in its eastern section.

Several years after Hegira, economic conditions improved for the Holy
Prophet and Muslims and the revenues of the treasury became
well-managed. Besides, the Holy Prophet's superficial power and
spiritual influences increased. Despite all that, the Holy Prophet's
life pattern did not change in comparison with his past; he preferred to
have a simple life in his residing-place next to the mosque. He neither
amassed wealth nor obtained a usual home.

The bed where he rested was made of leather with linen made of
date-palm leaves.[^188] He used to pray on a mat and that was the place
he rested. At times, the effect of the straws could be seen on his
sacred body.[^189] Towards his end, he ordered to distribute among the
needy some Dinars left from the treasury and kept by one of his
wives.[^190]

He lived a simple life and passed away in a simple residing-place.
However, when he passed away, there was left a great religion, there
remained a Divine and holy Book and a nation, God-loving and dynamic.
There had been established a new civilization in the history of the
world.


