A Perspective On the New Community of Muslims
=============================================

Upon his residence in Medina, the Holy Prophet took advantage of a free
space and appropriate social conditions to lay the stone for an Islamic
society and to overcame, yet gradually, all hindrances and obstacles. He
gave the Muslim nation (ummah) an independent religious and political
identity and spread the Divine Messages. At the time of his demise, he
believed that he had fulfilled his mission and gained bright and
brilliant successes. However, there were some issues in the society of
those days requiring discussions:

(1) In the light of Islamic instructions, the Holy Prophet could unite
the diverse tribes of Arabs who were always at odds with one another
with the common bonds of faith, belief and brotherly care. He could make
a unified nation out of scattered tribes. With the assistance of such
people, he could establish in Medina a Divine government under his own
leadership.

In this government, he could find solutions for the unsolved issues
through consultation with people. Everybody was free to express his/her
ideas and to criticize. For the first time and in the light of Islam,
the Arab nation could experience such unity, power and spiritualism.
However, the continuation of this success needed a powerful leader to
guide people politically and spiritually.

(2) At the time of the Holy Prophet's demise, idolatry was more or less
uprooted in the Arabian Peninsula. Although there was no military
victory for Islam beyond the borders of the Arabian Peninsula, the Holy
Prophet's universal invitation to Islam had reached the ears of the
governors of the world’s countries of those days.

However, inside the Arabian Peninsula, some of those who had converted
to Islam on the final days of the Holy Prophet's life, (especially those
who had turned to Islam after the conquest of Mecca and the Battle
Tabuk, had only superficially accepted the new faith that had not yet
penetrated into their souls.

The Holy Prophet never found a chance to send religious missionaries
among them for cultural purposes. Most of them had even not seen the
Holy Prophet face to face. Only their chiefs had some contact with him.
So, with the temporary weakness in the power of Islam, their return to
blasphemy was probable. This situation made the continuation of the
Islamic leadership even more pertinent so that the cultural work of the
Holy Prophet could have continued.

(3) Although the death of \`Abdullah ibn Ubayy, the head of the
Hypocrites, in the ninth year of Hegira caused this dangerous group to
lose some of their previous solidarity, they were around and inside
Medina. They were always waiting for an opportunity to attack Muslims.
In addition to the hypocrites who were considered internal enemies,
there were two other external dangers for the newly-established
government of Islam: the Iranian empire and the Romans. There were lots
of signs for their enmity and negative attitudes towards Islam.

This vicious triangle made the Holy Prophet so concerned that he had to
find solutions. This issue too made the presence of a strong leader
absolutely necessary.

(4) Prior to the advent of Islam, the social life of the people inside
the Arabian Peninsula was heavily reliant on the tribal system, which
was based on racial and familial bonds. The social effects of such a
system, including the blind tribal prejudices, nonsensical prides,
revenge tacking and conflicts, had made life miserable for them.

Through hard working and boundless attempts, the Holy Prophet
annihilated such a system and put the common faith for the common blood
or the common race, in the light of Islam's unifying instructions and
the word of monotheism. In this way, he was to a great extent able to
eradicate the tribal system. All this was the result of Islam, the Holy
Qur'an and the Holy Prophet's Mission.

However, history shows that the cultural remnants of this arrogant and
ignorant age still remained in the hearts and souls of these people who
manifested their tribal thinking as soon as they found it possible.
However, the Holy Prophet, with his skill and vigor, always tried to
stop this trend; he did not let it turn into a crisis. This once again
showed the vulnerability of Islamic unity in those days. An example of
this is the tribal inclinations between two distinguished groups of
Muslims in the event of the Saqifah immediately after the demise of the
Holy Prophet.

These worries clearly depicted the duties of the great leader of Islam
in those days and the whole issue was a great test to show who was after
the unity of Islam and would sacrifice everything for that unity on the
one hand and who would insist on the cultural aspects of the Ignorance
Era on the other hand.

(5) After his migration to Medina, the Holy Prophet was both the
religious and political leader for Muslims. He undertook these two
missions simultaneously so much so that Muslims would listen to his
words, perform the congregational prayers, and be so absorbed by his
spiritual charisma that they would rub the water of his ritual ablution
on their faces, participate in the military campaigns, slay the enemies,
ready themselves to martyrdom, be appointed by him as governors of
provinces, and carry out negotiations on his behalf with his political
opponents.

After his demise, it was not enough for his successor to be a political
leader; rather, he had to perform the political leadership together with
religious leadership so that he would be able to fill the Holy Prophet's
empty place on the strength of his thorough awareness of the Islamic
knowledge.

[^1] Muhammad al-Ghazzali, the Trial of Goldziher the Zionist, pp.
79-80.

[^2] Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:258-262.

[^3] Miyanji, Makatib al-Rasul 1:31. Ibn Husham, in al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 4:254, states that the Holy Prophet sent ten letters to
the rulers and kings of the world. According to Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi
2:66-67, the Holy Prophet’s letters were thirteen. Mas\`udi, in
al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf pp. 236-237, states that they were six. A
contemporary researchers, namely Ahmad sabiri Hamadani, in his book of
Muhammad wa-Zimamdaran, the Holy Prophet’s letters were only two or
three!

[^4] al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 2:434; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
4:360.

[^5] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 637-703. Al-Ya\`qubi states that the number
of these letters was twenty thousand (2:46).

[^6] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 637.

[^7] According to Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:266, the name was
Yusayr ibn Rizam.

[^8] Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:91-92.

[^9] Ibn Husham, op cit, 4:266-267.

[^10] Muhammad Hasanayn Haykal, Hayat Muhammad, pp. 386.

[^11] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 634.

[^12] Al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 646.

[^13] tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 3:93; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 4:349; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 4:186.

[^14] The Holy Prophet’s statement and Imam \`Ali’s mission were
reported with some differences in the following reference books: sahih
al-Bukhari 1:5; sahih Muslim 15:76-177; Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra
2:110-111; Shaykh al-saduq, Kitab al-Irshad, pp. 311; Tarikh al-tabari
3:93; al-Qanaduzi, Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah 1:47; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 2:219; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 3:36; al-Hakim
al-Naysaburi, al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-sahihayn 3:104; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 3:349; Ibn Hajar, al-sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah, pp. 121;
al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 2:635; Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:46; Ibn
Kathir, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 4:186; al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 2:733-736;
Shaykh al-tusi, al-Amali, pp. 380.

[^15] sahih Muslim 15:176.

Sa\`d ibn Abi-Waqqas (belonged to Banu-Zuhrah) was one of the early
converts to Islam at the age of seventeen (Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 3:134) or
fourteen (al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 1:434) in Mecca. In Medina, he was
considered one of the great figures of Muhajirun. He was among \`Ali's
political rivals and one of the members of the six-member council who
was set to select a caliph after \`Umar’s assassination. He refused to
vote for \`Ali (Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:188). After
the assassination of \`Uthman, Imam \`Ali was elected by all Muslims
except a few group among was Sa\`d who rejected to pay homage to Imam
\`Ali (Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 2:353; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 3:191). Despite his situation from Imam \`Ali, he had to
confess these three unmatched virtues of \`Ali.

[^16] saduq, al-Khisal, pp. 369, chapter 7.

[^17] al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 21:32.

[^18] Muhammad Ibrahim ayati, the History of the Prophet of Islam, pp.
473-475.

[^19] al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 2:690; Yaqut al-Hamawi, Mu\`jam al-Buldan
2:410.

[^20] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 3:352.

[^21] Yaqut al-Hamawi, op cit, pp. 410; al-Buladhari, Futuh al-Buldan,
pp. 36-37.

[^22] al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 42; Ibn Husham 2:352; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:224; al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:707; Yaqut al-Hamawi,
op cit, 4:236; Qasim ibn Sallam, al-Amwal, pp. 16.

[^23] Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 2:170-171; Halabi, al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 3:289-290.

[^24] Halabi writes: “The Holy Prophet sent a letter to Hercules, the
Roman emperor, who resided in Damascus at that time.” See al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 2:786.

[^25] Halabi, op cit, 2:786.

[^26] al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 2:755; Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra
2:128.

[^27] Ja\`far ibn Abi-talib, having lived in Abyssinia for several
years, returned to Medina in the seventh year of Hegira. After the
conquest of Khaybar, he met the Holy Prophet there. The Holy Prophet was
so delighted with Ja\`far’s return that he said, “I do not know which
news is more delightful; Ja\`far’s return or the conquest of Khaybar!”
See al-Hakim al-Naysaburi’s al-Mustadrak \`Ala’l-sahihayn 2:624. For
further information, refer to Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 4:35, Ibn
al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 1:287; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 1:210;
Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-talibiyyin, pp. 30; Ibn Kathir:
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 4:206.

[^28] tabrisi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 107. Although some reports state that
Zayd had taken the commandership of the Muslim army during that battle
before Ja\`far, some Shi\`ite narrations (according to tabarsi) show
that Ja\`far was the first commander, as is confirmed by some details of
the event. See Subhani, Furugh Abadiyyat 2:291-293. A narration reported
by Ibn Sa\`d deals with this issue. (Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:130). For
further information, refer to Ja\`far Murtaza’s Dirasat wa-Buhuth
fi’l-Tarikh wa’l-Islam 1:210 and the following pages.

[^29] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:19-21; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk 3:107-110; al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:755-769; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit,
2:128-130; Halabi, op cit, 2:787-793; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara pp.
102-104; Zayni Dahlan, op cit, 2:68-72; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar
21:50-63; tusi, al-Amali, pp. 141.

[^30] al-Maghazi 2:769.

[^31] Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:30.

[^32] Muhammad Ibrahim ayati, the History of the Prophet of Islam, pp.
501.
[^33] This city is situated in Jordan, in the southern province of
Karak, which is 135 Kilometers away from the capital Amman.

[^34] Ja\`far Subhani, A report of a journey made to Jordan (Mu'tah, the
land of Memories), Lessons from the School of Islam Magazine, year 38,
Issue No. 7, Mehr 1377 ASH.

[^35] Prior to Islam, these two tribes were on terms of enmity (Ibn
Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:310). Since that time, Banu-Khuza\`ah
were the allies of \`Abd al-Muttalib (al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 2:781).

[^36] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:33; al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi
2:783; Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:47.

Ibn Husham writes, “An individual from Banu-Khuza\`ah was killed in
this attack.” (4:33) However, al-Waqidi and Ibn Sa\`d mention that
twenty individuals were killed in this event. (al-Maghazi 2:784;
Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:134).

[^37] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 744-800; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 2:135.

[^38] al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:746-802; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 2:134.

[^39] al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:787-796; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 2:134.

[^40] Ibn Husham, op cit, 4:34; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 2:134; Tarikh
al-Ya\`qubi 2:47.

[^41] Ibn Husham 4:42, pp. 63; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 2:135; al-Waqidi, op
cit, 2:801.

[^42] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 42, 44, 46; al-Waqidi, op cit,
2:817-819.

[^43] The casualties were between fifteen and twenty-eight. See Ibn
Husham, op cit, pp. 50; al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:825; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit,
2:136.

[^44] Ibn Husham, op cit, 4:49; al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:832; Ibn Sa\`d, op
cit, 2:136. Also see Shaykh al-tusi, al-Amali, pp. 336; al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 3:30; Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 2:102;
Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ludaniyyah 1:322; Ibn tawus, al-tara’if
1:80-81; Ibn Shahrashub, al-Manaqib 2:135-136; Zamakhshari, Tafsir
al-Kashshaf 2:244.

Allamah Amini has reported this event from forty-one Sunni narrators.
(al-Ghadir 7:10-13). On the basis of some reference books (such as:
al-Khawarzmi’s al-Manaqib, Fara'id al-Simtayn, Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah, and
Tadhkirat al-Khawass) and in accordance with some narrations recorded in
Bihar al-Anwar, this event had taken place one year prior to the
Emigration and had taken part at night without letting Quraysh know
about it Most probably, the event might have happened in both ways.

The ascent of \`Ali over the Holy Prophet’s shoulders has been
mentioned by some poets, such as Ibn al-\`Arandas al Hilli, a poet of
the ninth century, who composed the following:

\`Ali’s ascent on Ahmad’s shoulders was more a great virtue and a lofty
point of honor for \`Ali. This virtue is different from being a relative
of the prophet.

In the same way, Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, in one of his elegies, which is
related to Mecca’s conquest, composed the following:

You have ascended on the loftiest shoulders which were surrounded with
the Qur’an-reciting angels. You have climbed the shoulder of the best of
God’s prophets; the shoulder of the dearest and holiest person who has
ever lived on the earth.

See Muhammad Ibrahim ayati, the History of the Prophet of Islam, pp.
524-530.

[^45] Al-Hurr al-\`amili: Wasa'il al-Shi\`ah 9:323, Narration 1.

[^46] The number is recorded to have been between eight and ten. (Ibn
Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:51-53; al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 2:825; Ibn
Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:136.) However, some of them were pardoned
by the Holy Prophet.

[^47] Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:49; Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 2:48.

[^48] Ibn Husham, op cit, 4:58; Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:50;
al-Waqidi, op cit, 2:844, with some alterations of words.

[^49] Sayyid Muhammad Husayn tabataba’i, al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an
19:246. This contract was convened after the revelation of the following
holy verses:

O Prophet! When believing Women come to you giving you a pledge that
they will not associate aught with Allah, and will not steal, and will
not commit Fornication, and will not kill their children, nor commit a
calumny which they have forged of themselves, and will not disobey you
in what is good, accept their pledge, and ask forgiveness of them from
Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. (60:11)

Because the content of this treaty was the same as that of the first
\`Aqabah, it is sometimes called bay\`at al-nisa' (the pledge of
women).

[^50] Al-Nuwayri, Nihayat al-Irab 3:11.

[^51] Al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:61.

[^52] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:303.
[^53] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 307.

[^54] Op cit, pp. 248; al-Nuwayri, op cit, pp. 37.

[^55] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 326.

[^56] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 292; al-Nuwayri, op cit, pp. 38.

[^57] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 330; al-Nuwayri, op cit, pp. 89.

[^58] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 331; al-Nuwayri, op cit, pp. 83.

[^59] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 352; al-Nuwayri, op cit, pp. 103.

[^60] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit.

[^61] al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 1:966.

[^62] al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 3:889; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk
3:125. Other reference books state another date for the conquest of
Mecca.

[^63] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 125; Qastalani, al-Mawahib al-Ludaniyyah
1:216.

[^64] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:50.

[^65] Qastalani, op cit, pp. 227; al-Nuwayri, Nihayat al-Irab 2:280-281;
Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:145-147.

[^66] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:80; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk 3:126.

[^67] Ibn Husham, op cit, 4:82; tabari, op cit, 2:127; al-Waqidi, op
cit, 3:893.

[^68] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 889; tabari, op cit, pp. 127.

[^69] Ibn Husham, pp. 83; tabari, op cit, pp. 127; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit,
2:150; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 113; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:52.

[^70] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 843; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 150.

[^71] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 889; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 150; tabarsi,
op cit, pp. 113; Shaykh al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad, pp. 74.

[^72] Hunayn was a valley, near Dhu’l-Majaz in a distance of three
nights away from Mecca.

[^73] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 85; al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 845; tabari, op
cit, pp. 128; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 14; al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 21:169; Shaykh al-Mufid, op cit, pp. 75.

[^74] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 897; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 150.

[^75] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 900; Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:52.

[^76] Kitab al-Irshad, pp. 74; concerning Imam \`Ali’s bravery during
this was, see Shaykh al-tusi’s al-Amali, pp. 574-575.

[^77] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 151; Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:52;
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 21:150.

[^78] The Romans were neighbors to the northern part of the Arabian
peninsula on the Damascus side.

[^79] al-Waqidi, al-Maghaz 3:440. Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:165;
Qastalan, op cit, pp. 346; Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:99. This
report was forged by the Nabataean tradesmen who also carried oil and
flour to Medina (al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 989-990).

[^80] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 990.

[^81] al-Waqidi, op cit, Ibn Sa\`d, op cit.

[^82] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 166.

[^83] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, Qastalan, op cit; Halabi, op cit, tabari,
Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 3:142.

[^84] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 992; tabari, op cit; Halabi, op cit; Ibn
Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:159.

[^85] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 990-991; Qastalan, op
cit, 1:347; Halabi, op cit, Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 160, tabarsi, I\`lam
al-Wara, pp. 122.

[^86] Tabuk was a famous place located between Medina and Damascus
(Qastalan, al-Mawahib al-Ludaniyyah 1:346; Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 2:125). It is 540 kilometers away from Medina. It took a
traveler twelve nights to reach there. (Mas\`udi, pp. 235). In those
days, it was on the border of the Roman-occupied territories in Damascus
where Christians used to live. Today, Tabuk is one of the cities of
Saudi Arabia near the Jordanian borders and the terrific sign on the
northern side of Medina shows 600 Kilometers to Tabuk.

[^87] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 165-167; al-Waqidi, op cit; Qastalan, pp.
346; tabarsi, op cit, Halabi, op cit, pp. 99; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp.
159.

[^88] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 991; tabari, op cit, 3:142.

[^89] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 166; al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 996, 1002;
Qastalan, op cit, pp. 349; Halabi, op cit, pp. 102.

[^90] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 1002; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 166.

[^91] Mas\`udi, al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 235.

[^92] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 165-166; al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 995.

[^93] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 993; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
4:160; Qastalan, op cit, pp. 342.

[^94] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 995; Ibn Husham, op cit, 4:162.

[^95] Shaykh al-Mufid, Kitab al-Irshad, pp. 82; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara,
pp. 122.

[^96] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab 3:34; Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah
3:104; Qastalan, al-Mawahib al-Ludaniyyah 1:348.

[^97] Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, op cit, pp. 27; Ja\`far Murtaza al-\`amili,
al-sahih min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam 4:193-196.

[^98] Al-Jurf is a place three miles away from Medina.

[^99] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:163; Halabi, al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 9:104).

[^100] sahih al-Bukhari 6:304; al-Maghazi, chapter 95, pp. 857; sahih
Muslim 15:175. The Holy Prophet's words on \`Ali can be found in the
following reference books: al-Mawahib 1:348; al-Isti\`ab 3:34;
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:7 and 8:77; Musnad Ahmad 1:179; Kanz
al-\`Ummal, h. 14242, 32881, 36572, sahih al-Tirmidhi, chap. 21, h.
3730; al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 235; al-sawa\`iq al-Muhriqah, pp. 121;
al-Isabah 2:509 No. 5688; Zayni Dahlan’s al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 2:126;
Muruj al-Dhahab 3:14; Amali by Shaykh al-tusi, pp. 599.

[^101] Despite this clear set of argumentations, among Sunni scholars,
such as Halabi and Ibn Taymiyah, have doubted the authenticity of these
narrations. For further information about the authenticity of this
narration and similar ones, refer to al-Ghadir 3:197-201; Ihqaq al-Haqq
5:133-234; Leadership from Islamic Point of View by Ja\`far Subhani,
chapter 15.

[^102] There was one horse for every three men.

[^103] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:167; Qastalan, al-Mawahib
al-Ludaniyyah 1:346; Halabi, op cit, 3:106.

[^104] sahih al-Bukhari 6:308; Mas\`udi, al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 235;
Qastalan, op cit, pp. 346. This name and title is taken from the Holy
Qur’an 9:117.

[^105] Al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 3:1990-1991.

[^106] Halabi, op cit, pp. 99.

[^107] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 2:166, 168; al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 1015.

[^108] tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 123; Qastalan, op cit, pp. 350;
tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 3:146.

[^109] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:165; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 4:159; Halabi, op cit, pp. 49; Qastalan, op cit, pp.
346.

[^110] Ja\`far Subhani, Furugh-e-Abadiyyat 2:403-404.

[^111] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:205. Biographers of the Holy
Prophet’s life have amassed a list of these treaties enumerating them as
sixty; see Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:291-359; The History of the Prophet of
Islam by Muhammad Ibrahim ayati, pp. 609-642.

[^112] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:190.

[^113] This event, with some variations, has appeared in the following
reference books: Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 3:154; Sirat Ibn Husham
4:190; al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:291, Majma\` al-Bayan 5:3; Tadhkirat
al-Khawas, pp. 57; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 537-38 and 7:358; Ruh
al-Ma\`ani; Tafsir al-Manar 10:157.

[^114] Circumambulating the Kaaba with naked body was one of the signs
of the religious corruptions of the infidels. It had its roots in
Quraysh’s control over the Kaaba.

[^115] The content of the Holy Prophet's warning, with some alterations,
appears in the following reference books: Sirat Ibn Husham 4:191;
Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an 9:163, 165; Tafsir al-Manar 10:157;
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 7:358, al-Ghadir 6:343, 348.

[^116] tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 3:154; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 2:291.

[^117] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:191; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:37.

[^118] Najran is one of the Yemenite centers next to Mecca. (al-Hamawi,
Mu\`jam al-Buldan 5:266).

Abu’l-Fida (672-732 AH) in, Taqwim al-Buldan, pp. 127 writes: “Najran
is a small town with palm-groves; the distance between Mecca and Najran
is about a twenty-day journey.” This town might have developed in the
following centuries, because Zayni Dahlan (1231-1304 AH) writes: “Najran
is a large city, near Mecca, on the way to Yemen, consisting of seventy
three villages.” (al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 2:144). As the maps of Saudi
Arabia shows, Najran is now one of the cities of that country, near the
boarders with the Yemen.

[^119] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:70-71; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah
5:53; Bihar al-Anwar 2:285; al-Watha’iq, pp. 34; \`Ali Ahmadi, Makatib
al-Rasul 1:175.

[^120] Sayyid Ibn tawus, Iqbal al-A\`mal 2:311.

[^121] Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:235-236; Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 2:144; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 21:347. \`Allamah
al-Majlisi has gathered all reports and narrations about the Holy
Prophet’s discussions with the missionary of Najran in volume 21 of
Bihar al-Anwar, pp. 319-355.

[^122] tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 129; Majma\` al-Bayan 2:452;
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 21:337.

[^123] Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:236; Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah wa’l-athar al-Muhammadiyyah 2:144.

[^124] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:72; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp.
129.

[^125] Halabi, op cit; Zayni Dahlan, op cit; Zamakhshari, Tafsir
al-Kashshaf 1:193; al-Fakhr al-Razi, Mafatih al-Ghayb 8:82; Sayyid
Muhammad tabataba’i, al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an 3:231; al-Bayzawi,
Anwar al-Tanzil, pp. 74.

[^126] See Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:72; Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:358, Futuh
al-Buldan, pp. 75-76; al-Watha’iq, pp. 134-135; al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah
wa’l-athar al-Muhammadiyyah 2:144; al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:236; Tafsir
al-Kashshaf 1:191; Mafatih al-Ghayb 8:182; Al-Mizan 3:232.

[^127] al-Azraqi, Akhbar Makkah 1:176; Ibn \`Abd-Rabbih, al-\`Iqd
al-Farid 3:313.

[^128] al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 3:1102; Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 2:143.

[^129] Husham Kalbi, al-Asnam, pp. 13. Ibn Husham, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 1:88; Mahmud Shukri al-alusi, Bulugh al-Irab 2:202.

[^130] Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:317.

[^131] al-Waqidi, op cit, 3:1104.

[^132] Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Furu\` min al-Kafi 21:390.

[^133] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:181; Halabi, op cit, 3:327.

[^134] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 1104.

[^135] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 1102; Zayni Dahlan, op cit, 2:143;
al-Majlisi, op cit, 21:392.

[^136] al-Waqidi, op cit, pp. 1104; al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 379.

[^137] Zayni Dahlan, op cit 2:143.

[^138] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 4:250-252; Halabi, al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 3:312; Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:186; al-Waqidi,
al-Maghazi 3:1111; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 21:380. It is worth
mentioning that according to both Ibn Sa\`d and al-Waqidi, the Holy
Prophet delivered this sermon at the desert of Mina.

[^139] Zamakhshari, op cit. Fakhr Razi, without mentioning the name of
\`a'ishah, records this narration and adds, “Both Sunni and Shi\`ite
scholars consider this narration authentic.” (al-Tafsir al-Kabir 8:82).
Al-Shablanji says, “Various reference books reckon this narration as
valid.” (Nur al-Absar, pp. 111).

[^140] The following reference books deal with this same topic: Tafsir
al-Kashshaf 1:193; Mafatih al-Ghayb 8:82; al-Durr al-Manthur 2:231-233,
as narrated by al-Hakim, Ibn Mardawayh, Abu-Na\`im in al-Dala’il;
Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn al-Mundhir, al-Bayhaqi, in al-Sunan, and Ibn
Jarir; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:71; Sharaf al-Nabi, pp. 262; al-Bayzawi,
Anwar al-Tanzil, pp. 74; Nur al-Absar, pp. 111; Manaqib \`Ali Ibn
Abi-talib by Ibn Mardawayh, pp. 226.

However, the most detailed description of this report can be found in
Sayyid Ibn tawus’s Iqbal al-A\`mal 2:310-348.

Despite the existence of so many narrations concerning al-Mubahalah,
some historians, influenced by their prejudices, have manipulated the
narrations adding or subtracting materials according to their whims and
desires. For instance, al-Buladhari, Ibn Kathir and al-Shi\`bi have
omitted the name of \`Ali from the narration.

(See Futuh al-Buldan, pp. 75, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 2:232.) Halabi
and Zayni Dahlan both have put the names of \`a'ishah and Hafsah among
the participants; they have reported \`Umar as having said, “If I wanted
to partake in the Mubahalah with those people (i.e. the Christians), I
would let \`Ali, Hasan, Husayn, Fatimah, \`a'ishah and Hafsah take
part.” (al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:236; al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah wa’l-athar
al-Muhammadiyyah 2:144-145). Al-Suyuti narrates from Ibn \`Asakir that
the Prophet invited Abu-Bakr and his children and \`Ali and his children
for Mubahalah! (Al-Durr al-Manthur 2:333).

The effects of forging and distortion are so obvious in these
narrations that we do not need for further explanation of the issue. It
only suffices to mention that if the word nisa'ana included the
Prophet's wives, why should only two of them, namely \`a'ishah and
Hafsah were worthy of to take part in Mubahalah?

[^141] sahih Muslim 15:176.

[^142] Tafsir al-Kashshaf 1:193.

[^143] Anwar al-Tanzil, pp. 74.

[^144] Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 21:350.

[^145] For more information, see Makatib al-Rasul 1: 179;
Furugh-e-Abadiyyat 2:441-445.

[^146] This was the final juncture of the pilgrims. The directions of
the pilgrims of Egypt, Iraq and Medina were separated, each one taking
their appropriate direction.

[^147] Allamah Amini, al-Ghadir fi al-Kitab wa’l-Sunnah wa’l-Adab
1:10.

[^148] They only doubt the reference of this event to \`Ali. For
instance, in the international symposium for the recognition of
Shi\`ism, which was held in Istanbul, Turkey, with the participation of
great scholars of Islamic countries and with the presence of a group of
distinguished Muslim scholars of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Dr.
Muhammad Sa\`id Ramazan al-Buti, one of the distinguished scholars of
the University of Syria criticized the statements of one speaker who had
denied the event of Ghadir saying, “There is no doubt about the
narration of Ghadir and his participation in it. However, it does not
pertain to Shi\`ites…” This claim was answered by an Iranian scholar.
See Congresses and Scientific Circles of ayatullah, pp. 21, 27.

[^149] Al-Ghadir 1:14-15.

[^150] Returning to Medina, the Holy Prophet traveled at night until he
reached a placed close to al-Juhafah called Ghadir Khumm. That was on
the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah. Taking \`Ali from the hand, the Holy
Prophet delivered a sermon there in which he said, “Am I not superior to
the believers than themselves?” The attendants answered affirmative. He
then said, “\`Ali is now the master of him who has considered me as his
master. O Allah, be the confidant of him who confides with \`Ali and be
the enemy of him who incurs the hostility of \`Ali.” (2:102).

Contrary to what is commonly said, Mas\`udi has referred to this event
to have taken place on the Holy Prophet's return from Hudaybiyah:

On his return from Hudaybiyah, the Prophet said to the Commander of the
Believers \`Ali ibn Abi-talib (may Allah be pleased with him) at Ghadir
Khumm, “\`Ali is now the master of him whose master was I.” That was on
the eighteenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah. See al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 221.

In Muruj al-Dhahab 2:245, counting the virtues of \`Ali, the author
refers shortly to the event of the Divinely commissioned leadership of
Imam \`Ali by saying,

Things due to which the companions of Allah’s Messenger deserved favor
are precedence to faith, migration, supporting Allah’s Messenger,
nearness to him, satisfaction, self-sacrifice for him, knowledgeability
with the Holy Book and the Revelation, strife for Allah’s sake, piety,
asceticism, judicature, fair judgment, jurisprudence, and knowledge.

In all these, \`Ali (peace be upon him) had the biggest share and the
greatest part. He was exclusively addressed by Allah’s Messenger when he
associated as brothers each two of his companions, saying, “You are my
brother.” Of course, Allah’s Messenger is matchless and incomparable. He
also addressed \`Ali by saying, “Your position to me is the same as
Aaron’s position to Moses except that there will be no prophet after
me.” He also said, “\`Ali is now the master of him whose master was I. O
Allah, support him who supports \`Ali and antagonize him who incurs the
hostility of \`Ali.”

[^151] Ibn Shahrashub, Ma\`alim al-\`Ulama’, pp. 106; Ibn tawus,
al-tara’if; Ibn Bitriq, \`Uyun sihah al-Akhbar 1:157.

This book is referred to by other names, such as Kitab al-Faza'il,
hadith al-wilayah, and Kitab Ghadir Khumm. These titles might have been
taken by authors with regards to the content of the book. Some others
have put the name of a special section of the book for the whole book.
As we will see in the next footnote, al-Najashi entitles it as al-radd
\`ala al-hurqusiyyah (Refutations of Hurqus’s claims). Hurqus ibn Zuhayr
was one of leaders of Khawarij. Most probably, the adoption of this
title was to indicate and refer to the opponents of \`Ali as
apostates.

[^152] Al-Najashi, Fihrist Musannaf al-Shi\`ah, pp. 225. In his book of
Iqbal al-A\`mal 2:239, Sayyid Ibn tawus refers to this name.

[^153] tusi, al-Fihrist, pp. 281.

[^154] It is worth mentioning that while Ibn Kathir mentions the event
of al-Ghadir, he distorts its relation to \`Ali.

[^155] Ibn Kathir, op cit, 11:147. This belongs to the events of the
year 310 which coincides with tabari's death.

[^156] Ma\`alim al-\`Ulama', pp. 106.

[^157] Al-tara’if 1:142.

[^158] This book has been printed in three volumes in Qum by the
Foundation for Islamic Publications in 1414 AH. In its first volume,
page 130 on, tabari's narrations are recorded.

[^159] Op cit, 1:130.

[^160] Op cit, 1:130. His motive in writing this book was that he was
informed that one of the experts in Baghdad has denied and rejected the
event of Ghadir, claiming that on the Prophet's return from the Farewell
Pilgrimage, \`Ali was not with him; rather, he was in Yemen. tabari was
extremely moved by this lie and denial; so, he wrote the book of
al-Wilayah to repudiate the view of that expert. In his book, he
described the event of Ghadir and confirmed its authenticity.

(Sharh al-Akhbar 1:130; Yaqut al-Hamawi, Mu\`jam al-Buldan 18:84-85).
According to Ibn \`Asakir and al-Dhahabi, the expert mentioned above was
Abu-Bakr ibn Abi-Dawud al-Sajistani, the author of Sunan Abi-Dawud.
(Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 52:197-198; Tarikh al-Islam, pp. 213; Tadhkirat
al-Huffaz 2:713.

Abu-Bakr Ibn Abi-Dawud is accused of having hatred against \`Ali
(Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 29:87; Mizan al-I\`tidal 2:434; Tarikh Baghdad
9:467-468.

[^161] Sharh al-Akhbar 1:134-135. For more information on Kitab
al-Wilayah, see Fazl \`Ali, by Rasul Ja\`fariyan, 34.

[^162] Al-Ghadir 1:350, 354, 356.

[^163] For instance, the Holy Prophet is reported to have said, “The
matrimonial contract of any woman that is married before obtaining the
permission of her mawla (guardian) is void.”

[^164] Al-Ghadir 1:367-370.

[^165] According to a narration reported by Ahmad ibn Hanbal Musnad
Ahmad 1:119 and Ibn al-Athir’s Usd al-Ghabah 4:28, the Holy Prophet
said, “Am I not superior to the believers than their own lives? Aren't
my wives their mothers?”

It is completely clear that when he refers to his wives as the mothers
of the believers, the statement that is confirmed in verse 6 of Surah
al-Ahzab is uttered to strengthen his prophethood. His reference to his
status as superior to the lives of Muslims shows that he wanted to
emphasize his own prophetic position and later on \`Ali's position.

It is worth mentioning that Ibn Kathir considers its source as dubious,
without presenting any reason whatsoever. (al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah
5:211). This is while its first narrator, i.e.; \`Abd al-Rahman ibn
Abi-Layla has been confirmed by Sunni scholars as trustworthy. Besides,
this hadith has been narrated by many others. (see al-Ghadir
1:177-178).

[^166] For a complete list of these signers and witnesses, see al-Ghadir
1:370-385; Leadership in the Eyes of Islam, Ja\`far Subhani, pp.
234-238.

[^167] For further information, see al-Waqidi, al-Maghazi 3:1081;
al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:208-209.

[^168] Nihayat al-Irab 3:168; al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 5:209; Ibn
\`Asakir, Tarikh Madinat Dimashq 1:386.

[^169] Historians and biographers mention the number of the troops under
Imam \`Ali’s mission to Yemen as three hundred. See al-Waqidi,
al-Maghazi 3:1019; al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:169.

[^170] Ibn Qutaybah al-Daynawari, al-Imamah wa’l-Siyasah, pp. 24-25.

[^171] For further information, see al-Ghadir 1: 214, 247.

[^172] For further information concerning this and also data related to
the distance between the abovementioned two verses (in Surah al-Ma’idah)
and the fact that what comes in the latter part of the 3rd verse deals
with forbidden meats and not related to the issue of succession, see
Tafsir Namunah 4:263-271.

[^173] A location in Syria between \`Asqalan and Ramlah, close to
Mu'tah. See Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:227.

[^174] A place three miles away from Damascus.

[^175] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:190; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran,
Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 1:121; Zayni Dahlan, 2:138; Halabi, op cit, pp.
227.

[^176] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 190; Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 3:227;
Zayni Dahlan, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah wa’l-athar al-Muhammadiyyah
2:138.

[^177] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 6:52.

[^178] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 190; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib Tarikh
Dimashq 1:121.

[^179] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 190; al-Miqrizi, Amta\` al-Asma’ 2:124;
Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 1:121.

[^180] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit; al-Miqrizi, op cit, 2:124; Zayni Dahlan, op
cit; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, op cit; Halabi, op cit, pp. 228; According
to sahih al-Bukhari and sahih Muslim, the words of the Prophet were:

If you impugn his commandership, you have already been impugning his
father. By Allah I swear, he was very suitable for leadership. He was
one of my dearest people. This one is also my dearest one after his
father.

See sahih al-Bukhari 6:326, H. 9; sahih Muslim 15:195.

[^181] Muhammad ibn \`Abd al-Karim al-Shahristani, pp. 29.

[^182] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:178.

[^183] From the improper analysis that Ibn Abi’l-Hadid puts on this
issue, we understand that this Shi\`ite analysis has always been a
controversial issue among historians.

[^184] sahih al-Bukhari 1:120; al-Maghazi, pp. 317-318; sahih Muslim
11:89; Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 2:242; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj
al-Balaghah, quoted from Abu-Bakr al-Jawhari, Kitab al-Saqifah.

[^185] For example, see the following sources: Ibn tawus, al-tara’if fi
Ma\`rifat Madhahib al-tawa’if 2:431-435; Sharaf al-Din al-Musawi,
al-Nass wa’l-Ijtihad, pp. 162-177; Ja\`far Subhani, Furugh-e-Abadiyyat
2:493-500; Mustafavi, al-Haqa'iq fi Tarikh al-Islam wa’l-Fitan
wa’l-Ahdath, pp. 129-135; Yusuf Qulayni, pas az ghurub 1:38-53; Muhammad
Hasanayn Haykal, Hayat al-Nabi, pp. 501; sahih Muslim commentary of
al-imam al-nawawi 11:84-93.

[^186] Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 22:514; the date of the
prophet's demise is reported differently in some sources. See op cit,
pp. 514-521; Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra, 3:272-274; al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah, 3:454.

[^187] Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi, 2:178.

[^188] Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah, 3:454.

[^189] Ibid.

[^190] Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra, 2:237-239.


