The Significance of Parentage
=============================

Two of the most significant criteria among the Arabs during the period
of ignorance were parentage and kinship relations. These were the very
basis of many other criteria.[^52] Boasting on one's race was prevalent
among the Arab tribes. A typical example was the rivalry between the
\`Adnanite Arabs (in the north) and the Qahtanite Arab (in the
south).[^53] For this very reason, an Arab gave great significance to his
parentage. al-Nu\`man ibn al-Mundhir said to Khosrow:

The members of other nations do not care about their parentage; if they
are asked about their ancestors, they will lack the necessary knowledge.
This was completely different in the case of Arabs, who recognized their
ancestors fully. The Arabs would not accept foreigners as members of
their clans. They would not enter any interaction with strangers. An
Arab is not called by any other name than his father's.[^54]

Thus, it is not surprising to see the science of genealogy, which was
one of the limited sciences in those days, receiving a prominent
significance. Genealogists received lots of respect, as well. alusi, a
prominent researcher on Arab issues, writes:

“Arabs in the Age of Ignorance put a lot of emphasis on their parentage
because this kind of recognition was one of the means to cooperate with
others. They really needed this sort of recognition, because they lived
in separate locations and the fire of war was always blazing. Plunder
was a common practice.

Since they were reluctant to accept anybody's help in order to defeat
their enemies, they had to stick to their parentage, because the love
and caring for ones’ relatives would result in mutual cooperation and
would prevent disunity.[^55]

Islam, however, rejected any concept of racial superiority. Although
the verses of the Holy Qur'an were revealed among the Arabs and the
tribe of Quraysh, they were never addressed to any Qurayshite or any
Arab. Rather, these sacred verses are addressed to people in general.
When Muslims are reminded of their duties, they are referred to as
believers. According to the Holy Qur'an, racial differences are natural
things. However, it rejects boasting about one's race, and recognizes
the criterion of piety as the base for values:

O you men! Surely We have created you of a male and a female, and made
you tribes and families that you may know each other, surely the most
honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful of his
duty, surely Allah is Knowing, Aware. (49:13)[^56]

The Holy Prophet emphatically rejected boasting about one's race or
parentage. Examples are the following:

(1) On the Conquest of Mecca when the Quraysh's main stronghold fell,
people of Quraysh considered themselves superior; hence, the Holy
Prophet remarked:

O people: God, through Islam, has strongly rejected taking pride in
one's parentage which existed at the age of Ignorance. Remember, you are
not at the Age of Ignorance. Remember, you are the offspring of Adam,
and Adam was created of dust. The best of God's servants are the most
pious. Arabism could not possibly be the father of anybody.

But Arabic is an eloquent language. One who is a loser in life could
not be saved through racial or ancestral privileges.[^57]

(2) During his last pilgrimage (hijjat al-wada\`; Farewell Pilgrimage)
and through a detailed discourse, the Holy Prophet warned the
attendants, saying:

“No Arab has any superiority over any non-Arab except for piety.”[^58]

While confirming Salman in his discussion with Quraysh and his
condemnation of the Arab’s wrong ideology in believing in racism, the
Holy Prophet (s), said:

“O People of Quraysh; one's honor rests on one’s religion; one's
manhood and honor rest on one’s behavior; one's true origin is one’s
wisdom and understanding.”[^59]

**Tribal Wars**

If a murder occurred among the Arabs, the murderer’s closest relative
would be responsible; and since the murderer's family used to support
him, a bloody war would be inevitable. These wars would start over minor
things and usually lasted for years. An example was the Basus War
between the two tribes of Banu-Bakr and Banu-Taghlib both of whom
belonged to Rabi\`ah. This war lasted for forty years. The source of the
conflict was the arrival of a camel of the former tribe into the
reserved pastureland of the other tribe who slaughtered it. The camel
owner, a lady named Basus, belonged to the former tribe.[^60]

Another war of the same nature broke out between Qays ibn Zuhayr, the
chief of Banu-Fazarah over a horse race. Dahis and al-Ghabra’ were the
names of two horses which took part in this competition. The former
belonged to Qays and the latter to Hudhayfah. Both Qays and Hudhayfah
claimed that their horses won. This minor event culminated in a disaster
in which many lives were lost.[^61] These kinds of calamities have been
termed Ayyam al-\`Arab on which numerous books have been written.

Of course, on some occasions, camels would be paid to the family of the
diseased one as blood money. In every tribe, it was up to the elderly
people to solve such conflicts. Solutions were offered, but not imposed
and the tribes would accept such peaceful solutions due to their
involvement in the tiring wars. If the murderer's tribe submitted the
murderer to the other tribe who had lost a member, wars could be
prevented. However, such submission was not honorable. Therefore, they
preferred to punish the wrongdoer. In the conceptualization of the
desert dweller, keeping one’s face was the very essence of ethics.

These desert rules and regulations were carried out in the cities of
Hijaz, i.e. ta’if, Mecca and Medina. This is because these citizens
resembled the desert dwellers in many ways: they were independent and
free, as they obeyed nobody whatsoever. However, these prestige-keeping
behaviors which manifested themselves in extremity within the desert
were somehow moderated in Mecca due to the respect that they showed
towards the Kaaba and because of the trade, contracts which were held in
that holy place.[^62]

The Holy Qur'an has condemned this sort of revenge-taking and
stipulated justice as the basis for the protection of people. It
emphasized the fact that Muslims should maintain justice even if this
justice might endanger themselves or their parents.

O You who believe! Be maintainers and justify bearers of witness of
Allah's sake, though it may be against your own selves or your parents
or near relatives; if he be rich or poor, Allah in nearer to them both
in compassion; therefore do not follow your low desires, lest you
deviate; and if you swerve or turn aside, then surely Allah is aware of
what you do. (4:135)

**Manslaughter and Plunder**

The desert-dwelling Arab did not show any love or sympathy towards
anybody outside his own tribe. This kind of affection did not go beyond
one's own family and tribe the members of which were close relatives. An
Arab's field of thinking and understanding was within the narrow range
of the tribe. The desert-dwelling Arab, like extremist nationalists of
our time, cared for his own interests and those of his close
relatives.

This behavior was manifested by one Arab, who was still under the
influence of his previous culture after the advent of Islam and said at
the time of praying, “O God, bless me and bless Muhammad; but do not
bless anybody else.”[^63]

The deprivation imposed by the severe conditions of the desert on the
desert-dwelling Arabs forced them to engage in plundering. This was due
to the fact that their land lacked the common assets of other lands.
They used to compensate for this deprivation through plundering. They
considered engagement in plundering the caravans a kind of bravery and
honor in the same way that capture and besiegement of a city is
considered honorable at our own time.[^64]

Of course, one of the causes for plundering and wars was rivalry among
tribes to capture the pastures. At times, bloody conflicts occurred for
the attainment of chiefship. For instance, at the time of the death of
an elder brother who used to be the chief, the younger brothers desired
for that position, and the deceased chief's sons, too, wanted to get
their father's position. Under such conditions, fight and struggles for
power were inevitable.

In such moments, poets also agitated people to be involved for more
bloodshed. They chanted tribal prides, criticized other rival tribes and
mobilized people to take revenge. Minor issues were the usual causes for
such bloody conflicts, it was then up to the two antagonistic tribes to
annihilate one another mercilessly.[^65] Savagery and avoidance of
civilized ways was among the reasons for their plundering. In the
opinion of Ibn Khaldun, this nation was savage.

Plundering and savagery were embedded in their very morale. For
instance, when they needed stones to build a fireplace, they used to
destroy buildings; they used to destroy buildings and castles in order
to prepare woods required for erecting tents. They got their sustenance
by means of swords; they would not be satisfied easily; they showed
greed for plunder; they would grab any piece of wealth they could put
their hands on.[^66]

Plundering was one of their sources of income. When they attacked a
tribe, they would confiscate their camels and enslave their wives and
children. Still another tribe would carry out the same pernicious acts
in a later time. When they could not locate an enemy, they would destroy
one another. This is made clear through the poem of al-Qattami, a poet
in the reign of the Umayyad rulers, who composed:

“It is our job to attack our neighbors and our enemies, and in those
moments when we cannot locate anybody else except for our brother, we
will attack him.”[^67]

The revenge-based wars between the two tribes of Aws and Khazraj in
Yathrib (Medina) were so severe and widespread that nobody dared to
leave his home. These wars had destroyed the lives of the Arabs. God
mentions in the Holy Qur'an their catastrophic condition and emphasizes
the brotherhood among people which was the result of Islam:

Remember the favor of Allah on you when you were enemies, then He
united your hearts so by His favor you became brethren; and you were on
the brink of a pit of fire, then he saved you from it; thus does Allah
make clear to you His communications that you may follow the right way.
(3:103)

**The Forbidden Months**

A ceasefire (called sacred peace) was held among Arabs only during the
Sacred Months (i.e. Dhu’l-Qa\`dah, Dhu’l-Hijjah, Muharram, and Rajab)
out of their respect for a tradition left from the time of Prophet
Abraham and Prophet Ishmael.[^68] During these tranquil times, Arabs
could have peace of mind and engage in trades or pilgrimage.[^69]

If any war occurred during these sacred months, they would be called
Harb al-Fujjar or a sinful fight. (the Holy Qur'an 9:37)

**Women in the Arab Society**

Arabs' outlook towards women was one of the manifestations and outcomes
of ignorance during the period of Jahiliyyah (pre-Islamic ignorance).
Women were denied their human rights and independence. The very
existence of women and girls at home was a sign of inferiority and shame
for a family.[^70] They would deprive girls of inheritance and believed
those who defend their tribes (i.e. boys) who use their swords are
entitled to inheritance.[^71] In accordance with a narration, women were
considered as merchandise. Upon her husband's death, the wife, if she
did not have a son, would be transferred, along with the husband's other
commodities, to the son of her husband from other wives.[^72]

In accordance with some pieces of evidence, upon the death of one's
husband, a woman would become the wife of her eldest son who would draw
a piece of cloth on her step-mother's face and consider her item of
inheritance and would marry her without any dowry. If he was reluctant
to marry his stepmother, he would then ask another man to marry her and
make use of her dowry for himself. If he preferred, he could deprive her
stepmother of any future marriages so that after her death he could
possess her wealth.

Thus, at the time of Arab Ignorance, marrying one's stepmother was not
illegal. For this reason, the Holy Qur'an has prohibited it.[^73]
According to some interpreters, when a man called Abu-Qays ibn al-Aslat
died and his eldest son wanted to marry his mother, the following verse
was revealed:

It is not lawful for you that you should take women as heritage against
their will. (4:22)[^74]

In those dark days, polygamy was very prevalent.[^75]

**The Tragedy of Women**

As it is well-known, one of the Arabs' worst habits at the time of
Ignorance was the practice of burying daughters alive. They would bury
their daughters alive because they were thought to be unable to defend
the tribal interests. Such men also feared that their daughters could be
enslaved by their enemies, be married to them and give birth to
children. This, they assumed, would be a sign of shame for them.[^76]
Some others buried their daughters alive due to severe poverty and
wretchedness. (6:151)[^77] As a whole, daughters were received as nasty
beings. They were held as a sign of disgrace. The Holy Qur'an describes
them in the following manner:

And when a daughter is announced to one of them, his face becomes black
and he is full of wrath. He hides himself from the people because of the
evil of that which is announced to him. Shall he keep it with disgrace
or bury it alive in the dust? Now surely evil is what they judge.
(16:58-59)

Women's deprivation and conviction are reflected amply in the Arab
literature of those days. It was a custom for the Arab men to sympathize
with a man who became a father to a daughter. They would tell him, “May
God keep you from her disgrace. May God provide you with the expenses
that she would create for you. May Gay turn her bridegroom's house into
grave.”

Regarding this, an Arab poet has written the following poem:

“For any father who has a daughter and wishes to keep her, there are
three kinds of bridegrooms: A house where she can shelter; a husband who
can keep her, and a grave to protect her; but the best the grave.”

A story is told that a man, called Abu-Hamzah, stayed with the
neighbors because his wife had given birth to a girl. His wife playfully
said the following piece of poetry for her child:

“What has happened to Abu-Hamzah who has left us, living with the
neighbors. He is angry because I have not given birth to a son. By God I
swear, it is not upon us to decide on the sex of the child. We will
receive what we are given.”

This mother's speech is in fact a revolt against the tyrant social
conditions prevailing over the Arab community in those days, and depicts
the tragedy of women then. The first tribe to establish such a nasty
institution was the tribe of Banu-Tamim.

It is said that upon their refusal to pay tribunes to al-Nu\`man ibn
al-Mundhir, there broke out a severe war in which the women and girls of
Tamim were taken prisoners. When Tamim's representatives went to
al-Nu\`man's court to receive the prisoners, the women were given option
to either stay at al-Hirah or return home among the Tamimi people.

The daughter of Qays ibn \`asim, the chief of the tribe, who was among
the prisoners and had married a courtier, chose to stay at the court.
Qays became utterly upset and decided to kill his daughters from then
on.[^78] This custom gradually became widespread and it is said that the
tribes Qays, Asad, Hudhayl, and Bakr ibn Wa'il committed this crime from
then on.[^79] Of course, not everybody or tribe performed such nasty
crimes.

Some tribes and dignified people, such as \`Abd al-Muttalib, the Holy
Prophet’s grandfather, opposed it.[^80] Individuals such as Zayd ibn
\`Amr ibn Nufayl and sa\`sa\`ah ibn Najiyah would take those girls who
were supposed to be buried alive due to their parents' poverty and keep
them safe.[^81] Sometimes, they provided their parents with some
camels.[^82] However, there is a lot of evidence which indicates that
this keeping of such girls was common:

1. sa\`sa\`ah ibn Najiyah once told the Holy Prophet that he had saved
280 girls from being buried alive.[^83]
2. Qays ibn \`asim killed twelve or thirteen of his daughters after he
had taken the decision to do so.[^84]
3. In the first treaty at al-\`Aqabah (12 years after the Holy
Prophet’s Divine Mission) which the Holy Prophet held with some groups
of Yathrib, one paragraph concerned the avoidance of burying daughters
alive.[^85]
4. After the Conquest of Mecca, one of the items of the treaty with the
women of this city stipulated that they should refrain from killing
their children.
5. The Holy Qur'an has condemned the practice of burying daughters
alive on several occasions:

And do not kill your children for fear of poverty; We give them
sustenance and yourselves too; surely to kill them is a great wrong.
(17:31)
And thus their associates have made fair seeming to most of the
polytheists the killing of their children, that they may cause them to
perish and obscure for them their religion. (6:137)
They are lost indeed who kill their children foolishly without
knowledge, and forbid what Allah has given to them, forging a lie
against Allah. (6:140)
And do not slay your children for fear of poverty-We provide for you
and for them. (6:151)
And when the female infant buried alive is asked for what sin she was
killed. (81:8-9)


