Chapter Two : Moral Features of the Arabs
=========================================

**Opposing Traits**

Despite the savage nature and plundering inclinations, the nomadic Arab
possessed some good traits such as generosity, hospitality and bravery.
He strongly stuck to his promises and kept his word so much so that at
times he even endangered his wellbeing to keep his promises; and this
loyalty to his promises was his most distinguishing feature. The
presence of such differing traits in the nomadic Arabs makes us
wonder.

If the Arabs had not lived in such a hostile land, it would have been
difficult for us to know the reason for such contrasts. The same Arab
who desired for plundering and did not hesitate to commit the most
vicious crimes showed sympathy, emotions and hospitality inside his
tent. If a needy person referred to him for help,

he would assist him generously and at times would endanger his own life
for their wellbeing.[^86] A nomadic Arab considered it the highest point
of honor and dignity to show bravery on the battlefield, to be extremely
generous, to be loyal to his tribal interests, and to be harsh in taking
revenge against those who have wronged him or his relatives or
tribe.[^87]

The Roots for the Arab's Good Manners:

Despite the fact that Arabs were most often engaged in bloody fights
over the possession of pastures, they had come to understand this truism
that they should engage in the highest form of hospitality towards
others since they lived in a hostile land in which resting-places or
hotels were not available to provide travelers with shelters.

Poets at the Ignorance Era, who acted like journalists of our time,
used to emphasize the notion of hospitality and admire this human trait
more than other human traits.[^88]

It should be however noted that the roots of most of their good traits,
such as bravery, hospitality, generosity, and protecting the needy, did
not rest in their human and spiritual values; rather, these traits had
their roots in the culture of the Ignorance Era. They performed these
human traits out of their rivalry and competition with other members of
society.

This is because that harsh environment called for bravery and audacity.
Love for a good name and leadership and fear of poets' criticism and
wish to avoid being called misers and mean persons led Arabs to show
great signs of generosity and protection towards those in trouble.[^89]

**Ignorance and Superstition**

The nomadic Arab of Hijaz who lived mostly in the desert lacked true
civilization; he was dominated by extreme fanatics and incapable of
comprehending the relations of nature. He could not analyze the
phenomena in nature critically and was unable to understand cause and
effect relations.

When a sick man received some drugs, he was incapable of analyzing
critically the relationship between pain and disease. The only thing he
knew was the fact that his clan-mates used to take this medicine under
similar conditions. For instance, he naively accepted that the tribal
chief's blood would remedy the disease of rabies, which was the result
of a dog's bite. In the same way, he was under the illusion that the
cause of sickness was a malicious spirit which entered the sick man's
body.

For this reason, attempts were made to expel this intruder from the
sick man's body. In the case of mental sickness, they used to put the
dead men's stones over the ill person’s body so that illness might be
cured. They strongly believed in spirits; they believed these creatures
loomed in deserted places at night or they trouble travelers at night.

When cows were taken to the river to drink water and a cow refused to
drink, they thought the reason for her refusal was the presence of a
devil inside the bull’s horns. In order to drive the devil away, they
used to strike the head of the bull.[^90] Such funny events were very
common among them.

The Arabs would not show any sign of doubt regarding these
superstitious acts so far as they were carried out by others, because
the source of doubt and skepticism lies in one's critical thinking. They
lacked such sophistications in those days. Of course, at times some
bright signs of clear thinking and bright ideas could be observed in
their poems, proverbs and tales.

However, even these lacked deep thought or analytic aspects. This
inability of analysis of phenomena was the root of all sorts of
superstitions in which they strongly believed and books of the history
of the Arabs contain a lot of them.[^91]

**Arab Sciences and Arts**

Some scholars have tried to prove that the nomadic Arabs were in
command of such sciences as medicine, astronomy and physiognomy.[^92]
However, this is an exaggeration. The Arab's knowledge in these domains
was sporadic, unorganized and mostly based on lucky guesses. This sort
of knowledge came down to them through elderly women and men of the
tribe. It could not be termed science. For instance, the Arabs’
knowledge of astronomy was limited to the recognition of some stars and
the time of their rising and setting.

This kind of knowledge was necessary for the navigation of their camels
on the vast expanses of the deserts or the recognition of the time for
prayers. Ibn Khaldun states, Their knowledge of medicine was based, most
often, on short-lived and narrow experiences. This sort of medicine was
inherited from elderly men and women from one generation to another.
Some sick people might haphazardly be cured, but these treatments were
not based on any laws.[^93]

The medical treatment of some physicians such as Harith ibn Kildah was
of this sort.

**An illiterate nation**

In the interpretation of the Holy Qur'an, people of Hijaz were
illiterate. They had remained as illiterate as when they were born. They
could neither write nor read. Al-Buladhari states:

At the advent of Islam, only seventeen persons in Quraysh and Yathrib
and eleven others from the tribes of Aws and Khazraj could read or
write.[^94]

This situation existed in spite of the fact that people of Quraysh were
affluent in Mecca and business and trade naturally asked for a trader to
be literate. Thus, how is it possible for such an advanced stage of
science?

**Poetry**

At the Ignorance Era, the only privilege the nomadic Arabs possessed
was their skill in poetry and rhetoric. Poetry, in particular, had
reached its climax. Poets played the roles of historians, genealogists,
satirists, moralists, journalists, fortune-tellers and
war-announcers.[^95] In those days, the great Arab poets used to present
their poems at season-bazaars, such as the bazaar of \`Ukaz,
Dhi’l-Majaz, and al-Majannah,[^96] which were held in the form of trade,
literary and general exhibitions.

The selection of any poem as a masterpiece was a great sign for the
poet and his tribe and his poem was hung on the Kaaba's walls.[^97] For
this reason, they were called al-Mu\`allaqat (the suspensions). Arab
poems, despite their superficial eloquence, lacked sublime thoughts and
richness due to the fact that this nation lacked proper culture and
civilization. The contents of this poetry relied heavily on the topics
of love, wine, women, epics, and tribal issues and their beauty lay in
the superficial glamour of language and literary subtleties.

**Arabs and the Neighboring Civilizations**

When we study Arab sciences and arts, we may ask the following
question: Did the Arabs of the Ignorance Era benefit from the two
civilized nations of those days: namely, Iran and Rome? Did their trade
transactions with these two states change their way of life in any way?
To answer these questions, we should be reminded that people of Hijaz,
due to their geopolitical status, were not only away from the political
domination of the neighboring lands but also stayed away from their
cultural influences. Arabs could have the influences of the neighboring
civilizations and cultures only in three ways: trade, the Iranians, and
the Jews and Christians.

We should however see to what degree this influence was active. Some
remarks made by certain historians considering this topic have been
exaggerative. For instance, some say:

The relations of the Arab tribes with both Iran and Rome to a certain
degree made them familiar with these two civilizations: Those Arabs who
traveled between Iran and Rome for trade purposes observed the
manifestations of civilization in these two centers. These influences
could be vividly observed in the poems left from the Ignorance Era.

Furthermore, many travelers and traders took with them many words and
stories from Iran and Rome to the Arabian Peninsula; in this way, some
of the ideologies of Iranians and Romans entered Arab culture.[^98]

However, it should be noted that these trade transactions between
traders of Hijaz and the Iranian or Roman merchants did not have any
significant influence over the cultural or intellectual advancement of
these people. This is because information was hard to pass through
mental sieves of these nomads.

Most often, what they passed on to others contained a lot of
distortions. This is shown in many Arab axioms whose sources are either
Solomon's tales or Iranian stories. In general, the Arabs in those days
did not receive science from others systematically. The obstacles in the
way of such receptions were the following:

(1) Natural barriers, such as mountains, seas, and deserts; these
barriers created problems for Arab's connection with the outside
world.

(2) Huge mental, intellectual and social differences between the Romans
and Iranians on one hand and the Arabs on the other hand.

(3) Illiteracy among the Arabs had caused those who came in contact
with both Iranians and Romans to memorize and narrate the axioms or the
tales in such a way as to be comprehensible to ordinary people.

Thus, it could be concluded that the Arab's relationships with the
neighboring lands had effects only on their financial, material and
literary life.[^99]

On the Jews' influences too, it is said that they emigrated to Hijaz
since the time of Prophet Moses due to the Romans' aggressions after the
destruction of Jerusalem.[^100] The arrival of Jews in Hijaz had a
tremendous effect on the social life of the whole region and the stories
of the Old Testament and Talmud became known to the Arabs of
Hijaz.[^101]

Of course, the influence of Jewish culture on the people of the Arabian
Peninsula cannot be denied and there are documents revealing the fact
that the Jews were superior to the Arabs in the intellectual and
religious domains. Even after the advent of Islam, many Muslims used to
ask them religious questions.[^102] Since Judaism, like Christianity, had
been severely distorted, the thoughts that the Arabs received from the
Jews were extremely disturbed and distorted. Not only were Jewish
instructions unhelpful but also they added to the Arabs’ confusion.


**The Arab's Inferiority vis-à-vis Iran and Rome**

As we have already noted, people of Hijaz used to have a tribal life in
the desert, lacking central government to unite them. They were mostly
involved in tribal conflicts. For this reason, they were wretched and
backward and were not noticed by the people of the world.

The Arabs were so entangled in the narrow sphere of their tribal
atmosphere and were so involved in the prejudices and dogmas. They were
also so deprived and disorganized that they could never think about
affairs occurring outside their immediate surroundings. They could never
think of defeating their neighboring powerful states of Iran and Rome;
rather, they felt extremely powerless, wretched and inferior towards
these two civilizations.

An Arab person, namely Qatadah, introduced the Arabs of those days as
the most miserable, wretched, backward, misguided, begging and hungry
people in the world. He says, “The Arabs were caught between two lions,
from both of whom they feared.”[^103]

A piece of evidence for this feeling of inferiority comes from the Holy
Prophet's dialogue with the Arabs in Mecca. When he was trying to spread
his ideologies among the Arabs, he encountered a group of distinguished
Arab individuals. He recited to them some of the verses of the Holy
Qur'an which were concerned with native and ethical instructions. All of
them were highly moved; they began to admire the verses. However, their
chief, al-Muthanna ibn Harithah, remarked:

“We are caught between two stretches of water. On one side lie the Arab
shores; on the other lie Iran and Khosrow rivers. We have pledged to
Khosrow not to create any problem and not to protect or shelter any
wrongdoer. Perhaps your ideologies are not palatable to the kings. If we
do anything wrong here, it would be pardoned, but such mistakes and
errors in the Iranian borders are not pardonable by Khosrow, the king of
Iran.[^104]

**Imaginary Pride**

Regarding the Arab inferiority complex, historians have written:

The Tamim tribe faced a drought, but Khosrow did not allow them to make
use of the fertile lands of Iraq. Then, one of their noblemen, named
Hajib ibn Zurarah, came to Khosrow's court as a representative of his
tribe. Khosrow said, “You, Arabs, are traitors. If I let you use these
fertile lands, you will agitate and excite people against me and make me
worried.” Hajib replied, “I assure you such a thing would never happen.”
Khosrow then asked, “How would you guarantee this?” Hajib answered, “I
pledge my bow with you.

” Khosrow accepted. Thus, Hajib's bow was kept by Khosrow as a pledge
(Hajib's bow was a symbol of his bravery, chivalry and manhood). After
Hajib's death, his son \`Utarad received his father's bow from
Khosrow.[^105] After this event and for a long time, people of the Tamim
tribe considered this pledge high point of honor.[^106]

On the other hand, since the Banu-Shayban, with the assistance of
Banu-\`Ujal and Banu-Yashkur, had overcome Khosrow Parviz in the Battle
of Dhi-Qar,[^107] this victory was a point of honor for them; they looked
at it unbelievingly. Whenever they remembered it, they would take pride
in it. They did not dare to call it the victory of Arabs over the
Persians; they considered it an accident,

but not as point of honor. They would recognize it as the pride of
three Arab tribes and not just one. Their self-admiration reached such a
point that Abu-Tammam, a poet, composed a poem in the honor of Abu-Dulaf
al-\`Ajali in spite of the fact that the Tamim tribe had one day taken
pride in having asked Khosrow to accept Hajib's bow as a sign of his
pledge for loyalty:

Once Tamim took honor in having pledged his bow and considered this as
a point of honor;

However, your swords at the war of Dhi-Qar overthrew the thrones of
those who had taken Hajib's bow as a pledge.[^108]

**The Ignorance Era**

In our discussions so far, we have referred to the people of the
Arabian Peninsula prior to the advent of Islam as an ignorant people,
living in an era of ignorance. There are documents showing that this
idiomatic expression was taken from the Holy Qur'an and was used by
Muslims to describe this specific era and had taken on a special meaning
and flavor.[^109] Some contemporary historians estimate the time interval
of 150-200 years prior to Prophet Muhammad's prophethood for the
existence of the Ignorance Era.[^110]

Although the word Jahiliyyah is taken from Jahl (meaning ignorance),
the word Jahl here is not taken to be the opposite of science or
knowledge; rather, it the opposite of wisdom and logic.

Having lacked knowledge, the people of the Arabian Peninsula were
illiterate at that time. They were given the name ignorant not due to
their lack of knowledge, but because of their wrong and negative
attitudes and illogical thinking and because of their prejudice,
selfishness, false pride and vengeful attitude. Islam, however, strongly
opposed these negative and destructive inclinations.[^111] Perhaps, under
such conditions, jahl connotes the meaning of being stupid, which is not
based on illiteracy.[^112]

In the Holy Qur'an, the word ignorance or Jahiliyyah has been used with
the meanings we have already referred to. Some of those cases are
referred to below:

(1) The unfounded expectations of some superficial believers who wanted
the Holy Prophet to do things in accordance with their whimsical wishes
were termed Ignorant. (Qur’an 5: 50)

(2) God has referred to the blind tribal prejudices of the
idol-worshipping Arab as ignorance. (Qur’an 48: 26)

(3) The Holy Prophet's wives were warned not to appear among community
with the ornaments of the women of the earlier times. (Qur’an 33:33)

(4) God refers to the feeble-minded who, after the defeat of Muslims in
the Battle of Uhud, had lost their faith and their morale as ignorant.
(Qur’an 3:154)

(5) God tells the story of the nation of Prophet Moses who had refused
his orders to sacrifice a cow by replying, “Do you make fun of us?”
Then, Prophet Moses remarked, “I take shelter in God not to be one of
the ignorant ones.” (Qur’an 2: 67)

Depicting the miserable life of the idol-worshipping Arabs, Imam \`Ali
(a.s) refers to their stupidity.[^113]


