Chapter One : the Holy Prophet’s Ancestors
==========================================

**Muhammad's Lineage**

The Holy Prophet’s ancestors up to the twentieth before his father
included: Abd al-Muttalib, \`Abd Manaf, Qusay, Kilab, Murrah, Ka\`b,
Lu’ay, Ghalib, Fihr, Malik, al-Nazr, Kinanah, Khuzaymah, Mudrikah,
Ilyas, Muzar, Nizar, Ma\`ad, and \`Andan.[^1] However, there is no
agreement concerning his other ancestors up to Prophet Ishmael, Prophet
Abraham’s son.

[^2] It is narrated that when the Holy Prophet enumerated his ancestors,
he refused to call any other ancestor prior to \`Adnan,[^3] and
recommended others to do so.[^4] Regarding the work of genealogists
concerning his lineage and the names of his other ancestors between
\`Adnan and Isma\`il, the Holy Prophet used to say, “Genealogists
lied.”[^5]

The Arab tribes are divided into Qahtani and \`Adnani groups. Quraysh,
due to its relation with \`Adnan (the Holy Prophet's twentieth ancestor)
belongs to \`Adnan. All clans whose lineage leads to al-Nazr ibn Kinanah
are called qurayshi, since Quraysh was their nickname.[^6] The tribe of
Quraysh is of different branches,[^7] such as Banu-Makhzum, Banu-Zuhrah,
Banu-Umayyah, Banu-Sahm, Banu-Asad and Banu-Hashim[^8] to which the Holy
Prophet belongs.

**\`Abd al-Muttalib’s Personality**

Among the Holy Prophet’s ancestors, we have a lot of information about
\`Abd al-Muttalib, the first ancestor, since he lived at a time close to
the Islamic era. \`Abd al-Muttalib was a beloved, generous, wise and
unique personality.[^9]

He, like all great divine personalities, was the chief of his time.
Despite his long life, he never took on the corrupt traits prevalent in
the society of Mecca. In those days, nobody in Mecca believed in the
Resurrection; and even if this belief existed, it was not strong. Not
only did \`Abd al-Muttalib believe in the Resurrection but also
emphasized the chastisement of that Day; he used to remark:

“There is a world after this one in which good-wishers will get their
rewards and evildoers their punishment.”[^10]

Although a tribal dogmatism prevailed in the Arabian Peninsula in those
dark days and everybody defended the rights of his relatives without
considering justice, \`Abd al-Muttalib was not such a person. He put a
lot of pressure on one of his relatives, called Harb ibn Umayyah, to pay
the blood money of a Jew who had been killed under instigation and
persuasion.[^11] He used to encourage his children to stay away from the
nasty deeds of this world and engage themselves in good deeds.[^12]

\`Abd al-Muttalib believed in a number of traditions which were
approved of in Islam; among them we may refer to the prohibition of
drinking wine, the prohibition of adultery, the punishment of
adulterers; the cutting of the thief's hand, the banishment of ill-named
Meccan women, the prohibition of burying daughters alive, the
prohibition of marriage with intimates, the prohibition of being naked
in circumambulating the Kaaba, carrying out one's vows and obligations,
the observance of the sacred months, and finally engaging in mutual
cursing (mubahalah).[^13] It is narrated that \`Abd al-Muttalib was the
evidence of God and Abu-talib God's Representative.[^14]

**The Household of Monotheism**

Prophet Muhammad's household was a household of monotheism. According
to the beliefs of researchers who believed in Imamate, Prophet
Muhammad's father and his ancestors from Adam to \`Abdullah were all
monotheists. There was no atheist among them—a fact asserted by many
Qur'anic verses and narrations. The Holy Prophet is reported to have
said, “God led me from the clean men's loin into the clean women's wombs
and put me into your world and never let me be mingled with the
corruptions of the Ignorance Era.”[^15]

We know that no dirt is worse than atheism or disbelief. If ever there
were an atheist or disbeliever among the progeny or progenitors of
anybody, he would not be considered clean. The Twelver Imamiyyah
scholars believe that Abu-talib and aminah bint (daughter of) Wahab—the
Holy Prophet’s mother—were monotheists.[^16] In this regard, Imam \`Ali
(a.s) has stated:

“I swear to God that my father and ancestors, \`Abd al-Muttalib, Hashim
and \`Abd Manaf, did not believe in any form of idolatory. They were
true followers of Prophet Abraham’s religion and used to perform prayers
to God at the Kaaba.”[^17]


**Chapter Two : The Holy Prophet’s Childhood and Adolescence**

**The Birth**

The Arabs at the Ignorance Era did not have any constant historical
starting point; rather, they considered some significant local events,
such as the death of a distinguished man or a bloody war between two
tribes as a temporary historical point of reference.[^18] No such
historical point existed among all Arab tribes either. Rather, each
tribe used a specific historical point of reference of its own.[^19]

When the army of elephants, under the leadership of Abrahah, the
Ethiopian commander, came to Mecca to destroy God's House,[^20] it was
severely defeated through God's hidden power. This event overpassed all
other events and that year became the historical point of reference for
many years to come.[^21] On that same year, Prophet Muhammad (s) was born
in Mecca.[^22] This event, with regards to some pieces of evidence such
as the emigration (Hegira) in 622 AD and the Holy Prophet’s demise in
632 AD at the age of 60-63 years must have occurred in the years 569-570
AD.[^23]

**Infancy and Childhood**

When Prophet Muhammad (s) became two years old,[^24] his father,
\`Abdullah, on his mercantile journey from Damascus, passed away in
Yathrib, where he was buried.[^25] Referring to the orphanage of the Holy
Prophet, the Holy Qur'an states:

Did He not find you an orphan and give you shelter; and find you lost
(i.e. unrecognized by men) and guide them to you; and find you in want
and make you to be free from want? (93:6-8)

aminah's infant was breast-fed by his mother for the first days of his
birth;[^26] he was then breastfed by Thuwaybah, a female servant freed by
Abu-Lahab.[^27] According to Arab customs,[^28] he was submitted to a
nurse, named Halimah al-Sa\`diyyah, from the tribe of Banu-Sa\`d ibn
Bakr who used to live in the desert.[^29] Halimah breastfed the Holy
Prophet[^30] for two years, cared for him for five years and finally
submitted him to his family.[^31]

Most probably, they put the keeping of the Holy Prophet in the hands of
a desert-dwelling nurse because his wanted him to nourish in the clean
air of the desert and to stay away from the disease of cholera epidemic
in Mecca.[^32] Another reason was that they wanted him to learn the
eloquent Arabic from the nomadic tribes. Some historians have referred
to this factor.[^33] Attesting this fact, the Holy Prophet is reported to
have said, “I am more eloquent than all of you because I am both a
Qurayshite and have been breastfed among the tribe of Banu-Sa\`d ibn
Bakr.”[^34]

Concerning the adoption of Halimah as the special nurse for Muhammad
(s), there are some accounts in historical documents to the effect that
since Muhammad (s) was an orphan, nobody would accept to take care of
him. This was because a nurse would receive some money from the child's
parents and such a means was not available to Muhammad (s). Halimah had
to accept him since there was no other option for her to be busy.[^35]
Lack of acceptance of Muhammad (s) on the part of nurses due to his
orphanage does not seem accurate for the following reasons:

As we have already said, \`Abdullah passed away several months after
Muhammad's birth; thus, at that time, he was not yet an orphan.

Due to \`Abd al-Muttalib's privileges in Mecca and because of his high
socio-economic status, nurses and caretakers would not refrain from
taking care of him; rather, they were extremely zealous to take care of
such a family.

This topic has not been discussed in many historical documents.[^36]

**His Mother’s Demise and \`Abd al-Muttalib's Guardianship**

Upon receiving her child from Halimah, aminah, together with her child
and Umm-Ayman, \`Abdullah's bondwoman, made a journey to Yathrib with a
caravan in order to pay a visit to his maternal uncles.[^37] After a stay
of one month in Yathrib and on her way back to Mecca, she passed away at
a house called Abwa, where she was buried. At that time, Muhammad (s)
was six years old.[^38] Umm-Ayman took him to Mecca with the caravan and
submitted him to \`Abd al-Muttalib[^39] who then resumed Muhammad's
guardianship and took good care of him as long as he was alive. He used
to say, “Muhammad will definitely have a high status.”[^40]

**\`Abd al-Muttalib’s Demise and Abu-talib's Guardianship**

When Muhammad (s) was eight years old, \`Abd al-Muttalib died and
Abu-talib, his full uncle, resumed his guardianship.[^41] From then on,
Abu-talib, a generous and respectful dignitary, became Muhammad's
guardian[^42] although he was extremely poor.[^43] He was a man of high
self-esteem among Quraysh.[^44] He was fond of THE Holy Prophet Muhammad
(s) whom he loved more than his children.[^45]

Abu-talib's wife, Fatimah bint Asad, had a significant role in the
education of Muhammad (s). She did her best in this regard. She loved
him like a genuine mother and preferred him to her own children. Never
did Muhammad (s) forget her care; he always referred to her as his
genuine and natural mother.[^46]

**Journey to Damascus and the Monk's Prediction**

On his journey to Damascus for trade, Abu-talib accompanied Muhammad
with him according to his request while he was 8, 9, 12 or 13 years of
age, according to different documents. When the caravan reached
Busr,[^47] they rested next to a hermitage in which there was a monk,
called Bahira, who was a well-known Christian priest.

Among the crowd, the monk paid a special attention to Muhammad in whom
he could see some signs of the expected Prophet. Talking with Muhammad
(s) for a short time and asking him some questions, the monk predicted
his prophethood and advised Abu-talib to take good care of and protect
him against the Jews' danger molestations.[^48] However, the following
points should be taken into consideration concerning this event:

(1) This event is referred to in some historical records briefly; while
in others, it is dealt with in more details. The essence of the event is
not doubtful, because in several verses of the Holy Qur'an, the
predictions of previous Prophets about Prophet Muhammad have been
stated.[^49]

(2) The signs that the religious scholars had about Muhammad (s) were
of two kinds: indicative of his personal life and body features (for
instance, his orphanage, facial features and his name) and others
related to his family background (such as his being an Arab and his
marriage).One of the most distinguished signs on his body was a speckle
(birthmark) between his shoulders, which is called the Prophet's speckle
or the Prophet’s seal.[^50]

(3) Bahira's prediction was only new to the people of the caravan
because Abu-talib and Muhammad's other close relatives had already been
aware of his bright future.[^51]

**Historical Distortions by the Christians**

Some Orientalists have distorted the event of Muhammad's encounter with
Bahira, claiming that during this visit, Muhammad learned the teachings
of the Torah and the Gospel.[^52] Will Durant, rather subtly, refers to
this event:

“When Muhammad was twelve years old, his uncle Abu-talib took him with
a caravan to Busr, a city in Damascus. He probably learned some aspects
of Judaism and Christianity during this journey.”[^53]

To answer these irrational claims and distortions, the following points
should be considered:

(1) Historians unanimously acknowledge that Muhammad (s) was
illiterate.

(2) At that time, he was less than thirteen years old.

(3) The interval between this visit and his prophethood was a long
time.

(4) His meeting with Bahira was rather short; it included the monk’s
questions and Muhammad's replies. How would it be possible to imagine
that an illiterate boy within a short period of time could have learned
the aspects of Judaism and Christianity so well that he could have
presented it as a complete religion at the age of forty?

(5) Had Muhammad (s) learnt anything from the monk, the aggressive and
excuse-seeking Quraysh would have used it against him. However, there is
no sign of this aggression against him in the history of Islam. Quoting
Quraysh's accusations and answering them, the Qur'an does not make any
reference to such an event.

(6) If such a thing were correct, how come those people on the caravan
did not refer to it?

p(7) If such an account were correct, why did Christian natives of
Damascus not claim at that time that they had been Muhammad's
instructors?

(8) If this claim were correct, Islamic teachings would be the same as
those of the Torah and the Gospel. However, these teachings are not only
contradictory, but also most of the Jewish and Christian ideas and
teachings of the Torah and the Gospel have been rejected by the Holy
Qur'an.[^54] Once, \`Umar ibn al-Khattab asked the Holy Prophet to let
him write down the narrations which he had heard from the Jews. The Holy
Prophet remarked, “Are you confused in your own religion like the Jews
and the Christians? I have brought you this holy and luminous religion.
If Moses were alive, he would follow my way now.”[^55]

In Medina, where a great number of Jews used to live, Muhammad (s) used
to show his disagreements in many religious plans and orders with the
Jews[^56] so much so that they used to say “This man wants to disagree
with us in all of our programs.”[^57]

Constan Virgil Giorgio, a Christian who desired to spread lies against
Islam, has narrated the event with so many distortions and illogical
details that his account is not only contrary to any standard of
thinking but also in disharmony with the claims of the Christians
themselves. He writes:

“Ibn Husham, an Arab narrator, writes: Contrary to people's beliefs,
Bahira was not Christian; he was Manichean, a follower of a man called
Mani who claimed prophethood at the time of the Sasanids. Bahram I, the
Sasanid King, ordered him to be crucified across the entrance of Gondi
Shapur in Khuzestan in 276 AD. Mani and his followers, including Bahira,
believed that God is not in the monopoly of a specific nation; rather,
he belonged to men all over the world. This is because all the world
nations belong to Him and God will send a prophet to a nation to speak
with the people in their own language whenever He wishes so.”[^58]

By the name Ibn Husham, the writer most probably refers to \`Abd
al-Malik ibn Husham (213 AH), the author of the famous book al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah, one of the significant documents of the history of Islam.
However, there is neither any mention of the word Manichean relating to
this issue in Ibn Husham's book nor in any older Islamic sources. This
man is introduced as either Christian or even rarely Jew. Now the
question is: How did Giorgio get this information?

Furthermore, Manichaeism did not have any follower in Damascus; the
center for Manichaeism was Iran. In the word of a scholar, Manichaeism
is ascribed to Bahira for purpose of establishing that Islam has
imitated the uniqueness of God and the universalism of Islam from
Manichaeism. During the last centuries, Islam has been confronted with
similar issues.

It is not important for the accusers to ascribe the most advanced form
of thoughts to the weakened religions because these old religions do not
have genuine followers to be proud of. Islam stands so high that the
world of Christianity even centuries after the Crusade campaigns, still
worries about the expansion of Islam and tries helplessly to
de-emphasize Islam's glories.[^59]


