Chapter Three : the Holy Prophet’s Youth
========================================

**Hilf al-Fuzul**

Hilf al-Fuzul,[^60] the most important Qurayshi treaty,[^61] was held
among some branches of Quraysh tribe, because one of the Banu-Zubayd
tribe had entered Mecca and sold some goods to al-\`as ibn Wa'il of
Banu-Sahm. The goods were delivered to al-\`as ibn Wa'il who refused to
pay the price to the seller.

A man from Banu-Zubayd then came to Wa'il to receive his money, but he
received nothing. There was a strong tribal system in Arabia in those
days and every tribe tried to defend its own interests and those of its
members. If a foreigner was wronged, there was nobody to help or protect
him. The Zubaydi man had to climb Abu-Qubays Mount and say passionate
poems to let the leaders of Quraysh hear what injustice he had suffered.
At that time, these leaders had gathered below the mountain to have a
meeting.

Having heard the man's call for justice, Zubayr ibn \`Abd al-Muttalib
encouraged the leaders of Banu-Hashim, i.e. \`Abd al-Muttalib,
Banu-Zuhrah, Banu-Tamim and Banu-Harith (who were among the prominent
clans of Quraysh) to gather at the home of \`Abdullah ibn Jad\`an
al-Taymi. They convened a treaty according to which nobody, either weak
or poor, was to be the subject of any act of injustice. Then they went
to the home of al-\`as and received the money for the Zubaydi man.[^62]
At that time, Muhammad (s) was twenty years old.[^63]

The participation of Muhammad (s) in this treaty was a brave act. It is
interpreted now as a symbolic act of protection of human rights in that
backward and ignorant society. His brave and just act is appreciated
when we notice that the youngsters of his age in those days were
participating in pleasure-seeking parties and did not have any concept
of protecting the oppressed or carrying out justice. After prophethood,
he used to remember his participation in that treaty with a lot of joy.
He said:

“I took part in a treaty at the home of \`Abdullah ibn Jad\`an which
made me even more delighted than receiving red-haired camels. If at this
era of Islam I am invited to such a pact, I will joyfully accept
it.”[^64]

Since this pact was superior to any other treaty, it had the name of
Hilf al-Fuzul.[^65] This pact was a stronghold for the homeless and the
miserable. Later on, it was repeatedly used to protect the oppressed
ones in Mecca against tyrants and oppressors.[^66]

**Second Journey to Damascus**

Khadijah, daughter of Khuwaylid, was a rich, honorable and dignified
trader who used to employ men for trade purposes, provide them with
capital and pay them wages in return.[^67] When Muhammad (s) was
twenty-five years old,[^68] Abu-talib said to him, “I have become broke
and empty-handed. Now a caravan is on its way to Damascus. I wish you to
go to Khadijah and ask for a job.”

At this time, Khadijah had become aware of Muhammad's traits of honesty
and good manners. She sent an errand to him saying, “If you accept the
supervision of my caravan, I will pay you more than others and I would
send my special servant, Maysarah, to help you.” Muhammad (s) accepted
this offer[^69] and accompanied the caravan to Damascus accompanied by
Maysarah.[^70] He could make more money than others.[^71]

Maysarah observed such feats of magnanimity in Muhammad (s) that he was
surprised. During this trip, Nustur the monk predicted his prophethood.
He observed that Muhammad (s) had some arguments with a man over trade.
That man said, “You should swear to Lat and \`Uzza so that I could
accept your statement.” Muhammad (s) replied, “I have never sworn to Lat
and \`Uzza in my whole life.”[^72] On his return to Mecca, Maysarah told
Khadijah what he had seen in Muhammad (s).[^73]

**Marrying Khadijah**

Khadijah was a farsighted, provident, honorable and dignified woman of
noble lineage. She was superior to all women of Quraysh.[^74] Due to her
high moral standards, she was nicknamed tahirah (immaculate)[^75] and
Sayyidah (doyenne) of Quraysh.[^76] She is said to have married twice but
her previous husbands had died.[^77] Every Qurayshi nobleman desired to
marry her.[^78] Some well-known persons such as \`Uqbah ibn Abi-Mu\`it,
Abu-Jahl, and Abu-Sufyan had asked her for marriage but she always
turned them down.[^79]

On the other hand, Khadijah was a relative of Muhammad (s) and both of
them had the common ancestor of Qusay. She had recognized the bright
future for Muhammad (s),[^80] and was pleased to accept him as her
spouse.[^81] She made an offer of marriage and he consulted with his
uncles who accepted this marriage, which took place in a family
gathering.[^82] It is said that at that time, Khadijah was forty years
old and Muhammad (s) was twenty-five.[^83] She was his first wife.[^84]

**Installation of the Black Stone**

Muhammad's excellent manners, honesty and decency had attracted the
Meccan people so much that everybody called him amin meaning
trustworthy.[^85] He was so reliable that they decided to use his good
judgment in the installation of the Black Stone.[^86] He resolved their
problem through high prudence and discretion. Due to the flood which
descended from the mountains of Mecca, the walls of the Kaaba had broken
on several sides. This event took place when he was thirty-five years
old.

Up to that day, the Kaaba had no ceiling and its walls were low. For
this reason, its internal treasures were unprotected. People of Quraysh
decided to build a roof; however, they were not able to carry out their
plan. After the event of the flood, the leaders of the Meccan tribes
decided to destroy the building to reconstruct it with a roof over it.

At the time of the reconstruction, there were disagreements among the
tribes over the location of the Black Stone. Once again, competitions
and resorting to tribal pride surfaced. Each tribe desperately tried to
have the honor of installing the stone. Some tribes, by thrusting their
hands into a vessel full of blood, vowed not to let any other tribe have
the honor of the installation.

Finally, upon the suggestion made by the eldest man of Quraysh, they
decided to follow the opinion of the first person who would enter the
Mosque from the entrance called Bab al-safa. Suddenly, Muhammad (s)
entered the mosque from that direction. Everybody declared that Muhammad
(s) was trustworthy and they would listen to his judgment.

A piece of cloth was brought in by the order of the trustworthy man of
Quraysh i.e. Muhammad (s). He spread the piece of cloth, wrapped the
stone inside it and asked the Qurayshi leaders to take each corner of it
and collectively carry it to the wall. As soon as the stone was taken to
the wall, Muhammad (s) installed it in its original location.[^87] With
his delicate discretion and prudence, he solved their problem stopping a
potentially huge amount of bloodshed.

**\`Ali in the School of Muhammad**

A devastating famine occurred in Mecca after the reconstruction of the
Kaaba and several years before Muhammad's prophethood. Abu-talib, the
Holy Prophet's uncle, was insolvent. Muhammad made the proposal to his
other uncle \`Abbas who was one of the richest members of Quraysh that
each one of them would take one of Abu-talib's children to his home to
protect them against famine. \`Abbas accepted this proposal. Both of
them went to Abu-talib and offered so.

Thus, \`Abbas took Ja\`far, and Muhammad (s) took \`Ali home to protect
and educate. \`Ali stayed at Muhammad's home until he was promoted to
the status of prophethood. Then, \`Ali confirmed and followed him.[^88]
At that time, \`Ali (a.s) was six years old and his personality was in
the making.[^89] Muhammad (s) wanted to compensate for the hardships
Abu-talib and his wife, Fatimah bint Asad, had gone through when he was
young by adopting one of his children, namely \`Ali.

He saw \`Ali as the most competent of Abu-talib's children. This is
evident by Muhammad's remark after he had adopted \`Ali, “I have
selected the one who has been selected by God to help me.”[^90] Muhammad
(s) showed a lot of respect and affection to \`Ali (a.s) and did
everything possible to educate him well. Fazl ibn \`Abbas, one of
\`Ali's cousins, says:

I asked my father, “Which one of his children did the Prophet love the
most?” He replied, “\`Ali ibn Abi-talib.” I said, “I have asked you of
the Prophet's sons.” He replied, “The Prophet loves \`Ali more than any
of his sons and showed affection towards him more than others. The
Prophet would never let go of \`Ali except for those days when he
attended Khadijah's caravan. We have never seen a father more
affectionate towards his son than the Prophet and we have never seen a
son more obedient to his father than \`Ali to the Prophet.”[^91]

After his prophethood, Muhammad (s) had so much emphasis over \`Ali's
education in the Islamic issues that if he received a Divine revelation
at night, he would teach it to \`Ali before dawn. If he received Divine
revelation during the day, he would inform \`Ali of it before
sunset.[^92] Once, \`Ali (a.s) was asked, “How come you learned more
narrations from the Prophet than his other followers?” He answered,
“Whenever I asked the Prophet anything, he would answer; and whenever I
was silent, he used to start telling me a narration.”[^93]

When \`Ali (a.s) was the caliph, he referred to his religious education
with the following remarks:

“You, followers of the Prophet, are well aware of my close relationship
with him; and you know that when I was a small boy, he used to embrace
me close to his breast and let me sleep in his bed in such a way that I
could touch his body and feel his smell; he even used to put food into
my mouth. I used to follow the Prophet like a child going after his
mother.

He used to teach me one of his ethical virtues each day and ordered me
to adopt that virtue. Each year, he used to pray God at the Hara'
Mountain; I was the only person to be with him. When he received the
Divine revelation, I could vividly hear Satan's voice. I asked the
Prophet what that noise was. He answered that it was Satan's noise and
that it had a terrible sensation for not being obedient on the earth. He
says that I could hear what he heard and see what he saw; the difference
was that he was the Prophet and I was not; I was his vizier and
representative for doing good on the earth.”[^94]

This discourse might just refer to the Prophet's prayer at Hara’ after
his prophethood, but since most of the Prophet's prayers were done at
Hara’ prior to his prophethood, we can be sure that this issue is
related to the era prior to his prophethood and Satan's noise of
discomfort is related to the descent of the first revelations. Anyway,
\`Ali's spirit and continuous education from the Prophet prepared him to
see and hear things which were not possible for ordinary people to hear
or see. These were due to his sensitive mind, piercing eyes, sensitive
ears and specific insight.

[^1] Tarikh al-tabari 2:191; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 1:13; tabarsi,
I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 5-6.

[^2] Ibn al-Athir, op cit, pp. 13; al-Bayhaqi, Dala'il al-Nubuwwah, pp.
118; Mas\`udi, al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 195-196; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:33; Ibn \`Anbah, \`Umdat al-talib, pp. 28.

[^3] Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:56; Al-Kalbi, Jamharat al-Nasab,
pp. 17.

[^4] Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib 1:155; tabarsi, op cit, pp. 6; al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 15:105.

[^5] Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, pp. 155; Ibn \`Anbah, op cit, p28.

[^6] Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, pp. 154; Ibn \`Anbah, op cit, pp. 26;
tabarsi, op cit, pp. 6; Ibn Qutaybah, al-Ma\`arif, pp. 67; tabarsi,
Majma\` al-Bayan 10:546; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:96; Ibn
\`Abd-Rabbih, al-\`Iqd al-Farid 3:312; Ibn Kathir, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 1:84; Muhammad Amin al-Baghdadi, Saba’ik al-Dhahab, pp.
62, Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 1:204.

Some genealogists have considered the children of Fihr ibn Malik ibn
Nizar as part of Quraysh. See Kalbi, op cit, pp. 21; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit,
p55; Ibn Anbah, op cit, pp. 26; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 96; Muhammad
Amin al-Baghdadi, op cit, pp. 62; Ibn Wazih, op cit, pp. 204; Ibn Hazm,
Jamharat Ansab al-\`Arab, pp. 12; Halabi, al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah
1:25-26.

There are some other statements regarding this issue. See al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 1:27.

[^7] The Arab groups and tribes are given different names, such as
sha\`b, qabilah, \`imarah, batn, fadkhdh and fasilah in accordance with
their extension and size. For instance, Khuzaymah was a sha\`b; Kinanah
qabilah, Quraysh \`imarah, Qusay batn, Hashim fakhdh, and \`Abbas
fasilah. See Ibn \`Abd-Rabbih, al-\`Iqd al-Farid 3:330; Husayn Mu'nis,
the History of Quraysh.

On the basis of this typology, some researchers have attributed Quraysh
to qabilah and some to \`imarah. But the very nature of this typology is
a suspect; some researchers would not accept it as such. See The History
of Quraysh, pp. 215-216. Here, we will refer to Quraysh as a qabilah
(tribe).

[^8] Mas\`udi states that the tribe of Quraysh had twenty-five branches
and he mentions them by names. See Muruj al-Dhahab 2:269.

[^9] Halabi, op cit, pp. 6.

[^10] op cit, p6; Shukri al-alusi; Bulugh al-Irab 1:324.

[^11] Halabi, op cit, pp. 6, al-alusi, op cit, pp. 323; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:15, al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:73.

[^12] Halabi, op cit, pp. 7; Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 2:109.

[^13] al-alusi, op cit, pp. 324, Ibn Wazih, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:7;
al-Sirah al-Halabiyyah 1:7; Shaykh al-saduq, al-Khisal 2:312-313.

[^14] saduq, al-I\`tiqadat, pp. 135; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 15:117;
Usul al-Kafi 1:445.

Among the issues concerning \`Abd al-Muttalib is his vow to sacrifice
one of his children for God. The report on this vow, despite its fame,
suffers some documental considerations and needs further clarifications.
See \`Ali Dawani, The History Of Islam From The Start To Hegira, pp.
54-59; Shaykh al-saduq, Man-La-Yahzuruhu’l-Faqih 3:89.

[^15] saduq, op cit, pp. 135; al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 117; Mufid, Awa’il
al-Maqalat, pp. 12; tabarsi, Majma\` al-Bayan 4:322.

Some researchers have interpreted this narration in the form of the
cleanliness of the progenitor. See Sayyid Hashim Rasuli Mahallati, Some
Lectures On The Analytic History Of Islam 1:64.

[^16] Mufid, op cit, saduq, op cit.

Some Sunni distinguished scholars, such as al-Fakhr al-Razi and
al-Suyuti, believe the same thing in this regard as the Twelver Shi\`ah.
See Bihar al-Anwar 15:118-122.

[^17] saduq, Kamal al-Din, pp. 175; al-Ghadir 7:387.

[^18] For further information regarding these events, see Mas\`udi,
al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 172-181; Muhammad Ibrahim ayati, The History
Of The Prophet Of Islam, pp. 26-27.

[^19] Mas\`udi, op cit, pp. 27.

[^20] Shaykh al-tusi, al-Amali, pp. 80-82; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, pp.
94-97; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 44-55; al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 67-69;
Muhammad Ibn Habib, al-Munammaq, pp. 70-77.

[^21] Prior to the event of the Elephant Army, Quraysh had appointed the
death of Qusay as a historical point of reference. See Tarikh
al-Ya\`qubi 2:4.

[^22] Shaykh al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi 1:439; Ibn Wazih, Tarikh
al-Ya\`qubi 2:4; Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 2:274; al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar 15:250-252; Halabi, op cit, pp. 95; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, pp.
72-73; Ibn Kathir, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:201; Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat
al-Kubra 1:101; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 1:14; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah
al-Nubawiyyah 1:167; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, The Clarification Of The
History Of Damascus; Ibn Ishaq, al-Siyar wal-Maghazi, pp. 61.

[^23] \`Ali Akbar Fayyaz, the History of Islam, pp. 62; \`Abbas Ziryab,
Sirat Rasulillah, pp. 86-87; Sayyid Ja\`far Shahidi, Tarikh Tahlili
Islam ta Payan Umawiyyan, pp. 37.

Concerning the exact date of the Holy Prophet's birthday, whether it
occurred in the Elephant Year or prior or after it, the matter is not
clear. For Further information, see Muhammad The Last Of The Prophets
1:176-177; the article of Sayyid Ja\`far Shahidi in Rasuli Mahallati’s
Lessons from the Analytical History of Islam 1:107; Ibn Kathir, al-Sirah
al-Nabawiyyah 1:203; Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 1:281-282; Sayyid Hasan
Taqizadah, From Parviz to Genghis, pp. 153; Husayn Mu’nis, the History
of Quraysh, pp. 153-159.

Furthermore, some European historians explained the motive behind
Abraha's military campaign to be an ambition for territorial expansion
against Iran via the northern part of Arabia, which took place due to
the Roman instigations. In Muslim reference books, the motive is said to
be religious due to the competition between the Church in Yemen and the
Kaaba in Hijaz. See Fayyaz, op cit, pp. 62; Abu’-l-Qasim Payandeh,
introduction of the translation of Qur’an into Persian.

[^24] Shaykh al-Kulayni, op cit, pp. 439; Ibn Wazih, op cit, pp. 6.
al-Karajaki, Kanz al-Fawa'id 2:167.

The age of the Holy Prophet at his father's death is also recorded as
eleven months and twenty-eight days. See Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra
1:100.

[^25] Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 17:282; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:99; Mas\`udi,
al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 196; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 2:176;
Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:10.

[^26] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:6; Halabi, op cit, 1:143.

[^27] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:6; I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 6; al-Bayhaqi, op cit,
pp. 110; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 1:15; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar
15:384.

[^28] Halabi, op cit, 1:146.

[^29] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:7; Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:171; Ibn Sa\`d, op
cit, pp. 110; Mas\`udi, al-Tanbih wa’l-Ishraf, pp. 196, Muruj al-Dhahab,
2:274; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 6; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, pp. 101-102;
Ibn Kathir, al-Siyar wal-Maghazi, pp. 49.

[^30] Al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:94; al-Maqdisi, al-Bad’ wal-Tarikh
4:131; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 15:401; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:112.

[^31] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:7; Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, 1:33;
al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 44; Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 2:275.

[^32] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 13:203; al-Majlisi, op
cit, pp. 401.

[^33] Ja\`far Subhani, Forugh Abadiyyat 1:159; Sayyid Ja\`far Murtaza
al-\`amili, al-sahih min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam 1:81.

[^34] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah, 1:176; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp.
113; Halabi, op cit, pp. 146; Khargushi, Sharaf Al-Nabi, pp. 146.

It is said while the Holy Prophet was living with Halimah al-Sa\`diyyah
in the desert when the case of opening his chest took place. However,
experts in the history of Islam regard this as invented and false for
many reason. See Sayyid Ja\`far Murtaza al-\`amili, al-sahih min Sirat
al-Nabi al-A\`zam 1:82; Sayyid Hashim Rasuli Mahallati, Lessons From The
Analytical History Of Islam 1:189, 204; Sheikh Muhmud Abu-Rayyah,
Azwa'un \`Ala al-Sunnah al-Muhammadiyyah 1:175-177.

[^35] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:171-172; al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 93, Ibn
Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 110-111.

[^36] Ibn Shahrashub, a distinguished narrator, has dealt with this
issue but has not dealt with the Holy Prophet’s orphanage. See
al-Manaqib 1:33.

[^37] Salma, the mother of \`Abd al-Muttalib was from Yathrib and from
Banu’l-Najjar. See al-Bayhaqi, op cit, 1:121.

[^38] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, p65; al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 94 Ibn Sa\`d, op
cit, pp. 116; Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 177; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, p121;
tabarsi, op cit, pp. 9; saduq, Kamal al-Din 1:172; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi
2:7; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 1:223.

[^39] Halabi, op cit, 1:172.

[^40] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:178; saduq, op cit, pp. 171; al-Majlisi, op
cit, pp. 406; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:9.

[^41] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 189; al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 406; tabari,
op cit, 2:194.

[^42] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi, pp. 1; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:119; al-Majlisi,
op cit, pp. 407; al-Suhayli, al-Rawz al-Anif 1:193.

[^43] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:11; Jawad \`Ali, al-Mufassal 4:82.

[^44] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 15:219.

[^45] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:119; Ibn Shahrashub, op cit, 1:36;
al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 407; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib Tarikh
Dimashq 1:285.

[^46] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:11; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, 1:14; Usul
al-Kafi 1:453.

[^47] A village in Hawran, a province of Damascus. See Yaqut al-Hamawi,
Mu\`jam al-Buldan 1:441.

[^48] This issue is brought up by the following Muslim historians and
narrators: Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:191-193; tabari, Tarikh
al-Umam wa’l-Muluk 2:195; Sunan al-Tirmidhi 5:90, h. 2620; Ibn Ishaq,
al-Siyar wa’l-Maghazi, pp. 73; Ibn Sa\`d, Al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:121;
Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 2:286; saduq, Kamal al-Din 1:182-186;
al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:96; al-Bayhaqi, Dala'il al-Nubuwwah
1:195; tabarsi, I\`lam al-Wara, pp. 17-18; Ibn Shahrashub, Manaqib 1:15;
\`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 1:270, 354; Ibn Kathir,
Sirat al-Nabi 1:243-249, al-Bidayah wa’l-Nihayah 2:229-230; al-Sirah
al-Halabiyyah 1:141; al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 15:409.

[^49] Qur’an 2:41, 42, 89, 146; 7:157; 6: 20; 61: 6.

[^50] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:193; al-Bayhaqi, op cit, pp. 195; Sunan
al-Tirmidhi 5:590; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib Tarikh Dimashq 1:278;
Ibn Kathir, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:245; saih al-Bukhari 5:28.

[^51] Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:11; al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:81; Usul
al-Kafi 1:447.

[^52] Gustav Le Bon, The Islamic And Arab Civilization, pp. 101, Igna'z
Goldziher, Doctrine and Law in Islam, pp. 25; Muhammad Ghazzali, Trial
of Goldziher the Zionist, pp. 47; Karl Brockleman, History of Muslim
Peoples, pp. 34; Treason in Historical Accounts 1:220-225

[^53] Will Durant, The Story of Civilization, pp. 207.

[^54] Qur’an 4:47,51,171; 5:72-73; 9:630.

[^55] Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Safinat al-Bihar 2:727; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Nihayah fi Gharib al-hadith wa’l-Athar 5:282.

[^56] Murtaza al-\`amili, al-sahih mi Sirat al-Rasul al-A\`zam, pp.
106.

[^57] Halabi, op cit, 2:332.

[^58] Muhammad, a prophet who should be re-evaluated, pp. 5. This book
includes weak points, errors and distortions which decrease the
scientific value of its content. The style of the translator, too, is
quite peculiar; see Nashr Danish Magazine, eighth year, Issue, 2, pp.
52, Article: a phenomenon called Zabihollah Mansuri, written by Karim
Emami.

[^59] Muhammad, the last of the prophets 1:188, the article of Sayyid
Ja\`far Shahidi. Some contemporary Iranian historians have raised some
doubts on the issue of the Holy Prophet’s visit to Bahira, such doubts
and disturbances should be taken care of. We shouldn’t that even if we
superficially believe that this visit has not taken place, nothing is
taken away from the grandeur of the Holy Prophet, because there were
numerous other predictions of the coming prophet beside Bahira. The
reason why we have brought up the claims of the Orientalists here is to
show that they have used this issue to make some distortions in the
history of Islam.

[^60] One of the events in which the Holy Prophet is said to have
participated in while he was young was the war of al-Fujjar. It is said
that this war had taken place prior to Hilf al-Fuzul when the Holy
Prophet was 14-20 years old. However, since his participation in this
war is doubtful, we will not follow it up here. See al-sahih min Sirat
al-Nabi al-A\`zam 1:95-97; Some analytical lessons of the history of
Islam 1:303-503.

[^61] Ibn Sa\`d, al-tabaqat al-Kubra 1:128; Muhammad Ibn Habib,
al-Munammaq, pp. 52.

[^62] Muhammad Ibn Habib, op cit, pp. 52-53; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 128;
Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:13; Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:142;
al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 2:12.

[^63] Muhammad Ibn Sa\`d, op cit. It is recorded that the age of the
Holy Prophet was even older at this time. Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:13;
al-Munammaq, pp. 53; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 15:225.

[^64] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 142; Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi, op cit, pp. 13;
al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 16; Muhammad Ibn Habib, op cit, pp. 188.

[^65] Muhammad Ibn Habib, op cit, pp. 54-55

[^66] al-Buladhari 2:13. The memory of this treaty was still fresh at
the start of Islam. For instance, during the reign of Mu\`awiyah
al-Walid ibn \`Utbah ibn Abi-Sufyan was the governor of Medina. He
quarreled with Imam al-Husayn on a financial issue about the grove of
Dhu’l-Marwah. Imam al-Husayn said, “Is al-Walid acting arrogantly
against me because he has ruling authority? I swear by Allah, if he does
not give me my due, I shall take my sword and stand in the Mosque of
Allah calling by the name of Hilf al-Fuzul.

” When his word was conveyed to \`Abdullah ibn al-Zubayr, he cried out,
“By Allah I swear, if al-Husayn calls by the name of Hilf al-Fuzul, I
shall certainly take my sword and support him; and then, either he will
be given his due or we die altogether.” When al-Walid was informed of
these situation, he had to give al-Husayn his due until he pleased him.
See Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:142; al-Buladhari, op cit, 2:14; Halabi, op
cit, 1:215; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, 15:226; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 2:42.

[^67] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:199; Ibn Ishaq, al-Siyar wa’l-Maghazi, pp.
81. Sibt ibn al-Jawzi, in Tadhkirat al-Khawass pp. 301, says “Khadijah
used to employ them in the form of limited partnership.” Ibn al-Athir,
in Usd al-Ghabah 1:16, says: “She used to employ either in the form of
limited partnership or on a wage-system.”

[^68] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:129.

[^69] There are some pieces of evidence which show that the Holy
Prophet’s job was in the form of limited participation and not on the
basis of wage-earning system. See al-sahih min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam
1:112.

[^70] Ibn Husham, op cit, pp. 199; Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 81.

[^71] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, pp. 130.

[^72] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 130.

[^73] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 82; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, p131; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:39; Tarikh al-tabari 2:196; al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il
al-Nubuwwah 1:215; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:435; al-Dulabi,
al-Dhurriyyah al-tahirah, pp. 45-46.

[^74] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:200-201; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:131;
al-Bayhaqi, op cit, 1:215; al-Dulabi, op cit, pp. 46; Ibn al-Athir,
al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:39.

[^75] Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:434; Halabi, op cit, 1:224;
\`Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-sahabah 4:281; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr,
al-Isi\`ab 4:279.

[^76] Halabi, op cit, 1:224.

[^77] Her previous husbands were \`Utayq ibn \`a’idh and Abu-Halah Hind
ibn Nabbash. See Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:434; Ibn Hajar, op cit,
pp. 281; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, op cit, pp. 280; Halabi, op cit, 1:229;
Khargushi, Sharaf Al-Nabi, pp. 201; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib
Tarikh Dimashq 1:302.

According to some documents, Lady Khadijah had never married before the
Holy Prophet who, accordingly, was her first and last husband. Some
contemporary experts emphasize this point. Murtaza al-\`amili, al-sahih
min Sirat al-Nabi al-A\`zam 1:121.

[^78] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, al-Bayhaqi, op cit, pp. 215; tabari, op cit,
2:197; Halabi, op cit, Ibn al-Athir, op cit, Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil
fi’l-Tarikh 2:40.

[^79] al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 16:22.

[^80] al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 20-21; Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:203; Ibn
Shahrashub, Manaqib 1:41.

[^81] al-Majlisi, op cit, pp. 21-23.

[^82] Ibn Ishaq, op cit, pp. 82; al-Buladhari, Ansab al-Ashraf 1:98;
Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:16; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:40;
Dulabi; op cit, pp. 46; Halabi, op cit, pp. 227; al-Majlisi, op cit,
16:19.

[^83] al-Buladhari, op cit, pp. 98; Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:132; tabari, op
cit, 2:196: Halabi, op cit, pp. 228; Ibn \`Abd al-Barr, al-Isi\`ab
4:280; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:435; al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:39.

Regarding Lady Khadijah’s age, there are various statements and
records. See Amir Muhanna al-Khayyami, Zawjat al-Nabi wa-Awladuhu, pp.
53-54.

[^84] Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:201; Dulabi, op cit, pp. 49; al-Bayhaqi, op
cit, 1:216; Khargushi, op cit, pp. 201; \`Abd al-Qadir Badran, Tahdhib
Tarikh Dimashq 1:302; Ibn al-Athir, Usd al-Ghabah 5:434.

[^85] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:121; Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:210; al-Bayhaqi,
op cit, 1:211; al-Majlisi, op cit, 15:369.

[^86] This stone, being the most sacred component of the Kaaba, is
introduced as a heavenly stone which became a component of Kaaba by
Prophet Abraham due to God's command. See al-Majlisi, op cit, 12:84, 99;
al-Azraqi, Akhbar Makkah 1:62-63. Al-Hajar al-Aswad is a reddish-black,
oval piece of stone set in the eastern side of the Kaaba at a height of
one meter and a half from the ground. It is the center of
circumambulation.

[^87] Ibn Sa\`d, op cit, 1:145-146, Tarikh al-Ya\`qubi 2:14-15;
al-Majlisi, op cit, 15:337-338; al-Buladhari, op cit, 1:99-100;
Mas\`udi, Muruj al-Dhahab 2:271-272. Some historians have given other
reasons for the reconstruction of the Kaaba. However, every historian
has referred to the Holy Prophet’s Judgment. See Ibn Ishaq, al-Siyar
wal-Maghazi, pp. 103; Ibn Husham, op cit, 1:205; al-Bayhaqi, Dala'il
al-Nubuwwah.

[^88] Ibn Husham, al-Sirah al-Nabawiyyah 1:262; tabari, Tarikh al-Umam
wa’l-Muluk 2:213; Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil fi’l-Tarikh 2:58; al-Buladhari,
Ansab al-Ashraf 2:90; Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 13:119,
and 1:15.

[^89] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah 1:15; Ibn Shahrashub,
Manaqib, 2:180.

[^90] Abu’l-Faraj al-Isfahani, Maqatil al-talibiyyin, pp. 15.

[^91] Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, op cit, pp. 13, pp. 200.

[^92] Shaykh al-tusi, al-Amali, pp. 624.

[^93] Al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa', pp. 170.

[^94] Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 192.


