5. Intercession: About What?
============================

The intercession in creation is related to every cause in this world of
the cause and effect.

As for the intercession in matters of legislation and judge­ment, some
of them wipe out every sin and its punishment, right from polytheism to
the smallest one. For example, repentance done, and true faith acquired,
before the Day of Resurrection. Some wipe out effects of some particular
sins, like some specified good deeds. As for the issue under discussion,
i.e., the intercession of the prophets and other believers on the Day of
Judgement, we have already explained that it shall avail those believers
who might have committed big sins, but whose faith Allâh is pleased
with.

**6. WHEN WILL INTERCESSION BE EFFECTED?**

We are talking here too about the intercession on the Day of Judgement
to waive off the punishment of sins. We have earlier quoted the verses
of the Chapter 42 (The Clothed One): Every soul is held in pledge for
what it has earned, except the people of the right hand, in gardens they
shall ask each other about the guilty (74:38-41) . As explained earlier,
the verses clearly say who would benefit from the intercession, and who
wont. They also imply that the intercession will get the wrong-doing
believers released from fetters of their sins, and protect them from
abiding for ever in the hell. But there is nothing to show that
intercession might avail against the turmoils of the Day of
Resurrection. Rather, the verse proves that it will be effective only
for rescuing the guilty believers from the hell, or preventing them from
entering into it.

It may be inferred from the verses that this talk will take place after
the people of the garden have settled in the gardens, and the people of
the hell in the hell; and that the intercessors shall then intercede for
a group of the guilty ones and rescue them from the hell. The phrase,
"in gardens", implies it, as does the question, "What has brought you
into hell?" Both phrases imply a more or less permanent abode. Likewise,
the comment, "so the intercession . . . avails them not", denotes
something occurring in present time i.e. after both groups have settled
in their abodes.

As for al-Barzakh ( = the period between death and the Day of
Resurrection) and presence of the Prophet and the Imams of the Ahlu
'1-bayt (a.s.) at the time of death and at the questioning in the grave
and the help given by them to the believer to overcome those
difficulties (as will be described under the verse: And there shall not
be any one of the people of the book but he must certainly believe in
him before his death (4:159), these things have nothing to do with
intercession. It is rather exercising the authority given to them by
Allâh over the creation. Allâh says: . . . and on the most elevated
places there shall be men who know all by their marks, and they shall
call out to the dwellers of the garden: "Peace be on you; they shall not
have yet entered it, though they hope". . -.And the dwellers of the most
elevated places shall call out to men whom they will recognize by their
marks, saying: "Of no avail were to you your amassings and your behaving
haughtily. Are these they about whom you swore that Allâh will not
bestow mercy on them?" "Enter the garden; you shall have no fear nor
shall you grieve" (7:46-49). It gives a glimpse of the authority or rule
vested in them by the permission of Allâh. If we look at the verse 17:71
from this angle, it too throws light on this aspect: (Remember) the day
when We will call every people with their Imâm; then whoever is given
his book in his right hand . . . The intermediary position of the Imam
in calling every people and giving them their books is a sort of
authority and rule vested in him by Allâh.

To make a long story short, intercession shall happen at the very last
stage on the Day of Judgement; it shall bring the divine forgiveness to
the guilty believers, prevent them from entering into hell and take
those out who would have entered into it; it shall be by extension of
mercy and/or manifestation of benevolence and magnanimity.

**TRADITIONS**

al-Husayn ibn Khâlid narrates from ar-Ridâ (a.s.), who narrated through
his forefathers from the Leader of the faithful (a.s.) that he said:
"The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) said \`Whoever does not believe in my
reservoir, may Allâh not bring him to my reservoir, and whoever does not
believe in my inter­cession, may Allâh not extend to him my
intercession.' Then he (s.a.w.a.) said: \`Verily, my intercession is for
those of my ummah who shall have committed great sins; as for the
good-doers, there shall be no difficulty for them.' " al-Husayn ibn
Khâlid said: "I asked ar-Ridâ (a.s.): \`O son of the Messenger of Allah!
what is then the meaning of the words of Allah, Mighty and Great is He:
and they do not intercede except for him whom He approves?' He (a.s.)
said: \`They do not intercede except for him whose religion Allah is
pleased with.' " (al-Amâli, as-Sadûq)

The author says: The tradition of the Prophet, "Verily my intercession
is . . .", has been narrated by both sects with numer­ous chains; and we
have shown earlier that it is based on the theme of Qur'ânic verses.

Sumâ\`ah ibn Mihrân narrates from Abû Ibrâhîm (a.s.) that he said about
the words of Allâh: may be your Lord will raise you to a praised
position: "The people, on the Day of Resurrection, will remain standing
for forty years; and the sun will be ordered so that it will ride over
their heads and they will be bridled by sweat - and the earth will be
told not to accept any of their sweat. So, they shall approach Adam to
intercede for them, and he will direct them to Nûh, and Nûh will direct
them to Ibrâhîm, and Ibrâhîm will direct them to Mûsa, and Mûsa will
direct them to \`Isâ, and \`Isâ will direct them saying: \`You should
seek help of Muhammad, the last prophet.' Thereupon, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.)
will say: \`I'll do it;' and will proceed until, arriving at the door of
the garden, he will knock at it. It will be asked, ‘Who is it?' (while
Allâh knows better!), and he will say: ‘Muhammad.' Then it will be said:
‘Open for him.' When the door will be opened he will turn to his Lord,
falling in sajdah. He will not raise his head until he is told: ‘Speak
up and ask, you shall be given; and inter­cede, your intercession shall
be granted.' He will raise his head and turning to his Lord will fall
(again) in sajdah. Then he will be promised as before; then he will
raise his head. (Thereupon, he shall intercede) until he will intercede
even for him who would have been burnt in the fire. Therefore, on the
Day of Resurrec­tion, no one among all the nations will be more eminent
than Muhammad (s.a.w.a.); and it is (the meaning of) the words of Allâh:
May be your Lord will raise you to a praised position. "
(al -\`Ayyashi)

The author says: This meaning is narrated by both sects in great
number, in detail as well as in short, with numerous chains; and it
proves that the "praised position" means the position of intercession.
This tradition is not in conflict with intercession of other prophets,
because probably their intercession will be an off­shoot of our
Prophet's, and it will begin on his hand.

\`Ubayd ibn Zurarah said: "Abu \`Abdillah (a.s.) was asked whether a
believer would have the right of intercession. He said: \`Yes.' Then
someone said: \`Will even a believer need the inter­cession of Muhammad
(s.a.w.a.) on that day?' He said: \`Yes. The believers too will come
with wrongs and sins; and there will be none but he shall need the
intercession of Muhammad on that day.' " (\`Ubayd) said: "And someone
asked him about the words of the Messenger of Allâh: ‘I am the Chief of
the children of Adam, and I say this without boasting.' He said: \`Yes.'
(Then) he said: \`He will hold the chain-link of the door of the garden
and open it; then he will fall in sajdah, and Allâh will tell him:
\`Raise your head, do intercede, your intercession shall be granted;
ask, you shall be given.' So he will raise his head and again will fall
in sajdah; then Allâh will (again) say to him: \`Raise your head, do
intercede, your intercession shall be granted, and ask, you shall be
given.' Thereupon he will raise his head and inter­cede - and his
intercession will be accepted; and he will ask and be given." (ibid.)

Muhammad ibn al-Qâsim narrates through his chains from Bishr ibn
Shurayh al-Basrî that he said: "I said to Muhammad ibn 'Alf (a.s.) :
\`Which verse in the Book of Allah is the most hope-inspiring?' He said:
\`And what do your people say (about it)?' I said: \`They say, (it is
the verse,) Say: "O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against
their own souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah. " ' He said:
\`But we, the people of the house, do not say so.' I said: \`Then what
do you say about it?' He said: \`We say (it is the verse,) And soon will
your Lord give you so that you shall be well pleased. (It means) the
inter­cession, by Allah the intercession, by Allah the intercession.' "
(at-Tafsîr, Furat ibn Ibrâhîm )

The author says: The words of Allah, may be your Lord will. raise you
to a praised position, refers to the Prophet's glorious position of
intercession, as the numerous traditions of the Prophet himself prove.
Moreover, the wording of the verse too supports it: "will raise you"
shows that it is a position which he will attain in future, i.e. on the
Day of Judgement; "praised" is general and unconditional, and implies
that he shall be praised by all men, past and present. al-Hamd () means
to praise someone for a good done to you intentionally. This definition
shows that the Prophet will do something by his own will and power which
will benefit all of them and in return everyone will praise him. That is
why the Imam said in the tradition of \`Ubayd ibn Zurarah, "and there
will be no one but he shall need the intercession of Muhammad on that
day."

We shall later explain it further.

Now about the declaration that the verse, "and soon will your Lord give
you so that you shall be well pleased," is the most hope-inspiring one
in the Qur’ân - especially when com­pared to the verse, Say: "O my
servants! who have acted extra­vagantly against their own souls, do not
despair of the mercy of Allâh; surely Allâh forgives the faults
altogether; surely He is the Forgiving, the Merciful. And return to your
Lord and submit to Him before there comes to you the punishment. . . and
fol­low the best that has been revealed to you. . . " (39:53–55).
al-Qunut ( = to lose hope, to despair) has been mentioned several times
in the Qur’ân. Allâh quotes Ibrahîm (a.s.) as saying: And who despairs
of the mercy of his Lord but the erring ones (15:56).

Also He quotes Ya'qûb (a.s.): surely none despairs of Allâh's mercy
except the unbelieving ones (12:87). But the con­text in both places
shows it as referring to losing hope of divine mercy in matters of
creation. As for the verse under discussion the context slows that it
admonishes against losing hope of divine mercy in matters of legislation
and judgement; look for instance at the words, who have acted
extravagantly against their own souls. They clearly say that one who has
committed sins should not despair of the mercy of Allâh. Also Allâh has
promised for­giveness for the faults altogether without any exception.
But this promise is followed by admonition to repent (turn to your Lord)
and submit to Allâh and follow the divine commandments. The text on the
whole demonstrates that a man who might have com­mitted sins need not
despair of the mercy of Allâh as long as he is in a position to turn to
Allâh, to submit to Him, and to follow His commandments. In short, this
mercy is conditional. And there is a vast difference between this
conditional mercy and the all-encompassing, unconditional mercy and
unrestricted granting and pleasing which Allâh has promised His Apostle,
who himself was a mercy for all the mankind. It is that promise which
will make the Apostle of Allâh (s.a.w.a.) well pleased: and soon will
your Lord give you, so that you shall be well pleased.

This last-mentioned verse occurs in a context where Allâh mentions His
grace and bounties to the Prophet; it is a unique promise never made to
anyone else. The phrase, "will give you," is unconditional and
unrestricted. A promise, somewhat similar, has been made to a group of
the people of the garden: they shall have what they please with their
Lord (42:22); They have therein what they wish and with Us is more yet
(50:35) . These verses show that those people shall be given more than
they wish for -and man by nature desires all that he can think of
happiness, good and felicity. It means that they shall be given more
than they can think of, as AllAh says: So no soul knows what is hidden
for them of the joy of the eyes (32:17). Now this is what Allâh has
promised those who believe and do good; and even this is beyond human
imagination. Surely, what He shall give to His Prophet as His special
grace, must be far greater than this.

This much about the grace of Allâh. Now let us reflect upon "you shall
be well pleased". Obviously this pleasure has no relation whatsoever to
the pleasure a man should have for whatever Allâh gives Him and decrees
for him. Allâh is the Master and the servant has nothing of his own
except the inherent need and poverty. He must always be happy and
grateful for whatever his Master gives him, no matter whether it is more
or less, big or small; he must always be pleased with whatever Allâh
decrees for him, whether it looks comforting or distressing. This is
what is expected of every good believer; surely the Prophet knows this
ideal better, and acts upon it more perfectly, than anyone else; in
short, he likes for himself only that which Allâh wills for him.
Therefore, it would have been superfluous and irrelevant to say that he
would be pleased after he was given something. It follows that this
promised pleasure refers to something else. It refers to that happiness
or satisfaction which a needy person experiences when his need is fully
met. A similar promise was given to some of His virtuous servants: (As
for) those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of men.
Their reward with their Lord is gardens of perpetuity beneath which
rivers flow, abiding therein for ever; Allâh is well pleased with them
and they are well pleased with Him; that is for him who fears his Lord
(98:7-8). Its context shows that this too is to show some special divine
favour for them, and hence it must be a very ex­clusive and
comprehensive pleasure. At this juncture, it should be mentioned that
Allâh has praised His Apostle in these words: to the believers (he is)
compassionate, merciful (9:128).

Keeping all these things in view, ponder on this question:

Can the Prophet be pleased to enjoy the bounties of the garden, or can
he be happy with the pleasures of the paradise, when some believers are
imprisoned inside the hell? Remember that they are the people who
believed in Allâh as the One God, in the Prophet as the true prophet,
and in what he brought with him as the true revelation; but they were
overcome by their indiscretion and Satan twisted them between his
fingers as a toy, and so they committed errors and sins - without any
thought of revolting against God, of any arrogance before Him. Even we,
when we remember what mistakes we committed in past, what chances of
spiritual perfection we missed before, we start blaming ourselves for
all the shortcomings; then if we see some inexperi­enced youth indulging
in youthful frolics, we are reluctant to condemn them; we feel
compassion for them. But this mercy of ours is a manifestation of the
imperfect compassion put in our nature by the Creator. How can we
understand the mercy of the Lord of the worlds, in a place where the
magnanimity of the compassionate, merciful Prophet and the mercy of the
Most Merciful of all have to decide about the indiscretions of a
power­less human being? Especially so when he had undergone all the
torments of al-barzakh in proportion to his misdeeds?

al-Qummî narrates a tradition in his at-Tafsîr, under the verse: And
intercession will not avail aught with Him save of him whom He permits
(34:23), that Abu '1-\`Abbâs al-Mukabbar said: "A servant of a wife of
\`Alî ibn al-Husayn (a.s.), named Abû Ay­man, came (to the fifth Imam -
a.s.) and said: \`O Abû Ja'far! You mislead the people, saying,
intercession of Muhammad, in­tercession of Muhammad.' (Hearing this) Abu
Ja'far became so angry that his face took a glowering expression; then
he said: \`Woe unto you! O Abû Ayman! Are you deluded by chastity of
your stomach and genitals? Why, when you will see the terrors of the
resurrection, you shall certainly be in need of intercession of
Muhammad. Fie on you! Would he intercede except for him who would have
been sentenced to the fire?' (Then) he said: ‘There is no one from the
early people to the later ones but he will need the intercession of
Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) on the Day of Resurrection.' Then again Abû Ja'far
said: ‘Certainly the Messenger of Allâh has (authority of) intercession
for his ummah, and we have (authority of) intercession for our Shî'ahs,
and our Shî'ahs have (authority of) intercession for their families.'
Then he said: ‘And surely a believer shall intercede for (very large
num­ber of) people like the (tribes of) Rabî'ah and Mudar. And surely a
believer shall intercede for his servant, saying: "O my Lord! I owe this
to him, he was protecting me from heat and cold." ' "

The author says: This tradition refers to a general inter­cession
("There is no one from the early people to the later ones but he will
need the intercession of Muhammad . . .") and a particular one ("Fie on
you! Would he intercede except for him who would have been sentenced to
the fire?"). We find similar idea in al-\`Ayyâshî's tradition from
\`Ubayd ibn Zurârah men­tioned earlier. There are other traditions of
the same theme narrated by both sects. It is supported also by the
verse: And those whom they call upon besides Him have no authority for
intercession, but he who bears witness of the truth and they know (him)
(43:86). This verse shows that the prerequisite of inter­cession is the
witnessing of the truth. The witnesses are the in­tercessors, the owners
of the intercession. And we shall describe under verse 2:143 (And thus
We have made you a medium [just] nation that you may be witnesses over
the people and [that] the Apostle may be a witness over you), that the
prophets are the witnesses and that Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) is the witness
over them; so he (s.a.w.a.) is the witness over the witnesses, and thus
he is the intercessor for the intercessors; and without the testi­mony
of the witnesses the foundation of the Day of Judgement would crumble.

The (fifth) Imam said about the verse, And intercession will not avail
aught with Him save him whom He permits: "No prophet or apostle may
intercede until Allâh permits him, ex­cept the Apostle of Allâh, because
Allâh has already given him permission before the Day of Resurrection;
and intercession is (allowed) to him and to the Imams from his progeny,
and after that to the prophets." (at-Tafsir, al-Qummi)

\`Alî (a. s.) said: "The Apostle of Allâh (s.a.w.a.) said: \`Three
(groups) shall intercede with Allâh and their intercession will be
accepted: The prophets, then the (religious) scholars, then the
martyrs.' " (al-Khisâl)

The author says: ash-Shuhadâ' () in the Qur’ânic terminology means
witnesses of the deeds; but in the traditions of the Imams it is
generally used for the martyrs who are killed in the way of Allâh. And
apparently it is in this meaning that the word has been used in this
traditions.

The Imam said: "We have the (authority of) intercession; and the people
who love us have the (authority of) intercession." (ibid.)

The author says: Numerous traditions prove that the Lady of paradise,
Fatimah (a.s.) has the power and authority of inter­cession, as do his
descendants other than the Imams. Likewise, a lot of traditions bestow
similar authority on the believers - even to their miscarried foetus.
There is a well-known tradition that the Prophet said: "Marry (and)
procreate; for I shall boast of you (i.e. your number) against other
nations on the Day of Resurrection - even of miscarried foetus; he shall
stand at the door of the garden in a restive mood; he shall be told to
enter, but he will say: ‘No, until my parents enter it . . .' "

Abû \`Abdillâh narrates, through his father and grandfather, from 'Ali
(a.s.) that he said: "The garden has eight gates: one for the entry of
prophets and the truthful ones, the other for the martyrs and the good
ones; and five gates are for the entry of our Shî'ahs and lovers - I
shall be standing on the as-Sirât ( = the path; the bridge over the
hell) praying and saying: \`My Lord! save my Shî\`ahs and my lovers and
my helpers and those who followed me in the (life of the) world.' Then
all of a sudden there will come a voice from inside the throne: \`Your
prayer is granted and your intercession for your Shî\`ahs accepted:' And
every Shî\`ah of mine and everyone who loves me, helps me and fights my
enemies by (his) deed or word, shall intercede for seventy thousand of
his neighbours and relatives - and (there is) a gate from which shall
enter all the Muslims who witness that there is no god except Allâh and
in whose heart there is not an iota of enmity towards us, the people of
the house." (ibid.)

Hafs al-Mu'adhdhin narrates that Abû \`Abdillâh (a.s.) wrote, inter
alia, in a letter to his companions: "And know that none of the
creatures of Allâh shall avail you against Him, neither an angel who is
near to Him, nor an apostle prophet nor any one below them. Whoever
likes intercession of intercessors to avail him, should ask Allâh to be
pleased with him." (al-Kâfî )

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said: "Jâbir told Abû Ja'far (a.s.): ‘May I be your
ransom, O son of the Apostle of Allâh! Narrate to me a tradition about
your grandmother, Fatimah.' (Then the tradition continues, mentioning
the intercession of Fatimah on the Day of Resurrection, until it says:)
Abû Ja'far (a.s.) said: ‘Then, by God, no one among the people will
remain (unsaved) except a doubting one or an unbeliever or a hypocrite.
When they shall be (put) into (various) ranks of the hell, they shall
cry out - as Allâh has said - So we have no intercessors, nor a true
friend: But if we could but once return, we would be of the believers
(26:100-102) .’ Then Abu Ja'far (a.s.) said: \`But oh! how preposterous!
They shall be denied what they asked for; and if they were ,sent back
they would certainly return to what they were forbidden, and most
certainly they are liars (6:28) .' " (at-Tafsîr, Furât ibn Ibrâhîm)

The author says: The Imam has proved by the sentence, "So we have no
intercessors", that intercession will take place on the Day of
Judgement. In this light, it is amusing to see our adversaries trying to
use it as an argument against intercession! Just as we said about the
verse, So the intercession of intercessors avails them not (74:48), this
verse too shows that intercession will surely take place on that day. If
the Qur’ân wanted to negate the inter­cession altogether, it would have
used the singular form (. . . no intercessor nor a true friend). But it
has used the plural, "So we have no intercessors"; and it proves that
there shall be a group interceding on behalf of some people, but it will
not be of any avail to those particular speakers. Moreover, the
following sen­tence, "But if we could but once return, we would be of
the believers," shows a desire within the frame of grief. Obviously such
a desire is related to that thing loss of which has caused the grief.
Therefore, what this sentence implies is this: Would that we could
return to the previous life; then we would be of the believers, so that
the intercession of intercessors would avail us too, as it has benefited
the believers. The verse, therefore, is a good proof for intercession.

al-Kâzim (a.s.) narrated from his father, through his fore­fathers,
from the Prophet that he said: "My intercession is for those of my ummah
who would have committed big sins; as for the doers of good, there shall
be no difficulty for them." He was asked: "O son of the Messenger of
Allâh! How can the inter­cession be for those who would have committed
big sins, while Allâh says, and they do not intercede except for him
whom He ap­proves (21:28) ; and a committer of big sins cannot be
approved?" He (a.s.) said: "No believer commits a sin but he regrets it
and feels ashamed. And the Prophet has said: ‘Enough is regret as a
repentance.’ And also he (s.a.w.a.) has said: ‘Whoever is pleased by a
good deed and displeased by a bad deed, he is a believer.’ Therefore, if
there is someone who does not feel remorse for a sin he has committed,
he is not a believer, and intercession will not avail him, and he will
be an unjust one. And Allâh says: the unjust shall not have any true
friend nor any intercessor who should be obeyed (40:18) ." It was said
to him: "O son of the Messenger of Allâh! How is it that he who is not
sorry of a sin he has committed, he does not remain a believer?" He
said: "Anyone who commits a big sin, knowing that he must be pun­ished
for it, will certainly feel remorse for what he has done. And as soon as
he is sorry, he is repentant, eligible for intercession. But if he is
not sorry, then he is persisting in it, and a persistent (sinner) is not
forgiven, because he does not believe in the punish­ment of what he has
done; had he believed in that punishment, he would have been sorry. And
the Prophet has said: \`No big sin abides with apologizing, and no small
sin remains (small) with persistence.' And as for the words of Allâh,
and they do not intercede except for him whom He approves, it means that
they do not intercede except for him whose religion He approves.
Religion is an acknowledgement that good and bad deeds have to be
recompensed. If one's religion were approved, one would feel remorse for
the sins one would have committed, because he would know what their
result would be on the (day of) resur­rection." (at-Tawhîd )

The author says: The words of the Imam, "and he will be an unjust one":
It gives the definition of "unjust" as applicable on the Day of
Resurrection. It alludes to the Qur’ânic verse, Then a crier will cry
out among them that the curse of Allâh is on the unjust, who hinder
(people) from Allâh's way and seek to make it crooked and they are
disbelievers in the hereafter (7:44-45). Accordingly, unjust is he who
does not believe in the Day of Judgement; naturally, such a man would
not be sorry if he neglected to do what he was ordered to do, or if he
indulged in sins and crimes. May be, he outright rejects basic truths
and teachings of religion; or may be he just does not care, is not
worried of punishment of sins on the Day of Reckoning. In later case,
his verbal acknowledgement of the Day of Judgement would be but a joke
and mockery.

". . . as soon as he is sorry, he is repentant, eligible for
intercession": The adjective, repentant, is not used here in its
well-known terminological sense - repentance (in the termino­logical
sense) is by itself the best intercessor and saviour. What the Imam
meant here is this: If he feels remorse for the sin com­mitted, he
returns to Allâh, his religion is thus approved by Him, and therefore he
becomes eligible for intercession.

"And the Prophet has said: \`No big sin abides with apolo­gizing . .
.’": The Imam narrated this tradition to prove that persistence in a sin
(even a small one) changes it from its original smallness to a far
greater transgression - it shows one's disbelief in the Day of Judgement
and injustice towards the signs of Allâh. And such a thing is not
forgiven. A sin is forgiven if the sinner sincerely repents, or if
intercession avails him - and this depends on his religion being
approved; and both repentance and approved religion are absent in case
of persistence.

A similar theme is found in a tradition quoted in \`Ilalulu
'sh­sharâ'i' from Abû Ishâq al-Laythî that he said: "I said to Abû
Ja'far Muhammad ibn \`Alî al-Bâqir (a.s.): ‘O son of the Messenger of
Allâh! Tell me about a believer, possessing religious understand­ing
when he reaches (a high point in) knowledge and becomes perfect, does he
commit fornication?' He said: ‘By God! No.' I said: ‘Then does he
indulge in sodomy?' He said: ‘By God! No.' I said: ‘Then does he steal?'
He said: ‘No.' I said: \`Then does he drink intoxicant?' He said: ‘No.'
I said: \`Then does he commit any of the big sins or indulge in any of
these indecencies?' He said: ‘No.' I said: ‘Then does he commit a sin?'
He said: ‘Yes, and he is a believer, sinner, submissive.' I said: \`What
does sub­missive mean?' He said: \`The submissive (servant) does not
per­sist in it, does not keep doing it . . .' "

ar-Rîda (a.s.) narrated through his forefathers that the Messenger of
Allâh (s.a.w.a.) said: "When the resurrection comes, Allâh, Great and
Mighty is He, will manifest Himself to His believ­ing servant, and will
remind him of his sins one by one; then Allâh will forgive him; Allâh
will not let (even) a near angel or an apostle prophet know of his
(sins), and will cover it lest any­one becomes aware of it. Then He will
say to his bad deeds: ‘Be good deeds.' " (al-Khisâl)

Abu Dharr said: "The Messenger of Allâh (s.a.w.a.) said: ‘A man will be
brought on the Day of Resurrection; and it will be said: "Show him his
small sins; and keep back from him his big sins." Then it will be said
to him: "You did so and so on such and such a day." And he will go on
confessing, while apprehensive of his big sins. Then it will be said:
"Give him a good deed in place of every bad deed." Then he will say: "I
had done some sins which I do not see (mentioned) here."' " Abu Dharr
said: "And I saw the Messenger of Allâh laughing until his teeth were
shown." (Muslim)

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said: "When the Day of Resurrection comes, Allâh,
Glorified and Sublime is He, shall spread His mercy until even Iblîs
will hope for His mercy." (al-Amâlî, as-Sadûq)

The author says: The last three traditions are of general nature. The
traditions about intercession of the Prophet, ema­nating from the Imâms
of Ahlu '1-bayt as well as from the Sunni sources have successively been
narrated by so many narrators as to leave no room for any doubt about
their authenticity. Alto­gether they prove that intercession will take
place, and that it will avail the believers who might have committed
sins; it will prevent them from entering into hell, or will rescue them
from it if already sent therein. It is however certain that the sinning
believers shall not be allowed to abide for ever in the hell. And we
have earlier explained that the Qur’ân too does not say more than
this.

**A PHILOSOPHICAL CONTEMPLATION**

According to Abû \`Alî Ibn Sinâ, intellectual reasoning cannot give us
details concerning the resurrection and judgement (as given in the
Qur’ân and sunnah), as it lacks the premises necessary to lead to a
conclusion. Nevertheless, it may contemplate the future of man after the
soul leaves the body and lives in the form of (Platonic) ideas - how it
proceeds on the path of happiness or unhappiness reaching the ultimate
station.

Whatever man does in beginning leaves an imprint on his psyche - either
of happiness or unhappiness. By "happiness" we mean what is good for him
as a man; on the other hand, "un­happiness" denotes what is bad for him
as a man. If the action is repeatedly performed the imprint becomes
deeper and deeper until it becomes a deep-rooted characteristic, until
it reshapes the psyche in its own mould.

If the mould is good, the resulting shape as well as the actions
emanating from it are good and agreeable to the man "as a man", and man
is "happy". If on the contrary the mould is bad, the resulting shape and
actions become ugly and disagree­able to the man "as a man"; and
although the deformed psyche seemingly enjoys those actions, in reality
it remains unhappy "as a man". Here we are talking about a man who is
happy in his psyche and good in his deed vis-a-vis a man who is unhappy
in his psyche and evil in his deeds.

It is the former that is the subject of our discussion here. A man may
be good and happy in his person, because he has got correct belief of
eternal truth; but his psyche has been polluted by the sins and
transgressions committed as a result of weakness of flesh and error of
judgement and choice. Consequently, psyche becomes "unhappy". But this
pollution and unhappiness is a matter of constraint that has been forced
on his inherently happy psyche; and we know from intellectual reasoning
that constraint does not continue for ever. That soul will most
certainly get rid of that unhappiness, pollution and rust in the fire of
chastisement in al-Barzakh or on the Day of Judgement - it depends on
its own strength and stage of inner perfection.

The opposite is true for the later group. Whatever the effects of good
deeds, they are no more than cosmetics; it is a forced appearance not
agreeable to its inner-self; and sooner or later it is bound to
disappear.

There remains a fifth category: The soul which could not turn its
potentials into achievements - good or bad - in this life. They will
remain in suspense, waiting for the divine judgement.

This much could be discerned from intellectual reasoning, concerning
the reward and punishment, the inseparable results of the deeds.

Reasons also prove that existence has various grades of perfection -
ideally perfect or less so, stronger or weaker. Con­sequently, the souls
have various ranks in relation to the Creator - nearer to, or further
from him. They are therefore one above the other, the highest being the
nearest to the First Cause. They are the most perfect and ideal souls,
like those of the prophets (may peace of Allâh be on them!). They may
become the me­diums through which the unnatural pollution and rust may
be removed from the weaker souls which are further below. It is this
role which we call intercession.

**A SOCIAL DISCOURSE**

Some people say: "Human society cannot continue without some laid
rules, nor without an authority to look after its affairs. When all
members maintain discipline and obey the rules, social justice is
maintained and strengthened. This system is based on temporal benefits
which the society cannot do without, as well as on spiri­tual and
ethical ideals, like truth, sincerity, keeping one's word etc. which the
development and good of the society depend upon. For these rules and
regulations to have any force and effect, it was necessary for them to
be accompanied by punishment laid down for the transgressors. Only in
this way the system could be protected against the willful transgression
of some and indifference and negligence of others. That is why when a
government (no matter which ideology it follows) is strong and capable
enough to make people obey its edicts, the country marches forward, and
society proceeds on the path of development. On the contrary when it is
weak, the country is overcome by lawlessness and dis­order, and plagued
by troubles and turmoil.

"In view of the above, it is essential for the good of society to make
people believe that they could not escape the conse­quences if they
transgressed the law. Nothing should be said or done to raise a hope in
them that they could avoid the punishment by some means, like
intercession, bribe or deception.

"The biggest objection against Christianity is aimed at its belief of
atonement: That Christ was crucified in order to atone for the sins of
his followers. Now the Christians rely on that atonement to get
salvation in the next world, without caring what they do in this life.
Religion, in this way, destroys the very foundation of society, retards
civilization and pulls it backwards. Data show that lie and injustice is
found in ardent followers of religion to a far greater extent than in
those who do not follow any religion. Its only reason is that the former
are confident that their sins would certainly be wiped off through
intercession."

This is in short what some "scholars" hold against the belief of
intercession: That it weakens the foundation of civili­zation and social
justice. But neither Islam proves intercession, in the meaning they have
given it, nor the intercession which Islam speaks of gives the result
they have claimed. Before writing against intercession, as taught by
Islam, they should learn what Islam teaches, how it applies its laws to
the society, what type of inter­cession it promises and how, when and to
what extent it is to be applied and effected:

First: What the Qur'ân confirms of the intercession is this: The
believers shall not abide in the hell, on the Day of Resur­rection,
provided they come to their Lord with approved belief and true faith.
Thus, it is a conditional promise. Then it has emphasized that the faith
remains in grave danger from sins, especially the big ones, and more
particularly if one persists in them. Such a believer would be tottering
on the brink of eternal damnation. When a believer remembers that
promise, his hope of deliverance soars high; when he needs this warning,
he is over­come by dread of perdition. His soul remains hovering between
hope and fear; he worships his Lord both with love and awe. Thus, he
spends his life in a moderate way, on the middle course. He experiences
neither discouragement of pessimism, nor the rashness of
over-optimism.

Second: Islam has made comprehensive laws for temporal and spiritual
upliftment of the society; these laws cover all aspects of life of an
individual and a group. It has prescribed suitable punishments for those
who violate any of those rules - from monetary compensation to
chastisement to firmly fixed punish­ment - until a stage comes when the
offender is deprived of his rights as a member of society and is
condemned to eternal shame, or even death. All this system has been
entrusted into the hands of divinely appointed ulu '1-amr ( = people
vested with authority). Then each Muslim has been made responsible, for
all other Muslims, as he is obliged to enjoin his compatriots, to do
good and desist from evil. To cap it all, the Muslim nation is ob­liged
to call others to the right path, and the way to affect this call is to
give them good news of eternal reward if they do good and to warn them
of eternal perdition if they indulge in evil.

It is this knowledge of this and the next world which is the foundation
of Islam's character-building. The Prophet promul­gated this system; and
experiment has proved its effectiveness and potency. Its power to mould
the society into divine image was proved during the time of the Prophet
and continued to do so until Umayyids came into power. They made the
sharî\`ah a toy to play with; put the Islam's penal code in cold storage
and behaved as though they were above all law, as if nothing could
hinder them in their pursuit of pleasure. The result of that exer­cise
is before our eyes today. The standard of "freedom" has been raised;
western civilization is making inroads in our society. In Islamic
countries, Islam exists in name only.

It is this manifest weakening of religion and this retrogress­ive
movement of the Muslims which has caused their fall from heights of
justice and virtue, and made them slip down the plane of morality and
ethics. It is their debauchery and their wal­lowing in their base
desires and sensualities that has made them bold to transgress every
limit, to violate every rule, so much so that even the atheists look
down at their debauchery, dishonesty and immorality.

This is the real and only cause of the deterioration of Muslim society.
The objector is completely off the mark when he attri­butes this state
of affairs to those sublime religious realities whose only aim, and only
effect, was and is the man's felicity and happiness in this world as
well as in the hereafter.

The data, mentioned in his argument, are irrelevant here. They have
looked at a Muslim society which has got no guardian and no authority to
enforce Islamic laws within its jurisdiction, and at an atheist society
which has a strong authority to enforce its laws and to keep the people
within the limits, with help of education and training of its own
choice. Therefore, this com­parison is quite clearly unjustified.


