Chapter 21 : Subject
====================

[^1] This argument seems inconclusive. If two words are synonymous, it
is not necessary for them to have the same preposition, al-Mawlâ () and
al-awlâ () have the same meaning – guardian, master, but the former is
used without a preposition while the latter is followed by the
preposition “bi” ( = for, with, etc.)

[^2] As may be seen in the verses 36:60-62, quoted above.

[^3] For example: And We have guarded it (i.e. the heaven) against every
accursed Satan, but he who steals a hearing; so there follows him a
visible flame (15:17-18).

1 The first and third replies seem strange, to say the least. The
author himself has said (while commenting on the phrase, " . . . the
Satan made them both slip from it") that the order to "get down" or to
"get out" may mean, "Get down from the company of the angels; or, get
down from the heaven". But here he rejects the second alternative
altogether! The third reply is based on an unacceptable analogy - that
which overlooks the important differences between the two sides. If the
Satan is governed by time and space how does it imply that Allâh too
should be governed by them? Moreover, in the same commentary the author
has proved on the strength of this same verse that "the Satan had
visited them near that tree in the Garden. He entered the Garden . . .
(and) Adam, his wife and the Satan all were removed from the Garden
together." This leaves us with the second reply, which is doubtlessly
without any flaw and is supported by the Qur’ân. (tr.)

2 That is, Abu 's-Salt Abdu 's-Salâm ibn Sâlih al -Harawî.

1 It is not in accord with the author's earlier assertion that the
verse 2:36 describes Adam's removal from the earlier-held place of
honour to the courtyard of the Garden; after which he learned "some
words" from Allâh and repented (2:37); and it was later that he was sent
down from the courtyard to the Garden (2:38). (tr)

[^4] Mûsâ was called to the Mount Sini'i and given Torah while the
Israel­ites were still in the wilderness. And it was at that time that
the events in question took place. They had not entered Palestine at
that time and Baytu '1-Maqdis was not built yet. Therefore, the word
"Baytu '1-Maqdis" used in this tradition must mean the tent which Mûsâ
erected for divine worship.
[^5] In those days, all the land now divided into Syria, Jordan, Lebnon
and Palestine, was called Syria or Greater Syria.

[^6] It is now almost certain that Yudhasaf is a corruption of
Budhastav, the title of Gautama Buddha, the founder of Bhuddhism.

[^7] Vide al-Muyamu '1-mufahris, by Muhammad Fu'ad \`Abdu'1-Baqi.

[^8] In the printed copy of at-Tafsîr of al-\`Ayyâshî (vol. 1, p.49) and
what has been quoted from him in al-Bihâr (vol. 15, p.226), al-Burhân
(vol.1, p.128) and Majma'u '1-bayAn (vol. 1, p.158) the name has
ap­peared as Hadâd. But we could not find such a name in geographical
dic­tionaries. Perhaps it is a corruption of Hadad which is a mountain
over­looking Taymâ'; (see Makamu '1-bayânn, vol. 2, p. 229; al -Qâmûs,
vol. 1, p. 287 and Tâju '1-'arûs, vol. 2, p. 333) or it may be another
reading of Hadad. (ed.)

[^9] (at -Tubba\`) was the title of the kings of Yemen.

[^10] The sentences in parenthesis are not in al-Mîzân. They have been
added from the quotation of al-\`Ayyâshî, given in Bîharu '1-anwâr, vol.
15, p.226. (m)


