Chapter 1 : Suratul Fâtiha: the Chapter of the Opening 1:1-5
============================================================

In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful (1).
All praise is due to Allâh, the Lord of the Worlds (2).
The Beneficent the Merciful (3).
The Master of the Day of Judgement (4).
Thee do we worship and Thee do we beseech for help (5).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful: People
often take the name of one of their great and powerful personalities at
the time of doing or beginning a work. By this association, it is
believed, the work would achieve success, great­ness and blessings; or
that it would be a memorial to keep the named one's memory alive for
ever. This is also observed in naming a child, a project, a house or an
association - they give it the name of a deeply loved or highly
respected person, so that his name would continue in this form; for
example, a man names his son after his father, in order to perpetuate
the father's memory.

This verse runs on the same line. Allâh began His speech with His Own
name - Great is His name - so that the ideas taught in this chapter be
stamped by, and associated with it. Also, it teaches a lesson to
mankind, showing them the perfect manner of starting all their talks and
actions; it guides them to put the stamp of the divine name on all their
activities; doing every work for the sake of Allâh, associating it with
His good names and attributes. In this way that action would neither be
rendered null and void, nor remain incomplete; it has been started in
the name of Allâh, and negation and annihilation cannot reach that
sacred name.

Allâh has declared variously in the Qur’ân that what is not for His
Person must perish, is in vain; He will proceed to the deeds not done
for His sake and shall render them as scattered floating dust; He shall
forfeit what they have done and shall nullify their deeds; and that
nothing shall remain except His honoured Person.

Therefore, what is done for the sake of Allâh and performed in His
name, shall continue and will not perish. Everything, every work and
every affair shall have its share of eternity - as much as it is related
to Allâh. It is this reality that has been hinted at in the universally
accepted tradition of the Prophet: "Every important affair, not begun
with the name of Allâh, shall remain incomplete. . ." The word al-abtar
( = translated here as "incomplete") means a thing whose end is cut off,
an animal whose tail is severed.

The preposition "bi” ( = in, with), in the phrase "In the name of
Allâh", is related to an implied verb, "I begin". This verse, at this
particular place, begins the speech which is a single action; this
singleness comes from the singleness of its meaning; that is, the
meaning intended to be conveyed, the aim and purpose of the speech.

Allâh has mentioned the purpose for which His speech -the whole
Qur’ân - has been revealed: . . . indeed, there has come to you a light
and a clear Book from Allâh; with it Allâh guides him who follows His
pleasure into the ways of safety. . . (5 :15 -16). There are other
verses which show that the aim with which the Book - the speech of
Allâh - has been sent down is the guidance of the people.

Therefore, the full import of the sentence would be as follows: The
guidance, total guidance is begun with the name of Allâh, the
Beneficent, the Merciful; He is Allâh, Whom the servants return to; He
is Beneficent, Who has opened the way of His All-encompassing mercy for
believers and disbelievers alike, the mercy which provides them with all
that is necessary and good for their existence and life; He is Merciful,
Who has reserved His special mercy for the believers, the mercy which
ensures their happiness in the life hereafter and their nearness to
their Lord. Allâh has said: . . . and My mercy encompasses all things;
so I will ordain it (specially) for those who guard (against evil) and
pay zakât, and those who believe in our signs (7 :156) . This
explanation has been written, putting this verse in the framework of the
whole Qur’ân, of which it is the first sentence.

Again, Allâh has repeatedly mentioned "chapter" in His speech. For
example: Say: "Then bring a chapter like this. . . " (10:38) ; Say:
"Then bring ten chapters like it, forged. . . " (11:13); And whenever a
chapter is revealed. . . (9:86); (This is) a chapter which We have
revealed. . . (24:1). It shows that Allâh Himself has divided His speech
in various parts, each part being called a chapter. It naturally means
that every chapter is a single unit in structure and in fullness of
meaning; and that that unity is not found between various verses of a
chapter or between one chapter and the other. It necessarily follows
that the theme of every chapter is different from the other; every
chapter is revealed with a certain aim in view, and when that aim is
achieved the chapter comes to its end.

Therefore, the verse, "In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the
Merciful" coming at the beginning of every chapter, refers to the
particular theme of that chapter.

Accordingly, this verse, at the beginning of this chapter of "The
Opening", refers also to the theme of this chapter. It appears from its
semantic flow that its purpose is to praise Allâh and to pledge the
believer's servitude (declaring that he worships only Allâh and seeks
help from Him only) and then to pray for divine guidance. This speech
has been uttered by Allâh, on be­half of His servant, so that the
servant may learn how, by repeat­ing these words, he may show his
gratitude to, and servitude before, Allâh.

This pledging of servitude is the important work which the servant of
Allâh intends to do; and which he begins in the name of Allâh, the
Beneficent, the Merciful. In this context, this verse would mean: In Thy
name, I pledge my servitude to Thee.

In this first verse of this chapter, therefore, the preposition, "in",
is related to the implied verb, "I begin"; and the aim is to perfect the
sincere servitude by addressing the pledge to Allâh Himself. Some people
have said that the implied verb is "I seek help" (by); although this
view is not objectionable, but "I begin" is more appropriate - the
chapter explicitly seeks divine help, "and Thee do we beseech for help";
therefore, it is not necessary in the beginning.

"al-Ism" ( = name) is the word that points to the named thing or
person. It is derived from as-simah ( = sign, identifying mark) or
as-sumuww ( = height, eminence). In any case, it is the word by which an
individual thing or person is spoken of or spoken to. Naturally, it is
other than, and separate from, the named thing.

The following is a sample of the academic exercises so much loved by
the ancients:

There is a name that means "the person himself seen in the light of an
attribute"; such a name is not separate from the named person; it is the
person himself. The word al-?lim ( = The Knower), one of the divine
names, points to the Person of Allâh as seen in the light of His
attribute of Knowledge. At the same time, it refers to Allâh Who cannot
be known except by one or the other of His attributes. Let us explain
this matter in another way: "Name" points to the named person; likewise
the personal traits and characteristics point to the holder of those
traits and characteristics - in this way, we may say that the personal
traits are the "names" of the person concerned. "Name", accordingly, can
be of two kinds: in words, and in substance. The direct name is of the
second type, ,that is, the personal trait that points to its own
subjects - for example, the "Knowledge" that points to Allâh, the holder
of the knowledge. And the word "the Knower" is in reality an indirect
name - it points to the direct name, that is, the attribute of
knowledge, which in its turn directly points to its holder, that is,
Allâh. "Knowledge" is, thus, the name of Allâh, and "the Knower" is "the
name of the name".

The above was the result of the academic analysis (or should we say,
mental luxury!) mentioned earlier; but such things should not be imposed
on language and literature. "Name", according to the "plain Arabic
language", means what we have written earlier. There was a lot of
controversy going on among the theo­logians of the early centuries of
Islam: whether the name was separate from the named person or not. Such
unnecessary pol­emics is out of place at present times; it is
self-evident that "name" and "named" are two things, and not one. We
should not waste time and energy in quoting the ancients' arguments and
counter-arguments, and in judging who was right.

"Allâh" ( = the divine name) was originally al-Ilâh; the "I" in the
middle was omitted because of frequent use. Al-Ilâh () is derived from
alaha ( = he worshipped) or from aliha or waliha (or = he was
bewildered). It is on paradigm of al-fi’âl () on meaning of al-maf’û1 (
= object-noun); for example, al-kitâb () means al -maktûb (= the
written); likewise a1-I1âh means al-Ma'lûh () that is the One who is
worshipped, or the One about whom minds are bewildered.

Quite clearly, it has become the proper name of God. It was commonly
used in this meaning in Arabic long before the Qur’ân was revealed. The
fact that even pre-Islamic Arabs used this name for God, may be inferred
from the following verses:

And if you should ask them who created them, they would certainly say:
\`Allâh". . . (43:87).

. . . and they say: "This for Allâh"-so they assert - "and this is for
our associates". . . (6:136).

Other divine names may be used as adjectives for this name; for
example, "the Beneficent and the Merciful Allâh"; also, this name is
used as subject of the verbs derived from other divine names; for
example, "Allâh knew", "Allâh had mercy", "Allâh gave sustenance" etc.
But the word, "Allâh", is never used as adjective to any other name, nor
is the verb derived from it used to describe other names. It is a clear
proof that it is the proper name of God.

The divine existence, inasmuch as Allâh is the God of everything,
presupposes that He should have all the attributes of perfection; and,
as a result, this name points to all perfect attributes. That is why it
is said that the name, "Allâh", means "the Person Who is the Essential
Being, and Who encompasses all the attributes of perfection". But the
fact is that it is the proper name of God and no other meaning (except
that related to worship or bewilderment) has been taken into
consideration here.

"ar-Rahmân ar-Rahîm " (= The Beneficent, the Merciful) are two
adjectives derived from ar-rahmah ( = mercy) .

When you see someone suffering from a deficiency which he cannot remove
by himself, the reaction which you experience and which tells you to
provide him with what he needs in order to make up his deficiency, is
called mercy. Ultimately, mercy means giving and bestowing to fulfill
other's need. It is this latter meaning in which this attribute is used
for Allâh.

"ar-Rahmân " () is on a paradigm which is used for magnification and
exaggeration. "ar-Rahîm"() is a paradigm of as-Sifatu 'l-mushabbahah ( =
perpetual adjective, inseparable attribute). Therefore, "ar-Rahmân " (
translated here as "the Beneficent") relates to that all-encom­passing
mercy that is bestowed upon the believers and the un­believers alike. It
is used in the Qur’ân, mostly in this meaning. Allâh says: The
Beneficent (God) is firm in power (20 : 5 ); Say: “As for him who
remains in error, the Beneficent (God) will surely prolong his length of
days. . . (19:75). "ar-Rahîm" (translated here as "the Merciful"), on
the other hand, is more appropriate for that mercy which shall remain
for ever, the per­petual inexhaustible mercy that shall be bestowed on
the believers in the life hereafter. Allâh says: . . . and He is
Merciful to the believers (33 :43); surely to them (i.e., the believers)
He is Com­passionate, Merciful (9 :117). That is why it is said that the
mercy of "ar-Rahmân " is common for the believers and the unbelievers,
and that of "ar-Rahîm" is reserved for the believers.

QUR’?N: All praise is due to Allâh: It has been said that "al- hamd" ()
is to praise someone for a good acquired by his

own intention, "al-madh"( = also translated as praise) is more
general - it is used to praise even that good which

someone is given without his will and power. If you praise someone for
his benevolence, you may use either word - al-hamd or

al-madh but if you want to praise a pearl for its lustre, you may use
the verb al-madh, but not al-hamd because the pearl has

not acquired that lustre by its own will and power.

"al "( = translated here as "all") in "al-hamd" denotes either species
or praise, or each and every praise. The end-result is the same in
either case; that is why it has been translated here as "all".

Allâh says: That is Allâh, your Lord, the Creator of every thing
(40:62). Whatever there is, is created by Allâh. Again He says: . . .
Who made good everything that He has created (32: 7). Everything is good
because it has been created by Allâh and is attributed to Him. In other
words, a thing becomes good because it is created by Allâh; and
everything created by Him is good. Every creature is good and beautiful
because Allâh has made it so; and every good and beautiful thing is
created by Allâh, attributed to Him. Allâh says: He is Allâh, the One,
the Subduer (of all) (39 :4) ; And the faces are humbled before the
Living, the Self­-subsistent God . . . (20:111). In other words, He has
created the creatures by His own knowledge, power and will, and not
because He was compelled by someone else to do so. Therefore, everything
is His own good work, done by His own will.

The above discourse was about Allâh's action. Coming to His names, He
has said: Allâh is He besides Whom there is no god; His are the very
best names (20 : 8) ; And Allâh's are the best names; therefore call on
Him thereby, and leave alone those who violate the sanctity of His names
(7:180). It is clear that Allâh is good in His names and good in His
actions; and that every good and beauty emanates from Him.

Therefore, Allâh is praised for His good names as He is praised for His
good actions. Every praise, uttered by any speaker for any good deed is
in reality addressed to Allâh only; because every good (which is the
object of praise) emanates from Him only. In short, to Him belongs the
species of the praise and all and every praise.

The verse: "Thee do we worship", shows that the whole chapter is
revealed on behalf of man. Allâh teaches him in this chapter how to
praise his Lord and how to show his allegiance to, and humility towards,
Him. And the phrase, "All praise is due to Allâh", further strengthens
this inference, as will be seen in the next paragraph.

The praise means to attribute, to ascribe; and Allâh has declared that
He is above all that His servants ascribe to Him. He has said: Hallowed
be Allâh (for freedom) from what they ascribe, except the servants of
Allâh, freed (from sins) (37:159 -160). This declaration is general and
unconditional; and it is further proved by the fact that not a single
verse in the Qur’ân ascribes the action of "praise" to anyone except
Allâh and some of the prophets (who were doubtlessly freed from sins).
Allâh addresses Nuh (Noah -a.s.) in these words: . . . Say: "All praise
is due to Allâh who delivered us from the unjust people" (23:28). And He
quotes Ibrahim (Abraham -a.s.) as saying: "Praise be to Allâh, Who gave
me in old age Ismâ’il and Ishâq . . ." (14:39). Also, He told His
Prophet, Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), in several places, And say: "Praise be to
Allâh. . . " (27:93). Further, he says about Dâwûd and Sulaymân (peace
be on both of them): . . . and they both said: “Praise be to Allâh. . .
" (27:15). Another exception is of the people of the Paradise -and they
also are freed from spite and rancour as well as from vain and sinful
words: . . . and the last of their cry shall be: "Praise be to Allâh,
the Lord of the worlds" (10:10).

As for other creatures, the Qur’ân never says that they "praise"
Allâh - they always "glorify Allâh with His praise". Allâh says: . . .
and the angels declare His glory with the praise of their Lord . . .
(42:5) ; and the thunder declares His glory with His praise . . .
(13:13); and there is not a single thing but glorifies Him with His
praise . . . (17:44) . In all these verses "praise" is preceded by
glorifying; rather "glorifying" is the main verb and "with praise" is
only a clause, attached to it. None except Allâh may comprehend the
beauty and perfection of His work, nor can anyone else understand the
beauty and perfection of His names and attributes. Allâh says: . . they
do not com­prehend Him in knowledge . . . (20 :110). In this background,
if they were to praise Him it would mean that they had compre­hended Him
in their knowledge; in other words, Allâh would be surrounded by their
limited understanding, confined within the boundary of their
comprehension. Therefore, they were careful enough to first declare His
glory from all the limits of their com­prehension, before starting His
praise. Allâh says: . . . surely Allâh knows and you do not know
(16:74).

So far as His purified servants are concerned, He treats their
utterance of praise as though He Himself has said it, because they are
free from sins and defects.

From the above discourse, it becomes crystal-clear what the good manner
of servitude demands: The servant should praise his Lord in exactly the
same words the Lord Himself has chosen for Himself; no deviation from it
would be tolerable, as the Prophet has said in an universally accepted
tradition; "I do not enumerate Thy praise; Thou art as Thou Thyself hast
praised Thyself . . . "

Therefore, the divine word, "All praise is due to Allâh", is a sort of
a training to the servant - a training without which he could not know
how to declare the praise of Allâh.

QUR’?N: the Lord of the worlds, the Beneficent, the Merciful, the
Master of the Day of Judgement: "ar-Rabb" () is the Master Who manages
the affairs of His servant. The word, thus, connotes the idea of
ownership. Ownership (in our social structure) is a special relationship
of one thing with another - a relationship that allows the owner to do
with the owned thing as he wishes. When we say, "This thing belongs to
us", it shows that it has a special relationship with us that allows us
to do with it as we wish; had it not been for this relationship, we
would not have had this authority over it. In this social context, it is
an idea which the society has laid down but which has no existence
out­side imagination. This idea is derived from another real and
posi­tive concept, which too is called "ownership": Our limbs and
faculties, like the sight, the hearing, the hands and the feet, belong
to us - they exist because of our own existence, they have no
independent existence, they depend on us for their existence and
continuity, and we use them as we like. This is the real ownership.

The ownership that may be attributed to Allâh is the real one, and not
that which is based on subjective outlook. Obviously the real ownership
cannot be disjoined from management of the affairs of the owned thing.
The owned thing depends on the owner in its existence, as well as in all
affairs related to its exist­ence. Allâh is "ar-Rabb "the Lord of
everything because the Lord is the owner who manages the affairs of, and
looks after, the owned thing - and only Allâh has this attribute.

"al-‘?lamîn () is the plural of al’âlam ( = the world) which literally
means, "what one is known with”. This paradigm is used for "instrument",
like al-qâlab ( = the mold, the form), al-khâtam ( = the seal, the
instrument of sealing), and at-tâba’ ( = the stamp, the impress). The
word al-‘?lam is used for the universe - the whole creation taken
together. Also it is used for each genes or species taken separately,
for example, the inorganic world, the vegetable world, the animal world,
the human world. It is also used for a class of a species, like the Arab
world, the African world etc. This last meaning is more appropriate in
the context of these verses: The verses that enumerate the good names of
Allâh until they come to "the Master of the Day of Judgement". The
judge­ment is reserved for mankind alone or together with the jinn.
Therefore, the "worlds" should refer to the worlds of the human beings
and the jinn, that is, their various groups. The word al­’âlamin (the
worlds) has been used in this sense in other Qur’ânic verses too. Allâh
says: . . .and has chosen you above the women of the worlds (3 : 42) ; .
. .so that he may be a Warner to the worlds (25:1); What! do you commit
an indecency which any one in the worlds has not done before you (7
:80).

"The Master of the Day of Judgement": We have explained above the
meaning of ownership, that is, mastership. The word "al-mâlik" ( ) is
derived from al-milk ( = possession, to possess). Some reciters have
read this word as "al -malik " ( = the sovereign, the king); it is
derived from al-mulk ( = country; kingdom). The king is the one who has
the authority to manage his nation's affairs; never­theless he does not
own the nation or the country. In other words, he holds the authority
for management and administration.

The reciters have given the reasons for their preference of either
recitation. But the fact remains that Allâh is the Master as well as the
King, and both words are equally correct, so far as the divine authority
is concerned. Looking at it from linguistic point of view, the word,
"King" is generally used in context of time and period. It is said, "the
King of that time"; but they do not say "the master of that time", as it
would be stretching the mean­ing too far. In this verse, Allâh has used
this word in reference to a certain "day"; therefore, linguistically, it
would be more proper to say, "the King of the Day of Judgement".
Moreover, Allâh has used the word, "Kingdom" in context of the same day
in other verse: To whom belongs the kingdom of this day? To Allâh, the
One, the Subduer (of all) (40:16).

**TRADITIONS**

ar-Riâ (a.s.) said in explanation of the divine words: In the name of
Allâh: "It means: ‘I mark my soul with one of the marks of Allâh', and
it is (His) worship." He was asked: "What is the ‘mark'?" He said; "The
brand." (\`Uyûnu '1-akhbâr and Ma'âni 'l-akhbâr).

The author says: This meaning emanates from the explana­tion given
earlier that the preposition, "in", herein connotes beginning. As the
servant marks his worship with the name of Allâh, he brands his soul -
real doer of the worship - with one of the divine marks.

It is narrated in at-Tahdhîb from as-Sâdiq (a.s.), and in \`Uyûnu
'l-akhbâr and at-Tafsîr of al-\`Ayyashi from ar-Ridâ (a.s.) that this
verse "is nearer to the Greatest name of Allâh than the iris of the eye
is from its white".

The author says: This tradition will be explained when we shall talk
about the Greatest name.

Amiru ‘l-mu'minîn (a.s.) said that (this verse) is from the chapter of
The Opening; and verily the Apostle of Allâh used to recite it and count
it as one of its verses, and he used to say, "The Opening of the Book is
\`the seven oft-repeated' (verses)". ( \`Uyûnu 'l-akhbâr )

The author says: This matter has also been narrated by the Sunni
narrators. ad-Dâr-qutnî narrates from Abû Hurayrah that he said: "The
Apostle of Allâh said: When you recite (the chapter of) The Praise
(i.e., The Opening), you shall recite, In the name of Allâh, the
Beneficent, the Merciful, because it is the source of the Book and (is)
the seven oft-repeated (verses), and, In the name of Allâh, the
Beneficent, the Merciful is one of its verses.

as-Sadiq (a.s.) said: "What have they done? May Allâh destroy them!
They proceeded to the greatest verse of the Book of Allâh, and thought
that it would be an innovation (unlawful act) if they recited it loudly!
" (al-Khisâl )

al-Baqir (a.s.) said: "They stole the most exalted verse of the Book of
Allâh, (that is) In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful. It
should be recited at the start of every big or small work, so that it
may be blessed.

The author says: There are numerous traditions of this meaning coming
from the Imams of Ahlu 'l-bayt (a.s.). All of them prove that the verse
(In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful) is a part of every
chapter, except the ninth (" Re­pentance") ; and the Sunni traditions
also prove it Anas (ibn Malik) said that the Apostle of Allâh said:
"Just now a chapter has been sent down to me." Then he began reciting,
"In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent, the Merciful. " (as-Sahih,
Muslim).

Abu Dawud narrates from Ibn \`Abbas (and they say that its chain is
"correct") that he said: "Verily, the Apostle of Allâh did not know the
separation of a chapter (and in another narrative it is \`end of a
chapter' ) until came down to him: In the name of Allâh, the Beneficent,
the Merciful. "

The author says: This matter has been narrated by Shi \`ite narrators
also from al-Baqir (a.s.).

It is reported in al-Kâfi, at-Tawhîd, Ma’âni '1-akhbâr and at-Tafsîr of
al-\`Ayyashi that as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said, inter alia, in a tradition: "And
Allâh is God of everything, ar-Rahmân (the Beneficent) for all His
creations, ar-Rahîm (the Merciful) es­pecially for the believers."

as-Sâdiq (a.s.) has said: "ar-Rahmân (the Beneficent) is a special name
with a general attribute; and ar-Rahîm (the Merciful) is a general name
with a special attribute."

The author says: The preceding commentary may explain why the mercy of
"the Beneficent" is general for the believer and the unbeliever alike,
and why that of "the Merciful" is reserved for the believer only. The
description given in this tradi­tion that "the Beneficent is a special
name with a general attribute, and the Merciful is a general name with a
special attribute ", perhaps this refers to the fact that the mercy of
the Beneficent is limited to this world and is common for the whole
creation; and that of the Merciful is common to this world and the
here­after but is reserved for the believer. In other words, the mercy
of the Beneficent is reserved for the creative blessings that are
bestowed on believers and unbelievers alike; and that of the Merciful is
common to the creative and legislative blessings (the latter opening the
way to happiness and felicity) and is reserved for believers, because
only the bounties bestowed upon them will last for ever, and the (good)
end is for guarding (against evil) and for piety.

It is narrated in Kashfu '1-ghummah that as-Sâdiq (a.s.) said: "A mule
of my father was lost. He said: \`If Allâh brought it back to me, I
would thank Him with praises He would be pleased with.” Shortly
afterwards, it was brought before him with its saddle and rein (intact).
When he sat on it and arrayed his clothes, he raised his head towards
heaven and said: ‘Praise be to Allâh.’ He said nothing more. Then he
said: “I did not omit, nor did I leave out, anything; I have declared
that all praises are for Allâh, Powerful and Great is He!; because there
is no praise but it is included in this (formula)."

It is narrated in \`Uyûnu 'l-akhbâr that 'Ali (a. s.) was asked about
its explanation. He said: "Verily, Allâh has explained to His servants
broadly some of His bounties on them, as they can­not know all His
bounties in detail - they are beyond enumer­ation and description.
Therefore, He said: Say: ‘All praise is for Allâh on what He has
bestowed upon us.’ "

The author says: The Imam points to the fact mentioned earlier that the
praise, in this verse, is from the servant, and that Allâh has revealed
it to teach him the manners of servitude and worship.

**FROM PHILOSOPHICAL POINT OF VIEW**

Reason tells us that an effect, as well as all its characteristics and
affairs, depend on its cause; whatever perfection it may be having, is a
shadow of the cause. If beauty or goodness has any existence, then its
perfect and independent entity is for Allâh only, as He is the Cause of
all causes. The praise and thank is ad­dressed, in reality, to the cause
which creates the perfection and excellence referred to. As every
perfection is caused by Allâh, every praise and thank, in reality, is
addressed to Allâh. There­fore, all praise is for, and due to Allâh.

QUR’?N: Thee do we worship and Thee do we beseech for help:

"al- Abd"() means slave, a human being who is owned. In its abstract
sense, it is applied to other intellectual beings also, as the words of
Allâh show: There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come
to the Beneficent God as (“\`abdan" = ) a slave (19:93). In modern
usage, it is commonly translated as ‘servant'

"al –‘Ibâdah " ( = to serve, to worship, to obey) is derived from this
word. Its inflexion and meaning changes accord­ing to the context.
al-Jawhari has written in his dictionary, as-?ihâh, that "the basis of
al-‘ubûdiyyah ( = bondage, servitude) is "al-khudu’ ( =) submission."
But this explanation is not of the word; it only shows a concomitant
quality of its meaning; because al-khudu\` is used with the preposition
“li” (), and al-\`ibâdah is used without any preposition.[^1]

When a servant of Allâh worships Him, he stands before the Lord as a
slave stands before his master. That is why worship is diametrically
opposed to arrogance and pride - but it is not so opposed to polytheism;
after all, a slave may be jointly owned by two or more masters. Allâh
says: Verily those who are arro­gant to My worship shall soon enter
Hell, disgraced (40:60). Also He says: . . . and he should not join
anyone in the worship of his Lord (18:110). It should be noted here that
polytheism - joining someone in the worship of Allâh - is a possibility,
and that is why it has been made subject of this prohibition; none
forbids an impossible thing. But arrogance does not exist with worship,
and that is why the expression, "arrogant to my worship ", has been used
in the first verse.

Servitude is effective in those affairs which are owned or controlled
by the master; and not in other matters related to the slave, like his
being son of his father, or having a height of so many centimetres -
there is no submission or servitude in such things. But the mastership
of Allâh is not limited; His mastership is not shared by anyone else,
nor is the servitude of the creatures divided between Allâh and someone
else. A master has only limited authority over his servants - he may
employ them to perform certain duties, but he cannot kill them or punish
them unjustly. But Allâh has total and all-encompassing authority over
His servants; He does whatsoever He wills with them and about them. His
ownership is unconditional and unlimited; and the servitude of His
creatures is likewise unconditional and un­limited. This "ownership" is
true and exclusive on both sides: The Lord has the exclusive ownership,
and the slave has the exclusive servitude. The construction of the
sentence, "Thee do we worship", points to this exclusiveness - the
object, "Thee", has been placed before the verb, and worship is
mentioned with­out any condition.

It has been explained earlier that the owned thing exists and subsists
because of, and with, its owner. In this sense, it should not divert an
onlooker's attention from its owner. You look at a house belonging to
Zayd; if you are looking at it merely as a house, you may possibly lose
sight of Zayd; but if you look at it from the angle that it is a
property of Zayd, you cannot wean your thoughts from him.

The only true attribute of the universe is that it is created and owned
by Allâh. Nothing in the creation can hide the divine presence, nor
should looking at these things make one forgetful of Allâh. He is ever
present, as He has said: Is it not sufficient as regards your Lord that
he is a witness over all things? Now surely they are in doubt as to the
meeting of their Lord; now surely He encompasses all things (41:53-54).
The true worship, therefore, is that in which the worshipped and the
worshipper both are present. Allâh should be worshipped as the One who
is present before the worshipper - and that is why the third person of
the preceding verses has been changed to the second person in this
verse, "Thee do we worship". The worshipper should be present before his
Lord, not only with his body but also with his soul; otherwise, the
worship would be a body without soul, a form without life. Nor should he
divide his attention between his Lord and someone (or something) else -
neither openly, (as the idol worshippers do) - nor secretly (like the
one whose mind is on something else while worshipping Allâh, or the one
who worships Allâh because he wants to enter the Garden or to save
himself from the hell). All these diversions are various facets of
poly­theism, and Allâh has forbidden it in His Book: . . . therefore,
worship Allâh, being sincere to Him in religion (39:2). Now, surely,
sincere religion is for Allâh (alone), and (as for) those who take
guardians besides Him, (saying): We do not worship them save that they
may make us nearer to Allâh, surely Allâh will judge between them in
that in which they differ (39:3 ).

Worship shall be a true worship when it is done with pure intention,
and this purity has been named as the presence of the worshipper. This
will happen only when the attention of the Worshipper is not fixed on
anyone other than Allâh (otherwise, it would be polytheism); and when
his aim of worship is not any other hope or fear like that of the
paradise or the hell (otherwise, the worship would not be purely for
Allâh). Moreover, he should not be concerned with his own self, as it
would tantamount to egotism and arrogance, completely opposite of
submission and servitude. Probably the plural pronoun - "we" worship -
points to this fact; it negates the individuality of the worshipper as
he includes himself in a multitude of people; it removes egotism,
creates humility, and effaces the tendency of self-importance.

The declaration of one's servitude with the words, "Thee do we
worship", is free from all defects, so far as its meaning and purity are
concerned. Yet, as the servant describes the worship as his own act, it
could create an impression that he thought to be independent in
existence, power and will, while in fact he is only a slave and slave
owns nothing. The second sentence, "and Thee do we beseech for help",
removes this possible misunder­standing. It means: "We ascribe the
worship to ourselves and make this claim only with Thy help; we are
never independent of Thee. In other words, the complete verse, "Thee do
we worship and Thee do we beseech for help”, gives a single meaning, and
that is "worship with purity of intention". Probably, that is why both
sentences have the same style; otherwise, it could be said, 'Thee do we
worship; help us and guide us . . .' The style has been changed in the
next verse, "guide us . . ." and its reason will be explained later.

The above-given explanation makes it clear why the pro­nouns in this
verse have been changed from the third to the second person; why the
restrictive device of putting the object ("Thee") before the verb has
been chosen; why the worship, in "do we worship", is used without any
condition; why wor­shipper includes others with him in this declaration
of allegiance and worship; why the second sentence is needed after the
first; and why both have the same construction and style.

The scholars have written other fine points about this verse; the
reader is advised to refer to their books for this purpose; Allâh is the
creditor whose debt can never be repaid.


