Chapter 4 : 2:6-7
=================

Surely those who disbelieve, alike is it to them whether you warn them
or do not warn them, they will not believe (6). Allâh has set a seal
upon their hearts and upon their hearing; and there is a covering over
their eyes; and for them is a great punishment (7).

**COMMENTARY**

QUR’?N: Surely those who disbelieve. . . will not believe: They were
the people who obstinately clung to rejection of faith and in whose
hearts disbelief had established deep roots. This may be inferred from
the fact that warning them and not warning them was all alike to them;
they would not move from their obduracy. Probably it refers to the
disbelievers of Quraysh, who were the bitterest enemies of Islam and who
did try their utmost to extinguish the light of faith; they persisted
stubbornly in their enmity until Allâh destroyed them in Badr and other
battles. The sentence, "alike is it to them whether you warn them or do
not warn them, they will not believe", strengthens this interpre­tation;
because it could not be applied to all the disbelievers of the world -
otherwise the door of guidance would be closed. Also, this same sentence
has come in Chapter of Yâsin (36:10) which is a Meccan chapter. Then it
appears in this chapter that is the first chapter revealed at Medina.
(It was revealed before the battle of Badr.) Therefore, more probably
this verse also refers to the same Meccan group. In other places too the
same explanation may be given to the word, "those who disbelieve",
unless there is a reason to the contrary.

Likewise, wherever the word, "those who believe", has been used in the
Qur’ân it refers to the first and early Muslims - unless there is any
reason to believe otherwise. .This style of address was reserved for
them as a protocol of honour.

QUR’?N: Allâh has set a seal. . . great punishment: Allâh has ascribed
the sealing to His own action, but the covering over their eyes is
attributed to their own selves. It shows that they had put a curtain on
their souls against the light of truth - it was their own choice. Then,
after their sins and disbelief, Allâh put another curtain or seal over
their souls. Their disbelief and misdeeds thus fall between two
curtains - the first from them­selves, the second from Allâh.

Its further explanation will be given under 2:26; Surely Allâh is not
ashamed to set forth any parable - that of a gnat or any thing above
that . . .

Disbelief, like belief, has various degrees and ranks; and its effects
also vary, like those of belief.

**TRADITIONS**

az-Zubayri says that he said to as-Sâdiq (a.s.): "Tell me how many ways
of al-kufr ( = disbelief, infidelity, to cover) are there according to
the Book of Allâh? Mighty and Great is He! He (the Imâm) said:
\`Disbelief, according to the Book of Allâh, is of five types. There is
the disbelief of denial (and denial is of two kinds), and the disbelief
by neglecting what Allâh has ordered, and the disbelief of disavowal,
and the ingratitude. As for the disbelief of denial, it is denial of the
Lord­ship; it is the talk of those who say: "there is no Lord (i.e.
Cre­ator), nor any Garden nor Fire". It is the word of two groups of
disbelievers who are called atheists. And they are those who say:
"nothing destroys us but time" (45:24). It is a religion invented by
them as it seemed good to them, but they have no proof to support their
view. That is why Allâh has said (about them): And they have no
knowledge of that; they only con­jecture (ibid.), that it is in reality
as they say. And He also said: Surely those who disbelieve, alike is it
to them whether you warn them or do not warn them, they will not
believe.' "(al-Kâfi)

And as for the second kind, it is the denial after knowing; it means
that the denier denies (the existence of God), but he knows (very well)
that He is the truth, and he is convinced of it (in his heart). And
Allâh has said (about such people): And they denied them unjustly and
proudly while their soul had been con­vinced of them (27:14) ; . . . and
aforetime they used to pray for victory against those who disbelieved,
but when there came to them that which they did recognize (i.e. the
Prophet) they dis­believed in him; so Allâh's curse is on the
unbelievers (2:89).

So this is the explanation of the two kinds of denial.

And the third way of disbelief is ingratitude to the bounties (of
Allâh) ; and it is as Allâh says quoting (the Prophet) Sulayman "This is
of the grace of my Lord that He may try me whether I am grateful or
ungrateful; and whoever is grateful, he is grate­ful only for his own
self, and whoever is ungrateful, then surely my Lord is Self-sufficient,
Honoured " (27:40) ; If you are grateful, I would certainly give you
more, and if you are ungrateful, My chastisement is truly severe (14:7).
Therefore remember Me, I will remember you, and be thankful to Me, and
do not be ungrateful to Me (2 :152) . (In all these verses Allâh has
used the word al-kufr = disbelief, to denote ungratefulness, and
in­gratitude. )

And the fourth way of disbelief is leaving out or neglecting what Allâh
has ordered to do. It is as Allâh says: And when We made a covenant with
you: You shall not shed your blood and you shall not turn your people
out of your cities; then you gave a promise while you witnessed. Yet you
it is who slay your people and turn a party from among you out of their
homes, backing each other up against them unlawfully and exceeding the
limits; and if they should come to you as captives, you would ransom
them - while their very turning out was unlawful for you. Do you then
believe in a part of the book and disbelieve in the other? (2:84-85). In
this verse Allâh has charged them with disbelief because they did not
follow the commandment of Allâh; (it should be noted that) Allâh has (in
this very verse) linked them to belief, yet He did not accept it from
them and it did not benefit them before Allâh. So Allâh (further) said:
What then is the reward of such among you as do this but disgrace in the
life of this world, and on the day of resurrection they shall be sent
back to the most grievous chastisement, and Allâh is not at all heedless
of what you do (ibid.)

And the fifth way of disbelief is disavowal. It is as Allâh says,
quoting lbrahim (a.s.) ". . . we renounce you, and enmity and hatred
have appeared between us and you for ever until you believe in Allâh
alone" (60:4), that is, we disavow and repudiate you. And He says,
describing Iblîs and his disowning his friends from mankind on the Day
of Resurrection: ". . . surely I dis­believed in your associating me
(with Allâh) before" (14:22). And also He says: And he said: "You have
only taken for yourselves idols besides Allâh by way of friendship
between you in the world's life, then on the resurrection day some of
you shall deny others, and some of you shall curse others . . . (29:25)
, that is, some of you shall dissociate from others.

The author says: This tradition confirms what we have previously
mentioned that disbelief has many grades and ranks.


