Chapter 5 : 2:8-20
==================

And there are some people who say: "We believe in Allâh and in the last
day"; while they are not at all believers (8). They desire to deceive
Allâh and those who believe, and they do not deceive except themselves
and they do not perceive (9) . There is a disease in their hearts, so
Allâh added to their disease and for them is a painful chastise­ment
because of the lie they were saying (10). And when it is said to them,
"Do not make mischief in the land", they say: "We are but peace-makers"
(11). Now surely they themselves are the mischief-makers, but they do
not per­ceive (12). And when it is said to them: "Believe as the people
have believed ", they say: "Shall we believe as the fools have believed?
" Now surely they themselves are the fools, but they do not know (13).
And when they meet those who believe, they say: "We believe "; and when
they are alone with their Satans, they say:

"Surely we are with you, we were only mocking" (14). Allâh pays them
back their mockery, and leaves them alone in their rebellion blindly
wandering on (15) . These are they who buy error for the guidance, so
their bargain brings (them) no gain, nor are they guided aright (16).
Their parable is like the parable of one who kindled afire, but when it
had illumined all around him, Allâh took away their light, and left them
in utter darkness - they do not see (17). Deaf, dumb (and) blind, so
they will not turn back (18). Or like an abundant rain from the heaven
in which is utter darkness and thunder and lightning; they put their
fingers into their ears because of the thunder peals, for fear of death,
and Allâh encom­passes the unbelievers (19). The lightning almost takes
away their sight; whenever it shines on them they walk in it, and when
it becomes dark to them they stand still; and if Allâh had pleased He
would certainly have taken away their hearing and their sight; surely
Allâh has power over all things (20) .

**COMMENTARY**

These thirteen verses are about the hypocrites. We shall discuss this
subject in detail in Chapter 63 (The Hypocrites) and in some other
places.

QUR’?N: They desire to deceive: "al-Khad'ah" () is deceit, duplicity.

QUR’?N: When they are alone with their Satans: "ash-Shaytân" () means
evil, wicked; that is why the Iblîs is called the Satan.

QUR’?N: Their parable is like the parable of one who kindled a fire . .
. they will not return: The hypocrites are like a man who is surrounded
by a blinding darkness in which he cannot distin­guish good from bad,
beneficial from harmful; to remove it he kindles a fire, and in its
light is able to see to some distance around it; then as soon as it has
illumined all around, Allâh, extinguishes it by wind, rain or some other
thing like it and he is left as he was before - in utter darkness. And
now he is pressed between two darknesses - that of the night and that of
bewilderment and nullity of his endeavour. This parable fits exactly on
hypocrites. A hypocrite declares himself to be a Muslim, and through it
gains some benefits, as he is treated as a Muslim in matters of marriage
and inheritance etc. But as soon as death approaches - the time when the
real and complete benefits of Islam should have ap­peared - Allâh takes
away the light, nullifies his deeds and leaves him in utter darkness in
which he cannot see at all. Thus he falls between two darkness - his
original one and the one he added with his dark deeds.

QUR’?N : Or like an abundant rain . . . Allâh has power over all
things: "as-Sayyib " ( = abundant rain); "al- barq " ( = lightning;
flesh of lightning); "ad-ra'd" ( = thunder that is heard after
lightning); "as-sâ \`iqah " ( = thunderbolt, to strike with
lightning).

This is another example for the hypocrites. A man is caught in a
rainpour; darkness surrounds him, he is unable to see around and loses
his bearings. The rain tells him to run away; to find a shelter
somewhere, but darkness prevents him from it; frightening thunder and
lightning-bolts have overwhelmed him, yet when lightning appears he
tries to take its advantage by walking ahead in its light - but it
appears only for a fleeting moment and then disappears; whenever it
shines he walks ahead and when darkness I engulfs him again he stops.

A hypocrite is exactly in the same position. He does not like Islam,
but has to profess to be a Muslim. His words do not reach his heart;
what he says is different from what he believes in his heart. Because of
this discrepancy his path is not illuminated as it should have been. The
result is that he gropes about aimlessly and stumbles every now and
then; he walks a little and then stops. Thus Allâh punishes him with
disgrace; and had He wished so, He would have taken away his sight and
hearing, thereby disgracing him on the very first day.


