The Reality of Miracle: According To the Quran
==============================================

The Qur’ân repeatedly asserts the occurrence of miracle - an unusual
preternatural phenomenon, which shows the authority of metaphysical
forces over the physical and material world. Miracle is not something
against self-evident rational truth.

Some people have tried to explain away the verses that describe various
miracles; their aim was to make the Qur'ân fit the principles of modern
physical sciences. But such attempts are unacceptable, as they are a
forced burden on the language and the Qur’ân.

We are going to explain, under various headings, what the Qur’ân
teaches us about the meaning and reality of miracle.

**1. The Qur’ân Confirms the General Rule of the Cause-and-Effect**

The Qur’ân says that in this natural world every thing, every effect,
has a cause; that there is a system of cause-and-effect permeating
through this world. It is a self-evident reality; and on this truth
depend the scientific and academic researches and discussions. Man by
nature believes that there must be a cause for every natural phenomenon.
Likewise, academic researches try to find out relevant causes for all
such happenings. What is a cause? It is such a thing, or a combination
of things, that when­ever it occurs, another thing - its effect -
unfailingly comes into being. We try to find out by experiments the
causes of various things. For example, experience has taught us that if
there is any burn, it must have bbeen caused by fire, movement, friction
or some such cause. A cause must be unfailable, compre­hensive and
universal. In other words, whenever and wherever the cause is found, its
effect must be found.

This matter is clearly confirmed by the Qur’ân. It takes this principle
for granted when it talks about life, death, susten­ance and other
heavenly or earthly phenomena - although it ultimately ascribes all the
effects, and their causes too, to Allâh.

The Qur'ân, therefore, confirms the general system of the
cause-and-effect; whenever a cause is found (with all its necess­ary
conditions) its effect must come into being, and whenever we see an
effect, it surely and unfailingly proves the existence of its cause.

**2. The Qur’ân Affirms Miracle (Super-Natural Events)**

The Qur’ân, nevertheless, narrates many an event that goes against the
normal, natural system of the cause-and-effect. It ascribes many
super-natural miracles to various prophets, like Nûh, Hûd, Sâlih,
Ibrâhîm, Lût, Dâwûd, Sulaymân, Mûsâ, \`Isâ and Muhammad (peace of Allâh
be on them all!). It should not be forgotten here that those events,
although abnormal and uncus­tomary, were not inherently impossible; they
were not like an assertion that \`A positive proposition and its
opposite are affirmed together and are negated together'; or like a
statement that \`A thing can be separated from its own self'; or that
\`One is not a half of two'. We instinctively know that such
propositions are impossible, they cannot be. But the miracles shown by
the proph­ets were not of this category; otherwise, the minds of untold
billions of religionists, since the dawn of humanity, would not have
accepted them and believed in them. No man accepts an inherently
impossible statement, nor does any sane person ascribe such a thing to
another.

Moreover, the effects that are called miracle, are not un­known to the
nature. The natural world is continuously engaged in bestowing on the
matter one form after the other, turning one event into another, giving
life to the dead, and death to the living, transforming the misfortune
into fortune and the comfort into discomfort. All this is happening
daily in the world of nature; the only difference between a natural
event and a miraculous one is in the speed and steps required to reach
the goal. A natural cause brings about its effect, in special
conditions, at a particular time and space, step by step in a long
series of changes. The matter present in a walking-stick may one day
appear in a running ser­pent; a disintegrating skeleton may one day
become a living man - but in its natural course it will take a very long
time, under certain conditions of time and space, with numerous
consecutive causes which would constantly change that particular matter
from one form to the other, taking it from one step to the next and then
to the third and so on, until it appears in the required shape and form.
In normal way, it cannot happen without its proper causes, without its
necessary conditons; nor can it be brought into being by will-power of a
human being. But when it comes to a miracle, it happens just by the will
of the prophet, without any material cause and without any lapse of

Of course, it is very difficult for a simple mind - as it is for a
scientific brain - to understand such super-natural events; man is,
after all, accustomed to the natural-causality. On the other hand, no
scientist can outright reject occurrence of super-natural phenomena even
in this atomic age. Every day someone or the other demonstrates his
skill bringing some super-natural events about; people see it, radios
and televisions broadcast it, news­papers and magazines publish it; and
nobody says that it could not have happened as it was against the laws
of nature.

Such phenomena have led many modern scholars to the theory that man,
like everything else, is surrounded by unknown magnetic or electric
currents; man may, through rigorous train­ing, get control over the
surrounding currents, and use them to affect other material things in
abnormal and unusual ways, bring­ing those astonishing feats about.

If this theory is proved correct and all-inclusive, it will supercede
all present theories that explain various happenings and effects in
terms of motion and power; it will replace all previous causes with one
all-pervasive natural cause: the mag­netic currents.

This is their theory. They are right in their belief that every natural
phenomenon must have a natural cause if the causal relationship between
them is intact.

The Qur’ân has not identified by name any all-pervasive natural cause
that would explain all natural and super-natural events, as it is not
within the main purposes of this divine book. But it affirms that every
natural phenomenon has a natural cause - by permission of Allâh. In
other words, every phenomenon is totally dependent on Allâh, Who has
appointed for it a certain procedure, a natural cause through which it
gets its existence -the existence that is given by Allâh. Allâh says:
and whoever fears Allâh He will make for him an outlet, and give him
susten­ance from whence he thinks not; and whoever trusts in Allâh, He
is sufficient for him; surely Allâh attains His purpose; Allâh indeed
has made a measure for every thing (65:2-3) . Its first sentence
unreservedly declares that whoever fears Allâh and has trust in Him,
Allâh is sufficient for him, and He will surely manage his affairs and
make him succeed, even if in the normal way it may seem impossible, even
if the material causes go against him. It is supported by the following
verses: And when My servants ask you concerning Me, then verily I am
very near; I answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls on Me (2
:186) ; Call upon Me, I will answer you (40:60); Is not Allâh sufficient
for His servant? (39:36).

The next sentence, "surely Allâh attains His purpose", explains the
reason of the first declaration. The same theme is found in the verse: .
. . and Allâh is predominant over His affair, but most people do not
know (12 :21). This sentence too is all-inclusive and without any
condition. Allâh has His own way to let a thing happen, if He so wills -
even if the normal ways are closed, even if usual paths to it are cut
off.

This may possibly happen in two ways: First, Allâh may bring that thing
into being simply by His will, without resorting to any material or
natural cause. Second, there may be an alter­native natural cause,
unknown to us, which Allâh may have ap­pointed for that phenomenon; it
may be hidden from our eyes but the Maker and Creator, Who has
prescribed it, knows it and uses it to attain His purpose. This second
possibility seems more appropriate in view of the last sentence, "Allâh
indeed has made a measure for every thing." This sentence shows that
every effect, whether it is in accordance with the normal causality or
not, has a measure appointed by Allâh, is related to other beings, has a
connection with other things; Allâh may bring that effect into existence
through any other related thing, even if the normal cause is absent.
What should not be forgotten is the basic fact that it is Allâh Who has
bestowed causality on a cause; this rela­tion of cause and effect is not
independent of Allâh.

Allâh has created causal relation between various things. He can attain
His purpose through any way He wishes. No doubt, there is the system of
cause-and-effect in the world; but this chain is in the hands of Allâh,
He may use it in any way He wills. There is a real causal relation
between a thing and the things that have preceded it; but that reality
is not as we know it - that is why no academic or scientific theory is
capable of explaining all phenomena of the world; it is really as Allâh
knows, makes and manages it.

This basic principle has been referred to in the verses of "decree" or
"measure": And there is not a thing but with Us are the treasures of it,
and We do not send it down but in a known measure (15:21). Surely We
have created every thing according to a measure (54:49); . . . and Who
created every thing, then ordain for it a measure (25:2). Who created
then made complete, and Who made (things) according to a measure then
guided (them to their goal) (87:2 - 3) . Look also at the following
verses: No misfortune befalls on the earth nor in your own souls, but it
is in a book before We bring it into existence (57:22). No affliction
comes about but by Allâh's permission; and whoever believes in Allâh, He
guides aright his heart; and Allâh is Cognizant of all things (64:11).

These verses (and especially the first) show that the things take their
particular identity in accordance with a measure ap­pointed for it by
Allâh; that measure gives it its individuality and defines it; and that
measure and definition precedes the thing and then accompanies it. A
thing can be properly delineated only if it is seen in its perspective,
clearly defining its relation to all other things. The other related
things serve as a mould that gives this item its peculiar shape and
particular form. Every material effect is connected with all things
which precede or accompany it. All such things together serve as the
cause of this effect; and this one in its turn becomes a part of the
cause of other effects that come later.

Also, it may be proved from the following two verses: That is Allâh,
your Lord, the Creator of every thing. . . (40:62) ; . . . there is no
living creature but He holds it by its forelock; surely my Lord is on
the straight path (11:56) . Add to them the fact that the Qur’ân
confirms the general system of causality -and you will find the complete
picture displayed before your eyes.

1. The first verse says that every thing is created by Allâh, and the
second one states that creation is on a single pattern; there is no
deviation in it as that would cause chaos and disturbance.

2. The Qur’ân confirms the general system of causality for all material
things.

3. It follows that every material thing and effect is invariably always
created by a cause - a cause that precedes it and brings it into being.
It makes no difference whether it is a normal and usual cause, or a
supernatural one. There must always be a cause.

4. Many usual causes which sometimes fail to bring about the expected
effects are not the real causes. The real causes are those which never
fail to create the expected effects. An example may be given of various
diseases and their causes; influenza was previously thought to be caused
by cold; but cold did not always create it, now it has been discovered
that it is caused by a virus. The same is true about many supernatural
feats.

**3. Whatever is Caused by Natural Causes is Really Caused by Allâh**

The Qur’ân, while affirming the causal relation between a cause and its
effect, ascribes every effect to Allâh. The inference is that these
normal and usual causes are not independent in creating their effects;
the real cause, in the true sense of this word, is only Allâh. Allâh
says: surely His is the creation and the command (7:54); Whatever is in
the heavens and whatever is in the earth is Allâh's (2:284); His is the
kingdom of the heavens and the earth (57:5); Say: “All is from Allâh"
(4:78). There are numerous such verses showing that everything belongs
exclusively to Allâh; He may deal with it in any way He likes; no one
else can handle it at all except by permission of Allâh; He allows
whomsoever He wishes to manage, influence and effect it to a certain
extent. But this divine permission, establishing the relation of
causality, does not make that cause independent of Allâh; it is just a
permission given by the real owner to use his property. The man having
this permission cannot transgress the limits imposed by the owner. Allâh
says: Say: "O Allâh, Master of kingdom! Thou givest the kingdom to
whomsoever thou pleasest and takest away the kingdom from whomsoever
Thou pleasest (3:26); Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its
cre­ation, then guided it (to its goal) (2:50) ; . . . whatever is in
the heavens and whatever is in the earth is His; who is he that can
intercede with Him but by His permission? (2:255); . . . and He is
firmly established on Arsh, regulating the affair; there is no
intercessor except after His permission (10:3).

The causes do have the causality because Allâh has given it to them.
They have got it, but are not independent of Allâh. It is this factor
that has been described in above verses as "inter­cession" and
"permission". Permission means that there was an impediment which, but
for this permission would have hindered the now-authorized agent from
interfering in this affair.

In short, every cause has been given the power to create the relevant
effect; but the real authority is yet in the hands of Allâh.

**4. The Souls of the Prophets do have Influence Over the Super-Natural
Events**

Allâh says: . . . and it was not meet for an apostle that he should
bring a sign except with Allâh's permission; but when the command of
Allâh came, judgement was given with truth, and those who treated (it)
as a lie were lost (40:78).

The verse shows that it was the apostle who brought the sign - by
permission of Allâh. The souls of the prophets were given a special
power to cause the miracle; and that causal power, like all other
causes, created its effect with permission of Allâh.
Again Allâh says: And they followed what the Satans chant (of sorcery)
against the kingdom of Sulaymân; and not that Sulaymân disbelieved, but
(it was) the Satans that disbelieved, they taught men sorcery and what
was sent down to the two angels at Babylon, Hârut and Mârut: Yet these
two taught no one until they had said, "Surely we are only a trial,
therefore do not be a disbeliever". Even then men learned from these two
that by which they might cause a separation between a man and his wife;
and they cannot hurt with it any one except with Allâh's permission
(2:102).

This verse proves two things: magic has some reality; and it, not
unlike miracle, is caused by a psychical factor of the magician, by
permission of Allâh.

Take a miracle, a magic, a mysterious wonder of a saint, or a
spell-bringing skill acquired through rigorous practice - all these
extra-ordinary or super-natural deeds emanate from their agents'
psychical factors - or will-power - as the above-mentioned verses have
shown. But Allâh has made it clear that the psychical cause found in His
apostles, prophets and believers is predominant, has the mastery, over
all other causes, in all imaginable conditions; it can never be
overpowered. Allâh says: And certainly Our word has already gone forth
in respect of Our servants, the apostles: Most surely they shall be the
assisted ones, and most surely Our host alone shall be the victorious
ones (37:171-173). Allâh has written down: I will most certainly
prevail, I and My apostle . . . (58:21). Most surely We help Our
apostles and those who believe, in this world's life and on the day when
the witnesses shall stand (40:51). As you see, these verses do not put
any condition or restriction on the promised victory; the apostles and
the believers shall be victorious over their adversaries in all
conditions and situations.

It may be inferred from it that this divine source is some­thing
metaphysical, preternatural. Material things are, in their nature,
measured and limited; they get the worst of it if they are faced by
another thing which is superior in power. But this preternatural
spiritual source, which is assisted by the will of Allâh, is never
defeated by any factor; whenever it is faced by any material adversary,
it is given by Allâh a far more superior power to achieve victory with
flying colours.

**5. Whatever is Caused by Psychical Power Depends on a Command from
Allâh**

Read again the last sentence of the verse 40:78, mentioned at the
beginning of the preceding chapter: "but when the com­mand of Allâh
came, judgement was given with truth, and those who treated (it) as a
lie were lost". You will see that the super­natural event caused by the
psychical power of the agent depends on a command from Allâh - in
addition to His permission. That command may coincide with the said
permission, or may be one with it. The command of Allâh is His creation,
described by the word ‘Be' in the verse: His command, when He intends
anything, is only that He says to it, "Be", and it is (36:82). Also
Allâh says: Surely this is a reminder, so whoever wishes takes to his
Lord a way. And you do not wish except that Allâh wishes; surely Alldh
is Knowing, Wise (76:29-30). It is naught but a reminder for the worlds,
for him among you who wishes to go straight. And you do not wish except
that Alldh wishes, the Lord of the worlds (81:27-29). These verses show
that the affairs which are within the sphere of the man's will, and
under his control and authority, are still dependent on the divine will
for their existence. What these verses say is this: The intentional
actions of a man are done by his will; but that will itself depends on
the will of Allâh.

The verses do not say that whatever is wished by man is wished by
Allâh. Had it been the case, no human wish would have remained
unfulfilled - because it would have become the will of Allâh! Also, many
verses refute this idea; And if We had wished We would certainly have
given to every soul its guidance . . . (32:13). And if your Lord had
wished surely all those who are in the earth would have believed
(10:99).
Our will depends on the divine will; our action depends on our will,
and also they depend - indirectly, through our will -on the will of
Allâh. And both our will and action depend on the command of Allâh - on
His word, "Be".

Things, affairs and events may be either natural or super­natural; and
the super-natural may be either on the side of good, like miracle, or on
that of evil, like magic and sooth saying. But all of them come into
being through natural causes, and at the same time they depend on the
will of Allâh. In other words, they cannot come into being unless the
natural cause coincides, or becomes one, with the permission and command
of Allâh. All things are equal in this respect; but when a prophet
brings about a miracle, or a good servant of Allâh prays to Him for a
thing, an additional factor, that is, the decisive command of Allâh, is
added thereto; and the desired effect or event unfailingly comes into
being. Allâh says: Allâh has written down: I will most cer­tainly
prevail, I and My apostles (58:21) ; I answer the prayer of the
suppliant when he calls on Me. . . (2:186). See also other such verses
quoted in the preceding chapter.

**6. The Qur’ân Attributes the Miracle to an Invincible Cause**

The preceding chapters have made it clear that miracle, like other
natural and super-natural things, needs a natural cause; and that all
causes depend on some metaphysical causes. All these events and effects
may, thus, be divided into four categories:

First: The normal events: They come into being by normal apparent
causes which are accompanied by real causes - in most cases those real
causes are material ones; arid those causes depend on the divine will
and. command.

Second: The extra-ordinary events of evil nature, like sor­cery and
sooth saying: They are caused by natural but unusual and abnormal
causes, which are accompanied by the real causes; and those causes
depend on the divine permission and will.

Third: The extra-ordinary events of good nature, like a prayer answered
by Allâh: They are caused by the natural and real cause, with permission
and will of Allâh - but such events do not contain any element of
challenge, that is, they do not purport to prove the truth of any call
or claim.

Fourth: The miracles: The extra-ordinary, super-natural events of good
character, which are brought about as a challenge, to prove the truth of
the call or claim. They too are caused by the natural and real causes
with permission and will of Allâh.

The third and fourth categories have an extra quality in them: Their
cause is fortified by an invincible factor; it can never be overpowered,
as it is always accompanied by the decisive command of Allâh.

Question: It is strange to say that miracle is caused by a natural
cause. Suppose, we discover the real natural cause of a miracle; will it
not then be possible for us to create that miracle? If yes, then
miraculousness would be a relative matter; any action would be a miracle
in the eyes of those who are unaware of its cause, but quite an ordinary
thing for those who know. In the same way, an event that was believed to
be a miracle in dark ages would not be so impressive in this age of
science and knowledge. If scientific research found out the real natural
causes of the miracles, there would be no miracle at all - and no
miracle could be used to prove the truth of the prophet's claim. What
all this leads to is this: A miracle is not a proof except against him
who is ignorant of its natural cause; therefore, it cannot be put as an
evidence of the truth of the prophet's claim.

Reply: Miraculousness of a miracle does not depend on unknowability of
its cause; nor is it a miracle because it emanates from an extraordinary
or mysterious cause. It is a miracle because it is brought about by such
an extraordinary cause which is in­vincible, which cannot be overcome,
cannot be defeated. Let us look at the case of a seriously sick person,
who, all of a sudden, is cured by the prayers of a believer. It is
called a miraculous event, because it emanates from an invincible cause.
We know that patient could be cured by medical treatment, and it would
have been a normal process; but this cause, that is, the medical
treatment, could be foiled by other more powerful factors; and that is
why it is not called a miracle.

**7. The Qur’ân Counts Miracle as a Proof of the Truth of the Claim of
Prophethood**

Question: What is the connection between miracle and veracity of the
claim of prophethood? Reason fails to see any binding relation between
the two. But the Qur’ân time and again asserts this concomitancy, as may
be seen in the stories of various prophets, for example, Hûd, Sâlih,
Mûsâ, \`Isâ and Muhammad (peace of Allâh be on all of them!). The Qur’ân
narrates that no sooner did they announce their claim than they were
asked by their people to bring some miracle to prove the truth of their
claim; and they responded to it by showing the miracle.

Not only that. Some of them were given their miracle even before their
nations had asked them for it. Allâh told Mûsâ (a.s.) at the start of
his mission: Go you and your brother with My signs and be not remiss in
remembering Me (20:42) . And He says about \`Isâ (a.s.): And (will make
him) an apostle to the children of Israel: "That I have come to you with
a sign from your Lord, that I create for you out of dust like the form
of a bird, then I breathe into it and it becomes a bird with Allâh's
permission and I heal the blind and the leper, and bring the dead to
life with Allâh's permission and I inform you of what you eat and what
you store in your house; most surely there is a sign in this for you, if
you are believers" (3:49).

The same is the position of the Qur’ân which was given to the Prophet
right at the start of his mission. The reason does not see any
connection whatsoever between the truth of the message of an apostle or
a prophet on one hand and his ability to show a super-natural sign on
the other.

Moreover, the beauty of the principles expounded by the apostles and
the prophets, strengthened as it is by irrefutable proofs, dispenses
with the need of any miracle - for an intelligent and knowledgeable
person. That is why it is said that miracles are needed for convincing
the simple-minded people, because they cannot understand a learned
discourse; but knowledgeable persons do not need them.

Reply: The prophets had not brought the miracles to prove any principle
of religion, like belief in Oneness of God and the Day of Resurrection
etc. - the truth of which could be realized by intellect and reason.
They always proved such things with reasoning and logical arguments. For
example, Allâh says regarding the existence of the Creator: Their
apostles said: "Is there doubt about Allâh, the Master of the heavens
and the earth?" (14:10); and He says about resurrection: And We did not
create the heaven and the earth and what is between them in vain; that
is the opinion of those who disbelieve; then woe to those who disbelieve
on account of the fire. Shall We treat those who believe an and do good
like the mischief-makers in the earth? Or shall We make those who guard
(against evil) like the wicked? (38:27-28).
Why were, then, the apostles asked to show miracle, and why did they
bring it about? It was to prove that they were in fact sent by Allâh; it
was meant to authenticate their claim.

The prophets claimed that they were sent by Allâh, that He had revealed
His message to them - either directly or through an angel. It was an
assertion of a super-natural event; a claim of a reality beyond the
physical senses and mental cognization of their people; a fact above the
level of man's perception. If that claim was right, it would be a
special metaphysical disposition reserved for the prophets only. The
difficulty was that the proph­ets were like any other human being in
their humanity and in its characteristics. How could they be favoured
for this especial relationship with the world beyond nature?

The disbelievers, therefore, resorted to two methods to disprove the
prophets' claim:

First Method: They tried to refute it through such "argu­ments" as the
following:

a) They said: "You are nothing but human being like us; you wish to
turn us away from what our fathers used to worship" (14:10). The
apostles were like all other men; and other men do not receive such
divine revelation as was claimed by the apostles. If they could be given
revelation from God, why could not others get it as well? Were not all
of them alike in their humanity?

The apostles replied to it in these words: Their apostles said to them:
"We are nothing but human beings like yourselves, but Allâh bestows
(His) favours on whom He pleases of His servants. . . " (14:11) . They
accepted that they were like all men in their humanity, but showed that
apostleship was a very especial favour of Allâh, and He bestows it on
whom He pleases. It is not difficult to. see that being alike does not
preclude some of them from being reserved for some especial favours. Of
course, if Allâh had pleased, He could have bestowed it on anyone among
them, but He chose for this favour whom He pleased. The same was the
thrust of their protest against the Prophet: "Has the reminder been
revealed to him from among us?" (38:8)

b) Of the same nature, but with added sarcasm, were the following
remarks of the polytheists of Mecca: And they say: "Why was not this
Qur'ân revealed to a man of importance in the two towns? " (43:31) And
they say: "What sort of apostle is this that he eats food and goes about
in the marts; why has not an angel been sent down to him so that he be a
warner with him? Or a treasure be thrown down to him, or be for him a
garden from which he may eat!" (25:7-8)

What they wanted to say was this: If the Apostle (of Islam) really has
been chosen by God to receive divine revelation, then he must be someone
above all the mortals. Then why does he require food to eat, and why is
he obliged to go about in the markets to earn his livelihood? If he is
truly a representative of God, he should have been accompanied by an
angel to assist trim in his work, or he should have been given a
treasure to save him the trouble of earning his livelihood in the
markets, or a garden should have been bestowed on him, so that he would
not need a food like ours.

Allâh answered them in these words: See how they coin comparisons for
thee! So they have gone astray, therefore they shall not be able to find
a way . . . And We did not send before thee any messengers but they most
surely ate food and went about in the markets; and We have made some of
you a trial for others; will you bear patiently? And your Lord is
Ever-seeing (25:9,20). And in reply to their demand for sending down an
angel, it was said in another chapter: And if We had made him angel, We
would certainly have made him a man, and We would certainly have made
confused to them what they make con­fused (6:9).

c) Going further, they raised their demands even higher: And those who
do not hope for Our meeting, say: "Why have not angels been sent down
upon us, or (why) do we not see our Lord? " Now certainly they are too
proud of themselves and have revolted a great revolt (25:21) . According
to their thinking, there was no difference between them and the Prophet;
all were human beings. Then why should he be reserved for this office of
apostleship? They too should be visited by angels; or, even better, they
should see the Lord. Allâh replied to them: On the day when they shall
see the angels, there shall be no joy on that day for the guilty, and
they shall say: "It is a forbidden thing totally prohibited" (25:22) .
It means that if they persist in their dis­belief, they shall not see
the angels except at the time of death, and then they shall not find any
joy in it. The same thing has been mentioned in another verse: And they
say: "O you to whom the Reminder has been revealed! you are most surely
insane. Why do you not bring to us the angels if you are of the truthful
ones?" We do not send the angels but with truth, and then they would not
be respited (15:6-8).

d) This last verse shows us one more twist of their "argu­ments". The
Prophet, according to their thinking, was truthful in his claim of
revelation, but he was insane; whatever news he brought was a product of
his unstable mind and was, therefore, not correct. The same "argument"
was put against Nûh (a.s.), as the Qur’ân says: . . . and they called
(Nûh) mad, and he was driven away (54:9).

These were the variations of their "arguments" against the claims of
the Prophet, the arguments which were based on similarity of the
prophets and their people in their humanity.

Second Method: It was to reject outright the claim of the prophets, and
demand from them proof of their veracity, asking them to bring some
signs to show that they were in fact represen­tatives of Allâh and
recipients of His revelation.

The apostles and the prophets claimed a distinction which was
intangible and unknowable to their people. They claimed that they were
given apostleship and /or prophethood; that they were spoken to by
Allâh - either directly or through angels. Now, such a claim could not
be verified by any test or experiment. It could be objected against in
two ways: (i) There was no proof that such a claim was true; (ii) there
was proof that it was not true. Revelation, divine speech, (and the
resulting sharî\`ah and religious discipline) could not be experienced
by anyone other than the claimant; the normal system of cause and effect
was against it. If such a claim were true, it would mean that the
Prophet was in direct contact with the world beyond nature; he was tuned
to the divine power - the power that can change the course of nature,
can make the effect appear without their usual causes. In that case, he
should be able to produce some another tangible super-natural effect;
after all one super-natural event is like any other super-natural event
so far as the divine authority is concerned. If Allâh spoke to the
Prophet - a super-natural effect - He should show on his hands some
other tangible super-natural effects in order to prove the truth of his
former claim, that is, the claim that he receives revelation from God.
If God wanted to guide the people aright by means of a super-natural
thing, that is, revelation, then let Him prove the truth of His Prophet
by means of another super-natural, that is, miracle.

That was why the people asked for miracles whenever a prophet was sent
to them. They wanted miracles to verify his claim of prophethood, and
not to ensure the truth of his teach­ings. Suppose a man is sent by a
ruler to his subjects with his commands and laws. He reaches his
destination and they ask him for his credentials. Will they be satisfied
if, at this juncture, he starts explaining the wisdom underlying each
rule and regulation? Certainly not. They will say: All that you have
said, just shows that these rules are based on wisdom and meant for our
good; but it does not prove in any way that they are from our ruler, nor
that you are his deputy authorized to manage our affairs on his behalf.
We shall believe in your claim only when you show us a credential to
this effect, for example, an appointment letter duly signed by the ruler
and having his official seal. It is as the polytheists had said to the
Prophet: ". . . until you bring down to us a book which we may read"
(17:93).

From the above explanation, two things become abundantly clear

First: Miracle has an inseparable. connection with the truth of the
claim of prophethood. Learned and ignorant, elite and common, all men
need miracle in order to be able to accept the truth of a prophet's
claim.

Second: What the prophet receives and perceives of the revelation is
entirely different from those things which we feel by senses or
comprehend by intellect. In plain words, revelation is not a function of
mind; it is a reality totally separate from "right thinking". This fact
is brilliantly clear from the Book of Allâh; and no one, having an iota
of common sense, can entertain any doubt about it. But in recent times
some "scholars" have closed their eyes from this reality, and tried to
reinterpret the spiritual facts and divine knowledge in the light of the
natural sciences. They have, accordingly, based their explanations on
materialistic theory. They believe that human perception and
comprehension is a characteristic of matter, emanating from the brain.
They are of the opinion that all real merits and perfections – whether
of an individual or of a group - are developments of matter only. Based
on these premises, they have explained prophethood and all related
spiritual factors on the following materialistic lines:

Prophethood is a sort of a sharp mental power, an intel­lectual genius.
The genius who is called prophet, looks at the social conditions of his
nation; analyses what they have inherited of the beliefs, ideas, customs
and superstitions; and then changes them to conform with the needs of
his time and place, in the most suitable manner. In that light, he
frames for them the basic social principles and ordains practical rules
and regulations - in order to raise their standard of life, to elevate
their morality and ethics, to make them better members of society.
Basing on this hypothesis, they have declared that:

1) Prophet is an intellectual genius, who calls his people to the good
of their social life.

2) Revelation is the good thought which comes into his mind.

3) Divine book is the collection of those good thoughts and ideas,
inasmuch as they are free from personal desires and selfish motives.

4) Angels who, the prophet says, come to him, are only the natural
material forces which keep the world going. Or, they are psychological
traits which lead the man to his perfection. The Holy Ghost is a higher
development of those material forces, which rains those pure ideas on
the prophet's mind. Satan is a retrogression of the same material
forces, which poisons the minds with evil thoughts and incites the
people to anti-social deeds. In the same vein they have explained away
all the realities which the prophets have told us about - like the
Tablet, the Pen, the Throne, the Chair, the Book, the Reckoning, the
Garden, and the Fire.

5) Religions are products of times; they change with the times.

6) The miracles, attributed to the prophets, are nothing more than
myths and fictions; which were forged in the in­terest of religion, to
strengthen the belief of common people; or to enhance the prestige of
religious leaders in the eyes of their followers.

This in short is their explanation. But prophethood, in this meaning,
should rather be called a political device than a divine reality. It is
not possible here to throw light on its various facets. What the
readers, however, should not overlook is that this inter­pretation has
no resemblance whatsoever to what has been de­scribed in the Books of
Allâh and the traditions of the prophets. What led these "scholars" to
such interpretations was their total submission to materialistic
theories; that was why they rejected every metaphysical reality, and
tried to bring it down to the level of lifeless matter.

Such peoples are academic descendants of an earlier group: Many early
theologians interpreted every religious reality - the Throne, the Chair,
the Tablet, the Pen, the Angels etc. - in material terms, adding, at the
same time, that those things existed beyond the grasp of our senses.
Needless to say that that inter­pretation was not based on any actual
experiment or sensual perception. Now that the area of physical sciences
has expanded so much, and every thing is being analyzed, tested and
experi­mented on, this later generation was obliged to reject the idea
of physical existence of those religious realities, because, as
mentioned above, their existence could not be proved by any test or
experiment. Therefore, they had to invent other meanings for those
realities, well within the area of sensual perception. They thought that
they were serving the cause of religion in this way - because their
interpretation would bring those realities within the sensual and
physical recognition, and thus save them from being totally rejected by
modern scholars.

Both groups have strayed from the right path. The ancient theologians
correctly understood the meanings of these words, without resorting to
any allegorical interpretation. But they erred when they thought that
those were material things although beyond the purview of sensual
perception, not subjected to the laws of matter.

The modern scholars took the wrong way from the very start; they gave
these words wrong meanings in their eagerness to make them conform with
material realities; in their attempt to pull these sublime truths down
to the level of physical experience.

The correct way is to explain these words according to the dictates of
the language and the usage; then shall come the stage of identifying
what, how and where, for example, the Pen is. This should be done with
the help of other relevant verses. After the Pen is identified, it may
be compared with current scientific ideas to check whether it goes
against them. If that examination reveals that the identified entity was
beyond the domain of matter, then it should not be proved, or disproved,
by the principles of physical sciences. The science is concerned with
material and physical things. What authority has it got to judge
metaphysical or spiritual things? Can we allow a linguist to prove, or
disprove, a proposition of astronomy by the rules of grammer? If not,
then why should the rules of physical sciences be applied to prove,
disprove or interpret metaphysical realities?

QUR’?N: But if you do (it) not - and never shall you do (it) -then be
on guard against the fire of which men and stones are the fuel; it is
prepared for the unbelievers. And convey good news to those who believe
and do good deeds, that for them are gardens in which rivers flow;
whenever they shall be given a portion of the fruit thereof, they shall
say: "This is what was given to us before;- and they shall be given the
like of it, and they shall have pure mates in them; and in them they
shall abide.

The chapter began with description of three groups: the pious ones, the
disbelievers and the hypocrites. But then all of them were joined
together by the words, "O men!", calling them to worship Allâh. In this
context, they could be divided in two groups only: those who answered
this call (i.e. the believers) and those who did not answer it (i.e. the
disbelievers). The hypocrites do not come into this picture, probably
because in their appearance they are with the first group, while in
reality they are included in the second. Perhaps, that is why the
previous designation of the first group (those who guard against evil)
has been changed here for "those who believe".

"al-Waqud" () is fuel. The verse says that man himself is the fuel of
the hell. He is his own fuel, to keep the fire burning, and to get
himself burned in that fire. Allâh says: then in the fire shall they be
burned (40:72). It is the fire kindled by AllAh, which rises above the
hearts (104:6-7). Man shall be burned in a fire that will be kindled and
fueled by his own self.

The next verse, 2:25, runs parallel to it and we find the same
principle at work here also: "whenever they shall be given a portion of
the fruit thereof, they shall say: \`This is what was given to us
before;' and they shall be given the like of it". It indicates that man
shall get there only what he has himself pre­pared here. The Prophet has
said: "As you live so you will die, and as you die so you will be
raised." But the people of the paradise have a pleasant distinction
vis-a-vis the people of the fire, because they shall be given
ever-increasing rewards by their Lord: They have therein what they wish
and with Us is more yet (50:35).

" . . . of which men and stones are the fuel": The stones referred to
here are the idols which the disbelievers worshipped. Allâh says: Surely
you and what you worship besides Allâh are the firewood of hell . . .
(21:98) .

" . . . they shall have pure mates in them": The adjective "pure",
inasmuch as it qualifies the "mates", refers to purity from all such
things as may create aversion and unpleasantness - whether in their
bodies or in their behaviour. In other words, the mates given to the
believers in paradise will be free from every disagreeable
characteristic or trait.

**TRADITIONS**

as-Sadûq narrates that as-Sâdiq (a.s.) was asked about this verse and
he said: "The pure mates are the ones who shall be free from
menstruation and other excrements."

The Author says: Some other traditions have expanded the meaning to
include cleanliness from all defective traits, all characteristics
causing aversion.


