Translator's Note
=================

"A fact of this world life" is an expression, which is unknown to the
majority of us. One who has knowledge of this life is in fact the
smartest and the most successful of all people. On the one hand, worldly
life is a fact that nobody can deny. On the other hand, it is extremely
difficult to acquire a comprehensive knowledge of it.

Almighty Allah(S.W.T.) poses us a basic question:

"What! did you then think that had created you in vain and that you
shall not be returned to us?" (Al-Qur'an 23:115)

In this Divine question two points are clear: One is that "life is a
fact" and the other is that "it has a purpose". In many places the Holy
Qur'an has made this point clear by giving us examples of past historic
events. The wealth of Shaddad and Fir\`aun (Pharaoh), and persons of
such categories, perished. They left this world ;with nothing but their
own deeds and they are tasting the punishment for the evils they
committed. Some of the verses of the Holy Qur'an have make it clear that
this worhtless world is nothing but play. For example:

"And this life of the world is nothing but a sport and play: and as for
the next abode, that most surely is the life - did they but know!

"(Al-Qur'an 29:64) I think we should strive hard, by using whatever
means and sources we have, to understand this worldly life.

HADITH AL-QUDSI (Sacred Hadith) is one of; the sources which opens up
our eyes, shakes us up, and awakens us so that we may think. For
example: "O Son of Adam! obey Me to the extent of your deeds towards Me.
Disobey Me to the extent of your ability to tolerate the Fire of Hell.
Collect wealth in this world according to the length of your stay here.
Collect for the Hereafter (Aakhirah) according to the length of your
stay here. Do not think that your death is far and that the Bounties
(you receive from Allah) will always be available, or that your sins are
hidden." (Al-Hadith Al-Qudsi, Hadith No.13)

The materialistic world has dragged humankind into a race of unlimited
desire. This mad search for pleasure, excitement, new sensations and the
accumulation of material wealth, results in a disgracerful life. This
drive to experience more and more is the direct and root cause of all
family and social problems and manifests itself in genocide, homicide,
substance abuse, child abuse and violence towards women.

The so-called "civilized" countries of our time have failed to
understand this, although they possess sophisticated weapons to defend
their values as well as accurate computers. In my view, Islam is the
only solution to all of these problems. Not only does it teach that we
should be achievers in this worldly life, but it also teaches humankind
to have God-consciousness (Taqwa). THE THREE WAYS OF COMMUNICATION OF
ALMIGHTY ALLAH:

As Mawlana Sayyid Akhtar Rizvi expresses in his book The Qur'an and
Hadith:

"According to the Muslims, the Revelations from God can be of three
kinds:

a) Al-Qur'an: Where the words and meanings both are revealed from God,
and it is meant to be a miracle in itself. Such Revelation is the
Qur'an. No other Revelation was meant to be a miracle, challenging the
antagonists to bring its 'like' if they can, and prophesying that they
can never do it. b)Hadith Al-Qudsi: Where the words and meanings are
both from God, but it is not intended to be a miracle. It is found in
the Books of Traditions and generally begins with these words: "The Holy
Prophet said that Allah said".

c)Hadith: Where only the meanings are from God, but the words are of
Prophets. Inspirations, and also Traditions of the Prophet of Islam come
into this category."

The Hadith Al-Qudsi is scattered in the Books of Tradition. Some of the
scholars have made attempts to compile them. This presentation of Hadith
Al-Qudsi has been taken from the book Kalimatullah by the great scholar
Aqai Sayyid Hassan Shirazi. As a child I would listen to my father's
speeches and his daily communications. From time to time he used to
mention these Hadith Al-Qudsi.

Consequently, I have been reading them over and over again. This
completion of Scared Hadith has been translated into Urdu by the late
Maulanay sayid Ali Muhammed Ijlal Lakhnavi of India. I hope that readers
will benefit from this translation, and pray for me and for the entire
Muslim Ummah for their unity.


Was Salaam.
S.M. ZAKI BAQRI


