Chapter 4
=========

Almighty Allah says:

O, Son of Adam! a person who starts his day with greed for this world,
finds no increase (in wealth) from Allah, and he is far from Allah. From
this world nothing added to his wealth but struggle, and for the
hereafter he has added exertion. Almighty Allah has added grief in his
heart that will never end. Almighty Allah will add to his poverty which
will never change into wealth, and increase his wishes and leave them
unfulfilled.

O, Son of Adam! every day of your life is getting shorter, but still
you do not understand? Each day I send down to you My bounties, but you
are not thankful to Me for them. You are not content with little nor are
you satisfied with much.

O, Son of Adam! not a single day misses but that your provision comes
to you from Me; and not a single night passes, but that My angles give
Me accounts of your bad deeds. You eat My provision, and you still
disobey Me; but still when you call Me, I still answer you. From Me,
good bounties descend upon you and from you. And from you, sinful deeds
come up to Me.

How good a master I am and how bad a servant you are! I give you what
ever you ask Me, but still you go on sinning. I hide these sins, one
after another, one evil deed after another. I am ashamed of you, but you
are not ashamed of Me? You forget Me, but I remember you. You are afraid
of people, and you are careless of Me. You fear enmity of people, but
you do not fear My wrath?


<p dir="rtl">
الحديث الخامس‏
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَابْنَ آدَمَ!! لَا تَكُنْ مِمَّنْ يَطْلُبُ التَّوْبَةَ بِطُولِ الأمَلِ
وَيَرْجُو الآخِرَةَ بِغَيْرِ عَمَلٍ، يَقُولُ قَوْلَ الزّاهِدِينَ وَ
يَعْمَلُ عَمَلَ الْمُنَافِقِينَ، إنْ أُعْطِىَ لَا يَقْنَعُ وَ إِنْ
مُنِعَ لَا يَصْبِرُ، يَأمُرُ بِالْخَيْرِ وَ لَا يَفْعَلُهُ، وَ يَنْهَى
عَنِ الشَّرِّ وَ لاَ يُنْهَى عَنْهُ، وَ يُحِبُّ الصَّالِحِينَ وَ لَيْسَ
مِنْهُمْ، وَ يُبْغِضُ الْمُنَافِقِينَ وَ هُوَ مِنْهُمْ .
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَابْنَ آدَمَ!! مَا مِنْ يَوْمٍ جَدِيدٍ إِلَّا وَ الأَرْضُ تُخَاطِبُكَ
وَ تَقُولُ: يَابْنَ آدَمَ، تَمْشِي عَلى ظَهْرِي وَ مَصِيرُكَ في بَطْني
وَتُذْنِب عَلَى ظَهْرِي وَ تُعَذَّبُ في بَطْنِي؛ يَابْنَ آدَمَ، أَنا
بَيْتُ الوَحْدَةِ وَ أنَا بَيْتُ الْوَحْشَةِ وَ أَنَا بَيْتُ الظُلْمَةِ
وَ أَنَا بَيْتُ العَقَارِبِ وَ الْحَيَّاتِ وَ أَنَا بَيْتُ الهَوانِ،
فَاعْمُرِني وَ لَا تَخْرَبْنِي.
</p>


**Chapter 5**

Almighty Allah says:

O, son of Adam! don not be like the one; who seeks pardon because of
his unlimited desires. Who hopes for heaven, but does not do good deeds;
Who speaks like pious person, but acts like hypocrites; Who has been
blessed by bounties, but is not content; And if who is given (bounties),
is not patient; Who advises others to do good deeds, but he himself
indulges in evil ones. Who advises others to stay away from evil deeds,
but he himself does not stay away from them; Who hates hypocrites, but
is one of them.

O, Son of Adam! the earth always says "You walk on me, but in the end
you will be within my bowls. I am a dwelling where you will have to stay
all alone. I am a dwelling which is full of ferocious things, such as
serpents and scorpions. So, O, Son of Adam, do good deeds and thereafter
enter me; only then would you be happy and without hardships."

<p dir="rtl">
الحديث السادس‏
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَابْنَ آدَمَ!! مَا خَلَقْتُكُمْ لِأَسْتَكْثِرَ بِكُمْ مِن قِلَّةٍ، وَ
لَا لِأَسْتَأنِسَ بِكُمْ مِنْ وَحْشَةٍ، وَ لَا لِأَسْتعِينَ بِكُمْ عَلَى
أَمْرٍ عَجَزْتُ عَنْهُ، وَ لَا لِاَجْلِ مَنْفَعَةٍ وَ لَا لِدَفْعِ
مَضَرَّةٍ، بَلْ خَلَقْتُكُمْ لِتَعْبُدُوني طَوِيلاً وَ تَشْكُرُوني
كَثِيراً وَ تُسَبِّحُوني بُكْرَةً وَ أصِيلاً، وَ لَو أنَّ أَوَّلَكُم وَ
آخِرَكُمْ وَ حَيَّكُمْ وَ مَيِّتَكُمْ وَ صَغِيرَكُمْ وَ كَبِيرَكُمْ
وَحُرَّكُمْ وَ عَبْدَكُمْ وَ إِنْسَكُمْ وَ جِنَّكُمْ اجْتَمَعْتُمْ عَلَى
طَاعَتِي لَمَا زَادَ ذلِكَ في مُلْكِي مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ، وَ لَوْ أَنَّ
أَوَّلَكُمْ وَ آخِرَكُمْ وَ حَيَّكُمْ وَ مَيَِّتَكُمْ وَ صَغِيرَكُمْ وَ
كَبِيرَكُمْ وَ حُرَّكُمْ وَ عَبْدَكُمْ وَ إنْسَكُمْ وَ جِنَّكُمَ
اجْتَمَعتُمْ عَلَى مَعْصِيَتي مَا نَقَصَ ذلِكَ مِنْ مُلْكِي مِثْقَالَ
ذَرَّةٍ، وَ مَنْ جَاهَدَ فَإنَّمَا يُجَاهِدُ لِنَفْسِهِ، إِنَّ اللَّهَ
غَنِىُّ عَنِ العَالَمِينَ.
</p>


**Chapter 6**

Almighty Allah says:

O, Children of Adam! I did not create you so as to: increase Myself out
of poverty through you, or to seek companionship through you after being
lonely, or to seek your help on matter in which I was inefficient, or
for the sake of a benefit or for warding off harms. But I created you so
you can worship Me constantly and thank Me a lot, and praise Me day and
night. Were the first you of and the last of you: those of who are
living and those of you who are dead, your youngesters and your elders,
your slaves your masters, the human among you and the jinn among you, to
join hand in hand, in order to obey Me, you would not be adding an atom
to My kingdom.

Were the first you of and the last of you: those of who are living and
those of you who are dead, your youngesters and your elders, your slaves
your masters, the human among you and the jinn among you, to join hand
in hand, in order todisobey Me, you would not reduce an atom in My
Kingdom. "Thus everything is perishable but He" (28:88).

If you fear of Hell fire like you fear poverty, I would have made you
wealthy to such an extent that nobody whould have been able to count
your wealth. If you desire of heaven as you desire this world, I would
have showered My blessings upon you in this world and hereafter. Don't
make your heart dead out of love for this world. Indeed, this world is
going to bring an end to you very soon. The one who struggles (in the
path of Allah (Jihad) is struggling for his own soul. Indeed, Allah is
self sufficient above any need of the worlds (3:97).


