Chapter 10
==========

<p dir="rtl">
الحديث العاشر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَابْنَ آدَمَ!! قَد جَاءَكُمُ الْحَقُّ مِنْ رَبِّكُمْ فَمَنْ شَاءَ
فَلْيُؤْمِنْ، وَ مَنْ شَاءِ فَلْيَكْفُرْ، وَ إنَّكُمْ لَا تُحْسِنُونَ
إلَّا بِمَنْ أَحْسَنَ إِلَيْكُمْ وَ لَا تَصِلُونَ إلَّا لِمَنْ
وَصَلَكُمْ وَ لَا تُكَلِّمُونَ إلَّا لِمَنْ كَلَّمَكُمْ، وَ لَا
تُطْعِمُونَ إلّا لِمَنْ أَكْرَمَكُمْ، فَلَيْسَ لِأَحَدٍ عَلَى أَحَدٍ
فَضْلٌ، إنَّما الْمُؤْمِنُونَ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَ رَسُولِهِ
الّذِينَ يُحْسِنُونَ إلَى مَنْ أسَاء إلَيْهِمْ، وَيَصِلُونَ إلَى مَنْ
قَطَعَهُمْ وَ يُعْطُونَ إلَى مَنْ حَرَمَهُمْ، وَ نُنْصِفُونَ مَنْ
خَانَهُمْ، وَ يُكَلِّمُونَ إلَى مَنْ هَاجَرَ مِنْهُمْ وَ يُكَرِّمُونَ
مَنْ أَهَانَهُمْ .
</p>

Almighty Allah says:

O, Son of Adam! indeed the truth has been revealed to you from your
Lord. Whoever wants to believe in Him, let him believe. And whoever
wants to disbelieve, let him be a disbeliever. Indeed you are not good
to a person, unless he is good to you. And you are not kind to your
relatives, unless they are good to you. And you do not talk to a person,
unless he talks to you. And you do not feed a person, unless he feeds
you. And you are not just to a person, unless he is just to you.

And you do not respect a person, unless he respects you. No one is
superior over the another. Indeed, the believers are: those who believe
in Allah and His Messengers, do good to those who are bad to them, are
kind to those who break ties of relationship with them, give to those
who do not give to them, just to those who are unjust to them, talk to
those who isolate themselves from them, respectful to those who don't
respect them.

<p dir="rtl">
الحديث الحادي عشر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَا أَيُّها النَّاسُ!! إِنَّما الدُّنْيَا دَارُ مَنْ لاَ دَارَ لَهُ وَ
مَالُ مَنْ لاَ مَالَ لَهُ وَلَهَا يَجْمَعُ مَنْ لاَ عَقْلَ لَهُ وَبِهَا
يَفْرَحُ مَنْ لاَ يَقِينَ لَهُ وَعَلَيْها يَحْرِصُ مَنْ لاَ تَوَكُّلَ
لَهُ وَيَطْلُبُ شَهَوَاتِها مَنْ لاَ مَعْرِفَةَ لَهُ؛ فَمَنْ أَخَذَ
نِعْمَةَ زَائِلَةَ وَ حَياة مُنْقَطِعَة وَ شَهْوَةً فاِنيَة ظَلَمَ
نَفْسَهُ وَ عَصَى رَبَّهُ وَ نَسِىَ آخِرَتَهُ وَ غَرَّتْهُ حَيَاتَهُ.
</p>

**Chapter 11**

Almighty Allah says:

O, You People! this world is a house for one who has no house. This
world is wealth for the one who has no wealth. One who is not have
certaint of the Hereafter, collects wealth in this world. One who does
not have trust in Allah, is greedy for this world. One who does not have
knowledge of Allah, desires this world. So, one who takes of the
exhaustible bounties in this short worldly life, and follows his
perishable desires, indeed he has been unjust to his soul. That person
is sinful to Allah and he has forgotten his hereafter. That persons life
has deceived him!

<p dir="rtl">
الحديث الثاني عشر
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَابْنَ آدَمَ!! أُذْكُروا نِعْمَتِي الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتُ عَلَيْكُمْ؛ كَما
لاَ تَهْتَدُونَ السَّبِيلَ إِلَّا بِالدَّلِيْلِ فَكَذلِكَ لاَ
تَهْتَدُونَ طَرِيقَ الْجنَّةِ إلَّا بِالْعِلْمِ وَ كَمَا لا
تَجْتَمِعُونَ الْمَالَ إِلّا بِالتَّعَبِ وَ كَذلِكَ لا تَدْخُلُونَ
الْجَنَّةَ إِلاّ بِالصَّبْرِ عَلى الْعِبَادَةِ فَتَقَرَّبُوا
بِالنَّوافِلِ وَاطْلُبُوا رِضَائِي بِرَضاءِ الْمَساكِيْنِ فَإنَّ
رَحْمَتِي لا تُفَارِقُهُمْ طَرْفَةَ عَيْنٍ أَبَداً.
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
يَا مُوسَى!! اسْمَعْ مَا أقُولُ وَالْحَقُّ مَا أقُولُ إِنَّهُ مَنْ
تَكَبَّرَ عَلى مِسْكِيْنٍ حَشَرْتُهُ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ عَلى صُورَةِ
ذَرَّةِ تَحْتَ أقْدَامِ النَّاسِ وَمَنْ تَعَرَّضَ بِهْتْكِ سِتْرِ
مُسْلِمٍ أهْتِكُ سِتْرَهُ سَبْعِيْنَ مَرَّة وَمَنْ تَوَاضَعَ لِعَالِمٍ
أوْ وَالِدَيْهِ رَفَعْتُهُ في الدَّارَيْنِ وَمَنْ أهَانَ مُؤْمِناً
مُسْلِماً لِفَقْرِهِ فَقَدْ بَارَزَنِي في الْمُحَارَبَةِ، وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ
مُؤْمِناً مِنْ أجْلِي صَافَحَتْهُ الْمَلائِكَةُ في الدَّارَيْنِ في
الدُّنْيا سِرّاً وَفي الآخِرَةِ جَهْراً.
</p>


**Chapter 12**

Almighty Allah says:

O, Sons of Adam! call to mind My favors which I bestow upon you.
Without a guide you cannot find the way. In the same way you cannot find
the way to Jannat (heaven), without knowledge. You cannot gather wealth
without struggle. In the same way, you cannot enter heaven except with
patience in My obedience. And you can get closer to Me by practicing
supererogatory acts. And seek My pleasure by pleasing the poor.Indeed My
pleasure never separates from you even for a blink of an eye. O, Musa!
listen to Me! what I say and what I say is the truth. Indeed, one who
has pride and does not associate himself with the poor, I will raise him
on the day of judgement, the size of an atom under people's feet.

The one who disgraces a Muslim, I will disgrace him 70 times. The one
who humbles himself before an A'lim (knowledgeable person) and his
parents, I will raise his dignity in this world and in the hereafter.
One who insults a Muslim and Mo'min (believers) because of his poverty,
indeed, he is calling me to fight with him. The one who loves a Mo'min
(believer) because of Me, Angels will greet him in both the worlds. In
this world, secretly. And in the Hereafter, openly.


