Editors Notes
=============

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحيِمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ كُنْ لِوَلِيِّكَ الْحُجَّةِ بْنِ الْحَسَنِ صَلَواتُكَ
عَلَيْهِ وَ عَليَ آبائِهِ في هَذِهِ السّاعَةِ وَ في كُلِّ سَاعَةٍ
وَلِيّاً وَ حَافِظاً وَ قَائِداً وَ نَاصِراً وَ دَليلاً وَ عَيْناً
حَتّيَ تُسْكِنَهُ اَرْضَكَ طَوْعاً وَ تُمَتِّعَهُ فيِها طَويِلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

**In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

*"O, Allah! Be now and at all times for your representative Hazrat
Hojjat-Ibnil-Hasan (may your blessings be upon him and his ancestors), a
mastr, protector, guide, helper, proof, and guard, until he resides
peacefully on the earth, and let him enjoy (your bounties) for a long
time (to come)."*

\*\*\*\*\*

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

The current book is the English translation of Muntakhab al-athar, which
is probably the largest single collection of traditions about the Mahdi,
peace be on him. The text used for this translation is the printed
edition of Salmān Fārsī publications, 1422 AH. The following notes
should be considered regarding this translation:

All verses of the Quran appear in boldface.

The words between square brackets are usually additions added by the
translator/editor to make the translation of the traditions more
expressive. Sometimes, square brackets have been used for the purpose of
showing differences in different manuscripts.

Some small sections from the original book have been omitted in the
translation. These were mostly explanations by the author about
not-so-common Arabic words used in the traditions. The results of these
explanations have been incorporated in the translated text and have been
used to select suitable equivalent English words. Other sections that
have been omitted were mostly minor variations in the wordings of the
traditions that the author had pointed to in the footnotes. Since these
variations usually had the same meaning in English they have not been
mentioned. Occasionally, the authors explanations have been slightly
altered or shortened to make them more fluent in English.

Verses of the Quran have mostly been translated by the editor (unless
otherwise mentioned).

All instances of ‘ibn’ (meaning son of) have been written as ‘b.’ except
in places where ‘ibn’ is not preceded by a proper noun, e.g. ibn
Qutayba.

For the sake of conciseness and simplicity, the connection between two
narrators in a chain is simply shown using the word ‘from.’ For
instance, if the chain is ‘X narrated to me that Y heard Z say’ it has
been written as ‘From X, from Y, from Z.’

Phrases like: ‘Allah’s blessings be on him and his family’ and ‘peace be
on him/her’ have not been abbreviated as is customary in some
translations.

The word ‘father’ which is written as ‘Abū, Abā, and Abī’ in Arabic, is
only written as ‘Abū’ in the translation, except in places where it is
preceded by b. or ibn in a compound name. In such cases Abī is used in
conformance with the Arabic pronunciation, e.g. Ali b. Abī Ṭālib or ibn
Abī l-Ḥadīd.

‘He says’ is usually used to refer to the author of the last book
mentioned, e.g. “Faraj al-mahmūm, p. 247, he says: ‘A section about what
we have narrated . . .’”

After some of the references in the footnotes, ‘short version’ has been
written. This means that the reference points to a shorter version of
the same tradition mentioned in the main text.

The transliteration used is in accordance with the following table:

Symbol
Transliteration
Symbol
Transliteration
ء
‘
ط
ṭ
Long:
ب
B
ظ
ẓ
ا، آ
ت
T
ع
\`
و
ث
Th
غ
gh
ی
ج
J
ف
f
Short:
ح
ḥ
ق
q
\_َ
خ
kh
ک
k
\_ُ
د
d
ل
l
ذ
dh
م
m
Diphthongs:
ر
r
ن
n
أو
ز
z
ه
h
أی
س
s
و
w
ش
sh
ی
y
ص
ṣ
ة
a, at
ض
ḍ
ال
al-, l-
Since we are fallible, it is inevitable that we will make mistakes. If
you find any in the current book please inform us so they can be
corrected in future versions.

Finally, I would like to thank Mr. Mr Abdol-Hossein Taleie for his
useful suggestions during the reviewing process and Ali Mansouri for
proofreading the draft.

The editor can be contacted through <h.akhoondali@yahoo.com>.


