Section Eight
=============

The traditions that indicate he is from the descendants of the two
grandsons, al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, peace be on them

Comprised of 125 traditions

526. Zakhāīr al-\`uqbā[^1]: The Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be
on him [and his family], said: “From these two—meaning al-Ḥasan and
al-Ḥusayn—is the Mahdī of this nation.”

527. Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr[^2]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Ruzaiq b.
Jāmi\` al-Miṣrī, from al-Haytham b. Ḥabīb, from Sufyān b. \`Uyayna, from
\`Alī b. \`Alī al-Makkī al-Hilālī, from his father who recounts:

I went to the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his
family], during his sufferings in which he passed away. Fāṭima [peace be
on her] was sitting near his head. She began crying until her voice
rose. The Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
looked up to her and asked, “My beloved Fāṭima! Why are you crying?” She
replied, “I fear neglect after you.” He replied, “My beloved Fāṭima! Do
you not know that Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, searched the earth
thoroughly, then chose from it your father and sent him with His
message.

Then, He searched the earth thoroughly and chose from it your husband.
Then he revealed to me that I should marry you to him. O Fāṭima! Indeed
Allah has granted us Ahl al-Bait seven characteristics that have not
been given to anyone before us nor to anyone after us: I am the seal of
the Prophets, the noblest of Prophets in front of Allah, the most
beloved of the creatures to of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, and I
am your father. My heir (waṣī) is the best of heirs and the most beloved
of them to Allah and he is your husband. Our martyr is the best of
martyrs and the most beloved of them to Allah and he is Ḥamzat b. \`Abd
al-Muṭṭalib, the (paternal) uncle of your father and the (paternal)
uncle of your husband.

From us is the one who has two green wings by which he flies where he
wishes in Paradise along with the angels and he is the cousin of your
father and the brother of your husband. From us are the two grandsons of
this nation and they are your two sons—al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn—and they
are the masters of the youths of Paradise. I swear by the One Who truly
sent me, their father is better than both of them. O Fāṭima! I swear by
the One Who sent me with truth, surely from these two is the Mahdī of
this nation.

When the world becomes engulfed in chaos and turmoil, fitnas appear, the
paths are cut-off, and people will loot each other. And when there will
be no elder who will have mercy on the young and there will be no young
who will respect the elders. Then, Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He,
will send from the two of them [i.e. al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn] a man who
will conquer the forts of deviation and the shrouded hearts. He will
rise with religion in the end of times just as I rose with it in the
first era. He will fill the earth with justice just as it will be filled
with injustice.

O Fāṭima, Don’t grieve and don’t cry, for surely, Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, is more merciful and kinder to you than me. This is
because of your position to me and your [close] place to my heart. Allah
has married you to your husband while he possesses the most noble
lineage amongst [the members] of your family, is the most honorable of
them in position, the most merciful of them with the people, the most
just of them in being fair, and the most insightful of them in judgment.
I asked my Lord, Mighty and Majestic be He, that you be the first to
join me from my Ahl al-Bait [after my death].” \`Alī, [peace be on him,]
said, “When the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his
family], passed away, Fāṭima, peace be on her, did not live after him
for more than seventy-five days, and Allah, the Exalted, took her to
him.”

528. Al-Amālī al-Shaykh[^3]: In a lengthy tradition through his chains
of narrators from Imam \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, which
includes Jābir honoring Imam al-Ḥasan and Imam al-Ḥusayn, peace be on
them . . . to where Jābir said:

One day, the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, was with us in the mosque and was surrounded by the people, when
he said to me, “O Jābir! Call Ḥasan and Ḥusayn for me,” and he was
extremely fond of both of them. I went and called them and carried them
in my arms—in turns—until I we reached him. He asked me—and I could see
the joy in his face on seeing me being so affectionate towards both of
them and my respect for them—“Do you love them, O Jābir?” I replied,
“And what would prevent me from that while I know their stature with
you, may my father and my mother be sacrificed for you?”

He said, “Should I not inform you about their virtues?” I replied, “Yes!
May my parents be sacrificed for you!” He said, “When Allah, the
Exalted, intended to create me, He created me as a pure white liquid
(nutfa) which He placed in the loin of my father Adam, peace be on him.
This liquid was continuously transferred from one pure loin to another
pure womb until [it reached] Noah and Abraham, peace be on them. This
continued to \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib, thus, nothing from the filth of
ignorance (jāhiliyya) touched me.

Then, this liquid was split into two halves: One went to \`Abd-Allah and
the other to Abū Ṭālib. I was born to my father [\`Abd-Allah] and Allah
sealed prophethood through me. \`Alī was born to Abū Ṭālib and
waṣiyya[^4] became terminated through him. These two halves—from me and
\`Alī—came together and resulted in the birth of al-Jahr and al-Jahīr
(i.e. al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn) and through them,

He sealed the grandsons of prophethood. He placed my seed (al-dhurriya)
in both of them and ordered me to conquer the city—or cities—of
disbelief. From his seed—pointing to al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him—a person
will emerge in the end of times. He will fill the earth with justice
just as it will be filled with unfairness and injustice. These two are
the pure and purified ones. They are the masters of the youths of
Paradise. Salvation is for those who love them, their father, and their
mother, and woe to those who fight them and have hatred towards them.”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 94–160, 463, 464, 465, 543, 546–548, 550–571, 590, 608, 641,
770, and 786–807.

[^1]: Dhakhā’ir al-uqbā, “Fi dhikr mā jā’a anna l-Mahdī fī ākhir
al-zamān,” p. 136. I say: The mother of Imam Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b.
\`Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn, peace be on them, was Fāṭima, the daughter of Imam
(Ḥasan) al-Mujtabā, the older grandson. Thus, our master Imam al-Bāqir
and all the seven Imams who succeeded him to Imam al-Mahdī, peace be on
them, are from the generation of Imam al-Ḥasan as well as Imam al-Ḥusayn
as has been mentioned by the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him
and his family. This news is knowledge of the unseen and one of the
signs of his prophethood.

[^2]: Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr, vol. 3, pp. 57–58, no. 2675; Ṣifat al-Mahdī
by Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim who has recorded it from him in \`Iqd al-durar,
chap. 7, pp. 151–153, and chap. 9, pp. 217–218, sect. 3; Majma\`
al-zawā’id, vol. 9, pp. 165–166; al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān,
chap. 1, p. 55, no. 1; Dhakhā’ir al-\`uqbā, pp. 135–136. He writes,
“al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū l-\`Alā al-Hamdānī has recorded it in Arba\`īna ḥadīthan
fī l-Mahdī; Kashf al-ghumma, citing al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim in al-Aḥādīth
al-arba\`īn, vol. 2, p. 84, no. 403; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir
al-zamān, chap. 2, pp. 94–95, no. 19; \`Abaqāt al-anwār (India), Under
ḥadīth al-ṭair (The Tradition of the Bird), vol. 4, second minhāj, p.
86; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 137, shortened
version citing al-Ṭabarānī in al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr; al-’Idhā\`a, p. 136;
Usd al-ghāba, vol. 4, p. 42, has recorded a shortened version from Abū
Nu\`aim and Abū Mūsā and also al-’Iṣāba; al-Qaul al-mukhtaṣar, p. 27, he
has recorded that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], said to Fāṭima, [peace be on her], “I swear by the One
Who truly sent me as a Prophet, surely, from these two (meaning al-Ḥasan
and al-Ḥusayn) is Mahdī of this umma.” Al-Dhahabī’s rejection of this
tradition in his book Mīzān al-i\`tidāl is not the least surprising
because he is notorious for rejecting authentic and famous traditions
that glorify the Ahl al-Bait and criticize their enemies. Since this
tradition is in conflict with his desires, he has judged it to be false
and has accused al-Haytham but has not put forward any evidence for his
accusation against al-Haytham or for his rendering it to be false;
except for the fact that he cannot tolerate the merits of the Ahl
al-Bait, peace be on them, which have been mentioned in it. Had this
tradition been in accordance with his desires—that is, against the Ahl
al-Bait and in favor of their enemies like Mu\`āwiya—he would have
announced it to be correct in content as well as chain of narrators and
would have declared its narrators as Sunnis. Surely, we have come from
Allah and to Him we will return. There is no power and strength save
that of Allah, the Exalted, the Great. As far as we are concerned, this
tradition is absolutely reliable in content. There is nothing amazing in
it and there are numerous traditions which support it like the narration
of \`Abāya from Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī and the tradition of Abū Sa\`īd
al-Khudrī that has been recorded in Yanābī\`’ al-mawadda, p. 490, citing
al-Sam\`ānī’s Faḍā’il al-ṣaḥāba from Abū Sa\`īd. Moreover, this view is
reinforced by the fact that this al-Haytham is the same al-Haytham b.
Ḥabīb al-Ṣairafī al-Kūfī—the brother of \`Abd al-Khāliq b. Ḥabīb— about
whom Aḥmad [b. Ḥanbal] has said: “His traditions are the best and his is
his steadfastness is the greatest.” It has not been proven that these
two are two different people, even if ibn Ḥajar claims so. I think that
when people see that they have no rational reason regarding their claims
against this tradition—because it has been narrated by someone like
al-Haytham, who has been praised by Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal using the words
mentioned above—then they claim that there are many al-Haythams!

[^3]: Amālī al-Shaykh, vol. 2, pp. 113–114, no. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol.
37, pp. 44–47, chap. 50, no. 22. I say: Perhaps, it would have been
better if had I mentioned this tradition in the forthcoming chapter.
Anyhow, I have recorded it here by considering the version in Biḥār
al-anwār which seems to be more accurate, and Allah knows the best. It
is like this: “He made my progeny in these two, and the one who will
capture the city—or cities—of disbelief. He will fill the earth . . .”

[^4]: The state of being the heir of a prophet—Ed.


