Section Ten
===========

The traditions that mention he is from the nine Imams from the
descendants of (Imam) al-Ḥusayn, peace be on them

Comprised of 165 traditions

532. Kifāyat al-athar[^1]: Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. al-Muṭṭalib, from
Ibrāhīm b. \`Abd al-Ṣamad b. Mūsā b. Isḥāq al-Hāshimī, from his father,
from \`Abd-Allah b. Bukair [or Bakr] al-\`Anawī [or al-Ghanawī], from
Ḥakīm b. Jubair, from Abū l-Ṭufail \`Āmir b. Wāthila, from Zaid b.
Thābit, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, who said:

\`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib is the leader of the righteous and the annihilator of
the transgressors. Whoever helps him will be helped and whoever deserts
him will be deserted. One who has doubts about \`Alī, peace be on him,
has doubts about Islam. He is the best [person] that can succeed me
after me. The best of my companions is \`Alī; his flesh is my flesh and
his blood is my blood. He is the father of my two grandsons. From the
loins of al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, will emerge nine Imams and from
them is the Mahdī of this nation.

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 127, 129, 168, 170, 173, 181, 191, 193, 205–308, 533–541, 543,
545, 550, 551, 558, 560–571, 590, 786–807, 859, 902, and 973.

[^1]: Kifāyat al-athar, “What has been narrated from Zaid b. Thābit from
the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
concerning the reports about the twelve Imams, Allah’s blessings be on
them”, chap. 12, pp. 96–97, no. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 36, chap. 41, p.
318, no. 168. I say: \`Abd-Allah b. Bukair is al-Ghanawī al-Kūfī; it has
been mentioned in al-Lisān that ibn Ḥibbān has mentioned him amongst the
reliable ones (al-thiqāt) narrators. He has narrated from Ḥakīm b.
Jubair.


