Section Eleven
==============

The traditions that indicate he is the ninth descendant of (Imam)
al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him

Comprised of 160 traditions

533. Kifāyat al-athar[^1]: Abū Ṣāliḥ Muḥammad b. [Faiḍ b.] Fayyāḍ
al-\`Ijlī al-Sāwī, from Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. \`Āmir, from \`Abd-Allah,
from Rukain, from al-Qāsim b. Ḥasan, from Zaid b. Thābit who recounts:

I heard the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, say, “The world will not come to an end until a person from the
loin (ṣulb) of al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, will rise with the affairs of
my nation. He will fill it with justice just as it will be filled with
injustice.” We asked, “Who is he, O Messenger of Allah?’ He replied, ‘He
is the ninth Imam from the loin of al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him.”

534. Kifāyat al-athar[^2]: Muḥammad b. Wahbān b. Muḥammad al-Nahbānī
al-Baṣrī, from al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī al-Bazaufarī, from \`Alī b.
al-\`Abbās, from \`Abbād b. Ya\`qūb, from Mismār b. Nuwayra, from Abū
Bakr b. \`Ayyāsh, from Abū Sulaimān al-Ḍabbī, from Abū Umāma who said:

The Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
said, “The Hour will not be established until the Qā’im from us rises
with the truth. This will occur only when Allah, Mighty and Majestic be
He, permits. Whoever follows him will be saved and whoever remains
behind will be destroyed. O servants of Allah! Be aware O servants of
Allah! Go to him even if [you have to trek over] ice, for he is Allah’s
caliph.” We asked, “O Messenger of Allah! When will the Qā’im from you
rise?” He replied, “When the world falls into chaos and confusion. He
will be the ninth from the loin of al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him.”

535. Kifāyat al-athar[^3]: Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah al-Shaibānī, from
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Ḥafṣ al-Khath\`amī al-Kūfī, from \`Abbād b.
Ya\`qūb, from \`Alī b. Hāshim, from Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah, from Abū
\`Ubaidat b. Muḥammad b. \`Ammār, from his father, from his grandfather
\`Ammār who recounts:

I was with the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, during one of the battles in which \`Alī, peace be on him, had
killed the standard-bearers and scattered them. He had killed \`Amr b.
\`Abd-Allah al-Jumaḥī and Shaibat b. Nāfi\`. I came to the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, and said to him, “O
Messenger of Allah! \`Alī has fought for Allah a worthy fight.”

He replied, “That is because he is from me and I am from him. He will
inherit my knowledge, repay my debts, fulfill my promises, and will be
my successor after me. If it was not for him, the pure believer would
not be recognized after me. His war is my war and my war is Allah’s war.
His peace is my peace and my peace is Allah’s peace. Know that he is the
father of my two grandsons and the Imams after me. Allah, the Exalted,
will bring out from his loin the rightly guided Imams. From them is the
Mahdī of this nation.”

I said, “May my father and my mother be sacrificed for you, O Messenger
of Allah! Who is this Mahdī?” He replied, “O \`Ammār! Know that surely
Allah, Blessed and High be He, has promised me that nine Imams will
emerge from the loin of al-Ḥusayn. The ninth of his descendants will
become concealed from the people. This is [the meaning of] the saying of
Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, ‘Say: Have you considered if your
water sinks in the ground, who is it then that will bring you flowing
water?’[^4]

He will have a lengthy occultation in which some people will stop
believing in him while others will remain steadfast about him. Then, he
will emerge in the end of times and will fill the world with fairness
and justice. He will fight in accordance with the interpretation [of the
Holy Quran] like I fought in accordance with its revelation. His name
will be my name and he is the most similar of people to me . . .”

536. Muqtaḍab al-athar[^5]: Narrated to us Abū \`Alī Aḥmad b. Ziyād
al-Hamdānī, from \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim, from his father, from \`Abd
al-Salām b. Ṣāliḥ al-Harawī, from Wakī\` b. al-Jarrāḥ and al-Rabī\` b.
Sa\`d, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Salīṭ, from Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, peace be on
him, who said:

From us are twelve Mahdīs (guided ones). The first one is Amīr
al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, and the last one is my
ninth descendant. He is the one who will rise with the truth. Through
him, Allah will give life to the earth after its death. Through him,
Allah will dominate religion [i.e. Islam] over all religions even if the
polytheists detest it. He will have an occultation in which some people
will apostate and others will remain steadfast in religion. They [i.e.
the steadfast] will be harassed and will be asked [tauntingly], “If you
are truthful, [then tell us] when will this promise happen?”[^6] He who
is patient during his occultation—with all the tortures and denials—is
like those who fight with their swords before [i.e. alongside] the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family.”

537. Kashf al-astār[^7]: Abū Muḥammad al-Faḍl b. Shādhān al-Nīsābūrī—who
passed away during the lifetime of (Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-\`Askarī,
peace be on him—has recorded in his book al-Ghayba: Narrated to us
al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from \`Alī b. Ri’āb, from Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be
on him, a lengthy tradition from Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī, at the end of
which he said:

Then, there will be enmity between the Arab and non-Arab rulers because
of their differences. It will be like this until the affair reaches a
person from the descendants of Abū Sufyān . . . thereafter the king of
the kings, the slayer of the unbelievers, the desired ruler, and the one
during whose occultation intellects (uqūl) will be baffled, will appear.
He is the ninth from your descendants, O Ḥusayn. He will emerge from
between the two rukns [of Ka\`ba] and he will be victorious over the
humans and the Jinn . . . Salvation is for the believers who realize his
time, reach his era, witness his days, and meet his followers.

538. Kamāl al-dīn[^8]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Ziyād b. Ja\`far
al-Hamdānī, may Allah be satisfied with him, from \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm b.
Hāshim, from his father, from \`Alī b. Ma\`bad, from al-Ḥusayn b.
Khālid, from Imam \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, from (Imam) Mūsā b. Ja\`far,
from his father (Imam) Muḥammad b. \`Alī, from his father (Imam) \`Alī
b. Ḥusayn, from his father (Imam) al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, who said:

My father Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib said to me, “O Ḥusayn! The
ninth from your descendants is the one who will rise with the truth,
manifest religion, and spread justice.” I asked him, “O Amīr
al-Mu’minīn! Will this [really] happen?” He replied, “Yes, I swear by
the One Who sent Muḥammad with prophethood and selected him from all the
creatures; but [this will happen] only after an occultation and
bewilderment in which no one will remain steadfast in his religion
except the sincere ones—those who are inseparable from the spirit of
certainty. They are the ones from whom Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He,
has taken the covenant of our mastership (wilāya), has written faith in
their hearts, and has assisted them with a Holy Spirit from Himself.”

539. Kamāl al-dīn[^9]: Narrated to us al-Muẓaffar b. Ja\`far b.
al-Muẓaffar al-\`Alawī al-Samarqandī, may Allah be satisfied with him,
from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from his father, from Jabra’īl b.
Aḥmad, from Mūsā b. Ja\`far al-Baghdādī, from al-Ḥasan b. Muḥammad
al-Ṣairafī, from Ḥanān b. Sadīr, from his father Sadīr b. Ḥakīm, from
his father, from Abū Sa\`īd \`Aqīṣā who said:

When (Imam) al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī signed the peace treaty with Mu\`āwiyat b.
Abī Sufyān, people came to meet him and some of them criticized him [for
signing] the treaty. He replied, “Woe to you! You do not know what I
know [or what I have done]. By Allah, what I did was best for our
followers—whether they be where the sun rises or it sets.

Don’t you know that I am your Imam whose obedience is obligatory upon
you and that I am one of the [two] masters of the youths of
Paradise—just as the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, has said about me?” They all replied in the affirmative. He
then said, “Do you know that when [the Prophet] Khiḍr, peace be on him,
drilled a hole in the boat, erected the wall, and killed a child, all
these actions angered Moses because the wisdom behind these acts were
hidden from him? These three acts were regarded by Allah, High be His
Remembrance, as nothing but wise and right?

Do you not know that there is no one from us but that on his neck is the
allegiance of the tyrants of his time, except the Qā’im behind whom
Jesus, son of Mary, Allah’s Spirit, will pray? Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, has concealed him and his birth so that he will not have
an allegiance on his neck when he emerges. He is the ninth descendant of
my brother al-Ḥusayn, the son of the Master of the Women of the
Universe. Allah will prolong his age during his occultation, then, He
will manifest him with His power in the form of a young man of less than
forty years of age. And this is because it should be known that Allah is
Powerful over all things.”

540. Kamāl al-dīn[^10]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad b.
\`Abdūs al-\`Aṭṭār, from Abū \`Amr al-Kashshī (or al-Laithī), from
Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. Shujā\`, from Muḥammad b.
\`Īsā, from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. al-Ḥajjāj,
from al-Ṣādiq Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, from his father (Imam) Muḥammad b.
\`Alī, from his father (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from (Imam) al-Ḥusayn
b. \`Alī—peace be upon them— who said: “My ninth descendant will have a
similarity with Yūsuf and a similarity with Moses, son of \`Imrān, peace
be on them both. He is the one who will rise from us Ahl al-Bait. Allah,
Blessed and High be He, will set right his affairs in one night.”

541. Kamāl al-dīn[^11]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Isḥāq
al-Mu\`ādhī (or al-Mu\`ārī), may Allah be satisfied with him, from Aḥmad
b. Muḥammad al-Hamdānī al-Kūfī, from Aḥmad b. Mūsā b. al-furāt, from
\`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad, from Sufyān, from \`Abd-Allah b. al-Zubayr,
from \`Abd-Allah b. Sharīk, from a person, from Ḥamdān, from al-Ḥusayn
b. \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, who said: “The Qā’im of this
nation is the ninth from my descendants who will have an occultation. He
is the one whose inheritance will be divided while he is [still] alive.”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 205–308, 543, 550, 551, 558–571, 608, 612, 641, 786–807, 859,
918, 973, 1104, and 1230.

[^1]: Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 12, p. 97, no. 3; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 36,
chap. 41, p. 318, no. 169; al-Ṣirāṭ al-mustaqīm, vol. 2, chap. 10, pp.
115–116, sect. 3. He writes: “Al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī al-Rāzī has narrated
the same concept which ends like this: ‘From the Loin of al-Ḥusayn will
emerge righteous infallible Imams. From them will be the Mahdī of this
nation behind whom Jesus, son of Mary, will pray. He is the ninth from
the loin of al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him.’”

[^2]: Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 12, p. 106; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 36, chap.
41, p. 322, no. 172; al-Ṣirāṭ al-mustaqīm, vol. 2, chap. 10, p. 116,
sect. 3, which is a short version. I say: In Biḥār al-anwār, it is
‘Maimūn b. Abī Nuwayra’ and in some copies, it is ‘Mismarat b. Abī
Nuwayra’. In the source, al-Hunā’ī has been mentioned but al-Nahbānī is
correct.

[^3]: Kifāyat al-athar, p. 120, no. 1; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 36, chap.
41, pp. 326–328, no. 183; al-Ṣirāṭ al-mustaqīm, vol. 2, chap. 10, p.
118, sect. 3, which is a short version.

[^4]: Quran 67:30.

[^5]: Muqtaḍab al-athar, p. 23; Kifāyat al-athar, pp. 231–232, chap. 31,
no. 2; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 30, p. 317, no. 2; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 36, p. 385, chap. 43, no. 6 and vol. 51, chap. 3, p. 133, no. 4;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 2, chap. 9, p. 133, no. 134.

[^6]: Quran 36:48.

[^7]: Kashf al-astār, p. 180 (1318 AH) and p. 221 (in the new edition);
al-Arba\`īn (Kifāyat al-Muhtadī), p. 31, under no. 1.

[^8]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1 chap. 26, , p. 304, no. 16; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 2, p. 110, no. 2; I\`lām al-warā, pp. 400–401.

[^9]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 29, p. 315–316, no. 2; Kifāyat
al-athar, chap. 30, pp. 224–226, no. 4. He has mentioned: “the ninth
descendant of my brother—al-Ḥusayn—the son of the Master of the Maids”;
I\`lām al-warā, p. 401; al-Iḥtijāj, vol. 2, p. 288.

[^10]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 30, pp. 316–317, no. 1; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 3, p. 132–133, no. 2; I\`lām al-warā, p. 401.

[^11]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 30, p. 317, no. 2; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 3, p. 133, no. 3; I\`lām al-warā, p. 401.


