Section Twelve
==============

The traditions that indicate he is from the descendants of (Imam) \`Alī
b. al-Ḥusayn Zain al-\`Ābidīn, peace be on him

Comprised of 197 traditions

542. Amālī al-Shaykh[^1]: A group informed us from Abū l-Mufaḍḍal, from
Abū \`Abd-Allah Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-\`Alawī al-Ḥusaynī,
from Abū Naṣr Aḥmad b. \`Abd al-Mun\`im b. Naṣr al-Ṣaidāwī, from Ḥusayn
b. Shaddād al-Ju\`fī, from his father Shaddād b. Rushaid, from \`Amr b.
\`Abd-Allah b. Hind al-Jamalī, from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b.
\`Alī, peace be on him, who said:

When Fāṭima—the daughter of \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him—observed
her nephew, Imam \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, constantly
worshipping, she approached Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah b. \`Amr b. Ḥizām
al-Anṣārī and said to him, “O companion of Allah’s Messenger! Surely, we
have some rights which you are obliged to fulfill for us. One of our
rights is that when you see one of [the Imams] from us straining himself
while striving [in the way of Allah], then you should remind him of
Allah and invite him to save his soul. Such is the present state of
\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, the remnant of his father al-Ḥusayn. His nose has
become wounded and the skin of his forehead, palms, and knees have
become coarse and thick because of constant worship.”

So, Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah went to (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn’s house and
[saw Imam] Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī standing there with some other
boys from the Banī-Hāshim. Jābir stared at him and said, “The way you
walk is like that of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, [and your features] resemble his features. Who are you,
son?” He replied, “I am Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn.”

On hearing this, Jābir cried and said, “By Allah! You are truly the
splitter (bāqir) of knowledge. Come near me, may my father be sacrificed
for you!” So, [Imam Abū Ja\`far] went near him and Jābir opened the
front of [Abū Ja\`far’s] shirt, placed his hand on his chest and kissed
it then put his own cheek and his face on [his chest] and said, “I bring
you greetings (salām) from your great-grandfather, the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who ordered me to do
what I just did.

He said to me, ‘You will live [a long life] and will continue to survive
until you meet from my descendants the one whose name is [Abū Ja\`far]
Muḥammad. He will truly split knowledge.’ He further informed me, ‘You
will live until you become blind and he will be the one who will give
you back your sight.’”

Then, Jābir said to him, “‘Seek permission from your father for me.”
(Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, went to his father and informed him
about what had happened and said, “There is an old man at the door whom
behaved with me in such and such manner.” [Imam al-Sajjād], replied, “O
son! He is Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah al-Anṣārī. Amongst all the children, did
he only say these things to you and behave with you in this particular
manner?” [Imam Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him], replied, “Yes.” He said,
“We are from Allah. Surely, he did not intend anything bad for you . .
.”

Then, he allowed Jābir to enter. [When Jābir entered], he found the Imam
in his prayer-niche whilst excessive worship had worn him out. The Imam
stood up and asked Jābir about his conditions then made him sit next to
him. Jābir turned to him and said, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Do you
not know that indeed Allah, the Exalted, has created Paradise for you
and for those who love you and He has created Hell for those who have
hatred towards you and enmity against you? Why have you obliged yourself
to perform such [a straining worship]? (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace
be on him, said, ‘O Companion of the Messenger of Allah! Don’t you know
that Allah had forgiven the past and future faults of my grandfather—the
Messenger of Allah—and yet he did not stop striving (for Allah)? And he,
may my father and my mother be sacrificed for him, continued worshipping
until his shinbone and feet became swollen? He was asked, ‘Why do you do
this whilst Allah has forgiven your past and future sins?’ He had
replied, ‘Should I not be a thankful servant?’”

Jābir looked at Imam \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, and saw that
he could not convince him to ease his efforts and fatigue, so he said,
“O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Please save yourself. Surely, you belong to
a family through whom calamities are warded off, hardships are removed,
and the sky pours its rain.” The (Imam) replied, “O Jābir! I will
continue to be on the path of my parents—Allah’s blessings be on
them—and mourn them until I meet them.” Jābir turned to those who were
present and said, “By Allah, none from the children of the Prophets can
be found who are like \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn except Yūsuf b. Ya\`qūb. By
Allah, the seed (dhurriyya) of \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, are
superior to the seed of Yūsuf b. Ya\`qūb. From them is the one who will
fill the earth with justice just as it will be filled with injustice.”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 113, 125, 126, 127, 129, 134, 136, 167, 168, 170, 173, 175–178,
181, 183, 191, 193, 194, 196, 205–308, 465, 466, 533-541, 543–571, 590,
608, 612, 641, 770, 786–807, 973, 974, 1216, and 1230.

[^1]: Amālī al-Shaykh, vol. 2, session 13, pp. 249–251, no. 16; Bishārat
al-Muṣṭafā, pp. 66–67, which is the same as the previous reference with
slight differences in the wording and chain of narrators. It ends like
this, “From him is the one who will fill the earth with justice just as
it will be filled with injustice”; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 46, chap. 5, pp.
60–61, no. 18.


