Section Thirteen
================

The traditions that indicate he is the seventh descendant of (Imam)
Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Bāqir, peace be on him

Comprised of 121 traditions

543. Kifāyat al-athar[^1]: Narrated to us Abū l-Mufaḍḍal, may God have
mercy on him, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Shādhān b. Ḥabbāb al-Azdī
al-Khallāl in Kūfa, from al-Ḥasan b. Muḥammad b. \`Abd al-Wāḥid, from
al-Ḥasan b. al-Ḥusayn al-\`Arabī [or al-\`Arafī or al-\`Uranī] al-Ṣūfī,
from Yaḥyā b. Ya\`lā al-Aslamī, from \`Amr b. Mūsā al-Wajīhī, from Zaid
b. \`Alī, peace be on him, who recounts:

I was with my father, (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, when
Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah al-Anṣārī entered. While he was talking with him my
brother Muḥammad came from one of the rooms. Jābir fixed his gaze at
him, then stood up and went towards him and said, “O boy, come!” He
obliged. Jābir requested again, “Go back,” and he went back. Jābir
remarked, “Characteristics like the characteristics of the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family! What is your name,
son?” He replied, “Muḥammad.” Jābir said, “Whose son are you?” He
replied, “I am the son of \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib.”

Jābir said, “Then, you must be al-Bāqir!” Then, Jābir bent over him and
began kissing his forehead and hands. Then he said, “O Muḥammad! The
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, has
conveyed salutations to you.” He replied, “May the best of salutations
be upon the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, and also upon you, O Jābir, for conveying the salutations.”

Jābir then returned to his prayer-mat and started talking to my father,
saying, “One day, the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, said to me, ‘O Jābir! When you meet my son, al-Bāqir,
convey my salutations to him because his name is like mine and he is the
most similar of people to me. His knowledge is my knowledge and his
judgment is my judgment. Seven of his descendants are infallible
trustees and righteous Imams and the seventh is their Mahdī, who will
fill the earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled with
injustice and unfairness.’ Then, the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, recited, ‘And We made them Imams who
guide with Our Command and We revealed to them good deeds, establishment
of prayers, and paying the poor-rate (zakāt) and they worshipped Us.’”

544. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī : Informed me \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from

Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-Rāzī, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Kūfī, from Ibrāhīm
b. Muḥammad b. Yūsuf, from Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from \`Abd al-Razzāq, from
Muḥammad b. Sinān, from Fuḍail al-Rassān, from Abū Ḥamza al-Thumālī who
narrates:

One day, I was with (Imam) Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Bāqir. When
the people around him dispersed, he said to me, “O Abū Ḥamza! From the
inevitable things that Allah will not change is the rising of our Qā’im.
Whoever has doubts about what I am saying will meet Allah while he does
not believe in Him and denies Him.” He continued, “My father and my
mother be sacrificed for him whose name will be my name and his epithet
will be my epithet and he will be my seventh descendant. My father be
sacrificed for the one who will fill the earth with justice and fairness
just as it will be filled with unfairness and injustice.

O Abā Ḥamza! Whoever reaches [his era] but does not submit to him, then,
it is as if he has not submitted to Muḥammad and \`Alī, Allah’s
blessings be on them. Allah will prohibit him from entering Paradise and
his dwelling place will be in fire and how bad is the abode of the
oppressors!”

A matter which is clearer, more illuminating, more lucid and brighter
than this—for those who Allah has guided and is beneficent to—thank God,
is His saying which is an unambiguous verse from His Book: “Verily, the
number of months (al-shuhūr) with Allah are twelve months in the Book of
Allah, the day He created the skies and the earth; from these, four are
sacred. This is the established religion, so do not be unjust to
yourselves during these [months].” Having knowledge about these months
like Muḥarram, Ṣafar, Rabī\` al-Awwal, etc. and the sacred ones from
them like Rajab, Dhu l-Qa\`da, Dhu l-Ḥijja, and Muḥarram, cannot be
called “an established religion.” Because the Jews, the Christians, the
Zoroastrians, and all the other nations and people—whether those in
favor and the opponents [of Islam]—were aware of these months and they
counted them with their names.

[In this verse,] months (shuhūr) refers to the infallible Imams, peace
be on them, who will establish the religion of Allah. The sacred ones
from these are Amīr al-Mu’minīn, whose name Allah, the Exalted, has
derived from His Name al-\`Alī, just as He has derived for the Messenger
of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, a name from His
Name, al-Maḥmūd. Three others from his descendants bear the name \`Alī:
\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, \`Alī b. Mūsā, and \`Alī b. Muḥammad. These names
have become sacred because they have been derived from the Name of
Allah, the Exalted. And Allah’s blessings be on Muḥammad and his noble
family who are sacred because of him.

545. Ithbāt al-waṣiyya[^2]: Al-Ḥimyarī, from Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from
al-Naḍr b. Suwayd, from Yaḥyā al-Ḥalabī, from \`Alī b. Abī Ḥamza who
said:

I was with Abū Baṣīr and with us was a slave of (Imam) Abū Ja\`far. He
narrated to us that he heard, (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, say,
“From us are twelve muḥaddaths[^3]. The Qā’im is the seventh after me.”
Abū Baṣīr stood up and declared, “I testify that I have been hearing Abū
Ja\`far, peace be on him, saying this since forty years ago.”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 235, 242–308, 550, 551, 554–571, 608, 612, 641, 786–807, 859,
973, 974, 1216, and 1230.

[^1]: Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 40, pp. 301–303, no. 3; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 36, chap. 41, p. 360, no. 230, with the following chain of
narrators: “Abū l-Mufaḍḍal al-Shaibānī, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī b.
Shādhān, from al-Ḥasan b. Muḥammad b. \`Abd al-Wāḥid, from al-Ḥasan b.
al-Ḥusayn al-\`Uranī, from Yaḥyā b. Ya\`lā, from \`Umar b. Mūsā, from
Zaid.”

[^2]: Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, p. 204; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 4, pp.
96–97; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 36, chap. 45, p. 395, no. 11.

[^3]: A muḥaddath is a person whom the angels speak with. This does not
mean that the person whom the angels speak with is a prophet. This can
be inferred from verses 19:17–19 of the Holy Quran that mention the
story of Mary, peace be on her, speaking with one of God’s angels—Ed.


