Section Seventeen
=================

The traditions that indicate he is the fifth descendant of the seventh
Imam, Mūsā b. Ja\`far, peace be on him

Comprised of 115 traditions

549. Al-Kāfī[^1]: \`Alī b. Muḥammad, from al-Ḥasan b. \`Īsā b. Muḥammad
b. \`Alī b. Ja\`far, from his father, from his grandfather, from \`Alī
b. Ja\`far, from his brother (Imam) Mūsā b. Ja\`far, peace be on him,
who said:

When the fifth from the descendants of the seventh disappears, fear
Allah, fear Allah, concerning your religion. [Take care] that no one
takes it away from you. O my son[^2]! Inevitably, the master of this
affair will have an occultation to the extent that even those who
believed in this affair will no longer believe in it. Indeed, it is a
test from Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, by which He will test His
creation. Had your fathers and ancestors known a religion more correct
than this, they would have certainly followed it.

I asked, “Who is the fifth from the descendants of the seventh?” He
replied, ‘O my son! Your intellects (uqūl) become small regarding this
and you will not be able to bear it. But if you live [to see him], you
will find him soon enough.”

550. Kamāl al-dīn[^3]: Narrated to us al-Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad b. Idrīs, may
Allah be satisfied with him, from his father, from Ayyūb b. Nūḥ, from
Muḥammad b. Sinān, from Ṣafwān b. Mihrān, from (Imam) al-Ṣādiq Ja\`far
b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, who said: “He who believes in all the
Imams but denies the Mahdī is like he who believes in all the prophets
but denies the prophethood of Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family.” He was asked, “O Son of the Messenger of Allah! Who is the
Mahdī from your descendants?” He replied, “The fifth from the
descendants of the seventh. His body will be hidden from you and will
not have permission to say his name.”

He has recorded the same tradition from al-Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad in another
chapter.

He has narrated the same from \`Alī b. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Daqqāq, from
Muḥammad b. Abī \`Abd-Allah al-Kūfī, from Sahl b. Ziyād al-Ādamī, from
al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from \`Abd al-\`Azīz al-\`Abdī, from \`Abd-Allah b.
Abī Ya\`fūr, from (Imam) al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him, but with the
difference: “‘Whoever acknowledges all the Imams from my forefathers and
my descendants but denies the Mahdī from my descendants, is like the one
who believes in all the prophets but denies the prophethood of Muḥammad,
Allah’s blessings be upon him and his family.’ I asked, ‘My master! who
is the Mahdī?’ . . . (to the end of the tradition).”

He has also recorded it from \`Alī b. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad through his
chain of narrators from ibn Abī Ya\`fūr.

551. Kamāl al-dīn[^4]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Ziyād b. Ja\`far
al-Hamdānī, may Allah be satisfied with him, from \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm b.
Hāshim, from his father, from Ṣāliḥ b. al-Sindī, from Yūnus b. \`Abd
al-Raḥmān who narrates:

I went to Imam Mūsā b. Ja\`far, peace be on him, and asked, “O son of
Allah’s Messenger! Are you the one who will rise with the truth
(al-qā’im bi-lḥaq)?” He replied, “I am the riser with the truth
(al-qā’im bi-lḥaq) but the Qā’im who will purify the earth from the
enemies of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, and fill it with justice
just as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness is the fifth
from my descendants. He will have an occultation that will be prolonged
because of fear for his life. During this period [of occultation], some
people will apostate from religion while others will remain steadfast.”

He continued, “Salvation is for our followers; those who grasp our rope
during the occultation of our Qā’im; those who are steadfast in loving
us and dissociating from our enemies. They are from us and we are from
them. They are satisfied with us as [their] Imams and we are satisfied
with them as our Shias. Salvation is for them, salvation is for them. By
Allah, they will be with us in our degree on the Day of Judgment.”

552. Muqtaḍab al-athar[^5]: Muḥammad b. Ja\`far al-Ādamī, from his own
handwriting—and ibn Ghālib al-Ḥāfiẓ has praised him—from Aḥmad b.
\`Ubaid b. Nāṣiḥ, from al-Ḥusayn b. \`Ulwān al-Kalbī, from Hammām b.
al-Ḥarth, from Wahb b. Munabba, who said:

Moses—in the night of Divine Conversation (laylat al-khiṭāb)—looked at
all the trees at Ṭūr, while each and every stone and plant was speaking
about the Prophet Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be upon him and his
family, and the twelve heirs (waṣīs) after him. Moses said, “My Lord! I
do not see any creature that you have created but that it is speaking
about Prophet Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, and
his twelve heirs (waṣī). What is their position before You?”

He replied, “O son of \`Imrān! I created them before the creation of the
lights. I placed them in My Store of Sanctity (khazānat qudsī), whilst
they enjoy the gardens of My Will (yarta\`ūna fī riyaḍi mashī’atī) and
inhale the fragrance of My Greatness (yatanassamūna rūḥ jabarūtī) and
witness the realms of my kingdom, until I desired with My Will to
implement My decree and destiny (qadā’ī wa qadarī). O son of \`Imrān! .
. . I have decorated My Heavens with them. O son of \`Imrān! Fasten to
their remembrance because surely, they are the store of My Knowledge,
the chest of My Wisdom, and the mine of My Light.”

Al-Ḥusayn b. \`Ulwān says, “I mentioned this (narration) to (Imam)
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, who said, ‘It is the truth. They
are twelve from the family of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and
his family: \`Alī, al-Ḥasan, al-Ḥusayn, \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, Muḥammad b.
\`Alī, and whoever Allah wills.’ I said, ‘May I be sacrificed for you! I
am asking you so that you may make the truth clear for me.’ He replied,
‘[After them], myself, then followed by this son of mine—and he pointed
towards his son Mūsā—the fifth from his descendants will be hidden and
it will not be permitted to mention him by his name.’”

553. Kamāl al-dīn[^6]: Narrated to us \`Alī b. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b.
\`Imrān, may Allah be satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Abī
\`Abd-Allah al-Kūfī, from Mūsā b. \`Imrān al-Nakha\`ī, from his paternal
uncle al-Ḥusayn b. Yazīd al-Naufalī, from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Abī
Ḥamza, from his father, from Abū Baṣīr, who heard [Imam] Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, say: “The customs of the prophets (sunan
al-anbiyā) by which they went into occultation, will exactly occur for
the Qā’im from us Ahl al-Bait.”

Abū Baṣīr says: “I asked, ‘O son Allah’s Messenger! Who is the Qā’im
from you Ahl al-Bait?” He replied, ‘O Abū Baṣīr! He is the fifth from
the descendant of my son Mūsā. He is the son of the Master of the Maids.
He will have an occultation in which the people of falsehood will become
skeptical. Then, Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will make him appear
and Allah will conquer by his hand the Easts and the Wests. The Spirit
of Allah, Jesus son of Mary, will descend and pray behind him. The earth
will be illuminated with the light of its Lord. There will not remain a
single spot on earth where anyone other than Allah, Mighty and Majestic
be He, had been worshipped except that Allah will be worshipped there.
The religion, in its entirety, will be only for Allah even if the
polytheists detest it.’”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 242–308, 558–571, 608, 612, 786–807, 859, 973, 1216, and 1230.

[^1]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 138, p. 336, no. 2; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī,
chap. 10, p. 154, no. 11; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 34, pp. 359–360,
no. 1; \`Ilal al-sharā’i\`, pp. 166–167, no. 128; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p.
104, Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 35, pp. 268–269, no. 1; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 7, p. 150, no. 1; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p.
476, no. 164; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 1; Bishārat al-Islām, chap.
8, pp. 149–150, no. 1; Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, p. 205.

[^2]: Apparently, ‘son’ is used by the Imam to refer to all those people
who were present there—Ed.

[^3]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 33, p. 333, no. 1; chap. 33, p. 338,
no. 12; chap. 39, pp. 410–411,no. 4; and chap. 39, p. 411, no. 5; I\`lām
al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 6, p. 145, no.
10; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, pp. 469–470, no. 138.

[^4]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 34, p. 361, no. 5; Kifāyat al-athar,
chap. 35, pp. 269–270, no. 2; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 7, p. 151, no. 6, with the difference that it
says, “grasp our love” instead of “grasp our rope”; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 477, sect. 5, no. 168.

[^5]: Muqtaḍab al-athar, p. 41, no. 24; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap.
26, p. 149, no. 24; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 1, chap. 9, p. 712, sect. 18,
no. 161. I say: We have not mentioned this tradition because Wahb has
narrated it, rather, we have relied on it because it has been confirmed
by Imam al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him.

[^6]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 33, pp. 345–346, no. 31; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 6, p. 146, no. 14, with a slight difference;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 473, sect. 5, no. 152, with a
slight difference.


