Section Nineteen
================

The traditions that indicate he is from the descendants of Imam Muḥammad
b. \`Alī, al-Riḍā, peace be on him

Comprised of 109 traditions

557. Kamāl al-dīn[^1]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Mūsā al-Daqqāq, may Allah
be satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Hārūn al-Ṣūfī, from Abū Turāb
\`Abd-Allah b. Mūsā al-Rūyānī, from \`Abd al-\`Aẓīm b. \`Abd-Allah b.
\`Alī b. al-Ḥasan b. Zaid b. al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on
him, who said:

I went to see my master (Imam) Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mūsā b. Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be upon
them, with the intention of asking him about the Qā’im [and to see] if
he is the Mahdī or not? He initiated the conversation [before I asked
the question] and said, “O Abū l-Qāsim! Surely the Qā’im from us is the
Mahdī who must be awaited during his occultation and obeyed when he
reappears.

He is my third descendant. I swear by the One Who sent Muḥammad with
prophethood and distinguished us with leadership (imāma), if nothing
remains from this world except one day, Allah will certainly prolong
that day until he emerges in it and fills the earth with fairness and
justice just as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness. Surely
Allah, Blessed and High be He, will set right his affairs in one night
just as He set right the affairs of Moses—the one he spoke with
(kalīmuhū)—when he went to bring fire for his family but returned while
he was a Prophet.” Then he said, “The best deed of our Shias is to wait
for relief (intiẓār al-faraj).”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 242–308, 558–571, 608, 641, 786–807, 859, 973, and 1230.

[^1]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, p. 377, no. 1; Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 37,
pp. 280–281, no. 1; I\`lām al-warā, sect. 2, chap. 2; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 27, sect. 2, p. 386, no. 19; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 9, p. 156, no. 1.


