Section Twenty
==============

The traditions that indicate he is from the descendants of Imam Abū
l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, peace be on him

Comprised of 107 traditions

558. Kamāl al-dīn[^1]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Ziyād Ja\`far al-Hamdānī,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm, from \`Abd-Allah
b. Aḥmad al-Mauṣilī, from al-Ṣaqr b. Abī Dulaf, from (Imam) \`Alī b.
Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā, peace be on him, who said: “The Imam after me
is al-Ḥasan, my son, and after al-Ḥasan will be his son, the Qā’im, who
will fill the earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled
with injustice and unfairness.”

559. Kamāl al-dīn[^2]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad b.
al-\`Abdūs al-\`Aṭṭār, may Allah be satisfied with him, from \`Alī b.
Muḥammad b. Qutayba al-Nīsābūrī, from Ḥamdān b. Sulaimān, from al-Ṣaqr
b. Abū Dulaf, who said:

I heard (Imam) Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā, peace be on him,
say, “The Imam after me is my son \`Alī. His affair is my affair (amruhū
amrī), his speech is my speech, and his obedience is my obedience. The
Imam after him will be his son al-Ḥasan. His affair is the affair of his
father, his speech is the speech of his father, and his obedience is the
obedience of his father.”

Then, he became silent. I asked him, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Who is
the Imam after al-Ḥasan?” [On hearing this], he started weeping
violently and said, “Verily, after al-Ḥasan will be his son who will
rise with the truth; the awaited one (al-muntaẓar).” I asked, “O Son of
Allah’s Messenger! Why is he called the one who will rise (al-Qā’im)?”
He answered, “Because he will rise after he is no longer remembered and
after most of those who had believed in his Imamate will no longer
believe in him.”

I enquired, “Why is he called the awaited one (al-muntaẓar)?” He
replied, “Because he will be in an occultation which will continue for
many days and long periods. The purified ones (al-mukhliṣūn) will wait
for his reappearance, the skeptics will renounce him, and the deniers
will make fun when he is mentioned. Those who determine the time [of his
reappearance] will be liars, those who hasten concerning his
reappearance will perish, and only those who submit will be saved.”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 242–308, 558–571, 608, 641, 786–807, 859, and 1230.

[^1]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 37, p. 383, no. 10; Kifāyat al-athar,
chap. 38, pp. 292, no. 4; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 30, sect. 1, p. 394, no. 17; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 50, sect. 2, p. 239, no. 4.

[^2]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 36, p. 378, no. 3; Kifāyat al-athar,
chap. 37, pp. 283–284, no. 3; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2,; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 2, p. 30, no. 4.


