Section Twenty-Four
===================

The traditions that mention when the three names, Muḥammad, \`Alī, and
al-Ḥasan, come after one other, then the fourth of them will be the
Qā’im

Comprised of 2 traditions

578. Dalā’il al-imāma[^1]: Narrated to us Abū l-Mufaḍḍal, from Muḥammad
b. al-Ḥasan al-Kūfī, from Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah al-Farsī, from Yaḥyā
b. Maimūn al-Khurāsānī, from \`Abd-Allah b. Sinān, from his brother
Muḥammad b. Sinān al-Zuhrī, from our master, (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, from his father, from his grandfather, from his
father al-Ḥusayn, from al-Ḥasan, from Amīr al-Mu’minīn, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said
to \`Alī, peace be on him: “O \`Alī! When the eleven Imams from your
descendants are completed, the eleventh will be the Mahdī from my Ahl
al-Bait.”

And through the same chain of narrators from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said: “When the four
names, Muḥammad, \`Alī, and al-Ḥasan come consecutively, then the fourth
of them will be the Qā’im, the wished, the awaited.”

579. Kamāl al-dīn[^2]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq, may
Allah be satisfied with him, from Abū \`Alī Muḥammad b. Hammām, from
Aḥmad b. Mābundād, from Aḥmad b. Hilāl, from Umayyat b. \`Alī al-Qaysī,
from Abū l-Haytham al-Tamīmī, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on
him, who said: “When three names Muḥammad, \`Alī, and al-Ḥasan come
consecutively, the fourth of them will be their Qā’im.”[^3]

[^1]: Dalā’il al-imāma, chap. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,” p. 236, no. 9;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 9, sect. 69, p. 103, no. 832, citing the
book Manāqib Fāṭima wa wuldihā through his chain of narrators from Amīr
al-Mu’minīn, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family.

[^2]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 32, p. 334, no. 3 and similar to it,
pp. 333–334, no. 2. He has recorded it in the preface of Kamāl al-dīn
from ibn Qubba in his answers to the objections of ibn Bashshār: “When
the three names Muḥammad, \`Alī, and al-Ḥasan come consecutively, the
fourth will be the Qā’im” (vol. 1, p. 55); Kifāyat al-athar, p. 280,
under the fourth tradition from the chapter on what has come from Imam
Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā, peace be on him: “Through his
chain of narrators from Abū al-Haytham al-Tamīmī who said that (Imam)
Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, said, ‘When the three names come
consecutively, the fourth of them will be their Qā’im: Muḥammad, \`Alī,
and al-Ḥasan.’”; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, p. 179, no. 26; I\`lām al-warā, p.
403. He has recorded ‘come together’ instead of ‘come consecutively’.

[^3]: It is clear who these names refer to: Muḥammad refers to Imam
Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, \`Alī refers to his son Imam \`Alī b.
Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, and al-Ḥasan refers to his son Imam
al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, Allah’s blessings be on them all.


