Section Twenty-Five
===================

The traditions that indicate he is the twelfth and last Imam, peace be
on them  
 Comprised of 151 traditions

580. Al-Ghayba by Faḍl b. Shādhān[^1]: Narrated to us Ṣafwān b. Yaḥyā,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from Ibrāhīm b. Abī Ziyād, from Abū
Ḥamza al-Thumālī, from Abū Khalid al-Kabulī who said:

I went to see my master (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib,
peace be on him, and asked, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Inform me about
those—whose obedience and love Allah has made compulsory and has made
following them obligatory for His servants—after the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family.” He replied, “O Kabulī!
Surely, those who possess authority (aulī l-amr) whom Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, has appointed as leaders for the people and made their
obedience obligatory are: Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, then my
uncle al-Ḥasan, my father al-Ḥusayn, and then the affair reached us.”

Saying this, he became silent. I said, “O my master! It has been
narrated to us from Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, that the earth
will not become empty of a proof from Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He,
upon His servants. So, who is the proof and Imam after you?” He said,
“My son Muḥammad and his name in the earlier [Holy] Books is Bāqir. He
will split knowledge, a thorough splitting. He is the Proof and the Imam
after me. After Muḥammad, it will be his son Ja\`far and he is known to
the inhabitants of the sky as al-Ṣādiq.”

I asked, “O my master! Why is he only called as al-Ṣādiq (the Truthful)
whilst all of you are truthful?” He answered, “Narrated to me my father,
from his father, peace be on them, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, who said, ‘When my son, Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib is born, name him
al-Ṣādiq because his fifth descendant—who will also have the name
Ja\`far—will falsely claim to be an Imam and will dare [to disobey]
Allah and lie against Him. To Allah, he will be known as Ja\`far the
liar (al-Kadhdhāb), the one who forges lies against Allah and claims the
position for which he was not eligible. He will oppose his father and
will be jealous of his brother. He is the one who will desire to
disclose Allah’s secret, Majestic be His Majesty, during the occultation
of the Guardian [appointed] by Allah.’”

Saying this, (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, cried intensely
and continued, “As if I am with Ja\`far al-Kadhdhāb who will be
assisting the tyrants of his time to find out about the Guardian
[appointed] by Allah; the one who will be concealed in the protection of
Allah and be in charge of his father’s dependents while [Ja\`far] will
be ignorant about his birth and seeks to kill him if he can get his
hands on him, and will have greed for the inheritance of his brother
which he will wish to seize unjustly.”

I asked, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Will these really happen?” He
answered, “Yes, by my Lord! All this is written in the manuscript we
possess which mentions the afflictions that will be inflicted on us
after the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family.” I said, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Then what will happen?” He
replied, “Then, the occultation of the twelfth Guardian [appointed] by
Allah will be prolonged. He will be from the heirs of the Messenger of
Allah after him. O Abū Khālid! The people who believe in his Imamate and
await his reappearance during his occultation, are the best people of
all times.

Because Allah, Blessed and High be He, has granted them such intellect
(\`aql), understanding (fahm), and recognition (ma\`rifa) that
occultation for them is the same as observation. He (Allah) has made
them in that time like the holy warriors who fought with their swords
before the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be upon him and his
family. They are truly the sincere ones, our real Shias, and the callers
towards the religion of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, secretly and
openly.” He then said, “Awaiting the Relief is one of the best reliefs
(intiẓār al-faraj min afḍal al-faraj).”

581. Kifāyat al-athar[^2]: Narrated to us \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b.
Muḥammad, from Hārūn b. Mūsā at Baghdad in the month of Safar, 381 AH,
from Aḥmad [Muḥammad] [b. Makhzūm] b. Muḥammad al-Muqrī—the slave of
Banī-Hāshim—in 324 AH, from Abū Muḥammad from both: (a) Abū Ḥafṣ \`Umar
[\`Amr] b. al-Faḍl al-Ṭabarī, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Farghānī,
from \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b. \`Amr al-Balwī, and (b) \`Abd-Allah
[\`Ubaid Allah] b. al-Faḍl b. Hilāl al-Ṭā’ī in Egypt, from \`Abd-Allah
b. Muḥammad b. \`Umar [\`Amr] b. Maḥfūẓ al-Balwī; from Ibrāhīm b.
\`Abd-Allah b. al-\`Alā, from Muḥammad b. Bukair who recounts:

I went to see Zaid b. \`Alī, peace be on him, while Ṣāliḥ b. Bishr was
with him. I said hello to him and he intended to go Iraq. I said, “O Son
of Allah’s Messenger! Narrate to me something which you have heard from
your father.” He said, “Yes. My father narrated to me from his
grandfather [or my father from his father from his grandfather] that the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said,
‘On whoever Allah has bestowed a favor, he should praise Allah, Mighty
and Majestic be He. One whose sustenance is delayed should seek
forgiveness [from Allah. One who is grieved by an affair] should say,
“There is no power and strength except by Allah.”’”

I said, “Please tell me more, O Son of Allah’s Messenger!” He said,
“Yes. My father narrated to me from his grandfather [or my father from
his father from his grandfather] that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, said, ‘I will intercede for four
people on the Day of Judgment: He who respects my seed (dhurriyyatī),
fulfills their needs, strives for them in their affairs when they need
it, and loves them with his heart and his tongue.’” I said, “Please tell
me more from the merits that Allah has bestowed upon you O Son of
Allah’s Messenger.”

He said, “My father has narrated from his [father, from his] grandfather
that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
said, ‘Whoever loves us Ahl al-Bait for the sake of Allah will be
gathered with us (ḥushira ma\`anā) and we will take him to Paradise with
us. O son of Bukair! He who fastens on to us will be with us in the
highest of ranks.’ O son of Bukair! Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted
be He, chose Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, and
selected us as his seed (dhurriyya). If it was not for us, Allah, the
Exalted, would not have created the world and the hereafter. O son of
Bukair! Through us Allah is recognized and through us Allah is
worshipped. We are the path to Allah; from us is al-Muṣṭafā, [from us]
is al-Murtaḍā, from us will be the Mahdī, the Qā’im of this nation.”

I enquired, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Did the Messenger of Allah
inform you when your Qā’im will rise?” He answered, “O son of Bukair!
You will not meet him and surely this affair will continue on for
another six heirs (waṣīs). Then, [Allah] will make our Qā’im appear and
he will fill [the earth] with fairness and justice just as it will be
filled with injustice and unfairness.” I asked, “O Son of Allah’s
Messenger! Aren’t you the master of this affair?” He replied, “I am from
the progeny. I asked again and he answered the same. I asked, “Were the
things that you said from yourself or from the Messenger of Allah?” He
answered, “Had I known the unknown, I would have massed much good. These
are a covenant that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, has taken from us.” Then, he recited the following poem

We are the chiefs of the Quraish

The foundation of truth is within us

We are the lights that

Existed before the existence of all creatures

From us is the chosen Muṣṭafā

And the Mahdī too is from us

Indeed, through us Allah is recognized

And we have stood with the Truth

Soon he will be thrown in the fire

He who turns away from us today

\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn says: “Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn al-Bazaufarī narrated
this tradition to us in the shrine of our master, (Imam) al-Ḥusayn b.
\`Alī, peace be on him, from Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb al-Kulainī, from
Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from Salmat b. al-Khaṭṭāb, from Muḥammad
b. Khālid al-Ṭayālisī, from Saif b. \`Umaira and Ṣāliḥ b. Uqba, all of
them from \`Alqamat b. Muḥammad al-Ḥaḍramī, from Ṣāliḥ [Ṣulḥ] who
recounts: “I was with Zaid b. \`Alī, peace be on him, when Muḥammad b.
Bukair came to see him . . . (he then mentioned the previous
narration).”

582. Kamāl al-dīn[^3]: Al-Muẓaffar b. Ja\`far b. al-Muẓaffar al-\`Alawī,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd,
from his father, from Abū l-Qāsim—who recorded it from the book of Aḥmad
al-Dahhān—from al-Qāsim b. Ḥamza, from ibn Abī \`Umair, from Abū Ismā’īl
al-Sarrāj, from Khaithamat al-Ju\`fī, from Abū Ayyūb al-Makhzūmī [Abū
Labīd al-Makhzūmī] who said: “(Imam) Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī
al-Bāqir, peace be on him, mentioned the biography of the twelve rightly
guided successors, Allah’s blessings be on them. When he reached the
last one he said, ‘The twelfth is the one behind whom Jesus, son of
Mary, peace be on him, will pray. [Follow] his customs and the Noble
Quran.’” The traditions with the following numbers also show the above
concept: 81, 113, 118, 153–165, 181, 196, 205–309, 553–541, 543–545,
547, 549–556, 574, 668, 1168, and 1230.

[^1]: Kifāyat al-muhtadī (al-Arba\`īn), pp. 92–93, no. 20, which has
some apparent mistakes. We have corrected it in accordance with the
other references; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 21, pp. 319–320, no. 2,
through two chains from al-Sayyid \`Abd al-\`Aẓīm al-Ḥasanī, may Allah
be satisfied with him, from Ṣafwān b. Yaḥyā; al-Iḥtijāj, vol. 2, pp.
317–318, both of them have recorded “and from the greatest of reliefs
(min a\`ẓam al-faraj)”; Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyā, sect. 15, pp. 365–366, up to
his saying, “secretly and openly”; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 36, chap. 44,
pp. 386–387, no. 1, which says: “and from the greatest of reliefs (wa
min a\`ẓam al-faraj)” and vol. 50, chap. 6, pp. 227–228, no. 2; I\`lām
al-warā, sect. 2, p. 224, up to his saying: “secretly and openly”;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 1, chap. 9, pp. 514–515, no. 247, from al-Faḍl b.
Shādhān in Ithbāt al-ghayba, al-Ṣadūq in Kamāl al-dīn, al-Ṭabarsī in
al-Iḥtijāj, and al-Rāwandī in Qiṣaṣ al-anbiyā, which say, “from the
greatest (min a\`ẓam)” ; al-Inṣāf, pp. 55–57, no. 47, which says, “from
the greatest of deeds.”

[^2]: Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 40, pp. 298–30, no. 1; Irshād al-qulūb, p.
414 (short version); Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 46, chap. 11, pp. 201–203, no.
77.

[^3]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 32, pp. 331–332, no. 17; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 1, chap. 9, p. 516, no. 251, which says: “follow his
customs and the Wise Quran”; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 5, p. 137,
no. 5. In the edition published by al-Maktabat al-Islāmiyya, vol. 1, p.
448, Abū Lubaid has been recorded instead of Abū Ayyūb. Also, “the one
who will pray behind him will be Jesus, son of Mary, peace be on him, in
the year of ‘Yāsīn, and by the Wise Quran’ (Quran 36:1–2).” This wording
is in harmony with what is found in al-Inṣāf (chap. ‘al-Hamza,’ p. 9,
no. 12). Apparently, this is due to the copyist’s error or his
misjudgment, because the wording of the tradition—according to the copy
that we have copied from which is the version corrected using the
hand-written manuscript—are like this: “follow his customs and the Wise
Quran.” Its editor has mentioned that its wording in the precious copy
does not have the words “follow his,” thus, it will mean: Jesus, peace
be on him, will act according to the Islamic sharia and pray behind him
in accordance with his customs and the Noble Quran. What we mean by ‘his
customs,’ are the customs of the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, or the customs of the Imam, peace be on him, which
are none but the traditions of the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him
and his family. The versions in which the words “follow his” have been
recorded are in accordance with Biḥār al-anwār and Ithbāt al-hudāt
except that in its end ‘Wise’ is used instead of ‘Noble’.


