Section Twenty-Six
==================

The traditions that indicate he will fill the earth with fairness and
justice just as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness

Comprised of 148 traditions

583. Al-Fitan[^1]: Al-Walīd narrated to us from Sa\`īd, from Qatāda,
from Abī Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, may Allah be satisfied with
him, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
who said: “[The Mahdī] will give away wealth munificently and will not
count [what he is giving away]. He will fill the earth with justice just
as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness.”

584. Al-Fitan[^2]: Al-Walīd narrated to us from Abū Rāfi\` Ismā’īl b.
Rāfi\`, from someone who narrated to him, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī,
from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “His nation will take refuge in him like the bees that take refuge
in their leader. He will fill the earth with justice just as it will be
filled with injustice; until the people return to their original state
[and will become so peaceful] that no one will wake up someone who is
asleep and no blood will be shed.”

585. Al-Fitan[^3]: Narrated to us ibn Wahb, from al-Ḥarth, from Minhāl
b. \`Amr b. Ziyād, from Abū Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the
Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be upon him and his family, who said:
“He will fill the earth with justice as it will be filled with
unfairness and injustice before him. He will rule for seven years.”

586. Al-Musnad[^4]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father, from
Muḥammad b. Ja\`far, from \`Auf, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū
Sa\`īd al-Khudrī that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, said: “The Hour will not be established until the
earth is filled with unfairness and oppression. Then, a person from my
progeny—or from my Ahl al-Bait—will emerge who will fill it with
fairness and justice just as it will be filled with unfairness and
oppression.”

587. Kanz al-\`ummāl[^5]: From \`Alī, peace be on him, who said:

The earth will be filled with unfairness and injustice to such an extent
that fear and grief will enter every house. They will ask for two
dirhams . . . but it will not be given to them. Wars will follow wars
and wealth will follow wealth until Allah surrounds them in His land;
then, he will fill the earth with justice and fairness.

588. Kamāl al-dīn[^6]: Narrated to us \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan
al-Qazwīnī, from Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥaḍramī, from Aḥmad b. Yaḥyā
al-Aḥwal, from Khallād al-Muqri’, from Qays b. Abī Ḥaṣīn, from Yaḥyā b.
Waththāb, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Umar, from al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, peace be
on him, who said:

If there remains but one day from the [end of the] world, Allah, Mighty
and Majestic be He, will prolong it until a man from my progeny emerges.
He will fill it with justice and fairness just as it will be filled with
injustice and unfairness. This is what I heard from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family.

589. Kamāl al-dīn[^7]: Narrated to us my father and Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥasan, may Allah be satisfied with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah,
\`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī, Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, and
Aḥmad b. Idrīs, all of them, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Abī
al-Khaṭṭāb, Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Khālid
al-Barqī, and Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim, all of them, from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b.
Faḍḍāl, from Tha\`labat b. Maimūn, from Mālik al-Juhanī; [and through
another chain] narrated to us Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad b. al-Walīd,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṣaffār,
and Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad al-Ṭayālisī, from
Mundhir b. Muḥammad b. Qābūs, from al-Naṣr b. Abī al-Sarī, from Abū
Dāwūd Sulaimān b. Sufyān al-Mustariq, from Tha\`labat b. Maimūn, from
Mālik al-Juhanī, from Ḥārith b. al-Mughaira al-Naṣrī, from al-Aṣbagh b.
Nubāta who said:

I went to Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, and
found him pondering over something and scratching the ground. I asked,
“O Amīr al-Mu’minīn! Why am I seeing you pondering and scratching the
ground; do you have any desire for it?” He answered, ‘No, by Allah! I
never had any desire for it or for the world, even for a single day. But
I was thinking about a child who will be from my loin (ẓahrī) and my
eleventh descendant. He is the Mahdī who will fill [the earth] with
justice just as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness. He will
have a bewilderment and an occultation in which, some will be deviated
and others will be guided.”

I asked, “O Amīr al Mu’minīn! Will this really happen?” He replied,
“Yes, just as he will be created. O Aṣbagh! Your knowledge about this
affair will be very limited. They are the best of this nation along with
the righteous ones of this progeny.” I said, “What will happen after
that?” He replied, “Then, Allah will do what He pleases, for surely, He
has intentions, aims, and endings.”

590. Kifāyat al-athar[^8]: Abū l-Mufaḍḍal informed us from Abū
\`Abd-Allah Ja\`far b. Muḥammad al-\`Alawī, from \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn
[al-Ḥasan] b. \`Alī b. \`Umar, from his father (Imam) \`Alī b.
al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, that he used to say: “Call for me my son
al-Bāqir [i.e. Muḥammad]!” I asked him, “O father! Why have you named
him al-Bāqir?” On hearing this, he smiled—and I hadn’t seen him smiling
before this.

Then, he performed a long prostration for Allah, the Exalted. I heard
him say in his prostration, “O Allah! All Praise is for you O my Master,
for all the blessings that You have endowed upon us Ahl al-Bait.” He
repeated this sentence a number of times then said, “O my son! The
Imamate is in his descendants until our Qā’im, peace be on him, rises.
Then, he will fill it with fairness and justice.

He is an Imam and the father of the Imams [following him]. [He is] a
mine of forbearance and the place of knowledge—which he will split as it
should be split. By Allah, he is certainly the most similar of the
people to the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family.” I asked, “How many Imams will follow him?” He replied, “Seven;
and from them is the Mahdī who will emerge with the religion in the end
of times.”

591. Dalā’il al-imāma[^9]: Through his chain of narrators (meaning Abū
l-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. Hārūn b. Mūsā from his father) from Abū \`Alī
al-Nahāwandī from Abū l-Qāsim b. Abī Ḥayya from Isḥāq b. Abī Isrā’īl
from Abū \`Ubaida al-Ḥaddād from \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Wāṣil al-Sadūsī from
\`Auf from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī that the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said:
“The Hour will not be established until the earth is filled with
unfairness and oppression. Then, a person from my progeny—or he said
from my Ahl al-Bait—will emerge. He will fill it with fairness and
justice just as it will be filled with unfairness and oppression.’”

592. Ghaybat of al-Shaykh[^10]: Through his chain of narrators [meaning
Ibrāhīm b. Salma, from Aḥmad b. Mālik al-Fazārī, from Ḥaidar b. Muḥammad
al-Fazārī, from \`Abbād b. Ya\`qūb, from Naṣr b. Muzāḥim, from Muḥammad
b. Marwān, from al-Kalbī, from Abū Ṣāliḥ,] concerning the saying of
Allah, the Exalted: “Know that Allah will give life to earth after its
death,” from ibn \`Abbās who said: “It means, he will reform the earth
through the Qā’im from the family of Muḥammad. ‘After its death’ means
after the injustice [committed by] its people. ‘Indeed, We have made
clear the signs for you’ with the Qā’im from the family of Muḥammad ‘so
that you may understand.’”[^11]

593. Dalā’il al-imāma[^12]: Abū l-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. Hārūn informed me
from his father, from Abū \`Alī al-Ḥasan b. Muḥammad al-Nahāwandī, from
al-\`Abbās b. Maṭar al-Hamdānī, from Ismā’īl b. \`Alī al-Muqrī, from
Muḥammad b. Sulaimān, from Abū Ja\`far al-\`Arajī, from Muḥammad b.
Yazīd, from Sa\`īd b. \`Abāya, from Salmān al-Farsī who said: “Amīr
al-Mu’minīn delivered a sermon in Medina. He had mentioned the fitna and
its nearness, then, he spoke about the rising of the Qā’im from his
descendant’s and that he would surely fill the earth with justice just
as it would be filled with injustice . . . (to the end of the tradition
in its entirety).”

594. Al-Kāfī[^13]: Aḥmad b. Idrīs, from Muḥammad b. Aḥmad, from Ja\`far
b. al-Qāsim, from Muḥammad b. al-Walīd al-Khazzāz, from al-Walīd b.
\`Uqba, from al-Ḥārith b. Ziyād, from Shu\`ayb, from Abū Ḥamza who
recounts:

I went to see (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah (al-Ṣādiq), peace be on him, and
asked him, “Are you the master of this affair?” He replied, “No.” I
asked again, “Is it your son?” He replied, “No.” I questioned again,
“The son of your son?” He said, “No.” I asked, “The son of the son of
your son?” He answered, “No.” I asked, “Then who is he?” He said, “He
who will fill [the earth] with justice just as it will be filled with
unfairness and injustice; during the concealment (fatra) of Imams, just
as the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
was sent when there was an absence (fatra) of Messengers.

595. Farā’id al-simṭain[^14]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad
b. \`Abdūs al-\`Aṭṭār al-Nīsābūrī, [from \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. Qutayba
al-Nīsābūrī, from Ḥamdān b. Sulaimān al-Nīsābūrī], from Muḥammad b.
Ismā’īl b. Bazī\`, from Ṣāliḥ b. \`Uqba, from his father, from (Imam)
Abū Ja\`far, Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Bāqir, from his father—the Master of
the Worshippers—\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from his father—the Master of the
Martyrs—al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, from his father—the Master of
the Heirs—\`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, Allah be satisfied with them all, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said:

The Mahdī is from my descendants. He will have an occultation and
bewilderment in which the nations will be deviated. [Then,] he will
emerge with the treasures of the prophets, peace be on them, and will
fill the earth with justice and fairness just as it will be filled with
injustice and unfairness.

596. Tafsīr Furāt al-Kūfī[^15]: Narrated to me \`Alī b. Muḥammad b.
\`Umar al-Zuhrī, through his sources from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be
on him, that

Al-Ḥārith al-A\`war said to (Imam) al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, “O Son of
Allah’s Messenger! May I be sacrificed for you! Inform me about the
saying of Allah in His Book, ‘By the Sun and its daylight’ (Quran
91:1)?” He replied, “Woe to you, O Ḥārith! This [verse] refers to
Muḥammad, the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family.” I asked, “And His saying, ‘And the moon when it follows the
sun’ (Quran 91:2)?” He said, “This refers to Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b.
Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, who follows Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family.” I enquired, “‘And the day when it reveals it’
(Quran 91:3)?” He said, “That refers to the Qā’im from the family of
Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and his family. He will fill the
earth with fairness and justice.”

597. Al-Nukat al-I\`tiqādiyya[^16]: From the Prophet, Allah's blessings
be on him and his family:

If nothing remains from the world but one hour, Allah will prolong that
hour until a person from my progeny emerges. His name will be my name
and his epithet will be my epithet. He will fill the earth with fairness
and justice just as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness. It
is obligatory for every creature to follow him.

598. Al-Muḥkam wa l-mutashābih[^17]: Concerning the saying of Allah, the
Exalted, “Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth . . .”[^18]
citing Tafsīr al-Nu\`mānī through his chain of narrators from (Imam)
al-Ṣādiq, from Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on them: “Niche refers to the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family; the lamp
is the [first] heir (al-waṣī) and the [following] heirs; the glass is
al-Fāṭima, peace be on her; and the blessed tree is the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, and the shining star
is the awaited Qā’im who will fill the earth with justice.”

The traditions with following numbers also show the above concept: 72,
80, 91, 95, 149, 153, 160, 161, 165, 181, 194, 205, 216, 217, 219, 221,
225, 226, 227 (which says, “Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will fill
the earth through him with light after its darkness and with justice
after its injustice and knowledge after its ignorance), 235, 241, 246,
247, 249, 253, 254, 257, 259, 263, 272, 275, 280, 281, 291, 295, 321,
339, 346, 353, 360, 365, 366, 367, 370, 371 (which says, “unfairness,
injustice, and oppression”), 374, 375, 378, 382, 390, 396, 400, 404,
406, 428, 429, 431, 451, 453, 454, 458, 460, 461, 463, 484, 485, 492
(which says, “he will fill the earth with justice just as it will be
filled with injustice”), 494, 497, 498, 500, 502, 505, 507, 508,511,
513, 524, 527, 528, 532, 535, 541, 543, 544, 547, 548, 551, 555, 556,
557, 563, 564, 567, 570, 581, 612, 653, 670, 701, 726, 748, 764, 775,
791, 796, 806, 807, 810, 828, 859, 910, 950, 983 (which says, “He will
fill the earth with truth and justice”), 1028, 1094, 1095, 1097, 1101,
1113, 1129, 1130, 1136, 1155–1160, 1195 (which says, “fairness and
justice, light, and reasoning”), 1198, and 1204.

[^1]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Sīrat al-Mahdī . . .,” p. 192.

[^2]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Sīrat al-Mahdī . . .,” pp. 192–93.

[^3]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Sīrat al-Mahdī . . .,” p. 193 ; Kashf
al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 468 (short version).

[^4]: Al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 36; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 271, no.
38691; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 1, p. 16, and chap. 3, pp. 36–37; Dalā’il
al-imāma, chap. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,” p. 249, no. 40; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 82, no. 22, citing what has been gathered
by al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim.

[^5]: Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 586, no. 39659.

[^6]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 30, pp. 317–318, no. 4; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 3, p. 133, no. 5; I\`lām al-warā, sect. 2,
chap. 1, pp. 401–402.

[^7]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 26, pp. 288–289, no. 1. I say: It is
clear that when he says “my eleventh descendant,” he is obviously
referring to the eleventh Imam from his descendant’s—who is al-Mahdī,
may my soul be sacrificed at his feet—and its first chain of narrators
is definitely correct. A similar tradition can be found in Ghaybat
al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 4, pp. 60–61, no. 4: “‘I am thinking about the child
who will be from my loin (ẓahrī). He is the Mahdī who will fill it with
fairness and justice just as it will be filled with unfairness and
injustice. He will have a bewilderment and an occultation in which some
people will deviate and others will be guided.’ I asked, ‘O Amīr
al-Mu’minīn! How long will this bewilderment and occultation last?’ He
replied, ‘A period of time . . .’” In this version, “my eleventh
descendant” has not been recorded. In some versions “from the loin of my
eleventh descendant” has been recorded but it is unclear if this is a
scribal error or a variation in the contents of the books. [We don’t
know] how this happened while the copy that the learned scholar,
al-Qummī, regarded as original for its first edition, which he corrected
and compared with numerous ancient manuscripts, did not contain any of
these two additions! What is understood from Biḥār al-anwār regarding
the compatibility of the contents of Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī with that of
al-Kāfī in the reply to the question about the duration of bewilderment
and occultation, is inconsistent with the copy of Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī
which we possess. For, he said: “a period of time (sibtun min al-dahr)”
which is different to what has been recorded in al-Kāfī, the contents of
which we will soon mention with their wordings. ‘Sibtun min al-dahr’
means a period of time which can be long or short. Similarly, the
contents of the printed version of the old handwritten manuscript of
al-Ikhtiṣāṣ are also incompatible with that of al-Kāfī. Also, it does
not have the question about the duration of bewilderment and
occultation. Al-Ikhtiṣāṣ, chap. “Ithbāt al-a’imma,” p. 209, with the
difference that he said: “But I was thinking of the child who will be
from the loin of my eleventh descendant; he is the Mahdī who will . . .”
Apparently this is incorrect, because Imam Ḥasan al-\`Askarī— the father
of Imam al-Mahdī, peace be on him—is without doubt the ninth descendant
of Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be upon him. Therefore, al-Majlisī has
written in Mir\`āt al-\`uqūl that “it means from the loin of the
eleventh Imam and ‘my descendant’ is used to describe the new-born . . .
(to the end).” Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 289, which is like what was in
al-Ikhtiṣāṣ except that it ends like this: “I asked, ‘O Amīr
al-Mu’minīn! For how long will this bewilderment and this occultation
last?’ He replied, ‘Why [do you want to know]? How [do you expect] to
have the knowledge of this affair, O Aṣbagh? They are the chosen ones of
this nation and the righteous ones of this progeny.’” Kifāyat al-athar,
chap. 29, pp. 219–220, no.2, which says, “but I was thinking about the
child who will be from my loin; my eleventh descendant who is the Mahdī.
He will fill it with justice just as it will be filled with injustice
and unfairness. He will have a bewilderment and occultation in which
some people will deviate and others will be guided . . . (to the end of
the tradition).” It must be noted that he has not recorded the entire
tradition. Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 338, no. 7, with the difference: “I
asked, ‘O Amīr al-Mu’minīn! How long will this bewilderment and
occultation last?’ He said, ‘Six days or six months or six years.’” And
also in the end: “for surely, He has alterations [in destinies],
intentions, aims, and endings (badā’āt wa ‘irādāt wa ghāyāt wa
nahāyāt).’” The copies vary in his saying, “from my loin, my eleventh
descendant.” Ghaybat al-Shaykh, pp. 103–104, same as al-Kāfī; Ithbāt
al-waṣiyya, which is also the same as al-Kāfī which says, “from my
loin.” Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 6, chap. “Al-Nuṣūṣ \`ala . . .,” pp.
357–358, no. 20, citing al-Kāfī, which also records ‘from my loin’ but
he has dropped the question and answer concerning the duration of
bewilderment and occultation just as he has dropped the last part of the
tradition. Perhaps, he has done so because he was uncertain about what
he had dropped as it was in contrast to the contents of the remaining
part of the tradition and even that of other traditions. It is apparent
that what has been recorded in al-Kāfī—regarding the answer (to the
question) about the duration of bewilderment and occultation—is
incompatible with his saying: “He will have an occultation and
bewilderment in which some people will deviate and others will be
guided,” because of the importance of the occultation, the examination
of the people by it, the firmness of the deviated on their deviation,
and the guided on their guidance. An occultation and bewilderment of
merely six days, cannot be the cause of the bewilderment and deviation
of the people and the same holds true for six months or six years. Once
this time passes [the bewilderment] will be over but when its period is
prolonged and extended, then some people will be deviated in it and will
remain steadfast in their deviation. To sum it up, the contents of the
tradition in al-Kāfī are indeed confusing and muddled but there is no
need to constrain ourselves to justify it because its chain is weak and
because a narration with a correct chain and wording devoid of any
disturbance and disorder and in accordance with other traditions exists
[which opposes it]. This narration is what al-Ṣadūq has recorded in
Kamāl al-dīn in one of his two chains of narrators for this tradition:
“From his father and Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan, may Allah be satisfied with
them, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah . . . (to the end of what we already
cited from him).” This (tradition) is reliable and others cannot be
relied upon because of their disturbance and disorder, the variations in
the different versions of the texts, and the weakness of the chain of
narrators due to some of its narrators being unknown (majhūl). One can
rely on what has been narrated in Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī and Kifāyat
al-athar because their text does not contain the disturbance and
disorder (of al-Kāfī’s tradition) and the weakness in their chain of
narrators is compensated by their harmony with the other traditions. If
someone says: al-Shaykh (al-Ṭūsī) has recorded this tradition in his
al-Ghayba with an authentic chain of narrators which also has the
question about the duration of bewilderment and occultation and the same
answer found in al-Kāfī has been mentioned; Then, we would answer: It
has been narrated in Al-Kāfī—with a chain of narrators which consists of
some unknown narrators (majāhīl)—and al-Shaykh has recorded it using the
wording of al-Kāfī through two chains of narrators, the first is the
weak chain used in al-Kāfī but the second is other than that and is
correct and authentic. Apparently, the latter is the shortened chain
mentioned by al-Ṣadūq in Kamāl al-dīn and it is the one which we have
relied on. It is clear for anyone who is skilled in the knowledge of
traditions that the wordings of the tradition in Ghaybat al-Shaykh are
exactly like those of al-Kāfī. This is all we will say about the chain
of narrators and the text of the tradition recorded in al-Kāfī.
Furthermore, the consistency of the text recorded in Ghaybat
al-Nu\`mānī—who was also the scribe of al-Kulainī—should also be taken
into account. The contents of this tradition in al-Kāfī are similar to
the contents of the tradition recorded by al-Ṣadūq in Kamāl al-dīn, vol.
1, chap. 31, pp. 323–324, no. 8, through his chain of narrators from our
master Imam Zain al-\`Ābidīn. We did not find some of the narrators in
the rijāl books. This narration comprises of the duration of the short
occultation: “Surely, our Qā’im will have two occultations; one of them
will be longer than the other. The first will last for six days, six
months, or six years, but the second, will become so long that most of
those who believed in this affair (i.e. Imamate) will reject it and no
one will remain steadfast in it except those who have strong certitude
and correct recognition. (Those) who will not become discomforted
because of what we have decreed or decided and will submit completely to
us Ahl al-Bait.” The same things that we said about the tradition in
al-Kāfī can also be mentioned here. To that we will add: six days or six
months cannot be used to describe the meaning of occultation in such
situations. Apparently, this tradition is in contradiction with that
found in al-Kāfī and it is not correct to reconcile between them. This
tradition cannot be used to verify what al-Aṣbagh has narrated—like what
our Shaykh, al-Majlisī, has done—just as al-Aṣbagh’s tradition cannot be
verified using this tradition. All we can say in such situations is that
the owners of these traditions—i.e. the Ahl al-Bait, peace be on
them—know their meanings best. It is wrong to justify this
narration—with its weak chain and troubling contents that have
restricted the duration of the occultation to six days, six months, or
six years— using the concept of badā’, which is one of the most
important things on which the foundations of Prophethood and the
benefits of dispatching the Messengers and sending down the Holy Books
and even the system of religion, the world, legislation, and creation
are laid. Because we believe badā’ will change only those things which
can be proved by intellect (\`aql) or sharia; things like death,
illness, sustenance, calamities, afflictions, and etc., which can be
changed by prayers, giving charity, bonding with relatives, and even
through treatment with medicine. Also, any action which is effective in
advancing or postponing the time of death or repelling calamities,
changing blessings or reducing or increasing them—which we have proved
elsewhere—are from the same category. Allah, the Exalted, says: “Allah
erases what He wills and keeps (what He wills) and with Him is the
Mother Book” (Quran 13:39), “Surely Allah does not change what is with a
nation until they change what is with themselves” (Quran 13:11), “Had
the people of the towns believed and were God-fearing, we would have
certainly opened [or expanded] for them blessings from the sky and the
earth, but they denied so we punished them because of what they used to
do” (Quran 7:96), “If you be grateful, I will certainly give you more
and if you be ungrateful, [then] My punishment is indeed severe” (Quran
14:7). It has also been narrated that “Protect your faith by giving
charity and protect your wealth by paying zakāt and repel the waves of
calamities through supplications” (Nahj al-balāgha, wisdom no. 146), and
also “Bonding with relatives (ṣilat al-raḥim) increases age, prevents
severe death, and keeps away poverty,” (Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 74, p.174).

[^8]: Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 32, pp. 237–238, no. 2; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 36, chap. 44, pp. 388–389, no. 3, citing Kifāyat al-athar with this
chain: “\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Umar b. al-Ḥusayn, from Ḥusayn b. Zaid,
from his (paternal) uncle \`Umar b. \`Alī, from his father.”

[^9]: Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 249, no. 40.

[^10]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 175, no. 131; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 5, p. 53, no. 32; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 12, p.
501, no. 287, and sect. 59, p. 581, no. 762; Muntakhab al-anwār
al-muḍī’a, p. 18; al-Maḥajja, pp. 221–222.

[^11]: Quran 57:17.

[^12]: Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 253.

[^13]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 138, pp. 340–341, no. 21; Ghaybat
al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, pp. 186–187, no. 38; Mir\`āt al-\`uqūl, vol. 4,
p. 54, no. 21. Al-Majlisī writes: “Absence (al-fatra) between two
Messengers is the period in which sending Messengers is paused and their
heirs (waṣīs) are hidden. The fatra of Imams means they are concealed
and do not appear for a long duration or there is an absence of a
powerful and dominant Imam. This includes the era of all the Imams
except Amīr al-Mu’minīn; and the first explanation seems more probable.”

[^14]: Farā’id al-simṭain, vol. 2, p. 335, no. 587; Yanābī\` al-mawadda,
chap. 94, p. 448; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 25, p. 287, no. 5; I\`lām
al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 72, no.
17; Ghāyat al-marām, chap. 141, p. 695, no. 30, and chap. 142, p. 695,
no. 23; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 5, p. 461, no. 105.

[^15]: Tafsīr Furāt al-Kūfī, p. 212; see Ta’wīl al-āyāt al-ẓāhira and
you will find other traditions from al-Ḥalabī, al-Faḍl Abū l-Abbās, and
Sulaimān al-Daylamī; all of whom have interpreted the verse, “And the
day when it reveals it” to the Qā’im and his rising, peace be on him.

[^16]: Al-Nukat al-i\`tiqādiyya, p. 35.

[^17]: Al-Muḥkam wa l-mutashābih, p. 27; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 2, chap.
9, sect. 26, p. 506, no. 468. It is appropriate that we mention here
what has been mentioned in the book al-Kunā wa l-alqāb, chap. 3, pp.
68–69, under the name ‘Quftān’ citing A\`yān al-Shī\`a: “Shaykh Muḥammad
Ṭāhā Najaf has narrated from al-Shaykh Aḥmad b. al-Shaykh Ḥasan b.
al-Shaykh \`Alī al-Najafī—the learned litterateur and poet (d. 1293
AH)—that he saw the Awaited Imam, peace be on him, in a dream and
complained to him. The Imam answered him with these two lines of poetry:
For us is the return after a prolonged occultation And we will fill it
with justice just as it was filled with unfairness Soon my promise will
be fulfilled, say to those who disbelieve in me Indeed this is a truth
that my Lord will certainly (fulfill)

[^18]: Quran 24:35.


