Section Twenty-Seven
====================

The traditions that indicate he will have two occultations and one will
be shorter than the other

Comprised of ten traditions

599. Al-Kāfī[^1]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn, from
ibn Maḥbūb, from Isḥāq b. \`Ammār, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be
on him, who said: “The Qā’im will have two occultations: one of them
will be short and the other long. In the first occultation, no one will
know his whereabouts except his special followers (khāṣṣatu shī\`atih).
As for the other, no one will know his whereabouts except his special
servants (khāṣṣatu mawālīh).”

600. Yanābī\` al-mawadda[^2]: Citing al-Maḥajja fī mā nazala fī l-Qā’im
al-Ḥujja, concerning the saying of Allah, the Exalted, “And he made it a
firm word in his future generations so that they may return” (Quran
43:28). From Thābit al-Thumālī, from Imam \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from his
father, from his grandfather Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, may
Allah be satisfied with him, who said:

This verse was revealed about us. Allah has put Imamate in the
generation of al-Ḥusayn until the Day of Judgment. Our Qā’im will
definitely have two occultations: one of them will be longer than the
other and no one will remain steadfast in his Imamate except those who
have strong certitude and correct recognition.

601. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^3]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b.
Sa\`īd, from \`Alī b. al-Ḥasan, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Abū Najrān, from
\`Alī b. Mahziyār, from Ḥammād b. \`Īsā, from Ibrāhīm b. \`Umar
al-Yamānī who said: “I heard (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, say,
‘The master of this affair will surely have two occultations.’ I also
heard him say, ‘The Qā’im will not rise while having anybody’s
allegiance on his neck [i.e. The Qā’im will rise while he will not have
pledged allegiance to anyone].’”

602. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^4]: Informed us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Sa\`īd,
from al-Qāsim b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. Ḥāzim, from his book, from
\`Ubais b. Hishām, from \`Abd-Allah b. Jabala, from Ibrāhīm b.
al-Mustanīr, from al-Mufaḍḍal b. \`Umar al-Ju\`fī, from (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him, who said:

The master of this affair will surely have two occultations: one of them
will be prolonged to such an extent that some of them will say, “He has
died,” some will say, “He has been killed,” and some of them will say,
“He has gone.” No one from his companions [i.e. followers] will remain
[steadfast] in his affair except for very few. No one will know his
whereabouts from his friends or anybody else except a servant who looks
after his affairs.

603. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^5]: Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Sa\`īd b. \`Uqda,
from Muḥammad b. al-Mufaḍḍal b. Ibrāhīm b. Qays and Sa\`dān [Sa\`d] b.
Isḥāq b. Sa\`īd and Aḥmad b. al-Ḥusayn [al-Ḥasan] b. \`Abd al-Malik and
Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan al-Qaṭawānī, all of them from al-Ḥasan b.
Maḥbūb, from Ibrāhīm [b. Ziyād] al-Khāriqī, from Abū Baṣīr who said:

I said to (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, that (Imam) Abū
Ja\`far, peace be on him, used to say, “The Qā’im from the family of
Muḥammad will have two occultations and one of them will be longer than
the other.” He said, “Yes, and this will not occur until the family of
so and so clash with each other, war rages (taḍīq al-ḥalqa), the Sufyānī
appears, calamities intensify, death and killings engulf the people, and
they seek refuge in the Sanctum of Allah (ḥaram Allāh) and the Sanctum
of His Messenger (ḥaram rasūlih), Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family.”

604. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^6]: \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. \`Abd-Allah, from Aḥmad
b. Muḥammad b. Rabāḥ, from Aḥmad b. \`Alī al-Ḥimyarī, from al-Ḥasan b.
Ayyūb, from \`Abd al-Karīm b. \`Amr, from al-\`Alā b. Razīn, from
Muḥammad b. Muslim al-Thaqafī, from (Imam) al-Bāqir Abū Ja\`far, peace
be upon him, who said: “The Qā’im will have two occultations. In one of
them, [some will say] ‘he has perished’ and [others will say,] ‘No one
knows where he is.’”

605. Al-Kāfī[^7]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā and Aḥmad b. Idrīs, from al-Ḥasan b.
\`Alī al-Kūfī, from \`Alī b. Ḥassān, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Kathīr,
from al-Mufaḍḍal b. \`Umar who said:

I heard (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, say, “The master of
this affair will have two occultations: in one of them, he will return
to his family. As for the other, [some will say] ‘he has perished’ and
[others will say,] ‘No one knows where he is.’” I asked, “What should we
do when this happens?” He replied, “When somebody claims [to be him],
ask him about matters that only someone like him can answer.”

606. Al-Kāfī[^8]: Al-Ḥusayn b. Muḥammad, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad from
al-Qāsim b. Ismā’īl al-Anbārī, from Yaḥyā b. al-Muthannā, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Bukair, from \`Ubaid b. Zurāra, from Abū \`Abd-Allah,
peace be on him, who said: “The Qā’im will have two occultations. In one
of them, he will be present during the Hajj season; he will see the
people but they will not be able see him.”

607. \`Iqd al-durar[^9]: From (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī,
peace be on him, who said: “The master of this affair—meaning the Mahdī,
peace be on him—will have two occultations. One of them will become so
elongated that some will say, ‘he has died,’ others will say, ‘he has
been killed,’ and others will say, ‘he has gone.’ No one will be aware
of his whereabouts, not his friends nor anybody else, except the
servants who look after his affairs.”

The following tradition also proves the above concept: 254.

[^1]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. “Fī l-ghayba,” p. 340, no. 19; Mir\`āt
al-\`uqūl, vol. 4, p. 52, no. 19; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 170,
no. 2, with a slight difference. Al-Nu\`mānī has also recorded this
tradition on p.170, no. 1: “From ibn \`Uqda, from \`Alī b. al-Ḥasan
al-Taimulī, from \`Umar b. Uthmān, from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from Isḥāq
b. \`Ammār al-Ṣairafī, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who
said, ‘The Qā’im will have two occultations: one will be long and the
other short. In the first occultation, his special followers (khāṣṣatu
shī\`atih) will know his whereabouts. As for the other, no one will know
his whereabouts except his special servants.’” In this tradition, the
long occultation has been mentioned before the shorter one which should
have been first. This does not affect our goal and intention for
mentioning this tradition.

[^2]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 71, p. 427; al-Maḥajja fī mā nazala fī
l-Qā’im al-Ḥujja, p. 200, under verse 43:28.

[^3]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, p. 171, no. 3.

[^4]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, pp. 171–172, no. 5.

[^5]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, pp. 172–173, no. 7; Dalā’il al-imāma, sect.
“Ma\`rifat mā warada min al-akhbār fī wujūb al-ghayba,” p. 293, to his
saying: “He said, ‘Yes.’”

[^6]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, p. 173, no. 8.

[^7]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 138, p. 340, no. 12; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī,
chap. 10, pp. 175–176, no. 9, which says: “He will return in one of
them” and “Then ask him about those great matters that only someone like
him can answer”; Mir\`āt al-\`uqūl, vol. 4, p. 54, no. 20. I say: When
he speaks about him returning in one of the occultations to his family,
he might mean that the his whereabouts will still be known to his
special (followers) and that they will be in touch with him—may my
father and mother be sacrificed for him—either through correspondence or
the privilege of directly meeting him or through representatives and
ambassadors between him and his followers. Al-Majlisī, may Allah have
mercy on him, says: “‘He will return to his family,’ means the
dependents of his father or to his representatives and ambassadors.
‘Only someone like him can answer,’ means that only someone like the
Qā’im, peace be on him, can answer such questions that are known to no
one except an Imam; things like informing all the people about the
unseen and questions about difficult issues and the sciences that only
they have knowledge about. If he answers these correctly—and his answers
are in accordance with what has reached you from their forefathers,
peace be on them—then know that he is the Imam; and this [questioning]
must be specifically performed by the knowledgeable scholars.”

[^8]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 138, p. 339, no. 12; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī,
chap. 10, pp. 175–176, no. 16; Mir\`āt al-\`uqūl, vol. 4, p. 47, no. 12.

[^9]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 5, p. 134; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir
al-zamān, chap. 12, pp. 171–172, no. 4; Bishārat al-Islām, chap. 4, p.
81, no. 4. The esteemed Shaykh, ibn Abī Zainab al-Kātib al-Nu\`mānī,
writes: “The traditions which mention that the Qā’im, peace be on him,
will have two occultations are regarded by us as true and authentic,
Praise be to Allah. Allah has made clear what the Imams, peace be on
them, had said and has shown the proof of their truthfulness in these
traditions. The first occultation, is the occultation in which there
were ambassadors in it—whom connected the Imam and the people. The
ambassadors were appointed from amongst apparent and prominent
personalities. Difficult sciences, abstruse talks of wisdom, and the
answer to all the hard and problematic questions which were asked were
delivered by them. This was the short occultation; whose time has
expired and its period has come to an end. The second occultation is the
one in which the ambassadors and emissaries were removed because of an
affair desired by Allah, the Exalted, and the strategy which He had
implemented amongst His creation, so that those who claim (to follow)
this affair will be sifted, examined, tested, separated, and
purified—just as Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, says, ‘Allah will not
leave the believers in the state which you are in until He distinguishes
the evil from the good; nor will Allah inform you of the unseen . . .’
(Quran 3:179). Indeed, this time has certainly come and may Allah make
us steadfast in the truth and make us one of those who will not pass
through the sieve of fitnas. This is the meaning of the saying that ‘he
will have two occultations.’ At the end, we ask Allah to hasten the
relief (faraj) of His friends and appoint us amongst the best of those
who obey him, and the purest of those who follow him, and from the best
of those who He deems fit for and has selected to help His friend and
Caliph. Surely, He is the Master of kindness, the Munificent, the
Benefactor” (Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, pp. 173–174). In I\`lām al-warā, sect.
1 of the 3rd chap., 2nd part of the 4th pillar, it has been mentioned
that “the traditions of occultation precede the era of al-Ḥujja, peace
be on him, and even the era of his father and grandfather, and that Shia
traditionalists have immortalized them in their Principles (Uṣūl books)
compiled during the time of the two masters, al-Bāqir and al-Ṣādiq,
peace be on them, and traced (their chains) from the Holy Prophet and
the Imams, peace be on them, one after the other, and this is why the
belief in the Imamate of the Master of the Time is correct; because he
possesses these attributes and an occultation that has been mentioned
amongst his attributes and no one can refute this.” He then says:
“Amongst the reliable Shia traditionists and authors is al-Ḥasan b.
Maḥbūb al-Zarrād who wrote the book al-Mashīkha more than a hundred
years before the period of occultation—which amongst the Shia Uṣūl books
is more famous than the book of al-Muzanī and its kind. He has recorded
in it some of what we have mentioned about the occultation. All these
occurred just as they had been foretold and everything that they had
guaranteed occurred without any variation. From these, is what he
narrated from Ibrāhīm al-Khāriqī, from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah . . . (he then mentions the fifth tradition in this chapter
and says,) see how the two occultations have occurred for the Master of
the Affair, peace be on him, exactly like how the aforementioned
narrations from his forefathers and ancestors had guaranteed” (Ghaybat
al-Nu\`mānī, pp. 173–174). Al-Mufīd writes in al-Fuṣūl al-\`ashara: “The
traditions narrated from the late Imams of the family of Muḥammad, peace
be upon them, complement each other in concluding that the awaited Qā’im
must definitely have two occultations and one of them will be longer
than the other. In the shorter occultation, some special people will
have news about him and in the longer occultation, no one from the
public will know of his abode except for a few of his reliable
companions who will have the privilege of being at his service and who
will only serve him and no one else. Such traditions have existed in the
writings of the Shia Imāmī authors before the birth of Abū Muḥammad
(al-\`Askarī), his father, and his grandfather, peace be on them. There
truth became apparent with the advent of the representatives and
ambassadors—whom we already named, may Allah have mercy on them—and the
truthfulness of the narrators also became clear with the start of the
major occultation. This was indeed a magnificent sign about the
truthfulness of the Shia Imāmī belief.” I say: The fact that these
traditions were recorded in al-Kāfī during the minor occultation, and
the minor occultation ending and the beginning of the second occultation
after it, is also evidence of their authenticity. For \`Alī b. Muḥammad
al-Samurī, may Allah be satisfied with him—who was the last
ambassador—passed away in the month of Sha\`bān, 329 AH, while
al-Kulainī died in 328 AH. According to another report, al-Kulainī died
in 329 AH, the same year in which the fourth ambassador died; who had
died in the middle of Sha\`bān, 329AH. Others believe that even if
al-Kulainī died in the year 329 AH, it was before the death of
al-Samurī. The fact that he has recorded these traditions in al-Kāfī
during the minor occultation is by itself proof of their authenticity
and correctness. You should know that the occultation of our master Imam
al-Mahdī—may my father and mother be sacrificed for him—has also been
mentioned in the poems of Shia poets like al-Ḥimyarī (d. 173 AH), who
said in his poem (see al-Ghadīr, vol. 2, p. 247) addressed to our master
al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him, We have been informed about the successor of
Muḥammad And what has been said is not a lie That the master of this
affair will be not be found and will become unseen Hidden, like he who
is fearful and waiting Then the wealth of the lost one will be
distributed as if . . . He will live for some time then will rise Like
the rising of a Star in the horizon I hold my Lord as a Witness that
your saying is a proof Upon all the creatures, obedient and sinners That
the Master of the Affair and the Qā’im Is the one whom my soul flies to
with delight For him is an occultation which is inevitable And Allah
sends salutations upon this concealed person He will stay thus for a
while and then appear And fill with justice the East and the West


