Section Twenty-Nine
===================

The traditions that indicate the reason behind his occultation

Comprised of nine traditions[^1]

632. Kamāl al-dīn[^2]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad b.
\`Abdūs al-\`Aṭṭār, may Allah be satisfied with him, from \`Alī b.
Muḥammad b. Qutayba al-Nīsābūrī from Ḥamdān b. Sulaimān al-Nīsābūrī,
from Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Madā’inī, from \`Abd-Allah b.
al-Faḍl al-Hāshimī who said:

I heard al-Ṣādiq Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, say, “The master
of this affair will definitely have an occultation in which every liar
will become doubtful.” I asked, “Why, may I be sacrificed for you?” He
replied, “Because of an affair that we have not been given permission to
disclose to you.” I asked, “What is the rationale behind his
occultation?” He answered, “The rationale behind his occultation is the
same rationale behind the occultations of the Proofs of Allah, High be
His Remembrance, who preceded him; Surely, the rationale will not be
disclosed until he reappears, just as the rationale behind al-Khiḍr’s
acts of drilling a hole in the ship, killing the boy, and erecting the
wall were not disclosed to Moses, peace be on him, except at the time of
their separation. O son of Faḍl! This affair is from the affairs of
Allah, the Exalted, a secret from Allah’s secrets, and an unseen from
Allah’s unseens. Once we know that He, Mighty and Majestic be He, is
wise, then, we will acknowledge that all His actions are wisdom even if
their reason is not disclosed [to us].’”

633. Kamāl al-dīn[^3]: Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. \`Iṣām al-Kulainī, from
Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb al-Kulainī, from Isḥāq b. Ya\`qūb, from the Master
of Time (Ṣāḥib al-Zamān), Allah’s blessings be on him, in his last
signed letter (al-tauqī\`) which was in reply to a question asked from
him by Muḥammad b. Uthmān b. al-\`Amrī:

As for the reason behind the occultation, then surely Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, says, “O you who believe! Do not ask about things which
if disclosed to you will upset you.”[^4] Verily, all my forefathers had
the allegiance of the tyrant of their time on their necks [i.e. were
forced to pledge allegiance to them] but when I reappear, I will not
have the allegiance of any oppressive king on my neck. As for benefiting
from me during my occultation, then indeed, it will be like benefiting
from the sun when the clouds conceal it from the eyes. I am security for
the inhabitants of earth just as the stars are security for the
inhabitants of the sky. So, don’t ask about things that you don’t need
and don’t strain yourself in learning the knowledge of things that you
will not be questioned about. Pray as much as you can for the hastening
of the relief (al-faraj) because it is your relief. Peace be on you, O
Isḥāq b. Ya\`qūb, and [on] whoever follows guidance.

634. \`Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā[^5]: Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq, from Aḥmad
b. Muḥammad al-Hamdānī, from \`Alī b. al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Faḍḍāl, from
his father, from Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, peace be on him, who
said: “It is as if I am with the Shias who are [wandering] like
livestock—during the occultation of my third descendant—in search of
pasture, but will not find it.” I asked, “And why will it be so, O Son
of Allah’s Messenger?” He answered, “Because, their Imam will be
concealed from them.” “Why?” I asked again. He answered, “So that he
will not have the allegiance of anyone on his neck when he rises with
the sword.”

635. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^6]: Al-Ḥusayn b. \`Ubaid Allah, from Abū Ja\`far
Muḥammad b. Sufyān al-Bazaufarī, from Aḥmad b. Idrīs, from \`Alī b.
Muḥammad b. Qutayba, from al-Faḍl b. Shādhān al-Nīsābūrī, from al-Ḥasan
b. Maḥbūb, from \`Alī b. Ri\`āb, who said: “Zurāra said, ‘The Qā’im will
have an occultation before he appears.’ I asked, ‘Why?’ He replied, ‘He
will fear for his life.’”

The following traditions also prove the above concept: 337, 626, 654,
656, and 669.

[^1]: Even though the reason behind the occultation is concealed from
us, this cannot be used as a pretext to deny it hasn’t occurred or the
existence of a benefit in its occurrence. For, Allah’s customs regarding
this event and other events that occur by Allah’s Wisdom are one. Just
as there is no way to deny the benefits in some of His actions whose
rationale and advantage are not known to us, likewise, there is no way
one can deny the benefits in His Assigned-Guardian (walī) and Proof’s
occultation. Surely, our senses and intellect fall short of perceiving
the benefits of most things including Allah’s customs in his creations
and religious laws. We have not even been given the power to comprehend
many of the unknown things. Thus, it is best to acknowledge the
deficiency in our understanding. It has been narrated from our master,
(Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah Ja\`far b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him: “O
son of Adam! If a bird eats your heart, it will not be satiated and if
your eye is poked with a needle you will become blind; Yet, you intend
to recognize through these two [i.e. heart and eye] the kingdom of the
heavens and the earth!” Thus, basically, we shouldn’t ask about these
matters after the Prophet and the Infallibles from his Ahl al-Bait,
Allah’s blessings be on them all, informed us about their occurrence,
and the indication of correct traditions about them, and such things
occurring in the previous nations, just as the Imam mentioned in the
long tradition narrated by Sadīr. Al-Mufīd says in al-Fuṣūl al-\`ashara:
“One of Allah’s friends travels in the earth while worshipping his
Exalted Lord and keeps away from the oppressors through his actions and
distances himself from the abode of the criminals. Through his religion
he stays far away from the place of the disobedient. None of the
creatures is aware of his residence and no human from them can claim to
have met him or to have been in his company. He is Khiḍr, peace be on
him, who lived before the time of Moses [and still lives] today. This is
a universally accepted fact amongst the traditionists and completely
agreed on by historians and narrators. He travels in the earth and no
one knows his abode and no one can claim to be in his company except
what has been mentioned in the Holy Quran about Moses, peace be on him.
Some people mention that he sometimes appears but he is not recognized.
Some who have seen him think that they have met a God-fearing and
abstentious person and when he leaves, they assume him to be Khiḍr even
though they are neither sure nor convinced about it. Sometimes, he
believes that he is one of the people of this time.” Then, he mentions
the occultations of Moses, Joseph, Jonah, and others. (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, has explicitly stated that the reason for
his occultation will not be revealed except after his reappearance and
it is a divine secret—as has been discussed in the first tradition of
this chapter from \`Abd-Allah b. al-Faḍl al-Hāshimī. On this basis, it
will be correct if we say: the real reason (for his occultation) is
concealed from us in His Wisdom and it will not be revealed completely
except after his reappearance. Of course, there are numerous benefits
and obvious advantages other than this. Some of these are: The people
will be tested by his occultation and the level of their submission,
recognition, and belief in what was revealed to the Holy Prophet,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, will be examined. Indeed, it
is the custom of Allah, the Exalted, to test the people. The creation of
people, sending of Messengers, and ascension of divine scripts was
naught but for testing. Allah, the Exalted, says: “We have created man
from a mixed semen [and] We [will] test him” (Quran 76:2). He, Honorable
is His Glory, also says: “[He] Who created death and life to test you as
to which of you is the best in conduct” (Quran 67:2), and “Do the people
think that they will be left alone if they say ‘we have believed’ and
they will not be tested” (Quran 29:2). From the traditions that you will
be acquainted with in this book, it can be understood that testing using
the medium of occultation is one the most difficult of tests and
fastening to religion in this period is like pulling thorns through your
fist. This is in addition to the fact that there is a special test and
examination for acknowledging, believing from the depth of the heart,
and being bound by what the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be upon him and
his family, has informed about the hidden affairs. The fruit of these
will be internal purification and a strength to practice the religion of
Allah, the Exalted. Through his occultation, the peoples actions,
beliefs, and knowledge will be tested. As for their actions, during the
occultation severe and intense fitnas will take place and the people
will be placed in great dilemma in a way that the most difficult of
things will be to remain steadfast in performing one’s religious duties.
As for knowledge and belief, then believing in the occultation is
believing in the unseen (al-ghayb) and no one will believe in it except
he whose faith has been perfected, his recognition strengthened, and his
intentions purified. To sum it up, the people will be tested for belief
in Allah and their submission and acknowledgement regarding the Holy
Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, and what he has
said. It is likely that the tests regarding having faith in the unseen
affairs is more severe than the other tests. Such believers have been
clearly described in Allah’s saying: “That Book which there is no doubt
in, is guidance for the God-fearing, those who believe in the unseen”
(Quran 2:2–3). This is because believing in everything that is hidden
from us—from the things that the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, has informed about—is not possible except for those
who possess certitude and are God-fearing. Those who have been saved
from the darkness of temptations and satanic doubts. Those who
illuminated their souls with the light of recognition, certitude, and
complete belief in Allah, His Messengers, and His Books. The perfection
of human preparedness for his reappearance; because his advent is not
like that of others from the Divine Proofs and Prophets and it is not
based on apparent and normal causes. His actions—as you will observe in
the coming chapters—will be based on realities and he will judge relying
on actualities. In his government, dissimulation (taqiyya) and tolerance
will be done away with in religious affairs. He will be very strict
regarding the governors and sinners. Such affairs will only be achieved
when the world reaches a special capacity and mankind progresses in the
fields of science, recognition, thought, ethics, and morality; so that
they become prepared to accept his superb teachings and reformative
programs. Fear of being killed: History bears witness that apparently,
the cause of his occultation is fear of being killed, because his
enemies—as you will see in the coming chapters—were determined to kill
him and to extinguish his light. They desired to eliminate this holy and
blessed generation, but Allah wanted nothing except the perfection of
His Light. Other reasons which have been mentioned in books specially
authored on this subject. If someone objects and says: What is the use
of an Imam who cannot be seen? There is no difference between him
existing or not! Then I will answer: The benefit in the presence of a
divine proof is not confined to his authority in apparent affairs.
Rather, the greatest advantage of his existence is the survival of the
universe—by the permission of Allah, the Exalted—and his order. Just
like what he, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, has said: “My
Ahl al-Bait are a cause of safety for the inhabitants of earth. If my
Ahl al-Bait cease to exist, the inhabitants of the earth will also cease
to exist.” He also said, “This religion will continue to survive while
twelve leaders from the Quraish exist in it. When they pass away, the
earth will swallow its inhabitants.” Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī
Ṭālib, peace be on him, has said: “Yes, by Allah! The earth will not
become empty of Allah’s Proof…” In the next chapter, we will mention
some of the traditions about how people will benefit from him during his
occultation. If he is not doing anything, it is not because this is what
he wants. The people are themselves the cause of this problem. Al-Ṭūsī
has pointed to two aspects in his book ‘al-Tajrīd’ using the following
words: “His existence is a grace and his authority is another grace, and
we are the cause of his absence (\`adamuhū minnā).” We don’t’ claim with
certainty that he is concealed from all his special followers—like it
has been recorded in al-Shāfī and Tanzīh al-Anbiyā’—and hence, some
important affairs are performed by him through his followers and special
companions and they will benefit from him. What is certain and clear is
the fact that he is concealed from the people and no one has access to
him during his occultation except some of his special companions—and
occasionally others, because of special reasons—but this does not mean
that the people are also concealed from him. For, according to what can
be derived from the traditions, he attends the Hajj pilgrimage every
year and visits the shrines of his grandfather and infallible
forefathers, accompanies the people, attends their gatherings, helps the
distressed ones, visits some of the sick, and etc. Perhaps, he even
fulfills their needs himself, may Allah sacrifice me for him. The
impossibility of having access to him during the occultation means it is
impossible to see him. It is not compulsory for the Imam to execute his
authority. Rather, he implements his authority through others just as he
did during his minor and major occultations. Thus, he appointed the
jurists and the just scholars who were learned about the laws of
judgment. He made them as proofs upon the people. So, during the
occultation, they apparently protect the sharia, explain the Islamic
laws, spread Islamic sciences, dispel the doubts, and take care of
anything which the affairs of the people are maintained with. A detailed
discussion can be found in the books on jurisprudence. If you seek more
elaboration, refer to the books of our great scholars like al-Mufīd,
Sayyid al-Murtaḍā, al-Ṭūsī, al-Ṣadūq, al-Majlisī, etc. May Allah reward
them on account of religion the best of rewards.

[^2]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 11, pp. 481–482, no. 44; \`Ilal
al-sharā’i\`, pp. 245–246, no. 8; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 20, p.
91, no. 4; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol.3, chap. 32, sect. 5, p. 488, no. 217
(short version).

[^3]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, pp. 483–485, no. 4; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, pp.
290–293, no. 247; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 3, sect. 3; Kashf al-ghumma,
vol. 2, pp. 530–532; al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 3, pp. 1113–1117,
no. 30; al-Iḥtijāj, vol. 2, pp. 281–284; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 53, chap.
31, pp. 180–182, no. 10, and vol. 75, chap. 30, p. 380, no. 1, citing
al-Durrat al-bāhira.

[^4]: Quran 5:101.

[^5]: \`Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā, vol. 1, chap. 28, p. 273, no. 6; Kamāl
al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 44, p. 480, no. 4; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap.
8, p. 152, no. 1. I say: The third means Imam Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan—the
father of al-Ḥujja, peace be on him—and the concealed Imam refers to his
son, al-Ḥujja, peace be on them both.

[^6]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 332, no. 274; similar to it in al-Kāfī, vol.
1, chap. 138, p. 338, no. 9, from ibn Bukair from Zurāra; Ghaybat
al-Nu\`mānī, pp. 176–177. Similar to it through numerous chains of
narrators and similar wordings can be found in numbers 19–22 from ibn
Bukair; \`Ilal al-sharā’i\`, p. 246, no. 9; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap.
44, p. 481, no. 9, and similar to it from ibn Bukair and Khalid b. Najīḥ
al-Jawwān and ibn Bukair from Zurāra in numbers 7, 8, and 10; similar to
it in Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 6, p. 359, no. 23, with a difference in the
narrators and minor differences in meaning.


