Section Thirty-Two
==================

The traditions that indicate when he reappears, he will look young and
the passing of time will not make him old

Comprised of ten traditions

645. Kamāl al-dīn[^1]: Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. \`Iṣām, from Muḥammad b.
Ya\`qūb al-Kulainī, from al-Qāsim b. al-\`Alā, from Ismā’īl b. \`Alī
al-Qazwīnī, from \`Alī b. Ismā’īl, from \`Āṣim al-Ḥannāṭ, from Muḥammad
b. Muslim al-Thaqafī al-Ṭaḥḥān, who recounts:

I went to see Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Bāqir, peace be upon him,
with the intention of asking him about the Qā’im from the family of
Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and his family. He started the
conversation [before I could ask my question]: “O Muḥammad b. Muslim!
Surely in the Qā’im from the progeny of Muḥammad, there are customs
[i.e. similarities] from five Messengers: Yūnus b. Mattā, Yūsuf b.
Ya\`qūb, Moses, Jesus, and Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family. As for the custom from Yūnus b. Mattā, it is his return after
his occultation while he will [look] young despite his old age. As for
the custom from Yūsuf b. Ya\`qūb, it is his concealment from his close
companions as well as the masses, his concealment from his brothers, and
the difficult situation for his father Ya\`qūb[^2] despite the little
distance between him and his father, family, and followers.

As for the custom from Moses, it is the continuation of his fear, the
lengthening of his occultation, the concealment of his birth, and the
hardships his followers will experience after him from the tortures and
degradations—until Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, allows him to
appear and gives him victory and assists him against his enemies. As for
the custom from Jesus, peace be on him, it will be the differences
people have concerning him, to the extent that a group will say, ‘He has
not been born.’ Another group will say, ‘He has died,’ yet another will
say, ‘He has been killed and crucified.’

As for the custom from his great grandfather, al-Mustafa Muḥammad,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, it is his emergence with the
sword and the slaying the enemies of Allah, the enemies of His
Messenger, the oppressors and the tyrants, and that he will be helped
with the sword and awe. His flag will never return defeated. From the
signs of his emergence are: the emergence of al-Sufyānī from Syria, the
emergence of al-Yamānī [from Yemen], a loud cry from the sky in the
month of Ramaḍān, and an announcer calling out his name and the name of
his father from the sky.”

646. Kamāl al-dīn[^3]: Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq al-Ṭāliqānī, from
Aḥmad b. \`Alī al-Anṣārī, from Abū l-Ṣalt al-Harawī who said:

I asked (Imam) al-Riḍā, peace be on him, “What are the signs of your
Qā’im when he emerges?” He replied, “His sign is that he will be old in
age [but] young in appearance. When someone looks at him he will guess
his age to be forty years or less. And from his signs is that he will
not become old with the passing of the days and nights until the arrival
of his death.

647. \`Iqd al-durar[^4]: From Imam Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī,
peace be on him: “[When] the Mahdī rises, the people will refute him
because he will return to them as a healthy youth. One of the greatest
tests is that their master will emerge for them as a youth while they
had thought he would be a very old man.”

648. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^5]: From Abū \`Abd-Allah [al-Ṣādiq], peace be
on him, in a tradition: “One of the greatest tests is that their master
will emerge for them as a youth while they had considered him a very old
person.”

649. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^6]: Narrated to us \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn
al-Mas\`ūdī, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from Muḥammad b. Ḥassān
al-Rāzī, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Kūfī, from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Jabala, from \`Alī b. Abī Ḥamza, from (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said: “[When] the Mahdī rises the
people will refute him because he will return to them as a healthy
youth. No one will keep faith in him except those whose covenant Allah
has taken in the first [world of] particles (al-dharr al-awwal).”

650. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^7]: It has been narrated in a tradition that the
Master of Time has a similarity with Jonah (Yūnus): “His return from his
occultation while he is in the prime of his youth.”

Some of the traditions which we mentioned or will soon mention,
interpret and clarify other traditions like the following two:

651. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^8]: Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from Muḥammad b. \`Īsā
b. \`Ubaid, from Ismā’īl b. Abān, from \`Amr b. Shimr, from Jābir
al-Ju\`fī, from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, who said:

Umar b. al-Khaṭṭāb asked Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be
on him, “Inform me about the Mahdī, what is his name?” He replied, “As
for his name, my beloved took a covenant from me that I will not reveal
his name until Allah sends him.” He then asked, “Then inform me about
his attributes.” He replied, “He will be a young man of medium figure
with beautiful hair that will flow over his shoulders. The light of his
face will make the blackness of his beard and hair shine. May my father
be sacrificed for the son of the best maid.”

652. Is\`āf al-rāghibīn[^9]: It has also been narrated about his
characteristics that he is young, has applied kohl on his eyes, has
arched eyebrows, an aquiline nose, a thick beard, and he will have a
mole on his right cheek and another on his right hand.

The following traditions also prove the above concept: 539 and 555.

[^1]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 32, p. 327, no. 7; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 13, pp. 217–218, no. 6.

[^2]: I say: The difficult situation of his father, peace be on him, is
perhaps because Allah, the Exalted, did not inform his father about some
of the things that he would go through—like the duration of his
occultation and the time of his reappearance.

[^3]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 57, p. 652, no. 12; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, p. 285, no. 16; al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 3, p. 1170,
under no. 65; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 4, sect. 4; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3,
chap. 34, sect. 8, p. 733, no. 91.

[^4]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, pp. 41–42; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 492
(short version).

[^5]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 188, no. 43; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
p. 420, no. 398; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 536, no. 483;
Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 21, p. 583, no. 2.

[^6]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 188, no. 43; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
p. 420, no. 398; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 536, no. 483;
Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 21, p. 583, no. 2.

[^7]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 421, no. 399; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap.
32, p. 512, no. 341.

[^8]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 470, no. 487; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 4, sect.
4; al-Irshād, chap. “The attributes of the Qā’im, peace be on him,”
no.1; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 464; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 3,
p. 36; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 34, sect. 6, p. 730, no. 71; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 3, p. 41 (short version).

[^9]: Is\`āf al-rāghibīn (published in the margin of the book Nūr
al-abṣār by Shablanjī), chap. 2, p. 135.


