Section Thirty-Three
====================

The traditions that indicate his birth will be concealed

Comprised of thirteen traditions

653. Kifāyat al-athar[^1]: Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Khuzā\`ī informed us, from
Muḥammad b. Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Kūfī, from Sahl b. Ziyād al-Ādamī, from
\`Abd al-\`Aẓīm b. \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥasanī, who said:

I said to (Imam) Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mūsā, peace be on him, “I hope
that you are the Qā’im from the Ahl al-Bait of Muḥammad who will fill
the earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled with
injustice and unfairness.” He replied, “O Abū l-Qāsim! There is no one
from us but that he rises with Allah’s commands and is the guide towards
the religion of Allah. But the Qā’im through whom Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, will cleanse the earth from the disbelievers and deniers
and will fill it with justice and fairness, is the one whose birth will
be concealed[^2] from the people.

He will disappear from them and they will not be allowed to say his
name. His name will be the same as the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, and also his epithet. He is the one
for whom the earth’s distances will be shortened, every difficulty will
be eased for, and for him will gather his companions—who are equal to
the ones who participated in the Battle of Badr, three hundred and
thirteen men—from distant places on earth. This is the [meaning of the]
saying of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He,

***‘Wherever you may be, Allah will bring forth all of you. Surely,
Allah has power over all things’ (Quran Surah Baqarah 2:148).***

When this number of sincere people gathers for him, he will make his
affair evident. When ten thousand men are complete, he will emerge with
Allah’s permission. Then, he will continue slaying Allah’s enemies until
Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, becomes satisfied.” I said to him, “My
Master! How will he know that Allah has become satisfied?” He answered,
“Mercy will be inspired in his heart . . . (to the end of the
tradition).”

654. Kamāl al-dīn[^3]: Through the same chain of narrators— meaning
\`Alī b. Aḥmad al-Daqqāq and Muḥammad b. Aḥmad al-Shaibānī, may Allah be
satisfied with them, from Muḥammad b. Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Kūfī, from Mūsā
b. \`Imrān al-Nakha\`ī, from his uncle al-Ḥusayn b. Yazīd, from Ḥamzat
b. Ḥumrān, from his father Ḥumrān b. A\`yun, from Sa\`īd b. Jubair—from
\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, the Master of the Worshippers, peace be on him, who
said: “The birth of our Qā’im will be concealed from the people until
they will say, ‘He hasn’t been born yet.’ [It is concealed] so that when
he reappears, he will not have pledged allegiance to anybody.”

655. Kamāl al-dīn[^4]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Hārūn al-Fāmī and \`Alī
b. al-Ḥusayn b. Shādhawayh al-Mu’addib Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Masrūr and
Ja\`far b. al-Ḥusayn, may Allah be satisfied with them, from Muḥammad b.
\`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī, from his father, from Ayyūb b. Nūḥ,
from al-\`Abbās b. \`Āmir al-Qaṣabānī, from Ja\`far b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥasan
b. \`Alī b. \`Abd-Allah b. al-Mughaira al-Kūfī, from his grandfather
al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. \`Abd-Allah, from al-\`Abbās b. \`Āmir al-Qaṣabānī,
from Mūsā b. Hilāl al-Ḍabbī, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Aṭā who said:

I said to (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, “Your followers in Iraq
are plenty. By Allah, there is no one in your Ahl al-Bait like you! So,
why do you not rise [against the government]?” He replied, “O
\`Abd-Allah b. \`Aṭā! You have you have filled your ears with nonsense.
By Allah, I am not your Master (ṣāḥibukum).” I asked, “So, who is our
Master?” He answered, “See [who is the one] whose birth is concealed
from the people; he is your master.”

656. Kamāl al-dīn[^5]: \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad al-\`Aṭṭār, from Abū
\`Amr al-Laithī, from Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from Jabra’īl b. Aḥmad, from
Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from Sa\`īd b. Ghazwān,
from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said:
“The birth of the Master of this affair will be concealed from these
people so he will not have pledged allegiance with anyone when he
reappears. Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will set right his affairs
in one [single] night.”

657. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^6]: Al-Kulainī, from a number of our
companions, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from Ayyūb b. Nūḥ who said:

I said to Abū l-Ḥasan al-Riḍā, peace be on him, “We hope that you are
the master of this affair and that Allah will hand it to you by
pardoning [the people] and not by using the sword; because they have
pledged allegiance to you and the coins have been forged with your name
inscribed on them.” He responded, “There is no one from us except that
when letters are sent to him or is pointed at by fingers [i.e. he
becomes famous] or is asked questions or wealth is taken to him, that he
is either assassinated or will die in his bed until Allah sends a
boy[^7] from us for this affair. His birth and upbringing will be hidden
but his parentage will not be concealed.”

658. Ithbāt al-Waṣiyya[^8]: From Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, through his chain
of narrators from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him: “The Qā’im is the
one whose birth will be concealed from the people.”

659. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^9]: Narrated to us \`Alī b. Aḥmad, from
\`Ubaid-Allah b. Mūsā al-\`Alawī, from Muḥammad b. Aḥmad al-Qalānisī—in
Mecca in the year 267 AH—from \`Alī b. al-Ḥasan, from al-\`Abbās b.
\`Āmir, from Mūsā b. Hilāl, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Aṭā al-Makkī who said:

I started the Hajj pilgrimage from Wāsiṭ and I met (Imam) Abū Ja\`far
Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, who asked me about the people and
the prices. I replied, “I left the people while they were yearning for
you. If you rise, the people will indeed follow you.” He answered, “O
son of \`Aṭā! You have listened to [the speech] of foolish people. By
Allah, I am not your master (ṣāḥibukum). None of us is pointed at with
fingers or with eyebrows but that he will be killed or that he will die
naturally.”

I asked, “What do you mean by he will die naturally?” He replied, “He
will die in his deathbed but in a state of anger, until Allah raises the
one whose birth is unknown.” I said, “And who is the one whose birth is
unknown?” He answered, “See who is the one that the people are not sure
whether he has been born or not. He is your master.”

The following traditions also prove the above concept: 539, 574, 610,
645, 686, and 688.

[^1]: Kifāyat al-athar, chap. “What has been narrated from Abū Ja\`far
Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā, peace be on him,” p. 277, no. 2; Kamāl
al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 36, p. 377, no. 2, with an addition at the end;
I\`lām al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2, with the aforementioned addition at
its end; al-Iḥtijāj, vol. 2, p. 449; Kifāyat al-muhtadī, pp. 100–101,
no. 26, citing Kamāl al-dīn.

[^2]: The reason of his concealed birth was that when the Abbasids found
out about the traditions from the Holy Prophet and the Imams from the
Ahl al-Bait, peace be on them, that the Mahdī is the twelfth Imam who
will fill the earth with justice, will conquer the forts of deviation,
annihilate the governments of the merciless, will kill the tyrants, and
will takeover the East and West of the earth, they decided to extinguish
His light by killing him. Hence, they appointed spies, secret agents,
and midwives to keep a watch on the house of the father of the Ḥujja,
Imam Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, peace be on him. But Allah
desired to complete His light. Therefore, He, Mighty and Majestic be He,
concealed the pregnancy of his mother Narjis from the people. It has
been narrated that al-Mu\`tamid, the Abbasid Emperor, sent midwives
secretly and ordered them to enter the houses of the Banī-Hāshim,
especially the house of Imam al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, without
permission whenever they wanted to investigate and find out about his
condition and affairs. But they were unable to find anything for Allah
had decided to repeat the custom of His Prophet, Moses, in His proof,
just as his enemies adopted the tradition of the Pharaoh and implemented
his policies. When the Pharaoh found out that his kingdom would be
destroyed by a man from the Israelites, he appointed inspectors to check
the pregnant women and monitored their births with strict surveillance.
If the new-born was a male, they would kill him instantly and if it was
a female, they would spare her. Consequently, they killed thousands of
infants in their quest to find Moses. Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He,
says: “They killed your sons and let you daughters live” (Quran 2:49).
In this situation, Allah, the Exalted, placed His Prophet under His
protection and concealed his birth from them. Allah, the Exalted, says:
“And We revealed to the mother of Moses, ‘Suckle him and when you fear
for him, throw him in the river and neither fear nor grieve. Surely, We
will return him to you and appoint him as a messenger’” (Quran 28:7).
His similarities with Abraham and Moses have also been mentioned in
numerous traditions. It has been narrated in Ilzām al-nāṣib from one of
the books of the highly learned scholar, Muḥammad Yūsuf al-Dihkhārqānī,
which he authored during the reign of Shah Abbās II: “One day, he [i.e.
Imam al-Mahdī] was in the room of his mother in the courtyard when
Narjis realized that some midwives were near. She became extremely
anxious but did not have enough time to hide that light. An announcer
called out to her, ‘Throw the Proof of Allah, the defeater (al-qahhār),
in the well in the courtyard.’ So she did. The midwives heard the voice
of the child and rushed into the house. They thoroughly searched the
house but found no trace of him. They went out confused and perplexed.
When the house became empty of strangers, Narjis went towards the well
to find out what had happened to the apple of her eye. As she looked
over the well, she saw that its water had risen to the level of the
ground of the house and the Divine Proof was floating on the water, safe
and sound, like a shining full moon. His diaper had not become wet at
all. So she took him, suckled him, and praised Allah and prostrated to
express her gratitude for Him . . .” From what we have mentioned, it
becomes clear why al-Ḥujja’s birth was concealed—but not his
forefathers’ births. The reason is the glad tidings that were given
about him: that he would conquer the forts, destroy the foundations of
polytheism and hypocrisy, and inherit the earth and rule it in the end
of times. The enemies of his forefathers knew they were practicing
dissimulation (taqiyya) and would not rise with the sword until the
voice would be heard from the sky and the signs were manifested. They
also knew that the Mahdī—who is the last Imam and their seal—would rise
with the sword, would put aside dissimulation (al-taqiyya), and would
kill the enemies of Allah and cleanse the earth from polytheism,
merciless rulers, oppressors, and disbelievers.

[^3]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 31, pp. 322–323, no. 6; I\`lām
al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 4, p. 135, no.
3; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 466, no. 126.

[^4]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 32, p. 325, no. 2; I\`lām al-warā,
chap. 2, sect. 2; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, pp. 522–523; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 467, no. 129. I say: Other traditions have also
been recorded with this meaning, see al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 138, p. 342,
no. 26; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, pp. 167–168, no. 7–9; Biḥār al-anwār, vol.
51, p. 128.

[^5]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, p. 480, no. 5; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 20, p. 96, no. 15.

[^6]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 168, no. 9; Kamāl al-dīn, vol.
2, chap. 35, p. 370, no. 1, similar to it.

[^7]: The author of Lisān al-\`Arab writes: “It is said ‘so and so is
the boy of the people’ even if he is old, which is like saying, ‘so and
so is the youth of the army’ even if he is old” (Lisān al-\`Arab, vol.
12, p. 440).

[^8]: Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, pp. 222–223. I say: Here, ‘people’ means
‘non-Shias’ because in numerous traditions ‘non-Shias’ have been
referred to as ‘people.’

[^9]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 168, no. 8. I say: As we already
mentioned above, ‘people’ refers to ‘non-Shias.’


