Section Thirty-Four
===================

The traditions that indicate he will not have pledged allegiance with
anyone

Comprised of twelve traditions

660. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^1]: \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from Muḥammad b.
Yaḥyā, from Muḥammad b. Ḥassān al-Rāzī, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Kūfī,
from Ibrāhīm b. Hishām, from Ḥammād b. \`Īsā, from Ibrāhīm b. \`Umar
al-Yamānī, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said: “The
Qā’im will rise and he will not have pledged allegiance with anybody.”

661. Al-Kāfī[^2]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad, from
al-Ḥusayn b. Sa\`īd, from ibn Abī \`Umair, from Hishām b. Sālim, from
(Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ṣādiq, peace be upon him, who said: “The Qā’im
will rise while he will not have pledged an oath, promise, or allegiance
to anybody.”

662. Ithbāt al-Waṣiyya[^3]: al-Ḥimyarī from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn, from
Muḥammad b. Sinān, from Abū l-Jārūd, from Uthmān b. Nashīṭ, from Amīr
al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, who said: “The Master of this affair will
not have pledged an oath, promise, or pact to anybody.”

663. Kamāl al-dīn[^4]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Mūsā al- Mutawakkil,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from
Muḥammad b. \`Īsā b. \`Ubaid, from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from Sa\`īd
b. Ghazwān, from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on
him, who said: “The birth of the master of this affair will be concealed
from [these] people so that he will not have pledged allegiance with
anyone when he emerges.”

664. Kamāl al-dīn[^5]: Narrated to us my father and Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥasan, may Allah have mercy on both of them, from Sa\`d b.
\`Abd-Allah, from Muḥammad b. \`Ubaid and Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Abū
l-Khaṭṭāb, from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from Jamīl b. Ṣāliḥ, from Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said: “The Qā’im will be sent while he
will not have pledged allegiance to anyone.”

665. Kamāl al-dīn[^6]: My father, may Allah have mercy on him, narrated
to me from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from Ya\`qūb b. Yazīd and al-Ḥasan b.
Ẓarīf, both from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from Hishām b. Sālim, from Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said: “The Qā’im will rise while he
will not have pledged allegiance to anybody.”

The following traditions also establish the aforementioned concept: 539,
601, 610, 634, 654, and 656.

[^1]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 191, no. 45.

[^2]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 342, no. 27; Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p.
171, no. 4.

[^3]: Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, p. 223.

[^4]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 44, p. 479, no. 1.

[^5]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 44, pp. 479–480, no. 2; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 6, chap. 32, p. 453, no. 208.

[^6]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 44, p. 480, no. 3; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 6, chap. 32, p. 436, no. 209.


