Section Thirty-Five
===================

The traditions that indicate he will kill Allah’s enemies, purify the
earth from polytheism and all injustice and unfairness, destroy the
kingdoms of the tyrants, and will fight for the interpretation (yuqātil
\`alā l-ta’wīl) of the Holy Quran just as the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, fought for its descent
(al-tanzīl)

Comprised of eighteen traditions

666. Kamāl al-dīn[^1]: Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Masrūr, from al-Ḥusayn b.
Muḥammad b. \`Āmir, from his uncle \`Abd-Allah b. \`Āmir, from Muḥammad
b. Abī \`Umair, from someone he mentioned, from Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace
be on him, who said: “The Qā’im will not reappear until the deposits of
Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, are brought forth. When these are
brought forth, he will reappear and will fight against the enemies of
Allah and kill them.”

667. Kamāl al-dīn[^2]: Al-Muẓaffar b. Ja\`far al-Muẓaffar, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from his
father, from \`Alī b. Muḥammad, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad, from al-Ḥasan b.
Maḥbūb, from Ibrāhīm al-Karkhī who said:

I—or someone—asked (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, “May Allah
set right your affairs! Wasn’t \`Alī, peace be on him, strong in the
religion of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He?” He replied, “Yes [he
was].” I said, “Then how did the people defeat him and why didn’t he
repel them? What stopped him from doing so?” He answered, “A verse from
the Book of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, prevented him from doing
so.” I said, “And what was that verse?”

He replied, “The saying of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, ‘Had they
been separated, We would have surely punished those who disbelieved from
amongst them with a painful punishment.’[^3] Allah, Mighty and Majestic
be He, put in the loins of the disbelievers and hypocrites the deposits
of the believers. \`Alī, peace be on him, did not kill the fathers until
the deposits came out [i.e. their faithful children were born]. When the
deposits came out, he stood up against [the opponents] and fought
against them. The same applies to the Qā’im from our Ahl al-Bait. He
will not reappear until the deposits of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be
He, appear. When they all appear, he will stand up against [his
opponents] and will kill them.”

The following traditions also prove the above concept: 283, 423, 432,
446, 450, 463, 529, 535, 537, 551, 553, 554, 574, 645, 653, and 1195.

[^1]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, p. 641.

[^2]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, pp. 641–642; Tafsīr nūr al-thaqalain, vol.
5, p. 70; Tafsīr al-Qummī, vol. 2, p. 316; al-Maḥajja, verse 38, p. 206;
\`Ilal al-sharā’i\`, vol. 1, p. 147, no. 3.

[^3]: Quran 48:25.


