Section Thirty-Eight
====================

The traditions that indicate he will take revenge on the enemies of
Allah, the enemies of His Messenger, and the enemies of the Imams, peace
be on them

Comprised of thirteen traditions

683. Dalā’il al-imāma[^1]: \`Alī b. Hibat-Allah informed me, from Abū
Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā al-Qummī, from \`Alī b.
Aḥmad b. Mūsā b. Muḥammad al-Daqqāq and Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. \`Iṣām,
from Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb, from al-Qāsim b. al-\`Alā, from Ismā’īl
al-Fazārī, from Muḥammad b. Jumhūr al-\`Ammī, from ibn Abī Najrān, from
someone he mentioned, from Abū Ḥamza Thābit b. Dīnār al-Thumālī who
said:

I asked Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad al-Bāqir, peace be on him, “O Son of
Allah’s Messenger! Why was \`Alī, peace be on him, given the title of
Amīr al-Mu’minīn (the Leader of the Believers) while no one before him
had this title and it is not permissible for anyone to have this title
after him?” He answered, “Because he is the source of knowledge and from
him knowledge must be taken and not from anyone except him.”

I asked, “Why is his sword called Dhū l-Faqār?” He said, “Because he
didn’t strike anyone from the people of the world with it but that his
family and children lost him [in this world] and he lost Paradise in the
hereafter.” I said, “O Son of Allah’s Messenger! Are not all of you the
risers with the truth?” He answered, “When my grandfather al-Ḥusayn,
peace be on him, was martyred, the angels cried and wailed and said,
‘Our God! Are you going to pardon the one who has killed Your chosen one
and the son of Your chosen one and the best one from Your creation?’

So Allah revealed to them, ‘Calm down, O My angels! [I swear] by My
Might and My Majesty, I will certainly take revenge on them even after
some time passes.’ Then, the Imams from the descendants of al-Ḥusayn
were revealed for them. The angels rejoiced because of this and saw one
of them standing (qā’iman) and praying. Allah, Glorified be He, said, ‘I
will take revenge on them through [the one] that is standing
(al-Qā’im).’”

684. Al-Amālī[^2]: Informed us Muḥammad b. Muḥammad, from Abū l-Ḥasan
Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. al-Walīd, from his father, from
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṣaffār, from Muḥammad b. \`Ubaid, from \`Alī b.
Asbāṭ, from Saif b. \`Umaira, from Muḥammad b. Ḥumrān, from (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said:

When the events about Imam al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, occurred, the
angels cried to Allah, the Exalted, “O Lord! [You stand aside] and they
do this with al-Ḥusayn, Your chosen one and the son of Your Prophet?” So
Allah showed them the figure of the Qā’im, peace be on him, and said,
“Through him I will take revenge on those who oppressed him.”

685. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^3]: Muḥammad b. Hammām, from Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad b. Mālik, from Isḥāq b. Sinān, from \`Ubaid b. Khārija, from
\`Alī b. \`Uthmān, from furāt b. Aḥnaf, from Abū \`Abd-Allah Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad, from his forefathers, peace be on them, who said:

The (river) Euphrates overflowed during the reign of Amīr al-Mu’minīn,
peace be on him. He and his two sons—al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, peace be on
them—mounted and passed by a village. The [villagers] said, “\`Alī has
come to drive away the water.” \`Alī, peace be on him, answered, “By
Allah, I and these two sons of mine will be martyred. Then, Allah will
send a person from my descendants in the end of times who will avenge
our blood (yuṭālibu dimā’anā). He will go in occultation so that the
people of deviation will be separated [from the real believers]. [It
will continue for so long] until an ignorant will say, ‘The family of
Muḥammad are unimportant for Allah.’”

The following traditions also establish the above concept: 109, 255,
258, 266, 270, 293, 305, 424, 432, and 515.

[^1]: Dalā’il al-imāma, chap. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im . . .,”, p. 239,
no. 14; \`Ilal al-sharā’i\`, chap. 129, p. 160, no. 1, similar to it,
through his chain of narrators from al-Thumālī. After “Don’t all of you
rise with the truth?” he writes: “He replied, ‘Yes.’ I asked, ‘Then why
is the Qā’im called the Qā’im (the one who will rise)?’ (To the end of
the tradition)”; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 37, chap. 54, p. 294, no. 8
(Al-Majlisī has explained this narration after narrating it).

[^2]: Al-Ṭūsī, Al-Amālī, vol. 2, p. 33; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 45, chap.
41, p. 221, no. 3.

[^3]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī , chap. 10, pp. 140–141, no. 1.


