Section Thirty-Nine
===================

The traditions that indicate in him will be customs (sunan) from the
Divine Prophets, one of these customs being occultation

Comprised of twenty-three traditions

686. Kamāl al-dīn[^1]: Al-Sharīf Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Mūsā b. Aḥmad b.
Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b.
\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on them, from
Muḥammad b. Hammām, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. al-Naufalī, from Aḥmad b.
Hilāl, from \`Uthmān b. \`Īsā al-Kilābī, from Khālid b. Najīḥ [Najḥ],
from Ḥamzat b. Ḥumrān, from his father, from Sa\`īd b. Jubair, from the
Master of the Worshippers, \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib,
peace be on him, who said:

In the Qā’im are customs from seven Prophets: A custom from our father
Adam, a custom from Noah, a custom from Abraham, a custom from Moses, a
custom from Jesus, a custom from Ayyūb (Job), and a custom from
Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on them all. As for the [custom] from
Adam and Noah, it is longevity. As for Abraham, it is concealed birth
and solitude. As for Moses, it is fear and occultation. As for Jesus, it
is the disagreement amongst the people about him. As for Ayyūb (Job), it
is relief after calamity, and as for Muḥammad, it is emergence with the
sword.

687. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^2]: Informed us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Sa\`īd,
from Muḥammad b. al-Mufaḍḍal and Sa\`dān b. Isḥāq b. Sa\`īd, Aḥmad b.
al-Ḥusayn and Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan al-Qaṭawānī, all of them
from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from Hishām b. Sālim al-Jawālīqī, from Yazīd
al-Kunāsī, from Abū Ja\`far al-Bāqir, peace be on him, who said: “The
Master of this affair will have a similarity with Yūsuf. He will be the
son of a dark-skinned slave-maid and Allah will set right his affairs in
one night.”

688. Kamāl al-dīn[^3]: Narrated to us my father [and Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥasan], may Allah be satisfied with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah,
from al-Mu\`allā b. Muḥammad al-Baṣrī, from Muḥammad b. Jumhūr and
others, from [Muḥammad] b. Abī \`Umair, from \`Abd-Allah b. Sinān who
said:

I heard (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, say, “In the Qā’im,
there is a custom from Moses, son of \`Imrān, peace be on him.” I asked,
“What is the custom from Moses, son of \`Imrān?” He replied, “His
concealed birth and his occultation from his people.” I asked, “How long
was Moses, son of \`Imrān, occulted from his nation and his family?” He
replied, “Twenty-eight years.”

689. Kamāl al-dīn[^4]: Narrated to us al-Muẓaffar b. Ja\`far b.
al-Muẓaffar al-\`Alawī, may Allah be satisfied with him, from Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from his father Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd al-\`Ayyāshī,
from \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. Shujā\`, from Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from Yūnus,
from \`Alī b. Abī Ḥamza, from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah,
peace be on him, who said:

In the Master of this affair are customs from the prophets; a custom
from Moses, son of \`Imrān, a custom from Jesus, a custom from Yūsuf,
and a custom from Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on them. As for the
custom from Moses, son of \`Imrān, he will be fearful and watchful. As
for the custom from Jesus, it will be said about him what was said about
Jesus. As for the custom from Yūsuf, it is the screen that Allah will
put between him and the people as a covering; they will see him but will
not recognize him. As for the custom from Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family, he will guide with his guidance and will follow
his ways.

690. Al-Imāma wa l-tabṣira[^5]: \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī, from
Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from Sulaimān b. Dāwūd, from Abū Baṣīr, from Abū
Ja\`far, peace be on him, who said:

In the master of this affair, there are four customs from four Prophets:
a custom from Moses, a custom from Jesus, a custom from Yūsuf, and a
custom from Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family. As for
the custom from Moses, he will be fearful and watchful. As for the
custom from Yūsuf, it is imprisonment. As for the custom from Jesus, it
will be said, “He has died,” but he would be alive. As for the custom
from Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, it is the
sword.

691. Ithbāt al-waṣiyya[^6]: Al-Ḥimyarī, from Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from
Sulaimān b. Dāwūd, from Abū Naṣr [or Abū Baṣīr], from (Imam) Abū
Ja\`far, peace be on him, who said:

In the Master of this affair, there are four customs from four Prophets:
A custom from Moses [which is] his occultation; a custom from Jesus
concerning his fear and his watchfulness regarding the Jews and them
saying that he has died, whilst he hadn’t died, [and them saying] he has
been killed, whilst he hadn’t been killed; a custom from Yūsuf
concerning his handsomeness and his generosity; and a custom from
Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, is the sword with
which he will emerge.

The following traditions also establish the above concept: 69, 249, 286,
540, 553, 557, 564, 575, 620, 626, 628, 632, 641, 642, 644, 645, and
650.

[^1]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 31, p. 321, no. 3; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 5, p. 466, no. 124, with slight variations;
I\`lām al-warā, chap. 2, sect. 2, which says, “Customs from six
Prophets” instead of “From seven Prophets.” It also says: “A custom from
Noah” instead of “A custom from our father Adam, a custom from Noah”;
Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 13, p. 217, no. 4.

[^2]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 10, p. 163, no. 3; Kamāl al-dīn, vol.
1, chap. 32, p. 329, no. 12; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 13, p. 218,
no. 8; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 5, p. 469, no. 135,
citing Kamāl al-dīn with the wording: “In the master of this affair is a
custom from Yūsuf [the son of a slave-maid], Allah will set right his
affairs in a single night.” The author of Biḥār al-anwār writes: “His
saying, ‘the son of a black slave-maid’ apparently contradicts the
numerous narrations that mention the attributes of his mother, peace be
on him, except if mother is interpreted as his grandmother.” I say: This
sentence does not exist in the copy of the Persian translation of Kamāl
al-dīn nor in the Najaf edition printed in the year 1389 AH, p. 320. See
vol. 1, p. 445. This is in addition to the fact that his similarity with
Yūsuf was in occultation and imprisonment. It is probable that something
has been added to the tradition and Allah knows the best.

[^3]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 33, p. 340, no. 18; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 13, p. 216, no. 2; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32,
sect. 5, pp. 471–472, no. 147.

[^4]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 33, p. 350, no. 46; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 13, pp. 223–224, no. 10, which says: “custom from the
prophets”; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 5, p. 474, no. 159.

[^5]: Al-Imāma wa l-tabṣira, pp. 93–94, no. 84; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p.
424, no. 408, which says: “And as for the custom from Yūsuf, peace be on
him, it is occultation” and on p. 60, no. 57, he has mentioned
“imprisonment” which probably refers to occultation; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 12, p. 499, no. 277, and chap. 32, sect. 5, p.
460, no. 101; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 13, pp. 216–217, no. 3;
Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 6, pp. 152–153, no. 16, which says: “and
imprisonment,” and also vol. 1, chap. 32, pp. 326–327, no. 6, which
says: “confinement.”

[^6]: Ithbāt al-waṣiyya (first edition), p. 202.


