Section Forty
=============

The traditions that indicate he will rise with the sword

Comprised of ten traditions

692. Kamāl al-dīn[^1]: Narrated to me my father, may Allah be satisfied
with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Abī
l-Khaṭṭāb, from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from \`Alī b. Ri’āb, from (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, concerning the saying of Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, “On the day when some of the signs of your Lord will
come, becoming a believer will be of no use to he who hadn’t already
believed.”[^2] He said: “Signs [refers to] the Imams and the awaited
sign is the Qā’im, peace be on him. On that day, becoming a believer
will be of no use for anyone who had not become a believer before the
rising of the Qā’im with the sword, even if he had believed in his
forefathers, peace be on them.”

693. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^3]: \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā
al-\`Aṭṭār, from Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-Rāzī, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī
al-Kūfī, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Abī Naṣr, from \`Abd-Allah b. Bukair,
from his father, from Zurāra who said:

I asked (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, “Name for me the Righteous
from the righteous ones [and] I mean the Qā’im, peace be on him.” He
replied, “His name is my name.” I asked, “Will he follow the customs of
Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family?” He answered, “No,
no, o Zurāra! He will not follow his customs.” I asked, “May I be
sacrificed for you! Why?” He replied, “The Messenger of Allah adopted
the path of gentleness in his nation and was very friendly towards the
people. But the Qā’im will adopt the path of killing. He is ordered to
adopt the path of killing in the book which is with him. He will not
seek repentance from anyone. Woe to he who opposes him!”[^4]

694. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^5]: Informed us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Sa\`īd b.
\`Uqda, from \`Alī b. al-Ḥasan, from Muḥammad b. Khālid, from Tha\`labat
b. Maimūn, from al-Ḥasan b. Hārūn who said:

I was sitting with (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, when
Mu\`allā b. Khunais asked him, “When the Qā’im appears, will his
approach differ from that of \`Alī?” He replied, “Yes. Because \`Alī,
peace be on him, adopted the path of kindness and restraint; because he
knew that his followers would be dominated after him. But when the Qā’im
rises, he will adopt the approach of sword and captivity; because he
will know that his followers will never be dominated [by anyone] after
him.”

695. Tafsīr al-Qurtubī[^6]: Concerning the saying of Allah, the Exalted:
“And most certainly We will make them taste the lower chastisement
before the greater chastisement,”[^7] he has narrated from Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad, [peace be on him], that “it [i.e. the greater chastisement]
refers to the emergence of the Mahdī with the sword and the lower
chastisement refers to high prices.”

In Tafsīr al-Ālūsī these words have been used: “From Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad, may Allah be satisfied with him: ‘It refers to the emergence
of the Mahdī with the sword.’”

696. Al-Kāfī[^8]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. \`Īsā,
from ibn Maḥbūb, from Hishām b. Sālim, from Abū Khālid al-Kabulī, from
(Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, who mentions that they saw in the
Book of \`Alī:

“The land belongs to Allah; He will [give it as] inheritance to whoever
He wishes from His servants, and the end belongs the pious
(al-muttaqīn)” (Quran 7:128), I and my Ahl al-Bait are those whom Allah
will give them the earth as inheritance and we are the pious
(al-muttaqūn). All the earth belongs to us.

Whoever from the Muslims enlivens a piece of land and inhabits it,
should pay its tax to the Imam from my Ahl al-Bait and what he eats from
it [remains] for him. If he abandons it or spoils it and another person
from the Muslims takes it, inhabits it, and gives life to it, then the
latter has more right over it than the former who has abandoned it.

The latter should pay its tax to the Imam from my Ahl al-Bait and
whatever he eats from it [remains] for him. [This will apply] until the
Qā’im from my Ahl al-Bait appears with the sword. He will take over all
the [lands], deprive [their inhabitants] of them, and [force the
inhabitants] out of [the lands] just as the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, took over [the lands] and deprived
[their inhabitants] of them. [The only exception] will be the
possessions of our Shias (shī\`atunā). He will leave them with what they
possess and will leave the earth in their hands.

The following traditions also prove the above concept: 423, 426, 572,
713, and 715.

[^1]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, p. 8, and vol. 2, p. 336; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 5, p. 51, no. 25; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 71, p. 422.

[^2]: Quran 6:158.

[^3]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 13, p. 231, no. 14; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 7, chap. 32, sect. 27, pp. 77–78, no. 500; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 26, p. 353, no. 109.

[^4]: There is no contradiction between this tradition and those that
indicate he will follow the customs of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family. For, when it is said he will follow
his customs, it means he will rise with the sword, which differs from
Jesus’ approach from amongst the prophets. His similarity to him,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, is in destroying the signs
of disbelief, and ending wicked habits and false regulations and the
laws that will appear in the end of times.

[^5]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 13, p. 232, no. 16; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 26, p. 353, no. 111; \`Ilal al-sharā’i\`, vol. 1, p. 210,
with some variations in the chain of narrators; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2,
pp. 628–629.

[^6]: Tafsīr al-Qurtubī (al-Jāmi\` li-aḥkām al-Quran), vol. 14, p. 107;
Tafsīr al-\`Ālūsī (Rūḥ al-ma\`ānī), vol. 21, p. 121; Rūḥ al-bayān, vol.
21, p. 124, from al-Lubāb from Tafsīr al-Naqqāsh: “The lower
[chastisement] will be high prices and the greater [chastisement] will
be the reappearance of the Mahdī with the sword”; Tafsīr al-tibyān, vol.
8, p. 306, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him: “The lower
punishment will be famine and the greater will be the emergence of the
Mahdī with the sword”; Al-Maḥajja, p. 173, from al-Mufaḍḍal b. \`Umar:
“Lower refers to the punishment in the grave and greater refers to the
Mahdī with the sword”; From Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Shaibānī in Kashf
al-Bayān: “Lower refers to famine and drought and greater refers to the
emergence of the Riser, al-Mahdī, with the sword in the end of times”;
Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, p. 59, and Ta’wīl al-āyāt al-ẓāhira, p. 437:
“Lower chastisement refers to high prices while greater refers to [the
reappearance of] the Mahdī with the sword; It has been mentioned in
Ilzām al-Nāṣib that “Lower refers to the punishment in Hell and greater
refers to [the emergence] of the Mahdī, peace be on him, with the sword
in the end of times.” I say: It is legitimate to interpret ‘lower
punishment’ as famine and other things that will take place before the
appearance of the Mahdī—may my mother and father be sacrificed for
him—and it being one of its examples. Such an interpretation will not
contradict the other interpretations which can be found in various
exegeses. Likewise, it is legitimate to interpret ‘the greater
chastisement’ as his reappearance with the sword or another event,
because it is one of its examples. There is no contradiction with this
interpretation and with interpreting the major chastisement as the
punishment of the Hereafter. Moreover, when the commentators have
differences about the interpretation of the verses, what should be
relied upon is what has been narrated from of the Ahl al-Bait, peace be
on them, just as we have explained in our book Amān al-umma min al-ḍalāl
wa l-ikhtilāf.

[^7]: Quran 32:21.

[^8]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. “The entire earth belongs to the Imam,” pp.
407–408, no. 1; Tafsīr nūr al-thaqalain, vol. 2, p. 56, no. 222, under
the commentary of Sura al-A\`rāf; Tafsīr al-\`Ayyāshī, vol. 2, p. 25,
no. 66; Tafsīr al-Ṣāfī, vol. 2, p. 228, under the commentary of Sura
al-A\`rāf; Tafsīr al-burhān, vol. 2, p. 28, under the commentary of Sura
al-A\`rāf; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 100, chap. 9, p. 58, no. 2.


