Section Forty-One
=================

The traditions that indicate the people will assist his government

Comprised of three traditions

697. Sunan ibn Māja[^1]: Narrated to us Ḥarmalat b. Yaḥyā al-Miṣrī and
Ibrāhīm b. Sa\`īd al-Jauharī, from Abū Ṣāliḥ \`Abd al-Ghaffār b. Dāwūd
al-Ḥarrānī, from Abū Lahī\`a, from Abū Zur\`a Amr b. Jābir al-Ḥaḍramī,
from \`Abd-Allah b. al-Ḥarth b. Jaz’ al-Zubaidī, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said: “A [group
of] people will emerge from the East and will prepare for the
Mahdī—meaning his government.”

698. Sunan Abī Dāwūd[^2]: From Hārūn, from \`Amr b. Abī Qays, from
Muṭarrif b. Ṭarīf, from Abū l-Ḥasan, from Hilāl b. \`Amr, from \`Alī,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, who said:

A person will emerge from Mā Warā’ al-Nahr. He will be called al-Ḥārith
b. al-Ḥarrāth; in the vanguard [of his army] will be a person called
Manṣūr. He will organize or prepare for the family of Muḥammad just as
the Quraish prepared for the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family]. It is compulsory for every believer to assist
him—or he said—to respond to his [call].

Tradition no. 720 also establishes the above concept.

[^1]: Sunan ibn Māja, vol. 2, chap. “The emergence of the Mahdī,” p.
1368, citing Kitāb al-fitan, chap. 34, no. 4088; \`Iqd al-durar, chap.
5, p. 125, citing Sunan ibn Māja and al-Bayhaqī. He has also recorded it
in al-Tadhkira, p. 240, from Abū Dāwūd with the difference: “they will
prepare for the Mahdī the throne of his kingdom”; Farā’id al-simṭain,
vol. 2, chap. 61, p. 333; al-Ṭabarānī, al-Mu\`jam al-ausaṭ, vol. 1, p.
200, no. 287, with minor variation; al-Munār al-munīf, sect. 50, p. 145,
no. 332; Nihāyat al-bidāya wa l-nihāya, vol. 1, p. 41; al-Burhān fī
\`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 7, p. 147, no. 2, which says: “they
will prepare for the Mahdī his kingdom”; Mukhtaṣar tadhkirat al-Qurtubī
by al-Sha\`rānī, p. 40, which says “they will prepare for the Mahdī the
throne of his kingdom”; al-Idhā\`a, p. 124; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p.
263, no. 38657; Majma\` al-zawā’id, vol. 7, p. 318, and many more
references.

[^2]: Sunan Abī Dāwūd, vol. 4, “Kitāb al-Mahdī,” pp. 108–109, no. 4290;
Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, vol. 2, p. 194; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 5, p. 130,
citing Abū Dāwūd, Sunan al-Nisā’ī, al-Bayhaqī, and al-Maṣābīḥ; Jam\`
al-jawāmi\`, vol. 1, p. 997, citing Abū Dāwūd; al-Tadhkira, p. 240, with
the difference: “a person from the ministers of al-Mahdī will emerge who
will be called al-Ḥarth b. al-Ḥarrāth” and “or he said—to help him”;
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 72, p. 430; al-Tāj al-Jāmi\` lil-uṣūl, vol.
5, p. 344, and many other references.


