Section Forty-Three
===================

The traditions that indicate his asceticism (zuhd)

Comprised of six traditions

713. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^1]: Informed us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Sa\`īd b.
\`Uqda, from Aḥmad b. Yūsuf b. Ya\`qūb Abū l-Ḥasan al-Ju\`fī, from
Ismā’īl b. Mihrān, from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Abī Ḥamza, from his father
and Wuhaib, from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on
him, who said:

When the Qā’im emerges, nothing will remain between him, the Arabs, and
the Quraish except the sword and he will receive nothing from them but
the sword. Why are they hastening for his emergence? By Allah, his
clothes will not be but coarse; his food will not be but crude barley
[bread]. [Life] will be accompanied by the sword and death is beneath
the shadow of the sword.

714. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^2]: Informed us \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, from
Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār at Qum, from Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-Rāzī,
from Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Kūfī, from Mu\`ammar b. Khallād who said:

The Qā’im was mentioned in of the presence of (Imam) Abū l-Ḥasan
al-Riḍā, peace be on him. He said, “Today, you are more in comfort than
you think you will be on that day.” They asked, “How?” He answered,
“When the Qā’im, peace be on him, emerges, there will not be anything
but blood, sweat, and sleeping on the saddles. The clothes of the Qā’im
will not be but rough and his food will be nothing but coarse.”

715. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^3]: \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, through his chain of
narrators from Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Kūfī, from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from
\`Alī b. Abī Ḥamza, from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah
(al-Ṣādiq), peace be on him, who said: “Why are you in such a hurry for
the appearance of the Qā’im? By Allah! His clothes are not but rough and
his food is not but coarse. [Life] will be accompanied by the sword and
death is beneath the shadow of the sword.”

716. Al-Kāfī[^4]: \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm, from his father, from ibn Abī
\`Umair, from Ḥammād b. \`Uthmān, from al-Mu\`allā b. Khunais who said:

One day, I said to (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him,
“May I be sacrificed for you! You mentioned the family of so and so (ālu
fulan) and the luxury that they enjoy! Had you been in power, we would
have lived with you [in luxury].” He remarked, “Never, O Mu\`allā! By
Allah, had this been the case [i.e. had we come to power], it would mean
nothing except administration by night, traveling by the day, wearing
rough clothes, and eating coarse food. [Now] these [hard tasks] have
been removed [due to the Umayyads and Abbasids who have withheld our
rights] and have you ever seen the withholding of a right that results
in a blessing except this?”

717. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^5]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Wāḥid b.
\`Abd-Allah b. Yūnus, from Abū Sulaimān Aḥmad b. Haudha al-Bāhilī, from
Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq al-Nahāwandī, from \`Abd-Allah b. Ḥammād al-Anṣārī,
from al-Mufaḍḍal b. \`Umar who said:

I was with (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, performing the
circumambulation (al-ṭawāf). He looked at me and asked, “O Mufaḍḍal! Why
do I see you grieved and distressed?” I said to him, “May I be
sacrificed for you! I see the Abbasids and the power, authority, and
clout that they enjoy. Had this been for you, we would have enjoyed it
with you.”

He answered, “O Mufaḍḍal! Had this been the case [i.e. had we been in
power], it wouldn’t be but administration by the night, traveling by the
day, eating coarse food, and wearing rough clothes similar [to the
lifestyle] of Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him; otherwise, [our abode]
would be the fire. Since [power and kingdom] have been removed from us,
we can eat and drink [as we like]. Have you seen an oppression that
Allah has turned into a blessing like this?’”

718. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^6]: Abū Sulaimān, from Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Ḥammād, from \`Amr b. Shimr who said:

I was with (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, in his house—which
was filled with people. People would come forward and ask him questions;
and he would not be questioned about a thing except that he answered it.
I started crying from one corner of the house and he said to me, “Why
are you crying, O \`Amr?” I replied, “May I be sacrificed for you! And
why shouldn’t I cry? Is there anyone in this nation like you? And yet,
the door has been shut on you and a veil drawn over you!” He replied, “O
\`Amr! Don’t cry. We eat delicious [food] and wear soft clothes. Had the
case been what you say [i.e. had we been in power], it wouldn’t have
been but eating coarse food and wearing rough clothes like Amīr
al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him. [If we practiced
anything other than this], the remedy would be chains in the hellfire.”

[^1]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 13, p. 234, no. 21; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 7, chap. 32, sect. 27, p. 79, no. 504 (short version); Ḥilyat
al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 37, pp. 629–630.

[^2]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 15, p. 285, no. 5; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 7, chap. 32, sect. 27, p. 85, no. 527.

[^3]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 13, p. 233, no. 20; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
p. 277, which has the following chain of narrators: “From him—meaning
al-Faḍl—from \`Abd al-Raḥmān [b.] Abī Hāshim, from \`Alī b. Abī Ḥamza,
from Abū Baṣīr, from Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him.” Its text is like
that of Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī with the difference that it mentions the
word barley before coarse; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 7, chap. 32, sect. 27,
p. 79, no. 503; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 37, p. 629.

[^4]: Al-Kāfī,vol.1, p. 410, no. 2.

[^5]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 1, pp. 286–287, no. 7; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 359, no. 127, with differences in the chain of
narrators.

[^6]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 15, pp. 287–288, no. 8; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 360, no. 128.


