Section Forty-Four
==================

The traditions that indicate his complete justice and the spread of
justice and security during his government

Comprised of seventeen traditions

719. Al-Irshād[^1]: Narrated \`Alī b. \`Uqba, from his father that

When the Qā’im, peace be on him, rises, he will judge justly and during
his reign injustice will be eliminated. The roads will become safe, the
earth will bring out its blessings, the right of each individual will be
returned to him, and the followers of no religion will remain except
that they will express [their belief in] Islam and acknowledge [the
truth of this] faith. Have you not heard Allah, the Purified, say,

***“And to Him submit those in the skies and the earth—willingly or
unwillingly—and to Him they will be returned.”***[^2]

He will judge amongst the people like the judgment of the family of
David and the judgment of Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family. It is then that the earth will reveal its treasures and expose
its blessings. No one from you will find a needy person on that day to
give him charity or be beneficent to him, because all the believers will
have become wealthy. Our government is the last of governments and there
will not remain a group except that they will have ruled before us so
that they will not say when they see our approach [in governance], “If
we had the opportunity to rule, we too would have ruled in this manner.”
And this is [the meaning of] the saying of Allah, the Exalted,

***“And the Hereafter belongs to the pious (lil-muttaqīn)***.”[^3]

720. Al-Maḥajja[^4]: (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, said:

By Allah, they will fight until [those being fought] will acknowledge
the Oneness of Allah and will associate nothing with Him and until an
old and frail lady comes out from the East intending to go to the West
and no one will prevent her. Allah will bring out of the earth its
seedlings and will send down from the skies its raindrops. The people
will put their taxes on their necks [i.e. backs] and take them to the
Mahdī, peace be on him . . . (to the end of the tradition).

721. Al-Fitan[^5]: Narrated to us Mu\`tamir b. Sulaimān [Mu\`ammar b.
Sulaimān], from Ja\`far b. Sayyār al-Shāmī who said: “The Mahdī, peace
be on him, will return the usurped rights to their rightful owners. Even
if a thing [unjustly taken] is beneath the molar tooth of a man, he will
remove it and return it [to its rightful owner].”

The following traditions also support the above concept: 367, 368, 455,
505, 538, 554, 584, 726, 1204, 1210, 1213, 1214, 1217, 1246, and many
other traditions.

[^1]: Al-Irshād, pp. 364–365; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, pp. 465–466,
which says: “and narrated \`Alī b. \`Uqba, from Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace
be on him”; I\`lām al-warā, p. 432; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, p. 338, no.
83.

[^2]: Quran 3:83.

[^3]: Quran 7:128.

[^4]: Al-Maḥajja; pp. 79–84, verse 22; It has been narrated in Yanābī\`
al-mawadda, chap. 71, p. 423, from Zurāra, from him, peace be on him,
with a slight variation in the words; Tafsīr al-\`Ayyāshī, vol. 2, pp.
56–61, which is a long tradition in which some aspects of his appearance
and other details are mentioned.

[^5]: Al-Fitan, p. 191, no. 5; al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, chap. 139, p. 68,
from Nu\`aim; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, p. 36, with the difference that
he said: “Ja\`far b. Yasār al-Shāmī.”


