Section Forty-Five
==================

The traditions that indicate his knowledge

Comprised of six traditions

722. \`Iqd al-durar[^1]: From al-Ḥārith b. al-Mughaira al-Naḍrī
[al-Naṣrī] who said:

I asked (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, peace be on him,
“(What are the attributes) of Imam al-Mahdī that he can be recognized
with?” He replied, “Serenity and dignity.” I asked, “What else?” He
said, “[He will] gave [complete] knowledge about the permissible (ḥalāl)
and the prohibited (ḥarām) and the people will need him but he will not
need anyone.”

723. Kamāl al-dīn[^2]: \`Alī b. Aḥmad b. Mūsā, may Allah be satisfied
with him, from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Abd-Allah al-Kūfī, from Muḥammad b.
Ismā\`īl al-Barmakī, from Ismā\`īl b. Mālik, from Muḥammad b. Sinān,
from \`Amr b. Shimr, from Jābir, from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on
him, who said:

The knowledge of the Book of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, and the
sunna of His Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, will
grow in the heart of our Mahdī like the finest things that a crop can
grow. Whoever amongst you survives to see him must say when he sees him,
“Peace be on you, O People of the House of Mercy and prophethood and the
source of knowledge and the position of Messenger-ship.”

724. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^3]: \`Alī b. Aḥmad, from \`Ubaid-Allah b. Mūsā
al-\`Alawī, from Abū Muḥammad Mūsā b. Hārūn b. \`Īsā al-Ma\`badī, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Muslimat b. Qa\`nab, from Sulaimān b. Bilāl, from (Imam)
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, from his father, from his
grandfather, from (Imam) al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, peace be on them all, who
said:

A man came to Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, and said, “O Amīr
al-Mu’minīn! Inform us about your Mahdī?” He replied, “When the things
that must pass away, pass away; the believers become rare, and the
troublemakers perish, it is then, it is then.” The man asked, “Which
[tribe] does this man belong to?”

He replied, “He is a Hashemite, the most exalted of the Arabs, a sea to
which all waters pour into, a sanctuary for those who seek refuge, and
the pure source when others become murky. He doesn’t cower when death
attacks, doesn’t weaken when death shows its face, and doesn’t recede in
the clashes in which the heroes fall. He is a skilled winner, a
defeater, a lion, reaper [of the enemies], and fearless. He is a sword
from the swords of Allah. He is a chief who possesses all goodness, is
from a great glorious family, and whose glory originates from the best
of roots. Let none of those who hasten towards mischief, speak the
evilest of words, and hide their corruptions inside them when keeping
silent, prevent you from pledging allegiance to him.”

He then returned to describing the attributes of the Mahdī, peace be on
him, and said, “He is the most generous in giving refuge, the most
knowledgeable, and the kindest of you to his kin. O Allah! Make his
advent an end to sorrows and unite the umma by him. If Allah chooses
goodness for you, be determined and do not deviate from [the Mahdī] if
you have success in reaching him and don not turn away from him if you
are guided to him.” Then, [Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him] sighed and
pointed at his chest with his hand and expressed his eagerness to see
him.

725. Sunan al-Dānī[^4]: Ibn Shaudhab said: “He is called the Mahdī (the
guided one) because he will guide to a mountain from the mountains of
Syria and will bring out of it the Scrolls of the Torah (asfār al-turāt)
and argue by them against the Jews; consequently, a group of Jews will
accept Islam at his hands.”

The following traditions endorse the above concept: 726 and 1182.

[^1]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, p. 41. I say: Abū \`Abd-Allah—the person
from whom the tradition has been narrated—is Imam Abū \`Abd-Allah
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him, and not our master Imam
Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥusayn, the grandson of the Prophet and the chief of
the youth of Paradise. This error has been repeated in numerous places
in the book \`Iqd al-durar. I do not know whether this error has been
introduced by the author, already existed in the source from which he
had recorded the narrations from, or made by the copyists. (The
narrator,) al-Ḥārith b. al-Mughaira al-Naṣrī, is related to [the tribe
of] Banī-Naṣr, as has been recorded in Mu\`jam rijāl al-ḥadīth by
al-Kashī. He has narrated from Imam Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad al-Bāqir, his
son Imam Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, his son Imam Mūsā b. Ja\`far, and Zaid the
martyr, peace be on them all. It is written in Lisān al-mīzān, vol. 2,
p. 160: “Al-Ḥārith b. al-Mughaira al-Naḍrī or al-Baṣrī. He has narrated
from al-Bāqir, his brother Zaid b. \`Alī, and Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, may
Allah be satisfied with him. Al-Ṭūsī and ibn al-Najāshī have mentioned
him as one of the reliable Shia narrators. \`Alī b. al-Ḥakam has said,
‘He was the most pious (aura\`) of men.’ Tha\`labat b. Maimūn, Hishām b.
Sālim, Ja\`far b. Bashīr, and others have narrated from him.’”

[^2]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 57, p. 653, no. 18; Ḥilyat al-abrār,
vol. 2, chap. 15, p. 557, and chap. 42, p. 639; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 27, pp. 317–318, no. 16.

[^3]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 3, pp. 212­214, no. 1.

[^4]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, pp. 40–41; al-Burhān, chap. 8, p. 157,
no. 7; Is\`āf al-rāghibīn, chap. 2, p. 139, which says: “It has been
mentioned in some traditions, ‘. . . surely the Mahdī, peace be on him,
will bring out the Ark of the Covenant (tābūt al-sakīna) from the cave
of Antioch (Anṭākiya) and the Scrolls of the Torah (asfār al-turāt) from
a mountain in Syria—by which he will argue with the Jews. Consequently,
many of them will accept Islam.’” I say: The biography of ibn Shaudhab
has been mentioned in Tahdhīb al-tahdhīb and his full name is
\`Abd-Allah b. Shaudhab al-Khurāsānī. We have mentioned what he has said
amongst these hadiths on the basis that people like him do not express
their own views about these events which are not known to anybody except
those who has been given knowledge by Allah, the Exalted; except
something that reached them from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family. Nevertheless, when similar things
are narrated by him from Ka\`b al-Aḥbār—whose condition is well-known—it
is probable that he was the source of what ibn Shaudhab and his ilk have
narrated, without relying on the hadiths of the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, and hence, one cannot rely
on those traditions.


