Section Two
===========

**The traditions that give glad-tidings about him and his reappearance
in the end of times.**

Comprises of 1092 traditions that will either be mentioned (located in
this chapter) or referred to (located in other chapters)

\*\*\*\*\*

353. Musnad of Aḥmad:[^1] Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father,
from Ḥajjāj and Abū Nu\`aim, from Fiṭr, from al-Qāsim b. Abī Bazza, from
Abū l-Ṭufail, from \`Alī, may Allah be satisfied with him, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “If there remains from the world but one day, Allah, Mighty and
Glorified be He, will send a man who will fill it with justice just as
it will be filled with injustice.”

[The narrator says,] Abū-Nu\`aim mentioned: “A man from us.” I heard
Murra narrating it from Ḥabīb, from Abū l-Ṭufail, from \`Alī, may, Allah
be satisfied with him, from the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him
[and his family].”

354. Sunan al-Tirmidhī (The Chapter on what has been narrated about the
Mahdī):[^2] Narrated to us \`Ubaid b. Asbāṭ b. Muḥammad al-Qurashī, from
his father, from Sufyān al-Thaurī, from \`Āṣim b. Bahdala, from Zirr,
from \`Abd-Allah, that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, said: “The world will not perish until a person from
my Ahl al-Bait will rule the Arabs. His name will be my name.” Abū \`Īsā
says: “It has also been narrated from \`Alī, Abū Sa\`īd, Umm Salma, and
Abū Huraira and this tradition is good (ḥasan) and authentic (sahih).

355. Sunan al-Tirmidhī (The Chapter on what has been narrated about the
Mahdī):[^3] Narrated to us Abd al-Jabbār b. al-\`alā’ b. Abd al-Jabbār
al-\`Aṭṭār, from Sufyān b. \`Uyayna, from \`Āṣim, from Zirr, from
\`Abd-Allah, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, who said: “A person from my Ahl al-Bait will rule. His name will
be my name.”

356. Sunan al-Tirmidhī (The Chapter on what has been narrated about the
Mahdī):[^4] Through the aforementioned chain of narrators, \`Āṣim and
Abū Ṣāliḥ narrate from Abū Huraira that the Holy Prophet, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, said: “If there remains only one day
from the world, Allah will certainly prolong that day until he rules.”

Abū-Īsā says: “This tradition is good (ḥasan) and correct (ṣaḥīḥ).

357. Musnad Aḥmad[^5]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father, from
Sufyān b. \`Uyayna, from \`Āṣim, from Zirr, from \`Abd-Allah, from the
Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said: “The
Hour will not be established until a person from my Ahl al-Bait rules.
His name will be my name.”

[\`Abd-Allah recounts] my father said: “He narrated this to us in his
house in his room. I saw some of the sons of Ja\`far b. Yaḥyā or Yaḥyā
b. Khālid b. Yaḥyā asking him about it.”

358. Sunan al-Tirmidhī[^6]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Bashshār, from
Muḥammad b. Ja\`far, from Shu\`ba, from Zaid al-\`Amī, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq
al-Nājī, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī who said:

We feared that misfortune would occur after our Prophet. So, we asked
the Messenger of Allah, may Allah’s blessings be upon him [and his
family], who replied, “Surely the Mahdī is from my umma. He will emerge
and live five or seven or nine.[^7]” Zaid al-Shāk said, “We asked, ‘What
are these?’ He replied, ‘Years. A man will come to him and say, “O
Mahdī! Give me, give me.” Then as much as he can carry will be put in
his cloth.’”

[Al-Tirmidhī says]: “This tradition is good (ḥasan) and has been
narrated from Abū Sa’īd, from the Holy Prophet, may Allah’s blessings be
on him [and his family]. The name of Abu l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī is Bakr b.
\`Amr. It has also been said Bakr b. Qays. Aḥmad has recorded it.”

359. Sunan Abī Dāwūd and ibn Māja[^8]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. ‘Ibrāhīm
from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Riqqī, from Abū l-Malīḥ al-Ḥasan b.
\`Umar, from Ziyād b. Bayān, from \`Alī ibn Nufayl, from Sa\`īd b.
al-Musayyib, from Ummi Salma who recounts: “I heard the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], say: ‘The Mahdī is
from my progeny from the descendants of Fātīma.’”

\`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far says: “I heard Abū l-Malīḥ praise \`Alī b. Nufayl
and mention him as a truthful person.”

Ibn Māja has recorded this tradition through his chain of narrators from
Abū l-Malīḥ, from Ziyād b. Bayān, from \`Alī b. Nufayl, from Sa\`īd b.
al-Musayyib, who said: “We were with Ummi Salma when we spoke of Mahdī.
She said, ‘I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], say: “Mahdī is from the children of Fātīma.”’”

I say: This is a correct (ṣaḥīḥ) tradition. Al-Suyūṭī and al-Ḥākim have
clearly declared its correctness.

360. Sunan Abī Dāwūd[^9]: Narrated to us Sahl b. Tamām b. Bazī\`, from
\`Imrān al-Qaṭṭān, from Qatāda, from Abū Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd
al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of Allah, may Allah’s blessings be upon
him [and his family], who said: “The Mahdī is from me. (He has) a
hairless forehead and an aquiline nose. He will fill the earth with
fairness and justice just as it will be filled with injustice and
unfairness. He will rule for seven years.”

Al-Ḥākim has narrated it through his chain of narrators with some
differences and has said: “This tradition is correct (ṣaḥīḥ) according
to the criteria of al-Muslim, but they [i.e. al-Bukhārī and al-Muslim]
have not narrated it.”

361. Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī[^10]: Narrated to us ibn Bukair, from al-Laith,
from Yūnus, from ibn Shihāb, from Nāfi’ the slave of Abū Qatāda
al-Anṣārī, from Abū-Huraira, from the Messenger of Allah, may Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, who asked: “What will be your
condition when the son of Mary descends amongst you and your Imam is
from yourselves?”

Muslim has also recorded this: “Narrated to me Ḥarmala b. Yaḥyā, from
ibn Wahab, from Yūnus, from ibn Shihāb, from Nāfi\` the slave of
Abū-Qatāda al-Anṣārī, from Abū-Huraira, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who asked: “What will be
your condition when the son of Mary descends amongst you and your Imam
is from yourselves?”

362. Musnad Aḥmad[^11]: Narrated to us Faḍl b. Dukain, from Yāsīn
al-\`Ijlī, from Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥanafiyya, from his father,
from \`Alī, peace be on him, who said that the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said: “The Mahdī is from us
Ahl al-Bait. Allah will straighten out his [affair] in one night.”

Ibn Māja has recorded this tradition in his Sunan: “Narrated to us
\`Uthmān b. Abī Shaiba, from Abū Dāwūd al-Khuḍrī, from Yāsīn, from
Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥanafiyya, from his father, from \`Alī, peace
be on him, that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, said: “The Mahdī is from us Ahl al-Bait . . .”

363. Sunan ibn Māja[^12]: Narrated to us Hadiyyat b. \`Abd al-Wahhāb,
from Sa\`d b. Abd al-Ḥamīd b. Ja\`far, from \`Alī b. Ziyād al-Yamāmī,
from \`Akramat b. \`Ammār, from Isḥāq b. \`Abd-Allah b. Abī Ṭalḥa, from
Anas b. Mālik, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], who said: “We children of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib are the
masters (sādāt) of the dwellers of Paradise: I, Ḥamza, \`Alī, Ja\`far,
al-Ḥasan, al-Ḥusayn and al-Mahdī.”

364. al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr[^13]: Narrated to us Yaḥyā b. \`Abd al-Bāqī,
from Yūsuf b. \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-Marwazī, from Abū Taqī \`Abd al-Ḥamīd
b. Ibrāhīm al-Ḥimṣī, from Ma\`dān b. Sulaim al-Ḥaḍramī, from \`Abd
al-Raḥmān b. Najīḥ, from Abū Zāhiriyya, from Jubair b. Nufair, from
\`Auf b. Mālik that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, said: “O \`Auf! What will be your condition when this
umma breaks up into seventy-three sects, one will be in Paradise and all
the others will be in Hell?” I asked, “When will this happen, O
Messenger of Allah?”

He replied, “When the dishonorable will be many, the slave-girls will
rule, children (al-ḥamlān) will sit on the pulpits, [the Holy Quran will
be (recited) with music, mosques will be decorated, the pulpits will be
raised][^14], the wealth [belonging to the Prophet] (al-fay’) will be
passed between [those that it doesn’t belong to], zakāt will be taken by
force, trust (al-amāna) will be taken as booty, knowledge in religion
will be learned with other than Allah in mind, man will obey his wife
while leaving his mother and expelling his father, the last of this umma
will curse its first ones, the sinners of a tribe will be their chiefs,
the most degraded people of a nation will be their leaders, and people
will be respected for the fear of their evil. When this happens, the
people will take refuge in Syria [and the Mahdī] will protect them from
their enemies.”

I asked, “Syria will be conquered?” He replied, “Yes, very quickly.
After it is conquered, fitnas[^15] will occur. Then, a dark, hazy fitna
will arise and fitnas will come after fitnas until a person from my Ahl
al-Bait emerges. He will be called the Mahdī. If you meet him, follow
him and be one of the guided ones.”

365. Musnad Aḥmad[^16]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father,
from \`Abd al-Ṣamad, from Ḥammād b. Salama, from Muṭarrif al-Mu\`allā,
from Abū l-Ṣiddīq, from Abū Sa\`īd that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him [and his family], said: “The earth will be filled
with unfairness and injustice. Then, a man from my progeny will emerge
and will rule for seven or nine [years][^17]. He will fill it with
fairness and justice.”

After mentioning this tradition, al-Ḥākim says: “This tradition is
correct (ṣaḥīḥ) according to the criteria of al-Muslim, but they [i.e.
al-Bukhārī and al-Muslim] have not narrated it.”

366. Dhikr akhbāri Iṣbahān[^18]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Ja\`far,
from Aḥmad b. Ḥusayn al-Anṣārī, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b.
Ḥafṣ, from his grandfather al-Ḥusayn, from \`Akramat b. Ibrāhīm, from
Maṭar al-Warrāq, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī
that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his
family], said:

The Hour will not be established (lā taqūm al-sā’a) until a person from
my Ahl al-Bait comes to power, [he will have a] reaping, and an aquiline
[nose]. He will fill the earth with justice just as it will be filled
earlier with unfairness. He will remain for seven years.”

367. Al-Mustadrak \`alā al-Ṣaḥīḥain[^19]: Al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad
b. Yaḥyā al-Tamīmī, from Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. Ibrāhīm b. Ḥaidar
al-Ḥimyarī at Kūfa, from al-Qāsim b. Khalīfa, from Abū Yaḥyā \`Abd
al-Ḥamīd b. \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-Ḥammānī, from Amr b. \`Ubaid-Allah
al-\`Adwī, from Mu\`āwiyat b. Qurra, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū
Sa\`īd al-Khudrī who informed that the Prophet of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him [and his family], said:

In the end of times, a severe disaster shall descend on my umma from
their rulers; a disaster with unprecedented severity, to the extent that
they will be under pressure in the vast expanse of the earth and it will
be filled with injustice and unfairness. A believer will not find a
place to take refuge from oppression. Then, Allah, Mighty and Glorified
be He, will send a man from my progeny who will fill the earth with
fairness and justice just as it was filled with unfairness and
injustice. The inhabitants of the skies and the residents of the earth
will be satisfied with him.

The earth will not have stored anything from its seeds but that it will
make it grow. The sky will not have accumulated anything of its
rain-drops but that Allah will pour it on to them. He will live amongst
them for seven, eight, or nine years. The living shall long for the dead
[i.e. wish the dead were alive] for what Allah, Mighty and Glorified be
He, will do with the people of earth from His goodness.”

Al-Ḥākim says: This tradition has a correct chain of narrators (ṣaḥīḥ
al-asnād), but they [i.e. Bukhārī and Muslim] have not recorded it.

368. Musnad Aḥmad[^20]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father,
from \`Abd al-Razzāq, from Ja\`far, from al-Mu\`allā b. Ziyād, from
al-\`Alā’ b. Bashīr, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū Sa\`īd
al-Khudrī, who informed that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings
be on him [and his family], said: “I give you glad-tidings about the
Mahdī who will be sent to my umma when the people will be in disputes
and disasters. He will fill the earth with fairness and justice just as
it will be filled with injustice and unfairness. The inhabitants of the
skies and the residents of the earth will be satisfied with him. He will
distribute wealth correctly (ṣaḥāḥā).”

A person asked him: “What do you mean by correctly (ṣaḥāḥā)?” He
replied: “He will distribute it equally amongst the people. Allah will
fill the hearts of the umma of Muḥammad with needlessness and his
justice will encompass them. He orders an announcer to call out, ‘Does
anybody need wealth?’ No one from the people will respond except one
man. He [i.e. the Mahdī] will ask him to go to the treasurer and say,
‘Mahdī orders you to give me wealth.’ He will respond, ‘Hold [your
hands].’ After he takes [what has been given to him] to his house he
will regret what he has done. He will say [to himself]: ‘Was I the
greediest in the umma of Muḥammad or did I lack what they possessed?’
Thus, he will return what was given to him but they will not accept it.
It will be said to him, ‘We don’t take back what we have given.’ This
will continue for seven, eight, or nine years. Then, there will be no
good in life after him.”

I say: He has narrated similar to this through another chain.

369. Firdaus al-akhbār[^21]: From \`Abd-Allah b. \`Abbās, from the Holy
Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “Mahdī
is the peacock of the inhabitants of Paradise.”

370. Musnad Aḥmad[^22]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father,
from Abū l-Naḍr, from Abū Mu\`āwiya Shaibān, from Maṭar b. Ṭahmān, from
Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī that the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], said:

The Hour will not be established until a person from my Ahl al-Bait
rules. He will have a wide [forehead] and an aquiline [nose]. He will
fill the earth with justice just as it will have been filled before him
with unfairness. He will remain for seven years.

371. Al-Mustadrak[^23]: Narrated to us both al-Shaykh Abū Bakr b. Isḥāq
\`Alī b. Hamshādh al-\`Adl and Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Bālawayh,
from Bishr b. Mūsā al-Asadī, from Haudhat b. Khalīfa, from \`Auf b. Abī
Jamīla, from al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī al-Dārimī, from Muḥammad b. Isḥāq
al-Imam, from Muḥammad b. Bashshār, from ibn \`Adī, from \`Auf, from Abū
l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “The Hour
will not be established until the earth is filled with unfairness,
injustice, and enmity. Then, a person from my Ahl al-Bait will emerge
who will fill it with fairness and justice just as it will have been
filled with unfairness and enmity.”

He [i.e. the author of al-Mustadrak] has said: “This tradition is
authentic (ṣaḥīḥ) based on the criteria set by Bukhārī and Muslim, but
they have not recorded it . . .”

From al-Musnad: “Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father, from
Muḥammad b. Ja\`far, from \`Auf, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū
Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], who said:

The Hour will not be established until the earth is filled with
unfairness and enmity. Then, a man will emerge from my progeny—or from
my Ahl al-Bait—who will fill the earth with fairness and justice just as
it will be filled with unfairness and enmity.

372. Sharḥ al-akhbār[^24]: From Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, who said: “Verily, Islam began
with loneliness (gharībā) and will soon become lonely just as it had
begun, and salvation is for the lonely ones.” [This tradition is famous
and has been narrated from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family. Numerous Shias and Sunnis have narrated it.
(Imam) Ja\`far b. Muḥammad al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him, has narrated it
from him but I have not mentioned the chain of narrators which reach
him.][^25] Abū Baṣīr says: “I said to him, ‘Elaborate this for me, may I
be sacrificed for you, O son of Allah’s Messenger!’ He, peace be on him,
replied: “The caller (al-dā\`ī) from us will renew the call just as the
Messenger of Allah [may Allah’s blessings be upon him and his family]
had made [a new] call.”

The same applies to the Mahdī. He will give a renewed invitation to
Allah when the [Islamic] customs are changed, innovations are increased,
the imams of deviation will dominate, the imams of guidance—those whose
obedience Allah has made obligatory upon the people—will seldom be
mentioned.

Those whom He has appointed for calling towards Him and to point to Him
through His signs. They will be forgotten and their news will be cut off
[from the people] because the leaders of oppression will dominate the
[Ahl al-Bait]. When Allah fulfills his promise to the Imams about the
reappearance of their Mahdī, there will be a need [for the Mahdī] to
give the [people] a renewed call just as the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, had called them in the very
beginning [of his messengership].[^26]

373. Ṣifat al-Mahdī[^27]: From Ḥudhayfa, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said: “(May Allah have
mercy) on this umma because of the oppressive rulers! It is amazing that
they will kill and frighten those who obey them except those who
excessively demonstrate their obedience for them! The God-fearing
believers will pretend with their tongues to be their friends but will
flee from them with their hearts. When Allah, Mighty and Glorified be
He, intends to return Islam to its might, He will destroy every tyrant;
and He has the power to do what He wills and to reform the umma after
its corruption.” Then, he said, “O Ḥudhayfa! If there not remains but
one day from the world, Allah will prolong that day until a person from
my Ahl al-Bait rules. He will lead bloody battles and Islam will be
victorious. He (Allah) does not violate His promise and He is quick in
calculating.”

374. Ṣifat al-Mahdī wa kitāb al-\`awālī[^28]: Through his chain of
narrators from Abī-Salmat b. \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. \`Auf, from his father,
from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
who said: “Allah will certainly raise from my progeny a man whose front
teeth are slightly apart from each other and who has a wide forehead. He
will fill the earth with justice and bestow wealth generously.”

375. Sunan ibn Māja[^29]: Narrated to us Uthmān b. Abī Shaiba, from
Mu\`āwiya b. Hishām, from \`Alī ibn Ṣāliḥ, from Yazīd b. Ziyād, from
Ibrāhīm, from \`Alqama, from \`Abd-Allah who said: “We were with the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], when
some youths from Banī-Hāshim entered. When the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], saw them, his eyes became
full of tears and his color changed. I said to him, ‘We are seeing on
your face something that we dislike.’ He replied, ‘Surely, Allah has
chosen for us Ahl al-Bait the Hereafter instead of this world. After me,
my Ahl al-Bait will most certainly witness calamities, expulsions, and
banishments, until a group of people come from the East who will carry
black flags. They will ask for goodness but it won’t be given to them.
They will fight and be victorious and then they will be given what they
had asked for. They will not accept it until they hand it over to a man
from my Ahl al-Bait (who) will fill the earth with fairness just as they
[i.e. the people] will have filled it with injustice. Whoever encounters
them must go to them even if he has to crawl on ice.’”

376. Al-Fitan[^30]: Narrated to us al-Walīd, from \`Alī ibn Ḥaushab,
from Makḥūl, from \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, who said:

I asked the Messenger of Allah, “Is the Mahdī from us Imams of guidance
or from others?” He replied, “He is from us. The religion will be sealed
by us just as it began through us. By us, they will be freed from the
deviations of mischief just as they were freed from the deviations of
polytheism. Through us, Allah will unite their hearts in religion after
the enmity of mischief, just as Allah united their hearts and their
religion after the enmity of polytheism.”

377. Sunan ibn Māja[^31]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Abū
Dāwūd, and from Muḥammad b. \`Abd al-Malik al-Wāsiṭī, from Yazīd b.
Hārūn, and narrated to us \`Alī ibn al-Mundhir, from Isḥāq b. Manṣūr,
all of them from Qays, from Abū Ḥaṣīn, from Abū Ṣāliḥ, from Abū Huraira,
from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him [and his
family], who said: “If there remains only one day from the world, Allah,
Mighty and Glorified be He, will elongate it until a man from my Ahl
al-Bait rules. He will conquer the mountain of Daylam and Constantinople
(Istanbul).”

I say: In the marginal commentary of al-Sindī, his saying, “until a man
will rule . . .” has been interpreted about the promised Mahdī.

378. \`Iqd al-durar[^32]: From Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him
[and his family], who said: “The Mahdī is from us Ahl al-Bait. [He is] a
man from my umma who has a high nose. He will fill the earth with
justice just as it will be filled with injustice.”

Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim has also mentioned it in Ṣifat al-Mahdī.

379. Musnad Aḥmad[^33]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father,
from \`Abd al-Ṣamad, from Abān, from Sa\`īd b. Zaid, from Abū Naḍra,
from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be
on him [and his family], who said: “After me, there will be a caliph who
will distribute wealth generously and will not even count it [to see how
much he is giving].”

380. Al-Bayān[^34]: Abū Ṭāhir Ismā’īl b. Ẓafar b. Aḥmad al-Nāblusī, from
Abū l-Makārim Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. al-Mu\`addil, from Abū
\`Alī al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan al-Ḥaddād, from al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim
Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah, from Sa\`d b. Muḥammad b. Isḥāq, from Muḥammad b.
Yūsuf al-Turkī, from Kathīr b. Yaḥyā, from Abū \`Awāna, from al-A\`mash,
from \`Aṭiyya, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of Allah,
may Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said: “After the
passing of some time and the appearance of fitnas, a man will [come] who
will be called the Mahdī. What he grants will be pleasant.”

[He said:] This tradition has been recorded by Abū Nu\`aim al-Ḥāfiẓ like
we have narrated it.

381. Mawaddat al-qurbā[^35]: Ibn \`Abbās, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who said: “Surely, Allah
granted victory to this religion through \`Alī. When he is killed,
religion will become corrupted and no one can reform it but the Mahdī.”

382. Mawaddat al-qurbā[^36]: \`Alī, [peace be on him], from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “The world will not be destroyed until a man from my umma rises
who is from the progeny of al-Ḥusayn; he will fill the earth with
justice just as it will be filled with unfairness.”

383. Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim[^37]: Narrated to us Zuhair b. Ḥarb, from \`Abd
al-Ṣamad b. \`Abd al-Wārith, from his father, from Dāwūd, from Abū
Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd and Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah, both of them from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “In the end of times, there will be a caliph who will divide
wealth but will not count it.”

And narrated the same tradition to us, Abū Bakr b. Abū Shaiba, from Abū
Mu\`āwiya, from Dāwūd b. Abū Hind, from Abū Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd, from
the Messenger of Allah.

384. al-Fitan[^38]: Narrated to us Abū Mu\`āwiya, from Dāwūd, from Abū
Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd, may Allah be satisfied with him, from the Holy
Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who said: “In the
end of times, there will emerge a caliph who will grant wealth without
counting it.”

385. Al-\`Arf al-wardī[^39]: Ibn Abū Shaiba has recorded from Abū Sa\`īd
that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
said: “A person will emerge from my Ahl al-Bait after the passing of
time and the appearance of fitnas; his grants will be abundant.”

386. Al-Musnad[^40]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father, from
\`Affān, from Ḥammād b. Salma, from \`Alī b. Zaid, from Abū Naḍra, from
Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family, who said: “Verily, Allah, Mighty and Majestic be
He, will send in this umma a caliph who will give away wealth generously
and will not count it.”

387. Al-Musnad[^41]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah, from his father, from
Khalaf b. al-Walīd, from \`Abbād b. \`Abbād, from Mujālid, from Abū
l-Waddāk who said to Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, “By Allah! No ruler rules
over us but that he is more evil than the previous one, and not a year
arrives but that it is more evil than the preceding year.” He replied,
“If I had not heard something from the Messenger of Allah I too would
have said like what you say. I heard the Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family, say, ‘From your rulers there will be
a ruler who will give away wealth abundantly but will not count it. A
person will come to him and ask him (for money). He will say, “Take.”
The person will spread his dress and he will fill it.’ The Messenger of
Allah spread a thick blanket which was covering him to show the act of
the person [who asked], then he gathered all its sides. He said, ‘He
will take it and then depart.’”

388. Al-Musnad[^42]: [In a tradition from Abū Naḍra, from Jābir that]
the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family,
said: “There will be a caliph in the last of my nation. He will give
away wealth abundantly but will not count it.”

389. Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim[^43]: Narrated to us Naṣr b. \`Alī al-Jahḍamī, from
Bishr (i.e. ibn al-Mufaḍḍal) and narrated to us \`Alī ibn Ḥajar
al-Sa\`dī, from Ismā’īl (i.e. b. \`Ulayya), both of them from Sa\`īd b.
Yazīd, from Abū Naḍra, from Abū Sa\`īd, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who said: “From your caliphs
there is a caliph who will give away wealth abundantly but will not
count it.”

390. Ṣifat al-Mahdī[^44]: From Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger
of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who said: “Most
certainly, the earth will be filled with enmity; then, a person from my
Ahl al-Bait will emerge who will fill it with fairness and justice just
as it will be filled with unfairness and enmity [injustice and
unfairness].”

391. Musnad Abī Ya\`lā[^45]: Narrated to us Sulaimān b. \`Abd al-Jabbār
Abū Ayyūb Sahl b. \`Āmir, from Fuḍail b. Marzūq, from \`Aṭiyya, from Abū
Sa\`īd, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, who said: “In the end of times, after the advance of ages and
passing of time, there will be an Imam who will be the most generous of
the people. A man will come to him and [the Imam] will put [wealth] in
his dress. He will be concerned as to who will accept the charity of
this wealth which is between him and his family as all the people will
be flushed with goodness’s (and riches).”

392. Tārīkh ibn \`asākir[^46]: He has recorded through his chain of
narrators, from ibn \`Abbās that the Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family, said: “How can a nation be destroyed
when I am at its beginning, Jesus is at its end, and the Mahdī is in its
middle?”

393. \`Iqd al-durar[^47]: From Anas b. Mālik, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who said: “A nation
will never be destroyed which I am at its beginning, its Mahdī is in the
middle, and Christ—the son of Mary—is at its end.”

394. \`Iqd al-durar[^48]: From Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī, from his
father, from his grandfather, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him [and his family], who said:

I give glad-tidings to you all! I give glad-tidings to you all! My
nation is like rain. It is not clear whether its beginning is good or
its end? Or like an orchard from which groups [of people] eat [fruit]
for one year. Perhaps the last group [that eats from it] is the most
widest and deepest[^49] and is better than all the others. How can a
nation perish when I am at its beginning, the Mahdī is in its middle,
and Christ is at its end? [Beware!], between all these will be crooked
leaders; they are not from me and I am not from them.

395. Faḍā’il al-ṣaḥāba lil-Sam\`ānī[^50]: From Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī who
said:

Fāṭima came to her father, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family],
during his illness and said while crying, “O my father! I fear
neglect/destruction (al-ḍay\`a) after you!” He replied, “O Fāṭima!
Verily Allah examined the earth thoroughly, then chose your father and
sent him as a Messenger. He examined the earth a second time and chose
your husband. He then ordered me to marry you to him and so, I married
you to him. He was the greatest amongst Muslims in forbearance (ḥilm),
the best of them in knowledge, and the first in [accepting] Islam.

Surely, Allah has granted seven characteristics to us Ahl al-Bait which
He has not given to anyone from those [before us] and no one from those
who will come [after us] will acquire them. Our Prophet is the best of
prophets and he is your father; our successor (waṣiyyunā) is the best of
successors and he is your husband; our martyr is the best of martyrs and
he is your father’s uncle, Ḥamza; from us is the one who has two wings
with which he will fly in paradise wherever he wishes, and he is Ja\`far
[al-Ṭayyār]; from us are the two grandsons of this nation and they are
your two sons; and from us is the Mahdī of this nation.”

Abū Hārūn al-\`Abdī says:

I met Wahb b. Munabba during the Hajj season and mentioned this
tradition to him. He said, “When the tribe of Moses was tested and took
the calf as god, a bitter situation was created for Moses. Allah said,
‘O Moses! The nations of all the Prophets before you were tested, and a
great fitna will befall upon the nation of Aḥmad to an extent that some
will curse others. Then, Allah will make right their affairs through a
man from the progeny of Aḥmad, and he is the Mahdī.’”

396. Al-Istī\`āb[^51]: [Jābir al-Ṣadafī] narrates from the Prophet,
Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “After me, there
will be caliphs. After the caliphs there will be rulers. After the
rulers there will be kings. After the kings there will be tyrants and
after the tyrants, a man will emerge from my Ahl al-Bait who will fill
the earth with justice.”

This tradition has been narrated by ibn Lahī\`a, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b.
Qays b. Jābir al-Ṣadafī, from his father, from his grandfather, from the
Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family.

397. Al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān[^52]: Ḥāfiẓ Abū l-Ḥasan Muḥammad
b. Abū Ja\`far al-Qurtubī and others in Damascus, and al-Muftī Ṣaqr b.
Yaḥyā b. Ṣaqr al-Shāfi\`ī and others in (the city) of Ḥalab, all of them
from Abū l-Faraj Yaḥyā b. Maḥmūd al-Thaqafī and Abū \`Alī al-Ḥasan b.
Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan, from al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah, from
Muḥammad b. Zakariyyā al-Ghalābī, from \`Abbās b. Bakkār, from
\`Abd-Allah, from al-A\`mash, from Zirr b. Ḥubaish, from Ḥudhayfa that
the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family],
said:

If there remains only one day from the world, Allah will definitely send
in it a person whose name is my name and whose morals are my morals. He
will be called Abū \`Abd-Allah. The people will pledge allegiance to him
between the Rukn and the Maqām. Through him, Allah will bring back the
religion and He will grant him victories. [Then,] no one will remain on
the face of earth but that he will acknowledge that there is no god but
Allah.

Salmān, may Allah be satisfied with him, stood up and asked: “O
Messenger of Allah! From which one of your sons will he be?” He
answered: “He will be from the descendants of this son of mine,” then
patted (Imam) al-Ḥusayn’s back.

398. Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan[^53]: Narrated to us Ḥamzat b. \`Alī,
from \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad, from Abū Khalīfa, from Musaddad, from ibn
Shihāb, from \`Aṣim, from Abū Ṣāliḥ, from Abū Huraira that the Messenger
of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], said: “If there
only remains one night from the world, Allah will make a person from my
Ahl al-Bait rule in it.”

399. Firdaus al-akhbār[^54]: From Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah that the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, said:
“The Paradise yearns for four people from my family. Allah loves [these
four] and has ordered me to love them: \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, al-Ḥasan,
al-Ḥusayn, and the Mahdī—behind whom Jesus, the son of Maryam, will
pray.”

400. Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr[^55]: Narrated to us al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī
al-Ma\`marī, from \`Abd al-Ghaffār b. \`Abd-Allah al-Mauṣilī, from \`Alī
b. Mus-hir, from Abū Isḥāq al-Shaibānī, from \`Āṣim b. Abū l-Najūd, from
Zirr b. Ḥubaish, from ibn Mas\`ūd who recounts that the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], said: “The days and
the nights will not go away until a person from my Ahl al-Bait rules;
his name will be my name.”

In another tradition, the following sentence has been added: “He will
fill the earth with justice just as it will be filled with injustice and
unfairness.”

401. Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr[^56]: Narrated to us Ma\`ādh b. al-Muthannā,
from Musaddad, from Abū Shihāb Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm al-Kinānī, from
\`Aṣim b. Bahdala, from Zirr, from \`Abd-Allah that the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], said: “If there
remains from the world but only one night, a person from the Ahl al-Bait
of the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], will rule
in it.”

402. Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr[^57]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad
al-Jammāl al-Iṣfahānī, from Ibrāhīm b. \`Āmir b. Ibrāhīm, from his
father, from Ya\`qūb al-Qummī, from Sa\`d b. al-Ḥusayn, from Abū Bakr b.
\`Ayyāsh, from \`Aṣim b. Abī l-Najūd, from Zirr b. Ḥubaish, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Mas\`ūd, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], who said: “The affairs of this nation—in the ends
of its time—will be in the hands of a man from my Ahl al-Bait. His name
will be my name.”

403. Al-\`Arf al-wardī[^58]: Abū Nu\`aim and al-Ḥākim have both narrated
from Abū Sa\`īd that the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him
[and his family], said:

The Mahdī will emerge in my nation. Allah will send him as a helper
(ghiāsā) for the people. The nation will be blessed, livestock will
feed, the earth will bring out its vegetation, and he will give away
wealth correctly (ṣiḥāhā)[^59].

404. Al-Fitan[^60]: Al-Walīd narrates from Abū Rāfi\` Ismā’īl b. Rāfi\`,
from someone who narrated to him from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the
Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said:

His nation will take refuge in him (i.e. the Mahdī) like the bees which
take refuge in their king. He will fill the earth with justice just as
it will it be filled with injustice. [This will continue] until the
people return to their initial state, that is, they will not wake up a
sleeping person and will not shed blood.

405. Kanz al-\`ummāl[^61]: “The Mahdī will emerge in the ends of my
nation. Allah will send rain for him and the earth will bring out its
vegetation. He will give away wealth correctly, livestock will increase,
and the nation will be glorified. He will live for seven or eight years
[as has been narrated by ibn Mas\`ūd].

406. Dhikr akhbār Iṣbahān[^62]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. al-Faḍl b.
Qadīd, from al-Ḥasan b. Yūsuf b. Sa\`īd al-Miṣrī, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā
b. Maṭar al-Makhramī, from Dāwūd b. al-Muḥabbar, from Abū l-Muḥabbar b.
Qaḥdham, from his father Qaḥdham b. Sulaimān, from Mu\`āwiya b. Qurra,
from his father that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], said: “Most certainly, this earth will be filled with
injustice and unfairness. When it is filled with injustice and
unfairness, Allah will send a person from me whose name will be my name.
He will fill it with fairness and justice just as it was filled with
injustice and unfairness.”

407. Al-Rauḍa min al-Kāfī[^63]: Al-Ḥusayn b. Muḥammad al-Ash\`arī, from
Mu\`allā b. Muḥammad, from al-Washshā, from Abū Baṣīr, from Aḥmad b.
\`Umar who narrates:

A person came to (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, and said, “Surely
you are the Ahl al-Bait of mercy. Allah, Blessed and High be He, has
distinguished you with this [characteristic].” He, peace be on him,
replied, “We are so, and all praise is for Allah. We don’t make anyone
go astray nor do we bring anyone out of guidance. Surely, the world will
not end until Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, sends a person from us
Ahl al-Bait who will act in accordance with the Book of Allah. He will
not see any evil in you but that he will denounce it.”

408. Al-Mu\`jam al-ausaṭ[^64]: From Ṭalḥat b. \`Abd-Allah, from the Holy
Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family] who said: “And
soon, a fitna will occur. The unrest will not cease in one place except
that it will start in another until an announcer from the sky will call
out: ‘Surely, your leader is so and so.’”

I say: The ambiguity of this tradition because of it not explicitly
stating the name of the Mahdī does not harm our purpose, because
numerous traditions we quoted earlier and those that will be cited in
the future explain this tradition and remove its ambiguity.

The author of Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn writes:

I have found a support for his tradition (i.e. the tradition of Ṭalḥa).
Ibn Abī Shaiba states, “Narrated to us al-Ḥasan b. Mūsā, from Ḥammād b.
Salma, from Abū Muḥammad, from \`Aṣim b. \`Amr al-Bajalī that Abū Umāma
said, ‘The name of a person will surely be called out from the sky. It
cannot be denied with any argument and no degraded person can prevent
it.’”

(He then mentions another narration) as support, from \`Alī, peace be on
him, which, God willing, we will mention in the future).

409. Al-Fitan by Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād[^65]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah b.
Marwān, from al-\`Alā b. \`Utba, from al-Ḥasan that “The Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], mentioned the
hardships that will be encountered by his Ahl al-Bait [which will
continue] until Allah raises a black flag from the East. Whoever helps
it, Allah will help him, and whoever deserts it, Allah will desert him,
until they come to a person whose name is my name. He will take over
their affairs and Allah will assist and help him.”

410. Al-Fitan[^66]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Razzāq, from Mu\`ammar, from
Qatāda that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his
family], said: “Soon, he will bring out the treasures, will distribute
wealth, and will fully establish Islam.”

411. Kanz al-\`ummāl[^67]: From Sa\`d al-Iskāf, from al-Aṣbagh b.
Nubāta, who narrates: “\`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, delivered a
lengthy sermon. He praised Allah and extolled Him then said:

Know that verily I and the good ones from my progeny and my Ahl al-Bait
are the most knowledgeable of the people in childhood and the most
forbearing of them in old age. With us is the flag of truth. Whoever
goes ahead of it will be degraded, whoever stays behind will be
destroyed, and whoever stays with it will have reached it. Surely we are
the people of mercy and through us the doors of wisdom are opened. Our
judgment is based on Allah’s Judgment and our knowledge is based on
Allah’s Knowledge and to the sayings of an honest person we have
listened.

If you follow us, you will be saved and if you turn away, Allah will
punish you at our hands. By us, Allah has opened the noose of disgrace
from your necks. By us—and not by you—Allah will end (binā yukhtam lā
bikum). Through us the one who lags behind will reach and to us the one
who has gone ahead will return . . . (He continued in another part,) by
Allah! I was taught the interpretation of the messages, the fulfillment
of the promises, and the completion of the words. Certainly, from those
who succeed me from my Ahl al-Bait, there will be a person who will
invite to Allah with strength and will judge with the laws of Allah.
This will be after a hard and disgraceful era in which the hardships
will be severe and hopes will be lost . . . (After mentioning some of
the bloody battles, he continued,) know that surely from us is the one
who will rise; his lineage will be pure and his companions will be
leaders.

When the enemies of Allah are to be destroyed, he will be called out
three times with his name and the name of his father in the month of
Ramaḍān. This will be after turmoil, killings, miseries, lunacies, and
the rise of calamities. I know that to whom the earth will extract its
deposits and hand over its treasures.

If I wanted, I could have struck [the earth] with my foot and said,
“Bring out from here helmets and armor” . . . Indeed, Allah will appoint
a Caliph who will remain firm in guidance and will not accept bribes in
his judgments. When he calls, he will be [heard] far and distant. [His
calls] will be lethal for the hypocrites and will bring relief for the
believers. Know that these will surely happen despite those who dislike
them [happening]. All praise is for Allah the Lord of the worlds and His
blessings be upon our master Muḥammad, the seal of the Prophets.

412. Al-Bayān wa l-tabyīn[^68]: From Abū ‘Ubaida Mu\`ammar b.
al-Muthannā, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, from his
forefathers, peace be on them, from Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī
Ṭālib, peace be on him, who said:

Know that the good ones (al-abrār) from my progeny and the pure ones
from my descendants, are the most forbearing of the people in childhood
and the most knowledgeable of them in old age. Know that we Ahl al-Bait
have learned knowledge from Allah’s knowledge. Our judgment is from
Allah’s judgment and we have listened to the sayings of an honest
person.

If you follow us, you will be guided with our insight but if you don’t
do so, Allah will destroy you at our hands. We hold the flag of truth.
Whoever follows it will reach [salvation] and whoever lags behind will
perish. Know that through us every believer is protected from bad fate
(binā taraddu dabaratu kullu mu’min), through us the noose of disgrace
is removed from your neck, and through us gains are made. Allah will
commence through us—not through you—and He will end by us, not by you.”

Ibn Abī l-Ḥadīd says in his commentary: “His saying, ‘He will end by us,
not by you,’ points towards the Mahdī who will appear in the end of
times. Most narrators have the view that he will be from the progeny of
Fāṭima, peace be on her. Our fellow Mu\`tazilī companions do not deny
this. They have clearly mentioned him in their books and their teachers
have testified about him.”

413. Īḍāḥ al-ishkāl[^69]: From Abū l-Za\`rā’ who narrates that \`Alī ibn
Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, used to say:

Verily I and the pure ones from my descendants and the good ones from my
progeny are the most forbearing of people in childhood and the most
knowledgeable of them in old age. By us Allah will invalidate falsehood;
by us Allah will break the teeth of the rabid wolves; by us Allah will
free you from disgrace and remove the noose of your necks. By us Allah
will begin and He will end.

414. Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha by ibn Abī l-Ḥadīd[^70]: The Chief of Justice
(qāḍī al-quḍat), may Allah the Exalted have mercy on him, has narrated
from Ismā’īl b. \`Abbād—may Allah have mercy on him—through his chain of
narrators which end at \`Alī, peace be on him, that he mentioned the
Mahdī and said: “He is from the progeny of al-Ḥusayn.” He then described
his appearance: “A man with a wide forehead, aquiline nose, sturdy
belly, long thighs, shining teeth, and on his left thigh is a mole.”

Ibn Abī l-Ḥadīd writes: “\`Abd-Allah b. Qutayba has mentioned this exact
tradition in Gharīb al-ḥadīth.”

415. Al-Fitan[^71]: Narrated to us al-Walīd and Rushdain, from ibn
Lahī\`a, from Isrā’īl b. \`Abbād, from Maimūn al-Qaddāḥ, from Abū
l-Ṭufail, may Allah be satisfied with him, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family. One of the two narrated from
\`Alī, peace be on him, from the Holy Prophet; Ibn Lahī\`a narrated from
Abū Zur\`a, from \`Umar b. \`Alī, from \`Alī, peace be on him, from the
Holy Prophet who said: “Religion will end through us just as it
commenced with us and through us they will be freed from polytheism.”

One of the two narrated [it like this]: “. . . from deviation. And
through us Allah will unite their hearts after the enmity of
polytheism.”

Another narrated [it like this]: “. . . deviation and mischief . . .”

416. Al-Fitan[^72]: Narrated to us al-Walīd, from Abū Lahī\`a and
informed us \`Ayyāsh b. \`Abbās, from ibn Zarīr, from \`Alī, peace be on
him, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his
family], who said: “He is a man from my Ahl al-Bait.”

He has recorded it through another chain of narrators: Narrated to us
ibn Wahb, from ibn Lahī\`a, from al-Ḥarth b. Yazīd, from ibn Zarīr
al-Ghāfiqī who heard \`Alī, peace be on him, say: “He is from the
progeny of the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family].”

417. Al-Fitan[^73]: Narrated to us Abū Hārūn, from \`Amr b. Qays
al-Mulā’ī, from al-Minhāl b. \`Amr, from Zirr b. Ḥubaish, from \`Alī,
peace be on him, who said: “The Mahdī is a man from us from the
descendants of Fāṭima, may Allah be satisfied with her.”

418. Al-Fitan[^74]: Narrated to us more than one person from ibn
\`Ayyāsh, from Sālim who said:

Najda wrote [a letter] to ibn \`Abbās asking him about the Mahdī. He
replied, “Surely, Allah the Exalted, has guided this umma through the
first of this house and will free them through the last of them. During
his [rule], goats which have horns and also those who don’t will not
fight with each other.”

419. Ṣaḥīḥ ibn Ḥibbān[^75]: From Umm Salma who recounts that the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], said
about the Mahdī: “He will distribute among the Muslims their booty and
will treat them in accordance with the customs (sunna) of their Prophet,
Allah's blessings be on him [and his family]. He will fully establish
Islam (yulqī al-islām bi jirānih ilā al-arḍ) throughout the earth. He
will live for seven years.”

420. Kanz al-\`ummāl[^76]: (In a lengthy tradition from \`Alī, peace be
on him, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family):

O \`Alī! Allah has commenced [Islam] by us and He will end it by us. By
us He will destroy the idols and whoever worships them. By us He will
crush every oppressor and every hypocrite to an extent that we will kill
for rightness like the people who killed for falseness. O \`Alī, this
nation is like an orchard that a group of people will eat from for a
year and another group will eat from it in another year. Perhaps, the
last group [is like a tree] who has the firmest root, the most beautiful
branch, and the sweetest fruit. They are the best and the most just and
will possess the longest kingdom.”

421. Murūj al-dhahab[^77]: It has been narrated that Amīr al-Mu’minīn
\`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, said:

When Allah willed to destine creation and create the creatures and make
the things [that He] made, He manifested the creatures in forms like
dust particles, and this was before the spreading of the earth and the
raising of the sky; while He was in the exclusivity of His Kingdom and
Uniqueness of His Omnipotence (jabarūtih). Thereafter, He made ready a
light from His Light so it shone and took a part from His Brightness and
it radiated. Then, He put the Light in the middle of these hidden forms,
and the form of our Prophet Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, approached it.

So, Allah the Almighty said, “You are the chosen one, the selected. With
you is entrusted My light and the treasures of My guidance. Because of
you, I level the desert, let the water flow, and raise the sky. [Because
of you], I reward and punish and [created] the Heaven and Hell. I will
appoint your Ahl al-Bait for guidance. I will bestow upon them from My
unseen knowledge so that the most complex of issues will not be
difficult for them and the hidden things will not make them incapable. I
will appoint them as My proof upon My creation and as those who draw the
attention [of the people] towards My Power and My Oneness.”

Then, Allah made them testify to [His] Lordship (al-rubūbiyya) and
purely acknowledge [His] Oneness (al-waḥdāniyya). After this pledge, He
blended the insight of his creations with the fact that he had selected
Muḥammad and his family. He showed them that guidance is with him, the
light belongs to him, and that leadership (al-imāma) is in his family .
. . Then, His Throne (\`arsh) became afloat on water, after which He
spread the earth on the surface of water, and from the water, He
extracted a smoke and made it the sky. Then, He summoned them both (i.e.
the earth and the sky) towards His obedience and they submitted by
responding [to His call].

Then, Allah made the angels with lights that He created and souls that
he invented. Then, he accompanied with His Oneness (tauḥīd) the
prophethood of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family],
whom became popular in the skies before he was sent to earth. When Allah
created Adam, He clarified his excellence for the angels and showed them
why He had distinguished him on account of His prior knowledge, when He
had taught him by informing him alone of the names of things. Thus,
Allah appointed Adam as a prayer-niche (miḥrāb), a Ka\`ba, a door (bāb),
and a Qibla to whom the righteous (al-abrār) and the spiritual lights
(al-rūḥānīīn al-anwār) prostrated.

Then, He made Adam aware of what He had put in him for safekeeping and
manifested for him what He had kept in him as trust. And this was after
He had named him as a leader (imām) in the presence of the angels . . .
He called the people, overtly and covertly, and invited them, secretly
as well as openly. He, peace be on him, drew the attention of the people
to the covenant which He had ordered the particles to, prior to
creation.

Whoever agreed with him and took from the lamp of Light that was offered
to them, was guided to His secret and His clear affair became apparent
for him. But, whoever was deceived by negligence, became eligible for
[divine] wrath. Thereafter, the Light was transferred inside us and
shone in our Imāms. Thus, we are the Lights of the sky and the Lights of
the earth. Salvation is achieved through us and from us [comes out] the
hidden knowledge. All affairs are destined to us. The proofs (al-ḥujaj)
will end at our Mahdī who is the seal of the Imams and the one who will
save the umma. [He is] the peak of illumination and the source of all
affairs. We are the most superior of the creatures, the noblest of the
monotheists, and the proofs of the Lord of the worlds. So, let him enjoy
the bounties, he who fastens to our mastership (wilaya) and holds on to
our rope.

This is what has been narrated from Abū \`Abd-Allah Ja\`far b. Muḥammad,
from his father Muḥammad b. \`Alī, from his father \`Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn,
from his father al-Ḥusayn, from Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib,
[peace be on them].

422. Nahj al-balāgha[^78]: Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, said in a
sermon narrated by al-Sharīf al-Raḍī—may Allah be satisfied with him—on
the authority of Nauf al-Bikālī who stated: “Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī,
peace be on him, addressed to us this sermon at Kūfa while standing on a
stone which Ja\`da b. Hubayra al-Makhzūmī had placed for him. He was
wearing a woolen cloak, his sword-belt was made of date-tree leaves, the
sandals on his feet too were made of date-tree leaves, and His forehead
was calloused [because of excess prostration].

Then, he, peace be on him, said[^79]: ‘. . . he will be wearing the
armor of wisdom—which he will have secured with all its conditions—such
as full attention towards it, its (complete) knowledge, and exclusive
devotion to it. For him, it is like a thing which he had lost and which
he was then seeking, or a need which he was trying to fulfill. If Islam
is in trouble, he will feel forlorn like a traveler and like a [tired]
camel beating the end of its tail and with its neck flattened on the
ground. He is the last of Allah’s Proofs and one of the vicegerents of
His Prophets.’”

Ibn Abī al-Ḥadīd says in his commentary on Nahj al-balāgha:

Every sect has interpreted this speech in accordance with their own
beliefs. The Imāmī Shias believe that it refers to the awaited Mahdī
they believe in . . . In my view, it is not improbable that the one
intended by this sermon is the Qā’im from the progeny of Muḥammad,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, in the end of times.

423. Yanābī\` al-mawadda[^80]: From Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī, peace be on
him, in a poem—that is not from his collection of poems:

Allah has a pearl, a brave Imam

Who will disgrace the polytheist warriors with his sword

He will manifest this religion in every region

And will defeat the polytheists

He will purify the earth from all corruption

And will disgrace every tyrant

He will spread justice in the East and the West

And will firmly establish Allah’s religion entrenched

. . .

I am not saying these out of pride

The chosen one from the Banī-Hāshim [i.e. the Prophet] has informed me.

424. Al-Dīwān[^81]:

O Ḥusayn! When you are a stranger in a city

Act in accordance with its etiquette

As if I am seeing myself and my progeny

And Karbala and its battleground

Our beards will be dyed with our bloods

Like a bride decorated with cosmetics

As if I am seeing it—but not with the eyes

And I have been given the keys to its doors

Calamities that don’t want to be dispelled

So be prepared for them [before they befall you]

May Allah satisfy our Qā’im who [will suddenly emerge before] Judgment
Day

Whilst the people are busy with their normal lives

He will Avenge my blood, O Ḥusayn

And your [blood], so be patient during the difficulties, O Ḥusayn

425. Al-Dīwān[^82]:

O my son! When the enemies mobilize their troops

Await the Mahdī’s kingdom, his rise, and his justice

The time that the kings from the Banī-Hāshim will be humiliated

And they will pledge allegiance to he who engages in revelry

He will be like a child with no opinion of his own

A fool who possess’ no wisdom

It is then that the rightful Qā’im from amongst you [Ahl al-Bait] will
rise

He will bring the truth and will act rightfully

He is the namesake of Allah’s Prophet; may my soul be sacrificed for him

Help him, O my son, and hasten in assisting him

426. Al-Durr al-munaẓẓam[^83]: It has been narrated from Amīr
al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, that: “The bearer of
the flag of Muḥammad and the [owner] of the government of Aḥmad will
emerge. He will rise with the sword and destruction. [He will be]
truthful in speech and will reform the earth and bring to life the
customs and the duties.”

427. Al-Muṣannaf[^84]: Narrated to us Abū Mu\`āwiya, from al-A\`mash,
from Ibrāhīm al-Taymī, from al-Ḥārith b. Suwayd, from \`Alī, peace be on
him, who said:

Islam will be degraded to the extent that even ‘Allah Allah’[^85] will
not be uttered. When this happens, the leader of the religion (ya\`sūb
al-dīn) will come out with his followers. Then, a group will be
dispatched that will gather around him like the clouds in autumn. By
Allah! I certainly know the name of their chief and the resting-places
of their horsemen.

428. \`Iqd al-durar[^86]: From Abū Wā’il who mentions that \`Alī looked
at al-Ḥusayn, peace be on them, and said:

This son of mine is a master (sayyid) just as the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], has named him. Soon, a
person from his loin will emerge whose name will be the same as that of
your Prophet. He will come when the people will be in a state of
negligence, truth will be dead, and injustice will be evident. The
inhabitants of the sky and its dwellers will rejoice at his
reappearance. He will have a wide forehead, an aquiline nose, sturdy
belly, and long thighs. There is a mole on his left thigh and his front
teeth are slightly apart from each other. He will fill the earth with
justice, just as it will be filled with unfairness and injustice.

429. Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan[^87]: He has narrated a lengthy tradition
which is a debate between ibn \`Abbās and Mu\`āwiya, in which ibn
\`Abbās has refuted Mu\`āwiya in the following manner:

As for what you said that “No one can possess both Caliphate and
Prophethood [at the same time],” then what about the saying of Allah,
Mighty and Glorified be He, “Indeed, We have given the family of Ibrāhīm
the Book and Wisdom, and We have given them a Great Kingdom.”[^88] The
Book refers to Prophethood and Wisdom refers to sunna and Kingdom refers
to Caliphate. We are the family of Ibrāhīm. The Command of Allah
concerning them and us is one and the sunna is implemented amongst us
and them.

As for your saying, “Your proof is ambiguous,” then I swear by Allah, it
is brighter than the sun and more brilliant than the moon and you
certainly know that yourself but you are a wretched person. We killed
your brother, your grand-father, your paternal uncle, and your maternal
uncle. So, don’t cry over decayed bones and souls being wasted in hell
fire. Don’t be angry because of the blood that became legible for
shedding because of polytheism and which has been degraded by Islam.

As for your saying, “We think that the government of the Mahdī belongs
to us,” then know that the word ‘think’ is used to refer to ‘doubt’ in
the book of Allah. Allah, Purified and High be He, says: “Those who
disbelieve think that they will never be resurrected. Say: Yes! By my
Lord, you will most certainly be resurrected . . .”[^89]

Everyone testifies that we have a King who will be appointed by Allah
even if nothing remains from the world but one day. Surely, we have a
Mahdī that if nothing remains but a single day, Allah will send him [to
fulfill] His commands. He will fill the earth with fairness and justice
just as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness . . . (to the
end of the tradition).

The tradition also speaks about the details of the descent of Jesus,
peace be on him, and his praying behind Imam Mahdī, peace be on him.

430. Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan[^90]: In the twenty-eighth chapter in which
he has discusses the book of Muḥammad b. Jarīr al-Ṭabarī called \`Uyūn
akhbār banī hāshim. He mentions ibn \`Abbās’ debate with Mu\`āwiya about
the Mahdī in which ibn \`Abbas says to Mu\`āwiya

There is not a single clan from [the tribe] of Quraish who can boast
about an affair except that there are other [clans] who [also] have a
claim in that affair, except for Banī-Hāshim. For, they can take pride
in Prophethood in which no one else was their partner nor was anyone
equal with them in [their virtues].

This merit cannot be taken away from them. I swear that Allah, Blessed
and High be He, did not appoint Muḥammad from the Quraish but because
the Quraish were the best of creatures, and He did not appoint him from
the Banī-Hāshim but because the Banī-Hāshim were the best amongst the
Quraish, and He did not appoint him, from the progeny of \`Abd
al-Muṭṭalib but that they were the best of Banī-Hāshim.

We do not take pride over you except in what you take pride over the
Arabs. This is the umma which is subject to Divine Mercy. To it belongs
its Prophet and its Mahdī. The Mahdī is at its end because the affairs
[of Islam] commenced with us and will end with us. Your kingdom is short
and our kingdom will be long. Your kingdom is prior to our kingdom but
there will be no kingdom after ours. We are the [pious] and the end is
only for the pious.

431. Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan[^91]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Raḥmān
b. Uthmān, from Qāsim, from ibn Abū Khaithama, from Muslim b. Ibrāhīm,
from al-Qāsim b. al-Faḍl, from ibn \`Umair al-Muhjarī, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq
who said:

Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī was sitting on the pulpit of the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], and crying and
longing for him. I asked, “What has made you cry?” He replied, “I
remembered the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family],
and his sitting on this pulpit while he was saying, ‘Surely, from my Ahl
al-Bait is the one with an aquiline [nose] and a wide [forehead]. He
will come when the earth will be filled with unfairness and injustice,
and he will fill it with fairness and justice. He will live for this
period.’ And he indicated seven or nine with his fingers.

432. Al-Iḥtijāj[^92]: In a lengthy tradition which he has narrated
through his chains of narrators from Saif b. \`Umaira and Ṣāliḥ b.
\`Uqba, both from Qays b. Sam\`ān, from Alqamat b. Muḥammad al-Ḥaḍramī,
from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, in his
lengthy sermon at the Ghadīr of Khumm:

O People! The Light of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, is inside me,
then in it will be in \`Alī followed by his progeny until the Qā’im, the
Mahdī, who will take back the rights of Allah and every right which
belongs to us.

He then said many things about the Mastership (wilāya) of \`Alī and the
Imams after him, peace be on them, then continued:

O People! Verily, I am a Prophet and \`Alī is my heir (waṣī). Know that
the seal of the Imams, the Qā’im, the Mahdī, is from us. Know that
surely he is the one who will dominate the religion. Know that surely he
is the one who will take revenge from the oppressors. Know that surely
he is the one who will conquer the forts and destroy them. Know that
surely he is the one who will kill all polytheist tribes. Know that
surely he is the one who will avenge the blood of all the friends of
Allah (auliyā Allāh).

Know that surely he is the one who will help the religion of Allah. Know
that surely he is the one who will take water from a deep ocean. Know
that surely he is the one who will mark every person of merit with his
merit and every person of ignorance with his ignorance. Know that surely
he is the chosen and selected one by Allah. Know that surely he is the
inheritor of all sciences and has full knowledge about them. Know that
surely he informs about his Lord, Mighty and Majestic be He, and
mentions the affair of His belief. Know that surely he is guided and
firm.

Know that surely [the affairs] have been handed over to him. Know that
surely he is the one about whom glad tidings have been given to those
before him. Know that surely he is the surviving proof (ḥujja) and there
is no proof (ḥujja) after him. There is no truth but that it is beside
him and there is no light but that it is with him. Know that no one can
overpower him and gain victory over him.

433. Al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān[^93]: From Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥanafiyya, may Allah be satisfied with him, who said:

We were with \`Alī, peace be on him, when a person asked him about the
Mahdī. He replied, “It is far! It is far!” Then, he showed nine with his
fingers and said, “This will happen in the end of times [in a time] that
if it is said to a person, ‘Allah, Allah,’ [that person] will be killed.
Then, Allah will gather a group for him like the gathering of clouds in
autumn. He will unite their hearts and they will not fear anybody nor
will they rejoice for anybody joining them. Their number will be equal
to the warriors [of the battle] of Badr. The prior ones will not
overtake them and the later ones will not reach them. Their number will
be equal to the soldiers of Ṭālūt—those who crossed the river with him.”

434. \`Iqd al-durar[^94]: From Sālim al-Ashall, from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far
Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Bāqir, peace be on him, who said:

Moses, peace be on him, looked in the first Exodus at what would be
granted to the Qā’im from the family of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be
on him [and his family], and pleaded, “O Lord! Make me the Qā’im from
the family of Muḥammad.” It was said to him, “This [position] belongs to
the seed of Aḥmad.” Then he looked in the second Exodus and saw the same
things, and made the same request and got the same reply. Again, in the
third Exodus, he saw the same things, made the same request and got the
same reply.

435. Musnad Abī Ya\`lā[^95]: Narrated to us Abū Bakr b. Abū l-Naṣr, from
Abū l-Naḍr, from al-Murjā b. Rajā’ al-Yashkurī, from \`Īsā b. Hilāl,
from Bushair b. Nuhaik, from Abū Huraira who said: “Narrated to me my
friend, Abū l-Qāsim, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], that
‘the Hour will not be established until a person from my Ahl al-Bait
rises against them. He will attack them until they return to the
truth.’” I (i.e. Nuhaik) asked, “How many will they be?” He (i.e. Abū
Huraira) replied, “five and two.” I enquired, “And what is five and
two?” He replied, “I don’t know.”

436. Kanz al-\`ummāl[^96]: From \`Adī b. Ḥātim, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “Indeed,
the Hour will not be established until the white castle which is in
Madā’in will be conquered, and the Hour will not be established until a
woman in a howdah travels safely from Ḥijāz to Iraq without fearing
anything. And the Hour will not be established until an Imam rules over
the people who will give away wealth freely.”

437. Musnad Abī Ya\`lā[^97]: Narrated to us Sulaimān b. \`Abd al-Jabbār
Abū Ayyūb, from Sahl b. \`Āmir, from Fuḍail b. Marzūq, from \`Aṭiyya,
from Abū Sa\`īd, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], who said: “In the end of times—after the advance
of ages and passing of time—there will be an Imam who will be the most
generous of the people. A man will come to him and [the Imam] will put
[the wealth] in his dress. He will be concerned as to who will accept
the charity of this wealth—which is between him and his family—as all
the people will be flushed with welfare.”

438. Al-Fitan[^98]: Narrated to us ibn Wahb, from ibn Lahī\`a, from
al-Ḥarth b. Yazīd, from \`Abd-Allah b. Zarīr al-Ghāfiqī, from \`Alī, may
Allah be satisfied with him, who said: “Trials are of four kinds: The
trial of prosperity, the trial of distress, the trial of so and so . . .
then, a person from the progeny of the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], will emerge. Allah will reform their affairs at
his hands.”

439. Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan[^99]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Raḥmān,
from Qāsim, from Aḥmad b. Zuhair, from \`Ammār al-Duhnī, from Sālim b.
Abū l-Ja\`d who said: “When we went for Hajj, I went to see \`Abd-Allah
b. \`Amr al-\`Āṣ. He asked me, ‘Where are you from?’ I replied, ‘From
Iraq.’ He said, ‘Then be from the people of Kūfa.’ I replied, ‘I am from
them.’ To which he answered, ‘They will be the most helpful to the
Mahdī.’”

440. Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan[^100]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah b.
Fuḍail, from \`Abbāb b. Hārūn, from al-Faḍl b. \`Ubaid-Allah, from Yaḥyā
b. Zakariyyā b. Yaḥyāwayh al-Nīsābūrī, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from
Muḥammad b. Salma, from Abū l-Wāṣil b. \`Ubaid, from Jābir b.
\`Abd-Allah, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], who said:

A group from my umma will always fight for the truth until Jesus, son of
Mary, descends at the time of dawn at Bait al-Maqdas. He will come to
the Mahdī and will be told, “Come forward O Prophet of Allah and lead
our prayers.” He will reply, “Verily, some from this umma are trustees
for others due to their honorable position with Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He.”

441. Al-Fitan[^101]: Narrated to us \`Abd-Allah b. Marwān, from
al-\`Alā’ b. \`Utba, from al-Ḥasan that “the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him [and his family], mentioned a hardship that will be
afflicted on his Ahl al-Bait until Allah sends a black flag from the
East. Whoever helps it, Allah will help him and whoever abandons it,
Allah will abandon him, until a person comes whose name will be my name.
Allah will make him in charge of their affairs and will assist him with
His help.”

442. Al-Fitan[^102]: Narrated to us Sa\`īd Abū Uthmān, from Jābir, from
(Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, that “Black Flags that will rise
from Khurāsān and will descend at Kūfa. When the Mahdī appears at Mecca,
they will go to him to pledge allegiance.”

443. Al-Fitan[^103]: Narrated to us al-Walīd and Rushdain, from ibn
Lahī\`a, from Abū Qubail, from Abū Rūmān, from \`Alī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, who said: “The Sufyānī and the Black Flags will
confront each other. Amongst the Black Flags there will be a youth from
Banī-Hāshim who has a mole on his left hand. Guiding them will be a man
from Banī Tamīm named Shu\`ayb b. Ṣāliḥ. There will be intense bloodshed
between these two armies. The Black Flags will be victorious and the
horsemen of Sufyānī will take to their heels. It is then that the people
will desire for the Mahdī and will seek him.”

444. Al-Fitan[^104]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah Abū
\`Abd-Allah al-Tayharti, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Ziyād b. An\`um, from
Muslim b. Yasār, from Sa\`īd b. al-Musayyib, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “Black
Flags belonging to the Banī \`Abbās will emerge from the east. They will
halt for a period that Allah wills. Then, smaller Black Flags will
appear from the east who will fight against a man from the progeny of
Abū Sufyān and his companions. They will advise [the people] to obey the
Mahdī.”

445. Nahj al-balāgha[^105]:

Until Allah brings out for you one who will gather you together and
unite you after your separation. Do not place expectations in one who
does not come forward and do not lose hope in one who has turned back
[from you], because it is possible that one of the two feet of the one
who has turned back may have slipped while the other has remained firm
and both [his feet] might return, until both are firm. Beware! The
example of the family of Muḥammad, Allah’s blessings be on them, is like
that of the stars in the sky. When one star sets another one rises.
Allah has completed his obligations upon you and He has shown [or will
show] you what you used to wish for.

446. Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha (by ibn Maitham)[^106]:

O People! Be aware of a knowledge that is definite. What the Qā’im will
encounter from your ignorance is like what the Messenger [of Allah] also
encountered from your ignorance. That is, because on that day the entire
umma will be engulfed in a state of ignorance except those upon whom
Allah has mercy.

Do not hurry lest your demise hastens towards you; and know that
lenience is a blessing and in forbearance is survival and comfort. The
Imam is more knowledgeable regarding what they deny/don’t know. I swear
by my life! He will uproot the evil judges from amongst you, he will
remove the diseased from you, he will dismiss the tyrant rulers, and he
will purify the earth of every deceiver.

Certainly, he will act amongst you with justice and stand amongst you
with the straight weighing scale. Those living from you will desire the
return of their dead ones even for a very brief period. It is then that
they will enjoy life and this will surely happen. For the sake of Allah
have patience, control your tongues, and live [peacefully] because soon
deprivation will reach you. If you exercise patience, act in a
calculated manner, and live in harmony, he will certainly seek the
blood-revenge of your killed ones, avenge the murdered ones, and get
back your rights. I swear by Allah a true oath,

***“Surely Allah is with those who restrain themselves and those who do
good” (Quran Surah Nahl 16:128).***

447. Al-Durr al-manthūr[^107]: He has recorded from ibn Mardawayh, from
ibn \`Abbās, that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], said: “The Companions of the Cave (aṣḥāb al-kahf) will
assist the Mahdī.”

It has been mentioned in Tafsīr al-tha\`labī, in the story about the
companions of the cave—which has also been narrated from him in ‘Iqd
al-durar, al-Burhān, al-\`Umda, and al-Ṭarā’if—that: “They went to their
sleeping places and will go to sleep until the end of times when the
Mahdī, peace be on him, emerges.” He continues, “The Mahdī will salute
them after which Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will bring them back
to life for him. Then, they will go to sleep again and will not wake up
until the Day of Rising (al-Qiyāma).”

448. \`Iqd al-durar[^108]: Saif b. \`Umair narrates:

I was with Abū Ja\`far al-Manṣūr [the Abbasid caliph] when he initiated
the conversation: “O Saif b. \`Umair! It is inevitable that a caller
will call out from the sky the name of a person from the progeny of Abū
Ṭālib.” I replied, “May I be given as ransom for you, O Amīr
al-Mu’minīn! Are you narrating this?” He answered, “I swear by the One
in whose hand is my life, Yes—for the listener who has ears.”

I said, “O Amīr al-Mu’minīn! I have never heard this tradition before.”
He replied, “O Saif! This is the truth. And when this happens, we will
be the ones who will be more worthy of responding to this call. The call
will be to a person from the sons of our cousins.” I asked, “A person
from the progeny of Fāṭima, peace be on her?” He answered, “Yes, O Saif!
Had I not heard it from Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him,
I would not have accepted it even if all the people on earth had
narrated it to me, but, he is Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him.”

449. Al-Amālī[^109]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad b.
al-Walīd, from al-Ḥusayn b. al-Ḥasan b. Abān, from al-Ḥusayn b. Sa\`īd,
from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn [al-Ḥasan] al-Kinānī, from his grandfather,
from Imam Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ṣādiq, peace be on him, who said:

Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, sent to His Prophet— Allah’s blessings
be on him and his family—a manuscript before his death and said, “O
Muḥammad! This manuscript is your will to the noble (al-najīb) one from
your family.” He asked, “And who is the noble one from my progeny, O
Jabra’īl?” He replied, “\`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib.” There were golden seals on
the manuscript and the Prophet handed it over to \`Alī, peace be on him,
and advised him to break one of the seals and act according to what was
in it. \`Alī, peace be on him, broke a seal and acted upon its
instructions.

Then he handed it over to his son al-Ḥasan, peace be on him, who broke a
seal and acted upon its instructions. Then he handed it over to his son
al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, who broke a seal and found written in it
that, “Go with a group of people towards martyrdom, for, there is no
martyrdom for them except with you and sell yourself to Allah, Mighty
and Majestic be He.” And he did, then handed it to \`Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn,
who broke a seal and found in it, “Maintain silence, be confined to your
house, and worship your Lord until certainty [i.e. death] comes to you”
and he did accordingly.

Then, he handed it over to Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, who broke
a seal and found in it, “Narrate/speak to the people and give verdicts.
Do not fear anyone except Allah because no one can harm you.” Then he
handed these to me. I broke a seal and found, “Narrate/speak to the
people and give verdicts. Spread the knowledge of your Ahl al-Bait and
confirm your righteous forefathers. Do not fear anyone except Allah for
you are in protection and safety.” I acted according [to the
instructions]. Then, I will pass it on to Mūsā b. Ja\`far who will hand
it over to the one after him. This will continue until the rise of the
Mahdī, peace be on him.

450. Al-Amālī[^110]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Mūsā b. al-Mutawakkil,
from Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah al-Kūfī, from Mūsā b. \`Imrān al-Nakha\`ī,
from his uncle al-Ḥusayn b. Yazīd al-Naufalī, from \`Alī ibn Sālim, from
his father, from Abū Ḥamza al-Thumālī, from Sa\`d al-Khaffāf, from
al-Aṣbagh b. Nubāta, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Abbās, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said:

When I was taken to the seventh heaven and from there to the Lote Tree
of the Boundary (sidrat al-muntahā) and from sidrat al-muntahā to the
veils of light (ḥujub al-nūr), my Lord, majestic be His Majesty, called
out to me, “O Muḥammad! You are my servant and I am your Lord. So, be
humble before Me and only worship Me. Rely on Me and trust Me for I am
satisfied with you as a servant, beloved, messenger, and prophet and [I
am satisfied] with your brother, \`Alī, as a successor and a door
(khalīfatan wa bābā). He is My proof (ḥujjatī) upon My servants and a
leader (Imām) for My creation.

Through him, My friends will be known from My enemies and through him,
Satan’s party will be distinguished from My party. Through him, My
religion will be established, My limits will be protected, and My
regulations implemented. Through you, him, and the Imams from his
progeny, I will have mercy on My male and female servants. And by the
Qā’im from amongst you I will give life to My earth with My Tasbīḥ,
Tahlīl, Taqdīs, Takbīr, and Tamjīd. Through him, I will clean the earth
from My enemies and make My friends inherit it. Through him, I will
degrade the word of the disbelievers and elevate My word.

Through him, I will enliven My servants and My cities with My knowledge.
For him, I will reveal the treasures and the reserves with My will. I
will disclose only to him the secrets and the hidden things by My
intention (bi Irādatī). I will help him with My angels so that they may
assist him in implementing My order and proclaiming My religion. He is
surely My [appointed] guardian and truly the guided one from My
servants.”

451. Al-Amālī of al-Ṭūsī [^111]: A group informed us from Abū
l-Mufaḍḍal, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Yasār b. Abī l-\`Ajūz al-Simsār,
from Mujāhid b. Mūsā al-Khuttalī, from \`Abbād b. \`Abbād, from Mujālid
b. Sa\`īd, from Jabr [or Jubair] b. Nauf Abū l-Waddāk who said:

I said to Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, “By Allah! No year comes upon us but
that it is worse than the previous one, and no ruler but that he is
worse than the previous,” to which Abū Sa\`īd answered, “I heard the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, say what
you are saying, but, I also heard the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, say, ‘This situation will not go
away from you until amongst all the fitnas and injustices, someone is
born who will not be recognized at that time. [This situation will
continue] until The world becomes filled with injustice to the extent
that no one will be able to utter: ‘Allah’.

Then, Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will send a person from me and
from my progeny. He will fill the earth with justice just as those
before him will have filled it with unfairness. [Allah] will bring out
its treasures[^112], and he will give away wealth freely and will not
even count [what he is giving]. This will continue until Islam is fully
established.’”

452. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^113]: Informed me a group from Abū Muḥammad
Hārūn b. Mūsā al-Talla\`ukbarī, from Abū \`Alī al-Rāzī, from ibn Abū
Dārim, from \`Alī ibn al-\`Abbās al-Sindī al-Muqāni\`ī, from Muḥammad b.
Hāshim al-Qaysī, from Sahl b. Tamām al-Baṣrī, from \`Imrān al-Qattān,
from Qatāda, from Abū Naḍra, from Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah al-Anṣārī, from
the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “The Mahdī will emerge in the end of times.”

453. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^114]: From Muḥammad b. Isḥāq, from al-Muqāni\`ī,
from Bakkār b. Aḥmad, from al-Ḥasan b. al-Ḥusayn, from Talīd, from Abū
l-Jaḥḥāf, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, who said: “I give you glad tidings about the Mahdī,” and he
repeated this statement three times. Then he said, “He will emerge when
there will be disagreements amongst the people and intense hardships. He
will fill the earth with fairness and justice as it will be filled with
unfairness and injustice. He will fill the hearts of Allah’s servants
with worship and they will benefit from his justice.”

454. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^115]: Through the aforementioned chain of
narrators, from al-Ḥasan b. Ḥusayn, from Sufyān al-Jarīrī, from \`Abd
al-Mu’min, from al-Ḥārith b. Ḥaṣīra, from \`Umāra b. Juwain al-\`Abdī,
from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī who said:

I heard the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, say [while he was] on the pulpit, “Verily, the Mahdī is from my
progeny from my Ahl al-Bait. He will emerge in the end of times. The sky
will pour down its raindrops for him and the earth will bring out its
seeds for him. He will fill the earth with justice and fairness just as
the people will have filled it with unfairness and injustice.”

455. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^116]: Muḥammad b. Isḥāq, from al-Muqāni\`ī, from
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad al-Zuhrī, from Isḥāq b. Manṣūr, from Qays b.
al-Rabī\` and others, from \`Āṣim, from Zirr, from \`Abd-Allah b.
Mas\`ūd who recounts that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be
on him and his family, said: “The world will not come to an end until a
person from my Ahl al-Bait rules my nation. He will be called the
Mahdī.”

456. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^117]: Informed me a group from Abū Ja\`far
Muḥammad b. Sufyān al-Bazaufarī, from Aḥmad b. Idrīs, from \`Alī ibn
Muḥammad b. Qutayba al-Naishābūrī, from al-Faḍl b. Shādhān, from Naṣr b.
Muzāḥim, from Abū Lahī\`a, from Abū Qubail, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Amr b.
al-\`Āṣ, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, who said in a lengthy narration: “It is then that the Mahdī
will emerge. He is from the descendants of this [man]—and he pointed
towards \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him.

Through him, Allah will destroy falsehood (al-kadhib) and will conclude
the era of hardship. Through him, the noose of disgrace will be removed
from your necks.” Then, he declared, “I am the first of this nation, the
Mahdī will be in the middle, and Jesus will be at the end. Between all
this there will be a crooked old man.”

457. Al-Amālī by al-Ṣadūq[^118]: Ibn al-Mutawakkil, from \`Alī, from his
father, from ibn Abū \`Umair, from someone who heard (Imam) Abū
\`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, say the following line [of poetry]:

For every nation is a government which they are on the lookout for,

And our government will appear in the end of times

458. Dalā’il al-imāma[^119]: Narrated to us Abū l-Mufaḍḍal Muḥammad b.
\`Abd-Allah, from Aḥmad b. Isḥāq b. al-Buhlūl al-Qāḍī, from his father,
from Samura b. Ḥajar, from Ḥamza al-Naṣībī, from Zaid b. Rafī\`, from
Abū \`Ubaida, from \`Abd-Allah b. Mas\`ūd who recounts:

I was with the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, when
a group of youth from Banī-Hāshim passed by whose faces were [shining
like] lamps. [On seeing them], the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, started weeping. I said, “What has made you cry, O
Messenger of Allah?”

He replied, “We are an Ahl al-Bait for whom, Allah has chosen the
Hereafter over the world. Soon, my Ahl al-Bait will be killed, driven
away, and displaced from the cities. [This will continue] until Allah
makes ready for us a flag which will come from the East and whoever
fights it will be defeated. Then, a person from my Ahl al-Bait will
emerge whose name will be like my name and whose character will be like
my character. My umma will go to him like birds returning to their
nests. Then, he will fill the earth with justice just as it will be
filled with injustice.”

Similar traditions with various chains of narrators have also been
reported on the authority of ibn Mas\`ūd.

459. Dalā’il al-imāma[^120]: Informed us Abū Ṭāhir \`Abd-Allah b. Aḥmad
al-Khāzin, from Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. \`Umar b. Muḥammad b. Muslim b.
al-Barā’ al-Ji\`ābī, from Abū l-Ḥasan \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b.
al-\`Abbās al-Rāzī al-Qummī, from his father, from (Imam) \`Alī ibn Mūsā
al-Riḍā, peace be on him, from his father (Imam) Mūsā b. Ja\`far, peace
be on him, from his father (Imam) Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him,
from his father (Imam) Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, from his
father (Imam) \`Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, from his father
(Imam) al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, from his brother (Imam) al-Ḥasan,
peace be on him, from his father (Imam) \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on
him, who said: “The Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, said to me, ‘The Hour will not be established until the true
Qā’im rises.

This will occur when Allah, Mighty and Glorified be, permits him to do
so. Whoever follows him will be saved and whoever doesn’t will perish.
[Fear] Allah! [Fear] Allah! O servants of Allah! Go to him even if you
have to crawl on ice because he is the Caliph of Allah (khalīfat Allah)
and my successor (khalīfatī).”

460. Dalā’il al-imāma[^121]: Through his chain of narrators [i.e. Abū
l-Ḥasan Muḥammad b. Hārūn b. Mūsā from his father], from Abū \`Alī
al-Nahāwandī, from Isḥāq, from Yaḥyā b. Sulaim, from Hishām b. Ḥasan,
from al-Mu\`allā b. Abū l-Mu\`allā, from Abū l-Ṣiddīq al-Nājī, from Abū
Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, who said: “Rejoice at the good news of the Mahdī.
Surely, he will come in the end of times amidst difficulties and
hardships. Allah will make the earth prosperous for him with justice and
fairness.”

461. Dalā’il al-imāma[^122]: From him [i.e. Muḥammad b. Hārūn b. Mūsā],
from his father Abū Muḥammad Hārūn b. Mūsā, from Abū \`Alī al-Ḥasan b.
Muḥammad al-Nahāwandī, from Aḥmad b. Zuhair, from \`Abd-Allah b. Dāhir
al-Rāzī, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Abd al-Quddūs, from al-A’mash, from
\`Āṣim b. Abū al-Najūd, from Zirr b. Ḥubaish, from \`Abd-Allah b.
Mas\`ūd, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and
his family, who said: “The Hour will not be established until a person
from my progeny rules. His name will be like my name. He will fill the
earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled with
unfairness and injustice.”

462. Dalā’il al-imāma[^123]: Informed us Abū l-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. Hārūn,
from Abū Hārūn b. Mūsā, from Muḥammad b. Jarīr al-Ṭabarī, from \`Īsā b.
\`Abd al-Raḥmān, from al-Ḥasan b. al-Ḥusayn al-\`Uranī, from Yaḥyā b.
Ya\`lā al-Aslamī, \`Alī ibn al-Qāsim al-Kindī, and Yaḥyā b. al-Musāwir,
from \`Alī ibn al-Musāwir, from \`Alī ibn al-Ḥazawwar, from al-Aṣbagh b.
al-Nubāta, (in a tradition from Imam \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, which he said
at the end): “And the Mahdī will be from us in the end of times. In all
the nations, there will be no other awaited Mahdī other than him.”

463. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^124]: Aḥmad b. Idrīs, from \`Alī ibn al-Faḍl,
from Aḥmad b. Uthmān, from Aḥmad b. Razzāq, from Yaḥyā b. al-\`Alā
al-Rāzī, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah (al-Ṣādiq), peace be on him, who
said:

Allah, the Exalted, will bring forth in this nation a person who is from
me and I am from him. Through him, Allah, the Exalted, will bring forth
the blessings of the skies and the earth. The sky will pour its
raindrops, the earth will bring out its seeds, and its beasts and wild
animals will be protected. He will fill the earth with fairness and
justice just as it will be filled with unfairness and injustice. He will
kill to the extent that the ignorant will say, ‘Had he been from the
seed of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, he would
have been merciful.’

464. Al-Kāfī[^125]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad, from
Muḥammad b. Sinān, from Abān, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah (al-Ṣādiq),
peace be on him, who said: “The world will not come to an end until a
person from me appears. He will judge using the judgment of the family
of [the prophet] David, peace be on him, and will not ask for any
testimony. He will give everybody their rights.”

465. Al-Irshād[^126]: Abū l-Qāsim; Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, from Muḥammad b.
Ya\`qūb, from \`Alī ibn Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim, from his father; and \`Alī
ibn Muḥammad al-Qāsānī, all of them from Zakariyyā b. Yaḥyā b.
al-Nu\`mān al-Baṣrī who said: “I heard \`Alī ibn Ja\`far b. Muḥammad say
to al-Ḥasan b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī ibn Ḥusayn, ‘Allah helped Abū l-Ḥasan
al-Riḍā, peace be on him, when his brothers and uncles rebelled against
him.” (He then mentions a lengthy tradition which ends with his saying:)
‘And I stood up and held Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā’s hand
and said to him, “I testify that you are my Imam [when I stand] before
Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He.”

On witnessing this, (Imam) al-Riḍā, peace be on him, wept and said, “O
uncle! Didn’t you hear my father say, ‘The Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, declared, “May my father be
sacrificed for the son of the pure, the best lady from the city of
Nūbiyya[^127]! From his [i.e. Imam Riḍā’s] descendants will be the
driven-away (al-ṭarīd), the wanderer (al-sharīd), whose father and
grandfather have been killed but not avenged. He will go in occultation
until it is said, ‘He has died or he has perished or which valley has he
entered?’”’” I replied, “You are speaking the truth, may I be sacrificed
for you!”’

466. Nafas al-mahmūm[^128]: From al-Kāmil by Shaykh al-Bahā’ī, from
(Imam) \`Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn Zain al-\`Ābidīn, peace be on him, in his
famous sermon delivered at Damascus:

Allah, the Exalted, bestowed upon us forbearance, knowledge, bravery,
and generosity and [put our] love in the hearts of the believers. From
us is the Messenger of Allah, his successor, the Master of the Martyrs,
and Ja\`far al-Ṭayyār (the flying one) in Paradise, the two grandsons of
this umma [i.e. Ḥasan and Ḥusayn], and the Mahdī, who will kill the
Dajjāl.

467. Maqātil al-ṭālibīn[^129]: (While mentioning the martyrdom of Zaid
b. \`Alī and its reason, he writes): Informed us \`Alī ibn al-Ḥusayn,
from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī al-Ādamī, from Abū Bakr al-Jabalī, from
\`Abd-Allah b. \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-\`Anbarī, from Mūsā b. Muḥammad, from
al-Walīd b. Muḥammad al-Mūqirī who said:

I was with al-Zuhrī at al-Ruṣāfa when he heard the sound of people
making fun. He said to me, “O Walīd! See what it is?” I peeped out a
window of his house and said, “It is the head of Zaid b. \`Alī!!” He sat
up and said, “The people of this house who hurried have been killed.” I
asked him, “Will they not rule?” He answered, “Narrated to me \`Alī ibn
al-Ḥusayn, from his father, from Fāṭima, that the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, informed her, ‘The Mahdī is
from your descendants.’”

468. Al-Amālī (known as al-Amālī al-khamīsiyya)[^130]: In a tradition
that he has recorded through his chain of narrators from \`Alī, peace be
on him:

By the One Who split the grain and created the wind! If only one day
remains from the world, Allah will prolong that day until a man from me
rules the earth. He will fill the earth with fairness and justice just
as it will be filled with injustice and unfairness . . . I swear by the
One Who split the grain and created the wind, if no one remains from
them (i.e. the Banī Umayya) except one man, he will indeed rebel with
evil against the religion of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He.

469. Qurb al-isnād[^131]: Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from \`Abd-Allah b. Maimūn
al-Qaddāḥ, from Ja\`far, from his father, from (Imam) \`Alī ibn Abī
Ṭālib, peace be on him, who said:

From us are seven people whom Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, has
created and has not created like them on earth. From us is the Messenger
of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, the master of the
first and the last and the seal of the Prophets. His heir (waṣī) is the
best of heirs, his grandsons are the best of grandsons—Ḥasan and Ḥusayn.
The Master of the Martyrs (sayyid al-shuhadā), Ḥamza, is his uncle. [And
the two others are] Ja\`far, the one who turns [or flies] with the
angels, and the Qā’im.

470. Kāmil al-ziyārāt[^132]: Through his previous chains of narrators,
from Abū l-Qāsim Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Qūlawayh, from a group of his
teachers which include: his father, Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan, and \`Alī ibn
al-Ḥusayn, [all of them] from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah b. Abū Khalaf, from
Muḥammad b. \`Īsā b. \`Ubaid al-Yaqṭīnī, from Abū \`Abd-Allah Zakariyyā
al-Mu’min, from ibn Muskān, from Zaid—the slave of ibn Hubayra—from
(Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said:

Fasten to the waist-belt of this anza\`[^133], for surely, he is the
greatest truthful person (al-ṣiddīq al-akbar) and the guide for those
who follow him. Whoever precedes him has gone ahead of religion. Whoever
deserts him, Allah will destroy him. Whoever holds fast to him has held
fast to the rope of Allah. Whoever accepts his guardianship (wilaya)
will be guided by Allah, and whoever rejects his guardianship (wilaya),
will be misled by Allah.

From him are the two grandsons of this nation, who are my two sons
al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn. From the descendants of al-Ḥusayn are the
guiding Imams and the Qā’im, the Mahdī. Love them and accept their
guardianship. Don’t take their enemy as an ally instead of them, in that
case you will be worthy of the wrath of your Lord and a disgrace in this
world, and indeed, whoever has forged a lie will be disappointed.

471. Mukhtaṣar baṣā’ir al-darajāt[^134]: Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Abū
l-Khaṭṭāb and Ya\`qūb b. Yazīd, from Aḥmad b. al-Ḥusayn al-Maithamī,
from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn, from Abān b. Uthmān, from Mūsā al-Ḥannāṭ,
from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah (al-Ṣādiq), peace be on him, who said: “The
Days of Allah (ayyām Allāh) are three: the day when the Qā’im rises, the
Day of Returning (yaum al-karra) [^135] and the Day of Judgment
(qiyāma).”

472. Al-Mustarshid[^136]: Narrated to us Abū Ḥafṣ \`Umar b. \`Alī ibn
Yaḥyā, from Qays b. Ḥafṣ, from Yūnus, from \`Alī ibn Ḥazawwar, from
Aṣbagh b. Nubāta, from \`Alī, peace be on him, who said:

When Allah gathers the first and the last [i.e. all the people], the
best of the people will be seven and all of them will be from the
descendants of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib. Your Prophet will be called the best
of the Prophets, [and he is] from the descendants of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib.
The heir (waṣī) of your Prophet, is the master of the heirs (sayyid
al-auṣiyā) [and he is] from the descendants of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib.
Al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, the two masters of the youth of paradise, are
from the descendants of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib. Ḥamza, the Master of the
Martyrs, is from the descendants of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib. Ja\`far, who has
two wings, is from the descendants of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib. And the Mahdī
who will emerge in the end of times, is from the descendants of \`Abd
al-Muṭṭalib. This is a generosity from Allah, the like of which has not
been granted to anyone from the first ones and the last ones.”

473. Sunan Abī Dāwūd[^137]: Hārūn narrates from \`Amr b. Abī Qays, from
Muṭarrif b. Ṭarīf, from al-Ḥasan, from Hilāl b. \`Amr, from \`Alī, may
Allah be satisfied with him, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “A person from Mā Warā’
al-Nahr will emerge who will be called al-Ḥārith b. Ḥarrāth. His army
will be led by a person called Manṣūr. He will strengthen the family of
Muḥammad, just like the Quraish who strengthened the Messenger of Allah.
It will be obligatory upon every believer to help him.”

474. Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā[^138]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b.
al-Ḥusayn b. Yūsuf al-Baghdadi, from al-Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad b. al-Faḍl—the
Imam of the Jāmi\` Mosque of Ahwāz—from Bakr b. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b.
Ibrāhīm al-Qaṣrī, the slave of al-Khalīl al-Maḥlamī, from al-Ḥasan b.
\`Alī ibn Muḥammad b. \`Alī ibn Mūsā, from \`Alī ibn Mūsā, from his
father (Imam) Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad who said: “The Qā’im will not
be but an Imam, the son of an Imam, and a heir (waṣī), the son of a heir
(waṣī).”

475. Al-Khiṣāl[^139]: Through his chain of narrators from \`Alī, peace
be on him, in the tradition mentioning seventy of his excellences in
which none of the companions of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, matched him, he said:

As for the fifty third [excellence], then surely Allah will not end the
world until the Qā’im from us rises. He will kill those who hate us, he
will not accept the non-Muslim tax (jizya), he will break the cross and
the idols. War will end and he will invite [people to come and] take
wealth and he will distribute it equally, and will deal justly with the
people.

476. Sharḥ al-akhbār[^140]: From Mujāhid (without mentioning the chain
of narrators): “. . . then the Qā’im from the family of Muḥammad will be
sent to punish them. The people will regard him weak [but] Allah will
grant him victory over the easts and the wests of the world. Be aware!
They are the true believers. Be aware! The finest jihad is at the end of
times.”

477. Sharḥ al-akhbār[^141]: From the narration of ibn Salām, through his
chain of narrators from Amīr al-Mu’minīn (\`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib), peace be
on him, who said:

Tests are of three kinds: The test during a good and enjoyable life, the
test during hardships, and the test in which the people will be cleaned
like the cleaning of the gold extracted from the mines. This will
continue until a man emerges from us—the progeny of the Prophet, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family—and then Allah will set right their
affairs.

478. Sharḥ al-akhbār[^142]: \`Abd-Allah b. Jabala, narrates through his
chain of narrators from \`Alī, peace be on him, that: “Islam will depart
from the people like a camel which runs away from rain. Allah will not
return it except by a person from us.”

479. Sharḥ al-akhbār[^143]: In another tradition from \`Alī, peace be on
him, who said: “As if I am seeing your religion fleeing from you.
Nothing from it will remain with you until Allah returns it to you by a
person from us.”

480. Sharḥ al-akhbār[^144]: From the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, whom mentioned the Mahdī and said:
“Whoever sees him, should obey/follow him even if he has to crawl on
ice—or fire—for surely he is Allah’s Caliph on earth.”

The traditions with the following numbers are either in harmony with the
topic of this section, or result in it, or based on the interpretation
of other narrations conform to it: 1–352, 481–715, 719–807, 864–870,
872, 876, 878, 881–912, 918, 928, 932, 933, 936, 941, 943, 951, 956­969,
971–973, 975–1029, 1039–1041, 1043, 1049, 1055, 1059–1062, 1083,
1086–1118, 1123–1169, 1173, 1175–1177, 1179–1186, 1195–1206, 1211–1223,
1228–1238, 1240, 1241, 1243, 1244, 1246–1249, 1251–1256, 1258–1261,
1266, 1267, 1270, 1271–1274, 1276, and 1277.

[^1]: Al-Musnad (al-Maṭba\`at al-Maymaniyya, 1313 AH), vol. 1, p. 99,
and (Egypt: Dār al-Ma\`ārif), vol. 2, pp. 117–118. Aḥmad Muḥammad Shākir
says: “Both its chains are correct”; Sunan Abī Dāwūd (Egypt:
Al-Maṭba\`at al-Tāziyya), vol. 2, p. 207, in the Book of al-Mahdī:
“Narrated to us \`Uthmān b. Abī Shaiba, from al-Faḍl b. Dukain, from
Fiṭr, from al-Qāsim b. Abī Bazza, from Abū l-Ṭufail, from \`Alī, may
Allah be satisfied with him,” with the difference that he said, “If
there remains from time (al-dahr)” and “from my Ahl al-Bait.” Also, Dār
al-Iḥyā’ al-Sunnat al-Nabawiyya edition, vol. 4, p. 107, no. 4283;
Al-Muṣannaf, vol. 5, “Kitāb al-Fitan,” p. 198, no. 19494, similar to
what has been narrated in Abū Dāwūd; Jāmi\` al-uṣūl (1370 AH), vol. 11,
book 9, chap. 1, sec.1, no. 7811; Maṭālib al-su’ūl (Maktabat Dār
al-Kutub al-Tijāriyya) vol. 2, chap. 12; Tadhkirat al-khawāṣ (Najaf), p.
364; Mukhtaṣar sunan Abī Dāwūd (Dār al-Ma\`rifa), vol. 6, p. 159, no.
4114; al-Nihāya or al-Fitan wa l-malāḥim, (Egypt: 1388 AH), vol. 1,
sect. “mentioning the Mahdī who will be in the end of times,” p. 25;
al-\`Arf al-wardī, vol. 2, p. 125; al-Ṣawā\`iq al-muḥriqa (Cairo: Dār
al-Ṭabā\`at al-Muḥammadiyya), p. 161; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 267,
no. 38675; Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, vol. 5, p. 179; al-Ishā’a, 1st ed., p.
113; al-Bayān (1399 AH), chap. 1, p. 93; \`Iqd al-durar (1399 AH), vol.
1, p. 18; Nūr al-abṣār (al-Maṭba\`at al-Maymaniyya), p. 154; Ibrāz
al-wahm al-maknūn (Damascus: 1347 AH). He writes: “The tradition of
\`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib has been narrated from him through various chains
which exceed twenty. Aḥmad and Abū Dāwūd have recorded it from Fiṭr b.
Khalīfa, from al-Qāsim b. Abī Bazza from Abū l-Ṭufail, from him [i.e.
Alī b. Abī Ṭālib]. Abū Dāwūd has recorded it from Shu\`ayb b. Abī
Khālid, from Abū Isḥāq al-Sabī\`ī, from him. Al-Ṭabarānī has mentioned
it in al-Ausaṭ from \`Abd-Allah b. Lahī\`a from \`Umar b. Jābir
al-Ḥaḍramī, from \`Umar, from his father. Al-Ḥākim has recorded it in
al-Mustadrak from the narration of al-Ḥārith b. Yazīd, from \`Abd-Allah
b. Zarīr al-Ghāfiqī, from him. Again, al-Ḥākim has recorded it from
\`Ammār b. Mu’āwiya al-Duhnī, from Abū l-Ṭufail, from Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥanafiyya, and has stopped at him. Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād—one of
al-Bukhārī’s teachers—has recorded it in Kitāb al-fitan. Similarly, ibn
al-Munādī in al-Malāḥim, Abū Nu\`aim in Akhbār al-Mahdī, Abū Ghanam
al-Kūfī in Kitāb al-fitan, ibn Abī Shaiba, and many others from numerous
chains and varying wordings, who have stopped at him [i.e. Alī ibn Abī
Ṭālib]”; Nihāyat al-bidāya wa l-nihāya, 1st ed., vol. 1, p. 37;
al-Jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr (Egypt: 1373 AH), under the letter al-Lām, vol. 2,
p. 131; al-\`Umda, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī, \`alayhi salām,” p. 225;
Jawāhir al-\`iqdain (manuscript), part 2, 8th discussion; Yanābī\`
al-mawadda, p. 432; al-Dur al-manthūr, vol. 6, p. 58, under the exegesis
of His saying, ‘Its conditions came’; \`Alāmāt al-qiyāmat al-kubrā, p.
74; Sunan al-Dānī, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” no. 15; Bayna
yaday al-sā’a, p. 111; \`Aun al-ma\`būd (The Commentary on Sunan Abī
Dāwūd), vol. 11, p. 373. He says: “The chain of narrators of this
tradition is good (ḥasan) and strong (qawī).” Thereafter, he refutes the
view of those who regard Fiṭr b. Khalīfa as weak (ḍa\`īf), saying:
“Aḥmad and Yaḥyā have indeed regarded him as reliable.”

[^2]: Sunan al-Tirmidhī, vol. 4, chap. 52, no. 2230; al-Musnad, vol. 1,
p. 376 and vol. 5 of Dār al-Ma\`ārif edition, p. 99, no. 3572, with the
difference that he, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said:
“The days will not finish and time will not perish until a person from
my Ahl al-Bait, peace be on him, will rule the Arabs; his name will be
my name.” Aḥmad Muḥammad Shākir says: “Its chain of narrators is correct
(ṣaḥīḥ),” also, vol. 1, p. 377; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 2, p. 29; al-Sunan
al-wārida fi l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” no. 22; Sunan
Abī Dāwūd, vol. 4, p. 107, no. 4282, with the difference that he,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said: “or it will not end”;
al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr (Maṭba\`at al-Waṭan al-\`Arabī), vol. 10, no.
10233/10218, which says: “the world will not come to an end”; Maṣābīḥ
al-Sunna (Egypt: Muḥammad \`Alī Ṣabīḥ), vol. 1, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā\`a,”
p. 193; Jāmi\` al-uṣūl, 2nd Ed., chap. 1, vol. 11, p. 48, no. 7810;
Farā’id al-simṭain, chap. 6, vol. 2, no. 577; Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ, vol.
2, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā\`a,” sect. 2, no. 5452/16; al-Nihāya or al-Fitan
wa l-malāḥim, vol. 1, p. 26; al-Fuṣūl al-muhimma, sect. 12, p. 293,
citing Musnad Abī Dāwūd; al-\`Arf al-wardī, p. 125; al-Ṣawā\`iq
al-muḥriqa, p. 169; Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, p. 179, no. 5; al-Malāḥim wa
l-fitan, chap. 17, p. 162, citing the chapters which he has recorded
from Abū Yaḥyā Zakariyyā b. Yaḥyā’s Kitāb al-fitan; al-Qanā\`a fī mā
yuḥsin al-iḥāṭa bihī min ashrāṭ al-sā\`a, p. 57; Ṣaḥīḥ al-jāmi\`, no.
7152; Nihāyat al-bidāya wa l-nihāya, vol. 1, p. 39; Bayna yaday
al-sā\`a, p. 111; Lawā’iḥ al-anwār al-bahiyya, vol. 2, under the
explanation of this line of poetry: From it is the last Imam, the
eloquent Muḥammad the Mahdī and the Christ

[^3]: Sunan al-Tirmidhī, vol. 4, Kitāb al-Fitan, chap. 52, no. 2231, p.
505; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 264, no. 38662; Nihāyat al-bidāya wa
l-nihāya, vol. 1, p. 39; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), p. 126;
al-Idhā\`a, p. 115; Jāmi\` al-uṣūl, vol. 11, chap. 1, , p. 49, no. 7810;
Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl (printed within the margins of Musnad of
Aḥmad), p. 3, vol. 6; Mahdī āl al-Rasūl, p. 19; Dhikru akhbār Iṣfahān,
vol. 1, p. 329. He, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said:
“The affairs of this Umma—in the ends of its era—will be in the hands of
a man from my Ahl al-Bait. His name will be my name”; Bayna yaday
al-sā’a, p. 111.

[^4]: Sunan al-Tirmidhī, vol. 4, p. 505, Kitāb al-fitan, chap. 52, no.
2231; Tuḥfat al-aḥwadhī, vol. 5, p. 179; al-\`Arf al-wardī, p. 126;
al-Idhā’a, p. 115; Jāmi\` al-uṣūl, chap. 1, vol. 11, p. 49, no. 7810;
Iqd al-durar, pp. 2 & 28; Mahdī āl al-Rasūl, p. 19. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad
al-Ṣiddīq says in his book Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn: “As for the
tradition of Abū-Huraira, indeed it has been narrated from him through
various chains . . . He mentions the names of those as follows: Aḥmad,
ibn Abī Shaiba, ibn Māja, al-Ṭabarānī, al-Bazzār, Abū Ya\`lā, al-Ḥākim,
Abū-Nu\`aim in al-Ḥilya, al-Dāraqutnī in al-Ifrād, al-Daylamī in Musnad
al-firdaus, Abd al-Jabbār al-Khaulānī in Tārīkh dāriyā, ibn \`Asākir in
Tārīkh dimashq, al-Bayhaqī in Shu’ab al-īmān, al-Khaṭīb in al-Muttafiq
wa l-muftariq, etc.; Bayna yaday al-Sā’a, p. 114. I say: Apparently,
this tradition has a second part, perhaps something like his saying: “A
person from my Ahl al-Bait, his name will be my name,” or something
similar. He has not mentioned it completely because he has mentioned the
tradition after that of \`Āṣim from Zirr from \`Abd-Allah, and has
thought both of them are the same tradition. Surely, his saying: “If
there remains only one day from the world, Allah will prolong that day
until . . .” was at the beginning of the first tradition or under it.
Its contents are not unknown due to the repetition of these two
traditions. The chain of one of them ends at ibn Mas\`ūd and the other
at Abū Huraira.

[^5]: Al-Musnad, vol. 1, p. 376 and from the Dār al-Ma’ārif ed., vol. 5,
pp. 196–197, no. 3571. Aḥmad Muḥammad Shākir says: “Its chains of
narrators are correct (ṣaḥīḥ); \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 2, p. 29.

[^6]: Sunan al-Tirmidhī, vol. 4, p. 506, Kitāb al-fitan, chap. 53, p.
34, no. 2232; al-Tāj al-jāmi\` lil-uṣūl (Egypt: 1354 AH), vol. 5, p.
364; Musnad aḥmad, vol. 3, pp. 21–22, through his chains of narrators
from Abū Sa\`īd with minor variations. He has narrated, “So we asked the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
replied, ‘The Mahdī will rise in my Umma for five or seven or nine (the
doubt is from Zaid).” I asked, ‘What are these?’ He said, ‘Years.’ Then
he said, ‘The sky will pour rain on them [by Gods order]. The earth will
not conceal anything from its vegetation and wealth will be amassed. A
person will come to him and say, “O Mahdī! Give me, give me.” Then, as
much as he can carry will be put in his cloth’”; Al-Tadhkira, p. 616;
Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ, vol. 3, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā\`a,” sec. 2, p. 19, no.
5454; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 126;
al-Ṣawā\`iq al-muḥriqa, p. 163; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 273, no.
38701; Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, vol. 5, p. 118; Nihāyat al-bidāya wa l-nihāya,
vol. 1, p. 43; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 11, p. 237.

[^7]: In the tenth chapter, we have brought a section about the length
of his rule and the stability of the affairs at his hands. For more on
this, refer to volume 3.

[^8]: Sunan Abī Dāwūd, vol. 4, Kitāb al-Mahdī, no. 4284, p. 107; Sunan
ibn Māja, vol. 2, p. 34, Kitāb al-Fitan, no. 4086; Ma\`ālim al-sunan, p.
344; Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, vol. 1, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā’a,” p. 193; Jami\`
al-uṣūl, vol. 11, p. 49, no. 7812; Maṭālib al-su’ūl, vol. 2, chap. 12,
p. 127; Mukhtaṣar sunan Abī Dāwūd, vol. 6, p. 149, no. 4115; Mishkāt
al-maṣābīḥ, vol. 3, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā\`a,” sec. 2, no. 5453/17;
al-Munār al-munīf, p. 146, sec. 50, no. 334; al-Sunan al-wārida fī
l-fitan, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” no. 29, 34, and 19, with the
difference: “Mahdī is from the children of Fāṭima”; al-‘Arf al-wardī
(al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 124; al-Ṣawā\`iq al-muḥriqa, p. 161. He
says: “Similar to this is what has been recorded by Muslim, Abū Dāwūd,
al-Nisā’ī, ibn Māja, al-Bayhaqī, and others: “Mahdī is from my progeny
from the children of Fāṭima”; Firdaus al-akhbār, vol. 4, no. 4943, with
the wordings: “Mahdī is from the children of Fāṭima.” The researcher of
Firdaus al-akhbār writes: “The scholars have declared the traditions
about al-Mahdī as correct (ṣaḥīḥ) and have compiled exclusive books
about it. Most of the scholars have put these traditions under the
category of conceptual tawātur (al-mutawātir al-ma\`nawī).” Kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 264, no. 38662; Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, vol. 5, pp.
179–180; Is\`āf al-rāghibīn with the marginal notes of Nūr al-abṣār,
chap. 2, p. 145; Nūr al-abṣār, p. 186; al-’Idhā’a, p. 117; Nihāyat
al-bidāya wa l-nihāya, vol. 1, p. 40; al-Jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, vol. 2, p.
187, no. 9241; Kunūz al-ḥaqā’iq, vol. 2, p. 128; Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ,
vol. 2, pp. 463–464; al-Tāj al-jāmi\` lil-uṣūl, vol. 5, p. 364 and vol.
2, p. 187; Yanābī’ al-mawadda, pp. 430 & 432; al-Bayān (Mu’assisat
al-Hādī), chap. 2, p. 89; Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, p. 30;
al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, p. 89, no. 2; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 1, p. 15, which says: “Abū Dāwūd, al-Nisā’ī, al-Bayhaqī,
Abū \`Amr al-Dānī, ibn Māja, and Abū Amr al-Muqrī have recorded it in
their Sunan and ibn al-Munādī in Kitāb al-malāḥim; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p.
114, through two chains of narrators from Ummi Salma; Majma\` al-bayān,
vol. 7, p. 67, under the interpretation of the verse: “And indeed We
have written in the Psalms . . .” (Quran 21:105), from Abū l-Ḥasan
\`Ubaid-Allah b. Muḥammad b. Aḥmad, from Abū Bakr Aḥmad al-Bayhaqī, from
Abū \`Alī al-Rūdbārī, from Abū Bakr b. Dāssa, from Abū Dāwūd, through
his chains of narrators from Sa\`īd, from Ummi Salma; Mahdī āl al-Rasūl,
p. 4; Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, 8th ed., vol. 2, p. 464; the author of Ibrāz
al-wahm al-maknūn writes: “The tradition from Ummi Salma has been
recorded by Abū Dāwūd from the tradition of Abū l-Khalīl . . .”;
al-Fuṣūl al-muhimma, sec. 12, p. 294; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 438.

[^9]: Sunan Abī Dāwūd, vol. 4, p. 101, Kitāb al-Mahdī, no. 4285;
al-Mustadrak (India: Haydarābād, 1334 AH), vol. 4, p. 557; al-Tāj, vol.
5, p. 364, from Abū Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhī; Nūr al-abṣār, chap. 2, p.
154, from al-Tirmidhī, until his saying: “and oppression.” He says:
“Tirmidhī states that this tradition is established (thābit) and correct
(ṣaḥīḥ)”; Jāmi\` al-uṣūl, vol. 11, chap. 1, p. 49, no. 7813; Mukhtaṣar
sunan Abī Dāwūd, vol. 6, p. 160, no. 4116; Mukhtaṣar tadhkirat
al-Qurtubī, p. 615; Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ, vol. 3, chap. 2, sec. 2, no.
5454. Al-Albānī—the researcher of this book—says: “Its chain of
narrators is good (ḥasan)”; al-Munār al-munīf, sec. 50, p. 144, no. 330.
He writes: “Abū Dāwūd has narrated it with really good (jayyid) chains
of narrators.’; al-Nihāya or al-Fitan wa l-malāḥim, vol. 1, pp. 298–299;
Sharḥ al-maqāṣid, p. 307; al-Fuṣūl al-muhimma, sec. 12, p. 293; Kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 264, no. 38665; Mirqāt al-mafātīḥ, vol. 5, p.
180. Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, p. 30; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3,
p. 33, no.1; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 437; al-Jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, no.
9244; al-Ṭarā’if \`ani l-jam\` bayn al-ṣiḥāḥ al-sitta, p. 177, no. 278;
Nihāyat al-bidāya wa l-nihāya, p. 39; Lawā’iḥ al-anwār al-ilāhiyya, vol.
2, under “His appearance and character”; Maṭālib al-su’ūl, vol. 2, chap.
12, p. 127; al-Idhā\`a, p. 120; \`Awn al-ma\`būd, no. 4265; Ibrāz
al-wahm al-maknūn, p. 506; al-Bayān, chap. 8, p. 117, no. 1; \`Alāmāt
al-qiyāmat al-kubrā, p. 74; Bayna yaday al-sā\`a, pp. 111–112; Ashrāṭ
al-sā\`a, p. 254, Mahdī āl al-Rasūl, p. 9; al-Durr al-manthūr, vol. 6,
p. 57.

[^10]: Ṣaḥīḥ al-Bukhārī, vol. 2, Kitāb bad’ al-khalq, chap. “Nuzūl \`Īsā
b. Maryam”; Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, vol. 1, chap. “Nuzūl \`Īsā”; al-Sunan
al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 6, chap. “Mā jā’a fī nuzūl īsā,” no. 2;
Firdaus al-akhbār, vol. 3, no. 4916; Nūr al-abṣār, chap. 2, p. 154;
al-Bayān (Syria: Manshūrāt Mu’assisat al-Hādī), chap. 7, p. 112, through
his chain of narrators from Nāfi\` and he said: “This tradition is
correct (ṣaḥīḥ) with a consensus on its correctness from the tradition
of Muḥammad b. Shihāb al-Zuhrī; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 432; Kashf
al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 438; Maṭālib al-su’ūl, vol. 2, chap. 12, citing
al-Baghawī’s Sharḥ al-sunna; Sharḥ al-maqāṣid, vol. 1, p. 308; al-Fuṣūl
al-muhimma, sec. 12, p. 294; al-Burhān, chap. 9, p. 158, no. 4;
al-\`Umda, sect. on “What has been narrated about the Mahdī from the
texts of the Ṣiḥāḥ al-sitta, citing al-Jam\` bayn al-Ṣaḥīḥain and
al-Jam\` bayn al-ṣiḥāḥ al-sitta; Jāmi\` al-uṣūl, vol. 11, chap. 1, no.
7808. I say: There is no doubt that the Imam mentioned in this tradition
is the Mahdī—the caliph of Allah. Therefore, it has been mentioned in
Jāmi\` al-uṣūl in the chapter of “al-Masīḥ wa l-Mahdī,” in Ibn Ṭalḥa
al-Shāfi\`ī’s Maṭālib al-Su’ūl, ibn Ṣabbāgh al-Mālikī’s al-Fuṣūl
al-muhimma under “The Traditions About the Mahdī,” al-Muttaqī al-Hindī’s
al-Burhān in the ninth chapter about “The gathering of the Mahdī With
Jesus,” and al-Muqaddisī al-Shāfi\`ī’s \`Iqd al-durar in the tenth
chapter. It has been written in Ghāyat al-ma’mūl sharḥ al-tāj al-jāmi\`
lil-uṣūl: “It has already been mentioned that the Caliph in whose era
Jesus, peace be on him, will descend, is the Mahdī, may Allah be
satisfied with him.” Some traditions explain others, therefore, no
attention must be paid to the opinion of those who follow their internal
desires and view themselves knowledgeable and civilized by rejecting the
traditions about the Mahdī, al-Dajjāl, the life of Jesus and his descent
in the end of times, and also by refuting the miracles mentioned in the
Holy Quran with the help of absurd and false justifications. They say:
“The traditions about the Mahdī, peace be on him, have not been recorded
in the two Ṣaḥīḥs (of Bukhārī and Muslim).” As a result, those who have
no experience and knowledge about traditions, think that the traditions
that have reached us which are about the Mahdī, peace be on him—the
person who will rise in the end of times and will rule the earth, and
whom Jesus, peace be on him, will pray behind him, etc.—are merely
speaking of a title (that can be given to anybody). Thus, they think
that the belief of Mahdawiyya—on which the umma has consensus—revolves
only around granting a name or bestowing a title on this promised person
as the Mahdī. Hence, they say that: “this subject has not been mentioned
in the Ṣaḥīḥain.” They did not understand that the belief about this
promised person, who will rise in the end of times to give life to
religion, destroy falsehood, establish justice, and eradicate
oppression, is a belief based on a consensus (amongst the Muslims). As
for his titles, attributes, reformatory actions, etc., although there is
no source for these except narrations, there is no need for each
narration to comprise of all of these. Such is the case in everything
explained by the sharia, whether it be the principles of religion or the
divine laws. The belief that whatever is not recorded in the Ṣaḥīḥain
should not be relied upon is another act of defiance that has been
unanimously rejected by the scholars of ḥadīth (muḥaddithīn). The doors
of legal interpretation (al-ijtihād) are still vast open. No verse in
the Holy Quran and no tradition states that what has not been recorded
in the Ṣaḥīḥain is incorrect, just as no verse in the Holy Quran or
tradition exists that testifies that whatever has been recorded in them
is absolutely correct and reliable. We will soon reject such beliefs by
quoting what the author of Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn has said under the
tradition: “In the end of times there will be a caliph who will
distribute wealth without counting it.” Refer to tradition no. 383.

[^11]: Musnad aḥmad (Egypt: Dār al-Ma\`ārif), vol. 2, p. 58, no. 645 Its
chains of narrators are correct (ṣaḥīḥ) as has been testified by Aḥmad
Muḥammad Shākir in Sharḥ al-musnad, vol. 3, p. 58, no. 654; Sunan ibn
Māja, vol. 2, chap. 34, p. 23, no. 4085; al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan,
vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” no. 32; Firdaus al-akhbār, vol. 4,
no. 6942; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 264, no. 38664; al-\`Arf al-wardī
(al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 124; al-Maqāṣid, p. 435; ibn Kathīr,
al-Nihāya, vol. 1, p. 52; Faiḍ al-qadīr, vol. 5, p. 278; al-Taysīr, vol.
2, p. 258; Jam’ al-fawā’id, vol. 2, p. 734; al-Fatḥ al-rabbānī, 24/51,
No. 146; ibn Kathīr, al-Fitan wa l-malāḥim, vol. 1, p. 25, section
“dhikr al-Mahdī”; al-’Idhā’a, p. 117; Muntakhab kanz al-ummāl in the
marginal notes of al-Musnad, vol. 6, p. 30, also in Kanz al-\`ummāl;
al-Jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, vol. 2, p. 187, no. 9243; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, pp.
432 & 488; al-Ṣawā’iq al-muḥriqa under the 12th verse, p. 163; al-Bayān,
chap. 2, p. 100. He says: “Abū-Nu\`aim has recorded it in Manāqib
al-Mahdī and al-Ṭabarānī in al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr.” The latter says:
“These narrations are certainly true because (a) the chain of narrators
of some of these complement the others and (b) the great memorizers of
traditions have mentioned them in their books.”; al-Burhān, chap. 2, p.
89, no. 1, from Aḥmad, ibn Abī Shaiba, ibn Māja, and Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād
in al-Fitan; al-Tadhkira, p. 240. He says: “In a tradition narrated by
Ḥāfiẓ Abū l-Qāsim, the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, said: ‘The Mahdī is from us Ahl al-Bait. Allah, Mighty
and Glorified be He, will straighten out his [affairs] in one night’ or
he, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said, ‘in two days.’”;
\`Iqd al-durar, chap. 6, p. 135 and chap. 7, p. 158, with the difference
that he, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, said: “in a single
night.” He (author of \`Iqd al-durar) says: “A group of narrators have
recorded it in their books.” He goes on to mention them as Aḥmad, ibn
Māja, al-Bayhaqī, al-Dānī, Nu’aim b. Ḥammād, Abū-Nu\`aim al-Aṣbahānī,
and al-Ṭabarānī; Dhikru akhbāri Iṣbahān, vol. 1, p. 170; al-Durr
al-manthūr, vol. 6, p. 58; Tahdhīb al-tahdhīb, vol. 11, pp. 172–173;
al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. 11, p. 201, through his chain of narrators from
\`Alī, peace be on him, with the addition of: “Al-Mahdī is from us Ahl
al-Bait.” I say: From what can be judged from other traditions, perhaps
his saying: “Allah will straighten out his [affairs] in one night,”
points to the unknown time of his reappearance. Thus, Allah will prepare
the grounds of his government and rule in only one night after which he
will reappear.

[^12]: Sunan ibn Māja, vol. 2, p. 24; al-Fitan, chap. 34: “Khurūj
al-Mahdī,” no. 4087; Dhakhā’ir al-\`uqbā, p. 15, with the difference
that he said: “the sons’ of Abd l-Muṭṭalib” and “Ja\`far b. Abī Ṭālib.”
He mentions that “ibn al-Sarī has recorded it”; al-Fuṣūl al-muhimma,
sec. 12, p. 294; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), p. 124, with
the difference that he said: “We seven from . . .” He cites al-Ḥākim,
ibn Māja, and Abū-Nu\`aim; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, p. 144, with the
difference that he said: “We seven children of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib are the
masters (sādāt) of the dwellers of Paradise: I, my brother \`Alī, my
uncle Ḥamza, Ja\`far, al-Ḥasan, al-Ḥusayn, and al-Mahdī.” He says: “A
group from the leaders of narrators have recorded it in their books”;
Al-Ṣawā’iq al-muḥriqa, p. 158, under the 10th verse citing al-Daylamī
and others. It is the same as \`Iqd al-durar with the difference that he
said: “I, Ḥamza, \`Alī . . .”; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, pp. 309 and 435;
al-Bayān, chap. 3, p. 101; Maqtal al-Ḥusayn, vol. 1, sec. 6, p. 108;
Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 113; al-\`Umda, vol. 1, sec. 9, through his chain
of narrators from al-Tha’labī. It can also be found in its second
volume; Hāmish al-jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, vol. 2, p. 129, no. 5; Tahdhīb
al-tahdhīb, vol. 7, p. 321, no. 543; Lisān al-mīzān, vol. 3, p. 271;
Dhikru akhbāri Iṣbahān, vol. 2, p. 130, the same as what has been
mentioned in \`Iqd al-durar; Tārīkh baghdād, vol. 9, pp. 434 & 550;
Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 438 and vol. 1, p. 52, he says: “I saw in
another tradition: ‘We sons of \`Abd al-Muṭṭalib are the masters (sādāt)
of the people.’”

[^13]: Al-Mu’jam al-kabīr, vol. 18, p. 51, no. 91; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol.
11, pp. 183–184, no. 31144; Majma\` al-zawā’id, vol. 7, pp. 323–324;
Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 5, p. 404; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), which starts from his saying: “a fitna will occur . . .”
pp. 137–138.

[^14]: The words in the square brackets are mentioned in Majma\`
al-zawā’id and Kanz al-\`ummāl.

[^15]: Fitna usually refers to social unrest or rebellion, especially
against a ruler—Ed.

[^16]: Al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 328; al-Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 558; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 1, p. 16, which mentions: “Then a person from my progeny
will emerge. He will fill the earth with fairness and justice. He will
rule for seven or nine years.” (The author of \`Iqd al-durar) says:
“Al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū-Nu\`aim has recorded it like this in Ṣifāt al-Mahdī.
Al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī has also recorded it but with a little
difference: “A person from my progeny will rule for nine or seven years,
then, he will fill it with fairness and justice.”

[^17]: The words sab\` (seven) and tis\` (nine) in the ancient Arabic
Kūfī handwriting were displayed using the same word. When the scribes
copied these narrations and wrote them down in Arabic, they used both
words ‘nine’ and ‘seven’ because they didn’t know to what number the
original word referred to. The uncertainty in the numbers originated
from the scribes’ stringent attitude in correctly transmitting the
narrations from one book to another—Ed.

[^18]: Dhikr akhbāri Iṣbahān, vol. 1, p. 84; Farā’id al-simṭain, vol. 2,
p. 324, no. 574.

[^19]: Al-Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 465; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 4, sect. 1,
p. 43 and chap. 7, p. 141; Al-Ṣawā’iq al-muḥriqa, p. 161, under the
twelfth verse; Is’āf al-rāghibīn, p. 134; al-Bayān, chap. 6, p. 108;
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 341.

[^20]: Al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 37 and similar to it in p. 52; Kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, pp. 261 and 262, no. 38653. It starts like this: “I
give you glad tidings about the Mahdī; a man from the Quraish from my
progeny”; Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl in the marginal notes of al-Musnad,
vol. 6, p. 29, citing Aḥmad and al-Bārūdī; Is\`āf al-rāghibīn, chap. 2,
p. 137; Nūr al-abṣār, chap. 2, p. 155; Al-Ṣawā’iq al-muḥriqa, p. 164;
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 469; al-I\`lām bi ḥukmi \`Īsā \`alayhi al-salām,
p. 162 (8); \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 4, 7, 8 and 11, pp. 62, 156, 164, 166
and 237; al-Burhān, pp. 79–80, chap. 1, no. 21; al-Dur al-manthūr, vol.
6, p. 57; Farā’id al-simṭain, vol. 2, chap. 61, p. 310, no. 561;
al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 124; Ibrāz al-wahm
al-maknūn, p. 562, no. 31; Kashf al-ghumma fī ma\`rifat al-A’imma, vol.
2, p. 471.

[^21]: Firdaus al-akhbār, vol. 4, no. 6941; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, p.
148, citing al-Daylamī; Kunūz al-ḥaqā’iq under the section of Alif and
Lām; Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 258; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 94, p. 488;
Al-Bayān, in the chapter of Alif and Lām through his chain of narrators
from ibn Abbās; Nūr al-abṣār, chap. 2, p. 154; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2,
p. 481.

[^22]: Al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 17; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, p. 35. He
says: “It has been recorded by al-Imam Aḥmad in his Musnad and by
al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū \`Abd-Allah Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād in Kitāb al-fitan. I say: I
did not find it in al-Fitan, although, he has narrated it in a scattered
form in the chapter of Sīrat al-Mahdī wa ṣifatih wa nasabih wa qadr mā
yamlik; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 270, no. 38690, with the
difference: “He will rule the earth” and “it will be filled with
unfairness”; al-Dur al-manthūr, vol. 6, p. 57

[^23]: Al-Mustadrak, vol. 4, Kitāb al-fitan wa l-malāḥim, p. 557;
al-Musnad, vol. 3, p. 36; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, pp. 36–37.

[^24]: Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 15, p. 372, no. 1241.

[^25]: The statement between the square brackets belongs to the author
of Sharḥ al-akhbār.

[^26]: This paragraph probably belongs to the author of Sharḥ al-akhbār.

[^27]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 4, pp. 62–63; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī
ākhir al-zamān, chap. 2, p. 92, no. 12; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap.
1, p. 74, under: “‘What has been narrated from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, about the Qā’im, peace be on him,”
no. 23; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 448, al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 133.

[^28]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap.1, p. 16. He says: “al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū-Nu\`aim has
recorded it in Awālī and in Ṣifat al-Mahdī.” Also chap. 3, p. 34 and
chap. 8, p. 170; al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, chap. 19, p. 139,
no. 1, with the difference: “he will fill the earth with fairness and
justice.” He says: “al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū-Nu\`aim has recorded it in al-\`Awālī
exclusively from Ṭālūt b. Abbād, who is famous with us for his
narrations; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 423 from Jawāhir al-\`iqdain; Is\`āf
al-rāghibīn, sect. 2, p. 135.

[^29]: Sunan ibn Māja, vol. 2, book 36, chap. 34, p. 22, no. 4082;
al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fi l-Mahdī,” no. 1
& 2; al-Fitan, vol. 4, chap. 13, p. 166; al-Bayān, chap. 5, p. 106;
al-Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 464; Talkhīṣ al-mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 464;
Al-Ṣawā’iq al-muḥriqa, p. 162. The twelfth verse is similar to this and
he says at the end of it: “Then, he should go towards them even if he
has to crawl on ice because in it is Allah’s Caliph, the Mahdī”; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 5, p. 124; al-Munār al-munīf, sect. 50, p. 149, no. 341;
al-Nihāya or al-Fitan wa l-malāḥim, vol. 1, p. 28; al-\`Arf al-wardī
(al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 127.

[^30]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 198; al-Bayān, sect. 11, p. 125 with the
difference: “I asked, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Is the Mahdī from us—the
progeny of Muḥammad—or from other than us?’ The Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], replied, ‘No, he is from
us. Through us Allah will end the religion just as He began it through
us. Through us they will be freed from the fitnas.’” He also said, “Like
He has united by us,” and “in their religion” has not been mentioned. He
also said: “I say, ‘This is indeed a good (ḥasan) and great (\`ālin)
tradition which has been recorded by the narrators in their books.
Al-Ṭabarānī has recorded it in al-Mu’jam al-ausaṭ, Abū Nu\`aim has
narrated it in Ḥilyat al-auliyā, and Abd al-Raḥmān b. Abī Ḥātim has
mentioned it in \`Awālī just as we too have recorded it. Majma\`
al-zawā’id, vol. 7, p. 316; Al-Ṣawā’iq al-muḥriqa, p. 161, under the
twelfth verse. He says: “Mahdī is from us; through us Allah will seal
the religion just as He has commenced it through us”; \`Iqd al-durar,
chap. 1, pp. 24 & 142; Al-Mu\`jam al-ṣaghīr, vol.1 p. 137; al-\`Arf
al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 129; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14,
p. 598, no. 38682; \`Abaqāt al-anwār, vol. 2, p. 68, no. 12, who cites
Nu\`aim in al-Fitan; al-Ṭabarānī in al-Mu\`jam al-ausaṭ, Abū-Nu\`aim in
Kitāb al-Mahdī, and al-Khaṭīb in al-Talkhīṣ; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p.
491; Nūr al-abṣār, chap. 2, p. 155; al-Burhān, p. 91, no. 7.

[^31]: Sunan ibn Māja, vol. 2, chap. 11, pp. 928-929, no. 2779;
al-Bayān, chap. 1, p. 92 with the difference: “Allah will prolong that
day until he rules . . .”; Lawāmi\` al-\`uqūl, vol. 4, p. 3, from Aḥmad;
Sharḥ sunan al-Tirmidhī by ibn al-A\`rābī, vol. 9, p. 74; al-Tadhkira,
p. 619, and he says: “Its chains of narrators are authentic (ṣaḥīḥ )”;
Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 266, no. 3874; Farā’id al-simṭain, vol. 2,
p. 318, who has narrated it through his chain of narrators from Abū
Huraira like this: “The Hour will not be established until a person from
my house rules. He will conquer Constantinople (Istanbul) and the
mountain of Daylam. If only one day remains, Allah will prolong that day
until he conquers it”; al-Munār al-munīf, sect. 50, p. 147, no. 336,
similar to Farā’id al-simṭain; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 474, no. 36,
from al-Arba\`īna ḥadīthā (Forty Traditions) by al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim.

[^32]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, p. 33; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 124; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 448; Farā’id
al-simṭain (Beirut: Mu’assisat al-Maḥmūdī li l-Nashr), vol. 2, p. 330;
Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, pp. 469–470.

[^33]: Musnad aḥmad, vol. 3, p. 49, and similar to it on p. 60; Kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 263, no. 38659; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 131.

[^34]: Al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, chap. 10, p. 124; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 4, p. 62, and chap. 8, p.167, with a minor difference;
al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 133; al-Burhān, chap.
1, p. 84, no. 33, with a minor difference, and p. 83, no. 28.

[^35]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, pp. 259 & 445, with the difference: “and
when \`Alī dies.”

[^36]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, pp. 258 & 445.

[^37]: Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, vol. 8, p. 185; Tārīkh ibn \`Asākir, vol. 1, p.
186; al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “What has been
narrated about the Mahdī,” no. 23, through his chain of narrators which
are connected until they reach Jābir and its wordings are: “In the last
of my umma, there will be a caliph; he will give away wealth profusely
and will not even count it”; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 264, no.
38660; Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, vol. 2, p. 192, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā\`a”;
al-Bayān, chap. 10, pp. 122–123, no. 3; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, pp. 182 &
230, from Jābir; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 8, p. 161; Is\`āf al-rāghibīn,
chap. 2, p. 135; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 131;
Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ, vol. 3, book 27, no. (5) 5441. The author of Ibrāz
al-wahm al-maknūn (pp. 513–514)—in reply to those who criticize this
tradition on the bases that there is no mention of the Mahdī in it and
there is no argument to show that it refers to him—writes: “The text of
these traditions are ambiguous whilst the method for recognizing [the
Mahdī] is obvious and established . . .” I say: There is no doubt that
some traditions explain other traditions. Also, there is no doubt that
the person about whom glad-tidings have been given in the traditions,
who will fill the earth with justice and fairness, will give away wealth
profusely, and he who has signs, symbols, attributes and titles that are
known in the traditions that have been narrated in numerous chapters, is
only one person, not many. Hence, no one has thought it to be anyone
other than the Mahdī or thought that Jesus, peace be on him, will
perform prayers behind someone else. All these quotes point to his
magnificent character.

[^38]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. 8, p. 194; Ṣaḥiḥ Muslim, vol. 8, p. 158;
al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 134, with a slight
difference; Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn, p. 581, no. 98, the same as
al-\`Arf al-wardī.

[^39]: al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 134; Ibrāz
al-wahm al-maknūn, p. 581, no. 99.

[^40]: Musnad aḥmad, vol. 3, p. 96; \`Iqd al-durar, chap 8, p. 168,
citing Musnad aḥmad and Sunan al-dānī.

[^41]: Musnad aḥmad, vol. 3, p. 98; al-Burhān, chap. 1, p. 81, no. 24;
al-\`Arf al-wardī, p. 128; al-Nihāya or al-Fitan wa l-malāḥim, vol. 1,
p. 31.

[^42]: Musnad aḥmad, vol. 3, p. 317; al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol.
5, chap. “Mā jā’a fi l-Mahdī,” no. 23; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol.2, p. 128. He has narrated a similar tradition from
al-Bazzār, from Jābir; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 26, no. 38659; Ṣaḥīḥ
Muslim, vol. 8, p. 185, with a slight difference; Maṣābīḥ al-sunna, vol.
2, chap. “Ashrāṭ al-sā\`a,” p. 192; al-Tāj al-jāmi\` lil-uṣūl, vol. 5,
p. 342; Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, p. 31; Yanābī\` al-mawadda,
p. 230; Mishkāt al-maṣābīḥ, vol. 3, book 27, no. 5441 (5).

[^43]: Ṣaḥīḥ Muslim, vol. 8, p. 185; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 266,
no. 38672; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 8, p. 161; al-Tāj al-jāmi\` lil-uṣūl,
vol. 5, p. 341 (The Seventh chapter about the caliph, al-Mahdī). The
author of Ghāyat al-ma’mūl (a commentary on al-Tāj al-jāmi\`), says:
“According to the traditions that will be mentioned, this is the Mahdī,
may Allah be pleased with him. This act of his is because of the
abundance of war booties and victories along with his generosity and his
giving away goodness to all the people.”

[^44]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 1, p. 19, from Abū Nu\`aim in Ṣifat
al-Mahdī; al-Jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, under the letter Lām, vol. 2, p. 123;
Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 471, no. 22, citing al-Arba\`īn by al-Ḥāfiẓ
Abū Nu\`aim, with a little difference; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 186.

[^45]: Musnad Abī Ya\`lā, vol. 2, p. 356–357, no. 131 (1105).

[^46]: Tārīkh ibn \`Asākir (1329 H.), vol. 2, p. 62; Kanz al-\`ummāl,
vol. 14, p. 269, no. 38682, with a slight difference and p. 266, no.
38671; Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, pp. 30–31; al-Sīrat
al-Ḥalabiyya (Egypt: Maṭba\`atu Muṣṭafā Muḥammad), vol. 1, p. 227;
al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 134; al-Taṣrīḥ bi mā
tawātara fī nuzūl al-Masīḥ, p. 181, no. 27. He says: “Al-Nisā’ī has
narrated it and so has Abū Nu\`aim in Akhbār al-Mahdī. Al-Ḥākim and ibn
\`Asākir have narrated it in their Tārīkh with the following wordings:
“How can a nation that I am at its beginning be destroyed . . .,” which
is like [what has been narrated] in Kanz al-\`ummāl. This is a good
(ḥasan) tradition as has been stated in al-\`Azīzī’s al-Sirāj al-munīr.
He writes under it: “‘middle’ means ‘before the last’ because Jesus will
descend to kill the Dajjāl during the era of the Mahdī. Our master Jesus
will pray behind him just as it has been mentioned in the traditions.”
Al-Taysīr bi sharḥ al-jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, vol. 2, p. 302; Faiḍ al-qadīr,
vol. 5, p. 301; al-Sirāj al-munīr, vol. 3, p. 196; al-\`Arāyis
(Maṭba’atu \`Āṭif Wa Wuldih), p. 227, through his chain of narrators
from ibn \`Abbās with the difference: “Al-Mahdī from my Ahl al-Bait is
in the middle”; al-Jāmi\` al-ṣaghīr, vol. 2, p. 128 (under the letter
Lām); \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, p. 146. He says: “Imam Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal
has also recorded it in his Musnad and Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim has narrated it
in his \`Awālī. I say: I did not find it in the published edition of
Musnad Aḥmad although it is apparent that the tradition was recorded in
the copy he possessed. We can only rely on a copy in which the tradition
has been recorded; Tafsīr Rūḥ al-jinān, vol. 3, p. 158. He has narrated
it from al-Manṣūr, from his ancestors, from ibn Abbas, who said: “The
Mahdī from my Ahl al-Bait is in its middle.” Abū l-Futūḥ—the author of
Rūḥ al-jinān—has used this tradition to prove the existence of the
Mahdī, peace be on him, because it will not be correct if it is said
that “The Mahdī will exist in the end of times prior to the descent of
Jesus. Such an interpretation would make it necessary for the Mahdī not
to exist in the long period of time between the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family, and the descent of Jesus,
whilst glad-tidings have been given that he will be in the middle of
these two. I say: Yes, the umma is unanimous that Jesus, peace be on
him, will descend at the time of the reappearance of the Mahdī, peace be
on him, and during his universal government. Jesus will pray behind him
and assist him in achieving reformist goals, spreading justice, and
destroying unfairness, which has been clearly elaborated in mutawātir
traditions. Therefore, the belief that the Mahdī will be between them
will not hold true for anyone except the one who has been mentioned in
the Shia belief. Because the Mahdī was born in 255 AH and continues to
live and is sustained by Allah until he reappears by the command of
Allah, the Exalted, for the announcement of His Word. The middle is
understood by some commentators to show that the appearance of the
Mahdī, peace be on him, will be before the descent of Jesus. This is
definitely not the meaning of the tradition and here the middle and end
have the same meaning. Some sycophants—who were the servants and on the
pay-roll of the arrogant and devilish rulers—thought that this tradition
referred to the Mahdī who was one of the Abbasid caliphs. No explanation
is needed to show the wrongness of this view. Such innovations are
actually an insult to the lofty stature of the Seal of the Prophets,
Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, and the great
personality of the Prophet Jesus, and the divine successor-ship of Imam
Mahdī, peace be on him. Moreover, the mutawātir traditions which
describe the Mahdī, his attributes, and his signs, clearly reject such
misguided interpretations. There is no proof in the tradition that Jesus
will live after the Mahdī, peace be on him, in addition to the fact that
such an idea has also been contradicted by a number of traditions about
the Mahdī and other traditions like those about security (al-amān), etc.
It is possible to interpret the tradition like this: His saying: “I am
its first (awwaluhā)” means that he is its founder, chief, and source.
Thus, this umma will not be destroyed, because its founder and the
caller towards it is “a mercy for all the worlds” (raḥmatan
lil-\`ālamīn). A nation will not be destroyed if its founder possesses
such traits and this was the purpose of his dispatching? How can a
nation be destroyed that has the Mahdī in its middle? As long as he
exists and is alive, this nation will not be destroyed. Amongst the
greatest benefits of his existence—even though he is in occultation—is
the survival of the nation because of his existence. And how can a
nation be destroyed that has Jesus at its end, who will descend in the
end of times? This means that this religion will remain and last until
the descent of Jesus from the sky. He will descend in the last nation
and acknowledge this religion in this very world. We can conclude that
this narration serves to give glad-tidings about the lasting of this
religion, the continuous survival of this nation because of the
blessings of the Prophet of Islam, who is a mercy for the worlds, and
the existence of the Mahdī, peace be on him. This nation will not be
destroyed and will remain until the end of times because the descent of
Jesus—which is one of the conditions of the Hour—will occur in the last
nation. Hence, this nation will survive and remain, as long as humanity
exists on the face of earth. Allah, His Messenger, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family, and the possessors of knowledge—those from his
Ahl al-Bait who are steadfast in it—have more knowledge about the
meanings of the Book and the Sunna.

[^47]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, p. 148. He says: Imam Abū \`Abd
al-Raḥmān al-Nisā’ī has recorded it in his Sunan. I say: I could not
locate it in al-Mujtabā min Sunan al-Nisā’ī but this does not mean it
does not exist in his Sunan. In fact, there is no doubt about it being
present there.

[^48]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, p. 146. He says: Imam Abū \`Abd
al-Raḥmān al-Nisā’ī has recorded it in his Sunan; Bahjat al-naẓar, sect.
6, has recorded it from Sunan al-Nisā’ī in the chapter: “What has been
narrated about the Arabs and the non-Arabs” and this is its last
chapter; al-Taṣrīḥ bi mā tawātara fī nuzūl al-Masīḥ, pp. 247–250, no.
66, with a slight difference in the wordings and that he said: “But
between this will be a crooked group; they will not be from me nor will
I be from them.” He says in his commentary: “The Holy Prophet has
described them as a group, then distanced himself from them because of
their deviation from the way and path that he had brought.” I say: This
tradition praises the beginning of the nation and its end. The latter,
being the time when the universal government of the Mahdī appears, in
which Jesus will descend, stay amongst them, and pray behind Imam Mahdī,
peace be on him. Also, both versions condemn the majority of the nation
between these two eras. This is because of the domination of the kings
or those who call themselves the Caliphs. They will come to power and
rule without the permission and satisfaction of Allah. Apart from this
vast majority, there will be some who will wait for the reappearance of
Allah’s command and the establishment of the rightful government of
Allah’s Caliph, the Mahdī, peace be on him. They will not approve the
atrocities committed by these tyrant kings upon the people, will not
assist them in their tyrannies and sins, and will not gain closeness to
them or try to satisfy them, because of Allah’s wrath towards them.
These are none but the followers of the Imams from the Ahl al-Bait,
peace be on them. The same Imams that the tyrants tried to conceal their
virtues and what Allah had specially given to them and to destroy their
guidance and that of their followers. The crooked groups are the
majority which have left the clear path of the Ahl al-Bait and have not
held on to them. They have opposed the mutawātir traditions like ḥadīth
thaqalain, ḥadīth safīna, ḥadīth amān, etc. \`Alī al-Qārī writes in
al-Mirqāt, vol. 5, p. 658: “Traditions with chains of narrators like
this are called golden chained (silsilat al-dhahab).” Al-Mishkāt, vol.
3, p. 293; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 489; al-\`Umda, vol. 2, sect. “What
has been narrated about the Mahdī in the texts of Ṣiḥāḥ al-Sitta from
al-Jam’ bain al-ṣiḥāḥ al-sitta of Razīn al-\`Abdarī,” p. 224.

[^49]: ‘the most widest and deepest’ probably means they will have the
biggest population and will live the longest on earth—Ed.

[^50]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 490.

[^51]: Al-Istī\`āb, vol. 1, p. 223; al-\`Iṣāba, vol. 1, p. 216, no. 1037
(short version); Usd al-ghāba, vol. 1, p. 260: “After me, there will be
caliphs, after the caliphs there will be rulers, after the rulers there
will be oppressive kings; then, a person from my Ahl al-Bait will emerge
who will fill the earth with justice just as it will be filled with
injustice . . .”; \`Iqd al-durar, sect. 1, p. 19, which is the same as
Usd al-ghāba, with the difference: “Then, the Mahdī from my Ahl al-Bait
will emerge” and “Then he will rule.” He says: “Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim has
narrated it in al-Fawā’id and al-Ṭabarānī has recorded it in al-Mu\`jam.
I say: The beginning of the tradition of Al-Istī\`āb and Usd al-ghāba is
strange. Closer to it in strangeness is the note beneath the tradition
of Usd al-Ghāba. Thus they cannot be relied upon. One can only rely on
his saying: “The Mahdī—who is from my Ahl al-Bait—will emerge,” or, “a
man from my Ahl al-Bait will emerge who will fill the earth with justice
as it will be filled with injustice.” These can be found in many
mutawātir narrations. Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 265, no. 38667

[^52]: Al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, sect. 13, p. 129. He writes:
“This tradition is good (ḥasan). Praise be to Allah for bestowing this
upon us. The meaning of his saying “his morals will be my morals,” is
one of the best indications that the Mahdī, peace be on him, will take
revenge on those who do not believe in the religion of Allah— just as
the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, did. And
indeed, Allah—the Exalted—has said to His Prophet: “And surely, you are
on the greatest morals” (Quran 68:4). Al-Irbilī writes in Kashf
al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 486: “His comment, ‘is one of the best indications
. . . (to the end)’ is truly amazing! How can he confine the moral
attributes of the holy Prophet and only limit them to revenge?! While he
possesses all the attributes of the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him
and his family, like his nobility, honor, knowledge, forbearance,
bravery, and other morals that we have mentioned at the beginning of
this book. Even more shocking, is the endorsement of his view by using
the aforementioned verse!” Farā’id al-simṭain, vol. 2, pp. 325–326;
\`Iqd al-durar, sect. 2, pp. 31–32, from Abū l-Ḥasan al-Raba\`ī
al-Mālikī, with a little difference; al-Ghadīr, vol. 7, p. 126, citing
Zakhāīr al-\`uqbā, p. 126, with the following wording: “‘If there
remains only one day from the world, Allah will prolong that day until
He sends a person from my progeny; his name will be my name.’ Salmān
asked, ‘From which of your sons, O Messenger of Allah?’ He replied,
‘From this son of mine,’ then patted (Imam) al-Ḥusayn’s back, peace be
on him.”

[^53]: Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī
l-Mahdī,” no. 26; \`Iqd al-durar, sect. 1, p. 18. He writes: “Ḥāfiẓ Abū
Nu\`aim has recorded it in Ṣifat al-Mahdī.” On p. 20, he writes:
“Al-Imam Abū \`Amr al-Muqri’ has recorded it in his Sunan”; Mawārid
al-ẓam’ān, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” p. 463, no. 1876; Kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. vol. 14, p. 269, no. 38684, with a little difference;
Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, p. 31; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 123. He has recorded it from al-Ḥasan b. Sufyān
and Abū Nu\`aim. Al-Ḥasan b. Sufyān is al-Ḥasan b. Sufyān b. \`Āmir
al-Nasawī, the author of al-Musnad al-kabīr and al-\`Arba\`īn—who passed
away in 303 AH—as has been mentioned in Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ. Or (he
could be) al-Fasawī who also expired in 303 AH—as has been mentioned in
al-Lisān. Apparently, it is al-Nasawī and al-Fasawī is an error made by
the writer of the manuscript. Al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir
al-zamān, chap. 2, p. 92, no. 13, from al-Ḥasan b. Sufyān and Abū
Nu\`aim.

[^54]: Kashf al-yaqīn, p. 117; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 1, p. 2, from Kitāb
al-āl of ibn Khālawayh; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 7, chap. 32, sect. 2, p.
182, no. 7.

[^55]: Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr, vol. 10, no. 10215 and 10219; al-Sunan
al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” p. 96, no. 16;
Tadhkirat al-ḥuffāẓ, vol. 2, p. 487, with the difference: “The days and
the nights will not pass until the Arabs are ruled by a person from my
Ahl al-Bait; his name will be my name.”

[^56]: Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr, vol. 10, no. 10216; Mawārid al-ẓam’ān ilā
zawā’id ibn Ḥibbān, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” p. 464, no. 1877;
al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 125; Kanz al-\`ummāl,
vol. 14, p. 269, no. 38683 with a minor difference.

[^57]: Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr, vol. 10, no. 10227; Dhikr akhbār Iṣbahān,
vol. 1, p. 329. I say: al-Ṭabarānī has recorded numerous traditions
through his chain of narrators from ibn Mas\`ūd from the Holy Prophet,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family. You can refer to these
traditions which are numbered from 10213 to 10230.

[^58]: Al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 132; Farā’id
al-simṭain, vol. 2, chap. 61, p. 317, with the difference: “Allah will
send him in a clear manner and the nation will be blessed by him.”

[^59]: ‘correctly’ probably means ‘justly’—ed.

[^60]: Al-Fitan, pp. 192–193; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī),
vol. 2, p. 153, from Nu\`aim, with a little difference; al-Burhān, chap.
1, p. 78, no. 10, with a slight difference. He will fill the earth with
justice just as it will be filled with injustice. This will continue
until the people will no longer have their initial state; the sleeping
one will not be awakened and no blood will be shed.”

[^61]: Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 273, no. 38700.

[^62]: Dhikr akhbār Iṣbahān, vol. 2, p. 165.

[^63]: Al-Rauḍa min al-Kāfī, p. 396, no. 597; al-Wāfī, vol. 2, chap. 52,
p. 459, no. 977–9.

[^64]: Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn, p. 561.

[^65]: Al-Fitan, vol. 4, chap. 13, p. 167. I say: This flag which Allah
will send is not from the Abbasid flags, as has been clearly explained
by Nu\`aim in the title of the chapter: “The Black Flags of Mahdī [That
Will Come] After the Abbasid and Other Flags”

[^66]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 195.

[^67]: Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, pp. 592–595, no. 39679. Ibn al-Athīr
writes in al-Nihāya: “In the tradition of \`Alī: ‘Surely after you there
is a fitna and calamity that is tedious and frowning’, frowning means
people will frown from its intensity.” Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol.
6, p. 34.

[^68]: Al-Bayān wa l-tabyīn, vol. 2, p. 58; Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha, vol.
1, pp. 276 & 281, sermon 16; al-Mustarshid, p. 160.

[^69]: Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 13, p. 130, no. 36413; \`Abaqāt al-anwār,
vol. 2, p. 68, no. 12. He writes: “Ḥāfiẓ \`Abd al-Ghanī b. Sa\`īd has
recorded it in Īḍāḥ al-ishkāl.”

[^70]: Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha, vol. 1, pp. 281–282; Yanābī\` al-mawadda,
pp. 497–498.

[^71]: Al-Fitan by Nu\`aim, vol. 5, chap. 11, pp. 198–199.

[^72]: Al-Fitan by Nu\`aim, vol. 5, chap. 11, pp. 199–200.

[^73]: Al-Fitan by Nu\`aim, vol. 5, chap. 11, p 201; al-\`Arf al-wardī
(al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 155.

[^74]: Al-Fitan by Nu\`aim, vol. 5, chap. 11, p 201.

[^75]: Al-I\`lām bi ḥukm \`Īsā \`alayhi al-salām by al-Suyūṭī, published
in the collection of books titled: al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī, vol. 2, p. 289.
He says in Ma\`ālim al-sunan, vol. 4, p. 344: “Al-Shaykh says, al-jirān
is the beginning of the neck (the front part of the camel’s back); it’s
mainly referred to the camel when it stretches its neck on the earth.
Hence, it is said: The camel has stretched its neck. It does so when it
rests in a place for a long time.’ The stretching of the neck of the
camel is used as an example for Islam to indicate its establishment and
that there will neither be a fitna nor turmoil. Islamic laws will be
implemented justly and steadfastly.”

[^76]: Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 16, p. 196, under no. 44216.

[^77]: Murūj al-dhahab, vol. 1, pp. 42–44; Also, refer to Tadhkirat
al-khawāṣ, pp. 128–130, the 6th chapter about the selected sayings of
Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him. He has recorded
similar to this—with minor differences in wording and meaning—through
his chain of narrators from Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah al-Hāshimī, from Imam
Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, from Imam al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, from his father Amīr
al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on them.

[^78]: Nahj al-balāgha, trans. Sayed Ali Reza (Iran: Sayed Mujtaba
Musavi Lari Foundation), sermon 181; Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha by ibn Abī
l-Ḥadīd, vol. 10, sermon 183, p. 96.

[^79]: The sermon is a long one, the likes of which is not found except
in his speech or the speech of his cousin, the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family. Al-Raḍī has mentioned it
with all its length in Nahj al-balāgha.

[^80]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 74, pp. 438–439.

[^81]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 74, p. 438; Sharḥ al-dīwān, under the
letter al-Bā’, p. 166 I say: al-Dīwān is a name given to a collection of
poems attributed to Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī ibn Abī Ṭālib, peace be on
him. It has been published several times and one of its commentaries is
the commentary by al-Ḥusayn b. Mu\`īn al-Dīn al-Maybudī al-Ḥakīm al-Ṣūfī
(d. 870 AH) who was a Sunni. He writes in his commentary: “‘Our Qā’im’
means the one from us who will stand up for the affairs of religion and
he is the promised Mahdī who was mentioned in the seventh preface.” He
says in Persian what translates to: “The term ‘Master of Judgment Day’
(ṣāḥib al-qiyāma) has been used to refer to the Mahdī because Judgment
Day (al-qiyāma) will be established after his rule comes to an end.” He
then discusses a second reason for referring to him by this title by
saying that in the time of his rising and reappearance, hidden things
will become apparent and the realities will become manifest; hence, it
will be: “The day when the hidden things become manifest” (Quran 86:9).
I say: It is clear that qiyāma refers to the day of his rising because
of the following reasons: domination of the word of Islam, manifestation
of truth, and the filling of earth with justice and fairness.

[^82]: Al-Dīwān under the letter al-Lām, p. 371.

[^83]: Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 68, p. 406.

[^84]: Al-Muṣannaf by ibn Abī Shaiba, vol. 15, p. 23, no. 19000;
al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 210, with some variations; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol.
14, p. 557, no. 39591, with a little difference; Muntakhab kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, pp. 19–20; refer to al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, chap. 37,
sect. 3, p. 176 and chap. 181, sect. 1, p. 80; Nahj al-balāgha, sermon
258. Ibn Abī l-Ḥadīd writes in Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha: “This narration is
from the narrations about bloody battles which he, peace be on him, has
informed of and has mentioned the Mahdī.” Ibn al-Athīr says in
al-Nihāya: “And from it is what \`Alī, [peace be on him], said: ‘They
will gather around him like the gathering of the scattered clouds of
autumn.’ Here, autumn is specifically mentioned because it is the
beginning of winter and the clouds are scattered in it, neither piled up
nor in layers. After that, some of them integrate with others.”

[^85]: This might refer to the testimony of ‘there is no God but Allah,’
as can be inferred from the previous footnote—Ed.

[^86]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 3, p. 38 and chap. 1, p. 23–24 (short
version). I say: In the published edition of \`Iqd al-durar, p. 23, it
is mentioned, “\`Alī looked at al-Ḥasan.” The researcher of the book
says: “In the original [narration] it was ‘al-Ḥasan’ and ‘al-Ḥusayn’ has
been mentioned by mistake.” You should know that what the researcher has
said is wrong and it is up to him to prove what has been mentioned in
the original narration. The oldest manuscript that we have access to and
have seen is present in al-Raḍawiyya Library (Kitābkhāniyi Āstān Quds,
no. 1752), dated 942 AH, and it is not the manuscript that the
researcher has relied on. The one used by the researcher is also
available in al-Raḍawiyya Library with the Serial no. 1751, dated 953
AH. We saw that ‘al-Ḥusayn’ was mentioned in the tradition of Abū Wā’il
and in the tradition of Abū Isḥāq which he has been mentioned on p. 39
after the current tradition. Anyhow, the oldest manuscripts of this book
are two: The first is the manuscript that bears the year 910 AH and
belongs to the Berlin Library, with serial no. 2723. This is the
manuscript which the researcher has regarded as the original. Yet, he
uses other manuscripts when this manuscript is not in conformity with
his opinions. The second manuscript is the one in the al-Raḍawiyya
Library with the serial no. 1752/185, which is probably older than the
Berlin manuscript and al-Ḥusayn has been clearly mentioned in it.
Moreover, it is apparent from the book al-Mahdī that in the manuscript
which al-Ṣadr possessed, the term ‘al-Ḥusayn’ has been used. The
correctness of the view about al-Ḥusayn is further endorsed by the many
mutawātir traditions recorded by us in this book and other books—some of
which we have narrated from Sunni sources. For example, in the narration
which speaks about al-Ḥasanī handing the affairs over to the Mahdī,
peace be on him, he says: “O paternal cousin (yabn al-\`am)! This
belongs to you.” It is also mentioned in this tradition that “he is from
the descendants of Fāṭima and the progeny of al-Ḥusayn, peace be on
them. Beware! Whoever accepts other than him as his master, will be
cursed by Allah.” Refer to \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 4, sect. 2, pp. 90, 99,
137, and 138; and al-Burhān, chap. 1, pp. 76,77, no. 15

[^87]: Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, chap. 17, pp. 116–117. He has recorded it
from the book Uyūn akhbār Banī-Hāshim, by Muḥammad b. Jarīr al-Ṭabarī,
the famous historian.

[^88]: Quran 4:54.

[^89]: Quran 64:7.

[^90]: Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, sect. 2, pp. 117–118.

[^91]: Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī
l-Mahdī’,” no. 4.

[^92]: Al-Iḥtijāj, “The Arguments of the Prophet on the Day of Ghadīr,”
pp. 66–84.

[^93]: Al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 6, p. 144,
no.8, from the published version that was copied from the manuscript of
Ḥaram al-Makkī that was finished by its writer Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan
al-Rashīdī in 1272 AH and from the hand-written manuscript that was
copied by al-Sharīf al-Sayyid Muḥammad Bāqir al-Sabziwārī from the
hand-written script preserved in the Library of the Holy Shrine of the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, in
Medina and the third manuscript is in the al-Jāmi\` Library (A\`ẓam
Mosque) that was established and built by our master Ayatullah
al-Burūjirdī, may Allah reward him with the best of rewards on behalf of
Islam and the Muslims. It has been recorded in Kashf al-astār, sect. 2,
p. 164, with the difference: “When a person says ‘Allah,’ he will be
killed. Then, Allah will gather for him like the gathering of clouds in
autumn; Allah will unite their hearts. They will neither submit to
anybody nor will they be recognized by anybody. They will be equal to
the number of the soldiers of [the battle of] Badr.” He says: “Al-Ḥāfiẓ
Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Ḥākim has recorded it in al-Mustadrak and has said:
“This tradition is correct (ṣaḥīḥ) based on the criteria set by of
al-Bukhārī and Muslim, but they have not recorded it [in their Ṣaḥīḥs].”
The author of Kashf al-astār continues: “It is worth mentioning that his
saying, ‘He will emerge in the end of times (ākhir al-zamān),’ then
counted with his hand to nine, shows the nine names from the progeny of
al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him. When he reached Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan, peace be
on him, he said, ‘He will emerge in the end of times,’ and this is a
clear comment from him that the Mahdī is the ninth descendant from the
progeny of Imam al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him. Thus, they should be aware.”
I say: This is an acceptable interpretation and there is no harm in it.
In the published copy of al-Mustadrak and its summary (vol. 4, p. 554)
and similarly in \`Iqd al-durar (chap. 4, sect. 1 p. 59, and chap. 5, p.
131) it has been written ‘seven’ instead of ‘nine’ and you will not find
a proper interpretation for this. Hence, it is better to leave the
interpretation to those who have knowledge about it. In these
manuscripts, it is difficult to understand the meaning of the tradition
unless we assume that ‘seven’ refers to the years of his kingdom and
rule. Of course it is more probable that the three available handwritten
manuscripts of al-Burhān and the handwritten manuscript of al-Mustadrak,
from which the author of Kashf al-astār has recorded the tradition, are
correct. Allah knows the best. This idea is supported by what some Sunni
scholars have mentioned. Muḥammad b. Pāyandi al-Sāwī, in his
treatise—which is a manuscript, dated 979 AH, and is an appendix to the
book al-Burhān—writes: “I have seen in history books that one day
Muḥammad b. Ḥanafiyya came to \`Alī, peace be on him, and asked, ‘When
will the Mahdī appear?’ He replied, ‘It is far!’, then he counted nine
with his hand and said, ‘In the end of times.’”

[^94]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 1, p. 26.

[^95]: Musnad Abī Ya\`lā, vol. 12, p. 19, no. 825 (6665); Majma\`
al-zawā’id, vol. 7, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Mahdī,” p. 315; al-Maṭālib
al-\`āliya, vol. 4, p. 343, no. 4554; Ibn Khaldūn’s al-Muqaddama, p.
379; Ibrāz al-wahm al-maknūn, p. 577; al-\`Arf al-wardī, (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 131, to his saying: “five and two”. I say:
Apparently, his saying “And what is five and two?” is the question of
the narrator from Abū Huraira or other than him from one of the other
narrators. It is not unlikely that his saying “to the truth,” marks the
end of the narration and the two questions were in fact from the
narrators who were asking each other. Allah knows the best.

[^96]: Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, p. 572, no. 39635.

[^97]: Musnad Abī Ya\`lā, vol. 2, pp. 356–357, no. 131 (1105); Similar
to it can be found in Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, no. 38703, from Abī
Ya\`lā and ibn \`Asākir.

[^98]: Al-Fitan, vol. 1, pp. 19–20; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 138, He says: “Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād has recorded it
in his book al-Fitan through a reliable chain of narrators in accordance
with the criteria set by Muslim.

[^99]: Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Mā jā’a fī
l-Mahdī,” p. 99, no. 3; Al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2,
p. 138, from ibn Sa\`īd and ibn Abī Shaiba.

[^100]: Al-Sunan al-wārida fī l-fitan, vol. 6, chap. “Mā jā’a fī nuzūl
\`Īsā,” p. 142, no. 5; Al-\`Arf al-Wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2,
p. 162; al-Taṣrīḥ bi mā tawātara fī nuzūl al-Masīḥ, p. 274, no. 5.
Tradition no. 4 and 6 which have been narrated from Jābir are similar to
it.

[^101]: Al-Fitan, vol. 4, p. 167, which we mentioned it under no. 409.

[^102]: Al-Fitan, vol. 4, p. 168.

[^103]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 172, and similar to it p. 168, no. 1.

[^104]: Al-Fitan, vol. 4, p. 168; al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, chap. 102, p.
55.

[^105]: Nahj al-balāgha, sermon 100, ibn Abū al-Ḥadīd writes while
explaining this sermon (vol. 7, p. 93): “Know that Amīr al-Mu’minīn,
peace be on him, delivered this sermon on the third Friday after he
became the caliph.” While explaining his saying, “Until Allah brings out
for you one who will gather you together and unite you after your
separation,” he writes, “that person [who will unite them] is from the
Ahl al-Bait, and refers to the Mahdī who will emerge in the end of
times” (vol. 7, p. 94). Under his saying: “Allah has completed his
obligations upon you . . . ,” he writes: “He then informs them about the
closeness of relief (faraj) and says, ‘Allah perfects his obligations
upon you and what you hope for is near—as if it has already occurred.’
This is like the divine promise about the establishment of the Hour. All
the Holy Books have explicitly declared that it is nearn even though it
is far from us and in Allah’s knowledge, all far things are near. He,
Glory be to Him, declares, ‘Surely, they deem it to be far while We
consider it to be near’ (Quran 70:6–7).”

[^106]: Sharḥ nahj al-balāgha by ibn Maitham, vol. 3, p. 9. He has
mentioned this tradition while explaining his saying: “Allah has
completed his obligations upon you,” and says: “What he has said is an
indication of Allah’s bestowal upon them by the appearance of the
Awaited Imam and the reformation of their condition by his presence.” He
then writes, “I have seen in the course of some of his sermons a section
in which he foretells the events that will occur after him—in addition
to explaining this promise. This is what he said, ‘O people! Be aware .
. . ,’” which is what we mentioned in the text.

[^107]: Al-Durr al-manthūr, vol. 4, p. 215; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, pp.
141–142; al-\`Umda, pp. 223–224; al-Burhān, chap. 1, p. 87, no. 44;
al-Ṭarā’if, p. 84; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 105, no. 40 and
vol. 39, chap. 17, p. 150, no. 14.

[^108]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 4, sect. 3, pp. 110–111; Al-Irshād, p.
385, through his chain of narrators from Saif b. \`Umaira; Ghaybat
al-Shaykh, pp. 265–266; Rauḍat al-Kāfī, p. 178, no. 255, from Saif.

[^109]: Al-Ṣadūq, al-Amālī, session 63, p. 328, no. 2.

[^110]: Al-Ṣadūq, al-Amālī, session 92, p. 504, no. 4; Al-Faiḍ,
al-Nawādir, the book of al-Nubuwwa wa l-imāma, chap. 41, p. 70; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, pp. 65–66, no. 3.

[^111]: Al-Ṭūsī, al-Amālī, vol. 2, p. 126; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, p. 68, no. 9; al-Nawādir, chap. 46, with some differences.

[^112]: In the narration, the term ‘pieces of liver’ has been used
instead of ‘treasures.’ Treasures have been likened to ‘pieces of the
liver’ and this is indeed an amazing metaphor. For, the liver is one of
the most vital organs of the body and so are the treasures of the earth.
This is what Sayyid al-Raḍī has mentioned in his book Majāzāt al-āthār
al-nabawiyya, no. 231.

[^113]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 178, no. 135; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, pp. 72 and 74, no. 22; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p.
502, no. 291.

[^114]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 179, no. 137; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, p. 74, no. 24; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 502, no.
293.

[^115]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 180, no. 138; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, p. 74, no. 25; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 502, no.
294.

[^116]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 182, no. 141; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, p. 75, no. 28; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 503, no.
297.

[^117]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 185, no. 144; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, p. 75, no. 29; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 503, no.
300.

[^118]: Al-Ṣadūq, al-Amālī, session 74, p. 396; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 6, p. 143, no. 3; al-Ṭūsī, Al-Amālī, vol. 1, part 7, p. 182, no.1:
“Through his chain of narrators from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from Abān, from
Ismā\`īl al-Ju\`fī who recounts, ‘A person came to (Imam) Abū Ja’far
Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, and with him was a page of questions
which were like [arguments for use in] a dispute. (Imam) Abū Ja\`far,
peace be on him, said to him, ‘This is a page which disputes the
religion by which Allah accepts the deeds.’ He replied, ‘May Allah have
mercy on you! This is what I intend!’ (Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on
him, said, ‘Testify that there is no god except Allah, He is Alone and
has no partner, and that Muḥammad is His servant and Messenger.
Acknowledge what he has brought from Allah and the Mastership (wilaya)
of us Ahl al-Bait and express hatred toward our enemies and submit to us
with humility and contentment and await our rule, because surely for us
is a government that will come if Allah wills.’”

[^119]: Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 235, sect. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,’ no.
6. Traditions with the same meaning have also been narrated in pp. 223,
224, and 226.

[^120]: Dalā’il al-imāma, sect. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,” pp.
239­–240, no. 15; \`Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā, vol. 2, p. 60, no. 230.

[^121]: Dalā’il al-imāma, sect. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,” pp. 249–250,
no. 41.

[^122]: Dalā’il al-imāma, sect. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,” p. 255, no.
54.

[^123]: Dalā’il al-imāma, sect. “Ma\`rifat wujūb al-Qā’im,” pp. 256–257,
no. 57.

[^124]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 188, no. 149; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 6, p. 146, no. 16; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 504, no.
305.

[^125]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, pp. 397–398, no. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 27, p. 230, no. 22.

[^126]: Al-Mufīd, al-Irshād, p. 340, no. 1; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 8,
sect. 2, p. 330; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 50, chap. 2, p. 21, no. 7.

[^127]: This refers to the mother of Imam Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā,
peace be on him. She was from the city of Nūbiyya and was called Sabīka.
“The son of the best lady from the city of Nūbiyya” does not refer to
our master Imam al-Mahdī, peace be on him, as is suggested by the author
of al-Wāfī, who writes, “It refers to the Mahdī, the Master of Time,
Allah’s blessings be on him. It seems he has been attributed to his
grand-mother, the mother of Imam Abū Ja\`far al-Thānī, peace be on him .
. .” He has reached this conclusion by relying on the manuscript of
al-Kāfī. Apparently, the following statement has been deleted from it:
“From his progeny will be the driven-away (al-ṭarīd), the wanderer
(al-sharīd)”. The manuscript of al-Irshād clarifies the meaning.

[^128]: Nafas al-mahmūm, pp. 242–243. It is worth mentioning that the
book al-Kāmil, has been written in Persian and it mentions the
translation of the Imam’s sermon, Al-Kāmil, vol. 2, pp. 299–302.

[^129]: Maqātil al-ṭālibīn, p. 143; Dalā’il al-imāma, sect. “Ma\`rifat
wujūb al-Qā’im,” p. 234, no. 5.

[^130]: Al-Amālī (known as al-Amālī al-khamīsiyya), vol. 2, p. 83.

[^131]: Qurb al-isnād, pp. 13–14.

[^132]: Kāmil al-ziyārāt, chap. 14, p. 52, no. 10.

[^133]: This word is used to refer to someone who has no hair on the
sides of his forehead.

[^134]: Mukhtaṣar baṣā’ir al-darajāt, p. 18; Īqāḍ al-ḥaj\`a, chap. 9, p.
282, no. 100.

[^135]: The ‘Day of Returning’ is the Day of Raj\`a and it is the day
about which Allah, the Exalted, says: “And on the day when We will
gather from every nation a group from among those who reject Our signs,
then they will be held in ranks” (Quran 27:83). On this day, only a
group from the deniers and a group from the believers will be gathered.
This has been mentioned in detail in mutawātir traditions. As for the
Day of Judgment, then on that Great Day, all the people will be raised
without exception as has been announced by Allah, the Exalted: “and We
will gather them and leave not any one of them behind” (Quran 18:47),
and His saying: “On that day people will come in scattered groups to be
shown their deeds” (Quran 99:6), “The day in which people will be like
scattered moths” (Quran 101:4), “On the day that you will see every
breast-feeder forgetting about what she was breast-feeding, and every
pregnant female will drop her fetus, and people will be drunk but (in
fact) they are not drunk, and the punishment of Allah will be severe”
(Quran 22: 2). The clear verses that describe the Day of Judgment are
indeed numerous and so are the verses that refer to the ‘Day of
Returning.’. These two groups of verses can be separated by pondering in
their style and wordings. Indeed, traditions narrated from the
infallible Imams, peace be on them, have also distinguished between
these two groups of Quranic verses. One must never consider the return
of the dead to this world as improbable, because such things have
already happened by the miracles of the divine Prophets and Allah, the
Exalted, has informed us about them in the following verses: “Or like
the person [\`Uzair] who passed by a town and its [walls] had fallen
down upon its roofs . . . So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years
then raised him to life” (Quran 2:259), and: “Did you not see those who
deserted their homes for fear of death, and they were thousands, then
Allah said to them, ‘Die’ and then He gave them life [again]” (Quran
2:243), and in the story of Ayyūb: “Then We responded to him and removed
what was harming him, and We gave him his family and the like of them
with them” (Quran 21:84). Moreover, prominent Sunni scholars like ibn
Mardawayh and others have narrated from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, that the Companions of the Cave
(aṣḥāb al-kahf) will return to this world when the Mahdī rises. We must
always remember that surely Allah is powerful over all things. The
belief in Mahdawiyya and the faith in Raj\`a are not two things that are
inseparable. The importance of believing in Raj\`a is not like the
importance of believing in Mahdawiyya about which the entire Muslim
nation has consensus about, and which has reliable traditions from both
the sects to support it. In this book, we intend to establish the belief
in the Awaited Mahdī, peace be on him, and explain it and elaborate on
it. The matter of Raj\`a—in addition to the fact that its position is
unlike that of Mahdawiyya—has no role in proving the belief in
Mahdawiyya. Discussions about Raj\`a, investigations concerning it, and
its details must be debated elsewhere.

[^136]: Al-Mustarshid, pp. 186–187.

[^137]: Sunan Abī Dāwūd, vol. 2, “Kitāb al-Mahdī,” pp. 208–209; al-Tāj
al-jāmi\` lil-uṣūl, “Kitāb al-fitan wa \`alāmāt al-sā\`a,” vol. 5, chap.
7, p. 344. The author of Ghāyat al-ma’mūl (printed in the marginal notes
of al-Tāj) writes: “In the end of times a righteous person will emerge
from Mā Warā al-Nahr. His name will be Ḥārith. He will have a great army
that will be led by a great person whose name will be Manṣūr. This man
will prepare the ground for the seed of Muḥammad. He will prepare the
army, the reserves, and the wealth to help the caliph who will appear
and he will be the Mahdī. Just like the companions who prepared the
ground for the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him [and his
family]. It is compulsory for every believer to help this army and this
caliph because both are [on the path] of truth.”

[^138]: \`Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā, vol. 2, chap. 35, p. 131, no. 13.

[^139]: Al-Khiṣāl, chap. “Seventy and Beyond,’ pp. 578–579, no. 1. The
entire tradition with the chain of narrators and text has been mentioned
on pp. 572–581.

[^140]: Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 14, p. 360, no. 1227.

[^141]: Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 15, p. 388, no. 1265.

[^142]: Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 15, p. 390, no. 1267.

[^143]: Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 15, p. 393, no. 1270.

[^144]: Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 14, p. 359, no. 1224.


