Section Forty-Seven
===================

The traditions that indicate Allah, the Exalted, will make him perform
the miracles of the Prophets to complete His Proof (itmām al-ḥujja) on
the enemies. With him are the inheritances of the Prophets and the
banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family

Comprised of fifteen traditions

736. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^1]: Informed us Abū Sulaimān Aḥmad b. Haudha,
from Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq al-Nahāwandī, from \`Abd-Allah b. Ḥammād
al-Anṣārī, from Abū l-Jārūd Ziyād b. al-Mundhir, from (Imam) Abū Ja\`far
Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, who said:

When the Qā’im reappears, he will have with him the banner of Allah’s
Messenger, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, the ring of
Solomon, and the stone of Moses and his staff. Then, he will order his
announcer to declare, “Know that none of you should carry any food,
drink, or fodder.” His companions will say, “He wants to kill us and our
animals with hunger and thirst.” He will travel and they will travel
with him. The first place at which they stop, he will strike the stone
[of Moses] and from it will come out food, drink, and fodder. They will
eat and drink and so will their animals, until they reach Najaf—at the
back of Kūfa.

737. Al-Amālī by Shaykh al-Mufīd[^2]: Informed me Abū l-Qāsim Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad b. Qūlawayh, may Allah have mercy on him, from his father, from
Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, from ibn Abī
\`Umair, from \`Abd-Allah b. Muskān, from Bashīr al-Kunāsī, from Abū
Khālid al-Kabulī, from (Imam) \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, who
said:

O Abū Khālid! Soon, a fitna will arrive which is like the darkness of
night. No one will be saved except those from whom Allah has taken his
covenant. They are the lamps of guidance and the sources of knowledge.
Allah will save them from every dark fitna. As if I am standing with
your master on top of your [city], Najaf, behind Kūfa along with about
three hundred and ten men; Jabra’īl (Gabriel) is on his right and
Mīkā’īl (Michael) is on his left and Isrāfīl is in front of him. He has
with him the banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, which he has spread. He will not approach any group
with this banner but that Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will destroy
them.

738. Al-Ghayba by Faḍl b. Shādhān[^3]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad
b. Abī Naṣr, may Allah be satisfied with him, from Ḥammād b. \`Īsā, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Abī Ya\`fūr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah Ja\`far b.
Muḥammad, peace be on him, who said: “There won’t remain a miracle from
the miracles of the Prophets and their heirs but that Allah, Blessed and
High be He, will manifest its like at the hands of our Qā’im to complete
the proof against the enemies [of Allah].”

739. Al-Kāfī[^4]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Salmat b. al-Khaṭṭāb, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad, from Manī\` b. al-Ḥajjāj al-Baṣrī, from
Mujāshi\`, from Mu\`allā, from Muḥammad b. al-Faiḍ, from (Imam) Abū
Ja\`far, peace be on him, who said:

The staff of Moses belonged to Adam, peace be on him, then it was
transferred to [the Prophet] Shu\`ayb who gave it to Moses son of Amram
(\`Imrān). Now, it is with us and I recently looked at it. Its [color]
is green like its form when it was plucked from the tree and it speaks
when spoken to. It has been prepared for our Qā’im, peace be on him.

He will do with it what Moses did. It will frighten [the enemies], will
devour their deceptions, and will do what it is ordered. Whenever it
comes forward to devour their deceptions, it will open its jaws: One jaw
will be on the ground and the other overhead. The distance between
[these two] will be [the length] of forty arms (dhirā\`). It will eat
their deceptions with its tongue.”

740. Al-Kāfī[^5]: Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn, from
Mūsā b. Sa\`dān, from \`Abd-Allah b. al-Qāsim, from Abū Sa\`īd
al-Khurāsānī, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, from (Imam)
Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, who said:

When the Qā’im rises at Mecca and intends to go towards Kūfa, his
announcer will call out, “No one should carry with him food or drink.”
He will carry with him the stone of Moses, son of Amram (\`Imrān) which
can hardly be carried by a camel. They will not stop at any place except
that a spring will flow from [the stone]. Whoever is hungry will be
satiated and whoever is thirsty will be quenched. It will be their
provision until they stop at Najaf [located] at the back of Kūfa.

741. Kamāl al-dīn[^6]: Through this chain of narrators (meaning ibn
al-Walīd from al-Ṣaffār, from Ya\`qūb, from ibn Abī Umair, from Abān b.
\`Uthmān), from Abān b. Taghlib, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be
on him, who said:

It is as if I am seeing the Qā’im, peace be on him, in the outskirts of
Najaf. When he reaches Kūfa, he will mount a dark piebald horse which
has a white stripe between his eyes. The horse will shake him [or he
will move the horse] and there will not remain a city but that its
inhabitants will think that he is with them in their city. When he
spreads the banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him and his family, thirteen thousand and thirteen angels will descend
upon him who were all awaiting the Qā’im, peace be on him.

They are the same [angels] who were with Noah, peace be on him, in the
Ark, with Abraham, the friend (khalīl) of Allah, peace be on him, when
he was thrown in the fire, and with Jesus, peace be on him, when he was
taken up [to the sky]. [These angels will be joined by] four thousand
marked angels—who will follow one-another in rows—and the three hundred
and thirteen angels from the Battle of Badr and the four thousand angels
who had descended to fight alongside al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, peace be on
him, but were not given permission and they ascended to seek permission
[from Allah] but when they descended, al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, had
already been martyred. They are in a disheveled state and dusty and will
cry beside al-Ḥusayn’s grave, peace be on him, until the Day of
Judgment. Between the grave of Imam al-Ḥusayn and the sky is the pathway
of the angels.

742. Kamāl al-dīn[^7]: Through the same chain of narrators from Abān b.
Taghlib, from Abū Ḥamza al-Thumālī who said:

(Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, said, “It is as if I am looking at
the Qā’im, peace be on him, who has appeared at Najaf. When he appears
at Najaf, he will spread the banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, whose pole is [made] from the pillar
of the Throne of Allah, the Exalted. The rest of it [is made from] the
Assistance of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He. He will not desire to
approach with it anyone except that Allah, the Exalted, will destroy
him.” I asked, “Is it already with him or will it be brought for him?”
He replied, “It will be brought for him and Gabriel (Jabra’īl), peace be
on him, is the one who will bring it for him.”

743. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^8]: Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Sa\`īd b. \`Uqda,
from Muḥammad b. al-Mufaḍḍal b. Ibrāhīm, Sa\`dān b. Isḥāq b. Sa\`īd,
Aḥmad b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Abd al-Malik, and Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan
al-Qaṭawānī, all of them from al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb, from \`Abd-Allah b.
Sinān, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, who said:

The staff of Moses is a stick from a myrtle (al-ās) [tree] grown in
Paradise. Gabriel (Jabra’īl), peace be on him, brought it for him when
he wanted to go to [the city of] Midian (Madyan). This [staff] and the
casket of Adam are in the lake of Tiberias (Ṭabariyya)[^9] and will
never decay nor change until the Qā’im, peace be on him, brings them
both out when he rises.

744. Kāmil al-ziyārāt[^10]: Narrated to me al-Ḥusayn b. Muḥammad b.
\`Āmir, from Aḥmad b. Isḥāq b. Sa\`d, from Sa\`dān b. Muslim, from
\`Umar b. Abān, from Abān b. Taghlib, who said:

(Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him, said: “It is as if I am with
the Qā’im at Najaf [near] Kūfa while he is wearing the armor of the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family. He will
shake [the armor] and it will fit [on his body]. Then, he will cover it
with a howdah made of brocade and will mount a dark-colored horse
between whose eyes there will be a white stripe. The horse will shake in
such a way that there will not remain the inhabitants of a city but that
they will think that he is with them in their city. He will spread the
banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, whose pole is from the pillars of the Throne (al-\`Arsh), and
the rest of it is [made from] Allah’s Assistance.

He will not desire to approach with it against anyone except that Allah,
the Exalted, will destroy him. When he waves it, there will not remain a
believer but that his heart will become like a slab of iron. Each
believer will be given the strength of forty men. There will not remain
a [deceased] believer but that this [event] will make him joyful in his
grave. They will visit each other in their graves and will give
glad-tidings to each other about the rise of the Qā’im. Then, thirteen
thousand three hundred and thirteen angels will descend upon him.”

I asked, “Are they all angels?” He answered, “Yes. They are the angels
who were with Noah in the Ark, those who were with Abraham when he was
thrown in the fire, those who were with Moses when he split the sea for
the Israelites, and those who were with Jesus when Allah took him up
towards Himself. [These will be joined by] four thousand marked angels
who were with the Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family,
with another one thousand—who follow one another row after row—and the
three hundred and thirteen angels of [the Battle of] Badr. [These will
be accompanied by] the four thousand angels who had come down to fight
alongside (Imam) al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him, but were not granted
permission to fight.

They are at his grave in a disheveled state and dusty, crying for him
until the Day of Judgment. The chief of these angels is an angel called
Manṣūr. No pilgrim (zā’ir) will visit his grave except that they will
welcome him, no one [from the pilgrims] departs but that they will bid
him farewell; or becomes ill but that they will visit him; or dies but
that they will pray on his body and seek forgiveness for him after his
death. All of them are on earth, awaiting the rise of the Qā’im until
the time of his appearance, Allah’s blessings be on him.”

745. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^11]: \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. \`Abd-Allah b. Yūnus,
from Muḥammad b. Ja\`far al-Qurashī, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Abī
l-Khaṭṭāb, from Muḥammad b. Sinān, from Ḥammād b. Abī Ṭalḥa, from Abū
Ḥamza al-Thumālī who said:

(Imam) Abū Ja\`far, peace be on him, said to me, “O Thābit[^12]! It is
as if I am with the Qā’im from my Ahl al-Bait while he is looking at
Najaf—and he pointed with his hand towards Kūfa. When he looks at Najaf,
he will spread the banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings
be on him and his family. When he spreads it, the angels from [the
Battle of] Badr will descend on him.”

I asked, “What is the banner of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family?” He replied, “Its pole is from the
pillar of the Throne of Allah and His Mercy. The rest of it is [made
from] the Assistance of Allah. He will not desire to approach anyone
with it but that Allah will make him perish.” I asked, “Is this flag
concealed with you until the Qā’im, peace be on him, rises or will it be
brought for him?” He replied, “It will be brought for him.” I asked,
“Who will bring it for him?” He answered, “Gabriel, peace be on him.”

746. Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī[^13]: Muḥammad b. Hammām, from Aḥmad b.
Mābundādh, from Aḥmad b. Hilāl, from Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from Abū
l-Maghrā’, from Abū Baṣīr, from (Imam) Abū \`Abd-Allah, peace be on him,
who said:

When Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, faced the people of Baṣra
[during the Battle of Jamal], he spread the banner—the banner of the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family—due to
which their feet started trembling. The sun had hardly become yellow
[i.e. was beginning to set] when they said, “We surrender, O son of Abū
Ṭālib!”

At this juncture, he declared, “Don’t kill the captives, don’t finish
off the wounded, and don’t pursue the fleeing ones. Whoever puts down
his weapon is safe and whoever shuts the door [of his house] is safe.”
When the day of [the Battle of] Ṣiffīn came, [his soldiers] asked him to
spread the banner but he refused. They tried to persuade him [to do
this] through (Imams) al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, peace be on them, and
\`Ammār b. Yāsir, may Allah be satisfied with him. So he said to
al-Ḥasan, “O my son! For this group is a time which they will reach
(muddatan yablughūnahā); no one after me will spread this banner except
the Qā’im, Allah’s blessings be on him.”

747. Al-Fitan[^14]: Narrated to us Yaḥyā b. al-Yamān, from Qays, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Sharīk who said: “With the Mahdī is the banner of the
messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, which is
the victory-bringer (al-mighlaba).”

I say : There were narrations from Ka\`b al-Aḥbār which were suitable
for this section, but we didn’t mention them because we didn’t need
them. The following traditions also establish the above concept: 373,
555, and 1213.

[^1]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 13, p. 238, no. 28; Ḥilyat al-abrār,
vol. 2, chap. 19, p. 579.

[^2]: Al-Amālī, session 5, p. 45.

[^3]: Kifāyat al-muhtadī (al-Arba\`īn), p. 141, no. 37; Kashf al-Ḥaqq
(al-Arba\`īn), p. 67, no. 13; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, sect.
7, p. 700, no. 137, citing Faḍl b. Shādhān’s book.

[^4]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. “The things from the signs of the prophets
that are with the Imams,” p. 231, no. 1; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap.
32, p. 439, no. 2; Baṣā’ir al-darajāt, part 4, chap. “What is with the
Imams from the weapons of the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be
on him and his family . . .,” p. 183, no. 36; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
pp. 27, 318, and 319, no. 90; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 58, p. 674,
no. 27; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 19, p. 578.

[^5]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. “What is with the Imams from the signs of
the prophets, peace be on them,” p. 231, no. 1; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2,
chap. 19, p. 579; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 58, pp. 670–671, no. 17,
with some differences; Kashf al-ḥaqq, p. 207, no. 37, which is a short
version and has variations in the chain of narrators; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 324, no. 37, with minor differences in the wording
and the chain of narrators; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 6, chap. 32, p. 351,
no. 3.

[^6]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 58, pp. 671–672, no. 22; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 325, no. 40; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2,
chap. 44, p. 642 (short version); Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p.
493, no. 244–245 (short version).

[^7]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 58, p. 672, no. 23; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 326, no. 41; Al-Nawādir, chap. 66, p. 182; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 493, no. 245 (short version).

[^8]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 13, p. 238, no. 27; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 351, no. 104; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32,
sect. 27, pp. 540–541, no. 508; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 19, pp.
579–580.

[^9]: A city in Palestine on the Western shore of the Sea of
Galilee—Trans.

[^10]: Kāmil al-ziyārāt, chap. 41, pp. 119–120, no. 5; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, p. 328, no. 48, and chap. 27, p. 391, no. 214, citing the
aforementioned book and mentioning a similar tradition; Dalā’il
al-imāma, p. 243, with differences in some of the words; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 493, no. 244 (short version); al-\`Udad
al-qawiyya, p. 74.

[^11]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 19, pp. 308–309, no. 3; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 27, pp. 361–362, no. 130; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol.
3, chap. 32, pp. 545–546, no. 534.

[^12]: Thābit is Abū Ḥamza al-Thumālī’s name—Ed.

[^13]: Ghaybat al-Nu\`mānī, chap. 19, p. 307, no. 1; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 52, chap. 27, p. 367, no. 151; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32,
pp. 544–545, no. 532.

[^14]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 191.


