Section Forty-Nine
==================

The traditions that indicate he will lead (the prayers) for Jesus, son
of Mary, and Jesus will follow him in prayers

Comprised of thirty-six traditions

756. Al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān[^1]: Al-Ḥāfiẓ Yūsuf informed us
at Aleppo[^2], from al-Qāḍī Abū l-Makārim, from [Abū l-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad]
Abū \`Alī al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad, from al-Ḥāfiẓ [Abū l-Faraj] Abū Nu\`aim,
from Abū l-Faraj al-Iṣbahānī, from Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan b. Shu\`ba, from
his father, from Ḥaṣīn b. Mukhāriq, from al-Khalīl b. Laṭīf, from Abū
Hārūn al-\`Abdī, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who said: “From us is the
one behind whom, Jesus, son of Mary, will pray.”

[The author of al-Bayān says] al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim has recorded it in
his book Manāqib al-Mahdī \`alayhi al-salām.

757. Ghāyat al-ma’mūl[^3]:

The Mahdī will turn his face [towards] Jesus, son of Mary— who will have
descended. It will be is as if water is dripping from [Jesus’] hair. The
Mahdī will say to him, “Come forward and lead the prayers for the
people.” He will reply, “The prayers have been established for you.” So,
[Jesus] will pray behind a person from my descendants and he is the
Mahdī.

758. Al-Fitan[^4]: From more than one person, from Ḥammād b. Salma, from
\`Alī b. Zaid, from a person, from \`Abd-Allah b. \`Amr: “The Mahdī is
the one that Jesus, son of Mary, will descend in his presence and will
pray behind him—peace be on them.”

759. Al-Fitan[^5]: Narrated to us Abū Usāma, from Hishām, from Muḥammad
who said: “The Mahdī is from this nation. He is the one who will lead
the prayers for Jesus, son of Mary—peace be on them.”

760. Al-Muṣannaf[^6]: Narrated to us Abū Usāma, from Hishām, from ibn
Sīrīn that “The Mahdī is from this nation. He is the one who will lead
the prayers for Jesus son of Mary.”

761. Al-Fitan by Abū Ṣāliḥ al-Salīlī[^7]: Narrated to us al-Ḥasan b.
\`Alī, from Sufyān b. Sa\`īd al-Thaurī, from Manṣūr b. al-Mu\`tamir,
from Raba\`ī b. Khirāsh, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings
be on him and his family, who mentioned a long tradition about the
unrests (fitan) that will occur and said: “Triumphant is that nation
from whom I am the first and Jesus is at its end. [Jesus] will pray
behind a person from my descendants . . . (to the end of the
narration).”

762. Al-Durr al-manthūr[^8]: Ibn Abī Shaiba, Aḥmad, al-Ṭabarānī, and
al-Ḥākim have recorded the (following) tradition and have regarded it as
authentic (Ṣaḥīḥ): From \`Uthmān b. Abī l-\`Āṣ, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said:

. . . Jesus will descend at the time of the morning prayers (ṣalāt
al-fajr). The commander of the people will say to him, “Come forward, O
Spirit of Allah, and lead the prayers for us.” He will reply, “Surely,
you from the people of this nation, some of you are commanders of
others. You come forward and lead the prayers for us.”

Thus, [the Mahdī] will go forward and will lead the prayers. When he
finishes, Jesus will take his spear towards the Antichrist (al-Dajjāl).
When he sees him, he will melt like the melting of lead. Then, he will
pierce between his breasts with his spear and will kill him and then he
will defeat his followers. On that day, nothing will give cover to [the
Antichrist’s followers]—to such an extent that the stone will call out,
“O believer! Here is a disbeliever, kill him.” And the tree will call
out, “O believer! Here is a disbeliever, kill him.”

763. Sunan ibn Māja[^9]: Narrated to us \`Ali ibn Muḥammad, from \`Abd
al-Raḥmān al-Muḥāribī, from Ismā’īl b. Rāfi\` Abī Rāfi\`, from Abī
Zur\`a al-Shaibānī Yaḥyā b. Abī \`Amr, from Abū Umāma al-Bāhilī who
said:

The Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family],
gave a sermon to us and most of his sermon was about the Antichrist
(al-Dajjāl) and he cautioned us about him . . . He continued the
narration until he said, “And their Imam will be a righteous man. When
their Imam goes forward to lead the morning prayers, Jesus, son of Mary,
will descend in the morning. Then, the Imam will withdraw a bit—walking
backwards—so that Jesus would come forward to lead the prayers for the
people. On [seeing] this, Jesus will place his hand [on the Imam’s back]
between his shoulders and say to him, ‘Go ahead and pray! The prayers
have been established for you.’ So, their Imam will lead the prayers for
them . . .”

764. \`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt[^10]: From the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family . . . who informed about the
emergence of the Mahdī who is the seal of the Imams, who will fill the
earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled with
unfairness and injustice. That Jesus will descend upon him at the time
of his emergence and reappearance and will pray behind him. [The author
of \`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt says,] “This is a report on which the Shias,
scholars, non-scholars, the Sunnis, the elite, the masses, the old, and
the children are all unanimous and agree to due to its fame.”

765. \`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt[^11]: From Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “I swear by the One in Whose Hands is my life! The Mahdī of this
umma—behind whom Jesus will pray—is from us; then, he patted the
shoulder of Imam al-Ḥusayn with his hand and exclaimed, ‘From him, from
him.’”

766. Al-Tafḍīl[^12]: Some of the Shias and also some of the Sunni
traditionists (muḥaddithīn) have recorded that

When the Mahdī appears, Allah, the Exalted, will send down Jesus upon
him and they will come together. When the time of the compulsory prayers
comes, the Mahdī will say to Jesus, “Come forward, O Spirit of Allah”
suggesting that he should lead the prayers. The Christ will reply, “No
one is allowed to precede you Ahl al-Bait.” So the Mahdī will go forward
and the Christ will pray behind him, peace be on them both.

767. Ḥāshiyatu fatḥ al-mubīn[^13]: One narration mentions that he will
descend after the Mahdī has commenced the prayers. He will go back a bit
so that Jesus may lead the prayers. Jesus will place his hand between
his shoulders and say to him, “You go ahead.” Before narrating this
tradition [the author of the book] says, “His descent will occur at the
time of the morning prayers.”

768. Anwār al-tanzīl[^14]: It has been narrated that

Jesus will descend at a mountain pass in the Holy Land called Afīq. In
his hand will be a lance by which he will kill the Antichrist
(al-Dajjāl). Then, he will come to Bait al-Maqdas while the people are
busy with the morning prayers. The Imam will withdraw but Jesus will
stand back and will pray behind him in accordance with the sharia of
Muḥammad, blessings and peace be on him.

\`Alī b. Burhān al-Dīn al-Ḥalabī al-Shāfi\`ī writes in al-Sīrat
al-Ḥalabiyya, “[Jesus’] descent will be at the time of the morning
prayers. He will pray behind the Mahdī after the Mahdī says to him,
‘Come forward, O Spirit of Allah!’ and he will answer, ‘You go ahead,
for indeed, the prayers have been established for you.’”

Similar to the above has been recorded in Rūḥ al-bayān under the saying
of Allah, the Exalted, “And surely, it is a knowledge of the Hour”
(Quran 43:61). Similar to it has also been mentioned in Tafsīr
al-kashshāf.

It has been recorded in Tafsīr rūḥ al-ma\`ānī that “It is famous that
his descent will take place at Damascus while the people are busy with
the morning prayers. On his arrival, the Imam—and he is the Mahdī—will
withdraw a bit but Jesus will want him to lead the prayers and will pray
behind him saying, ‘It has been established for you.’”

Al-Suyūṭī—while refuting the claim of those who deny that Jesus will
pray behind the Mahdī, peace be on him, because a Prophet’s position is
so great that he cannot pray behind a non-Prophet—writes in al-I\`lām bi
ḥukmi \`Īsā \`alayhi al-salām, “This is extremely amazing! The praying
of Jesus behind the Mahdī is proved beyond doubt in a number of
authentic traditions based on the news of the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], who is the truthful and
the verified whose prophecies no one can refute . . . ” He then proceeds
to mention some of these traditions and then says, “I am not surprised
by their denial [because they are claiming something] they do not know,
rather, I am amazed at them for writing these claims in pieces of paper
which will remain forever after they have passed away.”

769. Tafsīr al-Qummī[^15]: My father narrated to me, from al-Qāsim b.
Muḥammad, from Sulaimān b. Dāwūd al-Minqarī, from Abū Ḥamza, from Shahr
b. Ḥaushab who said:

Al-Ḥajjāj said to me, “A verse from the Book of Allah has exhausted me.”
I asked, “O Emir! Which verse is it?” He replied, “‘And there is no one
from the people of the Book (ahl al-kitāb) but that he will most
certainly believes in him before his death’ (Quran 4:159). By Allah, I
summon the Jews and the Christians and [order] their heads to be chopped
off. Then, I carefully observe them with my own eyes but I do not see
them moving their lips until they die.”

I said, “May Allah redeem the Emir! The verse is not as you have
interpreted it.” He said, “Then how is it?” I answered, “Jesus will
descend to the world before the Day of Judgment. Then, no one will
remain from the nation of the Jews and Christians except that he will
believe in him before his death and [Jesus] will pray behind the Mahdī.”
He said, “Woe to you! Where have you got this from? What is your
source?” I answered, “Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. \`Alī
b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, informed me.” He exclaimed, “By Allah,
You have brought this narration from a pure source.”

770. \`Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā[^16]: Tamīm b. \`Abd-Allah b. Tamīm
al-Qurashī, may Allah be satisfied with him, from his father, from Aḥmad
b. \`Alī al-Anṣārī, from al-Ḥasan b. al-Jahm who said:

One day, I went to al-Ma’mūn’s court and (Imam) \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā,
peace be on him, was with him. The jurists and dialecticians from
various sects had gathered there and one of them asked [the Imam], “O
Son of Allah’s Messenger! How can a person’s claim of Imamate be
verified?” He replied, “By divine text (al-naṣṣ) and reasons . . . (and
the narration continues until he said,) Whoever claims divinity for the
Prophets, or claims prophethood for the Imams, or claims Imamate for
others other than the Imams, then we dissociate ourselves from such a
people in this world and the hereafter.”

At that point, al-Ma’mūn said, “O Abū l-Ḥasan! What is your opinion
about the Return (al-raj\`a)?” (Imam) al-Riḍā, peace be on him,
answered, “Verily, it is the truth. It occurred in the previous nations
and the Quran has talked about it. The Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family, has said, ‘Whatever has occurred in
the previous nations will occur in this nation in the exact same
manner.’” Then, he continued, “When the Mahdī from my descendants
emerges, Jesus, son Mary, peace be on him, will descend and will pray
behind him.”

771. Al-Burhān fī tafsīr al-Quran[^17]: From ibn Bābawayh, through his
chain of narrators from Mu\`ammar, from Imam Abū \`Abd-Allah (al-Ṣādiq),
peace be on him, in a long tradition from the Holy Prophet, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family, who said: “From my progeny is the
Mahdī. When he emerges, Jesus, son of Mary, will descend to help him and
will ask him to lead [the prayers] and will pray behind him.”

The traditions which encompass this concept are too many to be listed
here and the chapter will become too long if they are all mentioned. The
following traditions also prove the above concept: 118, 153, 219, 284,
327, 361, 399, 429, 530, 539, 553, 582, 668, 669, 910, 1066, 1071, 1081,
1083, and 1105.

[^1]: Al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, chap. 7, p. 116; Kanz
al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, chap. 266, no. 38673. He has recorded it from Abū
Nu\`aim in the Book al-Mahdī from Abū Sa\`īd; Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl,
vol. 6, p. 30; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 54, p. 706, no. 73;
al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 9, p. 158, no. 1.

[^2]: A city in Syria with the Arabic name of Ḥalab—Trans.

[^3]: Al-Ṭabarānī, Ghāyat al-ma’mūl (Sharḥ al-tāj al-jāmi\` lil-uṣūl),
vol. 5, p. 365; Is\`āf al-rāghibīn, p. 147, and he says, “Similar to
this [has been recorded] in ibn Ḥibbān’s Ṣaḥīḥ, in Imāmat al-Mahdī”;
al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 158: “From Abū \`Amr
al-Dānī in his Sunan, from Ḥudhayfa, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “The Mahdī will
turn . . . (to the end of the tradition)”; al-Ṣawā\`iq al-muḥriqa, under
the twelfth verse from the verses which are about [the Ahl al-Bait,
peace be on them], p. 164, citing al-Ṭabarānī and Ṣaḥīḥ ibn Ḥibbān;
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chaps. 73 and 85, pp. 433 & 469; Jawāhir
al-\`iqdain, sect. 2, under no. 8, from Ḥudhayfa. He says: “al-Ṭabarānī
has recorded it, and in ibn Ḥibbān’s Ṣaḥīḥ similar to it has been
recorded from the tradition of \`Aqabat b. \`Āmir about the Imamate of
the Mahdī; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 9, p. 160,
no. 9, citing Abū \`Amr al-Dānī’s Sunan; Ḥilyat al-abrār, vol. 2, chap.
54, p. 719, no. 121 (short version) from Mu\`jam al-Ṭabarānī and Abū
Nu\`aim’s Manāqib al-Mahdī.

[^4]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 200.

[^5]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “Nisbat al-Mahdī,” p. 200; Ḥilyat
al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 54, p. 719, no. 123; Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap.
78, p. 449.

[^6]: Ibn Abī Shaiba, al-Muṣannaf, vol. 5, “Kitāb al-Fitan,” p. 198, no.
19495; al-I\`lām bi ḥukm \`Īsā \`alayhi al-salām (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī),
vol. 2, p. 299; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 135.

[^7]: Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, chap. 83, p. 153, from what he has recorded
from Abū Ṣāliḥ al-Salīlī’s al-Fitan.

[^8]: Al-Durr al-manthūr, vol. 2, p 243; al-I\`lām bi ḥukmi \`Īsā
\`alayhi al-salām (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 298; Majma\`
al-zawā’id, vol. 7, chap. “Mā jā’a fī l-Dajjāl”, p. 342; Musnad Aḥmad,
vol. 4, pp. 216–217, similar to it; al-Taṣrīḥ bi mā tawātara fī nuzūl
al-Masīḥ, pp. 162–164, no. 12; al-Mustadrak, vol. 4, p. 478.

[^9]: Sunan ibn Māja, vol. 2, pp. 1359–1362, no. 4407; Sunan Abī Dāwūd,
vol. 4, p. 117; Ṣaḥīḥ ibn Khuzayma (Manuscript); al-Mustadrak, vol. 4,
p. 536, and al-Dhahabī has endorsed it Talkhīṣ al-mustadrak; Fatḥ
al-bārī, vol. 6, pp. 358 and 450, and vol. 13, pp. 83–84, 87–88, and 93;
Tafsīr ibn Kathīr, vol. 1, p. 581; al-Taṣrīḥ bi mā tawātara fī nuzūl
al-Masīḥ, pp. 142–156, no. 13; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 10, p. 231; Ḥilyat
al-auliyā’, vol. 2, p. 712, no. 94 (short version), and vol. 6, p. 108;
al-I\`lām bi ḥukm \`Īsā alayhi al-salām (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 3, p.
298; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 9, p. 160, no. 6;
Nūr al-abṣār, p. 188. I say: This tradition does not clearly state that
Jesus will pray behind the Mahdī—peace be on them—but this meaning is
apparent from the context of similar traditions and also the current
tradition; because Jesus’s turning away from the congregational prayers,
not praying behind him, and praying along with the Muslims is highly
improbable. It seems as if the narration has been summarized and only
the details have been mentioned.

[^10]: \`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt, p. 141.

[^11]: \`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt, p. 64.

[^12]: Al-Tafḍīl, p. 24.

[^13]: Ḥāshiyatu fatḥ al-mubīn (Egypt: 1307 AH), p. 76; Ḥilyat al-abrār,
vol. 2, chap. 54, p. 712, no. 94, citing al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū \`Abd-Allah.

[^14]: Anwār al-tanzīl (under the saying of Allah, the Exalted, ‘And
surely, it is a knowledge of the Hour’ [Quran, 43:61]), vol. 2, p. 370;
al-Sīrat al-Ḥalabiyya (Egypt: Maṭba\`atu Mustafa Muḥammad), vol. 1, p.
226; Rūḥ al-bayān and al-Kashshāf under the mentioned verse; Rūḥ
al-ma\`ānī, vol. 25, p. 95; al-I\`lām bi ḥukm \`Īsā \`alayhi al-salām
(al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, pp. 297–299. I say: It has been mentioned
in some Sunni traditions that Jesus—peace be on our Prophet, his family,
and him—will kill the Antichrist (al-Dajjāl), whilst reliable traditions
narrated from the Ahl al-Bait, peace be on them, clearly establish that
it is the Mahdī, peace be on him, who will kill the Antichrist (see vol.
3, section 7, chap. 7). It is possible to reconcile between these two
traditions by considering the verb killing as passive or by supposing
that he will assist the Mahdī in killing him or he will undertake the
task of killing him by the order of the Mahdī.

[^15]: Tafsīr al-Qummī, vol. 1, p. 158, under verse 4:159; Al-Majlisī,
al-\`Arba\`īn, p. 411, no. 28, similar to it from \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn,
peace be on him; Tafsīr al-Ṣāfī, vol. 1, p. 411; Tafsīr nūr
al-thaqalain, vol. 1, p. 473; Tafsīr al-burhān, vol. 1, p. 426; Ḥilyat
al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 34, p. 619; al-Maḥajja, p. 62; Majma\` al-Bayān,
vol. 2, p. 137. Regarding this verse, he says: “There are numerous views
about this verse. Some say both the pronouns refer to Jesus. In other
words, no one from the People of the Book—the Jews and the
Christians—will remain but that they will believe in Jesus before Jesus’
death, when Allah sends him to the earth at the time of Mahdī’s
reappearance in the end of times to kill the Antichrist (al-Dajjāl).
Consequently, all the nations will be united [under one religion] and
that will be the true religion of Islam, the religion of Ibrāhīm; ibn
Abbās, Abū Mālik, al-Ḥasan, Qatāda, and ibn Zaid [have said] that is
when becoming faithful will not benefit them; al-Ṭabarī also has this
view and he has said, ‘This verse is specifically for those who will
live in that era.’ \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm has mentioned in his Tafsīr that his
father has narrated from Sulaimān b. Dāwūd al-Minqarī . . . (he then
mentions the tradition).”

[^16]: \`Uyūn akhbār al-Riḍā, vol. 2, chap. 46, pp. 200–202, no. 1. I
say: In this noble tradition the Return (raj\`a) has been mentioned.
Authentic and mutawātir traditions from the Ahl al-Bait prove it
conceptually and synoptically. The Holy Quran also establishes it. For
example, “And on the day that We will gather from every nation a party
from among those who rejected Our signs, then they will be formed into
groups” (Quran 27:83). There is no doubt that the day is not the day of
the great rising (qiyamat al-kubrā) because in that day all the nations
will be raised as Allah, the Exalted, says, “And We will gather them and
will leave none of them behind” (Quran 18: 47). A group of the early
scholars have written exclusive books to prove it. Therefore, it is
compulsory to believe in it in general without the details mentioned in
the singular (āḥād) traditions except what has been proved through
mutawātir narrations or by other means which one can become certain.
What he means by “the Quran has spoken about them” are the verses of the
Quran that have spoken about it. For instance, the saying of Allah, the
Exalted, “Or like the one who passed by a town and it had fallen down
upon its roofs. He said, ‘When will Allah give it life after its death?’
So Allah took his life for a hundred years, then raised him [to life
again]” (Quran 2:259), and His saying, “Have you not considered those
who abandoned their homes for fear of death—and they were thousands—then
Allah said to them, ‘Die’ then He gave them life [again]” (Quran 2:243),
and His saying to Jesus, peace be on him, “and you give life to the dead
by My permission” (Quran 5:110), and His saying, Mighty and Majestic be
He, about the chosen ones from the people of Moses for the meeting of
his Lord, “Then We raised you up after your death so that you might be
thankful” (Quran 2:56), and His saying in response to the supplications
of Job (Ayyūb), “Therefore We answered [his prayers] and took off what
harm he had, and We gave him his family and the like of them along with
them” (Quran 21:84). All such discussions concerning raj\`a, views about
it, questions about it and their answers, and its occurrence in the end
of times are dealt with in exclusive books written on the subject like
Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 53, chap. 29, pp. 39–144 and al-Majlisī,
al-Arba\`īn, pp. 400–448, no. 28.

[^17]: Al-Burhān fī tafsīr al-Quran, vol. 1, p. 89, no. 14.


