Section Fifty-One
=================

The traditions that indicate the second black flags that are different
from the first black flags

Comprised of five traditions

781. Al-Fitan[^1]: Informed us Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Aḥmad
b. Rabadha, from Abū l-Qāsim Sulaimān b. Aḥmad al-Ṭabarānī, from Abū
Zaid \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Ḥātim al-Murādī in Egypt in the year 280 AH,
from Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād, from al-Walīd and Rushdain, from ibn Lahī\`a,
from Abū Qubail, from Abū Rūmān from \`Alī, may Allah be satisfied with
him, who said:

The Sufyānī and the black flags will meet. Amongst them will be a youth
from the Banī-Hāshim and on his left palm will be a mole. His commander
will be a person from Banī Tamīm called Shu\`ayb b. Ṣāliḥ, at the
gateway if Iṣṭakhr. There will be a terrible bloodshed between these two
armies. The black flags will be victorious while the cavalry of Sufyānī
will take to their heels. It is then that the people will desire for the
Mahdī and will seek him.

782. Al-Fitan[^2]: Narrated to us Sa\`īd b. \`Uthmān, from Jābir, from
(Imam) Abū Ja\`far who said:

The black flags from Khurāsān [in Iran] will reach Kūfa. When the Mahdī
appears at Mecca, they will be sent to pledge allegiance to the Mahdī.

783. Al-Fitan[^3]: Narrated to us al-Walīd b. Muslim, from Abū
\`Abd-Allah, from \`Abd al-Karīm (meaning Umayya), from Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥanafiyya who said:

Black flags will emerge [in support of] the Abbasids. Then, from
Khurāsān, other black flags will appear; their hoods will be black and
their dresses will be white. A person called Shu\`ayb b. Ṣāliḥ or Ṣāliḥ
b. Shu\`ayb, from [Banī] Tamīm, will be their commander. They will
destroy al-Sufyānī’s Army until they reach Bait al-Maqdas. They will
prepare for the Mahdī his government and Three hundred people from Syria
will come to his aid. The time between his emergence and the handing
over of the affairs to the Mahdī will be seventy-two months.

784. Al-Fitan[^4]: \`Abd-Allah b. Marwān narrated to us, from al-\`Alā
b. \`Utba, from al-Ḥasan that “the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings
be on him [and his family], mentioned a calamity that his Ahl al-Bait
would encounter [which would continue] until Allah will send a black
flag from the East. Whoever helps it, Allah will help him and whoever
deserts it, Allah will desert him; until a man comes whose name is my
name and He will rule them. Allah will support and assist him.”

785. Al-Fitan[^5]: Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. \`Abd-Allah al-Taihartī
narrated to us, from \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Ziyād b. An\`um, from Muslim b.
Yasār, from Sa\`īd b. al-Musayyib, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “Black flags [in
support] of the Abbasids will emerge from the East. They will halt until
Allah wishes. Then, smaller black flags will emerge from the east who
will fight a person from the progeny of Abū Sufyān and his followers.
They will call out [to the people] to obey the Mahdī.”

[^1]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 172; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir
al-zamān, chap. 7, p. 151, no. 20 (short version).

[^2]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 173; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir
al-zamān, chap. 7, p. 150, no. 12; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, p. 217, no.
77.

[^3]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “al-Rayāt al-sūd lil-Mahdī ba\`d rāyāt
Banī l-\`Abbās,” p. 165.

[^4]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “al-Rayāt al-sūd lil-Mahdī ba\`d rāyāt
Banī l-\`Abbās,” p. 167.

[^5]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, chap. “al-Rayāt al-sūd lil-Mahdī ba\`d rāyāt
Banī l-\`Abbās,” p. 168.


