Section One
===========

Proof of his birth, its circumstances, its history, some information
about his mother, and her names, peace be on them both

Comprised of 426 traditions

786. Kitāb Faḍl b. Shādhān[^1]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. \`Alī b.
Ḥamza b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Ubaid-Allah b. al-\`Abbās b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib,
Allah’s blessings be on him, who said:

(Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, said, “Indeed, the Guardian
appointed by Allah (walī Allah), His Proof upon His servants, and my
successor after me, has been born circumcised [from birth], at the dawn
of Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH. The first who washed (ghusl) him was Riḍwān—the
caretaker of Paradise—while a group of archangels accompanied him. [They
washed him] with the water of Kauthar and Salsabīl.

Then, my aunt, Ḥakīma bt. Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā, peace be on them
washed him.” Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Ḥamza, may Allah be satisfied with
him, enquired about his mother. He replied, “His mother is Malīka who is
sometimes called Sūsan and sometimes Rayḥāna. Her other names are
Ṣaiqal, and Narjis.”

787. Kamāl al-dīn[^2]: Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. al-Walīd, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from Abū
\`Abd-Allah al-Ḥusayn b. Rizq-Allah, from Mūsā b. Muḥammad b. al-Qāsim
b. Ḥamzat b. Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī
b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on them, from Ḥakīma, daughter of (Imam) Muḥammad
b. \`Alī b. Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī
b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be on them, who said:

(Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, peace be on him, called for me
and said, “O Aunt! Break your fast this evening with us because it is
the evening of the 15th of Sha\`bān and Allah, Blessed and Exalted be
He, will reveal His proof (ḥujja) tonight and he will be His proof on
earth.” I asked, “Who is his mother?” He replied, “Narjis.” I exclaimed,
“May Allah sacrifice me for you! But there is no sign [of pregnancy] in
her!” He replied, “It will [occur] like I am informing you.”

[So] I went [to their house], said hello and sat down. [Narjis] came to
take off my shoes and said to me, “How are you my master [and the master
of my family]?” I replied, “No! You are my master and the master of my
family.” She denied what I said and replied, “O aunt! What are you
saying?” I said to her, “O my daughter! Surely, Allah, the Exalted, will
soon grant you in this very night a son (who will be) a master in this
world and the hereafter.” On hearing this, she expressed shyness. When I
finished my \`Ishā’ prayers, I broke my fast, went to bed and slept. In
the depth of the night, I got up for the night prayers.

When I finished my night prayers, I saw Narjis fast asleep while there
were no signs [of pregnancy] in her. I sat and performed the
rituals/supplications (ta\`qībāt) recommended after the prayers and then
lied down. Then I got up again fearfully and she was still asleep. Then,
she got up, prayed and went to sleep.

I went out to check if it was dawn yet [i.e. whether the time of prayers
had arrived or not]. At the first break of dawn (al-fajr al-awwal), she
was still fast asleep. At this juncture, I became slightly skeptical.
Immediately, [Imam] Abū Muḥammad [al-\`Askarī], peace be on him, cried
out from where he was, “O Aunt! Don’t be in such a rush! Indeed the
affair is near!” I sat down and began reciting the suras of Sajda and
Yāsīn. While I was busy [reciting them], she woke up startled. I leapt
towards her and said, “I seek Allah’s protection for you! Do you feel
anything?” She replied, “Yes, O Aunt!” I said to her, “Be calm and hold
your heart. This is what I had told you.”

Then suddenly I felt a weakness in myself and she felt a weakness in
herself. I came to with the sound of my master [the Mahdī] and removed
the cloth from over him. He was in a state of prostration and was
touching the earth with the places [which touch the ground during]
prostration. I embraced him and he was absolutely clean and immaculate.
(Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, called out to me, “O Aunt! Bring
my son to me,” and I did. He placed his hands beneath his lower-back and
back and put his feet on his chest. Then, he put his tongue in his mouth
and caressed his eyes, ears, and joints.

He then said, “Speak, O my son!” He replied, “I testify that there is no
god but Allah, He is One and has no partner. I testify that Muḥammad is
the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family.” He
then sent blessings on Amīr al-Mu’minīn and the Imams, peace be on them,
until he reached his father. He then stopped and didn’t continue.

(Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, called out, “O Aunt! Take him to
his mother so that he greets her and then bring him back to me.” I took
him to her and he greeted her, then, I took him back [to his father] and
put him on the ground. He said, “O Aunt! Come back to us on the seventh
day.”

In the morning, I went to greet (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him.
When I removed the curtain to see my master, I did not find him there. I
said, “May I be sacrificed for you! What happened to my master?” He
replied, “We have entrusted him to whom the mother of Moses entrusted
her son, peace be on him.”

On the seventh day, I went [to them], greeted them, and sat down. He
said, “Bring me my son.” I brought my master, peace be on him, while he
was wrapped in a cloth. He did [with his son] what he had done earlier.
Then, he put his tongue in his mouth as if he was feeding him milk or
honey. He then said, “Speak, O my son!” He declared, “I testify that
there is no god but Allah,” and he saluted and blessed Muḥammad, \`Alī,
Amīr al-Mu’minīn, and the infallible Imams, Allah’s blessings be on them
all, and he paused [after] his father’s name. Then he recited,

***“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. And We intend to
oblige those who have been rendered weak on earth and make them Imams
and make them the inheritors. And to grant them power in the land, and
show the Pharaoh and Haman and their armies what they feared.***” [^3]

Mūsā (the narrator of this tradition), says, “I asked \`Uqba, the
servant, about this and he replied, ‘Ḥakīma has said the truth.’”

788. Kamāl al-dīn[^4]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. \`Alī Mājīlawayh and
Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, may Allah be satisfied with them,
from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī al-Nīsābūrī,
from Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Mūsā b. Ja\`far, peace be on
them, from al-Sayyārī, from Nasīm and Māriya who both said:

When the Master of the Time came out of his mother’s womb, he bent on
his knees, raised both index fingers towards the sky, then sneezed and
said, “All Praise is for Allah, the Lord of the worlds. Blessings of
Allah be on Muḥammad and his family. The oppressors thought that Allah’s
Proof has been destroyed. Had we been permitted to speak, all doubts
would have been dispelled.

789. Kamāl al-dīn[^5]: Muḥammad b. \`Alī Mājīlawayh, Muḥammad b. Mūsā b.
al-Mutawakkil, and Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, may Allah be
satisfied with them, narrated to us from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār,
from Isḥāq b. Riyāḥ al-Baṣrī, from Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī who said:

When the Master, peace be on him, was born, (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace
be on him, said, “Send someone to Abū \`Amr.” Someone was sent to him
and when he came, [the Imam] said to him, “Buy ten thousand pounds
(raṭl[^6]) of bread and ten thousand pounds of meat and distribute it—I
think he said among the Banī-Hāshim—and slaughter such and such number
of sheep as his \`aqīqa[^7].”

790. Kamāl al-dīn[^8]: Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. \`Iṣām, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb al-Kulainī, from \`Alī b.
Muḥammad who said: “The Master was born on Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH.”

791. Al-Ghayba by Faḍl b. Shādhān[^9]: Aḥmad b. Isḥāq b. \`Abd-Allah
al-Ash\`arī, from (Imam) Abū Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-\`Askarī, peace be on
him, who said:

All praise is for the One who did not take me from this world until He
showed me the successor after me, who is the most similar of people to
the Messenger of Allah in creation and morals. Allah, Blessed and
Exalted be He, will protect him in his occultation. Then, He will reveal
him, and he will fill the earth with fairness and justice just as it
will be filled with injustice and unfairness.

792. Kamāl al-dīn[^10]: Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. \`Iṣām, may Allah be
satisfied with him, narrated to us from Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb al-Kulainī,
from \`Allān al-Rāzī who said: “Some of our companions informed me that
when the spouse of (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, became
pregnant, he said to her, ‘You will soon give birth to a boy; his name
will be Muḥammad and he is the Qā’im after me.’”

793. Kamāl al-dīn[^11]: Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq al-Ṭāliqānī, may
Allah be satisfied with him, narrated to us from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b.
Zakariyyā at Madīnat al-Salām, from Abū \`Abd-Allah Muḥammad b.
Khalīlān, from his father, from his father, from his grandfather, from
Ghiyāth b. Usaid who said:

I witnessed Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān al-\`Amrī, may Allah sanctify his soul,
say, “When the successor, al-Mahdī, was born, a light radiated from his
head to the outskirts of the sky. Then, he went down in prostration for
his Lord, Exalted be His remembrance, then he raised his head while he
was saying, ‘Allah testifies that there is no god but He and so do the
angels and the possessors of knowledge who stand with justice. There is
no god but He, the Invincible, the Wise. Verily, the religion [approved]
by Allah is Islam.’[^12]” [Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān] said, “His birth
occurred on a Friday.”

794. Kamāl al-dīn[^13]: Narrated to us \`Alī b. \`Abd-Allah al-Warrāq,
from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Wahb al-Baghdādī that
a signed letter (tauqī\`) came from (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on
him, that read: “They thought that by killing me, they would destroy
this generation; indeed Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, has refuted
their saying and all praise is for Allah.”

795. Tārīkh al-A’imma[^14]: From amongst the reasons that have been
narrated from (Imam) al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, at
the time of the birth of M-U-Ḥ-A-M-M-A-D b. al-Ḥasan, is what has been
narrated from him numerous times: “The oppressors thought they would
kill me to eliminate this generation; how did they find the power of the
All-Powerful?” And he named him the Hoped (al-Mu’ammal).

796. Kamāl al-dīn[^15]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. Mūsā al-Mutawakkil,
may Allah be satisfied with him, from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī,
from Muḥammad b. Aḥmad al-\`Alawī, from Abū Ghānim, the servant, who
said:

A boy was born to (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, and he named him
Muḥammad. On the third day, he showed him to his companions, saying, “He
is your master after me and my successor upon you. He is the Qā’im who
will be desperately awaited. When the earth becomes filled with
injustice and unfairness, he will emerge and will fill it with fairness
and justice.”

797. Kamāl al-dīn[^16]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. \`Alī Mājīlawayh, may
Allah be satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from Abū
\`Alī al-Khayzarānī, from a slave girl whom he had gifted to (Imam) Abū
Muḥammad, peace be on him, who had fled from Ja\`far al-Kadhdhāb (the
liar) when he had attacked the house and Abū \`Alī (the narrator) had
married her. Abū \`Alī says:

She informed me that she had been present when the master was born and
the name of the master’s mother is Ṣaqīl and Abū Muḥammad had informed
her about the events that would befall his family. She had asked him to
pray to Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, that He takes her life before
him. She died while Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, was still alive.
There is a tablet on her grave which says, “This is the grave of the
mother of Muḥammad.”

I also heard this slave-maid mention that when the master, peace be on
him, was born, she saw a light radiate from him towards the outskirts of
the sky. She also saw white birds descend from the sky, caress his head,
face, and, body with their wings and then soar again. When they had
informed Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, about what they had witnessed,
he had laughed and replied, “These were angels who had come to gain
blessings from this newborn and they will be his helpers when he
emerges.”

798. Kamāl al-dīn[^17]: Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad b. al-Walīd, may
Allah be satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Karkhī, from
\`Abd-Allah b. al-\`Abbās al-\`Alawī, from Abū l-Faḍl al-Ḥasan b.
al-Ḥusayn al-\`Alawī, who said: “I went to (Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan
b. \`Alī, peace be on him, at Sāmarrā’ and congratulated him on the
birth of his son, the Qā’im.”

799. Kamāl al-dīn[^18]: Muḥammad b. Mūsā b. al-Mutawakkil, may Allah be
satisfied with him, narrated to us from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far
al-Ḥimyarī, from Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm al-Kūfī that “(Imam) Abū Muḥammad,
peace be on him, sent meat from a slaughtered sheep to some people whom
he named for me and said, ‘This is from the \`aqīqa[^19] for my son
Muḥammad, [Allah’s blessings and salutations be on him].’”

800. Kamāl al-dīn[^20]: Muḥammad b. \`Alī Mājīlawayh, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from al-Ḥusayn b.
\`Alī al-Nīsābūrī, from al-Ḥasan b. al-Mundhir, from Ḥamzat b. Abī
l-Fatḥ who said:

He came to me one day and said, “I have good news! A son was born to Abū
Muḥammad, peace be on him, yesterday and he has ordered that this news
be kept a secret. He also ordered that three hundred sheep be
slaughtered as his aqīqa.” I asked him, “What’s his name?” He replied,
“His name is Muḥammad and his epithet is Ja\`far.”

801. Kamāl al-dīn[^21]: Abū l-\`Abbās Aḥmad b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Abd-Allah
b. Mihrān al-Ābī al-Azdī al-\`Arūzī at Marv, from Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan b.
Isḥāq al-Qummī who said:

When the righteous successor, peace be on him, was born, my grandfather
Aḥmad b. Isḥāq received a letter from (Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b.
\`Alī, peace be on him, in his own handwriting—the [same handwriting
with] which he had written all his other signed letters. It had been
written in it, “A son of ours has been born. Let this fact be hidden
with you and unknown to the general masses. For surely, we have not
revealed this information about him to anyone except the closest of
relatives because of their nearness and those who have accepted his
Guardianship (wilāya). We wished to inform you so that Allah may make
you joyful through him like He has made us rejoice through him. Wa
al-salām.”

802. Kamāl al-dīn[^22]: Abū Ṭālib al-Muẓaffar b. Ja\`far b. al-Muẓaffar
b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b. \`Umar b. \`Alī b.
Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from
Abū l-Naḍr Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, from Ādam b. Muḥammad al-Balkhī, from
\`Alī b. al-Ḥasan [al-Ḥusayn] al-Daqqāq, from Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad
al-\`Alawī, from Nasīm the female servant of (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace
be on him, who said:

I went to see the master of this affair, peace be on him, one night
after his birth and sneezed in front of him. He said to me, “May Allah
have mercy on you.” I became joyous at this remark. Then, he said to me,
“Shall I give you good news about sneezing?” I replied in the
affirmative. He said, “It delays death for three days.”

803. Kamāl al-dīn[^23]: Through the same chain of narrators (i.e. the
chain mentioned in the eighth tradition of this chapter) from Muḥammad
b. \`Uthmān al-\`Amrī, who said: “The master was born circumcised. I
heard Ḥakīma say, ‘Parturition blood was not seen in his mother and this
is the custom of the mothers of all the Imams, peace be on them.’”

804. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^24]: Aḥmad b. \`Alī al-Rāzī, from Muḥammad b.
\`Alī, from \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b. Khāqān al-Dihqān, from Abū
Sulaimān Dāwūd b. Ghassān al-Baḥrānī who said:

I read out for Abū Sahl Ismā’īl b. \`Alī al-Naubakhtī the birth of
(Imam) Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā b.
Mūsā b. Ja\`far al-Ṣādiq b. Muḥammad al-Bāqir b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b.
\`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, Allah’s blessings be on them all: “He was born in
Sāmarrā’ in 256 AH. His mother was called Ṣaqīl and his epithet is Abū
l-Qāsim—the same epithet as that of the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings
be on him and his family—who had said, ‘His name will be my name and his
epithet will be my epithet. His title is Mahdī and he is the Proof, the
Awaited, and the Master of the Time.’”

Ismā’īl b. \`Alī said, “I visited Imam Abū Muḥammad al-\`Askarī, peace
be on him, during his illness in which he passed away. I was with him
when he said to his servant \`Aqīd—who was a black Nubian slave who had
earlier served Imam \`Alī b. Muḥammad and had brought up Imam al-Ḥasan
al-\`Askarī, peace be on him—, “O \`Aqīd! Boil some mastic gum for me in
water.” He boiled it for him and then Ṣaqīl—the mother of the successor
Imam, peace be on him—brought it for him. As he held the bowl in his
hands and intended to drink, his hand started trembling and the bowl hit
the teeth of Imam al-Ḥasan. So, he put it down from his hands and said
to \`Aqīd, “Go inside the house. You will see a child in prostration.
Bring him to me.”

Ismā’īl b. \`Alī said, \`Aqīd said, “I entered [the house] to search for
[the child], and lo! I saw a child in prostration. He had raised his
index fingers towards the sky. I greeted him, due to which he shortened
his prayers. I said, ‘My master has ordered you to come to him.’ At that
very moment, his mother Ṣaqīl[^25] entered, held his hand, and took him
to his father (Imam) al-Ḥasan, peace be on him.”

Abū Sahl continued, “When the child stood before his father, he greeted
him and his color was like a pearl, his hair had short curls in them,
and he had fissures between his teeth. When (Imam) al-Ḥasan, peace be on
him, saw him, he started crying and said, ‘O master of his Ahl al-Bait!
Give me water to drink because I am going to my Lord.’ The child took
the bowl of boiled mastic gum in his hand.

He moved his lips and the child helped him drink. When he finished
drinking, he said, ‘Prepare me for prayers.’ A scarf was spread in his
room. The child helped him perform ablution, step by step and wiped
(masaḥa) his head and feet.

Then, Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, said to him, ‘Receive good news, O
my son! You are the Master of the Time, you are the Mahdī, you are
Allah’s Proof upon His earth, you are my son and my heir, and I am your
father. You are Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b.
Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib.
The Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, is
your ancestor and you are the last of the immaculate Imams.

The Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, has
given glad-tidings about you and has named and mentioned your epithet in
the [glad-tidings]. My father has taken a covenant from me on behalf of
your pure forefathers. The blessings of Allah, our Lord be on the Ahl
al-Bait. He is the Praiseworthy, the Majestic.’ Imam al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī
passed away at that moment; may Allah’s blessings be on them all.”

805. Ithbāt al-waṣiyya[^26]: Al-Ḥimyarī, from Aḥmad b. Isḥāq who said:

I went to see (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, who asked me, “O
Aḥmad! How were you feeling when the people were in doubt and
skepticism?” I answered, “O my master! When the letter reached us with
the news of our master and his birth, no man, woman, or child who had
attained understanding remained from us except that he spoke the truth.”
He continued, “Don’t you know that the earth will not become empty of
Allah’s Proof?”

Then, (Imam) Abū Muḥammad ordered that his mother perform the Hajj in
the year 259 AH and informed her about what will happen to him in the
year 260 AH. Then, he called for the Master of the Time (Ṣāḥib al-Zamān)
and willed to him. He handed over the Great Name (al-Ism al-A\`ẓam), the
inheritances, and the weapon to him. (Imam) Abū Muḥammad’s mother and
the master set off for Mecca and Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Muṭahhar Abū \`Alī
was in charge of fulfilling their needs. When they had gone some
distance on the way to Mecca, some Bedouin tribes met them and informed
them of the intense fear and scarcity of water. Consequently, most of
the people returned except those who were in the [Holy] Region; they
went ahead and were safe.”

806. Al-Ghayba by Faḍl b. Shādhān[^27]: Muḥammad b. \`Abd al-Jabbār who
said:

I said to my master (Imam) al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī (al-\`Askarī), peace be on
him, “O son of Allah’s Messenger! May Allah sacrifice me for you! I
would like to know who is the Imam and Proof of Allah upon His servants
after you?” He, peace be on him, replied, “The Imam and the Proof of
Allah after me is my son whose name and epithet is the same as that of
the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family. He
is the last of Allah’s proofs and the last of His caliphs.”

I asked, “From whom will he be born?” He replied, “From the daughter of
the son of the Caesar, the Emperor of Rome. Know that he will soon be
born and will be concealed from the people in a long occultation. Then,
he will appear and will kill the Antichrist (al-Dajjāl) and will fill
the earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled with
injustice and unfairness. No one is allowed to say his name or epithet
before his reappearance, Allah’s blessings be on him.”[^28]

807. Kamāl al-dīn[^29]: Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Ḥātim al-Naufalī, from Abū
l-\`Abbās Aḥmad b. \`Īsā al-Washshā al-Baghdādī, from Aḥmad b. Ṭāhir
al-Qummī, from Abū l-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. Baḥr al-Shaibānī who said:

I entered Karbala in 286 AH and visited the grave of the lonely
[grandson] of the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and
his family. Then, I left for Baghdad with the intention of visiting the
graves of the Quraish [meaning the place where Imams Kāẓim and Javād,
peace be on them, were buried] at a time when it was blazing hot and hot
winds were blowing.

On my way—when I reached the shrine of al-Kāẓim, peace be on him—I
inhaled the fresh air of his grave that was filled with mercy and
surrounded with the gardens of forgiveness. I threw myself on it with
tears flowing down unceasingly and non-stop sighs and moaning. My tears
had concealed the vision of my eyes. When the flow of tears ceased and I
stopped crying, I opened my eyes and saw an old man with a bent back and
hunched shoulders who had callus on his forehead and palms.

He was saying to another person accompanying him at the grave, “O my
nephew! Indeed, your uncle has been honored on account of the deep
unseens (ghawāmiḍ al-ghuyūb) and privileged knowledge granted to him by
the two masters. Such [knowledge] has not been given to anyone except
Salmān.

Your uncles time is nearly up and his life is coming to an end but he
has not found anyone from amongst the followers of wilāya [i.e. the
Shias] to whom he could pass on his secrets.” I thought to myself,
“Trouble and hardships have always afflicted you because you have always
been in pursuit of knowledge.

Now your ears are being pounded by words from this old man that indicate
immense knowledge [and you can seek knowledge from him without any
affliction].” So I said, “O Shaykh! Who are these two masters?” He
replied, “The Two stars concealed by soil in the land of Sāmarrā’.” I
said, “I swear by the mastership and the revered position of these two
masters of Imamate and inheritance, that I desire their knowledge and
seek what they have left behind. I will try with utmost faith to conceal
their secrets.”

He said, “If you are true in your speech, then come forth with what you
have from what has been narrated from them.” When he examined the books
and read through the narrations he said, “You speak the truth. I am
Bishr b. Sulaimān al-Nakhkhās and a descendant of Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī. I
am one of the servants of (Imams) Abū l-Ḥasan and Abū Muḥammad
(al-\`Askarī) and their neighbor in Sāmarrā.”

I said, “Please honor your brother by narrating some of the things that
you have witnessed from them.” He said, “Our master Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b.
Muḥammad al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, granted me deep knowledge about
the [trade] of slaves and consequently, I never bought or sold any
except with his permission.

Because of this, I kept away from ambiguous cases until my knowledge
about it was complete. Thus, I excelled in differentiating between the
permissible (ḥalāl) and the prohibited (ḥarām). One night, I was in my
house at Sāmarrā’ and a part of the night had passed, when someone
knocked on the door. I quickly ran [to the door] and saw Kāfūr, the
servant, who had come as a messenger of our master, Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b.
Muḥammad, peace be on him, to invite me to [his house].

I put on my clothes and went to him. When I entered, I saw him speaking
with his son Abū Muḥammad and his sister Ḥakīma from behind the curtain.
When I sat down, he said, ‘O Bishr! Verily, you are from the descendants
of the Anṣār. You possess [i.e. you have accepted our] guardianship
(wilāya) and you inherit it one generation after another.

You are the reliable [people] for us Ahl al-Bait. Verily, I am going to
increase your excellence and honor such that you will overtake the best
of the Shias concerning [our] guardianship through a secret which I will
tell you; and I will send you to purchase a slave-girl.’ Then, he wrote
a letter in Roman handwriting and language and imprinted its seal with
his ring. He brought out a yellow purse which contained two hundred and
twenty dinars and said, ‘Take this and go to Baghdad.

Stand on the passageway of the Euphrates on so and so day after sunrise.
When the boats of the captives are beside you and the slave-maids emerge
from them, they will be encircled by groups of buyers representing the
Abbasid leaders and by small groups of Iraqi youths. When you see this,
keep a watch on a slave-trader by the name of \`Umar b. Yazīd
al-Nakhkhās [^30] all day long from a distance. [He will] bring forth a
slave-girl possessing such and such characteristics who is wearing two
clothes made of pure silk and does not allow anyone to unveil or touch
her.

Whoever attempts to see her will have to do so from behind a thin veil.
The slave-trader will strike her and she will cry out and say something
in Roman. Know that she is saying, “Woe for the ripping of my veil!” One
of the buyers will say, “Give her to me for three hundred dinars because
her chastity has increased my desire for her.”

She will say to him in Arabic, “Even if you appear in the dress of
Solomon and sit on the throne of his kingdom, I will never be inclined
towards you. Do not waste your money on me.” The slave-trader will
plead, “What is the solution? I have no choice but to sell you.” The
slave-girl will say “Why are you rushing? It is necessary that I select
a buyer whose trustworthiness and religiousness appeases my heart.”

After this, go to \`Umar b. Yazīd al-Nakhkhās and say to him, “I have a
sealed letter with me written in the Roman language and handwriting of a
noble man. He has described in it his munificence, loyalty, nobility,
and generosity. Hand it over to her so that she may consider the moral
qualities of its author. If she is inclined towards him and is satisfied
with him, then I am his representative to purchase her from you.”’”

Bishr b. Sulaimān al-Nakhkhās continued, “I did everything as defined to
me by my master (Imam) Abū l-Ḥasan, peace be on him, regarding the
matter of the slave-girl. When she saw the letter, she started crying
uncontrollably and said to \`Umar b. Yazīd al-Nakhkhās, ‘Sell me to the
writer of this letter.’ She then swore a solemn oath that if she was not
sold to the writer of the letter, she would kill herself. Then, I
started bargaining about her price until the amount reached the exact
number of dinars given to me by my master, peace be on him, in the
yellow purse.

He took the money from me and handed over the slave-girl who was very
joyous and cheerful. I took her to the room I was staying in, in
Baghdad. She was restless until she took out the letter of her master,
peace be on him, from her pocket and started kissing it and placing it
on her cheeks. She covered her eyes with it and rubbed it on her body.

I asked her out of amazement, ‘You are kissing a letter while you don’t
even know its author?’ She said, ‘O weak and helpless regarding the
stature of the descendants of the Prophets! Listen to me carefully and
pay attention with your heart! I am Malīka, the daughter of Yashū\`ā b.
Caesar, the Emperor of Rome. My mother was from the descendants of the
disciples (of Jesus) and related to his heir Simon (Sham\`ūn). I will
inform you of the strangest of things. My grandfather Caesar intended to
marry me to his nephew when I was only thirteen years old.

So, he gathered in his palace three hundred men from the descendants of
the disciples (al-ḥawāriyūn), priests (al-qissīsīn), and monks
(al-ruhbān) along with seven hundred important people. Moreover, four
thousand others from the commanders of the armed forces, military
leaders, and tribal chiefs had also been invited.

He had placed a throne studded with precious stones on top of forty
pillars in the guest room. When his nephew stood on top of it and was
encircled with crosses and the bishops came forward with honor and the
Bibles were opened, the crosses fell to the ground and the pillars
crumbled and collapsed on the floor. The one who had mounted the throne
fell down unconscious.

When the bishops saw this, the color of their faces changed and their
shoulders started trembling. The archbishop said to my grandfather, “O
Emperor! Please excuse us from this [task due to which] bad omens have
become manifest because these are the signs of the demise of
Christianity and the imperial religion.” My grandfather too considered
it as a bad omen. He ordered the bishops, “Put up the pillars and raise
the crosses.

Bring the brother of this unlucky ill-omened [prince] to be married to
this girl [instead], so that he might convert his bad-omen to welfare.”
When everything was prepared, the same thing happened again. The
congregation broke up and my grandfather became very sad and went inside
the palace and the curtains were brought down. That night, I dreamt that
Jesus, Simon (Sham\`ūn), and some of the disciples had gathered in my
grandfather’s palace.

A pulpit was erected—which scraped the sky with elevation—in the royal
palace in the same place where my grandfather had installed his throne.
Soon after, Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, joined
them accompanied by a young man and some of his descendants. Jesus came
forward and embraced him.

Then [the Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family]
said, “O Spirit of Allah! I have come here to ask your heir Simon, for
the hand of her daughter Malīka, in marriage for my son here.” He then
pointed to Abū Muḥammad, the author of this letter. Jesus looked at
Simon and said, “Great honor has come to you, bond with the messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family.” He responded, “I
accept.” Then, Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and his family,
ascended the pulpit, delivered a sermon, and married me

[to Abū Muḥammad] while Jesus, the descendants of Muḥammad, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family, and the disciples were witnessing
this marriage. When I woke up from sleep, I feared narrating this dream
to my father and grandfather lest they kill me. So I kept it a secret in
my heart and did not reveal it to anyone.

The love for Abū Muḥammad had filled my heart to such an extent that I
could not eat or drink anything. As a result, I became very weak; my
body became frail and I became severely ill. No Roman city remained
except that its doctors had been summoned by my grandfather to come and
treat me. When despair overtook him, he said, “O apple of my eye! Is
there anything you desire so that I can fulfill it in this world?”

I replied, “O grandfather! I see all the doors of relief locked on me.
If punishment is removed from the Muslim captives in your prison, there
are chains removed, and you oblige them by releasing them, I hope that
Christ and his mother may grant me health and cure me.” When my
grandfather did as I requested, I started putting on a little weight and
ate a little food, which delighted my grandfather and he again honored
the Muslim prisoners and showed munificence towards them.

After four nights, I dreamt that the Master of the Women [i.e. Fatima,
peace be on her] had come to see me accompanied with Mary daughter of
\`Imrān and a thousand Heavenly maids. Mary said to me, “This is the
Master of All Women, the mother of your husband, Abū Muḥammad, peace be
on him.” On hearing this, I held her, started crying and complained to
her that Abū Muḥammad was not coming to see me. The Master of all Women,
peace be on her, replied, “My son Abū Muḥammad will not visit you whilst
you associate others with Allah and are a Christian. My sister, Mary,
too testifies before Allah, the Exalted, that she dislikes your
religion.

If you desire the satisfaction of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, the
satisfaction of Christ and Maryam, and desire that Abū Muḥammad visits
you, then say, ‘I testify that there is no God but Allah and I testify
that Muḥammad—who is my father—is the Messenger of Allah.’ When I
uttered these words, the Master of All Women hugged me to her chest and
assured me by saying, “Now wait for Abū Muḥammad to visit you because I
will send him to you.”

I woke up and cried out, “Oh, how much I desire to see Abū Muḥammad!”
The following night, Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, came in my dream. I
exclaimed, “O my beloved! You left me after you made my heart a prisoner
of your love!” He replied, “Nothing kept me away from you except your
polytheism. Since you accepted Islam, I will visit you every night until
Allah brings us together evidently [i.e. while awake].” Until now, his
visits to me have not ceased.’”

Al-Bishr continued, “I asked her, ‘How did you become a prisoner?’ She
replied, ‘One night, Abū Muḥammad informed me that my grandfather would
dispatch on so and so day, an army to fight against the Muslims and he
will join them himself. [He told me] to join them disguised as a servant
with the slave-maids who will accompany them and to take such and such
path and I did accordingly.

The Muslim informers spotted us and thus, my situation is as you are
seeing and witnessing. No one has found out that I am a Roman princess
until now except you, and that too because I have informed you. An old
man—in whose share I was given—asked me name and I hid my [real] name
and said, “Narjis.” He said, “That is a name given to the
slave-maids.”’”

Bishr continued, “I said, ‘Amazing! You are a Roman but are fluent in
Arabic?’ She replied, ‘My grandfather loved me immensely. He desired to
teach me lofty etiquette and hence he appointed a woman who was an
interpreter to come to me. She would come in the morning and in the
evening and would teach me Arabic. As a result, I learnt Arabic and
became fluent in it.’”

Bishr said, “When I brought her to Sāmarrā’ and came to my master Abū
l-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, he asked her, ‘How did Allah, the
Almighty, show you the might of Islam, the humiliation of Christianity,
and the excellence of the Ahl al-Bait of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family?’ She replied, ‘O son of Allah’s Messenger! How
can I describe for you what you know better than me?’ He said, ‘I intend
to dignify you. Which do you prefer: Ten thousand dirhams or good news
for you about eternal honor?’ She replied, ‘I desire good news.’

He, peace be on him, said, ‘I give you glad-tidings about a son who will
rule the East and the West of the world and will fill the earth with
fairness and justice just as it will be filled with unfairness and
injustice.’ She asked, ‘From Who?’ He, peace be on him, replied, ‘From
the one whom the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, asked your hand in marriage for, in such and such night, in such
and such city, and in such and such Roman year?’ She replied, ‘[You
mean] from Jesus and his successor.’

He said, ‘To whom did Jesus and his successor marry you to?’ She
replied, ‘To your son, Abū Muḥammad.’ He said, ‘Can you recognize him?’
She responded, ‘Ever since I became a Muslim through his mother, the
master of all women, he has been coming to me in my dreams every night.’

Then (Imam) Abū l-Ḥasan said, ‘O Kāfūr! Summon to me my sister Ḥakīma.’
When she came, he, peace be on him, said to her, ‘This is her.’ On
hearing this, she hugged her for a long time and was very overjoyed. Our
master advised her, ‘O daughter of the Messenger of Allah, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family! Take her to your house and teach her
the obligatory acts and the customs [of Islam]; for, she is the wife of
Abū Muḥammad and the mother of the Qā’im, peace be on them.’”

The following traditions—directly and indirectly—show the above concept:
1–309, 543–545, 547, 549–558, 560–571, 574, 575, 580, 581, 589, 590,
608, 612, 614, 808–862, 864, 866–870, 873, 878, and 881–899 .

These are in addition to the fact that the mutawātir and correct
traditions that confine the Caliphs to the twelve Imams—our masters,
peace be on them—and also the authentic and reliable traditions which
state that the earth can never be empty of a Divine Proof, can only be
true if our master, the Master of the Time, has been born.

[^1]: Kifāyat al-muhtadī (al-Arba\`īn), p. 116, no. 30; Kashf al-ḥaqq
(al-Arba\`īn), p. 24, no. 2, which mentions Ṣaqīl instead of Ṣaiqal and
Ḥamzat b. al-Ḥasan instead of Ḥamzat b. al-Ḥusayn. In the rijāl books,
al-Ḥasan has been recorded; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 570,
no. 683. I say: Al-Nūrī, may Allah have mercy on him, writes in al-Najm
al-thāqib: “The reason for the differences in the names of his revered
mother becomes clear in this tradition: she was called by all of these
five names.” Faḍl b. Shādhān died after the birth of the Mahdī, peace be
on him, and before the martyrdom of his father Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan
al-\`Askarī, peace be on him (i.e. between 255 and 260 AH). Al-Najāshī
says: “He was reliable (thiqa) and one of our jurists (fuqahā), and
dialectical theologian (mutakallim). He enjoyed great reverence and
majesty in the [Shia] sect. He is so reputable that it is not possible
for us to describe him.” Al-Kashī has mentioned that he has written more
than 150 books and even goes to mention the names of some of them. This
demonstrates his proficiency in Islamic sciences and in what the people
of the sects differ about, specially, the sciences of belief (\`aqīda),
monotheism (tauḥīd), Imamate, duties (farā’iḍ), and etc. Al-Ṭūsī has
included him in his Rijāl amongst the companions of (Imam) al-Hādī on
one occasion and (Imam) al-\`Askarī on another—peace be on them. He
writes: “Al-Faḍl b. Shādhān was a jurist, dialectical theologian
(mutakallim), and had a majestic stature. He has written many books and
treatises . . . From amongst his books are Kitāb al-malāḥim, Kitāb
al-Qā’im, and Kitāb al-imāma. Regarding Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Ḥamzat b.
al-Ḥasan b. \`Ubaid-Allah b. al-\`Abbās b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be
on him, al-Najāshī writes, “Abū \`Abd-Allah was reliable (thiqa), a
fountain of traditions, and had correct beliefs. He has narrated
traditions from (Imams) Abū l-Ḥasan and Abū Muḥammad, peace be on them,
and he also had correspondences with them. The mother of the Owner of
the Affair (ṣāḥib al-amr) stayed in his house after the death of (Imam)
al-Ḥasan, peace be on him. Imam Mahdī’s birth, peace be on him, took
place on the night of Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH, as is mentioned in this noble
and authentic tradition. Al-Mufīd writes in al-Irshād, “The Imam after
Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, was his son whose name was the same as
that of the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, and so was his epithet. His father did not leave behind a child
other than him—evident or hidden. He was occult and concealed just as we
mentioned earlier. His birth took place in the night of Sha\`bān 15, 255
AH. His mother was called Narjis. He was five years old when his father
died. At this tender age, Allah bestowed him with wisdom just as He
granted it to John (Yaḥyā) when he was a child. He, the Exalted, made
him an Imam in his apparent childhood just as He made Jesus a prophet
when he was in the cradle. Narrations about him preceded him in the
Islamic nation [which were narrated] from the Prophet of Guidance, peace
be on him. The same were narrated from Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī
Ṭālib, peace be on him. All the succeeding Imams gave news about him—one
after the other—until [the time] of his father, (Imam) Ḥasan
al-\`Askarī, peace be on him. His revered father mentioned him in the
presence of his reliable companions and special followers. The news of
his occultation existed before his advent in this world and the
prophecies about his government were abundant even before his
occultation. Amongst the Imams of guidance, he is the possessor of the
sword, peace be on them. He is the one who will rise with the truth and
the one awaited [to establish] the government of [true] faith. Before
his emergence, he will have two occultations. One will be longer than
the other as has been mentioned in these traditions. The shorter one was
from the time of his birth to the termination of ambassadorship between
him and his Shias and the absence of emissaries because of death. The
longer one was immediately after the first one and it will end when he
rises with the sword . . .” Al-Kulainī writes in al-Kāfī: “He, peace be
on him, was born on Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH.” This has also been narrated by
al-Karājukī in Kanz al-fawā’id and al-Shahīd in al-Durūs. Al-Ṭūsī writes
in Miṣbāḥ al-mutahajjid, “In this night was born the Successor
[al-Ḥujja], the Master of the Affair, peace be on him. It is recommended
to recite the following supplication in this night, ‘O Allah! For the
sake of this night and the one who was born in it . . .’” Shaykh
al-Bahā’ī says in Tauḍīḥ al-maqāṣid, “In it—meaning the 15th day of
Sha\`bān—Imam Abū l-Qāsim Muḥammad al-Mahdī, the Master of the Era, was
born at Sāmarrā’ in 255 AH.” Al-Ṭabrisī records in I\`lām al-warā, “He
was born in Sāmarrā’ in the night of Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH.” Al-Ṭūsī, in
both of his Miṣbāḥs, Sayyid b. Ṭāwūs in Iqbāl al-a\`māl, all the
compilers of supplication books—according to Biḥār al-anwār—and al-Mufīd
in Masār al-Shī\`a, have declared that he was born on the 15th of
Sha\`bān. A group of celebrated Sunni scholars have also declared this
fact. For example, ibn Ṣabbāgh al-Mālikī writes in Fuṣūl al-muhimma,
“Abū l-Qāsim Muḥammad al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan was born in Sāmarrā in the
night of Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH . . . his mother was called ‘Narjis, the
best of the maids.’ Some have said she had another name.” Ibn Khalkān
writes in Wafiyyāt al-a\`yān, “His birth took place on Friday, Sha\`bān
15, 255 AH. When his father—whom we mentioned earlier—died, he was five
years old. His mother was called Khamṭ. She was also known as Narjis.”
The author of Rauḍat al-ṣafā writes, “Imam Mahdī—whose name and epithet
was the same as that of the Messenger [of Allah]—was born in Sāmarrā in
the night of Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH. He was five years old when his father
passed away. Allah granted him wisdom in this small age just as He did
to John (Yaḥyā) when he was a child and made him an Imam in childhood
just as He made Jesus a prophet.” These facts have also been declared by
al-Sayyid Muḥammad Khāja Pārsā—the author of Rauḍat al-aḥbāb—and others.
There is no harm in mentioning the statements of reputable Sunni
scholars concerning his birth and mentioning their names. Indeed, most
of them agree with us that he is currently alive and that he will
continue to live until Allah, the Exalted, gives him permission to
reappear: Al-Shaykh, ibn Ḥajar al-Haythamī al-Makkī al-Shāfi\`ī (d. 974
AH) whom after speaking about Imam Abū Muḥammad al-\`Askarī, peace be on
him, in al-Ṣawā’iq, writes: “He did not leave behind a successor except
his son Abū l-Qāsim Muḥammad al-Ḥujja—whose age at the time of his
father’s death was five—and Allah bestowed him with wisdom [at such a
young age].” The author of Rauḍat al-aḥbāb—which was originally written
in Persian—the famous traditionist, Sayyid Jamāl al-dīn \`Aṭā Allah b.
Sayyid Ghiyāth al-dīn Faḍl Allah b. Sayyid \`Abd al-Raḥmān. It has been
narrated that al-Qāḍī Ḥusayn al-Diyārbakrī has considered this book as
reliable in the beginning of his work Tārīkh al-khamīs. According to
Kashf al-ẓunūn, it was written on the request of the vizier Mir \`Alī
Shīr after consulting his teacher and his cousin Sayyid Aṣīl al-dīn
\`Abd-Allah. It consists of three chapters in it. He passed away in the
year one thousand AH as has been mentioned in this book. According to
Kashf al-astār and al-Najm al-thāqib (in Persian), he says: “Most of the
traditionists believe that the twelfth Imam—Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan, peace
be on him—was born on Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH at Sāmarrā . . . He was his
mother’s only child and her name was Ṣaiqal, Sūsan, Narjis, or Ḥakīma.
The respected and honorable Imam’s name and epithet are the same as that
of the Best of the Creations [i.e. the Holy Prophet]. His titles are
Mahdī al-Muntaẓar, al-Khalaf al-Ṣāliḥ, and Ṣāḥib al-Zamān. At the time
of his revered father’s death, his age was five as per authentic
reports. Other reports mention he was merely two years old. Allah, the
Granter of bounties, granted him wisdom in childhood just as He gave
John son of Zechariah (Yaḥyā b. Zakariyyā), peace be on them. He
attained the lofty position of Imamate while still a child . . . [He
them mentions his desire that the Mahdī’s occultation comes to an end
and says,] May Allah bless the poet who said: Come O guiding Imam For,
awaiting has passed the limits of sorrow Remove the veil from your
shinning face The visage that is brilliant like the Sun Come out from
your place of hiding And manifest the effects of benevolence and
loyalty” \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah al-Mālikī al-Makkī,
known as ibn Ṣabbāgh, born in 734 AH and died in 855 AH—according to
al-Ḍau’ al-lāmi\` by Shams al-dīn Muḥammad b. \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-Miṣrī,
a disciple of ibn Ḥajar. In his book, al-Fuṣūl al-muhimma fī ma\`rifat
aḥwāl al-A’imma, he has spoken about his birth and its date. He has also
stated that his mother was Narjis, the best of the maids, as we earlier
mentioned. Moreover, he has talked about his lineage, the names of his
forefathers, their conditions, sayings, and miracles and that he is the
twelfth Imam. He has also recorded some traditions in this regard.
Shaykh Shams al-dīn Abū l-Muẓaffar Yūsuf b. Qazāwaghlī b. \`Abd-Allah,
the grandson of Shaykh Jamāl al-dīn Abū l-Faraj b. al-Jauzī (d. 654 AH),
the author of al-Tārīkh al-kabīr about which ibn Khalikān has written,
“I saw it and it was 40 volumes with his hand-writing and it was titled
Mir\`āt al-zamān.” The author of Tadhkira al-khawāṣ says, “He is
Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Riḍā b. Mūsā b.
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace
be on them, and his epithets are Abū \`Abd-Allah and Abū l-Qāsim. He is
the Successor (al-Khalaf), the Divine Proof (al-Ḥujja), Master of the
Time (Ṣāḥib al-Zamān), the Riser (al-Qā’im), the awaited (al-Muntaẓar),
al-Tālī, and the last Imam (Ākhir al-A’imma). \`Abd al-\`Azīz b. Maḥmūd
b. al-Bazzāz informed us from ibn \`Umar who said that the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, said, ‘A person from
my descendants will emerge in the end of times. His name will be like my
name and his epithet will be like my epithet. He will fill the earth
with justice just as it will be filled with injustice; he is the Mahdī.’
This is a famous tradition. Abū Dāwūd and al-Zuhrī have recorded similar
to it from \`Alī. It says, ‘If only one day remains from the world,
Allah will certainly send from my Ahl al-Bait one who will fill the
earth with justice.’ He has been mentioned in numerous traditions and it
said that he has two names: Muḥammad and Abū l-Qāsim. His mother was a
female slave and she was called Ṣaiqal. Al-Suddī writes, ‘The Mahdī and
Jesus will meet. When it is the time of the prayers, the Mahdī will say
to Jesus, “Go ahead.” Jesus will reply, “You are more worthy of leading
the prayers.” Then, Jesus will pray behind him as a follower (ma’mūm) .
. .’” Nūr al-Din \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Aḥmad b. Qiwām al-dīn al-Dashtī
al-Jāmī al-Ḥanafī, the poet, mystic (\`ārif), and author of Sharḥ
al-kifāya. According to Kashf al-astār, he has mentioned in his book
Shawāhid al-nubuwwa that al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan is the twelfth Imam. He
then discusses the strange conditions of his birth and some of his
miracles and that he is the one who will fill the earth with justice and
fairness. Then, he mentions Ḥakīma’s narration concerning his birth and
also other narrations which state that when he was born, he immediately
knelt on his knees, raised his index finger towards the sky, sneezed,
and then said, “All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.” He has
also recorded the narration about the person who came to (Imam) Abū
Muḥammad (al-\`Askarī), peace be on him, and enquired about his
successor. He went inside his house and came out with a three year old
child in his arms who was [shining] like the full moon. [The Imam] then
told the enquirer, “O so and so! If you were not high esteemed before
Allah, I would not have shown you this boy. His name is the name of the
Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, and his
epithet is his epithet. He is the one who will fill the earth with
justice and fairness just as it will be filled with injustice and
unfairness.” He has recorded yet another tradition about a man who came
to (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, while there was a curtain in
the room. He asked the Imam about the Master of the Affair after him.
The Imam told him to raise the curtain . . . He has also mentioned the
tradition about the person who was sent by al-Mu\`taḍid . . . Shaykh
al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū \`Abd-Allah Muḥammad b. Yūsuf b. Muḥammad al-Kanjī (d. 658
AH)—the author of al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān and Kifāyat al-ṭālib
fī manāqib Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib. In the eighth
chapter—from the chapters which he has added to the Faḍā’il chapters of
Kifāyat al-ṭālib—after mentioning the Imams from the descendants of Amīr
al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, he writes, “He (meaning Imam \`Alī
al-Hādī, peace be on him) was succeeded by his son Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan
who was born in Medina in the month of Rabī\` al-Ākhir, 232 AH and
passed away on Friday Rabī\` al-Awwal 8, 260 AH, at the age of twenty
eight. He was buried in his house in Sāmarrā’ in the same room that his
father was buried. He was succeeded by his son who is the awaited Imam,
Allah’s blessings be on him. We will end the book with a separate
section about him.” He writes in al-Bayān fī akhbār Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, “The
twenty fifth chapter: the proofs about the possibility of the Mahdī’s
survival—peace be on him—since his occultation until now and that there
is nothing impossible about it because [others like] Jesus, Ilyās, and
al-Khiḍr from amongst the friends of Allah, the Exalted, and al-Dajjāl
and Iblīs, the cursed enemies of Allah, have survived . . . (to the end
of his long statement in this chapter).” Abū Bakr Aḥmad b. al-Ḥusayn b.
\`Alī b. \`Abd-Allah b. Mūsā al-Bayhaqī al-Khusraujardī al-Nīsābūrī, the
Shāfi\`ī jurist (d. 458 AH). The author of Wafiyyāt al-a\`yān writes
about him: “The famous and great memorizer, unique in his era,
outstanding amongst his companions in sciences, and amongst the greatest
companions of al-Ḥākim . . . in this world, he was satisfied with
little.” Imam al-Ḥaramain says about him, “There is no follower of
al-Shāfi\`ī but that they are indebted to Imam al-Shāfi\`ī except Aḥmad
al-Bayhaqī, for he has obliged al-Shāfi\`ī.” According to Kashf
al-astār, al-Bayhaqī writes in Shu\`ab al-īmān—which is enumerated
amongst his writings according to b. Khalikān––“The people have differed
about the Mahdī. Some have stopped at it and have left the matter to its
knower. They believe that he is one of the descendants of Fāṭima, the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family. Allah will create him whenever He wills and will send him to
help His religion. Another group believes that the promised Mahdī was
born on Friday, Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH, and he is the Imam titled the
Divine Proof (al-Ḥujja), the Riser (al-Qā’im), and the Awaited
(al-Muntaẓar), Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī. He entered the cellar
(sardāb) at Sāmarrā and is alive and concealed from the eyes of the
people. He awaits his emergence and he will soon reappear and fill the
earth with justice and fairness just as it will be filled with injustice
and unfairness. There is no improbability in his longevity and the
prolongation of his life just like Jesus, son of Mary, and al-Khiḍr,
peace be on them. The Shias—specially the Imāmiyya—have such a belief
and a group of ahl al-kashf also agree with them.” By ahl al-kashf, he
does not mean—as some scholars have suggested—al-Shaykh Muḥyī al-dīn,
al-Sha\`rānī and al-Shaykh Ḥasan al-\`Irāqī, whom God willing, we will
discuss later; because, al-Bayhaqī preceded them by many years. For
instance, al-Bayhaqī expired in 458 AH whilst Shaykh Muḥyī al-dīn died
in 638 AH as has been claimed by al-\`Irāqī in the beginning of the
first chapter of al-Yawāqīt. Likewise, al-Sha\`rānī lived many centuries
after al-Bayhaqī. He finished writing al-Yawāqīt in 955 AH. Al-\`Irāqī
and al-Khawwāṣ were contemporaries of al-Sha\`rānī. Therefore, from what
al-Bayhaqī has said, it is clear that he too is inclined towards this
view about the Mahdī. In fact, he believes in it, otherwise he would
have rejected it. Shaykh Kamāl al-dīn Abū Sālim Muḥammad b. Ṭalḥa
al-Shāfi\`ī al-Qurashī al-Naṣībī (b. 582 AH), the author of al-\`Iqd
al-farīd. It has been written about him in Ṭabaqāt al-Shāfi\`iyya, “He
had profound knowledge about religion and excelled in it. He heard
traditions at Nīsābūr from al-Mu’ayyid al-Ṭūsī and Zainab al-Sha\`riyya
and narrated (traditions) at Aleppo and Damascus. Al-Ḥāfiẓ al-Dimyāṭī
and Majd al-dīn b. al-\`Adīm have narrated from him. He was from the
chiefs of the people and became a minister in Damascus for two days, but
then deserted everything including his clothes, slaves, and etc. due to
asceticism. Ibn Ṭalḥa passed away on Rajab 7, 652 AH. According to
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 410, ibn Ṭalḥa has written in his book al-Durr
al-munaẓẓam, “Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, has a caliph who will
emerge in the end of times whilst the earth will be filled with
injustice and unfairness. He will fill it with justice and fairness . .
. this is Imam al-Mahdī who will rise with the command of Allah and do
away with all the religions, then, nothing will remain except the pure
religion [of Allah] . . .” In Maṭālib al-su’ūl fī manāqib āl al-Rasūl,
which is a book in which he has mentioned the names of the twelve Imams,
peace be on them, and discussed their lives. He writes, “The Eleventh
chapter: Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, the Pure (al-Khāliṣ), born in
231 AH. As for his paternal and maternal lineage, his father was Abū
l-Ḥasan \`Alī al-Mutawakkil b. Muḥammad al-Qāni\` b. \`Alī al-Riḍā—whom
we have already discussed earlier. His mother was called Sūsan. His name
was al-Ḥasan, his epithet was Abū Muḥammad, and his title was the Pure
(al-Khāliṣ). His virtues: know that the highest virtue and greatest
merit for which Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, chose for him, made
him exclusive in it, and rendered it a permanent attribute—the novelty
of which cannot be worn out with the passage of time nor will the
tongues forget to recite and repeat—is that the Mahdī from the
generation of Muḥammad has been created from him, is his son that is
attributed to him, and is a part of his existence which has been
separated from him. God willing, we will discuss his virtues and the
details of his life in the following chapter. “The Twelfth chapter: Abū
l-Qāsim Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan al-Khāliṣ b. \`Alī al-Mutawakkil b.
Muḥammad al-Qāni\` b. \`Alī al-Riḍā b. Mūsā al-Kāẓim b. Ja\`far al-Ṣādiq
b. Muḥammad al-Bāqir b. \`Alī Zain al-\`Ābidīn b. al-Ḥusayn al-Zakī b.
\`Alī al-Murtaḍā Amīr al-Mu’minīn b. Abū Ṭālib, the Guided (al-Mahdī),
the Divine Proof (al-Ḥujja), the Righteous Successor (al-Khalaf
al-Ṣāliḥ), the Awaited One (al-Muntaẓar), peace be on them and Allah’s
Mercy and His blessings. “He [then writes a poem] and praises him
greatly and mentions the date of his birth, his paternal and maternal
lineage, and some of the traditions about the Mahdī which he narrates
from Abū Dāwūd, al-Tirmidhī, al-Baghawī, Muslim, al-Bukhārī, and
al-Tha\`labī. He then mentions some questions about him and answers
them.” Al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Muḥammad Aḥmad b. Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim al-Ṭūsī
al-Balādhurī, a resident of Ṭūs. It has been narrated in Kashf al-astār
from al-Sam\`ānī: “He was a memorizer, very understanding, and
knowledgeable about the traditions . . . He was unique in his era in
memorizing and preaching. He was great in socializing and was beneficial
to most people. He mostly stayed in Nīsābūr where he had two
congregations every week with the two teachers of the city, Abūl Ḥasan
al-Muḥmī and Abū Naṣr al-\`Abdī. Abū \`Alī al-Ḥāfiẓ and our teachers
used to attend his gatherings and were joyous of him mentioning the
traditions in public. I never saw them taunting him about the chains of
narrators or names or traditions [that he mentioned]. He wrote
[narrations] at Mecca from the Imam of the Ahl al-Bait, Abū Muḥammad
al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, peace be on
them. Abū l-Walīd—the jurist—writes, “Abū Muḥammad al-Balādhurī learned
(sami\`a) the Book of Jihād from Muḥammad b. Isḥāq, while his mother was
ill in Ṭūs . . . al-Ḥākim writes, ‘He was martyred in Ṭāhirān in 339 AH
and he was the learned scholar of his era.’” Shah Walī-Allah
al-Dihlawī—the father of \`Abd al-\`Azīz famous as Shah Ṣāḥib—and the
author of Tuḥfat al-Ithnā \`Ashariyya fī l-raddi \`Alā l-Imāmiyya, who
has been described by his son like this: “The last of the mystics, the
destroyer of the opposers, the chief of the muḥaddithīn, the authority
of the dialectical theologians, the proof of Allah upon the worlds . .
.” He writes in al-Nuzha, “My father has written in al-Musalsalāt—which
is well known for its evident merits saying, ‘ibn \`Aqla verbally gave
me permission to narrate everything that he had permission to narrate. I
found in his series of narrators (musalsalāt) a tradition whose
narrators all possessed great attributes. He, may Allah have mercy on
him, had written, ‘The unrivaled of his era, Shaykh Ḥasan b. \`Alī
al-\`Ajamī informed me from the memorizer of his time, Jamaal al-dīn
al-Bāhilī, from the trusted person of his time, Muḥammad al-Ḥijāzī, the
preacher, from the Sufi of his time, Shaykh \`Abd al-Wahhāb
al-Sha\`rānī, from the mujtahid of his era, Jalāl (al-dīn) al-Suyūṭī,
from the memorizer of his era, Abū Nu\`aim Riḍwān al-\`Aqabī, from the
reciter of his time, al-Shams Muḥammad b. al-Jazarī, from Imam Jamāl
al-dīn Muḥammad b. Muḥammad al-Jamāl, the ascetic of his era, from Imam
Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd, the traditionist of the Persian lands in his era,
from our shaykh, Ismā\`īl b. Muẓaffar al-Shīrazī, the learned one of his
time, from \`Abd al-Salām b. Abū l-Rabī\` al-Ḥanafī, the traditionist of
his time, from Abū Bakr \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b. Shābūr al-Qalānisī,
the shaykh of his era, from \`Abd al-\`Azīz, from Muḥammad al-Ādamī, the
Imam of his era, from Sulaimān b. Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. Sulaimān, the
exceptional of his era, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Hāshim al-Balādhurī,
the memorizer of his time, from M-U-Ḥ-A-M-M-A-D the son of al-Ḥasan b.
\`Alī the concealed, the Imam of his time, from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, from
his father, from his grandfather \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, peace be on
them, from Mūsā al-Kāẓim, from Ja\`far al-Ṣādiq, from Muḥammad al-Bāqir
b. \`Alī, from \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn Zain al-\`Ābidīn al-Sajjād, from
al-Ḥusayn, the chief of the martyrs, from \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, the chief
of the successors, peace be on them, who said, “The Chief of the
Prophets, Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, informed me from Gabriel, the Chief of the Angels, from Allah,
the Exalted, the chief of all chiefs, Who said, ‘Verily, I am Allah and
there is no god but Me. Whoever confesses to My Oneness, enters My Fort,
and whoever enters My Fort, is safe from My punishment.’”’” Al-Shams b.
al-Jazarī says, “This tradition has come from a blessed chain of
narrators and the responsibility of its authenticity lies on
al-Balādhurī. The aforementioned Shāh Walī-Allah writes in his treatise
al-Nawādir min ḥadīth sayyid al-awā’il wa l-awākhir, ‘The narration of
M-U-Ḥ-A-M-M-A-D b. al-Ḥasan from his noble forefathers, whom the Shias
believe to be the Mahdī: I have found in the Musalsalāt of al-Shaykh b.
\`Aqla al-Makkī, from al-Ḥasan al-\`Ajamī, from Abū Ṭāhir who was the
most capable of his time regarding the chain of narrators. He says,
“Informed us the unique of his era, al-Shaykh Ḥasan b. \`Alī al-\`Ajamī
. . . (to the end of what we already mentioned),”’ with slight
differences in some of the titles and arrangements of names.” It has
been mentioned in al-Burhān \`alā wujūd Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, after mentioning
what we quoted from Kashf al-astār: “It has been written in Shaykh \`Abd
al-Raḥmān al-Jabratī al-Ḥanafī’s \`Ajā’ib al-āthār (Egypt: 1301 AH) in
the margins of ibn al-Athīr’s al-Kāmil, about the incidence of the month
of Dhū l-Ḥijja in the year 1215 AH: ‘As for those who died in this year,
worth mentioning is the virtuous and righteous Imam, the highly learned
Shaykh, \`Abd al-\`Alīm b. Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. Uthmān al-Mālikī
al-Azharī al-Ḍarīr, who attended the lessons of al-Shaykh \`Alī
al-Ṣa\`īdī in both topics of narrating (riwāya) and dirāya and learned
(sami\`a) from the Ṣaḥīḥs, al-Muwatta’, al-Shamā’il, al-Jāmi\`
al-ṣaghīr, and the Musalsalāt of ibn \`Aqla. He has also narrated from
al-Malwī, al-Jauharī, and al-Balīdī . . . Whenever Allah was mentioned,
he cried excessively; tears came to his eyes quickly, and he was very
God-fearing. Al-Suyūṭī writes in Risālat al-tadrīb, ‘The author of Sharḥ
al-nukhba mentions that a musalsal tradition leads to certainty.’ Based
on these facts, the statement of ibn al-Jazarī ‘The responsibility of
its authenticity lies on al-Balādhurī’ is unfounded and baseless. This
is in addition to what he heard from al-Sam\`ānī in favor of
al-Balādhurī, specially his saying, ‘I never saw them taunting him . .
.’” Muḥaddith al-Nūrī has also mentioned this tradition in al-Najm
al-thāqib. Al-Qāḍī Faḍl b. Rūzbahān—the commentator of al-Tirmidhī’s
al-Shamā’il and the author of the book, Ibṭāl nahj al-bāṭil fī radd
kitāb kashf al-ḥaqq wa nahj al-ṣidq wa l-ṣawāb, which is a refutation of
Ayatullah \`Allāma al-Ḥillī’s Kashf al-ḥaqq wa nahj al-ṣidq wa l-ṣawāb.
The former was refuted by the great martyr al-Qāḍī Nūr Allah b. Sharīf
al-Mar\`ashī al-Ḥusaynī—may Allah cover him with His Mercy—through his
famous book Iḥqāq al-ḥaqq wa izhāq al-bāṭil. The book of Faḍl b.
Rūzbahān was also refuted by a contemporary scholar in his book Dalā’il
al-ṣidq. Al-Qāḍī Faḍl b. Rūzbahān, under the fifth issue of the third
section in the explanation of al-Ḥillī’s view (the second concept:
Concerning his wife and children . . .) writes the following, “I say:
What he has been narrated about the merits of Fāṭima—Allah’s blessings
be upon her father, upon her, and upon all the family of Muḥammad and
His salutations—is undeniable. For, denying the ocean’s mercy, the
richness of the earth, the light of the sun, the manifestations of all
lights, the generosity of the clouds, and the prostration of the angels,
is a denial that will lead to nothing but increased mockery of the
denier. [The same holds true for those] who refute a group who are on
the right path, the keepers of the mine of Prophethood, and the
protectors of the etiquette of chivalry, blessings and salutations of
Allah be upon them all. How beautiful is the poem that I have composed
about them: Salutation upon al-Muṣṭafā al-Mujtabā Salutation upon
al-Sayyid al-Murtaḍā Salutation upon our lady Fāṭima Whom Allah has
chosen as the Best of all women Salutation upon the one whose breath is
musk Upon Ḥasan the brilliant, the satisfied Salutation upon the
God-fearing Ḥusayn The martyr with his body at Karbala Salutation upon
the chief of the worshippers \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn the chosen one
Salutation upon al-Bāqir the guided Salutation upon al-Ṣādiq the
followed Salutation upon al-Kāẓim the tested Content in nature, the Imam
of the pious Salutation upon the Eighth, the trusted Upon al-Riḍā the
chief of the pure ones Salutation upon the pious, the God-fearer
Muḥammad the pure, the hoped one Salutation upon the fragrant, al-Naqī
Upon the noble, the guide of the people Salutation upon the Sayyid,
al-\`Askarī The Imam who will mobilized the army of the pure ones
Salutation upon the Qā’im, the Awaited Abū l-Qāsim, the saint, the light
of guidance He will rise like the sun in darkness He will save with his
un-sheathed sword You will see the earth filled with his justice As it
will be filled with the injustice of transgressors Salutation be upon
him and his forefathers And his helpers as long as the skies exist” The
famous scholar, Abū Muḥammad \`Abd-Allah b. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad
al-Khashshāb (d. 567 AH); According to Kashf al-astār, al-Najm
al-thāqib, and A\`yān al-Shī\`a, he has narrated in his book Tārīkh
mawālīd al-A’imma wa wafayātihim: “Through his chain of narrators from
Abū Bakr Aḥmad b. Naṣr b. \`Abd Allah b. al-Fatḥ al-Darrā\`
al-Naharawānī, from Ṣadaqat b. Mūsā, from his father, from al-Riḍā,
peace be on him, who said, ‘The righteous successor is from the
descendants of Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī and he is the Master of
the Time and the Mahdī.’ “‘Al-Jarrāḥ b. Sufyān narrated to us, from Abū
l-Qāsim Ṭāhir b. Hārūn b. Mūsā al-\`Alawī, from his father Hārūn, from
his father Mūsā, from his master Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him,
who said, “The Righteous Successor (al-Khalaf al-Ṣāliḥ) is from my
descendants and he is the Mahdī. His name is M-U-Ḥ-A-M-M-A-D and his
epithet is Abū l-Qāsim. He will emerge in the end of times. His mother
will be called Ṣaiqal . . .”’” I say: His book Mawālīd al-A’imma has
been published and is available. Al-Shaykh Muḥyī al-dīn Abū \`Abd Allah
Muḥammad b. \`Alī, known as ibn al-\`Arabī al-Ḥātimī al-Ṭā’ī al-Andulusī
(d. 638 AH)—according to what has been mentioned in Kashf al-ẓunūn. He
was buried in Ṣāliḥiyya in Syria and his grave is famous and a place of
visitation. Shaykh \`Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha\`rānī has narrated from him in
the sixty fifth chapter of al-Yawāqīt wa l-jawāhir ([Egypt:
al-Maṭba\`atu l-Azhariyyat al-Miṣriyya, 1307 AH], vol. 2, p. 145). He
writes: “This is what al-Shaykh Muḥyī al-dīn has said in the 366th
chapter of al-Futūḥāt, ‘Know that the emergence of the Mahdī, peace be
on him, is inevitable but he will not emerge until the earth is full of
injustice and unfairness and he will fill it with fairness and justice.
If there remains from the world none but one day, Allah, the Exalted,
will prolong that day until that caliph rules. He is from the progeny of
the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, and
from the descendants of Fāṭima, may Allah have mercy on her. His
ancestor is al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib and his father is al-Ḥasan
al-\`Askarī, the son of Imam \`Alī al-Naqī, the son of Muḥammad al-Taqī,
the son of Imam \`Alī al-Riḍā, the son of Imam Mūsā al-Kāẓim, the son of
Imam Ja\`far al-Ṣādiq, the son of Imam Muḥammad al-Bāqir, the son of
Imam Zain al-\`Ābidīn, the son of Imam al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib,
may Allah be satisfied with him. His name will be the same as that of
the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family. The
Muslims will pledge allegiance to him between the Rukn and the Maqām [in
Mecca]. He will be like the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on
him and his family, in creation and he will be slightly lower than the
Messenger of Allah in morality because no one can be equal to him in
this attribute. Allah, the Exalted, says, “And surely you are on a great
morality” (Quran 68:4). He will have a wide forehead and an aquiline
nose. The most fortunate of the people with respect to him will be the
residents of Kūfa. He will distribute wealth equally and be just towards
the citizens. A man will come to him and ask [for wealth] in a time that
there is wealth before him. He will fill the man’s cloth with so much
wealth that he will not be able to carry it . . .’” He then mentions his
attributes, characteristics, and deeds. The learned teacher Shaykh
Muḥammad al-Ṣubbān has recorded the exact same words from al-Futūḥāt in
his book Is\`āf al-rāghibīn ([Egypt: al-Maṭba’atu al-Maymaniyya, 1312
AH], chap. 2, p. 142). I could not find this exact statement in what I
observed in other copies [of al-Futūḥāt] like the copy published in
Egypt by Dār al-Kutub al-\`Arabiyya. Its wording differs with what is
found in al-Yawāqīt. I feel that those who distort the words from their
places have altered the book and erased the Imam’s noble lineage. Such
distortions and alterations are commonplace in the books published in
Egypt. By Allah, indeed, this is a great crime inflicted against
knowledge, religion, the Islamic nation, and those who seek the truth.
It seems that they consider it obligatory upon themselves to make such
changes and distortions whenever they find in a book the virtues and
merits of the Ahl al-Bait of the Prophet and his heirs and what doesn’t
conform to their whims and desires. May Allah grant refuge to us and
them from prejudice and obstinacy! The following is part of a poem by
Shaykh Muḥyī al-dīn in al-Futūḥāt, chap. 366: He is the Chief, the Mahdī
from the progeny of Aḥmad He is the Indian sword when he destroys He is
the sun that dispels sorrows and darkness He is like the monsoon rain
that pours heavily when he bestows Regarding the Mahdī and his
ministers, some lines of poetry have also been narrated from him in
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, p. 467, citing his book \`Unaqā al-maghrib
Al-Shaykh Sa\`d al-dīn Muḥammad b. al-Mu’ayyid b. Abī l-Ḥusayn b.
Muḥammad b. Ḥammawayh, known as Shaykh Sa\`d al-dīn al-Ḥimawī. He has
written a book exclusively about the Master of the Time (Ṣāḥib
al-Zamān), which is in accordance with the beliefs of the Shias as has
been narrated from \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī in Mir’āt al-asrār from the
author of al-Maqṣad al-aqṣā. He has also narrated from the author of
al-\`Aqā’id al-Nasafiyya that the mentioned Sa\`d al-dīn had declared
the Imamate of the Mahdī and that he is the Master of the Time (Ṣāḥib
al-Zamān), peace be on him, the last of the twelve heirs, and that there
are no more than these twelve Imams. Allah, the Exalted, has made them
His representatives in the religion of Muḥammad, and the Messenger of
Allah was referring to them when he said, “The scholars are the
inheritors of the prophets” and “The scholars of my nation are like the
Israelite prophets.” The author of Yanābī\` al-mawadda writes on p. 474:
“It has been written in the book of Shaykh \`Azīz b. Muḥammad al-Nasafī,
may Allah have mercy on him, “The Shaykh of the Shaykhs, Sa\`d al-dīn
al-Ḥimawī, says that ‘prior to our Prophet Muḥammad, Allah's blessings
be on him, the word ‘guardian’ (walī) was not used in previous religions
but the word ‘prophet’ (nabī) was used. All those who were close to
Allah and were the inheritors of the bringers of [new] religions were
called ‘prophets.’ In every religion, there was not more than one
bringer of religion. Therefore, in the religion of Adam, peace be on
him, there were some prophets who were his inheritors. They invited the
people towards his religion and his sharia. The same was the case in the
religions of Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Jesus, peace be on them. With the
advent of the new religion and sharia of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be
on him and his family, Allah, the Exalted, chose twelve people from his
Ahl al-Bait and appointed them as his inheritors. He made them close to
Himself and singled them out for his guardianship (wilāya). He appointed
them as the representatives of Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him and
his family, and his inheritors. The traditions, ‘The scholars are the
inheritors of the prophets,’ and ‘The scholars of my nation are like the
Israelite prophets,’ was said by him in their favor. The last
successor—which is the last and twelfth representative—is the seal of
the successors. His name is Mahdī, the Master of the Time. Shaykh says
that there are no more than twelve successors in the world; but those
356 hidden people are not called successors (auliya’), rather, they are
called substitutes (al-Abdāl).’” I say: This can be found in al-Nasafī’s
al-Insān al-kāmil ([Tehran], p. 319), with minor variations.
Abūl-Mawāhib al-Shaykh \`Abd al-Wahhāb b. Aḥmad b. \`Alī al-Sha\`rānī
(d. 973 AH [according to one place in Kashf al-ẓunūn; in another place
960 AH has been mentioned]) says in al-Yawāqīt wa l-jawāhir, ([Egypt:
al-Maṭba\`atu al-Azhariyyat al-Miṣriyya], vol. 2, p. 145): “The 65th
chapter: All the ‘conditions of the Hour’ (ashrāt al-sā\`a) which have
been mentioned in the traditions, will inevitably occur before the Hour
is established. Things like the emergence of the Mahdī . . . and he is
from the descendants of Imam Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, and his birth, peace be
on him, took place on the night of Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH, and he will
remain until he unites with Jesus, son of Mary, peace be on him.
Today—i.e. the year 958 AH—his age is 706 years. Shaykh Ḥasan al-\`Irāqī
who is buried at Egypt has informed me like this from Imam al-Mahdī when
he met him. This has also been endorsed by our Shaykh, my master, \`Alī
al-Khawwāṣ, may Allah have mercy on them both.” Al-Shaykh Ḥasan
al-\`Irāqī (the aforementioned). He has mentioned the Ḥujja and his
meeting with him as has been narrated by al-Sha\`rānī in Lawāqiḥ
al-anwār fī ṭabaqāt al-akhyār ([Egypt: 1305 AH], vol. 2, p. 140). After
narrating the journey of Ḥasan al-\`Irāqī he has narrated from this
book: “I asked the Mahdī about his age. He replied, ‘O my son! Today my
age is 620 years.’ . . .” Al-Sha\`rānī writes, “I mentioned this to my
master \`Alī al-Khawwāṣ and he agreed with him about the age of the
Mahdī, may Allah have mercy on him.’” The aforementioned Shaykh \`Alī
al-Khawwāṣ. He was called al-Khawwāṣ because he made crafts using
palm-leaves. Al-Sha\`rānī has greatly praised him in Lawāqiḥ al-anwār
(vol. 2, pp. 151–170). Ḥusayn b. Mu\`īn al-dīn al-Maybudī. In his
commentary on Imam \`Alī’s Dīwān, peace be on him, under the poem which
starts with the following line: O my sons! When the Turks mobilize their
armies then await the rule of a Mahdī, who will rise and be just He
writes on p. 371, “I hope that the Almighty Lord illuminates my eyes by
the precious kohl of the dust of his feet. May the sun of his great
reality shine on the door and roof of our personalities. Indeed, this is
not difficult for Allah.” On p. 123, he has declared his birth and its
date. Al-Ḥāfiẓ Muḥammad b. Muḥammad Maḥmūd al-Bukhārī, known as Khāja
Pārsā who is one of the celebrated Ḥanafī scholars and one of the great
Naqshbandī teachers. According to Kashf al-ẓunūn, he passed away in 822
AH. He writes in his book Faṣl al-khiṭāb: “The son of Abū Muḥammad
al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, M-U-Ḥ-A-M-M-A-D, was known to his father’s close
companions and the trusted ones of his family. (He then mentions the
narrative of al-Ḥakīma and the incident of al-Mu\`taḍid and some of the
signs of his reappearance, then he says,) Traditions in this regard are
more than can be enumerated. The virtues of the Mahdī, the Master of the
Time, who is hidden from the eyes and is present in every era, are
numerous. There are many narrations that talk about his reappearance,
the resplendence of his light, him renewing the sharia of Muḥammad,
fighting in the way of Allah as it should be fought, cleaning all of
earth from all impurities, his era is the era of the pious, his
companions are free from skepticism and doubt, free from defects, they
follow his guidance and his path, they receive the truth through him,
through him caliphate and Imamate will end, he is the Imam since his
father passed away until the Day of Judgment, and Jesus, peace be on
him, will pray behind him and will confirm his claim and will call the
people towards his religion which is the one brought by the Prophet,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family.” Al-Nūrī has narrated this
from him in Kashf al-astār. His statements about the birth of the Mahdī,
his occultation, and concealment have also been narrated from him in
Yanābī\` al-mawadda (p. 451). Al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū l-Fatḥ Muḥammad b. Abū
l-Fawāris. In his al-Arba\`īn—a copy of its manuscript is available in
the Āstāne Quds library (Mashhad, Iran)—he has narrated the following
tradition: “He who loves to meet Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, while
He is facing him, then he should accept the guardianship of \`Alī to the
last of the twelve.” At the end of his statement—according to what is
recorded in this book—he says, “I was inclined towards their excellence
and merits (meaning the Ahl al-Bait) after I moved along with the sects
and understood them. The truth became clear for me and I recognized it.
The path became obvious so I tread it with clear witnesses and authentic
and evident traditions. I was informed of them by reliable, pious, and
religious people. I have conveyed them just as they were narrated to
me.” Abū l-Majd \`Abd al-Ḥaqq al-Dihlawī al-Bukhārī who authored many
books. It has been narrated that his books were in excess of one hundred
volumes. He passed away in 1052 AH. According to Kashf al-astār, he has
written in his treatise about the Imams and their virtues, peace be on
them, “The son of Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī [is called]
M-U-Ḥ-A-M-M-A-D who was known to his special and trusted companions.”
Thereafter, he mentions the story of his birth in Persian. According to
Yanābī\` al-mawadda (p. 472) and the sixth session of Majālis
al-mu’minīn, Al-Shaykh Aḥmad al-Jāmī al-Nāmiqī has composed the
following poem (in Persian): Because of Ḥaidar’s love, every moment, I
feel serenity in my heart After Ḥaidar, al-Ḥasan is our Imam and guide
Like a dog, I am lying in his court The dust on al-Ḥusayn’s shoe is the
kohl of my eyes The Worshipper is my crown and al-Bāqir the light of my
eyes Al-Ja\`far’s religion is the truth and al-Mūsā’s religion should be
followed O Servants! Hear the characteristics of the King of Khurāsān A
speck of his grave’s dust cures the ill and needy O Muslims! Al-Taqī is
the leader of the faithful You love al-Naqī and everyone else should too
Al-\`Askarī is the light of the eyes of all men and creatures Where can
anyone find a commander like the Mahdī The Poets compose for the hope of
acquiring gold and silver Aḥmad al-Jāmī is the special servant of the
King of the Guardians Al-Shaykh Farīd al-dīn Muḥammad al-\`Aṭṭār
al-Nīsābūrī, who—according to Majālis al-mu’minīn—was killed in 627 or
589 AH. According to Yanābī\` al-mawadda (p. 473), he composed the
following poem in his book Muẓhir al-ṣifāt: In the world, Muṣṭafā is the
seal of the Prophets Murtaḍā is obviously the seal of the successors All
of Ḥaidar’s children are successors They are all one light, as the Lord
has said After mentioning the names of the Imams he continues: There are
hundreds of thousands of saints on earth Who are definitely asking Allah
for the Mahdī O Lord! Bring the Mahdī out of occultation So that the
world of justice becomes manifest Mahdī the guider, is the crown of the
pious The best of the creations and the tower of the saints O seal of
the successors of this era! You are hidden from everything, O spirit of
our lives! O both manifest and hidden! Your servant, al-\`Aṭṭār, has
come to praise you Jalāl al-dīn Muḥammad al-Balkhī al-Rūmī, the famous
mystic, better known as al-Maulawī (d. 672). According to Yanābī\`
al-mawadda (p. 473), he has composed in his large Dīwān—which is
arranged in alphabetical order—the following poem: O lord of the men,
\`Alī, the joyous salute you O lion of the men, \`Alī, the men salute
you . . . (to where he says) Tell the killer of the infidels, tell
religion and the religious Tell Ḥaidar, the continuous attacker, that
the joyous salute him Tell the Durj of the two jewels, tell the
constellation of the two stars Tell Shabbar and Shabīr that the joyous
salute them Tell the ornament of religion, the worshipper, tell the
light of religion, al-Bāqir Tell Ja\`far al-Ṣādiq that the joyous salute
them Tell Mūsā al-Kāẓim, tell the one from al-Ṭūs Tell al-Taqī, the
riser, that the joyous salute them Tell the prince of religion, al-Hādī,
tell the guided one, al-\`Askarī, Tell the successor, al-Mahdī, that the
joyous salute them Shaykh Ṣalāḥ al-dīn al-Ṣafadī (d. 764 AH), who knew
the secrets of the alphabet. According to Yanābī\` al-mawadda, he has
said in his book Sharḥ al-dā’ira, “The promised Mahdī is the twelfth
Imam from the Imams; the first of whom is our master \`Alī and the last
of them who is the Mahdī, may Allah be satisfied with all of them.”
Al-Maulawī \`Alī Akbar b. Asad-Allah al-Mu’ūdī, who is one of the more
recent Indian scholars. According to Kashf al-astār (p. 80) and Istiqṣā
al-afḥām (p. 98), in his book al-Mukāshifāt—which he wrote in the
margins of \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-Jāmī’s Nafaḥāt al-uns—he has explicitly
stated in the forty-fifth chapter, the Imamate and infallibility of
al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī and his forefathers to Amīr
al-Mu’minīn \`Alī. He states that the Mahdī was the pole (quṭb) [of the
mystics] after his father al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, peace be on them, who
too was a quṭb after his father—proceeding in this manner to Imam \`Alī
b. Abī Ṭālib. Moreover, he was concealed from the eyes of the ordinary
people as well as the elite except for the very, very special ones. He
then speaks about the infallibility of the twelve Imams. Shaykh \`Abd
al-Raḥmān the author of Mir\`āt al-asrār, who was one of the greatest
Ṣūfī shaykhs. Shāh Walī-Allah al-Hindī al-Dihlawī—the father of Shāh
\`Abd al-\`Azīz, the author of Tuḥfat al-Ithnā \`Ashariyya—has narrated
from him. According to al-Najm al-thāqib and Kashf al-astār, he has
written the following in Mir\`āt al-asrār: “The Sun of religion and
governance, the guide of the entire nation, the successor of Aḥmad, and
the true Imam, Abū l-Qāsim Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-Mahdī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, is the twelfth Imam from the Imams of the Ahl
al-Bait. His mother was a female slave and was called Narjis. His birth
took place on the night of Friday, Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH . . . His name
and epithet is like that of the Messenger [of Allah]. His titles are:
Mahdī, Ḥujja, Qā’im, Muntaẓar, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, and Khātam Ithnā \`Ashar.
He was five when his father Imam Ḥasan al-\`Askarī passed away and he
was appointed as an Imam [at this young age], just as Allah, the
Exalted, granted wisdom to John (Yaḥyā), son of Zachariah, in childhood,
and gave high stature to Jesus while he was an infant. He became an Imam
at a young age and his miracles are more than can be mentioned here. (He
then mentions what the aforementioned Shaykh Muḥyī al-dīn al-\`Arabī has
said, then continues,) Our master \`Abd al-Raḥmān Jāmī was a
well-experienced Ṣūfī who followed the Shāfi\`ī sect. He has written
about the birth and occultation of Imam Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-\`Askarī,
peace be on him, in great detail in his book Shawāhid al-nubuwwa. He has
extensively narrated from the Imams of the Ahl al-Bait and the authors
of biographies. The author of Maqṣadi aqṣā writes, ‘Shaykh Sa\`d al-dīn
al-Ḥimawī—the successor of Najm al-dīn—has written a book about Imam
Mahdī and has spoken about a lot of related subjects to such an extent
that no other creation can write [such a book]. When he reappears,
absolute guardianship will become manifest and the differences between
sects, unfairness, and evil will be completely uprooted—like it has been
mentioned in prophetic traditions about his characteristics. These
traditions state that the Mahdī will reappear in the end of times and
will cleanse every corner of the earth from injustice and unfairness.
Then, only one religion will remain. If the Antichrist (al-Dajjāl), the
evil-doer, can be alive and hidden, Jesus, peace be on him, can be born
and concealed from the people, then it is no surprise if the son of the
Holy Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, Imam Muḥammad
Mahdī b. Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, is too covered from the
eyes of the masses, and like Jesus and the Antichrist, will reappear on
Allah’s Command. It is not strange that some great scholars have denied
some concepts related to Mahdawiyya. It is wrong to deny these facts out
of sheer prejudice. Some of al-Sha\`rānī’s teachers; According to
Yanābī\` al-mawadda (p. 470): “Shaykh \`Abd al-Wahhāb al-Sha\`rānī has
written in his book al-Anwār al-qudsiyya, ‘Some of our teachers have
acknowledged that “We pledged allegiance to Imam al-Mahdī in Damascus
and stayed with him for seven days.” Shaykh \`Abd al-Laṭīf al-Ḥalabī
said to me in the year 1273 AH, “My father, Shaykh Ibrāhīm, may Allah
have mercy on him, said ‘I heard from some Egyptian Ṣūfī saints that
they pledged allegiance to Imam Mahdī.’”’” The lord of the scholars,
al-Qāḍī Shihāb al-dīn b. Shams al-dīn al-Daulatābādī (d. 849 AH), the
author of Manāqib al-sādāt and the Tafsīr al-Bahr al-mawwāj—both in
Persian—and al-Manāqib al-mausūm bi hidāyat al-su\`adā. According to
al-Najm al-thāqib and Kashf al-astār, in the latter, he has clearly
declared the Imamate of the twelve Imams and their names. He has
narrated the Tradition of the Tablet (ḥadīth lauḥ) and has said about
al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan, peace be on him, “He is in occultation and has a
long life like Jesus, Ilyās, and al-Khiḍr from amongst the believers and
al-Dajjāl and al-Sāmirī from amongst the infidels.” I say: Refer to
al-Hidāya, the second manifestation from the thirteenth guidance. Shaykh
Sulaimān b. Shaykh Ibrāhīm, known as Khāja Kalān al-Ḥusaynī al-Balkhī
al-Qundūzī (d. 1294 AH), the author of Yanābī\` al-mawadda. He has
mentioned in a number of places of this book, Imam Mahdī’s life, his
miracles, his birth date, his lineage, and some of the traditions that
are related to him. After mentioning the views about the date of his
birth, he writes on page 452, “The news regarded obvious and verified by
reliable scholars, is that the Qā’im, peace be on him, was born on
Friday night, Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH in Sāmarrā . . .” Shaykh \`Āmir b.
\`Āmir al-Baṣrī, the composer of al-Qaṣīdat al-Tā’iyya or Dhāt al-anwār,
comprised of twelve [sections called] lights, concerning knowledge,
judgment, secrets, and etiquette. According to Kashf al-astār, he has
written in the ninth light—which is about the recognition of the Master
of the Time and his reappearance—a poem which starts with the following
line: O Imam of guidance! Until when will you be occult Oblige us O
father by paying attention to us Al-Qāḍī Jawād al-Sābāṭī, who was a
Christian and converted to Islam and wrote al-Barāhīn al-Sābāṭiyya fī
l-radd \`alā l-Naṣārā in refutation of the Christians. According to
al-Najm al-thāqib and Kashf al-astār—after mentioning the differences
between the Muslims about the Mahdī—he writes: “The view of the Imāmiyya
[i.e. Shias] is closer [to the truth] as it is more in conformity with
the divine texts (al-naṣṣ).” Shaykh Abū l-Ma\`ālī Ṣadr al-dīn al-Qūnawī,
the author of Tafsīr al-Fātiḥa, Miftāḥ al-ghayb, and etc. Kashf al-astār
has reported that he has composed a poem which starts like this: “He
will rise by Allah’s order . . .” He has also said to his students in
his will, “Sell what books I have in my library on the topics of
medicine, wisdom, and philosophy and give its money in charity to the
needy. Keep the Tafsīr, Hadith, and Sufism books in the library. Recite
the word of oneness, ‘There is no god but Allah’ seventy thousand times
in the first night [of my death] with utmost attention of the heart and
convey my salām to the Mahdī, peace be on him.” The great learned
scholar \`Abd Allah b. Muḥammad al-Maṭīrī has clearly talked about him
in his book al-Riyāḍ al-ẓāhira fī faḍl Āl Bait al-Nabī wa \`itratih
al-ṭāhira. According to Kashf al-astār, he has named the Imams one after
the other, and he says: “The eleventh is his son, al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī,
may Allah be satisfied with him. The twelfth is his son, Muḥammad
al-Qā’im al-Mahdī, may Allah be satisfied with him. Divine texts are
available about him in the Islamic nation which date back to the Prophet
Muḥammad, Allah's blessings be on him [and his family], his ancestor
\`Alī b. Abū Ṭālib, may Allah approve of him, and from his other noble,
high statured forefathers. He is the Possessor of the Sword, the Riser,
and the Awaited one, as has been mentioned in authentic traditions.
Before his emergence, he will have two occultations . . .” The author of
Kashf al-astār writes, “The manuscript which I used was very old and
belonged to the author himself. In his own hand-writing he had written
on the cover, ‘al-Riyāḍ al-ẓāhira fī faḍl Āl Bait al-Nabī wa \`itratih
al-ṭāhira, written by the needy toward Allah, \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad
al- Maṭīrī al-Madanī, follower of the Shāfi\`ī religion, the Ash\`arī
belief, and the Naqshbandī path. May Allah benefit us from their
blessings, Amen.’” Shaykh al-Islam Abū l-Ma\`ālī Muḥammad Sirāj al-dīn
al-Rifā\`ī al-Makhzūmī, the honorable Sharīf. According to Kashf
al-astār, he has mentioned in his book Ṣiḥāḥ al-akhbār fī nasab al-sādat
al-Fātimiyya al-akhyār, under the biography of Abū l-Ḥasan al-Hādī,
peace be on him: “Imam \`Alī al-Hādī, the son of Imam Muḥammad al-Jawād,
peace be on them. His titles are: al-Naqī, al-\`Ālim, al-Faqīh, al-Amīr,
al-Dalīl, al-\`Askarī, and al-Najīb. He was born in Medina in 212 AH and
was martyred with poison during the reign of al-Mu\`tazz al-\`Abbāsī on
Monday, Rajab 3, 254 AH. He had five children: Imam Ḥasan al-\`Askarī,
al-Ḥusayn, Muḥammad, Ja\`far, and \`Ā’isha. Al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī was
succeeded by the Companion of the Cellar, al-Ḥujja, the Awaited One, the
Guardian assigned by Allah, Imam al-Mahdī, peace be on him. Mīr Khānd,
the famous historian, Muḥammad b. Khāwand Shāh b. Maḥmūd (d. 903 AH
[according to Kashf al-ẓunūn]). He has mentioned his birth, life, and
miracles in the third volume of Tārīkh rauḍat al-ṣafā. Naṣr b. \`Alī
al-Jahḍamī al-Naṣrī, one of the great and reliable Sunni scholars.
According to al-Najm al-thāqib, he has talked about his birth, his
mother’s name, and his janitors name. He is the same Naṣr about whom the
First Martyr (al-Shahīd al-Awwal) has said, “He stated in the presence
of al-Mutawakkil that the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, held (Imam) al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn’s hands and declared,
‘Whoever loves me, these two, and their mother, will be with me in my
rank in Paradise.’ On hearing this, al-Mutawakkil ordered that he be
whipped one thousand times. Abū Ja\`far \`Abd al-Wāḥid said, ‘He is a
Sunnī!’ and so he was pardoned.” Shaykh al-Islam, the great
traditionist, Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. al-Mu’ayyid al-Juwainī al-Khurāsānī
(d. 730 AH). In his book Farā’id al-simṭain (published in two large
volumes), he has mentioned his birth in a number of places and has
recorded traditions which speak about him and about the twelve Imams,
peace be on them. Al-Qāḍī al-Muḥaqqiq Buhlūl Bahjat Afandī, the author
of al-Muhākama fī tārīkh Āl Muḥammad in Turkish which was translated
into Persian. It has been published several times due to demand from the
readers. It is truly an excellent book which has investigated important
incidents in history and removed the numerous veils placed on historical
events by prejudiced writers and historians. In this book, he has
explicitly talked about the Imamate of the twelve Imams, some of their
merits and conditions, the birth of the twelfth Imam—and that he was
born on Sha\`bān 15, 255 AH—the name of his mother was Narjis, that he
had two occultations: the minor and major, that he is alive and will
appear when Allah, the Exalted, permits him to do so, and he will fill
the earth with fairness and justice. He also writes, “His [eventual]
appearance is agreed upon by all Muslims, and hence, there is no need to
prove it.” He then praises him with great words and mentions some of his
attributes and signs. Shaykh Shams al-dīn Muḥammad b. Yusuf al-Zarandī
who according to Ilzām al-nāṣib, has written in his book Mi\`rāj
al-wuṣūl ilā ma\`rifat faḍīlat Āl al-Rasūl: “The twelfth Imam is the
possessor of famous miracles whose stature is because of his great
knowledge and him following the truth and the traditions of the Prophet.
He will rise with the truth and will invite the people to the right
path. He is Imam Abū l-Qāsim Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan.” He then mentions his
birth date. Shams al-dīn al-Tabrīzī—the teacher of Maulawī Jalāl al-dīn
al-Rūmī. Kashf al-astār has cited Yanābī\` al-mawadda as stating that he
has acknowledged the birth of the Mahdī. The famous historian, ibn
Khalikān in Wafiyyāt al-a\`yān. We already mentioned what he has said in
the section about his birth and its history. Ibn al-Azraq, the famous
historian in Tārīkh mayyāfāriqīn (according to what has been narrated by
ibn Khalikān in Wafiyyāt al-a\`yān). Maulā \`Alī al-Qārī whom according
to Ilzām al-nāṣib and Kashf al-astār, has mentioned in his book
al-Mirqāt fī sharḥ al- mishkāt, the names of the twelve Imams and
pointed to some of their virtues and miracles. The great Ṣūfī saint for
whom \`Abd al-Raḥmān al-Ṣūfī’s book Mir\`āt al-asrār was written about
(as reported in Kashf al-astār). The famous historian ibn al-Wardī.
According to Nūr al-abṣār (chap. 2, p. 153), he has written in his
Tārīkh, “Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan, the purified one, was born in 255 AH.”
Al-Sayyid Mu’min b. Ḥasan al-Shablanjī, the author of Nūr al-abṣār. He
writes in chapter 2, page 152: “The section concerning the virtues of
Muḥammad b. Ḥasan al-Khāliṣ b. \`Alī al-Hādī b. Muḥammad al-Jawād b.
\`Alī al-Riḍā b. Mūsā al-Kāẓim b. Ja\`far al-Ṣādiq b. Muḥammad al-Bāqir
b. \`Alī Zain al-\`Ābidīn b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abū Ṭālib, may Allah
be satisfied with them. His mother was a female slave and her name was
Narjis. Others have said Ṣaqīl and Sūsan. His epithet is Abū l-Qāsim and
the Shias have given him the titles of al-Ḥujja (the Divine Proof),
al-Mahdī (the Guided), al-Qā’im (the Riser), al-Muntaẓar (the Awaited),
and Ṣāḥib al-Ẓamān (the Master of the Time). The most famous of these is
al-Mahdī.” Shaykh al-Nassāba Abū l-Fauz Muḥammad Amīn al-Baghdādī
al-Suwaydī, the author of Sabā’ik al-dhahab fī ma\`rifat qabā’il
al-\`Arab. He has mentioned the names of the twelve Imams and some of
their merits and virtues. He mentions Imam Ḥasan al-\`Askarī in chap. 6,
p. 77. He writes on p. 78, “Muḥammad al-Mahdī whose age was five when
his father passed away. He had an average figure, pleasant visage and
hair, an aquiline nose, and a wide forehead.” Shaykh al-Islam Ibrāhīm b.
Sa\`d al-dīn which has already been mentioned. Chief of the Imams, Ḍiyā’
al-dīn Muwaffaq b. Aḥmad al-Khaṭīb al-Mālikī al-Khāwrazmī, who was the
most eloquent of the speakers of Khāwrazm (according to Kashf al-astār).
He has recorded traditions in al-Manāqib that clearly establish this
point. Al-Maulā Ḥusayn b. \`Alī al-Kāshifī—the author of Jawāhir
al-tafsīr—who according to Kashf al-ẓunūn died in 906 AH. It has been
mentioned in Kashf al-astār that some of the knowledgeable have
attributed this belief to him and Kashf al-astār has narrated some of
his views that show his inclination towards it. Al-Sayyid \`Alī b.
Shihāb al-Hamdānī has openly stated this in the tenth chapter of his
book al-mawadda fī l-qurbā. Al-Shaykh Muḥammad al-Ṣubbān al-Miṣrī (d.
1206 AH), as is apparent in some of his words in Is\`āf al-rāghibīn. The
Abbasid caliph, al-Nāṣir Li-dīn Allah Aḥmad b. al-Mustaḍī’ Bi-Nūr Allah.
According to Kashf al-astār and Ilzām al-nāṣib he ordered that the
building of the noble cellar (sardāb) be reconstructed and a wooden
window be placed in the room on top of it. It was inscribed on the
window: “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. ‘Say, “I do
not ask you for any reward for it except the love of the close ones,”
and whoever does a good deed, We will increase it for him in goodness.
Surely, Allah is Forgiving and Grateful’ (Quran, 42:23). This was
ordered to us by our master—the leader whose obedience is obligatory on
all the creatures—Abū l-\`Abbās Aḥmad al-Nāṣir Li-dīn Allah, the
commander of the faithful, the caliph of the Lord of the Worlds, whose
kindness has covered the lands and his mercy and grace is prevalent in
the countries. May Allah establish his affairs with continuation of
success and facilitation, decorate them with help and support, make for
his eternal days a limit . . . And Allah suffices for us and He is the
best of those relied upon. Allah’s blessings be upon our master, the
seal of the Prophets, and upon his pure family and progeny.” Inside the
room, it was also inscribed on wood and hung on the walls: “In the Name
of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. Muḥammad the Messenger of Allah,
Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī Walī Allah, Fāṭima, al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, al-Ḥusayn
b. \`Alī, \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, Muḥammad b. \`Alī, Ja\`far b. Muḥammad,
Mūsā b. Ja\`far, \`Alī b. Mūsā, Muḥammad b. \`Alī, \`Alī b. Muḥammad,
al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, the Riser with the truth, peace be on them. This is
the work of \`Alī b. Muḥammad who loves the family of Muḥammad, may
Allah have mercy on him.” The author of Kashf al-astār also says: If
al-Nāṣir did not believe that the cellar (sardāb) was related to the
Mahdī and was the place of his birth, occultation, or miracles (and not
the place of his residence during his major occultation as has been
attributed to the Shias by some ignorant people, which has absolutely no
basis in their books, old or new), he would not have ordered for it to
be renovated or decorated. If the beliefs of the scholars of his time
were contrary to this and they had rejected the Mahdī’s birth, it would
have been very difficult or almost impossible for the caliph to
undertake such a project. Inevitably, if there was a consensus amongst
the scholars [of his time] that the Mahdī had not been born, it would be
have been fairly impossible for al-Naṣīr to do what he had done. The
reason we mentioned al-Nāṣir in this category is because of the
advantages he had like his merits, science, and being enumerated amongst
the traditionists. Ibn Sukayna, ibn al-Akhḍar, ibn al-Najjār, and ibn
al-Dāmghānī have all narrated from him. I say: These inscriptions still
exist in the noble cellar. We have seen and read them many times. Refer
to the book Dalīl Sāmarrā’ by Yūnus al-Shaykh Ibrāhīm al-Sāmarrā'ī, pp.
33–36 and you will find all of these in it. According to the book Nasmat
al-saḥar bi dhikr man tashayya\`a wa sha\`ar, vol. 1, p. 253, it appears
that al-Nāṣir considered himself the representative of the Mahdī, peace
be on him. This has also been reported from al-Dhahabī. The author of
the book Shadharāt al-dhahab, Abū l-Falāḥ \`Abd al-Ḥayy b. al-\`Imād
al-Ḥanbalī (d. 1089 AH), has declared the birth of the Mahdī in the
second section of his book, pp. 141 & 150. Shaykh \`Abd al-Raḥmān
Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Aḥmad al-Basṭāmī, who according to Yanābī\`
al-mawadda (p. 401), has said in Durrat al-ma\`ārif, “The Mahdī is the
most knowledgeable and forbearing of the people. He has a mole on his
right cheek and he is from the descendants of al-Ḥusayn.” According to
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, he has composed some poetry about him [these can be
found in the original Arabic edition of the current book—Ed.]. Shaykh
\`Abd al-Karīm al-Yamānī, the author of Yanābī\` al-mawadda writes on p.
466, “The majestic Shaykh, \`Abd al-Karīm al-Yamānī, writes and confers
his knowledge upon us . . .” He then mentions some lines of poetry
composed by him about the Mahdī. Al-Sayyid al-Nasīmī whom Kashf al-astār
has quoted citing Yanābī\` al-mawadda. \`Imād al-dīn al-Ḥanafī:
According to Kashf al-astār, some of the distinguished scholars have
attributed this belief to him. The respected scholar \`Abd-Allah b.
Muḥammad al-Maṭīrī in al-Riyāḍ al-ẓāhira fī faḍl Āl Bait al-Nabī wa
\`itratih al-ṭāhira. He begins this book by including all of Imam Jalāl
al-dīn al-Suyūṭī’s treatise called Iḥyā’ al-mayyit bi-faḍā’il Ahl
al-Bait \`alayhim al-salām, which is comprised of sixty traditions. He
has extended these traditions to 151 and he writes in the last one,
“From the seed of al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī will be the Mahdī who will be sent
in the end of times. . . The first Imam is \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace be
on him . . . (he names each one of the Imams until he says) The eleventh
Imam is his son, al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, and the twelfth is his son
Muḥammad al-Qā’im al-Mahdī. Divine texts concerning him have preceded
him in the Islamic nation from the Prophet Muḥammad, Allah's blessings
be on him and his family, his ancestor \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, and from his
other noble and high statured forefathers. He is the Possessor of the
Sword, the Riser, the Awaited.” The virtuous scholar, Rashīd al-dīn
al-Dihlawī al-Hindī. According to the book al-Imām al-thānī \`ashar, he
has recorded in his book Īḍāḥ laṭāfat al-maqāl, what Khāja Pārsā has
said in Faṣl al-khiṭāb and has agreed with him. Shāh Walī Allah
al-Dihlawī, the father of the author of al-Tuḥfa fī kitāb al-nuzha, and
many others who have narrated the tradition about the Musalsalāt which
we mentioned under al-Balādhurī (refer to no. 9). Shaykh Aḥmad al-Fārūqī
al-Naqshbandī, known as the ‘Restorer of the Second Millennium’
(al-mujaddid fī l-alf al-thānī) as has been recorded in al-\`Abqarī
al-ḥisān citing al-Makātīb (vol. 3, letter 123). Abū l-Walīd Muḥammad b.
Shaḥna al-Ḥanafī. In his history book known as Rauḍat al-manāẓir fī
akhbār al-awā’il wa l-awākhir, which has been published in the margins
of Murūj al-dhahab ([Egypt: al-Maṭba\`atu al-Azhariyya al-Miṣriyya, 1303
AH], vol. 1, p. 294). He writes: “This al-Ḥasan (meaning al-Ḥasan
al-\`Askarī, peace be on him) was granted a son, the Awaited One, the
twelfth amongst them; he is called the Mahdī, the Qā’im, the Ḥujja, and
Muḥammad. He was born in 255 AH.” Shaykh Khālid al-Naqshbandī (d. 1242
AH)—the author of Farā’id al-fawā’id and Risālat al-rābita. He has a
compilation of poems which have been published in Istanbul. He has
mentioned the twelve Imams in a poem in which he praises the eighth
Imam, \`Alī b. Mūsā al-Riḍā, peace be on him. In one part of this poem
(which is in Persian) he mentions the Mahdī and his forefathers. Sayyid
Bāqir b. Sayyid \`Uthmān Bukhārī, the author of Jawāhir al-auliyā’,
published in 1396 AH. He has expressed this meaning on pp. 31, 32, 307,
378, 471, 541, 544, and 556. Jamāl al-dīn Khāja Aḥmad Haqqānī. Refer to
Jawāhir al-auliyā’, p. 478. Sayyid Widāyat b. Sayyid \`Uthmān Bukhārī.
Jawāhir al-auliyā (p. 544) has narrated from him a supplication in
Persian which comprises of the names of the twelve Imams to our Master,
al-Mahdī, peace be on them. Shaykh \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b. \`Āmir
al-Shabrāwī al-Shāfi\`ī, the Dean of al-Azhar University, in his book
al-Itḥāf bi-ḥubb al-ashrāf, has clearly declared the Imamate of the
twelve Imams, peace be on them, and the birth of our Master, al-Mahdī,
the twelfth Imam, peace be on him. He has also mentioned some of their
merits and positions.

[^2]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 424, no. 1; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
pp. 234–237, no. 204, similar to it through his chain of narrators from
Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Muṭahharī, from Ḥakīma, which says: “My nephew,
(Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, called for me in Sha\`bān 15, 255
AH . . .” no. 205–207 mention the same story with some variations;
Yanābī\` al-mawadda, chap. 79, pp. 449–451, no. 1. He has narrated this
tradition through many different chains; Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, pp. 218–220;
I\`lām al-warā, chap. 1, sect. 2; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, no.
3.

[^3]: Quran 28:5–6.

[^4]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 430, no. 5; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
p. 147; Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, p. 221, concerning his birth: “From a group,
from Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā, from al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī al-Nīsābūrī, from
Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad, from Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Sayyārī . . . ,” similar
to it, with the difference that after saying “Allah's blessings be on
him and his family,” he continued, “a humble servant for Allah, who was
neither disobedient nor arrogant.” ; al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 1,
p. 457, no. 2; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 668, no. 34–35;
Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, pp. 498–499, under “The Miracles of Ṣāḥib
al-Zamān”; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 4, no. 1; Ḥilyat
al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 10, p. 544; al-Wasā’il, vol. 8, chap. 59, p.
461, no. 1, which only mentions the last section of the tradition;
Muntakhab al-anwār al-muḍī’a, p. 160 (short version); I\`lām al-warā,
part 4, sect. 2, chap. 1.

[^5]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, pp. 430–431, no. 6; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 5, no. 9; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, sect.
5, chap. 32, p. 483, no. 195.

[^6]: A unit of weight—Ed.

[^7]: \`Aqīqa is a sheep which is slaughtered on the occasion of the
birth of a child—Ed.

[^8]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, p. 430, no. 4; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 6,
chap. 32, sect. 5, p. 430, no. 194.

[^9]: Kifāyat al-muhtadī (al-Arba\`īn), p. 111, no. 29; Kifāyat
al-athar, chap. 39, pp. 290–291, no. 4; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 38,
pp. 408–409, no. 7, which says: “Narrated to us al-Muẓaffar b. Ja\`far
b. al-Muẓaffar al-\`Alawī al-Samarqandī, may Allah be satisfied with
him, from Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mas\`ūd al-\`Ayyāshī, from his father,
from Aḥmad b. \`Alī b. Kulthūm, from \`Alī b. Aḥmad al-Rāzī, from Aḥmad
b. Isḥāq b. Sa\`d, from Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī al-\`Askarī,
peace be on them, who said, ‘All praise is . . .’”

[^10]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 38, p. 408, no. 4; Kifāyat al-athar,
chap. 39, pp. 489–490, no. 2; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect.
5, p. 481, no. 185; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 9, p. 161, no. 13.

[^11]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 433, no. 13; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 669, no. 37.

[^12]: Quran, 3:18.

[^13]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, p. 38, no. 3; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 9, pp. 160–161, no. 8; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 481,
no. 184.

[^14]: Tārīkh al-A’imma, chap. “The Son of al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī
al-\`Askarī,” p. 14; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 223, no. 686, and p. 231, no.
197; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 31, sect. 10, p. 430, no. 116. I
say: The book Tārīkh al-A’imma or Tārīkh āl al-Rasūl or Tawārīkh
al-A’imma or al-Mawālīd, is a short and concise book about the birth
dates of the Messenger of Allah, Fāṭimat al-Zahrā, and the twelve Imams,
Allah’s blessings be on them all. It has been written by ibn Abū l-Thalj
al-Baghdādī (325 AH). His complete name is Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b.
Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Ismā\`īl, known as ibn Abū l-Thalj. Ibn Nadīm
writes in al-Fihrist, “He was a Shia who was inclined towards Sunnism
but he was inclined more towards Shi\`ism. He has narrated many
traditions from Sunnis and has authored books on different topics. He
was very religious, learned, and extremely pious.” His biography can be
found in other biography books. As for the aforementioned book, some
believe that this is the work of Naṣr b. \`Alī al-Jahḍamī, because at
its beginning, ibn Abū Thalj has narrated the birth dates of the
Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, the Master of the
Women (Fāṭima), and the Imams up to al-Riḍā, peace be on them, through
his chain of narrators from al-Naṣr, from (Imam) al-Riḍā, peace be on
him. Therefore, they have thought that the entire book was narrated from
al-Naṣr. The falsity of this idea becomes apparent by referring to the
book itself. Moreover, Naṣr b. \`Alī died during the reign of the caliph
al-Musta\`īn in 250 or 251 AH. If Naṣr had written this book about the
birth dates of the Imams, peace be on them, up to our Master al-Mahdī,
Allah’s blessings be on him, as has been stated by Sayyid b. Ṭāwūs in
Muhaj al-da\`awāt, p. 276 where he says: “Naṣr b. \`Alī al-Jahḍamī who
is a reliable scholar from the opponents (al-mukhalifīn), has mentioned
. . . in the book Mawālīd al-a’imma, ‘From the reasons is what has been
narrated from al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī al-\`Askarī when Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan
was born, “The oppressors think . . . he named him the Hoped
(al-Mu\`ammal).”’” Thus we must inevitably accept that he passed away
after the birth of the Mahdī in 255 AH. The following story has been
narrated about him: Al-Musta’īn asked for him to make him a judge. So he
said to the Emir of Basra, “I will go back [home] so that I may ask
Allah, the Exalted, for the best decision (astakhīru Allah).” He
returned to his house, performed two units (rak\`a) of prayers and said,
“O Allah! If being with you is better for me, then take me to yourself
[i.e. take my life].” He then went to sleep. When they came to wake him
up, he was dead. This narration is incorrect and the person who sought
him was not al-Musta\`īn. Rather, it was either al-Muhtadī or
al-Mu\`tamid. It is probable that al-Naṣr’s book only consisted of the
births and deaths of the Imams up to Imam Riḍā, peace be on him, and
that Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Fāryābī—the narrator from Naṣr and the one
from whom ibn Abū Thalj has narrated through \`Utbat b. Sa\`d b.
Kināna—has completed his book up to our Master, al-Qā’im, may my father
and mother be sacrificed for him. Even with all the probabilities,
attributing the book to ibn Abū Thalj will not be incorrect, because
either, he has narrated it from al-Fāryābī who has narrated a part of it
from al-Naṣr and completed the rest of it himself or he has compiled
what he has narrated from al-Naṣr and al-Fāryābī and integrated them
into this book. Anyway, the book which has been called Mawālīd al-A’imma
or Tārīkh al-A’imma or etc., is this book which Abū l-Mufaḍḍal
al-Shaibānī and others have narrated from ibn Abū Thalj. Hence,
attributing the book to him is justified and so is relying upon him and
regarding his book as reliable, especially when considering the fact
that it has been narrated from someone like ibn Abī Thalj and Allah
knows the best.

[^15]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 431, no. 8; Yanābī\`
al-mawadda, chap. 82, p. 460; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 100; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 5, pp. 483–484, no. 196.

[^16]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 431, no. 7; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 5, no. 10; Tabṣirat al-walī, pp. 45–46, no. 12. I
say: Her death before the death of Imam Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him,
which has been mentioned in this tradition, contradicts other traditions
like no. 804. We will discuss this issue under that tradition.

[^17]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 43, p. 434, no. 1; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
pp. 229–230, no. 195; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 17, no. 24;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, chap. 32, p. 506, no. 312.

[^18]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 432, no. 10; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 484, sect. 5, no. 198; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 5, p. 15, no. 17.

[^19]: \`Aqīqa is a sheep which is slaughtered on the seventh day after
an infant is born—Ed.

[^20]: Kamāl al-dīn (Published by al-Islāmiyya), vol. 2, chap. 45, p.
106, no. 11; Kamāl al-dīn (Published by Maktabat al-Ṣadūq), vol. 2,
chap. 42, p. 432, no. 11, in this version, his saying “And he ordered
that three hundred sheep be slaughtered for his \`aqīqa,” is missing;
Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 5, p. 15, no. 18; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol.
3, chap. 32, p. 484, no. 199, in which the following section is missing:
“And he ordered that . . .” I say: Perhaps his saying, “his epithet is
Ja\`far” in this tradition and in the fifth tradition from the 30th
chapter of Kamāl al-dīn (vol. 1, p. 318): “his epithet is derived from
his (paternal) uncle,” refers to his uncle and the uncle of his
forefathers, Ja\`far al-Ṭayyār, the martyr. This was done to enliven his
name and to honor his majestic position. It does not refer to his uncle,
Ja\`far b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad. In the tradition narrated from \`Aqīd, the
servant (narrated in Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 43, p. 474, no. 25), it
has been mentioned: “he was given the epithet Abū l-Qāsim, others have
said Abū l-Ja\`far.”

[^21]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, pp. 433–434, no. 16; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 5, p. 16, no. 21; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3,
chap. 32, sect. 5, p 484, no. 202.

[^22]: Kamāl al-dīn (Published by Maktabat al-Ṣadūq), vol. 2, chap. 43,
p. 441, no. 11; Kamāl al-dīn (Published by al-Islāmiyya) vol. 2, chap.
47, pp. 114–115, no. 12. It is worth mentioning that the variations and
differences in the numbers of the chapters and traditions in the two
versions of Kamāl al-dīn are insignificant except that in one version
the researcher has in some places merged two chapters as one and has
done the same to some of the traditions (or has thought they were really
one) and in the other version the researcher has done the opposite.
References from both copies have been mentioned to prevent errors. As
for ‘Nasīm’, it is clear in this tradition as well as what has been
narrated in Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 430, no. 5 (Maktabat
al-Ṣadūq) and vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 104, no. 5 (al-Islāmiyya) that she is
a woman. But in Ghaybat al-Shaykh (chap. “His Birth, Peace be on Him,”
p.139), Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb reports directly from Nasīm and states that
he is a male-servant. I believe that ‘Nasīm’ refers to a female servant
because she and Māriya—another woman—have both narrated in another
tradition (no. 788) what we mentioned that when he was born, he knelt
down and prayed . . . (to the end of the tradition). Obviously, only
women-servants were permitted to witness his birth. This fact is not
refuted by the argument that these women do not explicitly state that
they have actually witnessed the moment of his birth. Perhaps, both have
testified to what was clearly known to them through the testimony of
other women. Surely, this is against the literal meaning of the
tradition; so ponder on it. In Ghaybat al-Shaykh, “ten nights after his
birth” has been recorded instead of “one night after his birth.”
Al-Kharā’ij, vol. 2, p. 692, which says: “From Ibrāhīm al-Karkhī, from
Nasīm the servant of Abū Muḥammad . . . I went to see him ten days after
his birth . . .” Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, p. 198: “From \`Allān, from Nasīm
the slave of Abū Muḥammad . . . one night after his birth . . .” I say:
Such differences in the traditions do not weaken the essential substance
of the tradition which all the narrators and sources are unanimous
about. Such differences occur because only the main concepts of some of
them have been narrated and a word-by-word recount has not been used.
Those who have good understanding of traditions are aware of such
differences. Therefore, they take the common and definite parts from
them—which are agreed upon by all the tradition, or those in which the
narrators are more reliable and trustworthy, or those that are
preferable according to the intellectual preferences mentioned in dirāya
books. A tradition cannot be rejected merely on account of it having
minor differences with another. Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 18, p.
30, no. 24; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 500; Muntakhab al-anwār
al-muḍī’a, p. 160; al-Wasā’il, vol. 8, chap. 59, p. 461, no. 1; Ḥilyat
al-abrār, vol. 2, chap. 10, p. 544

[^23]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 433, no. 14; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 484, no. 201; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p.
16, no. 20.

[^24]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, pp. 271–273, no. 237; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 18, pp. 16–17, no. 14; Tabṣirat al-walī, pp. 164 & 166, no. 69;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 31, p. 415, no. 55 (short version). He
has recorded its beginning and its end in chap. 32, p. 509, no. 325. I
say: This tradition proves that Abū Sahl al-Naubakhtī believed that his
birth occurred in the year 256 AH. The tradition narrated from Abū Hārūn
is also like this (see Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 42, p. 432, no. 9).

[^25]: The traditions differ concerning the fate of the Imam’s mother,
peace be on him. Some state that she died after Imam Abū Muḥammad
al-\`Askarī in the house of Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Ḥamzat b. al-Ḥasan b.
\`Ubaid-Allah b. al-Abbās b. Amīr al-Mu’minīn \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, peace
be on him—who has been described as a reliable person and as a source in
traditions, who was true in his beliefs and had written a book—while
other traditions mention that she asked Imam Abū Muḥammad, peace be on
him, to pray for her death before his. The Imam obliged and his prayers
were accepted. In others (like the current tradition), it has been said
that she was present when the Imam, peace be on him, passed away. Yet,
other traditions say that she migrated to the Holy city of Mecca during
the lifetime of Imam al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, along with her son
al-Ḥujja, peace be on him, on the instructions of Imam Abū Muḥammad,
peace be on him. Most of these traditions indicate that she lived after
the death of the Imam, peace be on him, which is more probable and more
preferable. The proof for this fact lies in her grave which is behind
the grave of Imam Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him. Nevertheless, such
differences will not impact our purpose because our reliance in this
book is based on traditions that are mutawātir or non-singular, not on
singular narrations (al-āḥād). The traditions support each other in what
we have agreed on. It is worth mentioning that such secondary
differences also exist in the biographies of the Prophets, other Imams,
and historical figures. The details of such important
incidents—regardless of their essential subjects—cannot be the cause of
skepticism in the existence of those people, their obvious conditions,
and famous historical incidents related to them. This is in addition to
the fact that the conditions prevalent during the lifetime of Imam Ḥasan
al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, and after his death demanded that he,
peace be on him, concealed such secondary issues.

[^26]: Ithbāt al-waṣiyya, pp. 194-195; \`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt, p. 138,
similar to it from Aḥmad b. Maṣqala with the difference that it does not
mention the migration of the Master of Time along with Imam Abū
Muḥammad’s mother to Mecca. Its wording is: “Thereafter, he handed over
the Great Name (al-Ism al-A\`ẓam), the inheritances, and the weapon to
the Qā’im, the Master, peace be on him; and the mother of Imam Abū
Muḥammad left for Mecca.” I say: The aforementioned Aḥmad b. Maṣqala in
\`Uyūn al-mu\`jizāt is probably Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah b. \`Īsā b.
Maṣqalat b. Sa\`d al-Ash\`arī al-Qummī, who has been attributed to his
more famous grandfather, as can be inferred from many chains of
narrators in the traditions. It is also possible that he is one of the
cousins of Aḥmad b. Isḥāq b. \`Abd-Allah b. Sa\`d b. Mālik b. al-Aḥwaṣ
al-Ash\`arī Abū \`Alī al-Qummī, who has narrated from Imams \`Alī
al-Naqī and Abū l-Ḥasan. He was very close to (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace
be on him, and had also seen the Master of Time, peace be on him.
Al-Najāshī writes about Aḥmad b. Abd-Allah: “He was a reliable person
and has narrated a book from Imam \`Alī al-Naqī, peace be on him.”
According to this, he was contemporary with his cousin Aḥmad b. Isḥāq,
and had been alive during the life of (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on
him, and was still alive after 260 AH. The probability of Aḥmad b.
\`Abd-Allah and Aḥmad b. Isḥāq being the same person, is baseless except
for the fact that they were both descendants of Sa\`d and Aḥmad b.
Isḥāq’s grandfather had the same name as Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah’s father.
It is also probable that ‘Isḥāq’ has been dropped from the lineage of
Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah and ‘\`Īsā b. Maṣqala’ has been dropped from the
lineage of Aḥmad b. Isḥāq. If so, the lineage would be as follows: Aḥmad
b. Isḥāq b. \`Abd-Allah b. \`Īsā b. Maṣqalat b. Sa\`d b. Mālik b.
al-Aḥwaṣ al-Ash\`arī. Although this probability is weak, but perhaps
some evidence can be found by referring to the biographies of all the
men of this family, just as it is also likely that Aḥmad b. Isḥāq is the
nephew of Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah. With all this said, considering them as
two different people is still closer to the truth. Yes, the likelihood
of Aḥmad b. Maṣqala being Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah b. \`Īsā b. Maṣqala is
also high. Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 56, p. 579, no. 750,
which is a shortened version narrated from al-Mas\`ūdī.

[^27]: Kifāyat al-muhtadī (al-Arba\`īn), p. 104, no. 28; al-Arba\`īn
known as Kashf al-ḥaqq, p. 8, no. 1 and pp. 136–137, no. 22; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, sect. 44, p. 569, no. 680.

[^28]: Al-Mufīd, may Allah be satisfied with him, writes in al-Fuṣūl
al-\`ashara fī l-ghayba, p. 9: “The fact that (Imam) al-Ḥasan
(al-\`Askarī’s) son has been born has been established in the most
emphatic manner by which the lineage of the people are proved. For,
lineage is established by the testimony of a mid-wife, other women who
are usually present during birth, and those who assist them in it. Also,
the acknowledgement of the father will suffice and if required the
testimony of two men from the Muslims upon the confession of the man
that the child is his. Indeed, information from a group of religious
people, scholars, pious, ascetic, and highly knowledgeable people has
been narrated from Imam al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī who acknowledged the birth of
the Mahdī, peace be on him, informed them of his existence, and gave
them news about his Imamate after him. Some saw his child (in his
house), others saw an adolescent or a young man. After his father, he
ordered his Shia’s about what they should or shouldn’t do and answered
their questions . . . I have mentioned the names of a group of people
who I have already described their conditions, who were trusted by
(Imam) al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, peace be on him. They were very close to him
and were known for serving him and fulfilling (his orders). I have also
proved what they have narrated from him about the existence of his son,
them seeing him after his father (passed away), and them hearing the
divine news about his Imamate. These can be found in my books specially
the two famous ones known as al-Irshād fī ma\`rifat ḥujaj-Allah \`alā
l-\`ibād and al-Īḍāḥ fī l-imāma wa l-ghayba. Because of what I have
mentioned in those books, there is no need to prove them here again.”

[^29]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 41, pp. 417–423, no. 1; Ghaybat
al-Shaykh, pp. 208–214, no. 178; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, pp.
6–10, no. 12, citing Ghaybat al-Shaykh and pp. 10–11, no. 13, citing
Kamāl al-dīn; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 29, sect. 2, pp. 363–365,
no. 17 and chap. 31, sect. 1, pp. 408–409, no. 37 (short version).

[^30]: Al-Nakhkhās means slave-trader—Ed.


