Section Three
=============

The traditions that prove he is from the progeny of the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, from his Ahl al-Bait,
and from his seed

Comprised of 407 traditions

481. Al-Fitan[^1]: Narrated to us al-Walīd, from al-Shaykh, from
al-Zuhrī, from \`Urwa, from \`Ā’isha, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, who said: “He is a man from my
progeny. He will fight in accordance with my customs (sunnatī) just as I
fought in accordance with the revelations.”

482. Al-Fitan[^2]: Narrated to us al-Walīd from ibn Lahī\`a and informed
me \`Ayyāsh b. \`Abbās from ibn Zarīr, from \`Alī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him
and his family, who said: “He is a man from my Ahl al-Bait.”

And narrated to us ibn Wahb, from ibn Lahī\`a, from al-Ḥarth b. Yazīd,
from ibn Zarīr al-Ghāfiqī, from \`Alī, peace be on him, who said: “He is
from the progeny of the Prophet, may Allah’s blessings be upon him and
his family.”

483. Jawāhir al-\`iqdain[^3]: Aḥmad, ibn Māja, and others have narrated
from \`Alī, may Allah be satisfied with him, without a chains of
narrators, that: “The Mahdī is from us. Religion will be sealed through
us just as it by through us.”

484. Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr[^4]: Narrated to us al-Ḥusayn b. Isḥāq
al-Tustarī, from Wāṣil b. \`Abd al-A\`lā, from Muḥammad b. Fuḍail, from
Uthmān b. \`Abd-Allah b. Shubrama, from \`Āṣim b. Abī l-Najūd, from Zirr
b. Ḥubaish, from \`Abd-Allah b. Mas\`ūd, may Allah be satisfied with
him, who recounts that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], said: “A man from my Ahl al-Bait will emerge. His
name will be my name and his character will be my character. He will
fill [the earth] with justice and fairness just as it will be filled
with unfairness and injustice.”

485. Ṣifat al-Mahdī[^5]: From \`Abd-Allah b. \`Umar, from the Messenger
of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “The
Hour will not be established until a person from my Ahl al-Bait rules.
His name will be my name. He will fill the earth with justice and
fairness just as it will be filled with unfairness and injustice.”

486. Al-Fitan[^6]: Narrated to us al-Walīd, from Abū Rāfi\`, from Abū
Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], who said: “He is from my progeny.”

487. Al-Fitan[^7]: Narrated to us al-Qāsim b. Malak al-Muzanī, from
Yāsīn b. Sayyār, from Ibrāhīm b. Muḥammad b. al-Ḥanafiyya, from his
father, from \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib, may Allah be satisfied with him, from
the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family],
who said: “The Mahdī is from us Ahl al-Bait.”

488. Al-Fitan (by Abū Yaḥyā Zakariyyā b. Yaḥyā b. al-Ḥārith
al-Bazzāz)[^8]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Quddūs al-\`Aṭṭār, from \`Amr b.
\`Āṣim, from \`Imrān al-Qattān, from Qatāda, from Abū Naḍra, from Abū
Sa\`īd, from the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and
his family], who said: “The Mahdī is from us Ahl al-Bait.”

489. Al-Mu\`jam al-ausaṭ[^9]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Yaḥyā b. Khalid b.
Ḥibbān, from Muḥammad b. Sufyān al-Ḥaḍramī, from ibn Lahī\`a, from Abī
Zur\`a \`Amr b. Jābir, from \`Umar b. \`Alī, from his father \`Alī b.
Abī Ṭālib, peace be on him, who said:

I asked the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, “Is the
Mahdī from us or other than us, O Messenger of Allah?” He replied, “He
is from us. [Through us] Allah will seal just as He commenced through
us. Through us they will be liberated from polytheism. Through us Allah
will unite their hearts after clear enmity just as He united their
hearts after the enmity of polytheism.” I asked, “Will they be believers
or non-believers?” He replied, “[They will be] astray (maftūn) and
non-believers.”

490. Al-Mu\`jam al-ṣaghīr[^10]: Narrated to us Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b.
al-\`Abbās al-Qantarī, from Ḥarb b. al-Ḥasan al-Ṭaḥḥān, from Ḥusayn b.
al-Ḥasan al-Ashqar, from Qays b. al-Rabī\`, from al-A’mash, from \`Abāya
i.e. ibn Raba\`ī, from Abū Ayyūb al-Anṣārī, from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said to Fāṭima, [peace
be on her]:

Our Prophet is the best of Prophets and he is your father. Our martyr is
the best of martyrs and he is your uncle. From us is the one who has two
wings by which he flies in Paradise where he wishes, and he is your
father’s cousin, Ja\`far [al-Ṭayyār]. From us are the two grandsons of
this nation, al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, and they are your sons. And from us
is the Mahdī.

I say: Ibn al-Maghāzilī has recorded the entire tradition with its chain
of narrators—which ends at \`Abāya—who narrates from Abū Ayyūb
al-Anṣārī:

Once the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his
family], became ill and Fāṭima, Allah’s blessings be on her, visited him
while he was recovering from his illness. When she saw the affliction
and weakness of the Messenger of Allah, she started gasping until her
tears rolled down from her eyes.

He said to her, “O Fāṭima! Allah, Mighty and Glorified be He, searched
the earth thoroughly, then chose from it your father and sent him as a
Prophet. He searched it a second time and chose your husband.
Thereafter, He revealed [some matters] to me and I gave your hand in
marriage to him and made him the executor of my will. Are you not aware,
O Fāṭima, that because Allah holds you in such high esteem, He has
married you to a person who is the greatest in forbearance, the foremost
amongst them in Islam, and the most knowledgeable amongst them?”

On hearing this, Fāṭima became happy and rejoiced. Then, the Messenger
of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], said to her, “O
Fāṭima! \`Alī has eight obvious qualities: His belief in Allah and His
Messenger, his wisdom, his marriage to Fāṭima, his sons al-Ḥasan and
al-Ḥusayn, his enjoinment of good and forbiddance from evil, his
judgment by [using] the Book of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He. O
Fāṭima! We Ahl al-Bait have been given seven characteristics that have
not been given to anybody from the first ones and the last ones [or he
said: no one from the last ones except us].

Our Prophet is the most superior of the Prophets and he is your father.
Our heir (waṣī) is the best of the heirs, and he is your husband. Our
martyr is the best of martyrs and he is your father’s uncle. From us is
the one who has two wings by which he flies in Paradise where he wishes
and he is your cousin Ja\`far [al-Ṭayyār]. From us are the two grandsons
of this nation, al-Ḥasan and al-Ḥusayn, and they are your sons. And I
swear by the One in Whose hands is my life, from us is the Mahdī of this
nation.”

The traditions with the following numbers are either in harmony with the
topic of this section, or result in it, or based on the interpretation
of other narrations conform to it: 65, 70, 72, 80, 81, 83, 91, 95, 113,
118, 120, 125, 126, 127, 129, 132, 134, 136, 143, 149, 153, 158, 159,
160, 167, 168, 169, 170, 173, 175, 176, 177, 178, 181, 183, 191, 193,
194, 196, 205–309, 317, 318, 321, 323, 324, 325, 327, 336, 339, 345,
346, 349, 350, 353–357, 359, 360, 362–367, 370, 371, 373–378, 382, 385,
390, 395, 396, 398, 400, 401, 402, 406, 407, 411, 414, 416, 417, 418,
434, 435, 438, 450, 451, 456, 458, 461, 463–470, 475, 478–480, 492, 494,
496–499, 500, 502-509, 516–572, 575, 578, 580, 581, 586, 588, 590, 591,
595, 597, 603, 608, 609, 610, 613, 624, 625, 641, 645, 653, 654, 670,
685, 726, 757, 771, 780, 786, 787, 789–807, 859, 902, 903, 904, 918,
928, 932, 939, 942, 956, 958, 960, 973, 974, 1105, 1113, 1116, 1130,
1139, 1140, 1158, 1159, 1160, 1162, 1164, 1165, 1168, 1169, 1175, 1178,
1179, 1180, 1184, 1191, 1198, 1205, 1212, 1216–1219, 1223, 1230, 1235,
1237, 1240, 1243, 1246, 1251, 1252–1256, 1260, 1264, 1272, and 1274.

[^1]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, p. 199; al-Ṣawā\`iq al-muḥriqa, under the
twelfth verse, p. 162; Jawāhir al-\`iqdain, vol. 2, p. 8; Yanābī\`’
al-mawadda, chap. 73, p. 433; al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, chap. 192;
al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 2, p. 95, no. 21;
\`Iqd al-durar, chap. 1, pp. 16–17.

[^2]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, pp. 199–200; Al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir
al-zamān, chap. 2, p. 5, no. 21.

[^3]: Jawāhir al-\`iqdain, vol. 2, p. 8; al-Ṣawā\`iq al-muḥriqa, under
the twelfth verse from the verses that have been revealed about them,
citing al-Ṭabarānī, p. 161; Is\`āf al-rāghibīn (printed in the marginal
notes of Nūr al-abṣār), chap. 2, p. 134; Yanābī\`’ al-mawadda, chap. 73,
p. 433; \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 7, p. 145. He says: “Al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Bakr
al-Bayhaqī has recorded it”; Kashf al-khafā wa muzīl al-albās, vol. 2,
pp. 288–289.

[^4]: Al-Mu\`jam al-kabīr, vol. 10, no. 10229; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14,
p. 273, no. 38702; Muntakhab kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 6, p. 32, with a
little difference; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 2,
p. 92, no. 11. He has recorded it from al-Ṭabarānī and Abū Nu\`aim;
Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 471, no. 23, citing al-Arba\`īn by Abū
Nu\`aim with the difference that he has mentioned the narration to: “. .
. he will fill [the earth] with justice and fairness” ; al-\`Arf
al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 132, citing al-Ṭabarānī and
Abū Nu\`aim.

[^5]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 2, pp. 29–30. He says: “Al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Nu\`aim
has recorded it in Ṣifat al-Mahdī likewise” ; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2,
p. 471, no. 9, citing Abū Nu\`aim in al-Aḥādīth al-arba\`īn, through his
chains of narrators from ibn \`Umar.

[^6]: Al-Fitan (manuscript), vol. 5, p. 199; al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan,
chap. 194, p. 85, citing al-Fitan, with a slight difference in the
wording of the chain.

[^7]: Al-Fitan (manuscript), vol. 5, p. 201; al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan,
chap. 198, p. 86, citing al-Fitan.

[^8]: Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, sect. 3, chap. 19, pp. 163–164, citing
al-Fitan by Abū Yaḥyā Zakariyyā b. Yaḥyā b. al-Ḥārith al-Bazzāz, dated:
Wednesday, end of Rabī\` al-Awwal, 391 AH from al-Nizāmiyya Waqf; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 1, p.21.

[^9]: Al-Mu\`jam al-ausaṭ, vol. 1, p. 136, no. 757; Al-Fitan, chap.
“Nisbat al-Mahdī,” p. 198; Kanz al-\`ummāl, vol. 14, pp. 598–599, no.
39682; al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 2, p. 91, no.
7; al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 129; \`Iqd
al-durar, chap. 1, p. 25, and chap. 7, p. 142; Mahdī \`āl al-rasūl, p.
5.

[^10]: Al-Mu\`jam al-ṣaghīr, vol. 1, chap. “Min ismih Aḥmad,” p. 37;
Jawāhir al-\`iqdain, vol. 2, p. 8. He says: “Al-Ṭabarānī has recorded it
in al-Ausaṭ”; Yanābī\`’ al-mawadda, chap. 73, p. 434, with the
difference: “From us is the Mahdī and he is from your descendants”;
al-Bayān, chap. ½, p. 98; Dhakhā’ir al-uqbā, p. 44; \`Iqd al-durar,
chap. 1, p. 25; Majma\` al-zawā’id, vol. 9, p. 166; al-Ṣawā’iq, p. 163;
al-Manāqib by ibn al-Maghāzilī, pp. 101–102, no. 144; Yanābī\`’
al-mawadda, chap. 73, p. 436, with the difference: “I swear by the One
in whose hand is my life! From us is the Mahdī of this nation and he is
from your descendants”; al-Ṭūsī, al-Amālī, vol. 1, p. 154, like what has
been recorded in al-Manāqib; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 37, chap. 50 / 16, pp.
41–42, and pp. 65–66, no. 37, and vol. 51, chap. 1/6, p. 67; al-\`Umda,
p. 267, no. 423; al-Ṭarā’if, p. 134, no. 212; Sharḥ al-akhbār, vol. 2,
pp. 509–510, no. 900.


