Section Two
===========

Some of his miracles during the minor occultation

Comprised of twenty-nine traditions

844. Al-Kāfī[^1]: \`Alī b. Muḥammad, from Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Shādhān
al-Nīsābūrī, who said:

Four hundred and eighty dirhams had been given to me [from different
people] and I disliked sending [this odd amount] which was twenty
[dirhams] less than five hundred; so I added twenty dirhams to it from
my own money and sent it to al-Asadī [to give it to the Imam] without
mentioning that twenty of them were my own. Later, a letter reached me
which said, “Five hundred dirhams have been received—of which twenty
dirhams belonged to you.”

845. Al-Kāfī[^2]: \`Alī b. Muḥammad recounts:

A person from al-Sawād[^3] conveyed some wealth to [the Mahdī] but he
returned it to him saying, “Remove from it what belongs to your cousin
and is four hundred dirhams.” The man had in his possession the estate
of his cousin and had withheld their share. When he paid attention, he
realized that his cousin’s share was exactly four hundred dirhams. He
removed it and handed over the remaining, which was accepted.

846. Kamāl al-dīn[^4]: Narrated to me my father, may Allah be satisfied
with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Rāzī,
from a group of our (Shia) companions that

Once, [the Imam] sent a slave to Abū \`Abd-Allah b. Junayd, who was in
Wāsiṭ, and ordered him to sell it. He sold [the slave] and received its
fee. When he weighed the dinars, he realized that they were about
eighteen-twentieth of a dinar short. He added the missing amount from
his [own wealth] and sent them [to the Imam]. A dinar was returned to
him that weighed the exact amount that he had added [from himself].

847. Kamāl al-dīn[^5]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from \`Alī b. Muḥammad
al-Rāzī, known as \`Allān al-Kulainī, from Muḥammad b. Jabra’īl
al-Ahwāzī, from Ibrāhīm and Muḥammad the two sons of al-Faraj, from
Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Mahziyār that He entered Iraq as a skeptic and in
a state of confusion. He received a letter which said:

Say to Mahziyār, “We have heard what you have narrated from our friends
in your homeland. Tell them [i.e. our friends in your homeland], “Have
you not heard the saying of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, ‘Obey
Allah and obey His Messenger and those who have authority amongst
you.’[^6] Won’t this order be valid until the Day of Judgment? Don’t you
see that Allah has granted you forts that you take refuge in and known
people that you are guided with? [This has been happening] from the era
of Adam until the appearance of the one who has passed away [meaning Abū
Muḥammad], peace be on him.

Whenever a sign disappears, another becomes manifest and whenever a star
sets, another rises. Did you [people] think that when Allah took him
towards Himself, he had ripped the rope that was between Himself and His
creations? No! It will never be so until the Hour is established and the
commands of Allah become manifest and they will dislike it. O Muḥammad
b. Ibrāhīm! Don’t let skepticism enter your [heart] regarding what you
were in seek of, for Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will never make
the earth empty of a proof. Didn’t your father say to you before he died
that ‘Quickly bring someone here to weigh the dinars that are with me.’
There was a delay and the Shaykh feared that he would die soon, so he
ordered you to weigh those dinars yourself and gave you a big bag.

You had three bags yourself and a purse which contained dinars with
different [weights]. You weighed them and the shaykh put a seal on them
with his ring and asked you to seal them too. He then said, ‘If I live,
I am more worthy of them than you [i.e. I know what to do with them],
and if I die, then fear Allah regarding yourself firstly and regarding
me secondly.

Then free me [from this debt] and do what I believe you will do. May
Allah have mercy on you! Separate the extra dinars from amongst the
money— which are more than ten dinars—and send the remaining on your own
behalf for the times are much harsher than they used to be. And Allah is
enough for us and He is the Best that can be relied upon.’”

(Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm continued,) I went to the garrison [of Sāmarrā’] as
a pilgrim and wanted to go to the [Holy] Region when a woman came to me
and asked, “Are you Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm?” I replied in the affirmative.
She said, “Return! You cannot meet at this time. Come back at night and
the door will be kept open for you. Enter the residence and go to the
room in which there will be a lamp.” I did accordingly and went to the
door. It was open and I entered the residence and went to the room she
had described. I [came to myself] and found myself wailing and crying
between two graves. Suddenly, I heard a voice saying, “O Muḥammad! Fear
Allah (ittaq Allāh) and repent from the beliefs that you had for you
have accepted a great responsibility.”

848. Kamāl al-dīn[^7]: Narrated to us Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad b.
al-Walīd, may Allah be satisfied with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah,
from \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Rāzī, from Naṣr b. Ṣabbāḥ al-Balkhī who said:

In Marv, there was a scribe who was from Khūzistān[^8]—and al-Naṣr told
me his name. He had accumulated One thousand dinars from the Imam’s
money and he consulted me [to see who he should give the wealth to]. I
advised him to send it to al-Ḥājizī. He asked, “Will you claim
responsibility for them if Allah questions me about them on the Day of
Judgment?” I answered, “Yes.” I departed from him and after two years I
went to meet him and asked him about the money. He informed me that he
had sent 200 dinars from the money to al-Ḥājizī. A receipt had been
given to him in which he had prayed for him and he had then said, “The
money was one thousand dinars of which you have sent two hundred dinars.
If you want to transact [with us], then do it through al-Asadī at Riyy.”

When the [news about] the death of al-Ḥājizī reached me, I became
extremely anxious and very sorrowful.[^9] I said to him, “Why are you
sorrowful and anxious. Allah has obliged you through two signs: One, you
were informed about the total and exact amount of wealth and two, you
were informed about the death of al-Ḥājizī beforehand.”

849. Kamāl al-dīn[^10]: Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Aswad, may
Allah be satisfied with him, who said:

After the death of Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān al-\`Amrī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā b. Bābawayh, may Allah be
satisfied with him, requested that I tell Abū l-Qāsim al-Rauḥī to ask
our master, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, peace be on him, to pray to Allah, Mighty
and Majestic be He, to grant him a son. I asked him to do so and he
conveyed [the request]. After three days, he informed me that [the Imam]
had prayed for \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn and that he will soon be [the father]
of a blessed son whom [Allah] will make to be a cause of benefit; and
after him, more children [would come].

I too requested that he pray to Allah to grant me a son but my request
was not answered and he had said, “This is not possible.” Soon, Muḥammad
b. \`Alī was born to \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn, may Allah be satisfied with
him, and after him, more children. But I had no children.

The author of this book [i.e. al-Ṣadūq] says:

Whenever Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Aswad, may Allah be satisfied
with him saw me attending the classes of our teacher Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad b. al-Walīd, may Allah be satisfied with him, and my
crave for seeking knowledge and memorizing the books, he would say to
me, “I am not surprised that you have such crave in seeking knowledge;
because you were born through the prayers of Imam [Mahdī], peace be on
him.

850. Kamāl al-dīn[^11]: Muḥammad b. Hārūn al-Qāḍī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, narrated to us from Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah b.
Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī, from his father, from Isḥāq b. Ḥāmid al-Kātib, who
said:

There was a faithful cloth-seller in Qum who had a partner who belonged
to the Murji’a sect. Once, they received a precious cloth. The believer
said, “This cloth is appropriate for my master.” The partner answered,
“I don’t know your master. But you can do as you please.” When the cloth
reached the Imam, peace be on him, he cut it into two from top to bottom
and kept one half and returned the other and said, “We do not need the
wealth of the Murji’a.”

851. Dalā’il al-imāma[^12]: Abū l-Mufaḍḍal Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah
narrated to me, from Abū Bakr Muḥammad b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad al-Muqrī,
from Abū l-\`Abbās Muḥammad b. Shābūr, from al-Ḥasan b. Muḥammad b.
Ḥayawān al-Sarrāj al-Qāsim, from Aḥmad al-Dīnawarī al-Sarrāj—whose
epithet was Abū l-\`Abbās and his title was Istāra—who said:

I went from Ardabīl to Dīnawar with the intention of performing Hajj.
This was a year or two after the death of (Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan
b. \`Alī and the people were in a state of confusion. The people of
Dīnawar were giving each other the good news that I had arrived and the
Shias gathered around me.

They told me, “We have sixteen thousand dinars which we must give to
[the Imam]. We want you to take them with yourself and give them to the
one to whom they must be given.” I said, “O people! [We are in] a state
of confusion and we don’t know who the door to the Imam is [i.e.
representative of the Imam].” They responded, “We have chosen you to
carry this wealth because of what we know about your reliability and
nobility. So, take them with the condition that you don’t hand them over
[to anyone] except that [he shows you] proof.”

They gave me the money in various purses with the names [of the owners
written] on them. I took the money and left. When I reached Qarmīsīn, I
went to say hello to Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan who lived there. He was delighted
by seeing me and he gave me one thousand dinars in a sack and a bag of
dark colored clothes that I couldn’t figure out what it contained. He
said, “O Aḥmad! Carry this along with you but don’t hand it over to
anyone except [he who shows you] proof.” I took the money from him and
the bag of clothes with whatever was in it.

When I entered Baghdad, I had no worry but to search for someone who
would be pointed to as the bāb (door) [to Imam Mahdī, peace be on him].
I was told, there is a man here known as al-Bāqaṭānī who claims to be a
bāb (door); another person called Isḥāq al-Aḥmar also claims to be a
bāb; and there is yet another person known as Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī, who
also claims to be the bāb. I started with al-Bāqaṭānī.

I went to him and found him to be a radiant old man. He showed apparent
pomp and had Arabian carpets [or horses]. He had many slaves and people
had gathered around him and were speaking. I went to him and greeted
him. He welcomed me, called me near him, showed me kindness, and
expressed his joy. I sat with him for a long time until most of the
people left. He then asked me the reason of my visit.

I introduced myself as a person from Dīnawar and that I had some wealth
which I wanted to hand over to him. He said, “Hand it over to me.” I
said, “I need proof.” He replied, “Come back tomorrow.” I returned the
next day but he failed to show any proof. I returned the third day but
he showed no proof again.

So, I went to Isḥāq al-Aḥmar and found him to be a neat young man. His
house was bigger than that of al-Bāqaṭānī. His carpets [or horses],
clothes, and pomp were better than that of al-Bāqaṭānī and he had more
slaves and more visitors than him. I went in and greeted him. He
welcomed me and asked me to come near him. I waited until the crowds
dwindled. He then asked me why I had come. I said to him what I had said
to al-Bāqaṭānī, and went to see him for three days but he failed to show
any proof.

Finally, I went to Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī. I found him to be a humble old
man. He was wearing a white garment and was sitting on a felt mattress
in a small house. He neither had slaves nor apparent pomp nor the
carpets [or horses] that I found with the others. I greeted him and He
replied to my salutations. He brought me close to himself and reached
towards me. Then, he asked about me.

I told him that I had come from the region of Jabal and was carrying
wealth. He replied, “If you desire to transfer this wealth to where [it
should be transferred], then it is necessary that you go to Sāmarrā’ and
ask for the house of ibn al-Riḍā[^13] and ask for so and so person, the
representative—whose house will be teeming with its residents. You will
find there what you are after.” I left his company and went to Sāmarrā.
I reached the house of ibn al-Riḍā and asked for the representative.

The door-keeper said that he is busy inside the house and will come out
soon. I sat beside the door waiting for him to come out. He emerged
after some time and I stood up and greeted him. He held my hand and took
me inside his house. He asked me how I was and the reason for my visit.
I told him that I was carrying some wealth from the land of Jabal and
intended to hand it over to him after [he showed me] proof. He said,
“Yes.” Then, he brought food for me and said, “Eat this and rest because
you are tired and there is still some time left until prayer time. I
will bring for you what you want.” I ate and slept.

When the time of prayers arrived, I got up and prayed. I went to the
stream, had a bath, and returned. I waited until about one-fourth of the
night had passed when he came to me and with him was a piece of paper,
on which was written: “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad al-Dīnawarī has come and is carrying sixteen
thousand dinars and they are in so many purses.

One of them belongs to so and so and contains so many dinars. Another
belongs to such and such and contains so many dinars . . .” Until he
enumerated all the purses and finally said, “the purse of al-Dharrā\`
which contains sixteen dinars.” At this juncture, Satan tempted me [to
ask myself], “Is it possible that my master knows more about these
purses than me?” Then I started mentioning the purses—one after the
other along with the names of their owners—until I reached the last one.

[The letter] continued, “He has brought a bag from Qarmīsīn from Aḥmad
b. al-Ḥasan al-Bādarānī—the brother of the moneychanger—which contains
one thousand dinars and so many clothes. One of them belongs to so and
so person. Another’s color is such and such . . .,” until he described
[all] the clothes as to whom they belonged to and their colors. I
praised Allah and thanked Him for what He had obliged me by dispelling
the doubts from my heart. He had also ordered me to give everything that
I was carrying to whoever Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī ordered. [I left for
Baghdad and went to Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī] and my entire journey to
Sāmarrā’ and back was completed in three days.

When Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī saw me, he asked, “Why haven’t you gone yet?”
I replied, “My master! I have [just] returned from Sāmarrā.” I was
informing Abū Ja\`far about [my journey] when a note was brought to him
from our master, peace be on him, accompanied with a piece of paper like
the one which was with me.

The money and clothes had been mentioned in it and he had ordered that
they all be handed over to Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Ja\`far
al-Qattān al-Qummī. Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī wore his clothes and said to
me, “Take what is with you to the house of Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Ja\`far
al-Qattān al-Qummī.” I carried the money and the clothes to the house of
Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Ja\`far al-Qattān al-Qummī, handed them to him, and
then left for Hajj.

When I returned to al-Dīnawar, the people gathered around me. I brought
out the scroll which the representative of our Master had given to me
and read it out for the people. When they heard [me] mention the purse
with the name of al-Dharrā\`, [its owner] fell down and fainted. We
revived him until he regained consciousness. Immediately, he went into
prostration to thank Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, and said, “All
Praise is for Allah Who obliged us with guidance. Now, I am sure that
the earth cannot be empty of a [divine] proof. By Allah, this purse was
handed over to me by this al-Dharrā\` and no one was aware of this
except Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He.”

I left and after some time met Abū l-Ḥasan al-Bādarānī and informed him
about the entire incident and read the scroll for him. He exclaimed, “O
subḥān Allah! I have never doubted anything and you should never doubt
that Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, will empty His earth of a
(divine) proof.

Know that when Irtakūkīn attacked Yazīd b. \`Abd-Allah at Suhraward,
conquered his cities, and took hold of his treasury, a man came to me
and said that Yazīd b. \`Abd-Allah had put aside such and such horse and
sword for our master, peace be on him. I started transferring the
treasures of Yazīd b. \`Abd-Allah to Irtakūkīn and was protecting the
horse and the sword until nothing remained [in the treasury] except
these two things.

I was hoping that I could keep these two things for our master but the
demand of Irtakūkīn intensified and I had no choice but to hand them
over. I estimated that they were worth one thousand dinars and I gave
this sum to the treasurer and said, ‘Put these dinars in the safest of
places and don’t ever give them to me—no matter how intense [my] need to
them may be.’ Then I handed over the horse and the sword. Later, I was
sitting at my [special place] at Riyy, settling affairs, listening to
reports, and giving orders, when Abū l-Ḥasan al-Asadī came to me. He
would visit me time after time and I used to fulfill his needs. He
stayed with me for a very long time and I was extremely miserable.

I asked him, ‘What do you want?’ He replied, ‘I want some privacy.’ So,
I ordered the Treasurer to prepare for us a private place in the
Treasury. We entered the Treasury and He took out a small piece of paper
from our master, on which was written, ‘O Aḥmad b. al-Ḥasan! Hand over
to Abū l-Ḥasan al-Asadī the thousand dinars that belong to us and are
the price of the sword and the horse.’ I immediately went into
prostration for Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, to express my
gratitude for His obligation on me and then I knew that he was truly
Allah’s Caliph because no one was aware of this except me. So, I added
to that money three thousand more dinars because of my delight at the
obligation of Allah upon me on account of this event.”

852. Dalā’il al-imāma[^14]: Informed us Abū l-Mufaḍḍal Muḥammad b.
\`Abd-Allah, from Muḥammad b. Ya\`qūb, from al-Qāsim b. al-\`Alā who
said:

I wrote three letters to the Master of the Time and mentioned my needs.
I informed him that I am an old man and have no children. He replied to
me about my needs but said nothing about children. So, I wrote a fourth
letter to him and asked him to pray for me to Allah to grant me a son.
He replied to me and wrote about my needs and wrote, “O Allah! Grant him
a boy which will be the apple of his eyes and make [the child] from this
pregnancy his heir.” When I received the letter, I was not aware about
any pregnancies. I asked my slave-girl about it and she informed me that
she was no longer experiencing menstruations. [Some time later], she
gave birth to a boy.

853. Dalā’il al-imāma[^15]: \`Alī b. Muḥammad narrated to me from Naṣr
b. al-Ṣabbāḥ who said: “A person from Balkh sent five dinars to the
Master along with a [note] in which he had changed his name. When he
sent it to the Master, he received a receipt in which his [real] name
and lineage had been mentioned and he had prayed for him.”

854. Dalā’il al-imāma[^16]: Abū Ja\`far said, “A son was born to me and
I wrote to [the Imam] seeking permission to circumcise him on the
seventh day. The reply was, ‘No.’ The child died on the seventh day and
I wrote to him and informed him about his death. He replied, ‘Allah will
replace him with another [son] then another. Name [the new child] Aḥmad
and the next one Ja\`far.’ It happened like he had said.”

855. Al-Kāfī[^17]: \`Alī b. Muḥammad, from Abū \`Aqīl \`Īsā b. Naṣr who
said: “\`Alī b. Ziyād al-Ṣaimarī wrote [a letter to him] and asked for a
burial-shroud. He wrote in reply, ‘You will need it at eighty.’ He died
at eighty and [the Imam] sent him a shroud a few days before his death.”

856. Al-Kāfī[^18]: From Al-Qāsim b. al-\`Alā who said: “A number of sons
were born to me and I wrote to him asking him to pray (for the). But, he
did not write anything to me about them and (soon) all of them died.
When my son al-Ḥasan was born, I wrote to him and asked him to pray (for
him), I received the response, ‘He will survive and all praise is for
Allah.’

857. Al-Kharā’ij[^19]: And from amongst them (meaning the miracles of
Imam Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, peace be on him) is:

Abū Muḥammad al-Da\`lajī had two sons and he was one of our best
companions and had heard a lot of traditions. One of his two sons was on
the right path. His name was Abū l-Ḥasan and he used to bathe the dead.
His second son was walking on the path of the youth who indulged in
prohibited acts. Abū Muḥammad had been given some money to perform Hajj
on behalf of Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, peace be on him, and this was the practice
of the Shias in those times. He handed over some of this to his second
son who was infamous for his corruption and left for Hajj.

When he returned, he narrated that while he was at one of the stations
[during the pilgrimage], a handsome young man with a tanned complexion
and with two locks of hair who was busy supplicating, praying, invoking,
and worship.

When some of the people went near [him], he turned towards me and said,
“O Shaykh! Are you not ashamed?” I asked, “Why, O my Master?” He
replied, “You have been given some money to perform Hajj from whom you
know and you handed some of it over to a corrupt [man] who drinks wine.
The time that you will lose one of your eyes is close” and he pointed
towards my eye. From that day on, I was in a state of constant alarm and
fright.

Abū \`Abd-Allah Muḥammad b. Muḥammad al-Nu\`mān heard about this and
said, “Barely forty days had passed from his return [from the Hajj
pilgrimage] that he developed an ulcer in the eye which had been pointed
to and he lost his eyesight.”

858. Kamāl al-dīn[^20]: Narrated to me my father, may Allah be satisfied
with him, from Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, from \`Allān al-Kulainī, from
al-A\`lam al-Miṣrī, from Abū Rajā’ al-Miṣrī who said:

After the death of Imam Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, I went out in
search [of his successor] for two years but in these two [years] I found
nothing. In the third year, I was in Medina seeking the son of Abū
Muḥammad, peace be on him, at Ṣuryā’ and Abū Ghānim had asked me to have
dinner with him. I was sitting, engrossed in deep thought, and saying to
myself, “If there was anything, it should have appeared after three
years.”

Suddenly, a caller who I could hear but I could not see, called out, “O
Naṣr b. \`Abd-Rabbih! Say to the people of Egypt, ‘Did you become
believers in the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, only after you saw him?’” I did not know my father’s name
because I was born in Madā’in and al-Naufalī had adopted me when my
father had died and had brought me up. When I heard this voice, I
instantly got up and instead of going to Abū Ghānim, I took the road to
Egypt.

Two men from Egypt had written [to the Imam] about their two sons. The
answer they received was: “As for you, O so and so, may Allah reward
you!” And he prayed for the other. Soon, the son of the one who had been
consoled died.

859. Al-Ghayba (by the renowned jurist, traditionist, and ascetic,
al-Ḥasan b. Ḥamza, may Allah be satisfied with him [d. 385 AH])[^21]: A
righteous person from our companions narrated to us:

One year, I went to the Holy Ka\`ba to perform Hajj. It was a year of
extreme heat and intense hot winds. I was separated from my caravan and
lost my way. I was so overcome with thirst that I fell down and was
about to die when I heard a horse neighing. I opened my eyes and saw a
handsome fragrant youth riding a white animal.

He gave me water to drink—that was colder than ice and sweeter than
honey—and he saved me from death. I asked, “O My Master! Who are you?”
He replied, “I am the Proof of Allah upon His servants and the Remnant
of Allah on His earth. I am the one who will fill the earth with
fairness and justice just as it will be filled with injustice and
unfairness. I am the son of al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b.
Mūsā b. Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib,
peace be on them.” He then said, “Close your eyes” and I closed them.
Then, he said, “Open them.” I opened my eyes and I saw myself ahead of
the caravan. Then, he disappeared from my sight, Allah’s blessings be on
him.

860. Al-Dalā’il (by al-Shaykh Abū l-\`Abbās \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far
al-Ḥimyarī—one of the great scholars of the third century AH)[^22]: A
person from the outskirts of Ḥumaid wrote to [the Imam] and asked him to
pray for his child who was not born yet. The reply was: a prayer is
(useful) only within the first four months of pregnancy and that he will
soon have a son. Things turned out as he had said, Allah’s blessings be
on him.

861. Faraj al-mahmūm[^23]: From the aforementioned book (apparently
referring to al-Ḥimyarī’s al-Dalā’il) is what we have narrated from
al-Shaykh al-Mufīd and have recorded it from a very old manuscript from
the Usūl’s of our companions that was written during the life of the
representatives. This is what he cites from Al-Ṣafwānī, may Allah have
mercy on him:

I saw al-Qāsim b. al-\`Alā who lived for 117 years. Of these, he could
see until the age of eighty. In those [eighty years], he had seen our
Master Abū l-Ḥasan and our Master Abū Muḥammad, peace be on them. After
the age of eighty, he became blind but regained his sight seven days
before his death. I lived with him in the city of Arān in Azerbaijan.

The letters (tauqī\`āt) of our master, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, Allah’s blessings
be on him, would continuously reach him through Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b.
\`Uthmān al-\`Amrī and after him, through Abū l-Qāsim b. Rūḥ, may Allah
sanctify their souls. For about two months, no letters came to him and
he became worried, may Allah have mercy on him.

We were with him when the doorkeeper entered with good news and said,
“The messenger from Iraq has entered.” Al-Qāsim became delighted and
turned his face towards the Qibla and prostrated. A short man entered
carrying parcels and wearing the messengers uniform. He was wearing an
Egyptian overcoat, shoes from Amul[^24] adorned his feet, and on his
shoulder was a bag. He stood up, embraced him, removed the bag from his
neck, called for a tray of water, washed his face, and made him sit next
to himself.

We ate and washed our hands then the man stood up and removed a note
greater in size than half a paper. He handed it over to al-Qāsim who
kissed it and gave it to his scribe called \`Abd-Allah b. Abī Salma. He
took it, opened it, read it, and started crying to the extent that
al-Qāsim sensed his weeping. Al-Qāsim asked, “O \`Abd-Allah! Is
everything okay?” He replied, “Nothing unpleasant.” He asked, “And what
is that?” He said, “The Shaykh will pass away forty days after he
receives this letter. He will become ill on the seventh day after
receiving this letter. Then, Allah will restore his eyesight and seven
clothes will be taken to him.’’ Al-Qāsim asked, “[Will I die] while my
faith is safe?” He replied, “Yes, while your faith is safe.” [On hearing
this], he laughed—may Allah have mercy on him—and remarked, “What more
can I expect after this age?” The man stood up, removed from his bag
three red Yemeni trousers, a turban, two clothes, and a handkerchief and
the Shaykh took them.

With him was a shirt that was given to him by our Master Abū l-Ḥasan b.
al-Riḍā, peace be on him. He had a friend called \`Abd al-Raḥmān b.
Muḥammad al-Sarī who had great enmity towards the Shias. But, between
him and al-Qāsim—may Allah brighten his face—there was great affection
in worldly matters and he was fond of him.

\`Abd al-Raḥmān would come to Arān to reconcile between Abū Ja\`far b.
Ḥumdūn al-Hamdānī and Ḥayyān al-\`Ayn and would often visit him.
[Al-Qāsim] said to the two elderly people who lived with him—who were
called Abū Ḥāmid \`Imrān b. al-Mufallas and Abū \`Alī Muḥammad—, “I want
to read this letter for \`Abd al-Raḥmān because I would love him to be
guided and I hope that Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, guides him by
this letter.”

[One of them] said, “There is no god except Allah! When the Shias do not
have the capacity to bear the contents of this letter, how can \`Abd
al-Raḥmān do so?” He answered, “I know that I am revealing a secret that
I should not, but for the sake of my affection for \`Abd al-Raḥmān, I
desire that Allah guides him towards this affair, so I will read it for
him.” That day passed and it was a Thursday, Rajab 13, 304 AH. \`Abd
al-Raḥmān entered and greeted him. He said, “Read this letter and see
for yourself.”

He started reading it and when he reached the part where his death was
foretold, he threw the letter and said to al-Qāsim, “O Abū Muḥammad!
Fear Allah! You are a learned person in your religion and sound in
intellect. Verily, Allah says, ‘And no one knows what it will achieve
tomorrow and no one knows in which land it will die.’[^25] And He says,
‘Knower of the unseen; He does not reveal his unseen for anybody.’[^26]”
Al-Qāsim laughed and said, “The verse is finished by ‘Except for a
Messenger he approves of’[^27] and my master is one who is an approved
messenger.

I knew that you would say such things but take note of this day. If I
live after the mentioned date in the letter, then be sure that I was
wrong [in my beliefs]. And if I die [as mentioned in the letter] then
check [the date again].” \`Abd al-Raḥmān took note of that day and they
left each-other.

On the seventh day after the letter was received, al-Qāsim caught a
fever and became severely ill. He was leaning towards the wall while in
bed and his son, al-Ḥasan b. al-Qāsim who was an alcohol addict, was
married to [the daughter of] Abū \`Abd-Allah b. Ḥumdūn al-Hamdānī. Abū
\`Abd-Allah b. Ḥumdūn al-Hamdānī was sitting in one corner of the house
and he had covered his face with his cloth while Abū Ḥāmid was in
another corner.

Abū \`Alī b. Muḥammad and a group of people from the city were crying
when al-Qāsim leaned back on his hand and began to say: “O Muḥammad! O
\`Alī! O Ḥasan! O Ḥusayn . . . (to the last Imam). O my masters! Be my
intercessors before Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He.” He repeated this
for a second time and started saying it for the third time. When he
reached “O Mūsā! O \`Alī!”, his eyelids burst open like the windflowers
which are burst open by children.

His irises opened and he began rubbing his eyes gently with his sleeve.
A liquid oozed out from his eyes which was similar to blood serum. Then,
he looked at his son and said, “O Ḥasan! Come to me. O Abū Ḥāmid! Come
to me. O Abū \`Alī! Come to me.” They all gathered around him and looked
at his cured pupils. Abū Ḥāmid asked, “Can you see us?”

Then he placed his hand on each one of us. The news [about al-Qāsim
regaining his eyesight] spread amongst the people who flocked to see
him. The Chief Justice of Baghdad, \`Ayniyyat b. \`Ubaid-Allah Abū
Thābit al-Mas\`ūdī[^28], came to him and said, “O Abū Muḥammad! What is
on my hand?” He then showed him his ring with a turquoise gem on it and
brought it closed to him. He replied, “It is a ring with a turquoise gem
and three lines have been written on it.” Al-Qāsim then took it from him
but could not read [what was written on it]. The people left in
amazement and were spreading his story.

Then, al-Qāsim turned to his son al-Ḥasan and said, “O my son! Allah,
Mighty is His Name, has made your position my position and your status
my status. So, accept it with gratitude.” Al-Ḥasan replied, “I accepted
it.” Al-Qāsim said, “With what conditions?” He replied, “With [the
conditions] you order me [to accept].” He said, “On the condition that
you stop drinking wine.” Al-Ḥasan said, “O father! I swear by the One
Whom you are mentioning, I will stop drinking wine and also those things
which you do not know about.” Al-Qāsim raised his hands towards the sky
and said three times, “O Allah! Inspire al-Ḥasan with Your obedience and
keep him away from Your disobedience.”

Then, he called for a piece of paper and wrote his will with his own
hands, may Allah have mercy on him. The estates which were in his
position belonged to our master, peace be on him, and were endowed to
[the Imam] by his father (waqafahā lahū). [Al-Qāsim] had written in his
will to al-Ḥasan, “If you become eligible for this affair—meaning the
representation (wikāla) of our master—you will get a share of half of my
estates at Farjand and the rest of it is the property of my master, and
if you do not become eligible, then seek goodness from wherever Allah
sends it to you.” Al-Ḥasan accepted the will on these terms. On the
fortieth day, al-Qāsim died after the break of dawn.

On hearing the news of his death, \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Muḥammad came to
him while running in the markets barefooted and head uncovered, crying,
“O my master!” The people were amazed at this behavior and were asking
him, “What are you doing to yourself?” He replied, “Keep quiet! I have
seen what you have not seen.” Then, he participated in his funeral
procession and converted from his previous beliefs and endowed (waqafa)
most of his estates [to the Imam]. Abū \`Alī b. Muḥammad undertook the
task of giving al-Qāsim [the burial] bathe and Abū Ḥāmid poured water
for him.

He was wrapped in eight clothes. On his body was the shirt of our Master
followed by the seven clothes that had come from Iraq. After a short
period, al-Ḥasan received a letter of condolence from our Master and he
had prayed at the end of it that Allah Inspire him with His obedience
and keep him away from His disobedience. This was the same prayer
invoked by his father. The letter finished like this: “Indeed, we made
your father as an Imam for you and set his actions as examples.”

We narrated this narration—which we have also mentioned from Abū Ja\`far
al-Ṭūsī—may Allah be satisfied with him.

862. Al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ[^29]: It has been narrated from Abū
l-Ḥasan al-Mustariq al-Zarīr:

One day, I was in the court of al-Ḥasan b. \`Abd-Allah b. Ḥamdān Nāṣir
al-Daula. We started discussing the Imam and I said, “I used to neglect
the affair of the [Holy] Region (al-nāḥiya) until one day, I went to the
court of my uncle al-Ḥusayn and I began discussing this topic. He said,
‘O my son! I used to have your belief until I was told to take the
governorship of Qum as it had become a difficult problem for the King.

Anybody who entered it on behalf of the King was met with stubborn
resistance from its inhabitants. He gave me an army and I marched
towards it. When I reached the area of Ṭirz, I went out for hunting and
[my arrow] missed an animal and I rushed after it until I reached a
river.

I went in the river and the more I went forward, the vaster it became.
In this state, a rider appeared before me on a white mount, wearing a
green silky turban. I could see nothing of [his face] but his eyes and
he was wearing red shoes. He addressed me, “O Ḥusayn,” without saying my
title—Emir—or my epithet. I asked, “What do you want?” He said, “Why do
you neglect the affair of the (Holy) Region[^30] (al-nāḥiya)? And why do
you prevent my companions from one-fifth of your wealth?” I was indeed a
lordly person who feared no one but there I was trembling and overcome
by fright.

I replied, “My Master! I will do whatever you order.” He commanded,
“When you reach the place you intend to go [i.e. Qum], enter it and
pardon [its inhabitants]. After you acquire what you will acquire, give
a fifth of it to those who deserve it.” I said, “I have heard and I will
obey.” He said, “Go with guidance.” Then, he turned the reins of his
horse and went away.

I did not understand which path he took. I searched for him right and
left but he was concealed from me. This frightened me even more and I
returned to my camp and forgot the entire incident. When I reached Qum
with the intention of fighting them, its citizens came out and said, “We
fought those who came to us because they opposed us. But you have come
and there is no opposition between us.

Enter the city and govern it as you like.” I stayed there for quite some
time and acquired more wealth than I had calculated. Some of the
commanders complained against me to the King because they were jealous
of my long stay and the excessive wealth I had acquired. Consequently, I
was dismissed and I returned to Baghdad. I directly went to the King,
greeted him, and then went to my house.

Amongst my visitors was Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān al-\`Amrī. He overtook the
people and sat on my sitting place [beside me]. This angered me but he
continued to sit and didn’t get up while the people were coming and
going and my anger was increasing. When the people left and the
gathering dispersed, he came close to me and said, “Between you and me
is a secret, so listen to it.” I said, “Speak.”

He said, “The companion of the white horse and the river says, ‘We
fulfilled what we promised.’” Suddenly, I remembered the entire incident
and changed my attitude and said, “I listen and I obey.” Then, I stood
up, held his hand and opened the treasury. Then, he started separating
one-fifth of the wealth until he even removed one-fifth from those
things that I had forgotten that I had collected. He then left. After
this incident, my doubts were dispelled and the affair was proved.’

Ever since I heard this from my uncle, Abū \`Abd-Allah, all my doubts
were dispelled.”

The following traditions also prove the concept of this chapter: 823,
827, 828, 830, 832, 833, 838, 839, 840, and 868.

[^1]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, pp. 523–524, no. 23; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap.
45, pp. 485–486, no. 5, through his chain of narrators from Muḥammad b.
Shādhān b. Na\`īm al-Nīsābūrī; al-Irshād, p. 383, (pp. 353 and 354,
[Beirut: Mu’assisat al-A\`lamī]); Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, chap. “Proofs
of the Master of the time, peace be on him,” p. 456; I\`lām al-warā,
fourth rukn, part 2, chap. 3, sect. 2; Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 286, all of
them through their chains of narrators from Muḥammad b. Shādhān; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 295, no. 8, and p. 325, no. 44; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, pp. 663–664, no. 22; al-Thāqib fī l-manāqib,
p. 604, no. 552/16, from Muḥammad b. Shādhān b. Na\`īm al-Nīsābūrī. I
say: The aforementioned Muḥammad b. Shādhān in Kamāl al-dīn, al-Irshād,
Kashf al-ghumma, and al-Dalā’il, is either Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Shādhān
who has been mentioned in the chain of narrators of al-Kāfī, or he is
Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b. Shādhān whose biography has been recorded in the
rijāl books—as some of the authors of the lexicons have mentioned. It is
also possible that he is other than Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Shādhān
although, apparently, it is the same incident. However, neither of these
possibilities is a cause of weakness for the chain, because his high
stature will become obvious by referring to the rijāl and Hadith books.
He has been mentioned amongst the representatives (al-wukalā) in the
sixteenth tradition of the chapter on those who have seen the Qā’im,
peace be on him, in Kamāl al-dīn. Therefore, no attention should be paid
to the view of some contemporary scholars who believe he was unknown
(al-majhūl). As for Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Shādhān—if we suppose he is
other than Muḥammad b. Shādhān—it will suffice in proving his
reliability the fact that he has narrated the tradition of \`Alī b.
Muḥammad from him, who was from the teachers of al-Kulainī, and that
many traditions have been narrated from him in al-Kāfī. If it is argued
that this does not prevent him from still being unknown (al-majhūl), the
reply will be as follows: His reliability can be deduced from the fact
that al-Kulainī has narrated numerous traditions from him and has
trusted his narrations and has recorded them in his book. This argument
is enough to prove that al-Kulainī had regarded him as reliable. Even if
we overlook this argument, this narration in particular can be relied
upon due to the fact that there is no doubt that it occurred just like
other narrations that we have no doubt about their occurrence because of
the existence of legitimate presumptions. It is appropriate to mention
here that we believe it strongly probable that \`Alī b. Muḥammad—the
aforementioned in the narrations of al-Kāfī, al-Irshād, and Kamāl
al-dīn—is \`Alī b. Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Abān al-Rāzī, known as
\`Allān, who was one of al-Kulainī’s teachers. For, he had a book named
Akhbār al-Qā’im, peace be on him. He was amongst the most respected
scholars of the third century and had apparently lived during the
periods of two Imams: Imam Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, and his son
al-Mahdī, peace be on him, during the minor occultation.

[^2]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. “Birth of the Master, peace be on him,” p.
519, no. 8; al-Irshād, p. 378 , no. 3, with a minor difference ([Beirut:
Mu’assisat al-A\`lamī], p. 352); Similar to it, Dalā’il al-imāma, chap.
“Ma\`rifat shuyūkh al-ṭā’ifa al-ladhīna \`arafū Ṣāḥib al-Zamān \`alayhi
al-salām,” pp. 286–287, no. 6, from Abū al-Mufaḍḍal, from Muḥammad b.
Ya\`qūb, from Isḥāq b. Ya\`qūb, from al-Shaykh al-\`Amrī Muḥammad b.
Uthmān, who said, “Two people from the inhabitants of al-Sawād . . . (to
the end).” He has narrated it from \`Alī b. Muḥammad.; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 326, no. 45; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p.
659, no. 7; al-Thāqib fī l-manāqib, p. 597, no. 540/4, from Isḥāq b.
Ya\`qūb, from al-Shaykh al-\`Amrī; I\`lām al-warā, fourth rukn, part 2,
chap. 3, sect. 2, from \`Alī b. Muḥammad.

[^3]: The dwellings and villages near Kūfa—Ed.

[^4]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 486, no. 7; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 326, no. 46; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p.
673, no. 45; I\`lām al-warā, fourth rukn, part 2, chap. 3, sect. 2;
al-Thāqib, p. 597.

[^5]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, pp. 486–487, no. 8; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 326, no. 47. He has only mentioned the
last part of the tradition; Dalā’il al-imāma, chap. “Ma\`rifatu shuyūkh
. . .,” p. 287, no. 7, similar to it through his chain of narrators from
Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Mahziyār, to where he says, “Some dinars.”

[^6]: Quran 4:59.

[^7]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2. chap. 45, p. 488, no. 9; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 15, pp. 326–327, no. 48, with the difference that he
says, “he sent two hundred dinars from the wealth to Ḥijāz”; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 673, no. 46.

[^8]: A province in southwest Iran—Ed.

[^9]: Apparently part of the tradition has been deleted. See
al-Kharā’ij, vol.2, p.696, no. 10.

[^10]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, pp. 502–503, no. 31; Ghaybat
al-Shaykh, p. 320, no. 266; Rijāl al-Najāshī, pp. 184–185; al-Kharā’ij
wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 3, p. 1124, no. 42; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap.
15, pp. 335–336, no. 61; Faraj al-mahmūm, pp. 258 and 130; Yanābī\`
al-mawadda, chap. 81, p. 460; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 678,
no. 76 and 77; al-Thāqib fī l-manāqib, p. 614, no. 560/8.

[^11]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 510, no. 40; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 340, no. 66; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p.
680, no. 83; al-Thāqib, p. 600, no. 547/11.

[^12]: Dalā’il al-imāma, chap. “Ma\`rifat al-shuyūkh al-ṭā’ifa alladhīna
\`arafū Ṣāḥib al-Zamān \`alayhi al-salām,” pp. 282–285, no. 1; Faraj
al-mahmūm, pp. 239–244, through his chains of narrators from Muḥammad b.
Jarīr; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, pp. 300–303, no. 19.

[^13]: Ibn al-Riḍā refers to the tenth and eleventh Imams who were known
by this title because they were the descendants of Imam al-Riḍā, peace
be on them—Ed.

[^14]: Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 286, no. 4; Faraj al-mahmūm, p. 244, citing
al-Ḥimyarī and al-Ṭabarī; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, pp.
303–304, under no. 19; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 701, no.
141.

[^15]: Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 287, no. 8; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap.
15, p. 327, no. 49; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 673, no. 47.

[^16]: Dalā’il al-imāma, p. 288, no. 10; Faraj al-mahmūm, p. 244, citing
al-Ṭabarī and al-Ḥimyarī, with a very minor variation; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 308, no. 24, which says, “name the first one
Aḥmad”; al-Irshād, p. 355; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 283, no. 242, with a
very minor variation; al-Kāfī, p. 522, no. 17, with a very minor
variation; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 455, with a very minor variation;
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 662, no. 16.

[^17]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 125, p. 524, no. 37; Mir\`āt al-uqūl, vol.
6, chap. “Birth of the Master,” p. 199, no. 27. “Eighty” can either mean
his age or the year 280 AH; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, pp. 283–284, no. 243,
similar to it through his chain of narrators from Abū \`Aqīl; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 306, no. 20; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p.
456; Taqrīb al-ma\`ārif, p. 196; al-Thāqib, p. 590, no. 535/1; In
Dalā’il al-imāma, a similar miracle has been narrated which occurred for
\`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Samurī (pp. 285–286). It has been mentioned in
Faraj al-mahmūm, p. 244, what has been narrated in Dalā’il al-imāma,
from al-Ṭabarī—the author of Dalā’il al-imāma—and al-Ḥimyarī; Kamāl
al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 501, no. 26; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap.
32, p. 664, no. 26; I\`lām al-warā, sect. 2, p. 421; al-Kharā’ij wa
l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 1, pp. 463–464, no. 8. I say: It is probable that some
error has occurred while copying from Dalā’il al-imāma because \`Alī b.
Muḥammad al-Samurī died in 328 or 329 AH. Otherwise, he might have meant
eighty years of his age.

[^18]: Al-Kāfī, vol. 1, chap. 125, p. 519, no. 9; Biḥār al-anwār, vol.
51, chap. 15, p. 309, no. 27; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 659,
no. 8; I\`lām al-warā, sect. 2, pp. 418–419.

[^19]: Al-Kharā’ij, vol. 1, chap. “The miracles of Imam Ṣāḥib al-Zamān,”
p. 480, no. 21, printed at al-Imam al-Mahdī Organization; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 18, p. 59, no. 42; Faraj al-mahmūm, p. 256,
with a very minor variation at its end. He also says, “Al-Da\`lajī
refers to those attributed to a place behind the gateway of Kūfa—towards
Baghdad—whose inhabitants are called al-Da\`ālaja. He was a jurist
(faqīh) and an \`ārif. Al-Najāshī has mentioned him in his rijāl book
likewise.” He writes, “I learned the laws of inheritance from him and he
has a book on Hajj.” Therefore, it most possible that this miracle took
place during the major occultation, because al-Najāshī was born in 372
AH and died in 450 AH; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 695, no.
120; Wasā’il al-Shī\`a, vol. 8, chap. 24, p. 147, no. 2; Mustadrak
al-wasā’il, vol. 8, pp. 70–71, no. 4.

[^20]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, pp. 491–492, no. 15; al-Kharā’ij
wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 2, pp. 698–699, no. 1, with some variations,
published at al-Imam al-Mahdī Organization; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 15, p. 295, no. 10; Faraj al-mahmūm, sect. “Dalā’il al-Mahdī
\`alayhi al-salām,” p. 239; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, p. 696, with
differences in the wording.

[^21]: Al-Arba\`īn known as Kifāyat al-muhtadī, p. 140, no. 36;
al-Arba\`īn by al-Khātūn Ābādī, p. 49, no. 12. I say: Although, this
miracle possibly occurred in the major occultation, the probability of
it taking place in the minor occultation is greater due to what we have
mentioned here. And Allah knows the best. Know that the rijāl scholars
have praised this person with the attributes of profound knowledge,
piety, asceticism, etc. Al-Ṭūsī writes, “He was noble (fāḍil), a
litterateur (adīb), a mystic (\`ārif), a faqīh, an ascetic, God-fearing
(warā\`), and had many good characteristics. He wrote a number of books
. . .” Al-Najāshī says, “He was amongst the most famous of the Shias.”
Tanqīḥ al-maqāl mentions, “He was amongst the chiefs of the good
(people) and one of the greatest of the teachers. The rijāl scholars
have mentioned him, praised him with every beautiful (attribute), and
have immensely glorified him.”

[^22]: Faraj al-mahmūm, p. 247. He says: “A section about what we have
narrated through our chain of narrators from al-Shaykh Abū l-\`Abbās
\`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī from vol. 2 of the book al-Dalā’il . .
.”; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 675, no. 558; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 15, p. 332, no. 56.

[^23]: Faraj al-mahmūm, pp. 248–253. Wherever this copy contained
errors, we have corrected them using Biḥār al-anwār; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
pp. 310–315, no. 263, which mentions \`Abd-Allah b. \`Ubaid-Allah.
Apparently, this is the scribe’s error, because \`Utbat b. \`Abd-Allah
is correct. The latter is ibn Mūsā b. \`Abd-Allah al-Hamdānī who was a
judge in Marāgha, then Azerbaijan, Hamdān, and Baghdad. He died in 351
AH and lived for eighty six years. See Siyaru a\`lām al-nubalā’, vol.
16, p. 47, and Tārīkh Baghdād, vol. 12, p. 320; Al-Thāqib fī l-manāqib,
p. 590, no. 536/2, which mentions Abū l-Sā’ib \`Utbat b. \`Ubaid-Allah
al-Mas\`ūdī; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, pp. 313–316, no. 37,
which also mentions \`Utbat b. \`Ubaid-Allah; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3,
chap. 33, pp. 690–692, no. 106; Muntakhab al-anwār al-muḍī’a, pp.
130–134; al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 1, pp. 467–470, no. 14, which
also mentions Abū l-Sā’ib \`Utbat b. \`Ubaid-Allah al-Mas\`ūdī.

[^24]: A city located in Iran on the southern coast of the Caspian
sea—Ed.

[^25]: Quran 31:34.

[^26]: Quran 72:26.

[^27]: Quran 72:27.

[^28]: As we already mentioned, it seems that the correct name is
\`Utbat b. \`Ubaid-Allah Abū l-Sā’ib al-Mas\`ūdī.

[^29]: Al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 1, pp. 472–475, no. 17; Faraj
al-mahmūm, pp. 253–254; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 18, pp. 56–57,
no. 40; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, sect. 3, p. 694, no. 118
(short version); Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, pp. 500–501, under “The
miracles of the Master of the time, peace be on him.”

[^30]: Meaning what is related to the Mahdī, peace be on him—Ed.


