Section Three
=============

His ambassadors (sufarā’) and deputies (nuwwāb) during the Minor
Occultation

Comprised of twenty-seven traditions[^1]

863. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^2]: A group from Abū Muḥammad Hārūn b. Mūsā
informed me from Abū \`Alī Muḥammad b. Hammām al-Iskāfī, from
\`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī, from Aḥmad b. Isḥāq b. Sa\`d al-Qummī
who said:

One day I went to see Imam Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad, Allah’s
blessings be on him. I said, “My Master! Sometimes I am present and at
other times I am absent. It is not always feasible for me to contact you
even when I am present; So, whose word should we accept and whose
command should we obey?” He replied, “This is Abū \`Amr, the reliable,
the trustworthy. Whatever he says to you, he is narrating from me and
whatever he is conveying to you, he is conveying from me.”

After (Imam) Abū l-Ḥasan passed away—one day—I went to his son Abū
Muḥammad al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, peace be on him, and repeated what I had
said to his father. He replied, “This is Abū \`Amr, the reliable, the
trustworthy. He was deemed reliable by the one who passed [away] and I
deem him trustworthy during my life and death. Whatever he says to you,
he is narrating from me and whatever he conveys to you, he is conveying
from me.”

Abū Muḥammad Hārūn narrates from Abū \`Alī, from Abū l-\`Abbās
al-Ḥimyarī that “We used to mention this saying and describe the
majestic position of Abū \`Amr.”

864. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^3]: A group from Abū Muḥammad Hārūn informed us
from Muḥammad b. Hammām, from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far who said:

After (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him, passed away, we went to
perform Hajj one year. I went to Aḥmad b. Isḥāq at Baghdad and saw Abū
\`Amr with him. I said, “Verily, we regard this Shaykh—and I pointed to
Aḥmad b. Isḥāq—as reliable and approved. He has narrated such and such
things to us about you,” and I repeated what was mentioned earlier
regarding the excellence of Abū \`Amr and his position.

I continued, “Now, you are someone whose word and truthfulness cannot be
doubted. So I ask you for the sake of Allah and the two Imams who
endorsed your reliability, have you seen the son of Abū Muḥammad who is
the Master of the Time?” He cried and said, “[I will tell you] if you
promise not to disclose this to anybody while I am alive.” I agreed and
he said, “Indeed, I have seen him, peace be on him, and his neck is like
this—indicating that it is nice shaped and perfect.” I enquired, “What
is his name?” He replied, “You have been forbidden [from asking] this.”

865. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^4]: Aḥmad b. \`Alī b. Nūḥ Abū l-\`Abbās
al-Sairāfī, from Abū Naṣr \`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad b. Aḥmad known as ibn
Barniyyat al-Kātib, from some of the noble Shia traditionists, from Abū
Muḥammad al-\`Abbās b. Aḥmad al-Ṣā’igh, from al-Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad
al-Khaṣībī, from Muḥammad b. Ismā’īl and \`Alī b. \`Abd-Allah
al-Ḥasaniyyān who both said:

We went to see (Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan, peace be on him, at
Sāmarrā’ and with him were a group of his friends and followers. After
some time, Badr, his servant, entered and said, “My Master! There is a
group of disheveled and dust-covered people at the door.” He said to
them, “These are our Shias from Yemen.” (The narration is long and it
continues until the Imam says to Badr,) “Go and call \`Uthmān b. Sa\`īd
al-\`Amrī.” \`Uthmān entered after a short time and our Master Abū
Muḥammad, peace be on him, said to him, “O \`Uthmān! Be steadfast
because you are the representative and the reliable trustee upon Allah’s
wealth. Take from these Yemenis what they have brought of their wealth .
. .”

(The tradition continues to where they said), we all said together, “O
our Master! By Allah, \`Uthmān is one of your best Shias and you have
increased our knowledge regarding his position in serving you. He is
your representative and your trustee upon the wealth of Allah, the
Exalted.” He replied, “Yes. Testify before me that \`Uthmān b. Sa\`īd
al-\`Amrī is my representative and his son, Muḥammad, is the
representative of my son, your Mahdī.”

866. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^5]: From him (meaning Aḥmad b. \`Alī b. Nūḥ),
from Abū Naṣr Hibat-Allah b. Aḥmad al-Kātib, the son of the daughter of
Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī—may Allah sanctify his soul and satisfy him—from
his teachers that

When (Imam) al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī died, \`Uthmān b. Sa\`īd—may Allah
sanctify his soul and satisfy him—came for his ritual bath and took care
of his shrouding, embalmment, and preparing his grave. Apparently, he
was appointed for all these things which cannot be denied or disputed
except at the cost of denying the reality of things in all their
apparentness.

The signed letters (tauqī\`āt) of the Master of the Affair which
comprised of orders and prohibitions and also answers, were delivered
through \`Uthmān b. Sa\`īd and his son Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān,
to his Shias and the special companions of his father (Imam) Abū
Muḥammad, peace be on him.

[The letters] were written with the same handwriting as the ones which
were delivered during the lifetime of [Imam] al-Ḥasan, peace be on him.
The Shias never doubted their credibility until \`Uthmān b. Sa\`īd—may
Allah have mercy on him and be satisfied with him—died and his son Abū
Ja\`far gave him the ritual bath and became his successor and all the
affairs were referred to him. The Shias were unanimous in his
credibility, reliability, and trustworthiness due to what had been said
about his trustworthiness and credibility during the lifetime of (Imam)
al-Ḥasan, peace be on him, and after his death, in the lifetime of his
father \`Uthmān, may Allah have mercy on him.

867. Al-Kāfī[^6]: Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah and Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā both of
them, from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī who said:

I and shaykh Abū \`Amr, may Allah have mercy on him, were together with
Aḥmad b. Isḥāq. Aḥmad b. Isḥāq indicated to me that I ask him about the
heir. I said, “O Abū \`Amr! I want to ask you about something. Although
I have no doubt about it, nevertheless, I desire to question you about
it. Surely, it is my belief and my religion that the earth cannot remain
empty of a (divine) proof except forty days before the Day of Judgment.

When that happens, the (divine) proof will be taken away and the door of
repentance will be closed. Then, becoming faithful will no longer
benefit one who had not believed earlier or hadn’t earned goodness in
his faith.

They will be the worst from the creations of Allah, Mighty and Majestic
be He, and they are the ones whom the Day of Judgment will be
established upon. I intend to increase my certitude like Abraham who
asked his Lord, Mighty and Majestic be He, to show him how He raises the
dead. The answer was, ‘Do you not believe?’ and he replied, ‘I do but I
am asking for the contentment of my heart.’ Abū \`Alī Aḥmad b. Isḥāq
informed me that he had asked Imam Abū l-Ḥasan, peace be on him, ‘With
whom must I deal with or from whom must I take and whose words should I
accept?’ He had replied, ‘Al-\`Amrī is my trustee.

Whatever he conveys to you from me, he has [really] conveyed it from me
and whatever he says to you, he has said it on my behalf. Listen to him
and obey [him], because surely, he is reliable and trustworthy.’ Abū
\`Alī also informed me that he had asked (Imam) Abū Muḥammad a similar
question and he had replied, ‘Al-\`Amrī and his son are both reliable.

Whatever they convey to you from me, they have [really] conveyed it from
me and whatever they say to you, they have said it on my behalf. Listen
to both of them and obey them because they are both reliable and
trustworthy.’ This is what two Imams have said about you.” [On hearing
this], Abū \`Amr prostrated and cried.

Then, he said, “Ask your need.” I enquired, “Have you seen the successor
of (Imam) Abū Muḥammad, peace be on him?” He replied, “Yes, by Allah.
His neck is like,” and he indicated with his hands. I said, “Now, one
[question] remains.” He said, “Come forth with it.” I replied, “His
name?” He said, “It is prohibited for you to ask about it and I am not
saying this from myself because I cannot make anything permissible or
prohibited. This instruction is from him, peace be on him.

The King is under the impression that (Imam) Abū Muḥammad has died and
has not left behind a successor. As a result, his inheritance has been
divided and those who did not have a right to it have taken it. He has a
family who move freely and no one has the courage to harm them. When the
name is mentioned, the search [for him] begins. So, fear Allah and
refrain from this.”

Al-Kulainī, may Allah have mercy on him, says, “A shaykh from our
companions—whose name I have forgotten—narrated to me that Abū \`Amr was
asked the same question while Aḥmad b. Isḥāq was with him and he gave a
similar reply.”

868. Kamāl al-dīn[^7]: \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī says:

Al-shaykh Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān al-\`Amrī received a letter
of condolence [for the death] of his father, may Allah be satisfied with
them. In one part of the letter was written, “Surely, we are from Allah
and to Him we will return. We submit to His commands and are satisfied
with His decree. Your father lived a blissful life and died with praise.
May Allah have mercy on him and unite him with his masters and friends,
peace be on them. He always strived to implement their command and
worked hard to do the things that would draw him closer to Allah, Mighty
and Majestic be He, and to [his masters]. May Allah brighten his face
and overlook his faults.”

It was written in another part, “May Allah multiply your reward and
offer you the best of condolences. You are in mourning and so are we.
You have become lonely by his separation and so have we. Allah will make
him happy in the place where he has returned to. From amongst his good
fortune was that Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, has granted him a son
like you to succeed him and take his place by His orders and to ask
[Allah] to have mercy on him. [Imam Mahdī continued,] All praise is for
Allah, for, the souls have become pure by your position and whatever
Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, has granted you and near you. May
Allah help you, strengthen you, support you, and grant you success.
Allah is your Guardian, Protector, Caretaker, and He suffices you and is
your Helper.”

869. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^8]: A group informed me from Hārūn b. Mūsā, from
Muḥammad b. Hammām, from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Ḥimyarī that “When
Abū \`Amr, may Allah be satisfied with him, passed away, letters came to
us—with the same handwriting that we used when corresponding with
him—concerning the appointment of Abū Ja\`far, may Allah be satisfied
with him, as his successor.”

870. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^9]: (Through the same chain of narrators) from
Muḥammad b. Hammām, from Muḥammad b. Ḥammawayh b. \`Abd al-\`Azīz
al-Rāzī in the year 280 AH, from Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Mahziyār
al-Ahwāzī that he received [a letter] after Abū \`Amr’s death that said:

The son—may Allah protect him—was always considered reliable by us
during the lifetime of his father, may Allah be satisfied with and
satisfy him and brighten his face. He is like his father and has his
position. He ordered his son by our command and acted accordingly; May
Allah guard him. Obey him and tell others about our attitude towards
him.

871. Kamāl al-dīn[^10]: Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Alī al-Aswad, may
Allah be satisfied with him, narrated to us that Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī
dug a grave for himself and leveled it with teakwood. I asked him about
it and he replied, “For people, there are causes.” I asked him again and
he replied, “I have been ordered to gather my affairs.” He died two
months after this incident; May Allah be satisfied with him.

872. Kamāl al-dīn[^11]: Muḥammad b. \`Alī b. Mattīl, from his uncle
Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mattīl who said:

Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b. \`Uthmān al-Sammān—known as al-\`Amrī, may Allah
be satisfied with him—summoned me and gave me some small clothes with
signs [on them] and a purse filled with dirhams.

He said, “It is necessary that you travel alone to Wāsiṭ right now and
hand these over to the first person who comes to you when you dismount
on the beach of Wāsiṭ.” This made me extremely sorrowful and I said to
myself, “A person like me is being sent for a mission like this and made
to carry such an insignificant thing.” Anyhow, I went to Wāsiṭ and
dismounted and asked the first person who met me about al-Ḥasan b.
Muḥammad b. Qaṭāt al-Ṣaidalānī, the person in charge of endowments
(wakīl al-waqf) at Wāsiṭ. He said, “That’s me. Who are you?” I replied,
“I am Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Mattīl.”

He recognized me with my name and greeted me. I greeted him too and we
embraced each other. I said to him, “Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī has conveyed
his greetings to you and handed me these clothes and this purse to give
to you.” He replied, “All Praise is for Allah; Muḥammad b. \`Abd-Allah
al-Ḥā’irī [al-\`Āmirī] has died and I had come to prepare his shroud.”
He opened the parcel and in it were the necessary things for shrouding.
The purse contained camphor and the wage of the bier-carriers and the
grave-digger. We participated in his funeral procession and I returned.

873. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^12]: Al-Ḥusayn b. Ibrāhīm, from Abū Nūḥ, from
Abū Naṣr Hibat-Allah b. Muḥammad, from his (maternal) uncle Abū Ibrāhīm
Ja\`far b. Aḥmad al-Naubakhtī, from his father Aḥmad b. Ibrāhīm, his
uncle Abū Ja\`far \`Abd-Allah b. Ibrāhīm, and a group of his family
members—i.e. the tribe of Naubakht, that

When the condition of Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī worsened, he gathered a
group of influential Shiites including Abū \`Alī b. Hammām, Abū
\`Abd-Allah b. Muḥammad al-Kātib, Abū \`Abd-Allah al-Bāqaṭānī, Abū Sahl
Ismā’īl b. \`Alī al-Naubakhtī, Abū \`Abd-Allah b. al-Wajnā, and other
influential figures and elders. They all came to Abū Ja\`far, may Allah
be satisfied with him, and asked him, “If (the inevitable—meaning death)
happens, who will be your successor?”

He replied, “He—meaning Abū l-Qāsim al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ b. Abī Baḥr
al-Naubakhtī—will take my place. He is the ambassador between you and
Ṣāḥib al-Amr, peace be on him. He is the representative and the reliable
and trustworthy. Refer to him in your affairs and seek help from him in
important issues. I have been ordered [to convey] this and indeed, I
conveyed.”

874. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^13]: A theologian (mutakallim) known as Turk
al-Harawī asked [Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ], “How many daughters did the Messenger
of Allah have?” He replied, “Four.” He said, “Who amongst them was the
most superior?” He replied, “Fāṭima, peace be on her.” He said, “How did
she become the most superior while she was the youngest of them and had
accompanied the Messenger of Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his
family, less than them?” He replied, “Due to two characteristics with
which Allah had distinguished her and given to her as an advantage,
honor, and reverence: First, she inherited from the Messenger of Allah,
Allah's blessings be on him and his family, whilst none of his other
children inherited from him.

Second, Allah the Exalted, preserved the generation of the Messenger of
Allah, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, through her and not
through his other children. He did not distinguish her with these
[characteristics] except due to the excellence of the purity He had
known of her intention.” Al-Harawī replied [in astonishment], “I have
never seen anyone speak and reply in this context better and more
concise than him.”

875. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^14]: A group informed me from Abū \`Abd-Allah
al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā b. Bābawayh, from a group of his
townsmen who lived in Baghdad—in the year in which the Qarāmiṭa attacked
the hajis and it was the year of the falling stars—that “My father, may
Allah be satisfied with him, wrote to al-Shaykh Abū l-Qāsim al-Ḥusayn b.
Rauḥ, may Allah be satisfied with him, to seek permission to perform
Hajj.

He received the reply, ‘Don’t go this year.’ He wrote again asking, ‘It
is an obligatory vow (nadhr). Is it permissible for me not to go?’ The
response was, ‘If you have no choice [because it is obligatory], then go
with the last caravan.’ He joined the last caravan and was saved whilst
those who had gone in the earlier caravans were killed.”

876. Kamāl al-dīn[^15]: From Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq al-Ṭāliqānī,
may Allah be satisfied with him, who said:

I was with Shaykh Abū l-Qāsim al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ, may Allah sanctify his
soul, with a group—amongst whom was \`Alī b. \`Īsā al-Qaṣrī. A man stood
up and said to [al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ], “I want to ask you something.” He
replied, “Ask whatever comes to your mind.” He asked, “Inform me about
al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī, peace be on him; was he a guardian [appointed] by
Allah?” He replied in the affirmative.

The man said, “Was his killer an enemy of Allah?” He replied in the
affirmative. The man said, “Is it permissible that Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He, allows His enemy to dominate His friend?” Abū l-Qāsim
al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ—may Allah sanctify his soul—replied, “Understand what
I am telling you. Know that Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, does not
address the people [in a way that] the eyes can witness nor does He
converse with speech. Rather, He—Majestic is His Majesty—sent to them
messengers from their species and their kind, who were humans like them.

Had He sent to them Messengers from other than their kind and their
forms, they would have certainly fled from [the messengers] and would
have not accepted [their claims’]. When they came to them while they
were from their species who ate food and walked in the markets, the
people said to them, ‘You are mortals like us. We will not accept [what
you claim] until you perform for us a thing which we cannot do.

Only then will we know that you are the chosen ones instead of us
because [you can perform] what we are incapable of.’ So, Allah, Mighty
and Majestic be He, gave them miracles which the people were incapable
of performing. Some of them brought the storm—after warning and
cautioning—and drowned all those who oppressed and rebelled.

From them was he who was thrown in the fire which became cold and safe
for him. From them was he who brought forth a she-camel from solid stone
and made milk to flow from its udders. From them was the one for whom
the sea was split and springs flowed for him from a stone and a dry cane
was turned into a snake for him that devoured their lies.

From them was the one who cured the blind and the leper, gave life to
the dead with the permission of Allah, and informed them of what they
ate and stored in their houses. From them was the one for whom the moon
was split and with whom the animals like the camel, the wolf, and etc.
spoke. When they performed such [miracles] and the people were helpless
from performing the like of such deeds, Allah, Mighty and Majestic be
He, ordained by His grace upon His servants and His wisdom, that He make
His Prophets, peace be on them—with all their powers and miracles—at
times victorious and at other times defeated; at times triumphant and at
other times suppressed.

Had Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, made them victorious and
triumphant on all occasions and had not afflicted them nor tested them
[by these defeats], certainly the people would have taken them as Gods
instead of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He, and their excellent
patience during calamities, misfortunes, and tests would have remained
unknown [to the people]. But He, Mighty and Majestic be He, made them in
these situations like [ordinary people], so that they would be patient
and forbearing during ordeals and calamities, grateful in times of
safety and domination over the enemies, and humble in all conditions and
not proud and arrogant.

Thus, the people would know that they, peace be on them, have a Lord Who
is their creator and planner and [as a result, the people] would worship
Him and obey His Messengers. Hence, the proof of Allah would be
established against those who exceed the limits concerning them and view
them as deities, or disobey, oppose, defy, and refute what the
Messengers and Prophets, peace be on them, have brought. ‘So that he who
perishes, perishes by clear proof, and he who lives, lives by clear
proof.’[^16]”

(Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm b. Isḥāq, may Allah be satisfied with him, says),
The next day, I returned to Shaykh Abū l-Qāsim b. Rauḥ, may Allah
sanctify his soul, and was saying to myself, “Did he make up what he
said to us yesterday?” He initiated [the conversation] and said, “O
Muḥammad b. Ibrāhīm! It is more preferable for me to fall from the sky,
and then have a bird snatch me or the wind carry me away to a barren
land, than to say my own opinion or something from myself in the
religion of Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He. Rather, [what I said] was
from the [true] source and was heard from the Ḥujja, blessings and
salutations of Allah be on him.”

877. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^17]: A group informed us from Abū \`Abd-Allah
al-Ḥusayn b. \`Alī b. Bābawayh al-Qummī, from a group of people from
Qum—whom \`Alī b. Bābawayh was amongst—from another group of people from
Qum, amongst whom were \`Imrān al-Ṣaffār, his relative \`Alawiyyat
al-Ṣaffār, and al-Ḥusayn b. Aḥmad b. \`Alī b. Aḥmad b. Idrīs, may Allah
have mercy on them all, who all narrated:

We were in Baghdad in the year that Abū \`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn b. Mūsā b.
Bābawayh died. Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Samurī, may his soul be
sanctified, continuously asked us [who were] close to him about \`Alī b.
al-Ḥusayn, may Allah have mercy on him, and we always answered, “A
letter has reached us about his wellbeing.”

The day when [\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn] died, he asked us about him and we
gave him the same answer but he said, “May Allah reward you concerning
\`Alī b. al-Ḥusayn. He has just died.” We recorded the hour, date, and
month of [his death] and after about seventeen or eighteen days, news
reached us that he had died at the exact time mentioned by shaykh Abū
l-Ḥasan, may his soul be sanctified.

878. Kamāl al-dīn[^18]: From Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad al-Mukattib,
who said:

I was in Baghdad in the year that shaykh \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Samurī,
may Allah sanctify his soul, died. I went to him a few days prior to his
death. He brought a letter for the people which I made a copy from that
read, “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. O \`Alī b.
Muḥammad al-Samurī! May Allah increase the reward of your brothers
concerning you! You will die within six days, so, wrap up your affairs
and don’t appoint anyone as your successor after your death because the
second occultation has commenced.

There will be no reappearance except after Allah’s permission, Mighty
and Majestic be He, and this will happen after a long time has passed
and the hearts will have become hard, and the earth will have been
filled with injustice. Some of my followers will claim to have met me.
Beware! Whoever claims to have met me before the emergence of the
Sufyānī and the [heavenly] cry (al-ṣaiḥa) is a lying slanderer. There is
no power and strength except through Allah, the Exalted and the Great.”

We copied this letter and left him. On the sixth day, we returned to him
while he was on his death bed. Someone asked him, “Who is your
successor?” He replied, “For Allah is an affair which he will take to
its extent.” Saying this, he passed away; may Allah be satisfied with
him. These were the last words [anyone] heard from him.

879. Ghaybat al-Shaykh[^19]: Muḥammad b. Muḥammad b. al-Nu\`mān and
al-Ḥusayn b. \`Ubaid-Allah informed me from Abū \`Abd-Allah Aḥmad b.
Muḥammad al-Ṣafwānī, who said:

Al-Shaykh Abū l-Qāsim, may Allah be satisfied with him, willed to Abū
l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Samurī, may Allah be satisfied with him.
Thus, he took his place and performed Abū l-Qāsim’s duties. When he was
about to die, the Shias gathered around him and asked him about the
representative after him and his successor. He had said nothing about it
and had mentioned that he was not ordered to will to anyone after
himself about this matter.

880. Rijāl al-Kashī[^20]: Ja\`far b. Ma’rūf al-Kashī who said, “Abū
\`Abd-Allah al-Balkhī wrote to me and narrated from al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ
al-Qummī that Aḥmad b. Isḥāq wrote to [the Mahdī, peace be on him] to
seek permission for Hajj. Permission was granted and a cloth was sent to
him. Aḥmad b. Isḥāq said, ‘He has informed me about my death.’ He died
at Ḥulwān after returning from Hajj.”

The traditions with the following numbers also show the above concept:
789, 793, 811, 812, 821, 822, 825, 849, and 861.

[^1]: Know that during the minor occultation, his representatives
(wukalā’) and his deputies (nuwwāb) were a number of people who were
known for their reliability, trustworthiness, and truthfulness. This can
be verified by referring to credible books. His letters (tauqī\`āt) and
orders were transmitted through them. They demonstrated extraordinary
acts and told of the unseen—by the assistance of their master, peace be
on him. I will make this short by only speaking about the four most
famous ones whose trustworthiness, justice, elevated position, and high
status is agreed upon by all the Shias: Al-Shaykh Abū \`Amr \`Uthmān b.
Sa\`īd al-\`Amrī, may Allah the Exalted be satisfied with him: He was
appointed by Imams Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-\`Askarī and Abū
Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī al-\`Askarī, peace be on them. He was from
the Banī-Asad tribe and was known as al-\`Askarī and also al-Sammān
(meaning the oil trader) because he traded cooking oil as a cover-up for
his activities. The two aforementioned Imams have spoken about him as
well as our master Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, Allah’s blessings be on him. Al-Ṭūsī
has mentioned him in his Rijāl book amongst the companions of Imam
al-Hādī, peace be on him. He writes, “Uthmān b. Sa\`īd al-\`Amrī, whose
epithet is Abū \`Amr al-Sammān and who is also known as al-Zayyāt. He
served him when he was merely eleven years old and was famous for his
inclination towards him.” Al-Ṭūsī also mentions him as a companion of
(Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, peace be on him. He says,
“Highly honored, reliable, and his representative.” Yet again, he
writes: “Muḥammad b. Uthmān b. Sa\`īd al-\`Amrī whose epithet was Abū
Ja\`far and his father’s epithet was Abū \`Amr; both of them were the
representatives of Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, peace be on him, and enjoyed a great
position amongst the Shias.” The author of Tanqīḥ al-maqāl writes, “He
was more majestic and famous than can mentioned.” Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad
b. Uthmān b. Sa\`īd al-\`Amrī: When his father—Abū \`Amr—died, he
replaced him by [Imam] Abū Muḥammad’s order as well as the order of his
own father which was commanded by the Qā’im, peace be on him. Al-Ṭūsī
has narrated in al-Ghayba from Abū l-\`Abbās from Hibat-Allah b.
Muḥammad, from his teachers, that the Shias are unanimous in his
justice, reliability, and trustworthiness because of the statements
regarding his justice and the order to refer to him during the lifetime
of (Imam) al-Ḥasan (al-\`Askarī), peace be on him, and after his death
while his father was alive. He writes, “Numerous arguments [in support
of Shia] have been narrated from him and the miracles of the Imam have
been manifested at his hands . . .” The author of Tanqīḥ al-Maqāl
writes, “His majesty, high position, and status is so famous amongst the
Imāmiyya that there is no need to mention it . . .” He had written some
books using what he had directly heard from (Imam) Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan
and from the Master, peace be on them, and what he had heard from his
father, Uthmān b. Sa\`īd, from (Imams) Abū Muḥammad and al-Ḥasan
al-Hādī, peace be on them. Al-Ṭūsī writes in al-Ghayba, “Abū Naṣr
Hibat-Allah says, ‘I saw in the writings of Abū Ghālib al-Zurārī—may
Allah have mercy on him and forgive him—that Abū Ja\`far Muḥammad b.
Uthmān al-\`Amrī died in the end of (the month) Jumād al-Aulā, 305 AH.
Abū Naṣr Hibat-Allah b. Muḥammad b. Aḥmad has mentioned that Abū Ja\`far
al-\`Amrī, may Allah be satisfied with him, died in the year 304 AH. He
was in charge of these affairs for almost fifty years. The people took
their wealth to him and he would give them signed letters which had the
same handwriting as those which they received during the lifetime of
(Imam) al-Ḥasan (al-\`Askarī), peace be on him. [The letters] were about
the difficulties [encountered] in religious and worldly matters and
replies to questions they had asked him and comprised of amazing
answers. May Allah be satisfied with him and satisfy him.’” Al-Shaykh
Abū al-Qāsim al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ b. Abū Baḥr al-Naubakhtī, may Allah have
mercy on him: He attained the position of special deputyship after
Muḥammad b. Uthmān, may Allah have mercy on them. He succeeded Muḥammad
b. \`Uthmān by the orders of the Imam which were transmitted by Muḥammad
b. \`Uthmān. He was viewed by both Shias and Sunnis as one of the wisest
of the people and enjoyed a great position and elevated status amongst
the latter too. Muḥammad b. Uthmān had about ten close confidants; Abū
l-Qāsim b. Rauḥ was amongst them but the others were closer to Muḥammad
b. Uthmān than him. Amongst these, Ja\`far b. Aḥmad b. Mattīl was so
close to him and spent so much time in his house that the Shias had no
doubt that if something happened to al-Ḥusayn b. Rauḥ, he would surely
inherit his position. When the Imam appointed Abū l-Qāsim, no one denied
and they all submitted [to this order] including Ja\`far b. Aḥmad b.
Mattīl who showed the same attitude towards him which he had showed
towards Abū Ja\`far al-\`Amrī. He continued this manner until he passed
away. Shaykh Abū l-Qāsim died in the month of Sha\`bān, 326 AH. The
duration of his ambassadorship was twenty-one or twenty-two years. May
Allah be satisfied with him Al-Shaykh Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad
al-Samurī: He succeeded Shaykh Abū l-Qāsim by his order and he was the
last representative. With his death, the major occultation commenced and
the affair was delegated to the jurists and those who possessed the
traditions and sciences of the Ahl al-Bait, peace be on them. During the
major occultation, the people must refer to them. This is a fact which
has been established by numerous traditions—some of which have already
been mentioned. Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Muḥammad al-Samurī passed away in
329 AH; may Allah have mercy on him.

[^2]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” pp.
354–355, no. 315; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, pp. 344–345.

[^3]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” p. 355,
no. 315; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, pp. 345.

[^4]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” pp.
355–356, no. 317; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, pp. 345.

[^5]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” pp.
355–356, no. 318. He says on page 320 that Abū Naṣr Hibat-Allah b.
Muḥammad said, “Uthmān’s grave is on the western side of Baghdad at the
beginning of Mayadān Street in the place known as the gate of Jibilla in
the right section of the mosque of al-Darb. The grave is located in
Qibla side of the mosque itself—may Allah have mercy on him. Muḥammad b.
al-Ḥasan—the author of this book—says, ‘I saw his grave in the
aforementioned place. A wall was built on its side and the prayer-niche
was built on its other side. There was a door on one side which opened
into the place of the grave in a dark narrow room. We used to visit it
publicly during my stay in Baghdad from the year 408 to after 430 AH.
Then, the chief, Abū Manṣūr Muḥammad b. Faraj, broke down the wall,
raised the grave to ground level and built a box on top of it which was
beneath the roof. Whoever wanted to visit his grave would go there and
do so. The neighbors of the area sought blessings by visiting it and
used to say, “He was a righteous man” or “He was the son of (Imam)
Ḥusayn’s nurse,” while they were ignorant of the reality and it is still
the same today which is the year 447 AH.’”; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 16 p. 346.

[^6]: Al-Kāfī, chap. “The names of those who have seen him,” pp.
329–330; Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” pp.
359–361, no. 317, and chap. “Wilādat Ṣāḥib al-Amr \`alayhi al-salām,”
pp. 243­–244, no. 209; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, pp. 347–348.

[^7]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 510, no. 41; Ghaybat al-Shaykh,
chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” p. 361, no. 323, through his
chain of narrators from \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far; al-Kharā’ij wa
l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 3, p. 1112, no. 28; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16,
pp. 348–349; al-Iḥtijāj, vol. 2, pp. 300–301.

[^8]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” p. 362,
no. 324; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, p. 349, no. 2.

[^9]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” p. 362,
no. 325; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, p. 349, no. 2.

[^10]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 502, no. 29; Ghaybat
al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” pp. 365–366, no. 333,
from ibn Bābawayh, from a group; al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 3, p.
1120, no. 36; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, pp. 351–352, under the
fourth tradition; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 677, no. 74;
I\`lām al-warā, p. 422.

[^11]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 504, no. 35; al-Kharā’ij wa
l-jarā’iḥ, p. 1119, no. 35; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 7, chap. 33, pp.
314–315, no. 79; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, pp. 336–337, no. 63.

[^12]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” pp.
371–372, no. 342; Biḥār al-anwār, chap. 16, p. 355, no. 6.

[^13]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, chap. “Ṭarafun min akhbār al-sufarā’,” p. 388,
no. 353; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 43, chap. 2, p. 37, under no. 40. He has
recorded Buzl al-Harawī; al-Manāqib, vol. 3, chap. “Virtues of Fāṭimat
al-Zahrā, peace be on her,” pp. 323­–324, which also mentions Buzl
al-Hirawī. This is probably a scribal error. According to the
traditionists, al-Fīrūz Ābādī, the correct name is Badīl b. Aḥmad
al-Harawī.

[^14]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 322, no. 270; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 51, p. 293, no. 1; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 692, no.
110.

[^15]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, pp. 507–509, no. 37; Ghaybat
al-Shaykh, pp. 321–322, no. 269, and pp. 324–326, no. 273; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 44, chap. 33, pp. 273–274, no. 1; \`Ilal al-sharā’i\`,
vol. 1, chap. 177, pp. 241–243, no. 1; al-Iḥtijāj (Beirut), vol. 2, pp.
285–288 and pp. 471–­473.

[^16]: Quran 8:42.

[^17]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, pp. 395–396, no. 366. In some copies, the word
companion instead of close has been used; Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap.
45, p. 503, no. 32; Rijāl al-Najāshī, p. 262, no. 684; Faraj al-mahmūm,
p. 130; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 3, sect. 2, pp. 422–423; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, sect. 12, chap. 33, p. 693, no. 113, which has recorded
Harthamat b. al-\`Alawiyya; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, p. 361,
no. 8; al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 3, p. 1128, no. 45, which is a
shorter account.

[^18]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 45, p. 516, no. 44; Ghaybat
al-Shaykh, p. 395, no. 365; I\`lām al-warā, fourth rukn, part 2, chap.
3, sect. 2, which says: soon my followers will come; al-Kharā’ij wa
l-jarā’iḥ (Mu’assisat al-Imām al-Mahdī), vol. 3, p. 1128, no. 6; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 16, pp. 360–361, no. 7; Jannat al-ma’wā
(printed with the 53rd volume of Biḥār al-anwār), p. 318. I say: In some
copies of Kamāl al-dīn and other books, it has been written, “the
complete (al-tāmma) occultation has commenced.” The original printed
copy of Ghaybat al-Shaykh mentions, “[people] will come to some of my
followers.” Al-Kharā’ij and Jannat al-ma’wā have recorded “and from
amongst my followers some will claim,” and other books have narrated
“and amongst my followers.” It might be said that this letter apparently
contradicts numerous, consecutive, and definite reports that cannot be
enumerated due to their abundance and are an indication that the Imam
was seen and some people had the privilege of being in his presence. It
also contradicts the unanimous belief of the Shias—including the belief
of al-Ṣadūq, the narrator of this story—about a large group of people
who have met him. The scholars have mentioned a few reasons to resolve
this contradiction or to reply to this question. Six of these answers
have been mentioned in Jannat al-ma’wā. One of them is what a few
scholars have stated and has also been stated by al-Majlisī in Biḥār
al-anwār: The context of the tradition indicates that what is meant by
seeing him, is a seeing accompanied by the claim of representation and
ambassadorship and the conveying of news from him to the Shias—as was
the prevalent practice during the minor occultation. This probability is
highly likely. Another justification is that this tradition is a single
and weak narration that neither its narrator—al-Ṣadūq—nor our other Shia
companions have acted upon. Hence, the many incidents which certainty is
obtained from are not contradicted. Rather, some of them comprise of
miracles and extraordinary deeds that could not have been performed by
anyone but him. Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, sect. 3, chap. 33, p. 693, no.
112 (short version); al-Iḥtijāj (Beirut), vol. 2, p. 478.

[^19]: Ghaybat al-Shaykh, p. 394, no. 363; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 16, p. 360; I\`lām al-warā, chap. 3, sect. 1, p. 417.

[^20]: Rijāl al-Kashī (Jāmi\`at al-Mashhad), p. 557, no. 1052; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 7, sect. 12, chap. 33, p. 363, no. 148; Mu\`jam rijāl
al-ḥadīth, vol. 2, p. 49, no. 433; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 15, p.
306, no. 21.


