Section One
===========

His miracles during the Major Occultation

Comprised of fifteen traditions

881–882. Kashf al-ghumma[^1]: I will mention two incidents which
occurred fairly recently and a group of my reliable brothers narrated
them to me. In the suburbs of Ḥilla, there was a man called Ismā’īl b.
al-Ḥasan al-Hirqalī who belonged to a village called Hirqal. He died
during my lifetime but I did not see him. His son, Shams al-Dīn,
narrated to me the following:

My father informed me that during his youth, an abscess had appeared on
his left thigh which was the size of a fist. Every spring, it would
crack and open and blood and puss would flow out of it. Its pain
prevented him from performing many of his tasks. He resided in Hirqal
and one day went to Ḥilla to see the blessed [scholar] Sayyid Raḍī
al-Dīn \`Alī b. Ṭāwūs, may Allah be satisfied with him, and complained
to him about his suffering and he had expressed his desire to get it
treated. [Sayyid Raḍī al-Dīn] had gathered the doctors of Ḥilla and had
showed them the abscess.

They had said, “This abscess is on the saphenous vein and its treatment
is dangerous. If it is cut, there is a chance of excessive blood loss
and consequent death.” Sayyid Raḍī al-Dīn, may Allah sanctify his soul,
had said to him, “I am going to Baghdad, where the doctors may be more
knowledgeable and skillful than [the doctors] here, so accompany me.” He
mounted along with him and they had gone to see the doctors.

[The doctors] had repeated what the [doctors of Ḥilla] had said and he
had become heartbroken. Sayyid b. Ṭāwūs had told him, “The sharia
permits you to perform prayers in these clothes. Try to keep yourself
clean [from the blood] but don’t strain yourself because Allah, the
Exalted, and His Messenger have prohibited it.”

My father had replied, “When the state of affairs is such, and since I
have come to Baghdad, I will visit the Holy shrines at Sāmarrā’, peace
be on them, and then return to my family.” Sayyid (b. Ṭāwūs) had
appreciated the idea. So, he had left his clothes and belongings with
Sayyid Raḍī al-Dīn and had left. He recounted, “After entering the
shrine and visiting the Imams, peace be on them, I descended into the
cellar (sardāb) and appealed to Allah, the Exalted, and to the Imam,
peace be on him.

I stayed in the cellar for some part of the night and remained in the
shrine until Thursday. Then, I went to the River Tigris, bathed, and put
on some clean clothes. I filled a jug I had with me with water and
mounted to set off towards the shrine. On my way, I saw four horsemen
emerging from the gates of the city.

On the outskirts of the city lived some nobles who watched over their
sheep and I thought that these men were from them. We reached each other
and I saw that there were two youths among them. One of them was a slave
who was beginning to grow a beard. They were all armed with swords.

There was an old man amongst them whose face was covered and had a lance
in his hand. Another was armed with a sword and had a cloak which was
covering the sword and was under his armpit. The old man—who had a
lance—stopped on the right side of the road and placed the end of the
lance on the ground. The two youths stood on the left side of the road
and the man with the cloak stood in front of me.

Then, they all greeted me and I greeted them. The man with the cloak
asked, ‘Are you returning to your family tomorrow?’ I replied in the
affirmative. He said, ‘Come forward so that I may see what is
distressing you.’ I didn’t like them to touch me and I said to myself,
‘These are Bedouins who do not keep away from impure things (al-najāsa).
I have just come out of water and my shirt is wet.’ Nevertheless, I went
near him.

He held me with his hand and pulled me to himself. Then, he started
feeling one side of my body from my shoulder until he reached the
abscess. He squeezed it with his hand and I felt its pain. Then, he sat
on his saddle as he was earlier. The old man said to me, ‘You have
become successful, O Ismā’īl!’ I was amazed that he knew my name. I
answered, ‘God willing, we are successful and so are you.’ The old man
said to me, ‘This is the Imam.’ I rushed towards him, clung to him, and
kissed his thigh.

“He started riding while I was following him and was still clinging to
him. He said, ‘Go back.’ I replied, ‘I will never leave you.’ He said,
‘It is better that you return.’ But my answer was the same. The old man
said, ‘O Ismā’īl! Don’t you have any shame? Your Imam has ordered you to
return twice and you are disobeying him?’ Confronted with such a
statement, I let go of him. He went ahead a few steps then turned to me
and said, ‘When you reach Baghdad, Abū Ja\`far—meaning the caliph
al-Mustanṣir—will inevitably ask for you. When you go to him and he
offers you something refuse to accept it.

Tell my son, Sayyid Raḍī al-Din, to write to \`Alī b. \`Iwaḍ. I will
advise him to give you what you want.’ Saying this, he went along with
his companions. I was standing there and watching them until they
disappeared from my sight. The grief of his separation seized me and I
sat down on the ground for some time then started walking towards the
shrine.

The caretakers of the shrine gathered around me and said, ‘We see that
the color of your face has changed. Has something troubled you?’ I
replied in the negative. They asked again, ‘Has someone fought with
you?’ I answered, ‘No. Nothing of this sort has happened to me. But, I
ask you, do you know the horse riders who were with you?’ They replied,
‘These were noble sheep-owners.’ I said, ‘No, he is the Imam, peace be
on him.’

They asked, ‘Which one is the Imam? The old man or the man with cloak?’
I replied, ‘The man with the cloak.’ They asked again, ‘Did you show him
what was causing you pain?’ I replied, ‘He held it firmly and caused me
pain.’ Then, I uncovered my leg but there was no trace of it.

I was confused from astonishment and checked my other leg but there was
nothing there too. When the people saw this they took hold of me and
tore my shirt. The caretakers took me to the storeroom and withheld the
people from coming close to me. The supervisor of Mesopotamia was in the
shrine at that time.

He heard the shrieks and had asked about the reason. They had informed
him about the incident and he came to the storeroom and asked me my name
and the time I had come from Baghdad. I told him that I had come at the
beginning of the week. He then left. I slept in the shrine, performed
the morning prayers, and left. The people came out with me until I was
quite far from the shrine and then they returned.

I reached [the village of] Uwānā and spent the night there, then left
early in the morning and set off for Baghdad. [When I reached there] I
saw a huge congregation of people at the old arch. They asked anyone who
was entering the city about his name and lineage and where he was coming
from. They asked me my name and where I had come from. When I informed
them, they gathered around me and tore off my clothes and there was no
strength left in me [to protect myself].

The supervisor of Mesopotamia had written to Baghdad and informed them
about my conditions. Then, they carried me to Baghdad and a massive
crowd gathered around me and I was nearly killed by their pressure. The
Qummī Minister had summoned al-Sa\`īd Raḍī al-Dīn and he had come to
verify the authenticity of this news. May Allah have mercy on both of
them.

“Sayyid Raḍī al-Dīn b. Ṭāwūs came with a group of people and we met at
the gateway of al-Nūbī. His companions dispersed the people who had
surrounded me. When he saw me, he asked, “Are they talking about you?” I
replied in the affirmative. He dismounted and uncovered my thigh and
there was nothing there. He fainted for a while then held my hand and
took me to the minister while he was crying.

He said, “Your honor! This is my brother and the closest of people to my
heart.” The minster asked me about my story and I informed him. He
summoned the doctors who had examined me earlier and had been ordered to
cure me. They said, “It has no cure except that it be cut off, which
would lead to death.”

The minister said to them, “Suppose it was cut off and he did not die.
How much time would it take for it to heal?” They said, “At least two
months and a white hole would remain in its place where no hair would
grow.” The minister asked, “When did you last see him?” They replied,
“Ten days ago.” Then, the minister uncovered the ailing thigh and it was
exactly like the other thigh and there was absolutely no sign of [a
wound] on it. One of the doctors shrieked, “This is the work of Christ.”
The minister remarked, “Since it is not your work, we know whose work it
is.”

(His son continued), then, he was taken to al-Mustanṣir, the caliph, who
asked him about the story. He had told him what had happened and the
caliph had offered him a thousand dinars. When the dinars were brought,
the Caliph had said, “Take these and spend them.” He had replied, “I
don’t dare to take even one coin.” The Caliph said, “Whom do you fear?”
He answered, “From the one who did this to me. He said, ‘Do not accept
anything from Abū Ja\`far.’” The Caliph started crying and became angry
and [my father] left without taking anything from him.

The most needy of Allah’s Mercy from his servants, \`Ali b.
\`Īsā[^2]—may Allah forgive him—says:

I was narrating this incident to a group of people who were with me.
Shams al-Dīn Muḥammad (Ismā\`īl al-Hirqalī’s son) was present there and
I did not know him. When I finished the story he said, “I am his son
from his loin.” I was amazed at this coincidence. I asked him, “Had you
seen his wound before it was healed?” He said, “No. At that time, I was
just a child. But I did see it when it had healed.

There was no sign of the wound and hair had grown on it. I asked Ṣafī
al-Dīn Muḥammad b. Muḥammad Bishr al-\`Alawī al-Mūsawī and Najm al-Dīn
Ḥaidar b. al-Aisar, may Allah have mercy on them, who were respected,
noble, and distinguished people. They were my friends and very dear to
me.

They informed me that this story is true and that they had both seen him
during his illness and after he had been cured.” His son told me that
after this incident, his father used to be in a state of intense grief
due to his separation; to such an extent, that he had gone to Baghdad in
the winter and had every day, visited Sāmarrā’ and returned to Baghdad.

In that year, he had gone back and forth [between Baghdad and Sāmarrā]
forty times in the hope that this would occur for him again but we don’t
always attain what we desire. He died with this desire and passed off
into the Hereafter with his grieves. May Allah be his guardian and ours
on account of His Mercy, His Obligation, and His Nobility.

Al-Sayyid Bāqī b. \`Aṭwat al-\`Alawī al-Ḥusaynī narrated to me that his
father \`Aṭwa—who was a Zaidī—was suffering from hernia. He used to
protest to his sons about their Imāmī beliefs and would say to them, “I
will not testify to your beliefs and will not believe in what you
believe until your master—i.e. the Mahdī—comes to me and relieves me of
this illness.” He used to repeat this sentence quite often.

Once, we were sitting together late at night when my father shrieked and
called us to help him. We rushed to him and he said, “Go and join your
master. He left me just now.” We went out but saw no one. We returned to
him and asked him [what happened]. He replied, “A man came to me and
said, “O \`Aṭwa!” I said, “Who are you?” He answered, “I am the master
of your sons. I have come to relieve you [of your illness].” Then, he
extended his hand, squeezed the place of my ailment and left. I touched
that place with my hand but found no trace of the ailment.” His son
continued, “He then lived like a gazelle without an illness and this
incident became very famous.” I asked others—other than his son—who
informed me about and acknowledged [this story].

Many similar stories have been narrated about him. For instance, groups
of people who had got lost on their way to Ḥijāz and other places had
been saved by him and he had taken them to where they had intended to
travel. I am not mentioning them for the sake of conciseness. I will
suffice with the stories that I have narrated which occurred nearer to
my time.

883. Jannat al-ma’wā[^3]: Story Thirty-Two:

In the month of Jumād al-Aulā, 1299 AH, a man named Āqā Muḥammad Mahdī
entered the city of Kādhimain. He was a resident of Burma . . . He had
traveled at sea for six days with a steamer. His father was from Shiraz
but he was born and lived in the aforementioned port. Three years before
the aforementioned date, he fell terribly ill. Although he was cured
from it, he had become deaf and dumb.

He had beseeched (tawassala) the Imam’s [who were buried] in Iraq, peace
be on them, for cure. He had some relatives in Kādhimain—who were
amongst its famous traders. He came to them and stayed with them for ten
days. By chance, at the time of departure of the steamer for Sāmarrā,
the water was turbulent.

So, [his relatives] came to the ship, handed him to the other
passengers—who were from Baghdad and Karbala—and asked them to take care
of him and look after his needs due to his inability to express them.
They also wrote to some of the dwellers of Sāmarrā’ to take care of him.

When they reached that noble land and holy region, he went to the
illuminated cellar (sardāb) in the afternoon of Friday, 10th Jumād
al-Thānī of the aforementioned year. In the cellar was a group of
reliable and holy people. He had gone to the blessed ledge (al-ṣuffa)
and cried and pleaded for a long time.

He had written his condition on a wall in front of him and would ask
those who were looking at him to pray for him and intercede on his
behalf. His crying and beseeching had not come to an end when Allah, the
Exalted, returned to him his speech.

Due to the miracle of the Ḥujja, peace be on him, he went out of that
holy place with an expressive tongue and eloquent speech. On Saturday,
he was taken to the class of the chief of the jurists, the teacher of
the scholars, the leader of the Shias, the crown of sharia, the leader
of the Imāmiyya, our majestic master and great teacher, al-Ḥāj Mīrzā
Muḥammad Ḥasan al-Shīrazī—may Allah delight the Muslims by his long
life. This man recited the blessed Sura of al-Fātiḥa in a way that those
present acknowledged it was [recited] correctly and pronounced
perfectly. That day became a day of witnessing and that place became a
place of praise.

On the 21st night [of the month], the scholars and the learned had
gathered in the holy courtyard with joy and happiness. The air was lit
up with lamps and lanterns. They rendered the above incident into a poem
and distributed it in the cities. In the steamer, along with the cured
person, was a poet of the Ahl al-Bait, peace be on them, who was none
but the learned and intelligent al-Ḥāj Mullā \`Abbās al-Ṣaffār al-Zanūzī
al-Baghdadi. He had seen this man in both his conditions of sickness as
well as complete recovery. He had recited a long poem[^4] in this regard
which he read there.

When this news reached the great composer of poetry, the supported
master, the intelligent litterateur, the pride of the seekers, and the
honor of the \`Alawīs, al-Sayyid Ḥaidar b. al-Sayyid Sulaimān al-Ḥillī,
may Allah support him, he sent a letter to Sāmarrā, the contents of
which were as follows: “In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the
Merciful. The winds of the Imam’s generosity blew from the Holy Region
and its beautiful fragrance has spread far and wide.

The tongue of its dumb visitor was set free after he stood in their
presence; beseeching and supplicating. Therefore, from amongst the group
who has served His Holiness, I desired to compose a poem about this
great miracle and to distribute it. I would also like to congratulate
the most learned scholar of the time, the chief of the handsome, the
branch of the tree of Muḥammad, the lighthouse of the Islamic nation,
the symbol of the sharia, and the Imam of the Shias, so that I may
perform both forms of worship in the presence of these two holy
personalities.

So, I have composed this poem and I gift it to his place of residence,
Sāmarrā’, in the hope of it being accepted. And Allah will bring out
what is desired (he then mentions the poem[^5]).

884. Tanbīh al-khawāṭir (aka Majmū\`at al-warrām)[^6]: Narrated to me
the majestic and noble Sayyid, Abū l-Ḥasan \`Alī b. Ibrāhīm al-\`Urayḍī
al-\`Alawī al-Ḥusaynī, from \`Alī b. Namā, from Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan b.
\`Alī b. Ḥamza al-Aqsānī—while they were in the house of the honorable
\`Alī b. Ja\`far b. \`Alī al-Madā’inī al-\`Alawī. He said:

There was an old cloth-washer in Kūfa who was famous for his piety,
asceticism, and worship and followed the path of the righteous. One day,
I was sitting with my father and this old man was speaking with him
while he was faced towards him. He said, “One night, I was in the mosque
of Ju\`fī which is an old mosque.

It was midnight and I was there alone for solitude and worship. All of a
sudden, three people entered the mosque. When they reached the center of
the courtyard, one of them sat down and touched the earth with his right
and left hands. Suddenly, water started coming out from it. He performed
ablution (wuḍū’) with it and indicated to the other two to do the same.
Then, he went forward and they prayed behind him and I too prayed with
them.

When he finished his prayers, I was dazed by him and his amazing act of
bringing out the water. I asked the person who was on his right, ‘Who is
he?’ He replied, ‘He is Ṣāḥib al-Amr, the son of al-Ḥasan.’ I went near
him, kissed his hand and asked, ‘O Son of Allah’s Messenger, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family! What is your view about \`Umar b.
Ḥamza? Is he on the right path?’ He replied, ‘No. But perhaps, he may
receive guidance. He will not die until he sees me.’”

This news was new for us. A long time passed and \`Umar b. Ḥamza died
and no one spoke about him having seen the Imam. When I met the pious
Shaykh, ibn al-Nādiya, I mentioned the above incident to him. Then, in
refutation of the incident, I said, “Didn’t you mention that \`Umar b.
Ḥamza will not die until he meets the Ṣāḥib al-Amr about which I
mentioned?” He answered, “And how do you know that he did not meet him?”
Later, I encountered Abū l-Manāqib, the son of \`Umar b. Ḥamza and
talked with him about his father.

He said, “One night we were with my father while he was suffering from
the illness that ultimately led to his death. His energy was sapped, his
voice could hardly be heard, and all the doors of the house were closed.
Suddenly a man came to us. His entry frightened us but we were too
astonished to ask him. He sat beside my father and talked to him for a
long time and my father was crying.

Then, he stood up and when we no longer saw him, my father faintly said,
‘Make me sit up.’ We made him sit up and he opened his eyes and asked,
‘Where is the man who was with me?’ We replied, ‘He left from where he
had come.’ He said, ‘Go look for him.’ We went in search of him but all
the doors were locked and there was no sign of him. We returned to our
father and informed him of the situation and that we could not find him.
We asked him about that person and he replied, ‘He is the Ṣāḥib al-Amr.’
Then, his condition worsened and he lost consciousness.”

885. Al-Sulṭān al-mufarrij \`an ahl al-īmān[^7]: In the month of Ṣafar,
759 AH, my master, the great, the majestic, the most learned, the
complete example, the precise researcher, the possessor of all great
characteristics, the one who the learned referred to, the honor of the
scholars, the one with perfect faith, \`Abd al-Raḥmān b. al-\`Ammānī,
informed me the following through a letter with his own handwriting:

The servant of Allah, the Exalted, who is in dire need of His mercy,
\`Abd al-Raḥmān b. Ibrāhīm al-Qabā’iqī states, “I used to hear in [the
city of] Ḥilla—may Allah the Exalted protect it—that the revered Jamāl
al-Dīn, the son of the most majestic Shaykh, the jurist, Najm al-Dīn
Ja\`far b. al-Zahdarī was afflicted with paralysis. His paternal
grandmother treated him after the death of his father with every
possible treatment for paralysis but to no avail.

She was advised to take him to the doctors in Baghdad and she took him
to them who treated him for a very long time but without success.
Someone told her, ‘Why don’t you put him for one night under the dome of
the famous place in Ḥilla called ‘Maqām Ṣāḥib al-Zamān’? Perhaps, Allah,
the Exalted, may make him healthy and cure him.’ She did so and put him
under its dome for one night and the Master of the Time, peace be on
him, made him stand up and rid him of his paralysis.

“After this incident, we became companions and it seemed that we would
continue [being friends] forever. His house was a place of companionship
and all the high statured people of Ḥilla, their youth, and the children
of their kind would gather there. I asked him about this incident and he
said, ‘I was paralyzed and the doctors failed to cure me . . .’ and he
told me the story that I had heard many times in Ḥilla.

He said, ‘The [Divine] Proof, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, peace be on him, told me,
when my grandmother had put me under the dome, “Stand up.” I pleaded, “O
Master! I have not been able to stand up for more than a year.” He
repeated, “Stand up, with the permission of Allah, the Exalted,” and he
helped me stand up. I stood up and my paralysis was dispelled. The
people rushed towards me and almost killed me. They tore off my clothes
and took them as blessings and [some others] gave me some clothes to
wear. I returned to my house whilst there was so sign of paralysis in me
and I sent the clothes to their owners.’

I heard him narrating this story repeatedly to the people and to those
who would ask him to narrate it, until he died. May Allah have mercy on
him.”

886. Al-Sulṭān al-mufarrij \`an ahl al-īmān[^8]: A reliable person
narrated to me an incident that is very famous amongst the inhabitants
of Najaf al-Ashraf, may Allah protect it. It goes as follows:

The house which I am living in now—and the year is 789 AH—belonged to a
good and righteous person called Ḥusayn al-Mudallal. The sābāṭ[^9]
called Mudallal, which connects the two walls of the Holy Shrine are
named after him and [the story] is well known in the holy city of Najaf.
He had a wife and children and was struck with paralysis. Consequently,
he couldn’t stand up and his wife would make him stand up when it was
necessary. This continued for a long time and his family experienced
extreme tribulations. Soon, they became dependent on the people who
treated them harshly. In the year 720 AH, one night, after a quarter of
the night had passed, he woke up his family.

They got up and saw that the entire house and the roof were shining with
light to the extent that their eyes were dazzled. They asked him, “What
has happened?” He had replied, “The Imam, peace be on him, came to me
and said, ‘Stand up, O Ḥusayn!’ I answered, ‘O Master! Do you think I
can stand?’ So he held my hand and helped me up. And here I am, as
healthy as I can be.

He then said to me, ‘O Ḥusayn! I use this sābāṭ to visit my ancestor
[Amīr al-Mu’minīn]. Lock it every night.’ I responded, ‘I heard and I
will obey Allah and you, my Master.’” Then, he had stood up and had gone
to the holy shrine at Najaf, visited the grave of the Imam, peace be on
him, and had praised Allah, the Exalted, for the graces that he had
received. To this day, that sābāṭ is a place that the needy go to
fulfill their desires and no seeker returns disappointed due to the
blessings of the Qā’im, peace be on him.

887. Qabas al-miṣbāḥ[^10]: The truthful shaykh, Abūl Ḥasan Aḥmad b.
\`Alī b. Aḥmad al-Najāshī al-Ṣairafī—known as ibn al-Kūfī in Baghdad and
who was a brilliant and reliable person and was considered truthful by
both Shias and Sunnis—informed us in the last days of the month of
Rabī\` al-Awwal, in the year 442 AH, from al-Ḥasan b. Muḥammad b.
Ja\`far al-Tamīmī, from Abū l-Wafā’ al-Shīrazī, who was a friend, that

Abū \`Alī Ilyās, the governor of Kerman, arrested and imprisoned me.
Those who were guarding me kept telling me that he intended to harm me.
I became very worried and began supplicating to Allah, the Exalted,
through the Prophet and the Imams, peace be on them. On the eve of
Friday, I finished my prayers and went to sleep.

I saw the Prophet, Allah's blessings be on him and his family, in my
dream and he said to me, “Don’t ask me, my daughter, and my sons from
the desires of this world except what you seek for the obedience and
satisfaction of Allah, the Exalted. As for my brother, Abū l-Ḥasan
[\`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib], he will take revenge for you on he who has
oppressed you.” I asked, “O Messenger of Allah! How can he take revenge
from the one who has oppressed me whilst a rope was put around his neck
and he did not take revenge and his rights were taken from him and he
said nothing?!”

He, peace be on him, looked at me with a state of surprise and said,
“That was because of a covenant that I had taken from him and an order
that I had given him. He had permission for nothing but to act in
accordance [with what I told him] and he did so. Woe to those who act
aggressively towards the guardian [appointed] by Allah. As for \`Alī b.
al-Ḥusayn, [you must ask him] to save you from the rulers and
insinuations of the devils.

As for Muḥammad b. \`Alī and Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on them, [you
must ask them] for the Hereafter and the obedience of Allah, Mighty and
Majestic be He. As for Mūsā b. Ja\`far, peace be on him, seek safety
through him from Allah, Mighty and Majestic be He. As for \`Alī b. Mūsā,
peace be on him, ask him for safety on the land and the seas. As for
Muḥammad b. \`Alī, peace be on him, seek sustenance through him from
Allah, the Exalted. As for \`Alī b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, ask
through him for the recommended-tasks (mustaḥab), doing good for the
brothers [in religion], and the obedience of Allah, the Exalted.

As for al-Ḥasan b. \`Alī, peace be on him, ask him for the Hereafter. As
for the Master of the time, when the sword reaches here—and he put his
hand on his neck—seek help from him for he will help you.” I cried out
in my sleep, “O Ṣāḥib al-Zamān! Help me, for I have lost my patience.” I
woke up from my sleep and the guards were releasing my shackles.

888. Kashf al-astār[^11]: During these days, a splendid miracle appeared
from the Mahdī, peace be on him, for the relatives of the officials of
the Ottoman Empire who lived in Najaf. It was as apparent and manifest
as the midday sun. We seek blessings and are privileged to mention it
here using a reliable chain of narrators: The respected scholar, Sayyid
Muḥammad Sa\`īd Afandī al-Khaṭīb, narrated in a letter in which he wrote
himself:

There is a miracle performed by the progeny of the Messenger, Allah's
blessings be on him and his family, which is appropriate for mentioning
here for our Muslim brothers. There was a woman whose name was Malika
bint \`Abd al-Raḥmān, the wife of Mullā Amīn, who helped us in the
Ḥumaidī School in the holy city of Najaf. In the second night of Rabī\`
al-Awwal, 1317 AH, which was the eve of Tuesday, she got a terrible
headache. In the morning, she had lost her eyesight and couldn’t see
anything.

They informed me about her condition and I said to her husband,
“Tonight, take her to the holy shrine of (Imam) al-Murtaḍā [\`Alī b. Abī
Ṭālib], peace be on him, to seek intercession from him and to make him
an intermediary between her and Allah; perhaps Allah, Glorified and
Exalted be He, may cure her.” She did not go there that night—which was
Wednesday eve—because of the discomfort that she was in.

She had slept part of the night and had dreamt that her husband and a
lady called Zainab were going with her to visit the shrine of Amīr
al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him. On their way, they had seen a great mosque
filled with people.

They had entered to see it and the afflicted woman had heard a man from
amongst the congregation saying, “O woman who has lost her sight! Don’t
fear. God willing, both [your eyes] will be cured.” She had asked, “God
bless you! Who are you?” He had replied, “I am the Mahdī.” She had woken
up rejoicing and in the morning—which was Wednesday—she had gone to the
station (maqām) of our master, the Mahdī, which is outside the city,
accompanied by a large group of women. She had entered it alone and had
begun crying, wailing, and beseeching, due to which she had lost
consciousness.

In her state of unconsciousness, she had seen two majestic men; the
elder of the two was in front and the younger, a youth, was behind him.
The elder had addressed her, “Don’t fear.” She had asked, “Who are you?”
He had replied, “I am \`Alī b. Abī Ṭālib and the man behind me is my
son, the Mahdī.” Then, the elder had said to a woman who was there,
“Stand up, O Khadīja, and touch the two eyes of this needy woman.” She
had touched both her eyes and she had woken up and could see even better
than before [becoming blind]. All the women had started cheering,
rejoicing, and sending blessings on the Prophet and his family. Then,
they had accompanied her to visit the holy shrine of (Imam) al-Murtaḍā
[Amīr al-Mu’minīn], peace be on him. Thank God, now her eyesight is even
better than before [her illness].

What we have mentioned here is very little because many more instances
have occurred for their righteous servants with the permission of Allah,
the Majestic . . .

These were what this humble preacher, Sayyid Muḥammad Sa\`īd, has been
informed about in the holy city of Najaf.

889. Ithbāt al-hudāt[^12]:

We—a group of students and righteous people—were sitting in the village
of Mashgharā[^13] in our homeland in one of the Eids. I said to the
others, “I wish I knew how many of us would be alive next year on the
same Eid and how many of us would have died?” A person whose name was
Shaykh Muḥammad and who was my colleague in the class, said, “I know
that I will be alive in the next Eid and the next and the next until
twenty six years.” From his talk, it appeared that he was really serious
about what he was saying and was not joking.

I asked him, “Do you have knowledge of the unseen?” He replied, “No. But
I saw the Mahdī, peace be on him, in a dream while I was afflicted with
a serious illness. I said to him, ‘I am ill and I fear that I will die
whilst I don’t have any good deeds to meet Allah with.’ He reassured,
‘Don’t worry! Surely, Allah will cure you of this ailment and you will
not die by it. Rather, you will live for twenty six years.’ Then, he
handed me a cup which he was holding. I drank from it and my ailment was
dispelled and I became cured. I sat down and I was sure that this was
not [a dream] from Satan.”

When I heard this talk from this man, I wrote down the date which was in
the year 1049 AH. A long time passed from this incident and I went to
the holy city of Mashhad in the year 1072 AH. When the last year passed,
I felt in my heart that the [twenty six] years had passed.

I referred to the note I had written and saw that exactly 26 years had
passed. I thought to myself, “In all likelihood, that person must have
died.” Barely a month or two had passed when I received a letter from my
brother—who was in our homeland—in which he informed me about the death
of that person.

890. Al-Imāma wa l-mahdawiyya[^14]: The incident in which the righteous
wife of Shaykh Muḥammad al-Muttaqī al-Hamdānī—the highly learned scholar
at the Islamic Seminary at Qum—was cured. He was famous for the purity
of his soul and his piety. I have known him for many years for his
religiousness and virtuous moralities. The following are the exact words
that he wrote to narrate this incident:

I deemed it appropriate to mention my tawassul to the Imam—which is the
remnant of Allah on His earth—al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, and his
attention towards me; because the subject of this book is about proving
his existence through miracles and extraordinary feats.

It was Tuesday, Safar 18, 1397 AH. There was an issue that shook us and
hundreds of others. The wife of this servant—Muḥammad Muttaqī
Hamdānī—was in a constant state of sorrow, grief, crying, and weeping,
for more than two years, due to the death of two of her children in the
prime of their youth in the mountains of Shimīrān.

On this day, she was inflicted with a [disease similar to] malaria and
despite spending whatever possible on the doctors, there was no cure.
She remained in this state until the eve of Friday, 22nd of Safar, four
days after she had been inflicted with the illness. It was approximately
11 o’clock and I had gone to my room to rest. After reciting some verses
from the Holy Quran and a few brief supplications of the eve of Friday,
I supplicated to the Exalted Lord to permit my master and my chief,
Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan—Allah’s blessings be on him and
his infallible forefathers—to come to my aid.

The reason that I made tawassul to this great master and did not ask
Allah directly was that approximately a month before the strike, my
younger daughter Fāṭima had asked me to narrate for her some stories and
incidents about those people who were fortunate to receive the direct
grace of his Honor, Baqiyyat-Allah, and his beneficence and obligations,
may I and the souls of the inhabitants of the worlds be sacrificed for
him.

I had responded to her request by reading to her some of the incidents
in al-Nūrī’s al-Najm al-thāqib. Thus, it occurred to me that why
shouldn’t I be one of those hundreds who have received salvation at his
hands. So I made tawassul to the awaited proof, the twelfth of the
infallible Imams, peace be on them. Therefore—as I mentioned earlier—at
approximately 11 p.m., I invoked this great master with a heart laden
with sorrow and eyes overflowing with tears. I went to sleep and woke up
as usual at about 4 a.m. Suddenly, I felt a sound and a murmur coming
from the room downstairs where my ill [wife] was sleeping. The sounds
became louder and then completely ceased. At 5.30 a.m.—which in those
days was the time of the morning prayers—I went down to perform
ablution.

Suddenly, I saw my older daughter—who was usually asleep at this
time—and she was extremely happy and joyous. On seeing me, she screamed,
“Daddy! Good news! Good news!” I asked her, “What has happened?” I
thought that either my brother or my sister had arrived from Hamadan.
She said, “Good news! My mother has been cured.” I asked surprisingly,
“Who has cured her?” She said, “Four hours after midnight, she woke us
up with a loud, panicked, and distressed voice. Her daughter, her
brother Haj Mahdī, and her nephew Ghaffārī—the engineer—who had come
from Tehran to take her there for treatment were all sleeping in the
room to keep a watch on her.

All of a sudden, they had heard her cries and shouts and she was saying,
‘Get up and follow the master . . . get up and follow the master . . .’
She had thought that if she had waited until they got up from their
sleep, the Imam would leave.

Therefore, she had got up from her bed and had followed the Imam to the
door—although she had not been able to move for the last four days. Her
daughter, who was nursing her mother, had woke up by her loud screams of
follow the master and had followed her mother to the door to see where
she had gone.

When her mother had come to herself, she could not believe that she had
gone there by herself and had asked her daughter Zahra: ‘Zahra! Am I
dreaming or am I awake?’ She had answered, ‘Mother! You have been cured
. . . Where is the master about whom you were saying, “follow the
master,” because we cannot see anyone?’ Her mother had replied, ‘He was
a majestic Sayyid who was dressed like the scholars and was very high
statured. He was neither very young nor very old. He came and stood
beside me and said, “Get up for you have been cured.” I replied, “I
cannot get up.”

He repeated with a stronger tone, “Get up for you have been cured,” and
then I moved in awe of his majesty. He said, “You have been cured, so
don’t take any more medicines and don’t cry.” When he was about to leave
the room, I woke you all up so that you may follow him. But since you
were too slow, I stood up to follow the master myself.’”

All praise is for Allah! After this incident which I have mentioned, her
condition immediately improved and her left eye, with which she could
not see with clearly due to the stroke, was cured for good. In these
four days, she had no appetite but [after this incident] she had
immediately said, “I am hungry. Get me some food.” We gave her a bowl of
milk which we had in the house and she drank it with great appetite.

The color of her face returned to normal. She was relived of her grieves
and sorrows due to the Imam ordering her not to cry. Although she was
suffering from rheumatism for the last five years and the doctors had
failed to treat her, she was cured of this as well due to the grace of
Imam, peace be on him.

To complete the story, it is worth mentioning that since it was near the
anniversary of the martyrdom of Fāṭimat al-Zahrā, peace be on her, we
expressed our gratitude for this great favor by holding a commemoration
service.

Later, I mentioned the story of her being cured to the revered doctor
Sayyid Dānishwar, who was one of her doctors. He remarked, “Surely, her
illness was the result of a stroke and it is not possible to treat it
through ordinary means. By Allah! It can only be cured through miracles
and extraordinary feats.” All Praise is for Allah the Lord of the
worlds. Allah’s blessings be on Muḥammad and his infallible progeny,
specially the Imam of the Time, the Honor of the Era, the Pivot of this
Abode, the Imam and the Master of the Humans and the Jinn, the King of
the Earth and Time, the one in whose hand are the reins of the universe,
al-Ḥujjat b. al-Ḥasan al-\`Askarī, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
infallible forefathers until the Day of Judgment.

The traditions with the following numbers also show the above concept:
892, 895, 897, 898, and 899.

[^1]: Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, pp. 493–497; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 18, pp. 61–66, no. 51; al-Anwār al-nu\`māniyya, vol. 2, pp. 44–46.

[^2]: The author of Kashf al-ghumma.

[^3]: Jannat al-ma’wā, printed with the 53rd volume of Biḥār al-anwār,
pp. 265–269.

[^4]: The poem can be found in Jannat al-ma\`wā—Ed.

[^5]: The poem can be found in Jannat al-ma\`wā—Ed.

[^6]: Tanbīh al-khawāṭir, vol. 2, pp. 303–305; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 18, pp. 55–56, no. 39; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 7, sect. 15, chap.
364, p. 365, no. 151.

[^7]: Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 18, p. 73, under no. 55, citing the
aforementioned book.

[^8]: Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 18, pp. 73–74, under no. 55, citing
the aforementioned book.

[^9]: An arched roof which covers a section of an alley—Ed.

[^10]: Al-Kalim al-ṭayyib, pp. 63–66, citing the book Qabas al-miṣbāḥ by
Shaykh al-Sihrashtī. I say: The majestic Sayyid \`Alī Khan, may his
grave be sanctified, has mentioned in al-Kalim al-ṭayyib from
al-Ṣihrashtī, a tawassul to the Prophet and the Imams, peace be on them,
and after that, another one.

[^11]: Kashf al-astār, p. 206.

[^12]: Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 712, no. 170; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 53, pp. 273–274; Jannat al-ma’wā, 37th incident.

[^13]: Located in southern Lebanon—Ed.

[^14]: Al-Imāma wa l-mahdawiyya (Persian = Imāmat wa mahdawiyyat)
written by the author of the current book: vol. 2, pp. 171–174. I say:
Numerous similar incidents have been mentioned in Biḥār al-anwār and in
Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 7. Likewise, al-Muḥaddith al-Nūrī has mentioned
many incidents in Dār al-salām, Jannat al-ma’wā, and al-Najm al-thāqib,
as has al-Maithamī al-\`Irāqī in Dār al-salām and many other
traditionists and scholars who have recorded numerous miracles that far
exceed the limit of tawātur. The chains of many of these narrations are
extremely authentic and strong and comprise of the most pious and
God-fearing of scholars. These are in addition to what we witness every
day and night, from the blessings of his existence and the results of
asking him to help us and to intercede on our behalf. May Allah, the
Exalted, enlist us amongst his helpers, followers, and those who fight
alongside him, for the sake of Muḥammad and his pure family, Allah’s
blessings be upon them all.


