Section Two
===========

Those who have seen him during the Major Occultation

Comprised of Thirteen Traditions

891. Al-Anwār al-nu\`māniyya[^1]: (After mentioning the great
precautionary-piety [wara\`] of Muqaddas al-Ardabīlī and his abstinence,
piety, and miracles), he says: Narrated to me the most reliable of my
teachers in knowledge and practice that this man—referring to Muqaddas
al-Ardabīlī—had a student from Tafrish. His name was Mīr \`Allām
[Faiḍ-Allah] and he was very virtuous and pious. The student had said:

I had a room in the school which was surrounded by the Holy Dome. I had
finished my studies and a considerable part of the night had elapsed. I
went out of the room to look at the courtyard of the shrine and it was
terribly dark. Suddenly, I saw a man moving towards the holy shrine. I
thought to myself “perhaps he is a thief who has come to steal the
lanterns.” I came down and approached him and I could see him but he
couldn’t see me. He went to the door and stopped.

The lock opened by itself and the second door opened for him [too].
Then, the same happened with the third door. He approached the holy
grave and said hello. Someone replied to him from the holy grave. I
recognized the voice of this man and he was discussing some religious
issues with the Imam.

[When he finished], he went out of the city towards the Mosque of Kūfa.
I followed him but he couldn’t see me. When he reached the Mosque’s
prayer-niche, I heard him speaking to another man about the same issue.
He returned and I returned behind him. When he reached the city gates,
the morning had become bright. I announced myself to him and said, “Our
master! I was with you right from the beginning to the end.

Please inform me about the first person with whom you spoke to in the
Holy Shrine and the other one with whom you spoke in the Mosque of
Kūfa?” He took a covenant from me that I will not inform anyone about
his secret until he dies. He then enlightened me, “My son! When some
issues were unclear for me I would some nights go to the grave of our
master Amīr al-Mu’minīn, peace be on him, to discuss the issues with him
and hear the answers from him. Last night, he referred me to our master
Ṣāḥib al-Zamān and said to me, ‘Tonight my son Mahdī is in the Mosque of
Kūfa. Go to him and ask your questions.’ The [second] person was the
Mahdī, peace be on him.”

892. Biḥār al-anwār[^2]: A group from the citizens of Najaf informed me
that

A person from Qāshān came to Najaf on the way to the Sanctuary, the
House of Allah (Bait Allah al-ḥarām). He became severely ill to the
extent that both his legs became paralyzed and he was unable to walk.
His friends left him behind and entrusted him to a righteous person—who
lived in a room in the school surrounded by the holy shrine—and went
ahead for Hajj. Every day, this righteous man would lock the door and go
to the desert to seek sustenance. One day, the ill-man said to him, “I
am bored and I am fed up with being confined to this place. Today, take
me someplace and leave me there and go wherever you like.” (The ill-man
narrates,) “He accepted and carried me to the Station (maqām) of the
Qā’im outside Najaf. He made me sit there, washed his shirt in the pond,
and hung it on a tree, then left for the desert. I was alone and
sorrowful and was thinking about my fate. Suddenly, I saw a handsome
youth with a tanned complexion. He entered the courtyard, greeted me,
and went inside the building and started praying some units (rak\`a) in
the prayer-niche with a humility and humbleness the like of which I had
never witnessed before. When he finished his prayers, he came out to me
and enquired about my condition. I said to him, ‘I have been afflicted
with a calamity that has straitened me. Allah neither cures me so that I
am freed from it nor does he make me die so that I am relieved of it.’

He said, ‘Don’t be sad! Soon, Allah will give you both.’ Saying this, he
left. When he went away, I saw that the shirt had fallen on the ground
from the tree. I stood up and washed it and hung it back on the tree.
Then, it struck me that I could not move. So how did I get up and do all
these things? I inspected myself but found nothing of [my ailment].

I realized that he was the Qā’im—Allah’s blessings be on him. I went out
in the desert but saw no one and became very sorrowful. When the owner
of the room returned, he asked me about my condition and was amazed at
my condition. I informed him about what had happened. He too became
sorrowful about the opportunity both of us had lost and I walked along
with him to his room.”

He was in sound and healthy condition until the pilgrims and his friends
returned. When he saw them, he stayed with them for a short time but
fell ill and died. He was buried in the courtyard [of the Holy Shrine].
The truth about what the Imam, peace be on him, had said became
evident—for both things had occurred.

893. Jannat al-ma’wā[^3]: The 9th Incident: The practicing-scholar
(al-\`ālim al-\`āmil), the complete mystic, the diver in the depths of
fear and hope, the traveler in the lands of abstinence and piety, our
beneficial companion, our true friend, al-Āghā \`Alī Riḍā, the son of
the great scholar al-Ḥāj Maulā Muḥammad al-Nā’īnī—may Allah have mercy
on them both—informed me from the pious scholar, the possessor of
miracles and high stations, Maulā Zain al-\`Ābidīn b. Muḥammad
al-Salmāsī, may Allah have mercy on him, who was the student of
Ayatollah al-Sayyid . . . Muḥammad Mahdī, known as Baḥr al-\`Ulūm, may
Allah elevate his position. The aforementioned person was one of [Baḥr
al-\`Ulūm’s] very special students regarding both secret and open
matters. He said:

I was present in the assembly of the Sayyid in the Shrine of Najaf when
Muḥaqqiq al-Qummī—the author of al-Qawānīn—came to visit him. This
occurred in the year in which he had returned to Iraq from Iran to visit
the graves of the Imams, peace be on them, and to perform Hajj. All
those who were present in the assembly dispersed—and were about a
hundred people who had come to learn from him.

Only three people remained who were all pious and righteous and had
attained the high position of Ijtihād. The Muḥaqqiq turned towards the
Sayyid and said, “You [who live in Najaf] have seen many miracles . . .
please narrate some of these to us so that the hearts may become
assured.” The Sayyid replied without hesitation, “Three nights ago or
less (the doubt is from the narrator), I was in the Great Mosque of Kūfa
and was performing the night-prayers (ṣalāt al-layl). I had the
intention of returning to Najaf early in the morning so that the
religious debates and classes would be performed on schedule—and this
was his practice for many years.

When I came out of the Mosque, I felt a great desire to go to the Mosque
of Sahla but I dropped the idea fearing that I might not reach the city
in time to perform the classes. But my desire increased every moment and
my heart was inclined to that place. I would take one step forward and
would stop the other one.

Suddenly, a wind blew which was full of dust and I lost my way [in the
dust]. But since divine-success (taufīq) is the best of friends, I
landed at the gate of the Mosque of Sahla. I entered and it was empty of
worshippers and visitors except for a majestic man, who was engrossed in
supplicating to Allah. He was using words that would melt the hardened
hearts and would make tears flow from the dried eyes.

My tiredness vanished, my condition changed, my knees started trembling,
and my tears started flowing by hearing these words—that my ears hadn’t
heard and my eyes had seen nothing like them in the prayer-books. I
realized that the supplicant was making up the words at the same moment
that he was reciting them and he wasn’t saying something he had
memorized. I stood in my place and listened with pleasure until he
finished supplicating.

Then, he turned to me and called out in Persian, ‘Come here, O Mahdī!’ I
went a few steps toward him and stopped. Again, he ordered me to come
forward. I walked a little then I stopped. Once again, he ordered me to
proceed, saying, ‘Surely, etiquette lies in obedience.’ I went ahead and
our distance was such that my hand reached him and his hand reached me.
He then said some words.”

Al-Salmāsī, may Allah have mercy on him, said, “When the talk of the
Sayyid reached this stage, he stopped and started answering another of
Muḥaqqiq al-Qumī’s questions. Muḥaqqiq al-Qummī changed the topic again
and asked about those words. He indicated with his hand—in a gesture of
denial—that this was a secret that could not be disclosed.”

894. Jannat al-ma’wā[^4]: The 11th Incident: Through the same chain of
narrators (from al-Salmāsī):

We were praying behind the Sayyid in the holy shrine of the
\`Askariyyain [in Sāmarrā’]. When he intended to proceed from the
tashahhud to the third unit (rak’a), his conditions changed. He stopped
for a while then stood up.

When we finished, we were all surprised and could not understand its
reason. None of us dared to ask him until we returned to the house and
the dining cloth was laid. One of the Sayyids from amongst our
companions indicated to me to ask him about it. I said, “No. You are
closer to him than me.” He, may Allah have mercy on him, turned to me
and said, “What are you speaking about?” I replied—and I was the most
audacious of all towards him—“They want to know as what happened to you
during the prayers.” He responded, “The Ḥujja—may Allah hasten his
reappearance—entered the holy shrine to salute his father, peace be on
him.

So, whatever you saw of the change in my condition was on account of
witnessing his illuminated beauty, until he went out.”

895. Al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ[^5]: From them is what has been narrated
from Abū l-Qāsim Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Qūlawayh, who recounts:

When I reached Baghdad in the year 339 AH, I decided to go to Hajj. It
was the year when the Qarāmiṭa returned the Black-Stone (Ḥajar al-Aswad)
to its place in Ka\`ba.[^6] My greatest concern was to reach the one who
would place the stone [back in its place] because it had been written in
some books that whenever it had been removed [the only person that had
been able to] put it back in its place had been the Divine Proof of that
time.

For example, during the reign of al-Ḥajjāj, Imam Zain al-\`Ābidīn, peace
be on him, had placed it back and it had stayed in its place. Meanwhile,
I became so ill that I feared for my life and it became impossible for
me to do what I had intended. I appointed a representative who was known
as ibn Hishām and gave him a sealed letter in which I had asked about
the length of my life and that whether I would die in this illness or
not.

I told [ibn Hishām] that my concern was to convey this letter to the one
who would place the Black-Stone back in its place and to get the answer
to it. [After he returned), ibn Hishām reported, “When I reached Mecca,
I spent a lot [of money] on the custodians of the Holy House until they
allowed me to see who places the Black Stone back in its place. I stood
there and some of them remained with me to keep away the crowd of
people.

Whenever someone put it in its place, it would start shaking and would
not remain in its place. Then, a youth with a tanned complexion and
handsome visage came forward. He took it and placed it in its place and
it stuck there as if it had never been taken out. Due to this, [the
crowd] roared and the youth returned and left from the door. I stood up
from where I was and followed him and tore the crowd apart [sending
them] right and left.

The people thought I had lost my mind and moved out of my way. My eyes
were fixed on him until he moved out of the crowd. I rushed towards him
yet I couldn’t reach him, although he was walking calmly. When he
reached a place that no one could see him except me, he stopped, turned
to me, and said, ‘Bring forth what is with you.’ I gave him the letter
and without reading it he said, ‘Tell him that there is no fear for him
in this illness. The inevitable [i.e. death] will occur after thirty
years.’ I was astonished to the extent that I could not move and He left
me and went away.”

In the year 369 AH, Abū l-Qāsim became ill. He started organizing his
affairs, acquiring the needs for his grave, and writing his will and was
very serious in this regard. He was asked, “What do you fear? We hope
that Allah, the Exalted, will grant you good health? You need not fear!”
He had replied, “This is the year I was told to fear,” and he died from
his illness.

896. Muhaj al-da\`awāt[^7]: I was in Sāmarrā’ when I heard him, peace be
on him, supplicating in the morning. I memorized a part of his
supplication in which he mentioned the living and the dead then said:
“And make them survive—or—and make them live in our honor, our nation,
our kingdom, and our government.” This was on the eve of Wednesday, Dhū
l-Ḥijja 13, 638 AH.

897. Dār al-salām[^8] (Comprised of the stories of those who had the
honor of meeting the Imam of our time, peace be on him): The 19th
Incident: The virtuous scholar Mīrzā Muḥammad al-Tunkābunī in his book
Qiṣaṣ al-\`ulamā, from the learned al-Lāhījī Maulā Ṣafar \`Alī, from the
author of al-Mafātīḥ, al-Sayyid Muḥammad—the son of the author of
al-Riyāḍ—from Ayatollah al-\`Allāma in the margins of one of his books
in which he mentions that

One night he went to visit the grave of our master, Imam Abū \`Abd-Allah
al-Ḥusayn, peace be on him. He was riding a donkey and in his hand was a
whip to drive his beast. On his way, he met a man dressed like an Arab,
who joined him [on the journey] while the latter was walking in front of
him. Gradually, they started talking and discussing.

From the talks of the Arab, he realized that this Arab was very learned
and well informed and very few people were like him [in knowledge]. So,
he informed him about some difficult problems and found him to be the
solver of problems and puzzling issues and the key to scientific
dilemmas. He asked him the questions that had baffled him and [the Arab]
had revealed the answer to all of them.

The discussion reached an issue in which the Arab’s fatwa differed with
his view. He refuted him by saying, “Your fatwa is absolutely against
the basic principles and laws [of jurisprudence]. It is necessary that
some proof be put forward to establish it.” The Arab replied, “The proof
is the tradition recorded by al-Ṭūsī in al-Tahdhīb.” \`Allāma answered,
“I am not aware of any such tradition in al-Tahdhīb and neither Shaykh
nor anyone else have recorded it.” He replied, “Refer to the manuscript
of al-Tahdhīb which is with you now; go to such and such page and such
and such line and you will find it.” When the \`Allāma heard this from
him and realized that this news was of the unseen (al-ghayb), he was
astonished and became startled.

He thought to himself, “Perhaps this man who has been walking in front
of me for such and such time whilst I was on my mount, is the pivot
around whose existence the universe rotates.” Due to him being engrossed
in deep thought and astonishment, his whip fell from his hand. While the
whip was falling down from his hand, he asked, “Is it possible to have
the privilege of meeting our master and guardian, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān, during
the Major Occultation? The man bent down and picked up the whip and put
it in \`Allāma’s hand and said, “Why is it impossible whilst his hand is
in your hand?” On hearing this, \`Allāma threw himself on [the Imam’s]
feet and became unconscious. On regaining consciousness, he saw no one
and became sorrowful and sad. He returned to his family and browsed
through the copy of al-Tahdhīb. He found the tradition just as the Imam
had informed him in the margins of his copy. He wrote in his own
handwriting on that place, “My master and my chief informed me about
this tradition—which is in such and such page and such and such line.”

The virtuous al-Tunkābunī has narrated from Maulā Ṣafar \`Alī, from the
aforementioned Sayyid, may Allah have mercy on him, that he had seen
that copy with \`Allāma’s writing in its margin.

898. Dalā’il al-imāma[^9]: Abū l-Ḥusayn Muḥammad b. Hārūn b. Mūsā
al-Talla\`ukbarī, narrated to me from Abū l-Ḥusayn b. Abī l-Baghl
al-Kātib, who said:

I accepted a responsibility from Abū Manṣūr b. al-Ṣāliḥān but something
occurred between me and him that I went into hiding. He sought me and
frightened me and I remained in hiding and was fearful. On the eve of
Friday, I went to the graves of the Quraish and stayed there that night
to pray and supplicate.

It was a windy and rainy night and I asked the warden, ibn Ja\`far, to
close the doors so that I could pray and supplicate in solitude and be
safe from the entry of anyone with whom I felt unsafe with and feared to
meet. He did so accordingly and locked the doors. As it became midnight,
heavy wind and rain prevented anyone from venturing to that place. I
stayed there and supplicated, recited ziyārats, and prayed.

Suddenly, I heard footsteps near the grave of our Master (Imam) Mūsā,
peace be on him. There was a man visiting [his grave]. He sent
salutations to Adam and the Resolute Prophets (Aulū l-\`Azm) followed by
the Imams, one by one, up to Ṣāḥib al-Zamān. I was stunned and thought
to myself, “Perhaps, he has forgotten [the last Imam] or he does not
know or this is the religion of this man.” When he finished his ziyārat,
he performed two units of prayers. I feared him because I did not know
him. He was a youth and a perfect man.

He was wearing a white dress and a turban—whose ends were suspended and
lowered around his shoulders. He said to me, “O Abū l-Ḥusayn b. Abī
l-Baghl! Why don’t you recite the supplication of Faraj?” I replied,
“What (supplication) is that, my master?” He replied, “Perform two units
of prayers, then say, ‘O He who exposed the beautiful [deeds] and
covered the nasty ones, O He who does not rebuke for crimes and does not
rip the veil [which covers our crimes], O generous pardoner, O noble
excuser, O He who has broad forgiveness, O He who has opened His hands
with mercy, O He who all whispers [of supplications] end at Him, O He
who all complaints are sent to Him, O helper of all those who seek help,
O He who bestows graces before they are deserved, O my Lord (ten times),
O my Master (ten times), O my chief (ten times), O my final destination
(ten times), O my uttermost desire (ten times), I ask you for the sake
of these Names, and for the sake of Muḥammad and his pure family, to
remove my agony, and to remove my worries, and to free me from my
sorrows, and to set right my affairs.’ After this, supplicate as you
wish and ask your need. Then, place your right cheek on the earth and
say a hundred times while in prostration, ‘O Muḥammad O \`Alī, O \`Alī O
Muḥammad, suffice me for you are sufficient for me, help me for you are
my helpers.’

Then place your left cheek on the earth and say a hundred times, ‘Reach
me (adriknī),’ and repeat it many times. Then, say, ‘Aid me
(al-ghauth),’ until you run out of breath. Then, raise your head,
because Allah will surely fulfill your needs on account of His
munificence, if He, the Exalted, wills.”

I started the prayer and supplication and he left. After finishing, I
went to ibn Ja\`far to ask him about the man and how he had entered. But
I saw that all the doors were closed and locked like earlier. I was
surprised and thought to myself, “Perhaps there is another door which I
am not aware of.” I called ibn Ja\`far and he came out of the lamp-oil
store and I asked him about the man and how he had entered.

He replied, “All the doors are locked and as you can see I have not
opened them.” I informed him about what had happened and he said, “That
was our master, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān. I have seen him many times in such
nights when no one is here.” I became sorrowful because of what I had
missed. I left near morning and set off for Karkh—near the place where I
had been hiding in.

The sun was rising when the companions of ibn al-Ṣāliḥān requested to
meet me and were asking about me from my friends. They had a letter of
amnesty from the vizier and a note in his own handwriting in which he
had greatly praised me. I went to him with a few of my reliable friends.

He stood up and hugged me and dealt with me in a manner that he had not
done before. He said, “You reached such a state that you complained
about me to Ṣāḥib al-Zamān.” I replied, “I only supplicated and asked.”
He answered, “Woe to you! Last night—meaning the eve of Friday—I saw my
master Ṣāḥib al-Zamān in a dream.

He ordered me to be gracious [to you] and he treated me so harshly that
I became scared.” I said, “There is no God but Allah! I bear witness
that the [the Imams] are the truth and the pinnacle truthfulness. Last
night, I saw our master Ṣāḥib al-Zamān while I was awake. He instructed
me to do so and so,” and I explained in detail what I had seen the
previous night in the Holy Shrine. He was surprised and I attained
things that I had not expected and I acquired such a position before him
that I could not even think of. All these were because of the blessings
of our master, Ṣāḥib al-Zamān.

899. Al-Imāma wa l-mahdawiyya[^10]: In the Name of Allah the Beneficent,
the Merciful. His Holiness Shaykh Muḥammad al-Kūfī was famous for
abstinence, piety, and righteousness amongst the great scholars and
learned men of Najaf al-Ashraf.

He would continuously go to Najaf on the eve and day of Friday. I had
heard from a scholar about his meeting with the Master of the Time—may
Allah hasten his relief (faraj)—on a Friday in the Sadr School in Najaf,
in the room of one of his noble friends. He had the privilege of being
in his presence and at his service.

I asked him to recount the story of his meeting with the Imam, may Allah
hasten his relief (faraj), so that I could hear it directly from him.
Here, I am narrating what I remember from the things he mentioned to me.
He said:

I had gone with my father to Mecca and we only had one camel with us. My
father would ride it while I walked and my main concern was to serve
him. When we were returning, we reached al-Samāwa where we hired a mule
from a Sunni, whose profession was to transfer corpses between al-Samāwa
and Najaf.

[We hired the mule] because our camel travelled slowly and would usually
stop and lie down and we had to make him stand up again with great
difficulty. My father mounted the mule and I sat atop the camel. We
moved from al-Samāwa and the camel was lagging behind because in most
places, the path was filled with mud and water. I was afflicted with the
bad temper of this Sunni whose mule we had hired.

This situation continued until we reached a land which was extremely
muddy. The camel lied down and refused to budge. We tried our best to
make it move but to no avail. Due to our attempts in making it move, our
clothes became soaked in mud. The Sunni was forced to stop so we could
wash our clothes with the water that was there. I distanced myself a
little from them to take off my clothes and wash them.

I was worried about our fate and bewildered because I didn’t know what
would happen to us and how everything would end. Moreover, the valley
was dangerous because of bandits. I felt the need to make tawassul to
the Guardian of the Time, may our souls be sacrificed for him; but
nothing happened.

The desert was empty to where the eyes could see. Suddenly, I saw near
me a youth who resembled Sayyid Mahdī b. Sayyid Ḥusayn al-Karbalā’ī. [I
don’t recollect whether he said that there were two people or only this
person. Also, I don’t remember who greeted the other first.][^11] I
said, “What’s your name?” He replied, “Sayyid Mahdī.” I asked, “The son
of Sayyid Ḥusayn?” He replied, “No, the son of Sayyid Ḥasan.” I asked
again, “Where are you coming from?” He replied, “From Khuḍair.” In this
desert, there is a place known as Maqām al-Khiḍr, peace be on him.

I thought that he was referring to that place. He asked, “Why have you
stopped here?” I told him about the incident in detail and that the
camel had lied down and complained to him about my bad condition. He
looked at the camel and put his hand on the camel’s head and it
immediately stood up on its feet.

I saw him, peace be on him, speaking with the camel and pointing right
and left with his index finger and showing it the path. Then, he turned
to me and asked, “Do you need anything else?” I answered, “I have a lot
of needs but I cannot mention them in this state of restlessness and
discomfort. Specify a place for me so that I may come there prepared and
I will ask you.” He said, “The mosque of Sahla,” and suddenly
disappeared from before my eyes. I went to my father and asked, “Where
did the person who was talking with me go?” (I wanted to know whether he
had seen him, peace be on him, or not). He replied, “No one came here
and I can’t see anyone—as far as my eyes can see—in this desert.” I
said, “Mount [the mule]! Let’s go.” He asked, “What will you do with the
camel?” I replied, “Leave it to me.” They mounted and I sat atop the
camel. It moved very fast and overtook them. The Sunni hirer screamed,
“We cannot catch up with you with this speed.” Everything had turned
upside-down. The Sunni asked amazingly, “What has happened? The camel is
the same camel and the path is the same path?!” I answered, “That is a
secret.” Suddenly, a big river appeared right in the middle of the road.

For a second time, I was bewildered and didn’t know what to do with the
water. While I was in the state of bewilderment, the camel went inside
the river. Sometimes he would go to the right and other times to the
left. When my father and the Sunni hirer reached the river, they called
out, “Where are you going? You will drown. It is not possible to cross
this river.” But when they saw how fast I was crossing it with the camel
and nothing was happening to me, they too dared to cross. I said to
them, “Go right and left and follow the same path the camel had
crossed.” They crossed accordingly and we safely reached [the other
side]. It was then that I remembered the Imam pointing right and left to
the camel with his index finger. He had been showing [the camel how to
cross] the river.

Anyway, we started traveling until we reached some nomads in the night
and we dismounted near them. They all asked us surprisingly, “Where did
you come from?” We replied, “Al-Samāwa.” They all said, “The bridge has
collapsed and there is no other way to cross the river except with a
ship.” They were all amazed and the most amazed amongst them was the
Sunni hirer. He pleaded, “Inform me about the secret of this whole
affair.” I said, “When the camel sat down, I made tawassul to the
twelfth Imam of the Shias. He came to me and solved all our problems. [I
don’t remember whether he said that he (the Sunni) became a Shia along
with the others or not].[^12] Then, we traveled a few miles towards
Najaf. The camel sat down again and I put my head near its ear and said,
“You have been ordered to take us to Kūfa.” I had barely finished my
sentence when it got up from its place and completed the journey. At the
door of our house in Kūfa, it lowered its knees and sat down on the
ground. I neither sold it nor slaughtered it until it died. During the
day, it would go around Kūfa for grazing and in the evening, it would
return to the house to sleep.

After this, I asked him, “Did you have the honor of meeting our great
master in the Mosque of Sahla?” He answered, “Yes. But I am not
permitted to disclose the details of that conversation.”

Yours truly,

Āqā Imām al-Sidihī.

The traditions with the following numbers also show the above meaning:
881, 882, 884, and 886

What we mentioned in this section are only a handful from the many
incidents and stories that have been mentioned in reliable books. We
have sufficed with these because we did not want to make the book
lengthy. Moreover, these incidents are so many that it is impossible to
enumerate all of them.

The scholars have mentioned many of them in their books. To realize
their vast number, you can refer to Biḥār al-anwār, al-Najm al-thāqib,
Jannat al-ma’wā, Dār al-salām (comprised of the accounts of those who
had the privilege of meeting the Imam), al-\`Abqarī al-ḥisān, and etc.
Whoever browses through the books which have mentioned such incidents,
narratives, and accounts—most of which are authentic and reliable due to
the correctness of their chains of narrators, and the fact that their
narrators were famous for their trustworthiness, knowledge, and
piety—will become sure and certain about his existence, peace be on him.

We ask Allah to grants us the grace to compile an exclusive and large
book in this regard. Surely, He is the Best Facilitator and Helper.

[^1]: Al-Anwār al-nu\`māniyya, vol. 2, p. 303; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52,
chap. 24, pp. 174–175 I say: The aforementioned Mīr Faiḍ-Allah, is the
glorious Sayyid Amīr Faiḍ-Allah b. \`Abd al-Qāhir al-Ḥusaynī
al-Tafrishī. The author of Amal al-āmil writes: “He was a virtuous and
great traditionist. He has penned several books like Sharḥ al-mukhtalif
and a book about Uṣūl. My father’s maternal uncle, Shaykh \`Alī b.
Maḥmūd al-\`Āmilī, informed us about these two books. He had the
privilege of being his student in the city of Najaf and was given
permission by him to narrate traditions. He used to describe his
virtues, knowledge, righteousness, and worships. Sayyid Muṣṭafā
al-Tafrishī has described him in his Rijāl as “Our immaculate Sayyid who
had vast knowledge and great forbearance. He was a
dialectical-theologian (mutakallim), a jurist, reliable, and respected.
He was born in Tafrish and acquired knowledge in the city of Mashhad. He
now resides under the dome of the shrine of his ancestor, \`Alī [b. Abī
Ṭālib], peace be on him, in Najaf. He had great manners, was soft in
nature, and very polite. All the attributes of the righteous, the
scholars, and the pious were accumulated in him. He has written some
books like Sharḥ al-mukhtalif and Sharḥ al-Ithnā \`Ashariyya. He has
narrated from Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan Shahīd al-Thānī al-\`Āmilī.” It has
been mentioned in al-Rauḍāt that he was one of Muqaddas al-Ardabīlī’s
special students and was aware of his secrets.

[^2]: Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 24, pp. 176–177; Ithbāt al-hudāt,
vol. 3, pp. 708–709, chap. 33, no. 163.

[^3]: Jannat al-ma’wā (printed with Biḥār al-anwār), vol. 53, pp.
234–236.

[^4]: Jannat al-ma’wā (printed with Biḥār al-anwār), vol. 53, p. 237.

[^5]: Al-Kharā’ij wa l-jarā’iḥ, vol. 1, chap. “Concerning the miracles
of the master of the time, peace be on him,” pp. 475–478, no. 18; Biḥār
al-anwār, vol. 52, chap. 18, pp. 58–59, no. 41; Ithbāt al-hudāt, vol. 3,
chap. 33, pp. 694–695, no. 119; Faraj al-mahmūm, pp. 254–255, with minor
difference in some of the words; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, chap. 25, p.
502.

[^6]: The Qarāmiṭa were followers of the Ismailia sect who had taken
Ḥajar al-Aswad to Bahrain and had kept it there for twenty-two years
before returning it to Mecca again—Ed.

[^7]: Muhaj al-da\`awāt, p. 296.

[^8]: Dār al-salām, 15th story; al-Tunkābunī, Qiṣaṣ al-\`ulamā, p. 359.

[^9]: Dalā’il al-imāma, chap. “Those from amongst our companions who
have seen the Master of the Time, peace be on him, during his
occultation and have recognized him,” pp. 304–306, no. 5; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 33, p. 702, no. 145; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 15, pp. 304–306, the last part of no. 19, with some variations and
additions in the wording and some parts of the prayer; Faraj al-mahmūm,
pp. 245–247, with some variations in the prayer. I say: Abū Manṣūr b.
al-Ṣāliḥān was a Buyid vizier. A part of his biography can be found in
al-Kāmil, vol. 9. Sharaf al-Daula appointed him as a vizier in the year
374 AH. Bahā’ al-Daula endorsed him in 379 AH but put him aside in 380
AH. Then, he and Abū Naṣr b. Sābūr were appointed as viziers in 382 AH.
Finally, he resigned in the year 383 AH. Anyway, there is no doubt that
this incident occurred during the major occultation. This is also
confirmed by the fact that Hārūn b. Mūsā al-Talla\`ukbarī was from the
tenth generation (al-ṭabagha—in the chain of narrators) and his son
Muḥammad b. Hārūn (d. 413 AH)—who was a contemporary of al-Mufīd, may
Allah have mercy on him—was from the eleventh generation (of narrators).

[^10]: Al-Imāma wa l-mahdawiyya (Originally in Persian = Imāmat wa
mahdawiyyat), vol. 2, pp. 168–171. The narrator of this story is the
majestic, righteous, and pious scholar, al-Sayyid Āghā Imām
al-Sidihī—Allah’s mercy be on him—who wrote this incident by my request
and I have his Persian notes which are in his own hand-writing.

[^11]: What is within the brackets is the quote of the person who
narrated from Shaykh Muḥammad al-Kūfī.

[^12]: What is within the brackets is the quote of the person who
narrated from Shaykh Muḥammad al-Kūfī.


