Section Four
============

The traditions that show that his name and epithet (al-kunya) are the
same as the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his
family, and that his appearance, speaking, and actions are more similar
to him than any other person, and that he will act according to his
traditions (sunna)

Comprised of forty-five traditions

491. Al-Fitan[^1]: Narrated to us al-Walīd, from Abū Rāfi\`, from
someone who narrated to him, from Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, may Allah be
satisfied with him, from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him
[and his family], who said: “The name of the Mahdī is [the same as] my
name.”

492. \`Iqd al-durar[^2]: From \`Abd-Allah b. \`Umar, from the Messenger
of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said: “In
the end of times a person will emerge from my descendants. His name is
like my name and his epithet is my epithet (kunyatuhū kunyatī). He will
fill the earth with justice just as it will be filled with injustice.”

493. Al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān[^3]: Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād
has also recorded from \`Alī, peace be on him, that he said: “The name
of the Mahdī is Muḥammad.”

494. Sunan al-Dānī[^4]: From Abū Sa\`īd al-Khudrī, from the Messenger of
Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him [and his family], who said:

A man from my Ahl al-Bait will emerge. He will act according to my
customs (sunna). Allah will send down blessings for him from the sky.
The earth will throw out its treasures for him and it [i.e. the earth]
will be filled by him with justice just as it will have been filled with
unfairness and injustice. He will rule over this nation for seven years
and will dismount at Bait al-Maqdas.

495. Al-\`Arf al-wardī[^5]: Nu\`aim has also recorded from ibn Mas\`ūd
from the Holy Prophet, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said: “The Mahdī’s name is Muḥammad.”

496. \`Iqd al-durar[^6]: From \`Abd-Allah b. Mas\`ūd, may Allah be
satisfied with him, that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on
him [and his family], said: “The Hour will not be established until a
person from my Ahl al-Bait rules the earth. His name is like my name.”

This tradition has been recorded by al-Ḥāfiẓ Abū Bakr al-Bayhaqī.

497. Kamāl al-dīn[^7]: Narrated to us Ja\`far b. Muḥammad b. Masrūr, may
Allah be satisfied with him, from al-Ḥusayn b. Muḥammad b. \`Āmir, from
Muḥammad b. Abī \`Umair, from Abū Jamīla al-Mufaḍḍal b. Ṣāliḥ, from
Jābir b. Yazīd al-Ju\`fī, from Jābir b. \`Abd-Allah al-Anṣārī, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said:

The Mahdī is from my progeny. His name is my name and his epithet is my
epithet. He is the most similar of people to me in creation and
character. He will go in an occultation in which the nations will be
deviated. Then, he will emerge like a shining meteor. He will fill it
[i.e. the earth] with justice and fairness just as it will be filled
with injustice and unfairness.

498. Kamāl al-dīn[^8]: Narrated to us my father, Muḥammad b. al-Ḥasan,
and Muḥammad b. Mūsā al-Mutawakkil, may Allah be pleased with all of
them, from all of the following: Sa\`d b. \`Abd-Allah, \`Abd-Allah b.
Ja\`far, and Muḥammad b. Yaḥyā al-\`Aṭṭār, from all of the following:
Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. \`Īsā, Ibrāhīm b. Hāshim, Aḥmad b. Abī \`Abd-Allah
al-Barqī, and Muḥammad b. al-Ḥusayn b. Abī l-Khaṭṭāb, from Abū \`Alī
al-Ḥasan b. Maḥbūb al-Sarrād, from Dāwūd b. al-Ḥaṣīn, from Abū Baṣīr,
from (Imam) al-Ṣādiq, Ja\`far b. Muḥammad, peace be on him, from his
forefathers, peace be on them, that the Messenger of Allah, Allah’s
blessings be on him and his family, said:

The Mahdī is from my descendants. His name is my name and his epithet is
my epithet. He is the most similar of people to me in creation and
characteristics. He will have an occultation and a bewilderment. It will
be [so severe] that the people will deviate from their religions. When
this happens, he will emerge like a shining meteor and will fill the
earth with fairness and justice just as it will be filled with
unfairness and injustice.

499. Kamāl al-dīn[^9]: Narrated to us \`Abd al-Wāḥid b. Muḥammad b.
\`Ubdūs al-Nīsābūrī al-\`Aṭṭār, may Allah be satisfied with him, from
\`Alī b. Muḥammad b. Qutayba al- Nīsābūrī, from Ḥamdān b. Sulaimān, from
Aḥmad b. \`Abd-Allah b. Ja\`far al-Hamdānī, from \`Abd-Allah b. al-Faḍl
al-Hāshimī, from Hishām b. Sālim, from al-Ṣādiq Ja\`far b. Muḥammad,
from his father, from his grandfather, peace be on them, from the
Messenger of Allah, Allah’s blessings be on him and his family, who
said:

The Qā’im is from my descendants. His name is my name, his epithet is my
epithet, his features are my features, and his customs (sunna) are my
customs. His will make the people establish my religion and my nation
(yuqīmu al-nas \`alā millatī wa sharī\`atī) and he will call the people
to the Book of my Lord, Mighty and Majestic be He. Whoever obeys him has
indeed obeyed me and whoever disobeys him has indeed disobeyed me.
Whoever denies him in his occultation, then indeed he has denied me and
whoever refutes him, has indeed refuted me. Whoever acknowledges him has
acknowledged me. I will complain to Allah against those who reject what
I say about him, those who deny my word about his status and those who
deviated my religion from his path,

***“And soon those who act unjustly will know to what final place of
returning they will go to” (Quran Surah Shuaraa 26:227).***

The traditions with the following numbers also show the aforementioned
concept: 245, 255, 265, 272, 279, 288, 289, 321, 339, 354, 355, 357,
397, 400, 402, 406, 409, 428, 441, 461, 484, 485, 506 (which says: “he
has two names, one that is concealed and one that is apparent”), 525,
529 (which says: “his epithet will be Abū \`Abd-Allah”), 535, 544 (it
comprises of what shows that one of his agnomens will be that of Imam
Muḥammad al-Bāqir, peace be on him), 546 (which says: “he will have two
names: Khalaf and Muḥammad”), 562, 563, 564, 569, 597, 653 (which says:
“it is prohibited for them to say his name”), 693, 726, 784, 791, 792,
797, 799, 800 (which says: “his epithet will be Ja\`far,” 804, 806, and
810 (which say: “no one is permitted to address him by his name or by
his epithet”).

[^1]: Al-Fitan, vol. 5, under “Fī ism al-Mahdī,” p. 197. I say: The
sentence “his father’s name is my father’s name,” which has been
recorded by Zirr, from ibn Mas\`ūd, from Maimūn al-Qaddāḥ, from ibn
al-Ṭufail, has not been issued by the Holy Prophet. For, it has been
narrated like this: “Zirr from ibn Mas\`ūd” or “someone from the
narrators from whom he has narrated. I have heard [this tradition]
numerous times without the aforementioned sentence. Another thing that
denotes the weakness of this addition (i.e. “his father’s name is my
father’s name”) is its absence in Musnad of Aḥmad in what he has
narrated from ibn Mas\`ūd, along with the fact that the chains of
narrators of some of his traditions are exactly like the chains in
al-Fitan. See Aḥmad’s al-Musnad, vol. 1, pp. 376, 377, 430, and 448.
Soon, more evidence will be mentioned to prove this, Inshā’Allah.
Al-Malāḥim wa l-fitan, under the first section in which he has dedicated
to the book of Fitan by Nu\`aim b. Ḥammād, chap. 162, p. 74; al-Burhān
fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 3, p. 101, no. 9; al-\`Arf
al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 148

[^2]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 2, p. 32; Tadhkirat al-khawāṣ, p. 377, with
the addition of “This is the Mahdī” at its end.

[^3]: Al-Burhān fī \`alāmāt Mahdī ākhir al-zamān, chap. 3, p. 101, no.
8.

[^4]: Sunan al-Dānī, pp. 100–101; \`Iqd al-durar (citing al-Dānī’s Sunan
and Abū Nu\`aim’s Ṣifat al-Mahdī), chap. 1, p. 20, and chap. 7, p. 156;
Similar to this has been narrated in al-\`Arf al-wardī (al-Ḥāwī
lil-fatāwī), vol. 2, p. 131, citing al-Ṭabarānī’s al-Ausaṭ and Abū
Nu\`aim; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2, p. 472, no. 25, citing Abū Nu\`aim’s
al-Aḥādīth al-arba\`īn. I say: There is no contradiction between this
tradition and those that indicate that the capital of his government is
other than Bait al-Maqdas, because it has not been mentioned that he
will stay there as a place of permanent residence.

[^5]: Al-\`Arf al-wardī, no. 648.

[^6]: \`Iqd al-durar, chap. 2, pp. 30–31.

[^7]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 25, p. 286, no. 1; I\`lām al-warā,
chap. 2, sect. 2, p. 243; Kifāyat al-athar, chap. 7, pp. 66–67, no. 6;
Yanābī\`’ al-mawadda, chap. 94, pp. 488 & 493; Kashf al-ghumma, vol. 2,
p. 521; Farā’id al-simṭain, vol. 2, pp. 334–335, no. 585; Ithbāt
al-hudāt, vol. 3, chap. 32, p. 460, no. 103; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51,
chap. 1, pp. 71–72, no. 13.

[^8]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 1, chap. 25, p. 287, no. 4; Yanābī\`’
al-mawadda, chap. 94, p. 493; Biḥār al-anwār, vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 72,
no. 16.

[^9]: Kamāl al-dīn, vol. 2, chap. 39, p. 411, no. 6; Biḥār al-anwār,
vol. 51, chap. 1, p. 73, no. 19.


