II.
===

To substantiate the claim that Spinoza and Mulla Sadra still lived in
many respects in a common intellectual world, consider further their
views on the hierarchy of knowledge. Aristotle, in the Posterior
Analytics, describes three types of knowledge, “opinion”, “science” and
“rational intuition.” Aristotle had no category for the knowledge
afforded by religious texts, and theological writers –Christian as well
as Islamic-revised his category to account for the truth of sacred
writings and of revelatory expereinces, lest these fall into the
category of “opinion.” Gnostic and neo-Platonic writings took “rational
intuition” less in the Aristotelian sense of the apprehension of
self-evident axioms or the appraisal of immediate sensory experience and
facilitated the evolution of a specifically religious sense of
intuition. “Intuitive knowledge “comes to describe the apprehension of
unity and particularity, of particularity within unity and unity despite
particularity. The three paths of knowledge according to Sadra are
revelation (*al-wahy* ), demonstration or intellection (*al-burhan,
al-ta aqqqul* ), and spiritual or “mystical” vision (*al-mukashafah,
al-mushahadah* ).[^9]

Spinoza also has a tripartite scheme. It is hierarchical, and although
Spinoza notoriously denied that the utterances of the prophets
corresponded to knowledge, he preserves the religious and aspirational
sense of intuitive knowledge which he describes as “the greatest
endeavour of the Mind, and its greatest virtue.”[^10] He characterizes
the three sorts of knowledge by reference to a homely example involving
various tradesmen. They are given a sequence of numbers n, m, o, and
they need to determine a fourth number p, such that n/m =o/p. The
tradesman who remembers the rule p = m o/n that he has been taught and
who applies it automatically is like the person who knows something
“from particular things, represented to our intellect fragmentarily.”
This corresponds to knowledge by hearsay, or opinion causally acquired.
The second tradesman has learned the rule from Euclid’s Elements. He has
symbolic knowledge, knowledge of the second type, for he sees why the
rule follows from prior axioms. The third simply looks at the numbers,
grasps the ratio intuitively, and experiences its necessity.[^11]
Intuitive knowledge is identified with knowledge of “inmost essences.”
Though the example is a mathematical one, Spinoza suggests that objects
of experience as well can also be known “intuitively.”

The essences of singular, changeable things are not to be drawn from
their series, or order of existing, since it offers us nothing but
extrinsic denominations, relations, or at most, circumstances, all of
which are far from the inmost essences of things. That essence is to be
sought only from the fixed and eternal things, and at the same time from
the laws inscribed in these things, as in their true codes, according to
which all singular things come to be, and are ordered.[^12]

Such a conception of non-discursive knowledge of particulars recalls as
Wolfson[^13]   notes in his discussion, Ibn-Gabriol, who says that “the
action of the intellect is the apprehension of all the intelligible
forms in no-time and in no-place, without any investigation, without any
labour, and without any other cause except its own essence, for it is
completely perfect.”[^14] Similar

descriptions are employed earlier by St. Augustine and later by St.
Thomas in characterizing perfect or angelic knowledge.[^15] Surprisingly
perhaps, intuitive knowledge is standardly recognized in 17th century
epistemology up to the time of Locke. The Paracelsian ideas that
animated the English radical sects in the mid 17th century recalled the
notion of a fusion of the knower and the known, and the absorption of
the former into the hidden essence of the latter. For Paracelsus,
healing is accomplished through a sympathetic identification with nature
that enables the physician to become acquainted with the essences of the
stars and plants, curative and poisonous drugs. Knowledge of the world
in its particularities is knowledge of God and salvation is
self-healing. These doctrines appealed to the opponents of
school-philosophy who were looking towards the comprehensive moral and
spiritual renewal of the world Thus Gerard Winstanley, the English
radical reformer, writes in the 1640s:

To know the secrets of nature is to know the work of God. And indeed if
you would know spiritual things, it is to know how the spirit or power
of wisdom and life, causing motion or growth dwells within and governs
both the several bodies of the earth below as grass, plants, fishes,
beasts, birds, and mankind.[^16]

Now the notion that one can come to know spiritual things and thus be
united with God through a direct intuitive experience of nature is not
what we historians think of as typical 17th century Anglo-Continental
epistemology. We understand under that heading Baconian and Cartesian
claims about the importance of analytical methods. Discursive, not
intuitive knowledge is required, and the methods leading to the truth
are laborious and difficult. If mathematical relationships can still be
grasped in an instant, essences, which turn out to be arrangements of
particles, cannot. By the late eighteenth century, intuitive knowledge
has been driven into a para-and sometimes counter-scientific
metaphysics, and into aesthetics

But this is not yet the case for the post-Cartesian Spinoza. He says
that immortality, for the philosopher, comes about through the
possession of intuitive knowledge and is known introspectively. “The
human Mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the Body, but something
of it remains which is eternal.. And though it is impossible that we
should recollect that we existed before the Body --since there cannot be
any traces of this in the body...--still we feel and know by experience
that we are eternal.[^17]

The ignorant man is driven by his appetites and constantly distracted,
and, “as soon as he ceases to be acted on, he ceases to be,” whereas the
wise man “is hardly troubled in spirit, but being, by a certain eternal
necessity, conscious of himself, and of God, and of things, he never
ceases to be....”[^18] The wise man experiences the intellectual love of
God arising through the third kind of knowledge and this knowledge is
indestructible and confers immortality. These claims has been found
baffling by Spinoza’s recent commentators. Again it helps to have some
background. The notion of an immortality-conferring intellectual
endeavour can be traced back to an important passage in Aristotle’s De
Anima III: 5 that reads as follows:

Actual knowledge is identical with its object: in the individual,
potential knowledge is in time prior to actual knowledge, but in the
universe as a

whole it is not prior even in time. Mind is not at one time knowing and
at another not. When Mind is set free from its present conditions it
appears just what it is an nothing more; this alone is immortal and
eternal (we do not, however, remember its former activity because, while
mind in this sense is impassible, mind as passive is destructible), and
without it nothing thinks.

On the influential interpretation of this passage, offered by Averroes
the human intellect rejoins the Active Intellect of the universe at the
individual’s death. Aquinas glosses this passage and renders the
connection between intuitive knowledge and immortality as follows:

Eternity differs from time in that the latter has its being in a kind of
succession, whereas the former is all simultaneously. Now it has already
been proved that there is no succession in the vision in question, and
that whatsoever is seen in it, is seen at once and at a glance.
Therefore, this vision takes place in a kind of participation of
eternity. Moreover this vision is a kind of life, because the act of the
intellect is a kind of life. Therefore, by that vision the created
intellect becomes a partaker of eternal life.[^19]

There are two interesting aspects of this account of immortality. First
it is generic rather than specific all individuals who attain it seem to
experience the same afterlife. Second, it is intellectualistic.
Aristotle says that life is “essentially the act of perceiving or
thinking.”[^20] These features-genericity and intellectualism-- were
welcomed by some philosophers, but they were found problematic by
others, and they were not fully acceptable to most Christian and Islamic
theologians. Ibn-Sina had remained in the Aristotelian tradition.
Immortality is conditional upon an individual’s moving up the scale of
enlightenment while undeveloped souls perish.[^21] But the
Christian-Islamic doctrine of heaven and hell provoked philosophers to
separate the question of eternal survival from the question of
salvation. The good and faithful man, whether he is a philosopher or
not, must be capable of salvation as far as religion is concerned, and
the bad man cannot be spared the hell he deserves by annihilation.

Enough personality and capacity for pain and pleasure must remain in the
afterlife for the notions of reward and punishment to make sense.
Spinoza seems to stop short of a fully generic account of the afterlife,
but he is frankly intellectualists, even when he appears to be speaking
about the destiny of all men. That which remains of the good man after
the death of his body is simply the divine idea of him and the
personality it expresses. The divine idea of my personhood is perhaps
best conceived as a thought or memory attributable to God, who is
identical with nature taken as whole. The individual human mind is
actually instantiated in or by two bodies; “mine” --so long as my body
preserves its relationships of motion and rest--and, after this is no
longer true, God’s, in virtue of his having the idea of my me. The bad
man goes out of existence (though it is somewhat unclear why his essence
is not just as permanent), while the philosopher enjoys immortality
insofar as his essence becomes part of the whole of which it always was,
and always will be, only a mode. The universe-God- continues to think
the good man after death. In this sense he remains an individual.

Turning now to Sadra, we see that the theological requirement that both
the good and the bad man be subject to or rewarded by the afterlife is
firmly

in place. He too regards the individuality of the person as essential to
an account of the afterlife. If Aristotle represents one extreme: an
afterlife in which no trace of the former “conditioned” existence
remains, Sadra’s conception belongs at the other. The bulk of
humanity --commoners, women, children, craftsmen, (including doctors)--
experience, he says, an afterlife reflecting their lifelong involvement
with matter.[^22] And each individual mind makes its own heaven or hell.
The mind is active, not passive, in the generation of sensory or
imaginal worlds. As the natural dispositions of the soul are seen to
cause familiar external effects-blushing, pallor, shaking, illness, we
can also understand how they can also make a world appropriate to them.

The “imaginal world” one of the most fascinating of Sadra’s concepts--is
the third world that exists in addition to the world of material bodies
and the world of intellects. In addition to extended forms and shapes of
objects individuated by their matter, there can arise, Sadra says:

By mere volition… imaginal forms subsisting in no place, through the
imaginal power which is separate from this world….Those forms do not
subsist in the body of the brain, nor in the heavenly bodies, as some
people have maintained, nor in a world of phantasmal images subsisting
apart from the soul. Rather they subsist through the soul and exist in
the domain of the soul.….Although now the being of these forms is weak,
they are capable of becoming concrete particulars existing with a being
even stronger than the being of material forms.[^23]

The imaginal power of a man is not dependent on the body and remains
despite the decline and failure of this (bodily) frame. The unsoundness
and passing away (of the body) do not pertain to its essence and its
perceptions,…

After death it may conceive its essence as a man having the shape and
dimensions of the form which he had in the world; and its (imaginal)
body may be conceived as dead and buried.[^24]

The imaginal world does not exist “outside” the subject but it is not an
interior delusion either. The essence of the good man after death is not
absorbed into a totality; it creates the totality in which it is
situated thereafter:

None of the things that a man sees and directly witnesses in the other
world-whether they be the blessings of Paradise, such as …palaces,
gardens, trees and streams…or the opposite sorts of punishment that are
in Hell-- are outside the essence of the soul and separate form the
soul’s being… No one should ask concerning the place and position of
these forms, whether they are inside this world or outside it… The
wellspring of all that a man attains and is requited with in the other
world-whether it be good or evil, Paradise or Hell-is solely in his own
essence, in such things as his intentions, thoughts, beliefs, and traits
of character.[^25]


