Islam or Disbelief
==================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و صلى الله عليك يا وليّ العصر أدركنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Prophets Ibrahim (a.s.) and Yaqoub (a.s.) advised their sons thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّىٰ بِهَا إِبْرَاهِيمُ بَنِيهِ وَيَعْقُوبُ يَا بَنِيَّ إِنَّ
اللَّهَ اصْطَفَىٰ لَكُمُ الدِّينَ فَلَا تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ
مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And the same did Ibrahim enjoin on his sons and (so did) Yaqoub. O my
sons! Surely Allah has chosen for you (this) faith, therefore die not
unless you are Muslims.*** ***(Surah al-Baqarah, 2: 132)***

In another verse, Allah the Almighty addresses the believers,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اتَّقُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ تُقَاتِهِ وَلَا
تَمُوتُنَّ إِلَّا وَأَنْتُمْ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah with care which
is due to Him, and do not die unless you are Muslims.(*** ***Surah Aali
Imran, 3: 102)***

In another verse, He notifies,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ
وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ
سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْكَافِرُونَ حَقًّا ۚ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لِلْكَافِرِينَ
عَذَابًا مُهِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَلَمْ يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ
أَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ أُولَٰئِكَ سَوْفَ يُؤْتِيهِمْ أُجُورَهُمْ ۗ وَكَانَ
اللَّهُ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who disbelieve in Allah and His Apostles, and (those
who) desire to make a distinction between Allah and His Apostles and
say: We believe in some and disbelieve in others; and desire to take a
course between (this and) that.***

***These it is that are truly unbelievers, and We have prepared for the
unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement.***

***And those who believe in Allah and His Apostles and do not make
distinction between any of them - Allah will grant them their rewards
and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.(Surah an-Nisaa, 4: 150-152)***

In yet another verse, Allah the Almighty gives tidings,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
آمَنَ الرَّسُولُ بِمَا أُنْزِلَ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ رَبِّهِ وَالْمُؤْمِنُونَ
ۚ كُلٌّ آمَنَ بِاللَّهِ وَمَلَائِكَتِهِ وَكُتُبِهِ وَرُسُلِهِ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْ رُسُلِهِ ۚ وَقَالُوا سَمِعْنَا
وَأَطَعْنَا ۖ غُفْرَانَكَ رَبَّنَا وَإِلَيْكَ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***The Apostle believes in what has been revealed to him from his Lord,
and (so do) the believers; they all believe in Allah and His angels and
His books and His Apostles; We make no difference between any of His
Apostles and they say: We hear and obey, our Lord! Thy forgiveness (do
we crave), and to Thee is the eventual course.(*** ***Surah al-Baqarah,
2: 285)***

On paying attention to the above verses, it becomes amply clear that to
accept Allah and whatever He has revealed, and to obey Him, is belief.
On the flip side, refuting anything revealed by Him is disbelief and for
the unbelievers, Allah the Almighty has prepared a painful chastisement.

True Islam
----------

We should strive to ensure that our lives end on Islam (i.e. we die as
Muslims). For this, it is essential that we must subscribe to all that
Allah the Almighty has revealed and the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
has conveyed.

It is easy to believe in something. Anybody can believe in anything. But
only that creed can guarantee salvation, which has been endorsed by
those whom Allah has chosen as witnesses over this nation. Allah the
Almighty has appointed the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the
infallible Imams (a.s.) as witnesses over this nation.

On the Day of Judgment, only those, whose belief and creed has been
verified by these holy personas (a.s.), will gain deliverance.

True Beliefs
------------

Sayyed Abdul Azeem Ibn Abdullah al-Hasani (a.r.) was a highly revered
personality from the progeny of Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba (a.s.), whose
resplendent shrine is in Rayy, a suburb of present day Tehran, Iran. The
reward of visiting his shrine is as much as that of going to the holy
shrine of Imam Husayn (a.s.). He enjoyed an extremely great position and
had attained a high level of perfection in knowledge and virtues.

He is the pride of the family of Prophethood and Imamat. Fountains of
guidance have gushed out from his clan. But concerning truth and
correctness of his belief, he does not rely on his knowledge and
pre-eminence. Rather, he goes to the Imam of his time, Imam ‘Ali Naqi
(a.s.), presents his beliefs to him (a.s.) for verification and deems
him (a.s.) to be a witness over his creed. Come, let us hear it from the
source himself.

"I went to the presence of my blessed master, Imam ‘Ali Naqi (a.s.). On
seeing me, he (a.s.) remarked, 'Welcome, O Abul Qasim! You are our true
friend.' I requested, 'O son of Allah's Messenger! I want to present my
beliefs and creed before you. If you declare these beliefs to be correct
and are satisfied with them, I will remain steadfast on them and meet
the Lord with them.' He (a.s.) ordered , 'Go ahead, explain them.'

I declared, 'I believe that.

Tawhid (Divine Monotheism)
--------------------------

Allah, the High and the Almighty, is only One. None is like Him. He is
between the two limits, the limit of denial and the limit of immanence
(similarity). He is neither body nor form nor accident nor essence.
Rather, He is the Creator of bodies, the Maker of forms, the Originator
of accidents and essences. He is the Lord of everything and their
Master. He is their Originator and He is the One to grant them existence
from non-existence.

Prophethood
-----------

I deem Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) to be the slave of Allah, His
Messenger and His last Prophet. There will be no prophet after him till
the Day of Judgment. His Shariah is the last Shariah and there will be
no other Shariah till the Day of Resurrection.

Imamat
------

I believe that after Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.), the Imam, the
Caliph, and the one in authority (Wali al-Amr) is Ameerul Mu’mineen ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), followed by his two sons, Imam Hasan al-Mujtaba
(a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.), the Chief of the Martyrs. Thereafter,
Imam ‘Ali Ibn Husayn (Zainul Aabedeen) (a.s.), Imam Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali
(Baqer) (a.s.), Imam Ja'far Ibn Muhammad (Sadeq) (a.s .), Imam Moosa Ibn
Ja'far (Kazem), Imam ‘Ali Ibn Moosa (Reza) (a .s .), Imam Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali (Taqi) (a.s.), and after him, you, O master!

Mahdawwiyah
-----------

{On hearing this} Imam (a.s.) remarked, 'After me, my son Hasan (Askari)
(a.s.), followed by his successor. What will be the condition of the
people concerning his successor?'

I asked, 'Master! W hat will be this condition and what will happen?'

He (a.s.) informed, 'He will not be seen. It will not be permitted to
remember him by his name till he reappears and fills the earth with
justice and equity as it would be fraught with injustice and tyranny.'

Tawalla (Loving the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)) and Tabarra (Expressing Disgust
Against their Enemies):

I said, 'Master! I acknowledge their Imamat and believe that their
friend is Allah's friend and their enemy is Allah's enemy. T heir
obedience is tantamount to obeying Allah and disobeying them is defying
Allah.

Day of Judgment
---------------

I believe that the ascension (Me'raaj) is truth, questioning in the
grave is truth, paradise is truth, hell is truth, the bridge (Seraat) is
truth and the weighing scale (Mizan) is truth. Certainly, the Day of
Judgment is bound to arrive and there is no doubt or reservation about
its advent. And most surely, Allah, the Powerful, will raise the dead
from their graves.

Branches of Religion
--------------------

I subscribe to the creed that after Imamat and Mastership of the Ahlul
Bayt (a s.), the following obligations exist: Prayers, Fasting, Hajj,
Struggling in Allah's way, Enjoining Good and Forbidding Evil.'

After hearing all these, Imam ‘Ali Naqi (a.s.) exclaimed,

***"O Abul Qasim! Surely this is the very religion that Allah has chosen
for His servants. Be steadfast on it. May Allah keep you committed on
this in this world as well as the Hereafter!"***[^1]

Another Chain
-------------

There is a very important ziyaarat of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) called
Ziyaarat Aale Yaseen. Renowned traditionalist Shaikh Abbas Qummi (r.a.)
has mentioned it as the very first ziyaarat of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) in
his celebrated work , 'Mafaateeh al-Jena an'. It is highly recommended
to recite this ziyaarat on Mondays and Fridays.

These beliefs have been stated in this ziyaarat as well and Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) himself is made as a witness over these beliefs.

***"Then you be a witness on what I have made you as a witness."***

[^1]: Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 2, p. 379-380


