Belief, Disbelief and Deviation
===============================

The lowest grade of belief: Ameerul Mu’mineen ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.)
states,

"The bare minimum by which a person becomes a believer is that when
Allah introduces Himself, he should submit himself completely and
absolutely before His commands.

And when He grants him the recognition of His Prophet (s.a.w.a.), he
must obey him (s.a.w.a.). And when He introduces His Proof and His
Witness on His earth to him, he should acknowledge him and obey him
(a.s.)."

On this Sulaym asked Ameerul Mu’mineen (a.s .), "Even if he remains un
aware of other realities?"

He (a.s.) replied, "Yes. This will apply till he continues to obey what
has been made obligatory on him and refrains from what has been
prohibited."[^1]

The lowest grade of disbelief: In the same tradition, Ameerul Mu’mineen
(a.s.) proceeds to explain the minimum thing that makes a person an
unbeliever.

"The minimum that makes a person an unbeliever that he considers Allah's
command as prohibition and that Allah has determined for him a religion
which he is following, and he thinks that he is worshipping as per the
dictates of Allah, although the fact is that he is venerating the
Devil."

The lowest grade of deviation
-----------------------------

***"And the minimum level of deviation is that man does not recognize
Allah's proof, His witness up on the creatures, whose obedience has been
ordered by Allah and whose leadership and mastership is
compulsory."***[^2]

### Please Note

Man is either a believer or an unbeliever or deviated. In this
tradition, Ameerul Mu’mineen (a.s.) has provided the standards for all
three.

Belief is that man recognizes Allah, the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
and the Imam of his time. Along with this recognition, he also worships
Allah and obeys His Messenger and the Imam.

Disbelief is that man denies all that has been revealed or acknowledges
that which Allah has not revealed. He accepts them as his Prophet and
Imam whom Allah has not appointed.

Deviation is that he denies the Imamat and mastership of those whom
Allah has deemed to be His Proofs on the earth and made them as His
Witnesses on the people.

To believe in the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and his recognition
implies that we recognize him (s.a.w.a.) as Allah has introduced him
(s.a.w.a.). Moreover, we should believe that he (s.a.w.a.) enjoys all
those positions and stations that Allah has determined for him
(s.a.w.a.).

It is evident and everybody is aware of the fact that the Messenger of
Allah (s.a.w.a.) is the chief of all messengers and prophets (a.s.). He
is the last of all His messengers and prophets (a.s.). Messengership and
Prophet hood has ended with him (s.a.w.a.). Now, till the Day of
Judgment, no messenger or prophet will arrive.

His shariah is the last heavenly shariah and his book, the Holy Qur’an,
is the last divine and heavenly book. Islam is the last and most perfect
of all religions. Things that have been made permissible by it shall
remain so till the Day of Judgment and articles that have been
prohibited by it shall remain so till the Day of Judgment.

To believe in Allah's Proofs connotes that we believe only in the
leadership, mastership and caliphate of those appointed by Allah; who's
following is the guarantee for salvation, and whose love and obedience
are deemed to be the keys of paradise. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)
has fixed their number to be twelve and prophesied, "After me, till the
Day of Judgment, the number of my successors will be twelve. All of them
will be from Quraish.

The first of them will be ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the last and
twelfth will be the son of Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), the Hujjah, the
Mahdi. Allah will grant him a long life and keep him in occultation.
During his concealment, people will benefit from his existence like they
draw advantage from the sun when it hides behind the clouds."[^3]

Our Prophet is the Last Prophet
-------------------------------

From the above, we can easily deduce that the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) is the seal of all of His Messengers and Prophets (a.s.),
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the last Imam, the Majestic Qur’an is the last
book and Islam is the last religion.

But from times ancient, anti-Islamic forces, imperialist powers and
Zionist conspirators have tried their best to create obstacles in these
universally accepted and firmer than mountain beliefs of the Muslims,
and to deviate them from the right path.

Therefore, there were a few from the community, willing to sell their
conscience and negligent of realities, who claimed the elevated station
of Mahdawwiyah. Worse are their followers, who throw their leaders into
further depths by becoming their ardent fans, to the extent that they
(the claimants) seriously start considering themselves as a Prophet or
an Imam. Meanwhile, the Holy Qur’an has declared in no uncertain terms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ كَذِبًا أَوْ قَالَ
أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ وَلَمْ يُوحَ إِلَيْهِ شَيْءٌ وَمَنْ قَالَ سَأُنْزِلُ
مِثْلَ مَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ ۗ وَلَوْ تَرَىٰ إِذِالظَّالِمُونَ فِي
غَمَرَاتِ الْمَوْتِ وَالْمَلَائِكَةُ بَاسِطُو أَيْدِيهِمْ أَخْرِجُوا
أَنْفُسَكُمُ ۖ الْيَوْمَ تُجْزَوْنَ عَذَابَ الْهُونِ بِمَا كُنْتُمْ
تَقُولُونَعَلَى اللَّهِ غَيْرَ الْحَقِّ وَكُنْتُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِهِ
تَسْتَكْبِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, or
says; it has been revealed to me; while nothing has been revealed to
him, and he who says: I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed
and if you had seen when the agonies of death and the angels shall
spread forth their hands: Give up your souls: today shall you be
recompensed with an ignominious chastisement because you spoke against
Allah other than the truth and (because) you showed pride against His
communications."*** ***(Surah al-An'aam, 6: 93)***

Similarly, in another verse, it warns,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ الْإِبِلِ اثْنَيْنِ وَمِنَ الْبَقَرِ اثْنَيْنِ ۗ قُلْ
آلذَّكَرَيْنِ حَرَّمَ أَمِ الْأُنْثَيَيْنِ أَمَّا اشْتَمَلَتْ عَلَيْهِ
أَرْحَامُ الْأُنْثَيَيْنِ ۖ أَمْ كُنْتُمْ شُهَدَاءَ إِذْوَصَّاكُمُ
اللَّهُ بِهَٰذَا ۚ فَمَنْ أَظْلَمُ مِمَّنِ افْتَرَىٰ عَلَى اللَّهِ
كَذِبًا لِيُضِلَّ النَّاسَ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And two of camels and two of cows. Say: Has He forbidden the two
males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two females
contain? Or were you witnesses when Allah enjoined you this? Who, then,
is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah that he should
lead astray men without knowledge? Surely Allah does not guide the
unjust people.*** ***(Surah al-An'aam, 6: 114)***

False Claimants
---------------

Besides these clear statements, Allah the Almighty has made such
fantastic arrangements, which expose these false claimants and show
their true colors. They forgot that they as well as their followers
are/were believers of the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) and the Holy
Qur’an. When Allah the Almighty declares our Prophet to be the last of
all Prophets and the Holy Qur’an to the final of all revelations, then
where does the question of someone else's Prophethood arise? And if they
don't believe in our Prophet and do not regard the Holy Qur’an as their
book, the fact stands that till date Allah the Almighty has not sent a
Prophet or a Messenger, who has not verified the previous prophets and
accepted their books.

Hence, if these false claimants accept the prophethood of our Prophet
and acknowledge the truth of the Majestic Qur’an, then the Book of Allah
as well as the Prophetic traditions declare very clearly that Muhammad
is the last messenger and Islam is the final religion. Therefore, the
question of another prophethood is completely ruled out and when the
possibility of another prophethood is refuted, the discussion of another
religion is rejected at the very outset.[^4]

And if these false claimants do not accept the Prophethood of the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.), then such a person can never claim to be
a divine prophet, who does not verify the prophethood of the previous
prophets and their books. Hence, these false claimants cannot proof
their claim in any manner whatsoever.

How meaningful and consequential are the following verses of the Noble
Qur’an! Keeping brevity in consideration, we will take the opportunity
of giving only the translation.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ أَخَذَ اللَّهُ مِيثَاقَ النَّبِيِّينَ لَمَا آتَيْتُكُمْ مِنْ
كِتَابٍ وَحِكْمَةٍ ثُمَّ جَاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مُصَدِّقٌ لِمَا مَعَكُمْ
لَتُؤْمِنُنَّ بِهِ وَلَتَنْصُرُنَّهُ ۚ قَالَ أَأَقْرَرْتُمْ
وَأَخَذْتُمْ عَلَىٰ ذَٰلِكُمْ إِصْرِي ۖ قَالُوا أَقْرَرْنَا ۚ قَالَ
فَاشْهَدُوا وَأَنَا مَعَكُمْ مِنَ الشَّاهِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ تَوَلَّىٰ بَعْدَ ذَٰلِكَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَغَيْرَ دِينِ اللَّهِ يَبْغُونَ وَلَهُ أَسْلَمَ مَنْ فِي
السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ طَوْعًا وَكَرْهًا وَإِلَيْهِ يُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ آمَنَّا بِاللَّهِ وَمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَيْنَا وَمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَىٰ
إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَإِسْمَاعِيلَ وَإِسْحَاقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ وَالْأَسْبَاطِ
وَمَا أُوتِيَ مُوسَىٰ وَعِيسَىٰ وَالنَّبِيُّونَ مِنْ رَبِّهِمْ لَا
نُفَرِّقُ بَيْنَ أَحَدٍ مِنْهُمْ وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَبْتَغِ غَيْرَ الْإِسْلَامِ دِينًا فَلَنْ يُقْبَلَ مِنْهُ
وَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ مِنَ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And when Allah made a covenant through the Prophets: Certainly what I
have given you of Book and wisdom- then an apostle comes to you
verifying that which is with you, you must believe in him, and you must
assist him. He said: Do you affirm and accept My pact in this matter?
They said: We do affirm. He said: Then bear witness, and I too am of the
bearers of witness with you.***

***Whoever therefore turns back after this, these it is that are the
transgressors.***

***Is it then other than Allah's religion that they seek (to follow),
and to Him submits whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly or
unwillingly, and to Him shall they be returned.***

***Say: We believe in Allah and what has been revealed to us, an d what
was revealed to Ibrahim and Ismail and Ishaq and Yaqoub and the tribes,
and what was given to Musa and Isa and to the prophets from their Lord;
we do not make any distinction between any of them, and to Him do we
submit.***

***And whoever desires a religion other than Islam, it shall not be
accepted from him, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the
losers.*** ***(Surah Aali Imran, 3: 81-85)***

Seal of the Prophets
--------------------

The aforementioned verses unmistakably declare that it is compulsory and
obligatory to believe in all the previous prophets, messengers, and the
books revealed on them. Moreover, Allah will not accept any religion
other than Islam. Apart from the above, we present hereunder three
verses from the Holy Qur’an and one tradition that plainly announce our
Prophet to be the last Prophet and Islam to be the final divine
religion.

1.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا كَانَ مُحَمَّدٌ أَبَا أَحَدٍ مِنْ رِجَالِكُمْ وَلَٰكِنْ رَسُولَ
اللَّهِ وَخَاتَمَ النَّبِيِّينَ ۗ وَكَانَ اللَّهُ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ
عَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Muhammad is not the father of any of your men but he is the Messenger
of Allah and the seal of the Prophets. And Allah is the Knower of all
things.*** ***(Surah al-Ahzaab, 33: 40)***

This verse evidently announces of the finality of the Holy Prophet's
(s.a.w.a.) prophethood.

2.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ إِلَيْكُمْ جَمِيعًا
الَّذِي لَهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۖ لَا إِلَٰهَ إِلَّا
هُوَ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ ۖ فَآمِنُوا بِاللَّهِوَرَسُولِهِ النَّبِيِّ
الْأُمِّيِّ الَّذِي يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ وَكَلِمَاتِهِ وَاتَّبِعُوهُ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تَهْتَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: O people! surely I am the Messenger of Allah to you all, of Him
Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth there is no god but
He; He brings to life and causes to die therefore believe in Allah and
His messenger, the Ummi Prophet who believes in Allah and His words, and
follow him so that you may walk in the right way.*** ***(Surah
al-A'raaf,7: 158)***

In the above verse, the terms, 'O people!' and 'to you all' explain that
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) is not confined to a particular era or
to a special group or generation of people. Rather, his messengership
and prophethood is universal and forever.

3.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ الَّذِي أَرْسَلَ رَسُولَهُ بِالْهُدَىٰ وَدِينِ الْحَقِّ
لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.(*** ***Surah at-Tawbah, 9: 33)***

Noticeably, domination and overpowering imply that this religion will
continue to survive till the day of resurrection. Had Allah the Almighty
revealed any religion other than Islam and raised any other Prophet,
certainly this religion and Prophet would have abrogated Islam just as
Islam had abrogated the laws of the previous prophets.

In this case, Islam should not gain clear victory and domination over
other religions. But when Allah the Almighty is clearly declaring that
We have raised Our Messenger with Islam to grant it victory and
domination over all religions and sects, then such triumph can be
achieved only when Islam is the last heavenly religion and no other
religion ensues. This, undoubtedly, is the fact that Allah has not sent
any other shariah or religion or sect after Islam.

4. The following tradition is present in most of the authentic books of
the Shias as well as the Sunnis. Addressing ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.),
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) declared,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أنت مني بمنزلة هارون من موسى ، إلا أنه لا نبي بعدي"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"You are unto me as Haroon was to Moosa except for the fact that there
is no prophet after me."*

After these irrefutable and undeniable proofs, the falsity of all
claimants of prophethood after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) stands
exposed, whether he is the Punjabi of undivided India, Ghulam Ahmad
Qaadiyaani, or the Iranian, ‘Ali Mohammad Shirazi, known as Baab.

Interestingly, the teachings and ethics, which they claim to be their
creation, are all plagiarized from the Holy Qur’an and traditions, and
not a single of these belong to them. And whatever actually belongs to
these (impostors) is replete with contradictions. These inconsistencies
and paradoxes are sufficient proofs that they had nothing to do with
Allah.

Before claiming divinity, they had averred Mahdawwiyah. The sequence of
events was as follows: Initially, they claimed to be the representative
and door (Baab) of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), thereafter, they claimed to be
the Mahdi, then a Prophet and finally, God. Since there is no position
beyond divinity and godhood, they stopped at it. Incongruities in these
claims are sufficient evidences to expose these opportunistic
claimants.[^5]

[^1]: Al-Kaafi, vol. 2, p. 414, Tr. No. 1

[^2]: Ibid. p. 415

[^3]: Saheeh al-Muslim, vol.2, p. 19; Mataaleb al-So'l, vol. 2, p. 79;
Kamaal al-Deen, vol. 1, p. 280; Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 93

[^4]: Tableegh al-Resaalat, vol. 2, p. 144; Ayyaam al-Sulh, p. 146

[^5]: Talkhis al-Tarikh al-Nabeel, p. 317 by Haikaluddin


