Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) -The Last Imam
====================================

We have already mentioned that after the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.),
the number of his successors and the leaders of this nation is twelve.
The first of them is ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.) and the last is Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), who is still alive and in occultation on Allah's
command.

On analyzing these false claimants, the following consequences come to
light:

1) The presence of false claimants proves the existence of the true
claimant to this esteemed position. The counterfeit of only those
currencies are available, which are actually in circulation. Hence, one
can never find a 75 paise coin or a 25 rupee counterfeit note in the
market.

2) An important peculiarity of the real Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is that he
will spread Islam to the nooks and corners of the world. The Islamic
slogan 'There is no god but Allah and Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah" will echo throughout the universe. All these bogus charlatans
have departed from this world but failed in making Islam as the dominant
religion of the universe. On the contrary, they became the cause of
further dissension and disputes among the Muslims.

3) Yet another significant characteristic of the real Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) is that his Imamat and leadership will continue till the Day
of Judgment. Immediately after his death, Resurrection will occur. These
phony claimants have already left this world, causing confusion and
chaos with all their deviations and no sign of Resurrection. T heir
demise without the occurrence of Resurrection is another proof of their
falsity.

4) Yet another very important feature of Imam Mahdi's (a.t.f.s.)
leadership, which has been highlighted in all books concerning him, is
that he will fill the earth with justice, fairness and equity as it
would be fraught with injustice, tyranny and oppression. These sham
impostors neither reduced the oppression and tyranny of the world nor
did they fill it with justice and fairness. The converse was the
reality. They became the cause of intense augmentation and increase in
tyranny and oppression. This is another evidence of their deception and
fallacy.

5) Allah the Almighty has never appointed any fallible and sinning
person as a Prophet or an Imam. Human intellect supports the idea that a
person who is responsible for the guidance of the entire humanity and is
the guarantor of their salvation has to be infallible (ma'soom). While,
we observe that among all these fake claimants, none were infallible. A
brief look at their lives will reveal the filth and contamination in
which they existed.

6) The true representatives of Allah always raised their voice against
injustice and oppression. Consequently, the tyrants and their despotic
reigns always opposed them and afflicted them with all kinds of tortures
and troubles. On the other hand, these sham impostors assisted the
oppressors in their mischievous designs and considered rebellion against
the tyrants as prohibited.

Obviously, they had to support these oppressors for otherwise, from
where would they receive support and assistance for their devious aims?
This is precisely the reason that even today their head offices are
based in imperialist and colonial capitals. For instance, while intense
war rages on in Palestine, Bahaism continues to have its headquarters in
Israel. Similarly, Qaadiyanism has its main centers in Britain and the
United States. Obviously, children feel secure in the lap of their
parents and are nourished in better there.[^1]

For details, refer to books on Finality of Prophethood and on Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.). Moreover, reliable and authentic books have been penned in
refutation of these self-idolizing impostors and their sham religions.

These few lines have been jotted down to caution all from being deceived
by every false claimant and glib talker, and to preserve our religion
and belief.

The Messenger of Allah, Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) is the last
Prophet, his Shariat is the last Shariat and the Majestic Qur’an is a
divine book. After him (s.a.w.a.), there is neither any prophet nor book
nor religion. Even today, he (s.a.w.a.) is a Prophet and hence, everyday
we proclaim in our azaan and our prayers, ' I bear witness that Muhammad
is the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.)'. Not that he 'was' the Messenger
of Allah, but he 'is' the Messenger of Allah.

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is the twelfth and last of the chain of leadership
and guidance. He is alive and in occultation on divine command. Further
information concerning Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) will be provided for in the
coming pages, Inshallah.

Blessings of Allah be on you, O Master of Age, help us!

The belief in the Imamat, awaiting, and reappearance of Hazrat Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) is a mirror, which reflects the peak and perfection of
true Islam.

In it lies the cure of oppressed mankind and the remedy for tyrannized
humanity.

In which one can observe justice, equity, brotherhood and fraternity,
instead of injustice, oppression and tyranny.

In which one sees the manifestation of pure monotheism (Tawhid) and
sincere worship instead of polytheism and unbelief.

In which man, free from all sorts of dangers, hazards and insecurities,
is worshipping the One God.

It is the reappearance of the Imam who will raise the standard of a
divine government.

Who will destroy and uproot the oppressors and raise the oppressed
slaves to unprecedented glories.

Whose advent will be a living portrait of perfection of religion,
completion of bounties and satisfaction of the Lord.

1) The Creed of Imamate
-----------------------

The belief of Imamate is that important pillar of Islamic belief,
without which the religious structure remains incomplete. The acceptance
of all actions depends on the belief in Imamate. When the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) commenced his mission with Daawat al-Zul Asheerah, along with
the call for Divine Monotheism, proclamation of his own messengership,
he (s.a.w.a.) also announced the mastership and vilaayat of Ameerul
Mu’mineen (a.s.).

He invited one and all for accepting this invitation. From then onwards,
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) kept informing and announcing the people
about Imamate and Caliphate. Finally, on 18th Zilhajj, 10 A.H., in the
vast plain of Ghadir al-Khumm, in front of a crowd of 1,24,000 pilgrims,
he (s.a.w.a.) not only announced the successorship and Imamate of
Ameerul Mu’mineen (a.s.) in clear terms, but, even ordered the people to
pay allegiance to ‘Ali (a.s.). The Muslims duly obliged. Later, in the
destruction of Harith Ibn No'man, people also saw the fate of him who
denies ‘Ali's mastership.

Along with the announcement of the mastership of ‘Ali (a.s.), the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.) also declared the Imamate and mastership of his
eleven descendants. On various occasions, and in numerous ways, he made
it clear that after him, till the Day of Judgment, the number of his
successors and caliphs shall remain only twelve. The first of them will
be ‘Ali (a.s.) and the last, Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

In a number of traditions, he has also mentioned the names, titles,
agnomens, and characteristics of these twelve successors. Through his
companion, Jaabir Ibn Abdullah Ansari, he sent salutations to the fifth
among the Imams, Imam Muhammad al-Baqer (a.s.). All these are practical
testimonies of the truthfulness of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.).

The series of Imamate and guidance continues today and will go on till
the dawn of resurrection. The Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.a.) has
underlined the significance of Imam al-Asr's (a.s.) recognition through
the famous tradition,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من مات ولم يعرف إمام زمانه مات ميتة جاهليّة"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"One who dies without recognizing the Imam of his time, dies the death
of ignorance (i.e. unbelief)."*[^2]

As is evident, the unbelievers will not attain salvation. They will go
to hell and shall abide in it forever. Anybody who desires to save
himself from the perennial chastisement of hell and gain the everlasting
bounties of paradise, then it is for him to gain the recognition of the
Imam of his time. On the flip side, one who does not recognize the Imam
of his time, his religion is not perfect, his bounties are not complete
and Allah the Almighty is not satisfied with him.

### Today, who is our Imam?

The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) has already mentioned that the chain of
Imamate will continue after him till the Day of Judgment. Therefore, it
is necessary that there should be somebody from that series who has been
divinely ordained. Who is he? In the light of reliable and au the n tic
traditions (narrated by Shias as well as Sunnis), the Imam of our time,
is the son of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), Hazrat Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.).

2) The Importance in the Belief of Mahdawwiyah
----------------------------------------------

If somebody believes and is certain about the Prophethood of all the
previous Prophets and Messengers (peace be on them) but denies the
Messengership of the last Prophet, Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.),
is an unbeliever and his salvation, impossible.

Similarly, if someone believes in the Imamate of all the infallible
Imams (a.s.) but refuses to accept the Imamate of the last Imam, Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), he is not a believer and his deliverance,
unattainable. Renowned Sunni scholars like Shaikh al-Islam Hamveeni, in
his book "Faraaedus Simtain" and Shaikh Sulayman Qundoozi in his famous
work "Yanaabee' al-Mawaddah" have recorded that the Holy Prophet
(s.a.w.a.) said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"من أنكر خروج المهدي فقد كفر"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"One who denies the reappearance of Mahdi, is an unbeliever."*

### Imam's Life at a Glance

Name : Muhammad

Title : Mahdi, Baqiyyatullah, Imam az-Zaman, Vali al-Asr, Qa’im, etc.

Agnomen : Abul Qasim, Aba Saaleh al-Mahdi

Father : The Eleventh Imam, Hasan al-Askari (a.s.)

Mother : Narjis Khatoon, also called as Sosan.

Birthday : 15th Sha'baan, 255 A.H.

Birthplace : In the house of Imam Askari (a.s.) in the Iraqi city of
Saamarra  
 Commencement: 8th Rabi-al-Awwal, 260 A.H.of Imamat

Age : Still alive. Shall reappear on the command of Allah the Almighty

3) Occultation (Ghaibat)
------------------------

One can find in reliable traditions narrated on the authority of the
Holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) that when Mahdi reappears, oppression and
tyranny will be eradicated from the face of earth, and unjust and
tyrannical rulers will be uprooted.

Therefore, every oppressive king, particularly the contemporaries of
Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), strove to prevent the birth of Imam Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) and his advent in this world. Also, as the Messenger of Allah
(s.a.w.a.) had prophesied that the number of Imams will be twelve, and
that Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) will be the eleventh Imam, (and Mahdi
the twelfth), they were sure that Mahdi will be born in his house only.

Consequently, tight security and strict surveillance was imposed. But
just as Firaon had failed in his machinations to prevent the birth of
Hazrat Moosa (a.s.), which ultimately did occur, in the same way,
despite all their efforts, the oppressors could not stop the birth of
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.). As there was a great danger to the life of Imam
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), the news of his birth was not announced to all and
sundry. Only those who could be relied upon were informed about this
holy occurrence. After the martyrdom of Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.),
when the Imamate and leadership of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) began, the
perils to his life increased.

His residence was raided umpteen times by the king's army. Hence, on
divine command, Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) went into occultation. On the
one hand, conditions were threatening and danger loomed large. While on
the other, the masses had their queries and posers for which contact
with Imam (a.s.) was necessary. Considering this necessity, Imam (a.s.)
appointed four special deputies, through whom contact with Imam (a.s.)
could be possible. These four persons were called as Special Deputies
(Nawwaab al-Arba' or Naaebeen al-Khaas).

The names of these Special Deputies were as follows (in chronological
order):

1) Uthman Ibn Saeed Amri  
 2) Muhammad Ibn Uthman Ibn Saeed Amri  
 3) Husayn Ibn Rauh Nawbakhti  
 4) ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Seymouri

The series of special deputyship started from 260 A.H. and terminated in
the year 329 A.H. (i.e. 69 years). This period is called as Minor
Occultation (Ghaibat al-Sughra). The year 329 A.H., with the death of
the fourth deputy, ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Seymouri, marked the end of minor
occultation and the beginning of the Major Occultation (Ghaibat
al-Kubra). Till Allah the Almighty does not permit Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) to reappear, the major occultation will continue.

Today, we are living in the era of the major occultation in which, Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) has not appointed any special deputy. But he has
also not abandoned us. For our religious problems and questions, he has
appointed jurists (mujtahideen), bearing all the necessary conditions,
as his proof upon us and has ordered us to refer to them. As per his
command, it is essential that our lives should be in conformity with the
edicts of the living mujtahid.

4) Benefit of Imam az-Zaman's Existence in Occultation
------------------------------------------------------

Presently, our Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is in occultation. But it does
not mean that he is living in an isolated place, far away from
inhabitation.

Occultation means that people are not aware of his place of abode. Even
when they see their Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), they do not recognize him.
Imam Sadeq (a.s.) says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يرونهُ و لا يعرفونه"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"They see him but do not recognize him."*[^3]

But Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) sees the people and recognizes them too. He
himself declares,

*"None of your news is hidden from us. We are not negligent in your
protection nor are we forgetful of your remembrance. Had it not been so,
calamities would have descended upon you and enemies would have
annihilated you."*[^4]

This proves that although Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is hidden from the
eyes of the people, he is aware of their conditions. Now, we can benefit
from his existence just as people draw advantage from the sun when it is
concealed behind the clouds. We can relate all our difficulties to him.
At every step, we can reach out to him through our cries for help.

Just let us give it a try, and feel his hand reach unto us,
notwithstanding the veil of occultation. One can find thousands of such
incidents in reliable books when people have called out to Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) for help and he has come to their rescue.

5) Longevity
------------

Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) was born in 255 A.H. Today the age of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) exceeds 1150 years. This is just his present age and
his reappearance is still pending. The years after reappearance have
also been discounted.

Perhaps some minds might pose the query, 'Is it possible for a man to
live so long?'

The answer is a definite yes. Man can certainly attain longevity for the
following reasons:

1) Till date, no limit has been fixed for human age, that after such and
such age, man cannot or should not live.  
 2) There have been people who have lived even more than the present age
of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), like Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) who propagated for
950 years before the famous deluge and his total age exceeded 2500
years.  
 3) Hazrat Khizr (a.s.) and Hazrat Ilyas (a.s.) continue to live till
date.  
 4) Shaitan preceded Hazrat Adam (a.s.) in existence and is still alive.

Imam Zain al-Abedeen (a.s.) says,

*"In our Qa’im, is the tradition and sign of Hazrat Nuh (a.s.) and that
is his longevity."*[^5]

6) Awaiting
-----------

In the major occultation, an important duty is to await the reappearance
of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Imam Sadeq (a.s.) relates from the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.a.),

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أفضل أعمال أمتي انتظار الفرج"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"The best act of my nation is to await the reappearance."*[^6]

Awaiting is an inner condition that we experience vis-à-vis our beloved.
Our restlessness for the meeting with the beloved is directly
proportionate with the presence of love in our hearts for him. If you
are waiting for a guest, you will prepare yourself for his arrival by
cleaning up the house and providing the necessities of his comfort. You
will inform the people about his arrival and will exhort them to join
you in welcoming him. More than the house, you will prepare your heart
for his comfort, leisure and ease.

If such preparedness and restlessness is found in us, then we are truly
awaiting for the guest. But if I am simply sleeping lazily, without
feeling the need for any preparation and readiness, then such an
awaiting is nothing more than lip service.

Those who are waiting for Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) are restless for his
reappearance. They are preparing for his arrival by improving themselves
and inviting others to change for the better. They are themselves
learning religious laws and injunctions while making others also aware
of their religious obligations. They are restless due to the delay in
the reappearance. The occultation of their beloved Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) has snatched sleep from their eyes.

Imam Zainul Aabedeen (a.s.) has described the characteristics and
importance of the one who awaits the reappearance thus,

*"O Abu Khalid (Kabuli)! In the period of his occultation, those who
believe in his Imamate, await his reappearance are the best people of
all times. Allah the Almighty has endowed them with intellect ,
understanding and cognition to such an extent that occultation (of Imam)
for them is as good as his presence.*

*They are equal (in status) to those who are fighting alongside the
Prophet of Allah (s.a.w.a.) with their swords. Certainly, these are the
real believers and our true Shias and they call towards the path of
Allah, openly and secretly."*[^7]

7) Duties and Responsibilities
------------------------------

It is clear now as to how important it is to await for the reappearance
of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and how great is the status and position of
those who await. Also, it is a reality that as the level increases,
responsibilities and duties increase too. Although there are a number of
responsibilities of a believer during the major occultation, we shall
mention a few important ones hereunder, keeping brevity into
consideration.

### a) Recognition of Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.)

By recognition, historical knowledge and information is not what is
implied. Rather, it means to be aware of those levels, perfection and
authority that has been granted to Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) by Allah the
Almighty. If we believe in these, then we will be sure that he is
definitely keeping a watch on all our actions, every single one of them.
He rules on each and every particle of this world. The entire universe
is subject to his command. Only then will we refrain from sins and seek
refuge and help from him for all our difficulties.

### b) Improvement in deeds

We cannot see Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) with our sinful eyes but he,
definitely, is observing us. If somebody really believes that he is
constantly being watched by Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.), he will keep away
from quite a few sins. Good deeds are the only way to gain proximity and
nearness to Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). And who does not desire to be
nearer to his Imam (a.s.)? He (a.t.f.s.) himself has admonished us,

*"Then each one of you should act in such a way that your deeds bring
you closer to our love, and refrain from all those actions that will
bring you nearer to our wrath and anger."*[^8]

### c) Reformation of the Society

To rectify and improve our society, i.e. our children, brothers,
sisters, relatives, friends, acquaintances, etc. is also our
responsibility. For, it is essential that the ground be prepared for the
reappearance. I m am Hasan al-Askari (a.s.) says,

*"An orphan is he who loses his father. But greater than him is he who
has become distanced from his Imam and does not have access to him . He
is n o t aw are o f his responsibilities and obligations. Among our
Shias, one who is knowledgeable of our traditions and knowledge, should
teach this Shia who is ignorant and unaware, and guide him. It is as if
he has sheltered and nourished an orphan. Yes, the one who guides him
and teaches him our religious laws, will be with us in the highest
grades of paradise."*[^9]

### d) Supplication (Doa)

Supplication is a weapon of the believer through which he repels
calamities and encounters difficulties. He attains his desires with its
help. The reappearance of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and his being safe
from all evils and calamities is the heartfelt desire of every believer.
One of the rights that he (a.s.) enjoys upon us is that we should pray
for him, first and foremost, in our supplications and invocations.

Naturally, we always pray for that thing first which enjoys utmost
significance in our eyes. Nobody is greater than Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) nor is anything more important than his reappearance. It is
necessary that after every Salat (prayer), our first supplication be in
favor of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

We must begin and end our day with the prayers for the reappearance of
our beloved Imam (a.s.). Although there are a number of invocations for
Imam-e-Zamana (a.t.f.s.) like Doa al-Nudbah, which should be recited on
Fridays, etc. we shall suffice here with only two important
supplications for him.

(a) In every Salat (prayer), especially in obligatory prayers, we should
recite the following invocation in the Qunoot. This is also called as
*Doa al-Salaamati*.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّـهُمَّ كُنْ لِوَلِيِّكَ الْحُجَّةِ بْنِ الْحَسَنِ صَلَواتُكَ
عَلَيْهِ وَعَلى آبائِه في هذِهِ السَّاعَةِ وَفي كُلِّ ساعَة وَلِيّاً
وَحافِظاً وَقائِداً وَناصِراً وَدَليلاً وَعَيْنا حَتّى تُسْكِنَهُ
اَرْضَكَ طَوْعاً وَتُمَتِّعَهُ فيها طَويلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

(b) After Salat (prayer) al-Subh (morning prayers), we must recite the
brief Doa al-Ahd. It is a salutation, a covenant and a supplication, all
put together.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُمَّ بَلِّغْ مَولايَ صاحِبَ الزَّمانِ صَلواتُ الله عَلَيْهِ عَنْ
جَمِيعِ المُؤْمِنِينَ وَالمُؤْمِناتِ فِي مَشارِقِ الاَرْضِ
وَمَغارِبِها وَبَرِّها وَبَحْرِها وَسَهْلِها وَجَبَلِها، حَيِّهِمْ
وَمَيِّتِهِمْ وَعَنْ وَالِدَيَّ وَوُلْدِي وَعَنِّي مِنَ الصَّلَواتِ
وَالتَّحِياتِ زِنَةَ عَرْشِ الله وَمِدادَ كَلِماتِهِ وَمُنْتَهى رِضاهُ
وَعَدَدَ ما أحْصاهُ كِتابُهُ وَأَحاطَ بِهِ عِلْمُهُ، اللّهُمَّ إِنِّي
أُجَدِّدُ لَهُ فِي هذا اليَوْمِ وَفِي كُلِّ يَوْمٍ عَهْداً وَعَقْداً
وَبَيْعَةً فِي رَقَبَتِي، اللّهُمَّ كَما شَرَّفْتَنِي بِهذا
التَّشْرِيفِ وَفَضَّلْتَنِي بِهِذِهِ الفَضِيلَةِ وَخَصَصْتَنِي
بِهِذِهِ النِّعْمَةِ فَصَلِّ عَلى مَوْلايَ وَسَيِّدِي صاحِبِ
الزَّمانِ، وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنْ أَنْصارِهِ وَأَشْياعِهِ وَالذَّابِّينَ
عَنْهُ وَاجْعَلْنِي مِنَ المُسْتَشْهَدِينَ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ طائِعاً
غَيْرَ مُكْرَهٍ فِي الصَفِّ الَّذِي نَعَتَّ أَهْلَهُ فِي كِتابِكَ،
فَقُلْتَ: صَفّا كَأَنَّهُمْ بُنْيانٌ مَرْصوصٌ عَلى طاعَتِكَ وَطاعَةِ
رَسُولِكَ وَآلِهِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلامُ ؛ اللّهُمَّ هذِهِ بَيْعَةٌ لَهُ
فِي عُنُقِي إِلى يَوْمِ القِيامَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

### e) Sadaqah

When a person knows and likes somebody from the depth of his heart, he
wishes him well and desires his safety from all evils and calamities. He
prays for his wellbeing and health. He gives sadaqah for his safety and
protection.

Praying or giving sadaqah does not mean that the concerned person is
afflicted with calamities. Rather, it is an expression of our love for
him. The more we love him, the more will be our invocations and sadaqah
in his favor.

Today, who is more deserving to be loved and be attached with than the
holy persona of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)? Can a believer’s heart love
anybody else more than him? To pray for Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) and to
give sadaqah for his safety is an expression of our love for him. In the
ta’qeebaat of the obligatory prayers, it has been emphasized to recite
Ayat al-Kursi for the safety and security of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

### f) Seeking of Desires

Allah the Almighty has appointed the infallible Imams (a.s.) as the
media and doors for approaching Him. Presently, Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.)
is that door through whom Allah is approached. The Holy Qur’an says,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِلَّهِ الْأَسْمَاءُ الْحُسْنَىٰ فَادْعُوهُ بِهَا ۖ وَذَرُوا
الَّذِينَ يُلْحِدُونَ فِي أَسْمَائِهِ ۚ سَيُجْزَوْنَ مَا كَانُوا
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And Allah's are the best names, therefore call on Him thereby, and
leave alone those who violate the sanctity of His names; they shall be
recompensed for what they did.(*** ***Surah al-A'raaf, 7 :180)***

In the interpretation of this verse, traditions say that good names in
the verse implies the infallible Imams (a.s.) and that we should call
Allah through them.[^10]

Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is the Door of Allah and His Name. If we plead
to Allah through this all-important medium, our supplications will be
accepted. Besides, it is the sincere desire of every father or every
elder that the youngsters of the family approach him for their needs and
that he fulfils them. Particularly, when he is in a position of power
and authority. The elders feel great joy in fulfilling the needs of the
youngsters.

Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) is our father, elder and the master of all
bounties. Today, it is an important duty for us that we present our
difficulties to him for their solution.

Unfortunately, we speak of our problems to everybody but to that Imam
who is able to provide its remedies within no time.

The Holy Prophet (a.s.) says,

*"Whenever you get entangled in some difficulty, then seek refuge in the
presence of Hazrat Hujjat (a.t.f.s.) and invoke him. He will save you
and grant you salvation. He answers the needy. He is the refuge of
anybody who seeks refuge in him."*[^11]

8) Meeting
----------

Today, we are living in the times of the major occultation but it does
not imply that all the doors leading to Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) have
been shunted. Direct visitation is possible only on account of his
grace. Nobody can arrange a meeting with him unilaterally (without
Imam's consent). T here have been some extremely fortunate people who
had the honor and grace of a direct meeting with their master, Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

Consequently, their problems were solved. Reliable books have mentioned
the incidents of these fortunate ones. This was regarding apparent,
physical visitation. As far a s heart to he art rendezvous is concerned,
the possibility always exists for everybody. The heart is aware of the
path to the sought one. For heartily contact, words are not required.
Rather, its beats translate into the most effective of words. A broken
heart narrates a thousand incidents in a few seconds. In Doa al-Nudbah,
we cry,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِنَفْسِي أَنْتَ مِنْ مُغَيَّبٍ لَمْ يَخْلُ مِنّا بِنَفْسِي
أَنْتَ مِنْ نازِحٍ مانَزَحَ عَنّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"May our lives be sacrificed on him who is distanced from the eyes but
the hearts are not devoid of him. He is physically far from us but his
remembrance and memories are not distant from our gatherings."**

9) Time of Reappearance
-----------------------

There is no doubt that one day certainly Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will
reappear from the Holy Ka'bah. A heavenly voice will announce his advent
to one and all. There will not be any place on earth where the voice of
this announcement will not reach. Of course, none knows that when this
reappearance will actually occur. Its knowledge is only and only with
Allah and none else. The holy Prophet (s.a.w.a.) says,

*"The reappearance of Mahdi will be like resurrection which will be very
heavy for the heavens as well as for the earth. It will be sudden,
unexpected."*[^12]

W e cannot fix the time of reappearance but can advance it with our
incessant and unceasing invocations and supplications. Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.) exhorts,

*"Pray more for the reappearance for in it lies your salvation."*[^13]

10) The Companions of Imam az-Zaman (a.s.)
------------------------------------------

We all desire earnestly and fervently to be included among the
companions of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). Every believer aspires to help
the Imam of his time. There is no status or fortune higher than this for
him.

More than nearly fourteen hundred years after his friends achieved
martyrdom in Karbala while defending the Imam of their time, Imam Husayn
(a.s.), Prophets, Messengers, successors, angels, martyrs, witnesses,
the truthful ones, and even the Almighty Allah Himself, continue to send
incessant blessings and salutations on them.

The door of helping and assisting the Imam of the time is not closed. We
too can be among the helpers and supporters of the Imam of our time.
Traditions have talked about the characteristics of Imam az-Zaman's
(a.t.f.s.) helpers.

If these attributes and traits are found in us, then a million thanks to
the Almighty, and we should pray for their betterment and improvement by
the day (both quantitatively as well as qualitatively). But if these
characteristics are not found in us, or if some are found and others are
not, then we should supplicate to Allah the Mighty and the Wise that he
adorns us with these attributes, for the sake of Imam-e-Zamana
(a.t.f.s.). Some of these characteristics and attributes are as follows:

• They are devout and highly religious individuals.

• Their hearts are overflowing with the love of their Imam az-Zaman
(a.t.f.s.).

• They are nice and decent.

• They are concealed like mines of treasures in the earth.

• In their certitude, they are stronger than steel; if they pass by
mountain, they will render it into pieces.

• They fight only for divine pleasure; any opponent who stands against
them, bites the dust.

• They are not cowed down by criticism and censure.[^14]

11) Advent and Government
-------------------------

When Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) arrives, the world will be a completely
different place. Every particle will rejoice at his advent. Hazrat Eesa
(a.s.) will descend from the fourth heaven and perform Salat (prayer)
behind him. Self-sacrificing, pious, devout, religious and sincere
believers will gather around Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).

They will form circles around him, with him sitting right in the middle,
like a moon encircled with stars. He will reappear from Mecca and make
Kufa his capital. The entire world will be under the rule of true Islam
and the standard of Tawhid will be hoisted in the universe. Polytheism,
disbelief, hypocrisy and their like will be uprooted from the face of
the earth. Justice, equity, brotherhood and fraternity will be the order
of the day.

Traditions have painted the picture of his reappearance beautifully. We
shall mention a few special characteristics of his reappearance
hereunder:

### a) Justice and Equity

Numerous traditions contain the following sentence,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it would be fraught
with injustice and oppression."*

Today, whatever oppression or injustice we are witnessing in any form
whatsoever, will be totally annihilated. Justice, and sheer justice,
will prevail. The deeply felt prayer of humanity will be actualized with
the reappearance. The efforts of the Prophets (a.s.) and the Messengers
(a.s.) will yield fruits with the establishment of justice.

### b) Honor For Religion

Religion will be honored in the government of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.).
It will be implemented with all its minute details. The Holy Qur’an will
dominate the universe. All those religious injunctions that have been
forgotten or distorted will regain their original practical form and
every one will act on them. In the *salwaat* of Friday, we find,

**"O Allah! Enliven through him those laws of Your religion that have
been destroyed. Grant a fresh lease of life to those sciences of Qur’an
that have been forgotten . Manifest through him those laws that have
been distorted. Till Your Religion appears in its original and pure form
at his hands."**[^15]

### c) Unity and Harmony

One of the most serious maladies of our society is mutual discord and
disharmony. Capabilities are destroyed. Assets are rendered useless.
Respect and honor is ground to dust. Houses are divided and families are
torn to shreds. All because of a single ailment - disunity and
factionalism. But after the reappearance, all this will change. Factions
will unite on one platform. In Doa al-Nudbah, we read,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"أيْنَ جامِعُ الْكَلِمَةِ عَلَى التَّقْوى"
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Where is the one who will gather the people on piety and devotion?"**

### d) Freshness and Greenness

Traditions have prophesied that when Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) reappears,
the earth will throw up all its treasures. It will be green and vibrant.
There won't remain any piece of land that will be dry and barren. The
earth will gain new life and there will be vitality and vigor
everywhere. Grains and fruits will be in immeasurable abundance. In one
ziyarat, we salute Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) with the following sentence,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
"السلام عليك يا ربيع الأنام  ونضرة الأيام"
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"Peace be on you, O spring of creation and brightness of days."**

### e) Perfection of Intellect

Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will not only enliven the earth and extricate
its hidden treasures but he will infuse new life into hearts, restore
capabilities and perfect intellects. Traditions have prophesied,

*"When Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) reappears, he will gently stroke the
heads of the people by which their intellects will become complete and
perfect."*[^16]

Ameerul Mu’mineen ‘Ali Ibn Abi Taalib (a.s.), in the first sermon of
Nahjul Balagha, while explaining the aim of sending the Prophets and
Messengers (a.s.), states,

*"...that they may extricate the hidden treasures of the intellects..."*

Therefore, the advent of Imam az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.) will mark the
realization of the aim of sending of divine emissaries. Moreover, he
will also avenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.). All those who killed
him, oppressed him or were satisfied at these oppressions will be the
targets of his sword.

[^1]: Taryaaq al-Quloob, p. 15

[^2]: (Bihar Al-Anwar, 23/ 76)

[^3]: Muntakhab al-Asar, Part 2, Ch. 38, p. 301

[^4]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, Ch. 31

[^5]: Kamaal al-deen, vol. 2, p. 524

[^6]: Kamaal al-deen, vol. 2, p. 644

[^7]: Kamaal al-deen, Ch. 31, H. 2

[^8]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 181

[^9]: Tafseer Imam Hasan al-Askari (a.s.), p. 114, 115

[^10]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 618, H.2

[^11]: An-Najm al- Saaqib, p. 787

[^12]: Muntakhab al-Asar, Part 1, Ch. 1, p. 30

[^13]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 53, p. 181

[^14]: Muntakhab al-Asar, Part 6, Ch. 1, p. 421

[^15]: Mafaateeh al-Jinaan, A'maal for Friday

[^16]: Behaar al-Anwaar, vol. 52, p. 336


