A Final Request
===============

Come, let all of us make a covenant that we shall not attach ourselves
to any other door except that of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). (They are the
strong rope of Allah (Hablallah), without fastening unto them, salvation
is impossible). We shall pray for the safety and security of Imam
az-Zaman (a.t.f.s.). We will always remember him and narrate our
difficulties to him.

We shall plead to him from the depth of our hearts and seek cure from
him for our ailments. O Master! We are ill, weak, poor of memory,
backward, harassed, in debts, etc. Master! Your Shia and in such a bad
state!

We know that our deeds are presented to you due to which your heart
bleeds. You are unhappy and unsatisfied with our actions. We are very,
very sinful. We confess to all these but Master! If unworthy children
will not find refuge in the house of their father, where will they go?
Where shall the subjects go but to the court of the king?

If sinners will not go to their Imam, whose door will they knock?
Master! We are disgraced, ignorant and disobedient. But we do not have
anybody besides you. You are our refuge, our solace, our shelter. We
shed tears for your ancestor and seek apologies from you.

We shall end our brief discussion with the following statement:

The brothers of Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) were the ones who had thrown him in
the well and sold him. Whatever difficulties Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) had to
face were on account of his brothers. Yet, notwithstanding all these
atrocities and crimes which they had committed against their own
brother, when they came to Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.), who by then had become
the King of Egypt, they said,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَمَّا دَخَلُوا عَلَيْهِ قَالُوا يَا أَيُّهَا الْعَزِيزُ مَسَّنَا
وَأَهْلَنَا الضُّرُّ وَجِئْنَا بِبِضَاعَةٍ مُزْجَاةٍ فَأَوْفِ لَنَا
الْكَيْلَ وَتَصَدَّقْ عَلَيْنَا ۖ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَجْزِي
الْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when they came in to him, they said: O chief! distress has
afflicted us and our family and we have brought scanty money, so give us
full measure and be charitable to us; surely Allah rewards the
charitable.(*** ***Surah Yusuf, 12: 88)***

Accepting their brief apology, Hazrat Yusuf (a.s.) excused them.

W e repeat the same apology in the presence of Yusuf al-Zahra, Hazrat
Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.):

**"O Master! Difficulties and calamities have surrounded us. We have
come to you with very few good actions. But please have mercy on us and
grant us in full measure .....".**


