Hereafter , Day of Judgement , Paradise, Hell Fire
==================================================

Day of Judgement
----------------

**Surah Al-Isra’, 17:71**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ نَدْعُو كُلَّ أُنَاسٍ بِإِمَامِهِمْ فَمَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ
بِيَمِينِهِ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ يَقْرَؤُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كِتَابَهُمْ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ فَتِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma nad-‘uu kulla ’unaa-sim bi-’Imaa-mihim: fa-man ’outiya kitaa-bahuu
bi-ya-miinihii fa-’ulaaa-’ika yaqra-’uuna kitaa-bahum wa laa yuzlamuuna
fatiilaa.

*71. (Remember) the day when we will call every people with their Imam;
then whoever is given his book in his right hand, these shall read their
book; and they shall not be dealt unjustly by as much as a hair’s
breadth.*

The book mentioned here is the record of one’s own deeds accompanying
every individual which shall be manifested in a visible form on the Day
of Judgment.

It is said that whosoever an individual follows, in his lifetime, on the
Day of Judgment with him only the individual will be called to account
for his faith and deeds. Blessed are they who follow the Best Guides -
the Holy Ahlul Bayt (a), the purified ones of God.

When this verse was revealed, people asked the Holy Prophet (S) if he
was not the Imam of all the people. The Holy Prophet (S) said: “Yes,” “I
am the Imam until I am alive in this world; and after me the Imam will
be Ali Ibne Abi Talib (a), followed by his divinely chosen issues.
People attached to them will be safe and shall gain salvation, and those
who go astray and disassociate themselves from them, will be lost.”

To identify the genuine Imam against the false one, the quality of his
being endowed with the knowledge of everything is clearly marked out in
the Holy Qur’an, ***Surah Yasin, 36:12***:

*“ All things have We accommodated in a manifest guide (Imam).”*

Further as to who are those divinely chosen to be Imams of the people,
the Lord Himself has made it clear in ***Surah al-Baqarah, 2:124***:

‘*And remember when his Lord tried Ibrahim by (His) commandments and the
latter fulfilled them, He said “ Verily I make thee Imam for mankind;”
(Ibrahim) said “And of my offspring?”: He said: “My covenant reacheth
not the unjust.’*

In this verse Prophet Ibrahim was granted *Imamat* and he prayed that
his issues too be granted the same. It was said to him that it (i.e.
Imamat) would only reach the non-iniquitous ones in his seed. The
greatest iniquity according to the Qur’an being polytheism, ***Surah
al-Luqman, 31:13***, it gets very clear that those whom polytheism had
polluted, would never have this great gift of God.

Now if one analyses who during the advent of Islam, besides the Holy
Prophet (S), was totally free from the pollution of polytheism or shirk,
there is only one among the many around him who had never in his life
yielded to any false deity and that singular personality is Ali Ibne Abi
Talib (a); It is referring to this unique position of Ali (a) the Muslim
world as a whole mentions the name of Ali (a) with the suffix -
*‘Karramallaho Wajhaho’* - i.e. he whose face God has graced to have not
bowed to any one, besides God.

Repeated warning of the Day of Judgement
----------------------------------------

**Surah Saba, 34:3**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا لَا تَأْتِينَا السَّاعَةُ قُلْ بَلَى
وَرَبِّي لَتَأْتِيَنَّكُمْ عَالِمِ الْغَيْبِ لَا يَعْزُبُ عَنْهُ
مِثْقَالُ ذَرَّةٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَلَا فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَا أَصْغَرُ
مِن ذَلِكَ وَلَا أَكْبَرُ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qaalal-laziina kafaruu laa ta’-tiinas-Saa-‘ah: qul balaa wa Rab-bii
lata’tiyan-nakum ‘Aalimil-ghayb. Laa ya‘-zubu ‘anhu mithqaalu zar-ratin
fis-samaawaati wa laa fil-’arzi wa laaa ’asgharu min zaalika wa laaa
’akbaru ’il-laa fii kitaabim-mubiin:

*3. And yet, they who are bent on denying the truth assert, “Never will
the Last Hour come upon us!” Say: “Nay, by my Sustainer! By Him who
knows all that is beyond the reach of a created being’s perception: it
will most certainly come upon you!”*

*Not an atom’s weight (of whatever there is) in the heavens or on earth
escapes His knowledge; and neither is there anything smaller than that,
or larger, but is recorded in His clear degree.*

**Surah Al – Haqqah, 69:1-3**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَاقَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-Haaaq-qatu!

*1. Oh, the laying-bare of the truth!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا الْحَاقَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mal-Haaq-qa?

*2. How awesome that laying-bare of the truth!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْحَاقَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maaa ’adraaka mal-Haaaq-qa?

*3. And what could make thee conceive what that laying-bare of the truth
will be?*

Signs to proclaim the arrival of the Day of Judgement
-----------------------------------------------------

**Surah At – Takwir, 81:1-14**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا الشَّمْسُ كُوِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Izash-shamsu kuw-wirat;

*1. When the sun is shrouded in darkness,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا النُّجُومُ انكَدَرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izan-nujuu-mun-kadarat;

*2. and when the stars lose their light,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْجِبَالُ سُيِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-jibaalu suy-yirat;

*3. and when the mountains are made to vanish,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْعِشَارُ عُطِّلَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-‘ishaaru ‘ut-tilat;

*4. and when the she-camels big with young, about to give birth, are
left untended,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-wuhuu-shu hushirat;

*5. and when all beasts are gathered together,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ سُجِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-bihaaru suj-jirrat;

*6. and when the seas boil over,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا النُّفُوسُ زُوِّجَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izan-nufuusu zuw-wijat:

*7. and when all human beings are coupled (with their deeds),*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْمَوْؤُودَةُ سُئِلَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-maw-’uudatu su’ilat-

*8. and when the girl-child that was buried alive is made to ask*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَيِّ ذَنبٍ قُتِلَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bi-’ay-yi zambin-qutilat:

*9. for what crime she had been slain,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الصُّحُفُ نُشِرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izas-suhu-fu nushirat:

*10. and when the scrolls (of men’s deeds) are unfolded,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا السَّمَاء كُشِطَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izas-samaaa-’u kushitat;

*11. and when heaven is laid bare,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْجَحِيمُ سُعِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-Jahiimu su‘-‘irat;

*12. and when the blazing fire (of hell) is kindled bright,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْجَنَّةُ أُزْلِفَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-Jan-natu ’uzlifat;

*13. and when paradise is brought into view:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا أَحْضَرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Alimat nafsum-maaa-’ah-zarat.

*14. (on that Day) every human being will come to know what he has
prepared (for himself).*

The above verses mention the signs which will herald the dawn of the Day
of Judgement. It is a well-known fact that the sun is the centre,
controlling the solar system and it is the sun that gives all the light,
heat and energy. With the sun losing its essential property, will
naturally cease to maintain the present order in the heavenly bodies and
every heavenly body will consequently lose its native property and will
necessarily be decomposed and lose its form, its use and the usual
functioning.  
 The stars will follow suit and with it the earth, mountains and every
created thing in this world. The whole equilibrium of the natural
control at the flow of the water and its level will be lost and oceans
will have no bounds and consequently surge and boil. Human beings will
be sorted, separated and re-classified or paired with the others of
corresponding, equal or the identical value. As mentioned in ***Surah
al-Waqiah, 56:1-7***, there will be three general classifications of the
people on the Day of Judgement. With the solar system disappearing,
there will naturally be an open space in the place of the present skies.

**Surah Al – Infitar, 82:1-5**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا السَّمَاء انفَطَرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’izas - Samaaa - ’un-fatarat;

*1. When the sky is cleft asunder,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ انتَثَرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-kawaa-ki-bun-tatharat;

*2. and when the stars are scattered,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْبِحَارُ فُجِّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-bihaaru fuj-jirat;

*3. and when the seas burst beyond their bounds,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْقُبُورُ بُعْثِرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’izal-qubuuru bu‘-thirat;

*4. and when the graves are overturned -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا قَدَّمَتْ وَأَخَّرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Alimat nafsum-maa qad-damat wa’akh-kharat.

*5. every human being will (at last) comprehend what he has sent ahead
and what he has held back (in this world).*

This is another verse about the happening of the Day of Judgement. The
collective meaning of all these events will be that the Day of the Final
Judgement will begin with the total destruction of the present physical
world which we see and its disappearance, giving place to a new state of
pure and spiritual nature, laying bare everything in its essential
reality. The rivers and sees will burst forth and boil. The fresh and
the saltish waters will be mixed and the flood will cover the whole
globe.

State of Mankind on the Day Of Judgment
---------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Hajj, 22:1-2**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّ زَلْزَلَةَ السَّاعَةِ
شَيْءٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَرَوْنَهَا تَذْهَلُ كُلُّ مُرْضِعَةٍ عَمَّا أَرْضَعَتْ
وَتَضَعُ كُلُّ ذَاتِ حَمْلٍ حَمْلَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaa ay-yuhan naa-sut-taqu Rab-bakum; In-na zal-zala-tas-saa-‘ati shay-un
‘aziim.

*1. O people! guard against(the punishment from) your Lord; for, verily,
the violent convulsion of the Last Hour will be an awesome thing.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَى النَّاسَ سُكَارَى وَمَا هُم بِسُكَارَى وَلَكِنَّ عَذَابَ
اللَّهِ شَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yau-ma tarau-naha taz-halu kul-lu mur-zi-‘atin ‘am-maa ar-za-‘at
wataza-‘u kul-lu zaa-ti ham-lin ham-laha wa taran-naasa sukaa-ra wa maa
hum bi-sukaa-ra wa laa-kin-na ‘azaa-bal Lahi sha-diid.

*2. On the day when you shall see it, every woman that feeds her child
at her breast will utterly forget her nursling, and every pregnant woman
shall lay down her burden, and men will seem intoxicated, although they
shall not be intoxicated but vehement will be (their dread of) God’s
chastisement.*

State of Mankind when the Trumpet is blown
------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Qamar, 54:6-8**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَوَلَّ عَنْهُمْ يَوْمَ يَدْعُ الدَّاعِ إِلَى شَيْءٍ نُّكُرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fatawal-la ‘anhum. Yawma yad-‘ud-Daa-‘i ’laa shay-’in-nukur.

*6. turn thou away from them, On the Day when the Summoning Voice will
summon (man) unto something that the mind cannot conceive,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُشَّعًا أَبْصَارُهُمْ يَخْرُجُونَ مِنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ كَأَنَّهُمْ
جَرَادٌ مُّنتَشِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Khush-sha-‘an absaa-ruhum yakhru-juuna minal-’ajdaa-thi ka-’an-nahum
jaraa-dum-mun-tashir.

*7. they will come forth from their graves, with their eyes downcast,
(swarming about) like locusts* *scattered (by the wind),*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُّهْطِعِينَ إِلَى الدَّاعِ يَقُولُ الْكَافِرُونَ هَذَا يَوْمٌ عَسِرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muh-ti-‘iina ’ilad - Daa‘! Yaquu-lul-kaafiruuna “Haazaa Yawmun ‘asir”

*8. running in confusion towards the Summoning Voice; (and) those who
(now) deny the truth will exclaim, “Calamitous is this Day!”*

This Life will seem like an hour on the Day of Judgment
-------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Yunus, 10:45**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يَحْشُرُهُمْ كَأَن لَّمْ يَلْبَثُواْ إِلاَّ سَاعَةً مِّنَ
النَّهَارِ يَتَعَارَفُونَ بَيْنَهُمْ قَدْ خَسِرَ الَّذِينَ كَذَّبُواْ
بِلِقَاء اللّهِ وَمَا كَانُواْ مُهْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa yawma yah-shuruhum ka-’al-lam yal-bathuuu ’il-laa
saa-‘atam-minan-nahaari yata-‘aara-fuuna bay-nahum. Qad
khasi-ral-laziina kaz-zabuu bi-liqaa-’il-laahi wa maa kaanuu muh-tadiin.

*45. And on the day when He will gather them (unto Himself, it will seem
to them) as if they had not tarried (on earth) longer than an hour of a
day, knowing one another; (and) lost indeed will be they who (in their
lifetime) considered it a lie that they were destined to meet God, and
(thus) failed to find the right way.*

Not only is this verse metaphorical, where the Day of Judgment will be
so long, that the life spent in this world will seem like just an hour,
but also man’s memory of his life in this world will be so sharp that he
will feel that all that he has done in this world was just like having
done an hour ago.

State of affairs on Day of Judgement
------------------------------------

**Surah Az – Zumar, 39:67-75**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا قَدَرُوا اللَّهَ حَقَّ قَدْرِهِ وَالْأَرْضُ جَمِيعًا قَبْضَتُهُ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ وَالسَّماوَاتُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَطْوِيَّاتٌ بِيَمِينِهِ سُبْحَانَهُ وَتَعَالَى عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maa qadarul-laaha haq-qa qadrihii wal-‘arzu jamii-‘an-qabzatuhuu
Yawmal-Qiyaa-mati was-samaa-waatu matwiy-yaatum-biyamiini: Sub-haa-nahuu
wa Ta-‘aalaa ‘am-maa yush-rikuun!

*67. And no true understanding of God have they (who worship aught
beside Him), inasmuch as the whole of the earth will be as a (mere)
handful to Him on resurrection Day, and the heavens will be rolled up in
His right hand: limitless is He in His glory, and sublimely exalted
above anything to which they may ascribe a share in His divinity!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَصَعِقَ مَن فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَن فِي
الْأَرْضِ إِلَّا مَن شَاء اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ نُفِخَ فِيهِ أُخْرَى فَإِذَا هُم قِيَامٌ يَنظُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa nufikha fis-Suuri fasa‘iqa man fis-samaa-waati wa man fil-‘arzi
’il-laa man-shaaa-’al-laah. Thum-ma nufikhaa fiihi’ukh-raa fa-’izaa hum
qiyaamun-yanzuruun!

*68. And (on that Day) the trumpet (of judgement) will be sounded, and
all (creatures) that are in the heavens and all that are on earth will
fall down senseless, unless they be such as God wills (to exempt).*

*And then it will sound again - and lo! standing (before the Seat of
Judgement), they will begin to see (the truth)!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَشْرَقَتِ الْأَرْضُ بِنُورِ رَبِّهَا وَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ وَجِيءَ
بِالنَّبِيِّينَ وَالشُّهَدَاء وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُم بِالْحَقِّ وَهُمْ لَا
يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’ash-raqatil-’arzu bi-nuuri Rab-bihaa wa wuzi-‘al-Kitaabu wa jiii-’a
bin-nabiy-yiina wash-shuha-daaa-’i wa quziya baynahum-bil-haq-qi wa hum
laa yuz-lamuun.

*69. And the earth will shine bright with her Sustainer’s light. And the
record (of everyone’s deeds) will be laid bare, and all the Prophets
will be brought forward, and all (other) witnesses; and judgement will
be passed on them all in justice. And they will not be wronged,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوُفِّيَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ وَهُوَ أَعْلَمُ بِمَا
يَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa wuf-fiyat kul-lu nafsim-maa ‘amilat wa Huwa ’a‘ lamu bimaa
yaf-‘aluun.

*70. for every human being will be repaid in full for whatever (good or
evil) he has done: and He is fully aware of all that they do.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسِيقَ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ زُمَرًا حَتَّى إِذَا
جَاؤُوهَا فُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا أَلَمْ
يَأْتِكُمْ رُسُلٌ مِّنكُمْ يَتْلُونَ عَلَيْكُمْ آيَاتِ رَبِّكُمْ
وَيُنذِرُونَكُمْ لِقَاء يَوْمِكُمْ هَذَا قَالُوا بَلَى وَلَكِنْ
حَقَّتْ كَلِمَةُ الْعَذَابِ عَلَى الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa siiqal-laziina kafaruuu ’ilaa Jahan-nama zumaraa: Hat-taaa ’izaa
jaaa-’uuhaa futihat ’abwaa-buhaaa wa qaala lahum khazanatuhaaa ’alam
ya’-ti-kum rusulum-minkum yatluuna ‘alaykum ’Aayaati Rab-biikum
wayunziruu-nakum Liqaaa-’a Yawmikum haazaa? Qaaluu balaa wa laakin
haq-qat Kalimatul-‘Azaabi ‘alal-kaafiriin!

*71. And those who were bent on denying the truth will be urged on in
throngs towards hell till, when they reach it, its gates will be opened,
and its keepers will ask them, “Have there not come to you apostles from
among yourselves, who conveyed to you your Sustainer’s messages and
warned you of the coming of this your Day (of Judgement)?” They will
answer: “Yea, indeed!”*

*But the sentence of suffering will (already) have fallen due upon the
deniers of the truth;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قِيلَ ادْخُلُوا أَبْوَابَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا فَبِئْسَ مَثْوَى
الْمُتَكَبِّرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qiilad-khuluuu ’abwaaba Jahan-nama khaalidiina fiihaa fabi‘sa
math-wal-mutakab-biriin!

*72. (and) they will be told, “Enter the gates of hell, therein to
abide!” And how vile an abode for those who were given to false pride!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسِيقَ الَّذِينَ اتَّقَوْا رَبَّهُمْ إِلَى الْجَنَّةِ زُمَرًا حَتَّى
إِذَا جَاؤُوهَا وَفُتِحَتْ أَبْوَابُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ لَهُمْ خَزَنَتُهَا سَلَامٌ عَلَيْكُمْ طِبْتُمْ فَادْخُلُوهَا
خَالِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa siiqal-lazii-nat-taqaw Rab-bahum ’ilal - Jan-nati zumaraa: hat-taaa
’izaa jaaa-’uuhaa wa futihat ’abwaa-buhaa wa qaala lahum khazanatuhaa
“Salaamun ‘alaykum tibtum fad-khuluuhaa khaalidiin,”

*73. But those who are conscious of their Sustainer will be urged on in
throngs towards paradise till, when they reach it, they shall find its
gates wide-open; and its keepers will say unto them, “Peace be upon you!
Well have you done: enter, then, this (paradise), herein to abide!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي صَدَقَنَا وَعْدَهُ وَأَوْرَثَنَا
الْأَرْضَ نَتَبَوَّأُ مِنَ الْجَنَّةِ حَيْثُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَشَاء فَنِعْمَ أَجْرُ الْعَامِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qaalul-Hamdu-lil-lahil lazii sadaqanaa Wa‘-dahuu wa
’awra-thanal-’arza natabaw-wa-’u minal-Jan-nati hay-thu nashaaa:
fani‘-ma ’ajrul-‘aamiliin!

*74. And they will exclaim: “All praise is due to God, who has made His
promise to us, come true, and has bestowed upon us this expanse (of
bliss) as our portion, so that we may dwell in paradise as we please!”*

*And how excellent a reward will it be for those who laboured (in God’s
way)!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَرَى الْمَلَائِكَةَ حَافِّينَ مِنْ حَوْلِ الْعَرْشِ يُسَبِّحُونَ
بِحَمْدِ رَبِّهِمْ وَقُضِيَ بَيْنَهُم بِالْحَقِّ وَقِيلَ الْحَمْدُ
لِلَّهِ رَبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa taral-malaaa-’ikata haaaf-fiina min hawlil-‘Arshi yusab-bihuuna
bi-Hamdi Rab-bihim. Wa quziya baynahum-bil-haq-qi wa qiilal-Hamdu
lil-laahi Rab-bil-‘Aalamiin!

*75. And thou wilt see the angels surrounding the throne of (God’s)
almightiness, extolling their Sustainer’s glory and praise. And
judgement will have been passed in justice on all (who had lived and
died), and the word will be spoken: “All praise is due to God, The
Sustainer of all the worlds!”*

**Surah Al – Haqqah, 69:13-37**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا نُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ نَفْخَةٌ وَاحِدَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-izaa nufikha fis-suuri nafkhatuw-waahida

*13. Hence, (bethink yourselves of the Last Hour,) when the trumpet (of
judgement) shall be sounded with a single blast,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَحُمِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ وَالْجِبَالُ فَدُكَّتَا دَكَّةً وَاحِدَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa humilatil-arzu waljibaalu faduk-kataa dak-kataw-waahida

*14. and the earth and the mountains shall be lifted up and crushed with
a single stroke!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَوْمَئِذٍ وَقَعَتِ الْوَاقِعَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa yauma-izinw-waqa-‘atil waaqi-‘a

*15. And so, that which must come to pass will on that Day have come to
pass;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَانشَقَّتِ السَّمَاء فَهِيَ يَوْمَئِذٍ وَاهِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wanshaq-qatis-samaaa-u fahiya yauma-izinw-waahiya

*16. and the sky will be rent asunder - for, frail will it have become
on that Day -;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمَلَكُ عَلَى أَرْجَائِهَا وَيَحْمِلُ عَرْشَ رَبِّكَ فَوْقَهُمْ
يَوْمَئِذٍ ثَمَانِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal malaku ‘alaaa arjaaa-ihaa. Wa yahmilu ‘arsha rab-bika fauqahum
yauma-izin thamaaniya

*17. and the angels (will appear) at its ends, and, above them, eight
will bear aloft on that Day the throne of thy Sustainer’s
almightiness.....”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ تُعْرَضُونَ لَا تَخْفَى مِنكُمْ خَافِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yauma-izin tu‘razuuna laa takhfaa minkum khaafiya

*18. On that Day you shall be brought to judgement: not (even) the most
hidden of your deeds will* *remain hidden.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِيَمِينِهِ فَيَقُولُ هَاؤُمُ
اقْرَؤُوا كِتَابِيهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-am-ma man uutiya kitaabahu biyamiinihii fayaquulu haaaumuqra-uu
kitaabiya

*19. Now as for him whose record shall be placed in his right hand, he
will exclaim: “Come you all! Read this my record!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنِّي ظَنَنتُ أَنِّي مُلَاقٍ حِسَابِيهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In-nii zanantu an-nii mulaaqin hisaabiya

*20. Behold, I did know that (one day) I would have to face my
account!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَّاضِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fahuwa fii ‘iishatir raaziya

*21. And so he will find himself in a happy state of life,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fii jan-natin ‘aaliya

*22. in a lofty paradise,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُطُوفُهَا دَانِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qutuufuhaa daaniya

*23. with its fruits within easy reach.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُوا وَاشْرَبُوا هَنِيئًا بِمَا أَسْلَفْتُمْ فِي الْأَيَّامِ
الْخَالِيَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kuluu washrabuu haniii-am bimaaa aslaftum filay-yaamil-khaaliya

*24. (And all who are thus blest will be told:) “Eat and drink with good
cheer in return for all (the good deeds) that you have sent ahead in
days gone by!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ أُوتِيَ كِتَابَهُ بِشِمَالِهِ فَيَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي
لَمْ أُوتَ كِتَابِيهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa am-ma man uutiya kitaabahu bishimaalihii fayaquulu yaalaitanii lam
uuta kitaabiya

*25. But as for him whose record shall be placed in his left hand, he
will exclaim: “Oh, would that I had never been shown this my record,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ أَدْرِ مَا حِسَابِيهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Walam adrimaa hisaabiya

*26. and neither known this my account!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا لَيْتَهَا كَانَتِ الْقَاضِيَةَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaalaitahaa kaanatil qaaziya

*27. Oh, would that this (death of mine) had been the end of me!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا أَغْنَى عَنِّي مَالِيهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Maaa aghnaa ‘an-nii maaliya

*28. Of no avail to me is all that I have (ere) possessed,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلَكَ عَنِّي سُلْطَانِيهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Halaka ‘an-nii sultaaniya

*29. (and) all my power of argument has died away from me!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذُوهُ فَغُلُّوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Khuzuuhu fagul-luuhu

*30. (Thereupon the command will go forth:) “Lay hold of him, and
shackle him,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ الْجَحِيمَ صَلُّوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thum-mal jahiima sal-luuhu

*31. and then let him enter hell,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ فِي سِلْسِلَةٍ ذَرْعُهَا سَبْعُونَ ذِرَاعًا فَاسْلُكُوهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thum-ma fii silsilatin zir‘uhaa sab‘uuna ziraa-‘an faslukuu

*32. and then thrust him into a chain (of sinners like him - a chain)
the length whereof is seventy cubits:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ كَانَ لَا يُؤْمِنُ بِاللَّهِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

In-nahu kaana laa yu-minu bil-laahil ‘aziim

*33. for, behold, he did not believe in God, the Tremendous,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَحُضُّ عَلَى طَعَامِ الْمِسْكِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laa yahuz-zu ‘alaa ta-‘aamil miskiin

*34. and did not feel any urge to feed the needy:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَيْسَ لَهُ الْيَوْمَ هَاهُنَا حَمِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa laisa lahul yawma haa-hunaa hamiim

*35. and so, no friend has he here today,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِنْ غِسْلِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Walaa ta-‘aaamun il-laa min ghisliin

*36. nor any food save the filth*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يَأْكُلُهُ إِلَّا الْخَاطِؤُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laa ya-kuluhuuu il-lal khaati-uun.

*37. which none but the sinners eat!”*

**Surah Al - Ma’arij, 70:6-18**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُمْ يَرَوْنَهُ بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nahum yarawnahuu ba-‘iidaa:

*6. Behold, men look upon that (reckoning) as something far away*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَرَاهُ قَرِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa naraahu qariibaa.

*7. but We see it as near!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَكُونُ السَّمَاء كَالْمُهْلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma takuunus-samaaa-’u kal-muhl,

*8. (It will take place) on a Day when the sky will be like molten
lead,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa takuunul - jibaali kal-‘ihn,

*9. and the mountains will be like tufts of wool,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يَسْأَلُ حَمِيمٌ حَمِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laa yas-’alu hamiimun hamiimaa,

*10. and (when) no friend will ask about his friend,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُبَصَّرُونَهُمْ يَوَدُّ الْمُجْرِمُ لَوْ يَفْتَدِي مِنْ عَذَابِ
يَوْمِئِذٍ بِبَنِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yubas-saruu-nahum,: ya-wad-dul-mujrimu lau yaftadii min ‘Azaabi
Yaw-mi-’izim-bi-baniih,

*11. though they may be in one another’s sight: (for,) everyone who was
lost in sin will on that Day but desire to ransom himself from suffering
at the price of his own children,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَاحِبَتِهِ وَأَخِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa saahi-batiihii wa’akhiih,

*12. and of his spouse, and of his brother,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَفَصِيلَتِهِ الَّتِي تُؤْويهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa fasiilatihii-latiii tu’-wiih,

*13. and of all the kinsfolk who ever sheltered him,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا ثُمَّ يُنجِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa man fil-’arzi jamii-‘an-thum-ma yunjiih:

*14. and of whoever (else) lives on earth, all of them - so that he
could but save himself.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّهَا لَظَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kal-laa! ’in-nahaa lazaa!

*15. But, nay! Verily, all (that awaits him) is a raging flame,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَزَّاعَةً لِّلشَّوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Naz-zaa-‘atal-lish-shawaa!

*16. tearing away his skin!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَدْعُو مَنْ أَدْبَرَ وَتَوَلَّى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tad-‘uu man ’ad-bara wa tawal-laa,

*17. It will claim all such as turn their backs (on what is right), and
turn away (from the truth),*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَمَعَ فَأَوْعَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa jam-‘a fa-’aw-‘aa!

*18. and amass (wealth) and thereupon withhold (it from their
fellow-men).*

**Surah An - Nazi’at, 79:34-41**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا جَاءتِ الطَّامَّةُ الْكُبْرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’izaa jaaa-’atit-taaam-’matul-Kubraa,-

*34. And so, when the great, overwhelming event (of resurrection) comes
to pass -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنسَانُ مَا سَعَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma yatazak-karul-’insaanu maa sa-‘aa,

*35. on that Day man will (clearly) remember all that he has ever
wrought;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبُرِّزَتِ الْجَحِيمُ لِمَن يَرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa bur-rizatil-Jahiimu liman-yaraa.

*36. and the blazing fire (of hell) will be laid open before all who
(are destined to) see it.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَن طَغَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’am-maa man-taghaa,

*37. For, unto him who shall have transgressed the bounds of what is
right,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَآثَرَ الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa-’aa-tharal-hayaatad-dun-yaa,

*38. and preferred the life of this world (to the good of his soul),*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ الْجَحِيمَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’in-nal-Jahiima hiyal-ma’-waa.

*39. that blazing fire will truly be the goal!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَى النَّفْسَ عَنِ الْهَوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’am-maa man khaafa Maqaama Rab-bihii wa nahan-nafsa ‘anil-hawaa,

*40. But unto him who shall have stood in fear of his Sustainer’s
Presence, and held back his inner self from base desires,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’in-nal-Jan-nata hiyal-ma’-waa.

*41. paradise will truly be the goal!*

**Surah ’Abasa, 80:33-41**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا جَاءتِ الصَّاخَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’izaa jaaa-’atis-Saaakh-khah,-

*33. And so, when the piercing call (of resurrection) is heard,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَفِرُّ الْمَرْءُ مِنْ أَخِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma yafir-rul-mar-’u min ’akhiihi.

*34. on a Day when everyone will (want to) flee from his brother,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُمِّهِ وَأَبِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’um-mihil wa ’abiihi,

*35. and from his mother and father*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَصَاحِبَتِهِ وَبَنِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa saahiba-tihii wa baniih.

*36. and from his spouse and his children:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِكُلِّ امْرِئٍ مِّنْهُمْ يَوْمَئِذٍ شَأْنٌ يُغْنِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Li-kul-limri-’im - minhum Yawma-’izin sha’-nun-yugh-niih.

*37. on that Day, to every one of them will his own state be of
sufficient concern.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ مُّسْفِرَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wujuu-hun-Yawma-’izim-musfirah,

*38. Some faces will on that Day be bright with happiness,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضَاحِكَةٌ مُّسْتَبْشِرَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zaahika-tum-mustab-shirah,

*39. laughing, rejoicing at glad tidings.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ عَلَيْهَا غَبَرَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa wujuu-hun-Yawma-’izin ‘alayhaa ghaba-rah;

*40. And some faces will on that Day with dust be covered,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَرْهَقُهَا قَتَرَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tarha-quhaa qatarah:

*41. with darkness overspread:*

**Surah Al – Infitar, 82:17-19**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maaa ’ad-raaka maa Yawmud-Diin?

*17. And what could make thee conceive what that Judgment Day will be?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ مَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا يَوْمُ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thum-ma maaa ’ad-rakaa maa Yawmud-Diin?

*18. And once again: What could make thee conceive what that Judgement
Day will be?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ لَا تَمْلِكُ نَفْسٌ لِّنَفْسٍ شَيْئًا وَالْأَمْرُ يَوْمَئِذٍ
لِلَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma laa tamlik nafsul-li-nafsin-shay-’aa: wal-’Amru
Yawma-’izil-lil-laah.

*19. (It will be) a Day when no human being shall be of the least avail
to another human being: for on that Day (it will become manifest that)
all sovereignty is God’s alone.*

**Surah Al – Ghashiyah, 88:1-16**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ أَتَاكَ حَدِيثُ الْغَاشِيَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hal ’ataaka hadii-thul-Ghaashiyah?

*1. Has there come unto thee the tiding of the Overshadowing Event?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ خَاشِعَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wujuu-hun-Yawma-’izin khaashi-‘ah.

*2. Some faces will on that Day be downcast,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَامِلَةٌ نَّاصِبَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Aamila-tun-naa-sibah.

*3. toiling (under burdens of sin), worn out (by fear),*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَصْلَى نَارًا حَامِيَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Taslaa Naaran haamiyah,-

*4. about to enter a glowing fire,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُسْقَى مِنْ عَيْنٍ آنِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tusqaa min ‘aynin-’aaniyah,

*  
*
5. given to drink from a boiling spring

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّيْسَ لَهُمْ طَعَامٌ إِلَّا مِن ضَرِيعٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laysa lahum ta-‘aamun ’il-laa min-Zarii‘.

*6. No food for them save the bitterness of dry thorns,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا يُسْمِنُ وَلَا يُغْنِي مِن جُوعٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laa usminu wa laa yughnii min juu‘

*  
*
7. which gives no strength and neither stills hunger.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وُجُوهٌ يَوْمَئِذٍ نَّاعِمَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wujuu-uy-yawma-izin-naa-‘ima

*8. (And) some faces will on that Day shine with bliss,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِسَعْيِهَا رَاضِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lisa‘-yihaa raaziya

*9. well-pleased with (the fruit of) their striving,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّةٍ عَالِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fii jan-natin ‘aaliya

*10. in a garden sublime,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا تَسْمَعُ فِيهَا لَاغِيَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laa tasma-‘u fiihaa laaghiya

*11. wherein thou wilt hear no empty talk.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيهَا عَيْنٌ جَارِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fiihaa a‘iinun jaariya

*12. Countless springs will flow therein,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِيهَا سُرُرٌ مَّرْفُوعَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fiihaa sururum-marfuu-‘aa

*13. (and) there will be thrones (of happiness) raised high,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَكْوَابٌ مَّوْضُوعَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa-akwaabum-mauzuu-‘aa

*14. and goblets placed ready,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَمَارِقُ مَصْفُوفَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa namaariqu masfuufa

*  
*
15. and cushions ranged,

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَزَرَابِيُّ مَبْثُوثَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wazaraa biy-yu mab-thuutha

*16. and carpets spread out.....*

**Surah Al – Fajr, 89:21-30**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِذَا دُكَّتِ الْأَرْضُ دَكًّا دَكًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kal-laa ’izaa duk-katil-’arzu dak-kan dak-kaa,

*21. Nay, but (how will you fare on Judgement Day,) when the earth is
crushed with crushing upon crushing,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَاء رَبُّكَ وَالْمَلَكُ صَفًّا صَفًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa jaaa-’a Rab-buka wal-malaku saf-fan saf-faa,

*22. and (the majesty of) thy Sustainer stands revealed, as well as (the
true nature of) the angels, rank upon rank?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجِيءَ يَوْمَئِذٍ بِجَهَنَّمَ يَوْمَئِذٍ يَتَذَكَّرُ الْإِنسَانُ
وَأَنَّى لَهُ الذِّكْرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa jiii-’a Yawma-’izim-bi-Jahan-nam,-Yawma-’ izin-yatazak-karul-’insaanu
wa ’an-naa lahuz-zikraa?

*23. And on that Day hell will be brought (within sight); on that Day
man will remember (all that he did and failed to do): but what will that
remembrance avail him?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَقُولُ يَا لَيْتَنِي قَدَّمْتُ لِحَيَاتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaquulu yaalay-tanii qad-damtu li-Hayaatii!

*24. He will say, “Oh, would that I had provided beforehand for my life
(to come)!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَوْمَئِذٍ لَّا يُعَذِّبُ عَذَابَهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-Yawma-’izil-laayu--’za-zibu ‘Azaa-bahuuu ’ahad,

*25. For, none can make suffer as He will make suffer (the sinners) on
that Day,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا يُوثِقُ وَثَاقَهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laa yuu-thiqu wathaaqa-huuu ’ahad,

*26. and none can bind with bonds like His.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaaa-’ay-yatuhan - Nafsul-mutma-’in-nah!

*27. (But unto the righteous God will say,) “O thou human being that
hast attained to inner peace!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ارْجِعِي إِلَى رَبِّكِ رَاضِيَةً مَّرْضِيَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Irji-‘iii ‘ilaa Rab-biki raa-ziyatam-marziy-yah!

*28. return thou unto thy Sustainer, well-pleased (and) pleasing (Him):*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَادْخُلِي فِي عِبَادِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fad-khulii fii ‘Ibaadii!

*29. enter, then, together with My (other true) servants -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَادْخُلِي جَنَّتِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wad-khulii Jan-natii!

*30. yea, enter thou My paradise!”*

**Surah Az – Zalzalah, 99:1-8**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا زُلْزِلَتِ الْأَرْضُ زِلْزَالَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Izaa zul-zilatil-’Arzu zilaa-lahaa

*1. When the Earth quakes with her (last) mighty quaking,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَخْرَجَتِ الْأَرْضُ أَثْقَالَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’akhra-jatil - ’Arzu ’ath-qaalahaa,

*2. and (when) the earth yields up her burdens,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ الْإِنسَانُ مَا لَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qaalal-’insaanu maa lahaa? –

*3. and man cries out, “What has happened to her?”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ تُحَدِّثُ أَخْبَارَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma - ’izin -tuhad-dithu ’akhbaa-rahaa

*4. on that Day will she recount all her tidings,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَنَّ رَبَّكَ أَوْحَى لَهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Bi-’an-na Rab-baka ’awhaa lahaa.

*5. as thy Sustainer will have inspired her to do.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ يَصْدُرُ النَّاسُ أَشْتَاتًا لِّيُرَوْا أَعْمَالَهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma-’izin - yasdurun-naasu ’ashtaa-tal-liyuraw ’a‘-maalahum.

*6. On that Day will all men come forward, cut off from one another, to
be shown their (past) deeds.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Faman-ya‘-mal mithqaala zar-ratin khay-ran-yarah!

*7. And so, he who has done an atom’s weight of good, shall behold it;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa man-ya‘mal mithqaala zar-ratin shar-ran-yarah!

*8. and he who shall have done an atom’s weight of evil, shall behold
it.*

There will be the violent effects of destruction and disaster on the
earth on the day of Judgement. The whole earth will be quaked and will
get reduced to nothing, bursting and throwing out its contents, even the
heaviest one. Due to all this, man will be plunged into a terrific
surprise.

The Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said that ***“Save yourselves
from calamities by always being clean with ablutions. Save yourselves by
always being regular in your prayers. Beware of your good and evil deeds
on earth, for it will disclose everything on the Day of Judgement.”***
Here man is warned of the strictness with which he will be dealt with in
the accounting of his deeds. Even the smallest deed, good or evil, will
not escape the accounting and will be duly recompensed and no one will
be able to bear the burden of the other.

**Surah Al - Qari’ah, 101:1-11**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْقَارِعَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-Qaari-’ah:

*1. Oh, the sudden calamity!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا الْقَارِعَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mal-Qaari-‘ah?

*2. How awesome the sudden calamity!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا الْقَارِعَةُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maa ’ad-raaka mal-Qaari-‘ah?

*3. And what could make thee conceive what that sudden calamity will
be?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يَكُونُ النَّاسُ كَالْفَرَاشِ الْمَبْثُوثِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yawma yakuu-nun - naasu kal-faraashil-mab-thuuth.

*4. (It will occur) on that Day when men will be like moths swarming in
confusion,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَكُونُ الْجِبَالُ كَالْعِهْنِ الْمَنفُوشِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa takuunul - jibbalu kal-ihnil-manfuush.

*5. and the mountains will be like fluffy tufts of wool.....*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا مَن ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’am-maa man-thaqulat mawaa-ziinu-huu.

*6. And then, he whose weight (of good deeds) is heavy in the balance*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَهُوَ فِي عِيشَةٍ رَّاضِيَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-huwa fii ‘Ishatir-raazi-yah.

*7. shall find himself in a happy state of life;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’am-maa man khaf-fat mawaa-ziinu-huu.

*8. whereas he whose weight is light in the balance*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأُمُّهُ هَاوِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’um-muhuu Haawiyah.

*9. shall be engulfed by an abyss.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا هِيَهْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maaa ’ad-raaka maa hiyah?

*10. And what could make thee conceive what that (abyss) will be?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَارٌ حَامِيَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Naarun haamiyah!

*11. A fire hotly burning!*

A tremendous clamorous striking noise will accompany the inauguration of
the great calamity. Out of terror that this clamorous noise will create
in the minds of people, they will run bewildered on all sides in
tumultuous multitude - out of fear and the tumult each falling over the
other, like the tiny insignificant being, the moths scattered by a
violent stormy wind. This is to give an imaginable view of the confusion
and distress and helplessness man will be thrown into, all of a sudden.

In Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“Oh! Son of Adam! Fear Allah before the Day of Judgement :  
 • the great Event (Waqia), the day of Calamity, the day which measures
50,000 years,

• the day on which no one can talk, the day when excuses won’t be
accepted,

• the day of predominating calamity (Taamma),

• the day when the deafening cry comes (Sakha), the day of stern and
distress,

• the day when no soul shall control anything for another soul,

• the day of destruction , the day of earthquake, the day of terrible
Calamity (Zilzaal),

• the day of horror that turns children into old people.

Don’t become one of those people who will say we heard and we
disobeyed.”

State of the Believers and Non Believers on the Day of Judgement
----------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ya’Sin, 36 :51-65**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنُفِخَ فِي الصُّورِ فَإِذَا هُم مِّنَ الْأَجْدَاثِ إِلَى رَبِّهِمْ
يَنسِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa nufikha fis-Suuri fa-’izaa hum-minal-’ajdaathi ’ilaa Rab-bihim
yansiluun!

*51. And (then) the trumpet (of resurrection) will be blown - and lo!
out of their graves towards their Sustainer will they all rush forth!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا وَيْلَنَا مَن بَعَثَنَا مِن مَّرْقَدِنَا هَذَا مَا وَعَدَ
الرَّحْمَنُ وَصَدَقَ الْمُرْسَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qaaluu yaa-waylanaa mam-ba-‘athanaa mim-marqa-dinaa-Haazaa maa
wa-‘adar-Rahmaanu wa sadaql-mursaluun!

*52. They will say: “Oh, woe unto us! Who has roused us from our sleep
(of death)?”*

*(Whereupon they will be told:) “This is what the Most Gracious has
promised! And His message-bearers spoke the truth!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن كَانَتْ إِلَّا صَيْحَةً وَاحِدَةً فَإِذَا هُمْ جَمِيعٌ لَّدَيْنَا
مُحْضَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-kaanat ’il-laa Sayhatanw-waalidatan fa-’izaa hum jamii-‘ul-ladaynaa
muh-zaruun!

*53. Nothing will there have been but one single blast - and lo! before
Us will all of them be brought (and be told):*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَالْيَوْمَ لَا تُظْلَمُ نَفْسٌ شَيْئًا وَلَا تُجْزَوْنَ إِلَّا مَا
كُنتُمْ تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fal-Yawma laa tuzlamu nafsun shay-’anw-wa laa tuj-zawna ’il-laa maa
kuntum ta‘-maluun.

*54. “Today, then, no human being shall be wronged in the least, nor
shall you be requited for aught but what you were doing (on earth).*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَصْحَابَ الْجَنَّةِ الْيَوْمَ فِي شُغُلٍ فَاكِهُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-na ’As-haabal-Jan-natil-Yawma fii shu-ghulin-faakihuun.

*55. “Behold, those who are destined for paradise shall today have joy
in whatever they do:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمْ وَأَزْوَاجُهُمْ فِي ظِلَالٍ عَلَى الْأَرَائِكِ مُتَّكِؤُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hum wa ’azwaa-juhum fii zilaalin ‘alal-’araaa-’iki mut-ta-ki-’uun;

*56. in happiness will they and their spouses on couches recline;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُمْ فِيهَا فَاكِهَةٌ وَلَهُم مَّا يَدَّعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lahum fiihaa faakiha-tunw-wa lahum-maa yad-da-‘uun.

*57. (only) delight will there be for them, and theirs shall be all that
they could ask for:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلَامٌ قَوْلًا مِن رَّبٍّ رَّحِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Salaam!” - Qawlam-mir Rab-bir-Rahiim!

*58. peace and fulfilment through the word of a Sustainer who dispenses
all grace.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَامْتَازُوا الْيَوْمَ أَيُّهَا الْمُجْرِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wamtaazul-Yawma ’ay-yuhal-muj-rimuun!

*59. “But stand aside today, O you who were lost in sin!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ أَعْهَدْ إِلَيْكُمْ يَا بَنِي آدَمَ أَن لَّا تَعْبُدُوا
الشَّيْطَانَ إِنَّهُ لَكُمْ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Alam ’a‘had ’ilaykum yaa-Baniii-’Aadama ’al-laa ta‘bu-dush-Shaytaan;
’in-nahuu lakum ‘aduw-wun-mubiin?-

*60. Did I not enjoin on you, O you children of Adam, that you should
not worship Satan - since, verily he is your open foe -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ اعْبُدُونِي هَذَا صِرَاطٌ مُّسْتَقِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’ani-buduunii. Haazaa Siraatum-Mustaqiim.

*61. and that you should worship Me (alone)? This would have been a
straight way!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ أَضَلَّ مِنكُمْ جِبِلًّا كَثِيراً أَفَلَمْ تَكُونُوا
تَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laqad ’azal-la minkum jibil-lan kathiiraa. ’Afalam takuunuu
ta‘qiluun?

*62. And (as for Satan -) he had already led astray a great many of you:
could you not, then, use your reason?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذِهِ جَهَنَّمُ الَّتِي كُنتُمْ تُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Haazihii Jahan-namul-latii kuntum tuu-‘aduun!

*63. “This, then, is the hell of which you were warned again and again:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اصْلَوْهَا الْيَوْمَ بِمَا كُنتُمْ تَكْفُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Islau-hal-Yawma bimaa kuntum takfuruun.

*64. endure it today as an outcome of your persistent denial of the
truth!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْيَوْمَ نَخْتِمُ عَلَى أَفْوَاهِهِمْ وَتُكَلِّمُنَا أَيْدِيهِمْ
وَتَشْهَدُ أَرْجُلُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-Yawma nakhtimu ‘alaaa ’afwaahihim wa tukal-limunaaa ’aydiihim wa
tash-hadu ’ajruluhum-bimaa kaanuu yaksibuun.

*65. On that Day We shall set a seal on their mouths - but their hands
will speak unto Us, and their feet will bear witness to whatever they
have earned (in life).*

Man’s limbs will be his witness on the Day of Judgement
-------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Fussilat, 41:19-23**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَوْمَ يُحْشَرُ أَعْدَاء اللَّهِ إِلَى النَّارِ فَهُمْ يُوزَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa Yawmayuh-sharo ’a‘-adaaa-’ul-laahi ’ilan-Naad fahum yuuza-‘uun.

*19. Hence, (warn all men of) the Day when the enemies of God shall be
gathered together before the fire, and then shall be driven onward,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّى إِذَا مَا جَاؤُوهَا شَهِدَ عَلَيْهِمْ سَمْعُهُمْ
وَأَبْصَارُهُمْ وَجُلُودُهُمْ بِمَا كَانُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hat-taaa ’izaa - maa jaaa-uuhaa shahida ‘alayhim sam-‘uhum wa
’absaa-ruhum wa juluu-duhum-bimaa kaanuu ya‘maluun,

*20. till, when they come close to it, their hearing and their sight and
their (very) skins will bear witness against them, speaking of what they
were doing (on earth).*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لِجُلُودِهِمْ لِمَ شَهِدتُّمْ عَلَيْنَا قَالُوا أَنطَقَنَا
اللَّهُ الَّذِي أَنطَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ وَهُوَ خَلَقَكُمْ أَوَّلَ مَرَّةٍ
وَإِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qaaluu lijuluu-dihim lima shahit-tum ‘alaynaa? Qaa-luuu ‘antaqakul-la
shay-’inw-wa ’antaqakil-la shay-’inw-wa Huwa khala-qakum ’aw-wala
mar-rantinw-wa ’ilayhi turja‘uun.

*21. And they will ask their skins, “Why did you bear witness against
us?” - (and) these will reply: “God, who gives speech to all things, has
given speech to us (as well): for He (it is who) has created you in the
first instance - and unto Him you are (now) brought back.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كُنتُمْ تَسْتَتِرُونَ أَنْ يَشْهَدَ عَلَيْكُمْ سَمْعُكُمْ وَلَا
أَبْصَارُكُمْ وَلَا جُلُودُكُمْ وَلَكِن ظَنَنتُمْ أَنَّ اللَّهَ لَا
يَعْلَمُ كَثِيراً مِّمَّا تَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maa kuntum tastatiruuna ’an-yash-hada ‘alaykum sam-‘ukum wa laaa
‘absaarukum wa laa juluu-dukum wa laakin zanan-tum ’an-nal-laaha laa
ya‘-lamu kathiiram-mim-maa ta‘-maluun!

*22. And you did not try to hide (your sins) lest your hearing or your
sight or your skins bear witness against you: nay, but you thought that
God did not know much of what you were doing -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَذَلِكُمْ ظَنُّكُمُ الَّذِي ظَنَنتُم بِرَبِّكُمْ أَرْدَاكُمْ
فَأَصْبَحْتُم مِّنْ الْخَاسِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa zaalikum zan-nukumul-lazii zanan-tum-bi-Rab-bikum ’ardaakum
fa-‘asbahtum-minal-khaasiriin.

*23. and that very thought which you thought about your Sustainer has
brought you to perdition, and so now you find yourselves among the
lost!”*

Division of Mankind into three groups on the Day of Judgement
-------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al - Waqi’ah, 56:4-14**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا رُجَّتِ الْأَرْضُ رَجًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Izaa nuj-jatil-’arzu raj-jaa,

*4. When the earth is shaken with a shaking (severe),*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبُسَّتِ الْجِبَالُ بَسًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa bus-satil-jibaalu bas-saa,

*5. and the mountains are shattered into (countless) shards,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَانَتْ هَبَاء مُّنبَثًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fakaanat habaaa-’am-mum-bath-thaa,

*6. so that they become as scattered dust -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنتُمْ أَزْوَاجًا ثَلَاثَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa kuntum ’azwaajan-thalaathah.

*7. (on that Day), then, shall you be (divided into) three kinds.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’As-haabul-May-manah: Maaa ’As-haabul-May-manah?

*8. Thus, there shall be such as will have attained to what is right:
Oh, how (happy) will be they who have attained to what is right!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa as-haabul mash-amah: maaa as-haabul mash-amah?

*9. And there shall be such as will have lost themselves in evil: Oh,
how (unhappy) will be they who* *have lost themselves to evil!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Was-Saabiquu-nas-Saabiquun.

*10. But the foremost shall be (they who in life were) the foremost (in
faith and good works):*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Ulaaa-’ikal-Muqar-rabuun:

*11. they who were (always) drawn close unto God!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّاتِ النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fii Jan-naatin-Na-‘iim:

*12. In gardens of bliss (will they dwell) -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُلَّةٌ مِّنَ الْأَوَّلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thul-latum-minal-’aw-waliin.

*13. a good many of those olden times,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَلِيلٌ مِّنَ الْآخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qali-lum-minal-’aa-khiriin.

*14. but (only) a few of later times.*

Intercession will be permitted by Allah on the Day of Judgement
---------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah An – Najm, 53:26**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَم مِّن مَّلَكٍ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ لَا تُغْنِي شَفَاعَتُهُمْ شَيْئًا
إِلَّا مِن بَعْدِ أَن يَأْذَنَ اللَّهُ لِمَن يَشَاء وَيَرْضَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa kam-mim-malakin-fis-samaa-waati laa tugh-nil shafaa-‘atuhum shay-’an
’il-laa mim-ba‘-di ’an-ya’-zanal-laahu liman-yashaaa’u wa yarzaa.-

*26. For, however many angels there be in the heavens, their
intercession can be of no least avail (to anyone) - except after God has
given leave (to intercede) for whomever He wills and with whom He is
well-pleased.*

Intercession will be accepted from His selected people
------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Az – Zumar, 39:44**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلَّهِ الشَّفَاعَةُ جَمِيعًا لَّهُ مُلْكُ السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ ثُمَّ إِلَيْهِ تُرْجَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul-lil-laahish-Shafaa-‘atu jamii-‘aa: lahuu mulkus-samaa-waati
wal-‘arz: thum-ma ’ilayhi turja-’uun.

*44. Say: “God’s alone is (the power to bestow the right of)
intercession: His (alone) is the* *dominion over the heavens and the
earth; and, in the end, unto Him you will all be brought back.”*

The inheritors of Paradise
--------------------------

**Surah Ash – Shura, 42:36-39**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا أُوتِيتُم مِّن شَيْءٍ فَمَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا
عِندَ اللَّهِ خَيْرٌ وَأَبْقَى لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَلَى رَبِّهِمْ
يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Famaa ’uutiitum-min-shay-’ in-famataa- ‘ul-bayaatid-dunyaa: wa maa
‘indal-lahi khay-runw-wa ‘abqaa lil-laziina ’aamanuu wa ‘alaa Rab-bihim
yatawak-kaluun.

*36. And (remember that) whatever you are given (now) is but for the
(passing) enjoyment of life in this world - whereas that which is with
God is far better and more enduring.*

*(It shall be given) to all who attain to faith and in their Sustainer
place their trust;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَجْتَنِبُونَ كَبَائِرَ الْإِثْمِ وَالْفَوَاحِشَ وَإِذَا
مَا غَضِبُوا هُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَغْفِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina yajto-nibuuna kabaaa-’iral-’ithmi wal-fawaa-hisha wa ’izaa
maa ghazibuu hum yaghfiruun.

*37. and who shun the more heinous sins and abominations; and who,
whenever they are moved to anger, readily forgive;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ اسْتَجَابُوا لِرَبِّهِمْ وَأَقَامُوا الصَّلَاةَ
وَأَمْرُهُمْ شُورَى بَيْنَهُمْ وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziinas-tajaa-buu li-Rab-bihim wa ’aqaamus-Salaah; wa ’amruhum
Shuuraa bay-nahum wa mim-maa razaq-naahum yunfiquun;

*38. and who respond to (the call of) their Sustainer and are constant
in prayer; and whose rule (in all matters of common concern) is
consultation among themselves; and who spend on others out of what We
provide for them as sustenance;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَهُمُ الْبَغْيُ هُمْ يَنتَصِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina ’izaa ’asaabahumul-bagh-yu hum yantasiruun.

*39. and who whenever tyranny afflicts them, defend themselves.*

The heinous sins or *‘Dhunub al-Kabira’* are Polytheism, Adultery,
Drunkenness, etc. The Fifth Imam Muhammad ibn Baqir (a) said that, one
who, with the power, authority and means to retaliate, still suppresses
his own anger against any one - on the Day of Judgement God will fill
his heart with peace and security and he will be safe from Hell-fire.

There are two kinds of people among the believers: Those who overlook
and forgive the excesses and aggression against them and the others who
take revenge for the wrongs done to them. The command is that the
revenge should never exceed the limits of the wrong done and under no
circumstances the retaliation should cross the extend of the offence,
and , if any wrong is forgiven and pardoned, it has its own reward with
God - for the compensation for it, God has taken it on Himself, which
means the reward would be extraordinarily great.

The critics of Islam may note the control that Islam imposes even on
those who suffer wrongs, far, far away from allowing any one to commit
any aggression against any one at all. It would be a disgraceful lie to
say that such a religion was spread by sword. What Islam prescribes for
punishing the evil doer, is a golden mean: it is neither the merciless
justice of ‘tooth for tooth’ nor the impracticable ideal of *‘giving
away the coat also if the cloak has already been taken away by force’.*

**Surah Al - Mu’minun, 23:1-11**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qad ’aflahal-mu’minuun,

*1. Truly, to a happy state shall attain the believers :*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ هُمْ فِي صَلَاتِهِمْ خَاشِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-laziina hum fii Salaati-him khaashi-‘uun;

*2. those who humble themselves in their prayer*[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنِ اللَّغْوِ مُعْرِضُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina hum a‘nil-laghwi mu’ri-zuun;

*3. and who turn away from all that is frivolous,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِلزَّكَاةِ فَاعِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina hum liz-Zakaati-fa-‘iluun;

*4. and who are intent on inner purity*[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِفُرُوجِهِمْ حَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina hum li-furuujihim haafizuun,

*5. and who are mindful of their chastity,*[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا عَلَى أَزْوَاجِهِمْ أوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُمْ فَإِنَّهُمْ
غَيْرُ مَلُومِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Il-laa ‘alaaa ’azwaa-jihim ’aw maa malakat ’aymaanuhum fa-’in-nahum
ghayru maluumin.

*6. (not giving away to their desires) with any but their spouses - that
is, those whom they rightfully possess (through wedlock) - for then,
behold, they are free of all blame,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ ابْتَغَى وَرَاء ذَلِكَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْعَادُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Famanib-taghaa waraaa-’a zaalika fa’ulaaa-’ika humul-‘aaduun.

*7. whereas such as seek to go beyond that (limit) are truly
transgressors;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ لِأَمَانَاتِهِمْ وَعَهْدِهِمْ رَاعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina hom li-amaa-naa-tihim wa ah-dihim raa-uun.

*8. and who are faithful to their trusts and to their pledges,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَلَى صَلَوَاتِهِمْ يُحَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-laziina hom alaa salawaa-tihim yoha-fizuun.

*9. and who guard their prayers (from all worldly intent)*[^4],

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ الْوَارِثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ulaa-ika homul waa-rithuun.

*10. It is they, they who shall be the inheritors*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَرِثُونَ الْفِرْدَوْسَ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-laziina yarithu-nal Firdausa, hom fiiha khaa-liduun.

*11. that will inherit the paradise; (and) therein shall they abide.*

This verse gives the description or the identifications of the true
believers of God.

Hell-Fire - the final resort of the evil doers and the unbelievers
------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Muddaththir, 74:35-48**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهَا لَإِحْدَى الْكُبَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nahaa La-’ihdal-kubar.

*35. Verily, that (hell-fire) is indeed one of the great (forewarnings)*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَذِيرًا لِّلْبَشَرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Naziiral-lil-bashar,-

*36. a warning to mortal man -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِمَن شَاء مِنكُمْ أَن يَتَقَدَّمَ أَوْ يَتَأَخَّرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Liman shaaa-’a minkum ’an-yata-qad-dama ’aw yata-’akh-khar;

*37. o every one of you, whether he chooses to come forward or to hang
back!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kul-lu nafsim-bimaa kasabat rahiinah,

*38.(On the Day of Judgement,) every human being will be held in pledge
for whatever (evil) he has wrought-*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا أَصْحَابَ الْيَمِينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Il-lasa ’As-haabal-yamiin.

*39. save only those who shall have attained to righteousness:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِي جَنَّاتٍ يَتَسَاءلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fil Jan-naa-tin-yata-saaa-’aluun

*40. (dwelling) in gardens (of paradise), they will inquire*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنِ الْمُجْرِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Anil-mujrimiin:

*41. of those who were lost in sin:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا سَلَكَكُمْ فِي سَقَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Maa salaka-kum fii Saqar?

*42. “What has brought you into hell-fire?”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qaaluu lam naku minal-Musal-liin.

*43. They will answer: “ We were not among those who prayed,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ نَكُ نُطْعِمُ الْمِسْكِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa lam naku nut - ‘imul-Miskiin;

*44. and neither did we feed the needy;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنَّا نَخُوضُ مَعَ الْخَائِضِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa kun-naa nakhuuzu ma’al-khaa-’iziin.

*45. and we were wont to indulge in sinning together with all (the
others) who indulged in it;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنَّا نُكَذِّبُ بِيَوْمِ الدِّينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa kun-naa nukaz-zibu bi-Yawmid-Diin

*46. and the Day of Judgement we were wont to lie -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّى أَتَانَا الْيَقِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hat-taaa ’ataanal-yaqiin.

*47. until certainty came upon us (in death).”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا تَنفَعُهُمْ شَفَاعَةُ الشَّافِعِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Famaa tanfa-‘uhum shafaa‘atush-shaafi-‘iin.

*48. And so, of no benefit to them could be the intercession of any that
would intercede for them.*

There are no limits to the number of signs of God and the Day of Final
Requital is the greatest of God’s signs. The message of Islam in the
Holy Qur’an is for the human world as a whole and not for any particular
community, clan, tribe or nation.

Condition of unbelievers in Hell
--------------------------------

**Surah Al – Hajj, 22:19-22**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَذَانِ خَصْمَانِ اخْتَصَمُوا فِي رَبِّهِمْ فَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا
قُطِّعَتْ لَهُمْ ثِيَابٌ مِّن نَّارٍ يُصَبُّ مِن فَوْقِ رُؤُوسِهِمُ
الْحَمِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hazaa-ni khas-ma-nikh-tasa-mu fi rab-bihim; Fal-lazii-na kafa-ru
qot-ti-at lahum thia-bum min naa-rin yusab-bo min fau-qi ro-usihim-ul
hamiim.

*19. But (thus it is:) as for those who are bent on denying the truth -
garments of fire shall be cut out for them (in the life to come);
boiling water will be poured over their heads,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُصْهَرُ بِهِ مَا فِي بُطُونِهِمْ وَالْجُلُودُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yos-haro bihii maa fi botunihim wal-joludo

*20. causing all that is within their bodies, as well as the skins, to
melt away.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَهُم مَّقَامِعُ مِنْ حَدِيدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa lahum maqa-mi-o min hadiid.

*21. And they shall be held (in this state as if) by iron grips;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلَّمَا أَرَادُوا أَن يَخْرُجُوا مِنْهَا مِنْ غَمٍّ أُعِيدُوا فِيهَا
وَذُوقُوا عَذَابَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْحَرِيقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Kul-lamaa araa-duu an yakhroju min-ha min gham-min o-iidu fiiha wa zuqu
asaa-bal hariiq.

*22. and every time they try in their anguish to come out of it, they
shall be returned thereto and (be told): “Taste suffering through fire
(to the full)!”*

In a Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“Oh, Son of Adam! How could you disobey Me while you cannot resist the
hot sun and the hot desert.

And indeed, for hell, there are seven levels in which there are fires
which eat each other.

• In each level of Hell, there are seventy thousand valleys of fires,

• In each valley of fire, there are seventy thousand sections of fires.

• In each section of fire, there are seventy thousand cities of fires,

• In each city of fire, there are seventy thousand castles of fires,

• In each castle of fire, there are seventy thousand houses of fires,

• In each house of fire, there are seventy thousand rooms of fires,

• In each room of fire, there are seventy thousand wells of fires,

• In each well of fire, there are seventy thousand chests of fires,

• In each chests of fire, there are seventy thousand trees of Zaqqum.

• Under each tree of Zaqqum, there are seventy thousand nails of fires,

• with each nail, there are seventy thousand chains of fire,

• In each chain of fire, there are seventy thousand serpents of fires.

• And the length of each serpent is seventy thousand yards.

• In the stomach of each serpent, there is an ocean of black poison in
which there are seventy thousand scorpions of fires.

• And each scorpion has seventy thousand tails of fires.

• The length of each tail is seventy thousand vertebras, and in each
vertebra there are seventy thousand Ratis (449.28 grams) of red poison.

I swear by Myself, by Mount Sinai, by the written Book, by an
outstretched fine parchment, by the House (Ka’aba) that is visited  
 I have not created this Hell fires but for all the unbelievers, and for
the miser, and for the gossiper, and for the A’aq (disinherited by
parents), and for the preventer of Zakat, and for the eater of Riba
(usury), and for the Zani (adulterer), and for the collector of haram
(unlawful), and for the one who forgets the Qur’an, and for the bad
neighbour.

Except for those who do repentance (Tawba), and enjoin goodness.”

[^1]: In prayers they are filled with awe for God’s Glory - Humility on
the part of the individual presented in prayer manifests the
individual’s estimation and the acknowledgement of his own self, being
nothing in the presence of the Almighty power of God’s glory. The Holy
Prophet (S) said that while a man is in ‘Qayam’ i.e. when he stands in
prayer, the individual must be looking down fixing his gaze to the point
where he places his forehead while in prostration, when he is in ‘Rukn’
the gaze to be between his two feet - while in ‘Qunoot’ he should fix
the gaze on the palms of his hands, placing them in front of his face,
flattening and facing heaven and during ‘Sajdah’ the eyes looking at his
nose, and while reciting ‘Tashahud’ the gaze to be towards his armpits.

[^2]: Inner purity is that which purifies the heart which is by payment
of his dues from his wealth among other things.

[^3]: This comprehends in a few words all the aspects of a chaste life
of a human being. A true believer in God, i.e. a Muslim, is described to
be one who with all the other virtues of his faith, also controls the
sex urge in him against any excesses beyond the prescribed limits. It is
to be noted that the word used is ‘Hafizoon’ i.e. those who guard,
meaning those who hold the native endowment of this urge as a trust to
be closely guarded against being misused.

[^4]: A strict guard on the regular observance of the prescribed prayers
has been made a separate and an exclusive point of the quality and the
identification of a true believer. In Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:
“Oh! Sons of Adam! No one is going to enter into My Heaven except : He
who has humbled himself in front on My Greatness. He who has spent his
day in My remembrance. He who has safeguarded his soul from lust, for
the sake of Allah. He who shows brotherhood towards a traveller. He who
takes care of the poor. He who is merciful towards the afflicted. And he
who respects the orphans and act as a kind father to them, and for the
widows he is like a tender husband. The one who are these qualities, if
he calls Me, I will answer him at once and if he asks Me (for anything)
I will give him.”


