Prayers, Supplications
======================

Directive for Prayers (Salat) with stress on the Morning (fajr) and Midnight (tahajjud) Prayers
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al-Isra’, 17:78-79**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ لِدُلُوكِ الشَّمْسِ إِلَى غَسَقِ اللَّيْلِ وَقُرْآنَ
الْفَجْرِ إِنَّ قُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ كَانَ مَشْهُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Aqimis-Salaata li-duluu-kish-shamsi ’ilaa ghasaqil-layli wa
qur-’aanal-Fajr; ’in-na qur’aanal-Fajri kaana mash-huudaa.

*78. Keep up prayer from the declining of the sun till the darkness of
the night and the morning recitation; surely the morning recitation is
witnessed.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَّكَ عَسَى أَن يَبْعَثَكَ
رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَّحْمُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa minal-layli fa-tahaj-jad bihii naafilatal-lak: ‘asaaa ’ay-yab-‘athaka
Rab-buka Maqaamam-Mah-muudaa!

*79. And during a part of the night, pray tahajjud(as well) beyond what
is incumbent on you; maybe your lord will raise you to a position of
great glory.*

In Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“O Son of Adam! Do not miss the morning prayers; because all the things
on which the sun shines will pray for the one who performs the prayer.”

No excuse for refraining from daily Prayers (Salat)
---------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ta – Ha, 20:132**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأْمُرْ أَهْلَكَ بِالصَّلَاةِ وَاصْطَبِرْ عَلَيْهَا لَا نَسْأَلُكَ
رِزْقًا نَّحْنُ نَرْزُقُكَ وَالْعَاقِبَةُ لِلتَّقْوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa’-mur ’ahlaka bis-Salaati wasta-bir ‘alayhaa. Laa nas-’aluka rizqaa:
Nahnu narzuquk. Wal-Aaqibatu lit-Taqwaa.

*132. And enjoin prayer on thy followers, and adhere thou steadily unto
it. (And remember) We do not ask thee to provide subsistence for Us: it
is We who provide sustenance for Thee. And the future belongs to the
God-conscious.*

The first thing a believer would be questioned on the Day of Judgment
would be about the Prescribed Compulsory Prayers, because for the offer
of prayers (Salaat), one needs nothing besides his own self. If one
cannot stand and pray, he may do it sitting. If that also be not
possible, to do it lying, and if one cannot move his hands, he can do it
even by signs. Under any circumstances none is exempted from the
Prescribed Prayers excepting the ladies when they are under the usual
terminal and delivery confinements.

Prescribed Prayers (Salat) at particular times
----------------------------------------------

**Surah An – Nisa, 4:103**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُمُ الصَّلاَةَ فَاذْكُرُواْ اللّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا
وَعَلَى جُنُوبِكُمْ فَإِذَا اطْمَأْنَنتُمْ فَأَقِيمُواْ الصَّلاَةَ
إِنَّ الصَّلاَةَ كَانَتْ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ كِتَابًا مَّوْقُوتًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’izaa qazay-tamus-Salaata faz-kurul-laaha qiyaa-manw-wa qu-‘uudanw-wa
‘alaa junuubikum. Fa-izat-ma’-nantum fa-’aqii-mus-Salaah:
’in-nas-Salaata kaanat ‘alal-Mu’-miniina kitaabam-mawquutaa.

*103. And when you have finished your prayer, remember*

*Verily, for all believers prayer is indeed a sacred duty linked to
particular times (of the day).*

**Surah Hud, 11:114**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ طَرَفَيِ النَّهَارِ وَزُلَفًا مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ
إِنَّ الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّـيِّئَاتِ ذَلِكَ ذِكْرَى
لِلذَّاكِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ‘aqi-mis-Salaata tarafa-yin-nahaari wa zulafam-minal-layl: ’in-nal
hasanaati yuz-hibnas-say-yi-’aat: zaalika zikraa liz-zaa-kiriin:

*114. And be constant in praying at the beginning and the end of the
day, as well as during the early watches of the night: for, verily, good
deeds drive away evil deeds: this is a reminder to all who bear (God) in
mind.*

**Surah al-Isra’, 17:78**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَقِمِ الصَّلاَةَ لِدُلُوكِ الشَّمْسِ إِلَى غَسَقِ اللَّيْلِ وَقُرْآنَ
الْفَجْرِ إِنَّ قُرْآنَ الْفَجْرِ كَانَ مَشْهُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’ Aqimis - Salaata li-duluuu-kish-shamsi ’ilaa ghasaqil-layli wa
qur-’aanal-Fajr; ’in-na qur-’aanal-Fijri kaana mash-huu-daa.

*78. Keep up prayer (regular) from the time the sun has passed its
zenith till the darkness of the night, and the recital at the morn;
verily the recital at the morn is witnessed*[^1].

These verses gives the ordinance about the five times of the prescribed
daily prayers. This is another clear evidence about the fallacy in the
claim of *‘Hasbuna Kitaballah’*. The verse only gives the timing of the
prayers while the details as to how they should be conducted and with
what recitals of the passages of the Holy Qur’an, i.e. the wording of
the prayers, we have to get from the Holy Prophet (S). This fact clearly
indicates that any heavenly scripture, particularly the Holy Qur’an,
independent by itself without the guidance from the Apostle of God, can
never be sufficient to guide any one right.

It was only in view of the above fact , the Book of God was left by the
Holy Prophet (S) with those exactly like him in purity and knowledge,
and it was declared:

“I leave behind me amidst you Two great things, the ‘Book of God’ (The
Holy Qur'an) and my Ahlul-Bayt (a) (i.e. the members of the Holy
Family). Should you be attached to these Two, never, never shall you be
misled after me, for verily these Two will never be separated from each
other until they meet me at the Spring of Kawthar.”

The offering of the five daily prayers in Islam is of the greatest
importance and it is the first and the foremost prescribed daily duty of
every Muslim.

The Holy Prophet (S) said

“that the likeness of the prescribed five daily prayers is that of a
river flowing at every door and he who bathes five times in it (i.e.
offers prayers regularly five times every day) no dirt of any sin will
remain on him.”

According to Imam Ali (a) this verse is the most hope-giving verse in
the Holy Qur’an for sinners.

While the Shia acknowledge the *Five Daily Prayers*, they believe that
it is acceptable to pray them in *Three distinct Times*, and not five.
The Fajr (morning) prayers is at the same time as their Sunni brothers
do, however, the Shia usually wait 10 minutes before they consider it to
be time for Fajr. They pray the noon and the afternoon prayer one after
the another. And similarly they pray the sunset and the night prayer
too, one after the other (without a lot of delay between the two).

No doubt, it is better to pray in their own specific time (close to what
Sunnis do), but it is not necessary. The prayers in all cases are
*Distinct* and separate, and it is not (as commonly misunderstood) that
the Shia pray eight rakat of Zuhr and Asr straight or seven rakat of
Maghrib and Isha straight, as part of one prayer. It is the same regular
form of prayer, but combines into one **Time** and **Not one Prayer**.

It should also be noted that the Sunni brothers agree to the combining
of prayers in the case of Rain, Travel, Fear or other emergencies. The
exception among them are the Hanifites (followers of Imam Abu Hanifa)
who contend that you cannot combine the prayers at any time, not even if
you are travelling. This clearly violated the other Sunni schools of
thought. The Maliki’s, Shafeei’s, and the Hanbali’s all agree to the
combining of prayers when one is travelling, but are in conflict on
other times. The Shia believe that one can combine the prayers anytime
without any cause of fear, rain or whatever. Nonetheless, the Shia also
contend that they can be prayed separately too.

Furthermore, Allah (swt) continually reminds us in the Qur’an that Islam
was revealed to make your life easier, not more difficult.

Another area of difference with respect to prayers (*Salat*) between the
Shia and Sunni brothers are that the Shia will only pray on natural rock
or ground (if the ground has nothing planted in it which is edible and/
or something of which clothes can be made which are to be worn by
humans), rugs made of dry grass like material or rugs made of palm tree
leaves. A Shia will not pray on regular carpet or cement because the
ingredients that they are made up of are not known.

They may contain material which are haram to prostrate one’s head on.
Secondly the prostration on the ground is more humble and modest and is
a form of eliminating pride, arrogance and flamboyance. While the Shia
prefer to use the mud of Karbala, where their 3rd Imam Hussain (a) was
slaughtered by Yazid’s army, it is not a mandatory requirement - the mud
can be from anyplace on Earth as long it is clean and as mentioned
earlier, is not planted edible foods or material which can be made into
clothe that humans can wear.

**Sahil al-Bukhari** V2, page 256, in the chapter of “Retreating to
Prayer in the last ten days (of Ramadhan)” narrates at the end of a long
tradition that when the Holy Prophet (S) raised his head from prayer,
the companions saw marks of mud and water on his forehead. This
indicates that he prayed on the ground.

**Sahih Muslim** V1, page 168, narrates that the Holy Prophet (S) had a
special rug made of Palm tree leaves that he used to pray on.

Salat ordained along with patience in adversity
-----------------------------------------------

**Surah Qaf, 50 :39-40**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاصْبِرْ عَلَى مَا يَقُولُونَ وَسَبِّحْ بِحَمْدِ رَبِّكَ قَبْلَ
طُلُوعِ الشَّمْسِ وَقَبْلَ الْغُرُوبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fasbir ‘alaa maa yaquuluuna wa sab-bih bi-Hamdi Rab-bika qabla
tuluu-‘ish-shamsi wa qabla tuluu‘ish-shamsi wa qablal-ghuruub,-

*39. Hence, (O believer), bear thou with patience whatever they may say,
and extol thy Sustainer’s limitless glory and praise before the rising
of the sun and before its setting;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَسَبِّحْهُ وَأَدْبَارَ السُّجُودِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa minal-layli fasab-bih-hu wa ’ad-baaras-sujuud.

*40. and in the night, too, extol His glory, and at every prayer’s end.*

Common supplication in Qunoot of Prayer
---------------------------------------

**Surah Baqarah, 2:201**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وِمِنْهُم مَّن يَقُولُ رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي
الآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa minhum - man - yaquulu Rab-banaaa ‘aatinaa fid-duniya hasanatanw-wa
qinaa azaaban-Naar.

*201. But there are among them such as pray, “O our Sustainer ! Grant us
good in this world and good in the life to come ( hereafter ), and keep
us safe from suffering through the fire”*

Those who pray either for the present life only or only for the
hereafter show that they feel themselves secure in the life for which
they do not pray for, without the help of God. Hence the prayer of a
true or a sincere believer must be for both the life here and also for
the hereafter.

Recitation of “Bismillah” and seeking refuge from Satan, before reciting the Qur’an
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah An – Nahl, 16:98-100**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَرَأْتَ الْقُرْآنَ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللّهِ مِنَ الشَّيْطَانِ
الرَّجِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’izaa qara’-tal-Qur-’aana fasta-‘iz bil-laahi
minash-Shay-taanir-Rajiim.

*98. Now whenever thou happen to read this Qur’an, seek refuge with God
from Satan, the accursed.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ لَهُ سُلْطَانٌ عَلَى الَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ وَعَلَى
رَبِّهِمْ يَتَوَكَّلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nahuu laysa lahuu sultaanun ‘alal-laziina ’aamanuu wa ‘alaa
Rab-bihim yatawak-kaluun.

*99. Behold, he has no power over those who have attained to faith and
in their Sustainer place their trust:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا سُلْطَانُهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ يَتَوَلَّوْنَهُ وَالَّذِينَ هُم
بِهِ مُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-namaa sultaa-nuhuu ‘alal-laziina yata-wal-lau nahuu wal-laziina
hum-bihii mushrikuun.

*100. he has power only over those who are willing to follow him, and
who (thus) ascribe to him a share in God’s divinity.*

The Sustainer’s assurance to accept the prayer of all who call upon Him sincerely
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ghafir, 40 :60**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qaa-la Rab-bukumud-‘uuniii as-tajib lakum; In-nal laziina
yastakbiruuna ‘an ibaa-datii sa-yad-khuluu-na Jahan-nama daakhiriin.

*60. But your Sustainer says: “Call unto Me, (and) I shall respond to
you! Verily, they who are too proud to worship Me will enter hell,
abased!”*

This indicates that no prayer from man is without the response from God.
The response may be in complete accord to what man has prayed for or it
may be a blessing in other shape and form depending upon, and in God’s
knowledge what is advantageous to the supplicant. The seventh Imam, Imam
Musa al-Kadhim (a) has said that *‘Dua’* itself is one of the best forms
of devotion to God and no devotion will be left without reward. There is
nothing more loved by God than man’s asking and beseeching Him for His
bounties and there is nothing which is disliked by God more than the one
who refrains from such devotion and does not beseech for His bounties,
even for the minute thing in life or the hereafter.

In Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“Oh! Son of Adam! Be patient and be humble and I will elevate you.  
 Thank Me and I will increase your bounties.  
 Seek pardon from Me, and I will forgive you.  
 Call upon Me, and I will answer you.  
 Ask from Me, and I will provide for you.  
 Give alms in My way, and I will bless your bounties.  
 Be kind towards your relatives, and I will add to your age by delaying
death.  
 Seek from Me good health as long as you are healthy.  
 Seek safety from Me when you are alone.  
 Seek sincerity in purity.  
 Seek piety in repentance (Tawba).  
 Seek worship in knowledge.”

Assurance of acceptance from Allah when asked from Him through the Medium of Dua
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Baqarah, 2:186**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ فَلْيَسْتَجِيبُواْ لِي وَلْيُؤْمِنُواْ بِي
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْشُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ‘izaa sa-’alaka ‘ibaadii ‘an-nil fa-’innii Qariib: ‘ujiibu
da’-watad-daa-’i ‘izaa da-’aani fal-yastajiibuu lii wasyu’ - minuu bii
la-allahum yar-shuduun.

*186. And if My servants ask thee about Me - behold, I am near ; I
respond to the call of him who calls, whenever he call unto Me: let
them, then, respond unto Me, and believe in Me, so that they might
follow the right way.*

It is clearly stated in this verse that a devout supplicant is heard or
responded to, by God. The words of the Verse clearly indicate the
acceptance of a sincere prayer, as promised by God. Acceptance of a
prayer referred to here does not mean immediate fulfilment or the grant
of whatever sought for. Only that which is best in the infinite wisdom
of the All-Merciful Lord, for the individual, is done.

Reverting to prayer or the efficacy of prayer, it does not at all
exclude the necessity on the part of the Supplicant, of the use of the
necessary external means of achieving the desired object.

The connection between the practical means and prayer is indissoluble.
Any sincere seeker of an object will naturally look for the practical
means to achieve it. In the search for the means one must endeavour as
best as possible for him, employing all his native faculties, devoting
the necessary time and attention to achieve the desired object. When one
is in search for the means open and hidden, he naturally desires
guidance from higher powers from which nothing is hidden and for which
nothing is impossible or difficult.

Prayer blesses the supplicant by granting him the guidance necessary for
the realization of the desire. With the sincerity of intention, and
fullness of effort one seeks help from the Almighty Lord, the seeker
will naturally be granted his desires if in the view of the
All-Merciful, All-Wise Lord the realization of that object also be
profitable to the seeker.

***“Therefore, call upon Allah, being sincere to Him in religion,
through averse be the disbelievers.”*** **Surah al-Ghaafir, 40:14**

***“Call upon your Lord humbly and secretly; surely He loves not those
who exceed the limit. And call on Him fearing and hoping; surely, the
mercy of Allah is near to those who do good.”*** **Surah al-A’araf,
7:55-56**

It is narrated in Hadith al Qudsi, wherein Allah (swt) says:

“ O’ Musa! Ask from Me all that you need, even fodder for your goat and
salt for your dough.”

The Prophet of Islam (S) has said:

“Calling (upon Allah) is better than reciting the Qur’an, because Allah
has said, “Say, My Lord would not care for you were it not for your
prayers.”

He also has said,

“Allah (swt) informed one of his prophets in a revelation: ‘By My Power
and Dignity! Verily I shall change into despair the hope of everyone who
hoped from other than Me, and I shall remove him from My relief and
bounty. Does my servant put his hope in other than Me in hardships,
while hardships are in My hand; And does He expect anything from other
than Me, while I am Self-sufficient, the Munificent? In My hands are the
keys of the doors, while they are closed; and ***My door is open for the
one who call on Me.**”*

He has also said:

“Resort to Allah (swt) in your needs; and seek refuge in Him in your
misfortunes; and humiliate yourselves before Him and beseech Him,
because, verily, supplication is the essence of worship.”

Imam Ali (a) wrote in his will to his son Imam Hussein (a):

“Then He placed the keys of His treasures in your hands in the sense
that He allowed you to ask Him. Therefore, whenever you wish, you may
get the doors of His bounties opened with prayer. Delay in acceptance of
the prayer should not disappoint you, because the granting (of prayer)
in according to the measure of (your) intention.”

Imam al-Baqir (a) has said:

“A servant does not extend his hand towards Allah (swt), but that Allah
(swt) is ashamed to return it empty. He puts in it from His bounty and
mercy whatever He wishes. So, when one calls (upon Allah (swt)), he
should not return his hand until he wipes it on his head and face.”

The Messenger of Allah (S) said to Abu Dharr:

“ O Abu Dharr! Should I not teach you some words by which Allah (swt)
will benefit you? Guard (the commands of) Allah (swt), (and) Allah (swt)
will guard you. Keep (the remembrance of) Allah (swt), (and) you will
find His before you. Make the acquaintance of Allah (swt) in opulence
(i.e. prosperity), He will know you in hardship. And when you ask, ask
from Allah (swt); and when you seek help, seek help from Allah (swt),
and if all the creatures together strived to benefit you with what Allah
(swt) did not write for you, they would not be able to do so.”

Supplication (Dua) recited by Prophet Sulayman (a)
--------------------------------------------------

**Surah An – Naml, 27:19**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَبَسَّمَ ضَاحِكًا مِّن قَوْلِهَا وَقَالَ رَبِّ أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ
أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ وَعَلَى وَالِدَيَّ
وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ وَأَدْخِلْنِي بِرَحْمَتِكَ فِي
عِبَادِكَ الصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fatabas-sama zaahikam-min-qawliha wa qaala Rab-bi ’awzi‘-niii’ an
’ashkuru ni‘matakal-latiii ’an-‘amta ‘alay-ya wa ‘alaa waaliday-ya wa
’an ’a‘mala saalihan-tarzaahu wa ‘ad-khilnii bi-Rahmatika fii
‘ibaadikas-saalihiin.

*19. Thereupon (Solomon) smiled joyously at her words and said: “O my
Sustainer! inspire me so that I may forever be grateful for those
blessings of thine with which Thou hast graced me and my parents, and
that I may do what is right (in a manner) that will please Thee; and
include me, by Thy grace, among Thy righteous servants!”.*

Advised to mention “If Allah wills (Insha Allah)” before intending to do any deed
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Kahf, 18:23-24**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَقُولَنَّ لِشَيْءٍ إِنِّي فَاعِلٌ ذَلِكَ غَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laa taquu lan-na li shai-in in-nii faa-‘ilun zaalika ghadan.

*23. And never say about anything , “Behold, I shall do this tomorrow,”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا أَن يَشَاء اللَّهُ وَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ إِذَا نَسِيتَ وَقُلْ عَسَى
أَن يَهْدِيَنِ رَبِّي لِأَقْرَبَ مِنْ هَذَا رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Il-laaa ’ay-yashaaa - ’al-laah! Wazkur-Rab-baka ’izaa nasii-ta wa qul
‘asaaa ’ay-yah-diyani Rab-bii li-’aqraba min haazaa rashadaa.

*24. without adding, “if God so wills.” And if Thou shouldst forget
(thyself at the time, and become aware of it later),call thy Sustainer
to mind and say: “I pray that my Sustainer guide me , even closer than
this, to a consciousness of what is right!”*

Note the extent of dependence on God’s Will, Islam demands of every true
believer; for when one promises to do a thing he is not to depend upon
his own will or ability but subject his will and ability to the Will of
the Lord and say - ‘If God wills’

It is a general directive that man should never feel confident of his
ability when he decides to do anything in future. However strong may be
his will-power and ability, he is nothing before God’s Will and Ability.

[^1]: Allah (swt) mentions in the Holy Qur’an in Surah al-Israa, 17:78
three and not five different occasions for prayers, i.e. Sun’s decline,
Darkness of the Night, and the Morning. Ibn Abbas, one of the most
famous narrators, has quoted a Hadith of our Holy Prophet (S) which is
written in “Muwatta” of Malik (Imam of Maliki sect) Vol.1, page 161:
“The Holy Prophet (S) prayed Zuhr and Asr in combination and Maghrib and
Isha in combination without a reason for fear or travel.” The same is
quoted in Sahih Muslim, English version, chapter CCL, Tradition \# 1515
in the following words: “ The messenger of Allah (S) observed the noon
and the afternoon prayers together, and the sunset and Isha prayers
together without being in a state of fear or in a state of journey.”
Another quote by the same authority in Sahih Muslim, English version,
Chapter CCL, Tradition \# 1520 reports the following : Ibn Abbas
reported that the messenger of Allah (S) combined the noon prayer with
the afternoon prayer and the sunset prayer with the Isha prayer in
Medina without being in a state of danger or rainfall. And in the hadith
transmitted by Waki (the words are): “I said to Ibn Abbas: What prompted
him to do that? He said: So that his (Prophet’s) Ummah should not be put
to (unnecessary) hardship.” Other Traditions are \#1523-1524-1516-1522
in Sahih Muslim.


