Preface
=======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the name of God the Most Gracious, the Dispenser of Grace***

All praise is God’s the Lord of the worlds, and peace and blessings be
on the Best of His creation, the last of His prophets and apostles, the
Chief of the foremost and the later ones, the Redeemer of the sinners,
the Mercy unto the Worlds – Muhammad (p) and his progeny, the Clean, the
Pure and the Infallible ones.

A humble effort is made to highlight the directives given by Allah (swt)
in the Holy Qur’an in context of various subjects that touch the
day-to-day lives of every Muslim and for that matter every human being.

It is out of my personal experience I realise that most of my Muslims
brethrens go along their entire lives not actually knowing what our
Scriptures contain, which I realise is so straight and clear in most of
the important issues touching the normal lives of a believer. While most
of us read the Arabic text, the essence and the message is never really
conveyed to us due to the limitation of not being well versed with the
Arabic language. One is then dependent on hearsay, presumptions and
assumptions, beliefs and customs. I too have been guilty of it in the
past and know of many more such people.

Nevertheless the fact remains that all who believed and believe in it,
this Qur’an represents the ultimate manifestation of God’s Grace to man,
the ultimate wisdom, and the ultimate beauty of expression: in short,
the true Word of God. This compilation of mine is keeping people like me
in mind, with limited time and education in Islam, and comprises of
extracts of the Holy Qur’an along with its translations and commentaries
by Mir Ahmed Ali and Muhammad Asad, and also from Al-Mizan by Allama
Tabatabai among other books.

It is also directed towards my Non-Muslims friends, who have such wrong
preconceived notions about Islam. It is more than probable that one of
the main reasons for their negative attitudes and lack of appreciation
of this ‘Untarnished Word of God’ is to be found in that aspect of the
Qur’an which differentiates it fundamentally from all other sacred
scriptures: its stress on reason as a valid way to faith as well as its
insistence on the inseparability of the spiritual and the physical (and,
therefore, also social) spheres of human existence: the inseparability
of man’s daily actions and behaviour, however “mundane”, from his
spiritual life and destiny.

This absence of any division of reality into “physical” and “spiritual”
compartments makes it difficult for people brought up in the orbit of
other religions, to appreciate the predominantly rational approach of
the Qur’an to all religious questions. Consequently, its constant
interweaving of spiritual teachings with practical legislation perplexes
the Western reader who is suddenly confronted with the claim of the
Qur’an to being a guidance not only towards the spiritual good of the
hereafter but also towards the good life attainable in this world.

Another reason may be found in the fact that the Qur’an itself has never
yet been presented in any Universal language in a manner that would make
it truly comprehensive.

The attempt here is to at least highlight certain verses which are
revealed in the form of directives and which touch the daily lives of
every human being. This is definitely not exhaustive and am aware could
not really ‘do justice’ to the Qur’an and the layers upon layers of its
meaning, for,

***“if all the sea were ink for my Sustainer’s words, the sea would
indeed be exhausted before my Sustainer’s words are exhausted.” (Surah
al-Kahf, 18:109)***

Ayatullah Sayyid Abul Qasim al-Khui writes in his book **‘Al-Bayan fi
Tafsiril Qur’an**[^1]**’:**

*"I was enamoured by Qur'an from the childhood, always keen to unravel
its secrets and to discover its meaning. It behoves every true Muslim,
and even non‑Muslim thinkers to ponder over the Qur'an, to unfold its
hidden meaning and to benefit from its light. For it is a Book which has
a message for human welfare and guides it to success and salvation.
Qur'an is a reference for the linguist, a guide to the grammarian, an
authority for the jurist, an example for the refined, a lost treasure
for the wise. It even guides those who admonish and shows the goal in
life. It is a source of social as well as political sciences, and upon
it rest the sciences of Islam. It will reveal to you the fascinating
secrets of Nature, and introduce you to the laws of crea­tion. Qur'an is
the abiding miracle of this ever lasting religion, and a code of conduct
based on the high and esteemed Shariah".*

My personal thanks and gratitude to Brother Khalil Jaffer for his
invaluable support, encouragement and efforts in making this project a
reality. His guidance and knowledge has indeed played a pivotal role
throughout my research. He has prepared a computer software programme to
supplement this publication, which is available at the addresses given
below.

My thanks and appreciation to Brother Moonawar Dhanani for the
confidence he has placed in me and assuring me of his support in this
publication.

The rewards of both my brethren remain with Allah (swt) alone.

Forbearance is sought for any errors and all are invited to offer
suggestions - views - advices - comments on this publication and may be
addressed to the undersigned. This would help us in our next publication
the work of which has already started.

1. *Hasnain Suchedina*

*P.O. Box 3014, Deira , Dubai, United Arab Emirates*  
*Tel: 724741*

2. Moonawar Dhanani  
 Crown Bureau De Change, Nairobi, Kenya.  
 Tel: 252388

3. World Islamic Network  
 67/69 Hazrat Abbas (A.S.) Street, Dongri, Mumbai 400 009, India  
 Tel: 3773648

[^1]: In English it’s available the translation of two important
chapters of this book titled “The Collection and Preservation of the
Holy Qur’an” published by Madrasa as-Seyed al-Khui, Stanmore, Middlesex,
U.K. and available on line at: http://al-islam.org/tahrif\_Qur’an /


