Repentance
==========

God is Most Gracious in Giving Mankind a Chance To Repent
---------------------------------------------------------

**Surah An – Nahl, 16:61**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللّهُ النَّاسَ بِظُلْمِهِم مَّا تَرَكَ عَلَيْهَا مِن
دَآبَّةٍ وَلَكِن يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ إلَى أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى فَإِذَا جَاء
أَجَلُهُمْ لاَ يَسْتَأْخِرُونَ سَاعَةً وَلاَ يَسْتَقْدِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa lau yu-’aakhizul-laahun-naasa bi-zulmihim maa-taraka ‘alay-haa min
daaab-batinw-wa laa kiy-yu-’akh-khiruhum ’ilaaa ’ajalim-musam-maa:
fa-’izaa jaaa-’a ’ajaluhum laa yasta’-khiruuna saa-‘atanw-wa laa
yastaq-dimuun.

*61. Now if God were to take men (immediately) to task for all the evil
that they do (on earth), He would not leave a single living creature
upon its face. However, He grants them respite until a term set ( by
Him): but when the end of their term approaches, they can neither delay
it by a single moment, nor can they hasten it.*

**Surah Al – Fatir, 35:45**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ يُؤَاخِذُ اللَّهُ النَّاسَ بِمَا كَسَبُوا مَا تَرَكَ عَلَى
ظَهْرِهَا مِن دَابَّةٍ وَلَكِن يُؤَخِّرُهُمْ إِلَى أَجَلٍ مُّسَمًّى
فَإِذَا جَاء أَجَلُهُمْ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ بِعِبَادِهِ بَصِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa lau yu - ’aakhizul-laahun-naasa bimaa kasabuu maa taraka ‘alaa
zahrihaa min daaab-batinw-wa laakinyu - ’akh-khiruhum ’ilaaa
’ajalim-musam-maa: Fa-’izaa jaaa- ’a ’Ajaluhum fa -’in-nal-laaha kaana
bi- ‘ibaadihii Basiiraa.

*45. Now if God were to take men (at once) to task for whatever (wrong)
they commit (on earth), He would not leave a single living creature upon
its surface. However, He grants them respite for a term set (by Him):
but when their term comes to an end - then, verily, (they come to know
that) God sees all that is in (the hearts of) His servants.*

It is God’s mercy that the sinners in the world are left to themselves
with the respite to amend their ways otherwise every one on earth would
long have been perished if God had dealt everyone with His strict
justice. That is why the holy Ahlul Bayt (a) have taught us to be ever
prayerful saying ‘O Lord! Deal us with thy Mercy and deal Thou not with
Thy Justice.’

God’s acceptance of Tawbah
--------------------------

**Surah An-Nisa, 4:17-18**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا التَّوْبَةُ عَلَى اللّهِ لِلَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ السُّوَءَ
بِجَهَالَةٍ ثُمَّ يَتُوبُونَ مِن قَرِيبٍ فَأُوْلَـئِكَ يَتُوبُ اللّهُ
عَلَيْهِمْ وَكَانَ اللّهُ عَلِيماً حَكِيماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-namat - tawbatu ‘alal-laahi lil-lazina ya-maluunas-suuu-a bi
jahaalatin sum-ma yatuubuuna min-qariibin - fa’ulaaa - ’ika
yatuu-bul-laahu ‘alayhim - ’ika yatuu-bul-laahu ‘alayhim: wa kaanallaahu
‘Aliiman Hakiimaa.

*17. Verily, God’s acceptance of repentance relates only to those who do
evil out of ignorance and then repent before their time runs out: and it
is they unto whom God will turn again in His mercy - for God is
all-knowing, wise;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَيْسَتِ التَّوْبَةُ لِلَّذِينَ يَعْمَلُونَ السَّيِّئَاتِ حَتَّى
إِذَا حَضَرَ أَحَدَهُمُ الْمَوْتُ قَالَ إِنِّي تُبْتُ الآنَ وَلاَ
الَّذِينَ يَمُوتُونَ وَهُمْ كُفَّارٌ أُوْلَـئِكَ أَعْتَدْنَا لَهُمْ
عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laysa-tit-taw-batu lillaziina ya’- maluunas-sayyi’aati hat-taaa’izaa
hazara ’ahadahummul-mawtu qaala ’in-nii tubtul-’aana wa lal-laziina
yamuutuuna wa hum kuf-faar: ’ulaaa-’ika ’a ‘-tadnaa lahum ‘azaaban
’aliimaa.

*18. Whereas repentance shall not be accepted from those who do evil
deeds until their dying hour and then say, “Behold, I now repent”; nor
from those who die as deniers of the truth: it is these for whom We have
readied grievous suffering.*


