Sustenance
==========

Sustenance for every created thing is provided only by Allah (swt)
------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Hijr, 15:19-23**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالأَرْضَ مَدَدْنَاهَا وَأَلْقَيْنَا فِيهَا رَوَاسِيَ وَأَنبَتْنَا
فِيهَا مِن كُلِّ شَيْءٍ مَّوْزُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wal-’arza madad-naahaa wa ’al-qay-naa fiihaa rawaasiya wa ’ambat-naa
fiihaa min kul-li shay-’im-maw-zuun.

*19. And the earth - We have spread it out wide, and placed on it
mountains firm, and caused (life) of every kind to grow on it in a
balanced manner,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلْنَا لَكُمْ فِيهَا مَعَايِشَ وَمَن لَّسْتُمْ لَهُ بِرَازِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ja-‘alnaa lakum fiihaa ma-‘aa-yisha wa mal-las-tum lahuu
bi-raa-ziqiin.

*20. and provided thereon means of livelihood for you (O men) as well as
for all (living beings), whose sustenance does not depend on you.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن مِّن شَيْءٍ إِلاَّ عِندَنَا خَزَائِنُهُ وَمَا نُنَزِّلُهُ إِلاَّ
بِقَدَرٍ مَّعْلُومٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’im-min-shay-’in ’il-laa ‘indanaa khazaaa-’inuh; wamaa
nunaz-zi-luhuuu ’il-laa bi-qadarim-ma‘luum.

*21. For, no single thing exists that does not have its source with Us ;
and nought do we bestow from on high unless it be in accordance with a
measure well-defined.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَرْسَلْنَا الرِّيَاحَ لَوَاقِحَ فَأَنزَلْنَا مِنَ السَّمَاء مَاء
فَأَسْقَيْنَاكُمُوهُ وَمَا أَنتُمْ لَهُ بِخَازِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’arsalnar-riyaaha la-waa-qiha fa-’anzalnaa minas-samaaa-’i maaa-’an
fa-’as-qay-naa-kumuuh: wa maaa ’antum lahuu bi-khaa-ziniin.

*22. And We let loose the winds to fertilize (plants), and we send down
water from the skies and let you drink thereof: and it is not you who
dispose of its source -*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإنَّا لَنَحْنُ نُحْيِي وَنُمِيتُ وَنَحْنُ الْوَارِثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’in-naa lanahnu nuh-yii wa numiitu wa nahnul-waarithuun.

*23. for, behold, it is We - We alone - Who grant life and deal death,
and it is We alone who shall remain after all else will have passed
away!*

**Surah Ar - Ra’d, 13:26**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَنْ يَشَاء وَيَقَدِرُ وَفَرِحُواْ
بِالْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا فِي الآخِرَةِ
إِلاَّ مَتَاعٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-laahu yabsutur-Rizqa limay-yashaa-u’ wa yaq-dir. Wa farihuu
bil-ha-yaatid-dunyaa. Wa mal-hayaatud-dunyaa fil-’Aakhi-rati ’il-laa
mataa‘-

*26. God grants abundant sustenance, or gives it in scant measure, unto
whomever He wills; and they (who are given abundance) rejoice in the
life of this world - even though, as compared with the life to come, the
life of this world is naught but a fleeting pleasure.*

In Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“Oh! Son of Adam! If Almighty Allah has taken the responsibility of
providing your sustenance then why are your efforts directed exclusively
towards it?

And if all fortunes and misfortunes are from Me, then why are you
impatient.

So, you should not be disappointed when you love something and should be
so happy when you gain something from this world.”

**Surah Az – Zumar, 39:52**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوَلَمْ يَعْلَمُوا أَنَّ اللَّهَ يَبْسُطُ الرِّزْقَ لِمَن يَشَاء
وَيَقْدِرُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Awalam ya-lamuuu ’an-nal-laaha yabsutur - rizqa liman-yashaaa- ‘u wa
yaqdir? ’In-na fii zaalika la-’Aayaatil-liqaw-min-yu’-minuun ?

*52. Are they, then, not aware that it is God who grants abundant
sustenance, or gives it in scant measure, unto whomever He wills?*

The provision of sustenance to His creation is a matter which is in the
hands of God Himself. He provides everything with its sustenance. With
sustenance in the hands of God, the existence of everything would
naturally depend upon Him. There is no need for any creature to fear or
implore anyone else save God. Any act of worshipping anyone beside Him
would not only be foolishness but an unpardonable act of ingratitude and
thanklessness.


