Allah (swt)
===========

Allah (swt) is most Gracious - The Dispenser of Grace
-----------------------------------------------------

**Surah Az-Zumar, 39:53**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ يَا عِبَادِيَ الَّذِينَ أَسْرَفُوا عَلَى أَنفُسِهِمْ لَا
تَقْنَطُوا مِن رَّحْمَةِ اللَّهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يَغْفِرُ الذُّنُوبَ
جَمِيعًا إِنَّهُ هُوَ الْغَفُورُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul yaa - ‘Ibaadiyal-laziina ’asrafuu ‘alaaa ’anfusihim laa taq-natuu
mir - Rahmatil-laah: ’in-nal-laaha yagh-firuz - zunuuba jamii - ‘aa.
’In-nahuu Huwal - Ghafuurur - Rahim.

*53: “ Say (Thus speaks Allah (swt)): ‘O you servants of Mine who have
transgressed against your own selves! Despair not of Allah’s mercy:
behold, Allah forgives all sins - for, verily, He alone is
much-forgiving, a dispenser of grace!”*

The first Holy Imam Ali ibn Abi Talib (a) says that there is no greater
verse of God’s grace and His mercy than this verse in the whole of the
Qur’an. It is Islam and no other religion in the world which introduces
God to His creation, not as a mere merciless just judge whose decisions
are based only on law and facts without any concern of any grace or
mercy in it, but as the Independent - the Beneficent - the
Oft-Pardoning - the most Gracious - the Dispenser of Grace, who deals
with His creation as He pleases, and whose justice is ever tempered with
mercy.

His infinite mercy is ever in the waiting to receive repentance from his
offenders. He has made mercy incumbent on Himself (***Surah al-An’aam,
6:12 and 6:54***). He Himself enjoins upon the sinners to seek His
pardon (***Surah an-Nisaa, 4:106***). He bestows His mercy on whomsoever
He pleases, and also entitles him to rewards. He is such a merciful
judge that He does not wait to punish but to pardon. Hence before the
matter comes to be tried, He invites repentance and even encourages the
sinners to make haste in seeking His pardon. He never wants any sinner
to be dejected and go hopeless of His mercy. But, the pardon is granted
only when it is asked in time.

It is said that ‘Wahshi’ the assassin of Hazrat Hamza (p) at the Battle
of Ohad, got hopeless of being forgiven by God and hence did not embrace
Islam but when he came to know of this verse, he joined the ranks of the
faithful.

In Hadith al-Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“It were not for ‘Ruku’ (kneeling) of elders, suckling babies, grazing
animals, humble youths, indeed I would have made the sky of steel, the
earth of copper and the mud of pebbles. I would have not sent a single
drop of water from the sky and grown a single grain from the earth. I
would have poured on you My worst wrath.”

He also says:

“O Son of Adam! If people know what I know about you, not one of My
creatures will say Salaam to you. If your brother just smells your sin,
he will never sit beside you. Your sins are increasing everyday and your
life is decreasing. Don’t waste your life in falsehood and carelessness.
If you want more, then be in the company of the generous. Seek refuge
from the worldly people and mix with the deprived.”

Allah (swt) is Omniscient (Knowing Everything)
----------------------------------------------

**Surah Yunus, 10:61**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تَكُونُ فِي شَأْنٍ وَمَا تَتْلُو مِنْهُ مِن قُرْآنٍ وَلاَ
تَعْمَلُونَ مِنْ عَمَلٍ إِلاَّ كُنَّا عَلَيْكُمْ شُهُودًا إِذْ
تُفِيضُونَ فِيهِ وَمَا يَعْزُبُ عَن رَّبِّكَ مِن مِّثْقَالِ ذَرَّةٍ
فِي الأَرْضِ وَلاَ فِي السَّمَاء وَلاَ أَصْغَرَ مِن ذَلِكَ وَلا
أَكْبَرَ إِلاَّ فِي كِتَابٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maa takuunu fii sha’-ninw-wa maa tatluu minhu min Qur-’aaninw-wa laa
ta’-maluuna min ‘amalin ’il-laa kun-naa ‘alay-kum Shuhuu-dan ’iz
tufii-zuuna fiih. Wa maa ya‘-zubu ‘ar-Rab-bika mim-mith-qaali
zar-ratin-fil ar-zi wa laa fis-sa-maaa-’i wa laa ’as-ghara min-zaa-lika
wa laaa ’akbara ’il-laa fii kitaa-bim-Mubiin

*61: “And in whatever condition thou mayest find thyself (O Prophet,)
and whatever discourse of this (divine writ) thou mayest be reciting,
and whatever work you (all, O men,) may do - (remember that) We are your
witness (from the moment) when you enter upon it: for, not even an
atom’s weight (of whatever there is) on earth or in heaven escapes thy
Sustainer’s knowledge; and neither is there anything smaller than that,
or larger, but is recorded in (His) clear decree.”*

This verse makes it clearly understood that the Book of God mentioned
here is not the one in any written or printed form but the Sacred Tablet
(the Lauhe-Mahfooz) in which is secured the knowledge of everything in
the Universe and the Will of the Lord.

Allah (swt) is Omnipotent and Omnipresent (Having infinite power and being present everywhere)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Qaaf, 50:16**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa laqad khalaqnal-’insaa-na wa na‘-lamu maa tuwas-wisu bihii nafsuh. wa
Nahnu ’aqra-bu ’ilayhi min hablil-wariid

*16: Now, verily, it is We who have created man, and We know what his
innermost self whispers within him: for we are closer to him than his
jugular vein.*

Man has been created by God. God knows everything, even the innermost,
i.e. the most latent endowments of the feelings and thoughts of each
individual. The life-vein i.e. the jugular vein which is the big trunk
vein, running on each side of the neck which brings the blood back from
the head to the heart, which is considered so near to the life of an
individual is cited here just to illustrate that God is nearer to the
very existence of the individual than the very vein on which his life
depends.

Declaration of Allah’s (swt) Perfection and Absolute Oneness
------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ikhlas, 112:1-4**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul Hu-wal-laahu ’Ahad;

*  
*
Say: “He is the One God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

. ’Al-laahus-Samad;

*  
*
God the Eternal, the Uncaused Cause of All Being.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lam yalid, wa lam yuulad;

*  
*
He begets not, and neither is He begotten;

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Walam yakul-la-Huu kufuwan ’ahad.

*and there is nothing that could be compared with Him.”*

This chapter with all its brevity is considered to contain the gist or
the spirit of the Absolute Unity of God which is the fundamentals of the
faith, Islam. It is considered that one third of the Qur’an is revealed
as an explanation of this Synthesis. It is said that the Holy Prophet
(p) was asked to give the idea of godhead that he preached and this
Chapter was revealed.

Attributes of Allah (swt)
-------------------------

**Surah al-Hashr, 59:22-24**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ
وَالشَّهَادَةِ هُوَ الرَّحْمَنُ الرَّحِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

.

Huwal-laa-hul-lazii Laaa-’i-laaha ’il-laa Huu; - ‘Aalimul-ghaybi
wash-shahaa-dah; Huwar-Rahmaa-nur-Rahiim.

*God is He save whom there is no deity: the One who knows all that is
beyond the reach of a created being’s perception, as well as all that
can be witnessed by a creature’s senses or mind: He, the Most Gracious,
the Dispenser of Grace.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ اللَّهُ الَّذِي لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا هُوَ الْمَلِكُ الْقُدُّوسُ
السَّلَامُ الْمُؤْمِنُ الْمُهَيْمِنُ الْعَزِيزُ الْجَبَّارُ
الْمُتَكَبِّرُ سُبْحَانَ اللَّهِ عَمَّا يُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Huwal-laa-hul-lazil Laaa-’i-laaha ’il-la a Huu; -
’Al-Malikul-Qud-duusus-Salaamul - Mu‘-minul -
Muhay-minul-‘Aziizul-Jab-baarul-Mutakab-bir: Sub-haanal-laahi ‘am-maa
yushri-kuun.

*God is He save whom there is no deity: the Sovereign Supreme, the Holy,
the One with whom all salvation rests, the Giver of Faith, the One who
determines what is true and false, the Almighty, the One who subdues
wrong and restores right, the One to whom all greatness belongs!*

*Utterly remote is God, in His limitless glory, from anything to which
men may ascribe a share in His divinity!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ اللَّهُ الْخَالِقُ الْبَارِئُ الْمُصَوِّرُ لَهُ الْأَسْمَاء
الْحُسْنَى يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ وَهُوَ
الْعَزِيزُ الْحَكِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Huwal-laahul Khaaliqul- Baari-’ul-Musaw-wiru lahul-’Asmaaa-’ul-Husnaa:
yusab-bi-hu lahuu maa fis-samaa-waati wal-’arz: wa Huwal-
‘Aziizul-Hakiim.

*He is God, the Creator, the Maker who shapes all forms and
appearances!*

*His (alone) are the attributes of perfection. All that is in the
heavens and on earth extols His limitless glory: for He alone is
Almighty, truly wise!*

These verses contain the most beautiful of God’s names using which in
his supplication any sincere believer can invoke the infinite mercy of
the Lord for the blessings desired by the adorer. None of the divine
attributes of His, in any way or any extent resemble the qualities in
any of His creatures. Thus He is the unique unit in all respects in the
Absolute sense of the term.

Allah’s (swt) Justice (‘Adil)
-----------------------------

**Surah Ali \`Imran, 3:182**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ أَيْدِيكُمْ وَأَنَّ اللّهَ لَيْسَ بِظَلاَّمٍ
لِّلْعَبِيدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zaalika bimaa qad-damat ’y-diikum wa ’an-nallaaha laysa
bi-zal-laamil-lil-’abiid.

*In return for what your own hands have wrought - for never does God do
the least wrong to His creatures!*

Here the infidels are warned saying: ‘do not think that your evil deeds
end here and have no echo in your life hereafter. God is All-Just every
evil doer shall be duly punished.’

The following verses also make reference to Allah’s (swt) justice:

**Surah Fussilat, 41:46**

 *“Whoso does what is just and right, does so for his own good; and
whoever does evil, does so to his own hurt: and never does God do the
least wrong to His creatures.”*

**Surah az-Zalzal, 99:7-8**

*“And so, he who shall have done an atom’s weight of good, shall behold
it; and he who shall have done an atom’s weight of evil, shall behold
it.”*

**Surah an-Nisa, 4:40**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَظْلِمُ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ وَإِن تَكُ حَسَنَةً
يُضَاعِفْهَا وَيُؤْتِ مِن لَّدُنْهُ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nallaaha laa yazlimu misqaala zar-rah: wa ’in-taku hasanatan -
yuzaa - ’ifhaa wa yu’-ti mil-la-dunhu ’ajran ‘a-ziimaa.

*“Verily, God does not wrong (anyone) by as much as an atom’s weight;
and if there be a good deed, He will multiply it, and will bestow out of
His grace a mighty reward. (i.e. far in excess of what the doer of good
may have merited)”*

**Surah an-Nisa, 4:49**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ يُزَكُّونَ أَنفُسَهُمْ بَلِ اللّهُ
يُزَكِّي مَن يَشَاء وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ فَتِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Alam tara ilal-lazina yu-zak-kuuna ’anfusahum? Balil-laahu yuzak-kii
man-yashaaa-’u wa laa yuzlamuuna fatiilaa.

*“Art thou not aware of those who consider themselves pure? Nay, but it
is God who causes whomsoever He wills to grow in purity; and none shall
be wronged by as much as a hair’s breadth.”*

A Supplication for Allah’s (swt) Unlimited Mercy
------------------------------------------------

**Surah al-Baqarah, 2:286**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُكَلِّفُ اللّهُ نَفْسًا إِلاَّ وُسْعَهَا لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
وَعَلَيْهَا مَا اكْتَسَبَتْ رَبَّنَا لاَ تُؤَاخِذْنَا إِن نَّسِينَا
أَوْ أَخْطَأْنَا رَبَّنَا وَلاَ تَحْمِلْ عَلَيْنَا إِصْرًا كَمَا
حَمَلْتَهُ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِنَا رَبَّنَا وَلاَ تُحَمِّلْنَا
مَا لاَ طَاقَةَ لَنَا بِهِ وَاعْفُ عَنَّا وَاغْفِرْ لَنَا وَارْحَمْنَا
أَنتَ مَوْلاَنَا فَانصُرْنَا عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laa yukalli-fullaahunaf-san‘il-las wus-’ahaa. Lahaa maa kasabat wa
‘alay-haa mak-tasabat. Rab-banaa wa laa tuham-mil-naa maa laa taaqata
lanaa bih. Wa’-fu ‘an-naa, waghfir lanaa, war-ham-naa. ‘Anta Mawlaa-naa
fan-surnaa ‘alal-qaw-mil-kaafi-riin.

*“ God does not burden any human being with more than he is well able to
bear: in his favour shall be whatever good he does, and against him
whatever evil he does.”*

*“ O our Sustainer ! Take us not to task if we forget or unwittingly do
wrong !”*

*“ O our Sustainer ! Lay not upon us a burden such as Thou didst lay
upon those who lived before us !”*[^1]

*“ O our Sustainer ! Make us not bear burdens which we have no strength
to bear !”*

*“And efface Thou our sins, and grant us forgiveness, and bestow Thy
mercy upon us! Thou art our Lord Supreme: succour us, then, against
people who deny the truth !”*

The Innumerous Blessings of Allah (swt) Bestowed upon Mankind
-------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah an-Nahl, 16:66-69**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنَّ لَكُمْ فِي الأَنْعَامِ لَعِبْرَةً نُّسْقِيكُم مِّمَّا فِي
بُطُونِهِ مِن بَيْنِ فَرْثٍ وَدَمٍ لَّبَنًا خَالِصًا سَآئِغًا
لِلشَّارِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’in-na lakum fil-an‘aami la-‘ibrah. Nus-qiikum-mim-maa fii
butuu-nihii mimbayni far-thinw-wa damil-labanan khaalisan -
saaa-’ighal-lish-shaa-ribiin.

*And, behold, in the cattle (too) there is indeed a lesson for you: We
give you to drink of that (fluid) which is (secreted from) within their
bellies between that which is to be eliminated (from the animal’s body)
and (its) life-blood: milk pure and pleasant to those who drink it.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن ثَمَرَاتِ النَّخِيلِ وَالأَعْنَابِ تَتَّخِذُونَ مِنْهُ سَكَرًا
وَرِزْقًا حَسَنًا إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa min - thama-raatin-na-khiili wal-’a‘-naabi tat-takhi-zuuna minhu
sakaranw-wa rizqan hasanaa: ‘in-na fii zaalika la- ’Aaya-tal-liqaw-min
ya‘-qi-luun.

*And (We grant you nourishment) from the fruit of date-palms and vines:
from it you derive intoxicants*[^2] *as well as wholesome sustenance -
in this, behold, there is a message indeed for people who use their
reason!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَوْحَى رَبُّكَ إِلَى النَّحْلِ أَنِ اتَّخِذِي مِنَ الْجِبَالِ
بُيُوتًا وَمِنَ الشَّجَرِ وَمِمَّا يَعْرِشُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa’awhaa Rab-buka ’ilan Nahli ’anit-ta-khizii minal-jibaali
buyuu-tanw-wa minash-shajari wa mim-maa ya‘-ri-shuun;

*And (consider how) thy Sustainer has inspired the bee: “Prepare for
thyself dwellings in mountains and in trees, and in what (men) may build
( for thee by way of hives);*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ كُلِي مِن كُلِّ الثَّمَرَاتِ فَاسْلُكِي سُبُلَ رَبِّكِ ذُلُلاً
يَخْرُجُ مِن بُطُونِهَا شَرَابٌ مُّخْتَلِفٌ أَلْوَانُهُ فِيهِ شِفَاء
لِلنَّاسِ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لآيَةً لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Thum-ma kulii min kul-lis-thamaraati faslukiisubula Rab-biki zululaa.
Yakhruju mim-butuu-nihaa sharaa-bum-mukh-talifun ’lwaa-nuhuu fiihi
shifaaa-’ul-lin-naas: ’in-na fii zaa-lika
la-’Aaya-tal-li-qawmin-ya-tafak-karuun.

*and then eat of all manner of fruit, and follow humbly the paths
ordained for thee by thy Sustainer.” (And lo!) there issues from within
these (bees) a fluid of many hues, wherein there is health for man. In
all this, behold, there is a message indeed for people who think!*

How to earn Allah’s (swt) Mercy
-------------------------------

**Surah An-Nur, 24:56**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِيمُوا الصَّلَاةَ وَآتُوا الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
لَعَلَّكُمْ تُرْحَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’aqiimus - Salaata wa ’aatuz - Zakaata wa ’atii-‘ur-Rasu-la la -
‘al-lakum turha-muun

*Hence, (O believers,) be constant in prayers, and render the purifying
dues, and pay heed unto the Apostle, so that you might be graced with
Allah’s mercy.*

Certain Knowledge is only with Allah (swt)
------------------------------------------

**Surah Luqman, 31:34**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ عِندَهُ عِلْمُ السَّاعَةِ وَيُنَزِّلُ الْغَيْثَ
وَيَعْلَمُ مَا فِي الْأَرْحَامِ وَمَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ مَّاذَا تَكْسِبُ
غَدًا وَمَا تَدْرِي نَفْسٌ بِأَيِّ أَرْضٍ تَمُوتُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ
عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nal-laaha ‘indahuu ‘il-mus-Saa-‘ah Wa yunaz-zilul-ghaythawaya‘-lamu
maa fil - ’arhaam. Wa maa tadrii nafsum-maa-zaa taksibu ghadaa: wa maa
tadrii nafsum-bi-’ay-yi ’arzin-tamuut. ’In-nal-laaha ‘Aliimun khabiir.

*Verily, with God alone rests the knowledge of when the Last Hour will
come; and He (it is who) sends down rain; and He (alone) knows what is
in the wombs*[^3]*: whereas no one knows what he will reap tomorrow, and
no one knows in what land he will die. Verily, God (alone) is
all-knowing, all-aware.*

Taking Refuge With The Almighty
-------------------------------

**Surah Al–Falaq, 113:1-5**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul ’a-‘uuzu bi-Rab-bil Falaq,

*Say: “I seek refuge with the Sustainer of the rising dawn,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن شَرِّ مَا خَلَقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Min-shar-ri maa khalaq;

*from the evil of aught that He has created,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن شَرِّ غَاسِقٍ إِذَا وَقَبَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa min-shar-ri ghaa-siqin ’izaa waqab,

*and from the evil of the black darkness whenever it descends,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن شَرِّ النَّفَّاثَاتِ فِي الْعُقَدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa min-shar-rin Naf-faa-thaati fil-‘uqad,

*and from the evil of all human beings bent on occult* *endeavours,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِن شَرِّ حَاسِدٍ إِذَا حَسَدَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa min-shar-ri haasidin ’izaa hasad.

*and from the evil of the envious when he envies.”*

**Surah An–Nas, 114:1-6**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul ’a-’uuzu bi Rab-bin-Naas.

*Say: “ I seek refuge with the Sustainer of men,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَلِكِ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Malikin-Naas,

*the Sovereign of men,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَهِ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Ilaahin-Naas,

*the God of men,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِن شَرِّ الْوَسْوَاسِ الْخَنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Min-shar-ril-Waswaasil-khan-Naas,

*from the evil of the whispering, elusive tempter*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي يُوَسْوِسُ فِي صُدُورِ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-lazii yu was-wisu fii su duu-rin-Naas

*who whispers in the hearts of men*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَ النَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Minal-Jin-nati wan-Naas.

*from all (temptation to evil by) invisible forces as well as men.”*

[^1]: A reference to the heavy burden of rituals imposed by the Law of
Moses upon the children of Israel, as well as the world-renunciation
recommended by Jesus to his followers.

[^2]: Some commentators thought that this passage was revealed before
the prohibition of intoxicating liquor but the passage has nothing to do
with the permissibility or the prohibition of liquor. It states the
various usage of the product of the fruits.

[^3]: This relates not merely to the problem of the sex of the as yet
unborn embryo, but also to the question of whether it will be born at
all, and if so, what its natural endowments and its character will be,
as well as what role it will be able to play in life.


