The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) & his Ahlul Bayt (a)
==================================================

The Holy Prophet (S) Made the Medium of Revelations and Path to Self-Surrender
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ash–Shura, 42:52-53**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَلِكَ أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ رُوحًا مِّنْ أَمْرِنَا مَا كُنتَ
تَدْرِي مَا الْكِتَابُ وَلَا الْإِيمَانُ وَلَكِن جَعَلْنَاهُ نُورًا
نَّهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ نَّشَاء مِنْ عِبَادِنَا وَإِنَّكَ لَتَهْدِي إِلَى
صِرَاطٍ مُّسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa kazaalika awhaynaaa ilaika ruuham-min amrinaa. Maa kunta tadrii mal
kitaabu wa lal-iimaanu wa laakin ja‘alnaahu nuuran-nahdii bihil
man-naasahaaa-u min ‘ibaadinaa; wa ’in-naka latahdii ’ilaa
Siraa-tim-Mustaqiim,

*52. And thus, too, (O Muhammad,) have We revealed unto thee a
life-giving message, (coming) at Our behest.*

*(Ere this message came unto thee,) thou didst not know what revelation
is, nor what faith (implies): but (now) We have caused this (message) to
be a light, whereby We guide whom We will of Our servants: and verily,
(on the strength thereof) thou, too, shalt guide (men) onto the straight
way*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صِرَاطِ اللَّهِ الَّذِي لَهُ مَا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَمَا فِي الْأَرْضِ
أَلَا إِلَى اللَّهِ تَصِيرُ الأمُورُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Siraatillaahil - lazii lahuu maa fissamaawaati wa maa fil’arz. ’Alaaa
’ilallaahi tasiirul-’umuur.

*53. the way that leads to God, to whom all that is in the heavens and
all that is on earth belongs.*

*Oh, verily, with God is the beginning and the end of all things!.*

The Holy Prophet (S) is “Rahmatul Aalamin”
------------------------------------------

**Surah At–Tawbah, 9:61**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْهُمُ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ النَّبِيَّ وَيِقُولُونَ هُوَ أُذُنٌ
قُلْ أُذُنُ خَيْرٍ لَّكُمْ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللّهِ وَيُؤْمِنُ
لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَرَحْمَةٌ لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُواْ مِنكُمْ وَالَّذِينَ
يُؤْذُونَ رَسُولَ اللّهِ لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa minhumul-lazina yu’-zuunan-Nabiy-ya wa yaquu-luu-na “Huwa ’uzun.” Qul
’uzunu khay-ril-lakum yu’-minu bil-laahi wa yu’-minu lil-mu’-miniina wa
Rahmatul-lil-laziina ’aa-manuu minkum. Wal-laziina yu’-zuuna
Rasuu-lal-laahi lahum ‘azaabun ’aliim.

*61. And there are some of them who malign the Prophet and say: He is
one who believes every thing that he hears; Say: “(Yes) he is a hearer
of what is good for you. He believes in Allah and trusts the believers
and is ( a manifestation of God’s ) grace towards such of you who have
(truly) attained to faith. And (as for) those who malign the Apostle of
Allah, grievous suffering awaits them (in the life to come)!”*

Abdulla bin Naofil was a hypocrite; whatever he used to hear from the
Holy Prophet (S), he would divulge everything to the public. Allah
informed the Holy Prophet (S) of this man’s conduct. The man was
calledHHH

and asked by the Holy Prophet (S), if he actually did it. He took an
oath, saying he did not do so. The Holy Prophet (S) said that he would
be pardoned. The hypocrites came and told men that the Holy Prophet (S)
had very big ears for he hears whatever is said outside, away from him.
It was then that this verse was revealed.

The leniency of the Holy Prophet (S) towards the mischief-maker
hypocrites and listening to their excuses with toleration made them to
think that he was very credulous, one who is easily deceived by them.
Hence this verse which explains that it is due to his kindness and
leniency and not any credulity that he listens to every one. At the end
it also warns them against annoying the Holy Prophet (S). ***Refer to
Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:57-61***.

The hypocrites used to annoy the Holy Prophet (S) by accusing him of
being unworthy of his position or annoying the members of his family or
the innocent believers. The Holy Prophet (S) had prophesied that the
annoyance of the members of his family will continue after his death.

The Reciting of Salwaat on The Prophet (S) is Made Incumbent on Mankind
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al–Ahzab, 33:56**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ وَمَلَائِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَى النَّبِيِّ يَا أَيُّهَا
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا صَلُّوا عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nal-laaha wa Malaaa-’i-katahuu yusal-luuna ‘alan-Na-biyy: Yaa
’ay-yuhal-laziina ’aamanuu sal-luu ‘alayhi wa sal-limuu tasliimaa.

*56. Verily, God and His angels bless the Prophet: (hence) O you who
have attained to faith, bless him and give yourselves up (to his
guidance) in utter self-surrender!*

It is said that whenever there is a mention of the name of the Holy
Prophet (S), a believer must in duty bound recite the *‘Salawat’* or the
salutation, and the one who does not do it, shall be away from God’s
mercy and he who forgets to do it shall forget the right way to
salvation. This is the least that every Muslim can do for the person who
borne all pains and sufferings with patience to guide humanity aright
and save it from being lost forever. This is highly regarded by Allah
(swt) too, and amply rewarded by Him.

Hence, the believers are advised that if they want their prayers to be
surely and certainly granted, encircle it with *‘Salawat’* i.e. by
reciting it in the beginning of the prayer and at the end of it, for it
is far from the Grace of Allah (swt) to accept the initial and the
terminal part of the prayer which is the irrejectable offer (i.e.
salawat) and reject only the middle part of the submission to Him.

The very act of *‘Salawat’* or Salutation implies that the Holy Prophet
(S) is not considered a deity, but rather a ‘Devoted Servant’ deserving
the highest blessings of Allah (swt).

To follow Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------

**Surah Ali-’Imran, 3:31**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللّهُ
وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ وَاللّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul’in-kuntum tuhib-buunallaaha fat-tabi-’uunii yuhbib-kumullaahu wa
yaghfir lakum zunuubakum: wallaahu Ghafuurur-Rahim.

*31. Say ( O Prophet ): “ If you love God, follow me, (and) God will
love you and forgive you your sins; for God is much-forgiving, a
Dispenser of Grace.”*

The love of God has to be proved by faithfully following the Prophet
(S). It is only when we follow the Holy Prophet (S), Allah (swt) will
love us and forgive our sins.

To Disobey Allah (swt) And His Prophet (S) can Erase Man’s Good Deeds
---------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Muhammad, 47:33**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا
الرَّسُولَ وَلَا تُبْطِلُوا أَعْمَالَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaaa’ay-yuhal-laziina ’aa-manuu ’atii-’ul-laaha wa’atii-’ur-Rasuula wa
laa tubtiluuu ’a’-maalakum!

*33. O you who have attained to faith! Pay heed unto God, and pay heed
unto the Apostle, and let not your (good) deeds come to nought!*

Merely doing of any amount of good deeds in the life has no guarantee of
their being of any avail to the individual. He must be a sincere
believer in God and he must obey God and His Apostle Muhammad. Otherwise
all the good that has been done by the individual would be made null and
void. Apply this verse to those who disobeyed the Holy Prophet (S) even
before he had left the world. At the verge of his departure he commanded
those surrounding him, to get him pen and paper to record something so
that the people may never get astray. But what was the reply? A flat
denial with an insult saying “The man (i.e. the Holy Prophet) is
delirious”. The injury thus caused to the Holy Prophet (S) was deep and
grievous. The people created such noises that the Holy Prophet (S) at
last, had to order them saying *“Qoom Anni”* i.e. ‘get yea away from
me’.

The Holy Prophet’s (S) Responsibility Towards Mankind, as Directed By Allah (swt)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ash – Shura, 42:48**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ أَعْرَضُوا فَمَا أَرْسَلْنَاكَ عَلَيْهِمْ حَفِيظًا إِنْ
عَلَيْكَ إِلَّا الْبَلَاغُ وَإِنَّا إِذَا أَذَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِنَّا
رَحْمَةً فَرِحَ بِهَا وَإِن تُصِبْهُمْ سَيِّئَةٌ بِمَا قَدَّمَتْ
أَيْدِيهِمْ فَإِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ كَفُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’in ’a‘-razuu famaaa ’arsal-naaka ‘alayhim hafiizaa. ’In ‘alayka
’il-lal-balaagh. Wa ’in-naaa ’izaaa ’azaqnal-’insaa-na min-naa
Rahmatan-fariha bihaa. Wa ’in-tusib-hum say-yi-’atum-bimaa qad-damat
’aydii-him fa-’in-nal-’insaana kafuur!

*48. But if they turn away (from thee, O Prophet, know that) We have not
sent thee to be their keeper: thou art not bound to do more than deliver
the message (entrusted to thee).*

*And, behold, (such as turn away from Our messages are but impelled by
the weakness and inconstancy of human nature: thus,) when We give man a
taste of Our grace, he is prone to exult in it; but if misfortune
befalls (any of) them in result of what their own hands have sent forth,
then, behold, man shows how bereft he is of all gratitude!*

What The Holy Prophet (S) expects in Return of His Services to Mankind
----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ash – Shura, 42:23**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذَلِكَ الَّذِي يُبَشِّرُ اللَّهُ عِبَادَهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ قُل لَّا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلَّا
الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي الْقُرْبَى وَمَن يَقْتَرِفْ حَسَنَةً نَّزِدْ لَهُ
فِيهَا حُسْنًا إِنَّ اللَّهَ غَفُورٌ شَكُورٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zaalikal-lazii yubash-shirul-laahu ‘Ibaa-dahul-laziina ’aa-manuu wa
‘amilus-saalihaat. Qul-laaa’as-alukum, ‘alayhi ’ajran ’il-lal-mawad-data
fil-qurbaa. Wa man-yaqtarif hasa-natan-nazid lahuu fiihaa: husnaa
’in-nal-laaha Ghafuurun-Shakuur.

*23. that (bounty) whereof God gives the glad tiding to such of His
servants as attain to faith and do righteous deeds. Say (O Prophet): “
No reward do I ask of you for this (message) other than (that you
should) love my relatives.” For, if anyone gains (the merit of) a good
deed, We shall grant him through it an increase of good: and, verily,
God is much-forgiving, ever responsive to gratitude.*

This verse is clear in its meaning that the Holy Prophet (S), is being
commanded to ask the believers to love his kith and kin i.e. the holy
Ahlul Bayt (a) and that would be the return for his apostolic services.

Etiquette in The Holy Prophet’s (S) Presence, as Commanded by Allah (swt)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Hujurat, 49:1-5**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ِ يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيِ اللَّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaaa-’ay-yuhal-laziina ’aa-manuu laa tuqad-dimuu bayna yada - yil-laahi
wa Rasuu-lihii wat-taqul-laah: ’in-nal-laaha Samii-‘un ‘Aliim.

*1. O you who have attained to faith! Do not put yourselves forward in
the presence of (what) God and His Apostle (may have ordained),*[^1]
*but remain conscious of God: for, verily, God is all-hearing,
all-knowing!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ
صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ وَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ
بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ أَن تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لَا
تَشْعُرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaaa-’ay-yuhal-laziina ’aa-manuu laa tarfa-‘uuu ’aswaata-kum fawqa
sawtin-Nabiy-yi wa laa tajharuu lahuu bil-qawli kajahri ba‘-zikum
li-ba‘zin ’an tah-bata ’a‘maalukum wa ’an-tum laa tash-‘uruun.

*2. O you who have attained to faith! do not raise your voices above the
voice of the Prophet, and neither speak loudly to him, as you would
speak loudly to one another, lest all your (good) deeds come to nought
without your perceiving it.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِندَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى لَهُم
مَّغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nal-laziina yaghuz-zuuna ’aswaa-tahum ‘inda Rasuulil-laahi
’ulaaa-’ikal-laziinam-taha-nal-laahu quluu-bahum lit-taq-waa: lahum -
Magh-firatunw-wa ’Ajrun ‘aziim.

*3. Behold, they who lower their voices in the presence of God’s
Apostle - it is they whose hearts God has tested (and opened) to
consciousness of Himself; (and) theirs shall be forgiveness and a reward
supreme.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُنَادُونَكَ مِن وَرَاء الْحُجُرَاتِ أَكْثَرُهُمْ لَا
يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nal-laziina yunaaduu-naka minw - waraaa-’il-Hujuraati ’ak-tharuhum
laa ya‘-qiluun.

*4. Verily, (O Prophet) as for those who call thee from within thy
private apartment - most of them do not use their reason:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ صَبَرُوا حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ إِلَيْهِمْ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا
لَّهُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَّحِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa lau ’an-nahum sabaruu hat-taa takh-ruja ’ilayhim lakaana
khayral-lahum: wal-laahu Ghafuurur-Rahiim.

*5. for, if they had patience (to wait) until thou come forth to them
(of thine own accord), it would be for their own good.*

*Still, God is much forgiving, a dispenser of grace.*

This verse ordains perfect and implicit obedience and reverence to the
Holy Prophet (S). It is implied that none should sit before the Holy
Prophet (S) but in a respectable posture and none should even go before
him while walking along with him on the way but to be behind him. When
there is a discourse with him or before him, not to sound any verdict of
one’s own opinion, unless the Holy Prophet (S) himself grants his own
decision.

Before this verse was revealed, people used to come and stand out of the
apartment in which the Holy Prophet (S) lived and shout, calling him by
name ‘O Muhammad! come out!’. When addressing him they would call him by
name.

Annoyance of the Holy Prophet (S)
---------------------------------

**Surah Al – Ahzab, 33:57**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُؤْذُونَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ لَعَنَهُمُ اللَّهُ فِي
الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَأَعَدَّ لَهُمْ عَذَابًا مُّهِينًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-nal-laziina yu’- zuunal laaha wa Rasuulahuu la-‘anahumul-laahu
fid-dunyaa wal ’Aakhirati wa ’a-‘ad-da lahum ‘Azaabam-mubiinaa.

*57. Verily, as for those who (knowingly) annoy God and His Apostle -
God will reject them in this world (i.e. exclusion from His Grace) and
in the life to come; and shameful suffering will He ready for them.*

Characteristics of the Choicest & Closest Companions of the Holy Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Fath, 48:29**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُّحَمَّدٌ رَّسُولُ اللَّهِ وَالَّذِينَ مَعَهُ أَشِدَّاء عَلَى
الْكُفَّارِ رُحَمَاء بَيْنَهُمْ تَرَاهُمْ رُكَّعًا سُجَّدًا
يَبْتَغُونَ فَضْلًا مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرِضْوَانًا سِيمَاهُمْ فِي
وُجُوهِهِم مِّنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ ذَلِكَ مَثَلُهُمْ فِي التَّوْرَاةِ
وَمَثَلُهُمْ فِي الْإِنجِيلِ كَزَرْعٍ أَخْرَجَ شَطْأَهُ فَآزَرَهُ
فَاسْتَغْلَظَ فَاسْتَوَى عَلَى سُوقِهِ يُعْجِبُ الزُّرَّاعَ لِيَغِيظَ
بِهِمُ الْكُفَّارَ وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا
الصَّالِحَاتِ مِنْهُم مَّغْفِرَةً وَأَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muham-madur - Rasuulul-laah: wal-laziina ma-‘ahuuu ’a-shid-daaa-’u
’alal-kuf-faari ruha-maaa-’u bay-nahum taraahum ruk-ka-‘an-suj-jadan -
yabtaghuuna Fazlam-minal-laahi wa Rizwaanaa. Siimaahum fii
wujuuhihim-min ’atharis-sujuud. Zaalika mathaluhum fir-Tawraati wa
mathaluhum fil-’Injiil; kazar-‘in ’akhraja shat-’ahuu fa-’aazarahuu
fastagh-laza. Fastawa; ‘alaa suuqihii yu‘-jibuz-zur-raa-‘a li yaghiiza
bihimul-kuf-faar. Wa-‘adal-laa - hul-laziina ’aamanuu wa
‘amilus-saalihaati minhum-Magh-firatanw-wa ’Ajran ‘aziimaa.

*29. Muhammad is Allah’s (swt) Apostle; and those who are (truly) with
him are firm and unyielding towards all deniers of the truth, (yet) full
of mercy towards one another. Thou canst see them bowing down,
prostrating themselves (in prayer), seeking favour with Allah (swt) and
(His) goodly acceptance: their marks are on their faces, traced by
prostration.*

*This is their parable in the Torah as well as their parable in the
Gospel: (they are) like a seed that brings forth its shoot, and then He
strengthens it, so that it grows stout, and (in the end) stands firm
upon its stem, delighting the sowers....*

*(Thus will God cause the believers to grow in strength,) so that
through them He might confound the deniers of the truth. (But) unto such
of them as may (yet) attain to faith and do righteous deeds, God has
promised forgiveness and a supreme reward.*

**‘***Those who are (truly) with him’* could never be any of the
companions who remained with the Holy Prophet (S) when it served their
own purpose in peace and prosperity and deserted him and took to their
heels from the battle-fields leaving him in the midst of his enemies as
done at Ohad and Hunain - history will give the names of these deserters
among the companions. And those who sat quiet on the Day of Badr and
Ahzab (Khandaq) and returned defeated by the enemies of Khaiber
frightened, and refused to go even as a messenger to the Meccans to
carry the message of the Holy Prophet (S) on the day of the first
attempt for the pilgrimage.

Was it not ‘Ali’ who laid himself down in the bed of the Holy Prophet
(S) and covered himself with the same mantle which the Holy Prophet (S)
used, and helped him to escape from the house surrounded by the enemy on
the night of Hijrat, risking his life under the swords of the plotters?

Was it not ‘Ali’ who stood single handed fighting the enemy and
protecting the life of the Holy Prophet (S) when every one of his
companions had deserted and ran away saving their lives in the battle of
Ohad and Hunain?

Was it not ‘Ali’ who provided for the beggar even when he was approached
while he was in prayer in the Mosque at which the verse in ***Surah
Maaida, 5:55*** was revealed?

Was it not ‘Ali’ and his family who gave away their bread to the poor
for three days, themselves fasting consecutively at which the verse in
***Surah al-Insaan, 76:8-9*** was revealed?

These are the ones referred to here.

The pity is whenever any interpretation of any verse brings out the
super excellence of the holy personalities of the Ahlul Bayt, some
commentators have tried to include all the companions of the Holy
Prophet (S), in spite of their knowing fully about the personal
qualities, character and the conduct of every one of them particularly
of those brought in comparison or contrast to that of the holy Ahlul
Bayt (a). Can anyone deny any of the disloyalties, treacheries and the
desertions on the part of some of those who called themselves as the
companions of the Holy Prophet (S), dreading the disbelievers and
escaped from the battlefield at Ohad and Hunain. Could this ever be in
any sense whatsoever, taken as the firmness against the disbelievers?

It would therefore be most appropriate and just to conclude that the
whole of the above verse refers to ‘Ali’ and to those of the holy Ahlul
Bayt (a), who possessed all the qualities of personal excellence
mentioned in this verse.

Mubahila and its importance in Defining Who are The Ahlul Bayt in Surah 33 (Surah Al-Ahzaab) Ayat 33
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ali-’Imran, 3:61**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنْ حَآجَّكَ فِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ مَا جَاءكَ مِنَ الْعِلْمِ فَقُلْ
تَعَالَوْاْ نَدْعُ أَبْنَاءنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَبْنَاءكُمْ وَنِسَاءنَا وَنِسَاءكُمْ وَأَنفُسَنَا وأَنفُسَكُمْ
ثُمَّ نَبْتَهِلْ فَنَجْعَل لَّعْنَةُ اللّهِ عَلَى الْكَاذِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Faman haaaj-jaka fiihi mim-ba’-di maa jaaa-’aka minal-’ilmi faqul
ta-’aalau nad-’u’ab-naaa-’anaa wa ’ab-naaa-’akum wa nisaa -’anaa wa
nisaaa-’akum wa ’anfusanaa wa’anfusakum summa nabta - hil
fanaj -’alla-natallaahi alal-kaazibiin.

*61. And if anyone should argue with thee about this (truth) after all
the knowledge that has come unto thee, say: “Come ! Let us summon our
sons and your sons, and our women and your women, and ourselves and
yourselves; and then let us pray (together) humbly and ardently, and let
us invoke God’s curse upon those (of us) who are telling a lie.”*

This verse is a reference to the historic Mubahila or the Spiritual
Contest with the Christians of Najran. At the appointed hour the Holy
Prophet (S) entered the field with Hussein (a) in his lap, Hasan (a)
holding his finger and walking beside him, Lady Fatima (a) following him
and Ali (a) behind her.. The Holy Prophet (S) then raised his hands
towards heaven and said *“Allahumma haa’oolaae Ahlu-Bayti” i.e. Lord
these are the people of my house.* At the appearance of these godly
souls with the hallow of the divine light radiating from their holy
faces, the chief monk who had brought the selected group of Christians,
began to gaze at their faces and exclaimed *“By God! I see the faces
which, if they pray to God for mountains to move from their places, the
mountains will immediately move.”*

This historic event has a great significance with regard to what it
discloses about those who accompanied the Holy Prophet (S) on that
memorable and unique occasion of highest sanctity. Many great Sunni
scholars, commentators and traditionalists have given the details of the
event with the various aspects of its significance, saying :

a. The event unquestionably establishes the truth about the spiritual
purity and the holiness of the holy Ahlul Bayt (a).

b. It proves beyond all doubts as to who are the members of the family
of the Holy Prophet (S), i.e., the holy Prophet’s Ahlul Bayt (a).

c. The seriousness and the solemnity of the occasion demands absolute
purity, spiritual as well as physical in the individuals, to serve in
the fateful occasion for the Holy Prophet (S) to present them to Allah
(swt) as the best of His creation to be heard in their prayers for the
Truth.

Thus it was unquestionably and firmly established and openly proved
beyond all doubts before the huge crowds of the Muslims as well as the
non-Muslims to bear witness that the Holy Prophet (S), his daughter Lady
Fatima (a), her sons, and her husband are the divinely purified *‘Ahlul
Bayt’*, addressed to, in ***Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:33*** and none else, for
Allah’s (swt) command in this verse contains plurals as regards each
kind of the relations to be summoned for the event, i.e., to call sons,
women, and the selves to invoke the heavens curse on the liars, but the
Holy Prophet (S) took only two children whereas there were innumerable
other children of his followers, only one lady was taken whereas there
were nine other ladies in his own household who were his wives among who
were the daughter of Abu Bakr and also of Omar; and only one soul Ali
(a), who is called as one of the ‘Selves’ of the Holy Prophet (S)
*‘Anfosona’* was taken, whereas there were those who claim to be his
companions and very close companions too. This act of the godly
selection on the part of the Holy Prophet (S), loudly declares that
there were no others either among the children or the women or the other
adults to be compared to these godly souls in their personal purity and
holiness.

The whole Muslim world recognizes these five as the *‘Panjatane-Pak’*
the ‘Pure Five’ and this sacred term is not used for any others.

Directives to the Holy Prophet’s (S) Wives and his Holy Ahlul Bayt (a)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Ahzab, 33: 28-33**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُل لِّأَزْوَاجِكَ إِن كُنتُنَّ تُرِدْنَ
الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا وَزِينَتَهَا فَتَعَالَيْنَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُمَتِّعْكُنَّ وَأُسَرِّحْكُنَّ سَرَاحًا جَمِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaaa - ’ay-yuhan - Nabiy-yu qul li-’azwaajika ’in-kuntun-na
turidnal-hayaatad-dunya wa ziinatahaa fata-‘aalayna ’umat-ti‘-kun-na wa
’usar-rih-kun-na saraahan-jamiilaa.

*28. O Prophet! Say unto thy wives: “If you desire (but) the life of
this world and its charms - well, then, I shall provide for you and
release you in a becoming manner;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كُنتُنَّ تُرِدْنَ اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ وَالدَّارَ الْآخِرَةَ
فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ أَعَدَّ لِلْمُحْسِنَاتِ مِنكُنَّ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’in-kuntun-na turidnal-laaha wa Rasuulahuu wad-Daaral-’Aakhirata
fa-’in-nal-laaha ’a-‘ad-da lil-Muhsinaati minkun-na ’ajran ‘aziima.

*29. but if you desire Allah (swt) and His Apostle, and (thus the good
of) the life in the hereafter, then (know that), verily, for the doers
of good among you God has readied a mighty reward!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا نِسَاء النَّبِيِّ مَن يَأْتِ مِنكُنَّ بِفَاحِشَةٍ مُّبَيِّنَةٍ
يُضَاعَفْ لَهَا الْعَذَابُ ضِعْفَيْنِ وَكَانَ ذَلِكَ عَلَى اللَّهِ
يَسِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaa-Nisaaa - ’an - Nabiy-yi man-ya’-timinkun-na bifaahishatim -
mubay-yinatin - yu-zaa-‘af lahal-‘Azaabu zi‘-fayn: wa kaana zaalika
‘alal-laahi yasiiraa.

*30. O wives of the Prophet! If any of you were to become guilty of
manifestly immoral conduct, double (that of other sinners) would be her
suffering (in the hereafter): for that is indeed easy for God.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَقْنُتْ مِنكُنَّ لِلَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ وَتَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا
نُّؤْتِهَا أَجْرَهَا مَرَّتَيْنِ وَأَعْتَدْنَا لَهَا رِزْقًا كَرِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa Man-yaqnut minkun-na lil-la-hi wa Rasuulihii wa ta‘-mal
saalihan-nu’-ti-haaa ’ajrahaa mar-ratayni wa ’a‘-tadnaa lahaa
Rizqan-kariimaa.

*31. But if any of you devoutly obeys God and His Apostle and does good
deeds, on her shall We bestow her rewards twice-over: for We shall have
readied for her a most excellent sustenance (in the life to come).*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا نِسَاء النَّبِيِّ لَسْتُنَّ كَأَحَدٍ مِّنَ النِّسَاء إِنِ
اتَّقَيْتُنَّ فَلَا تَخْضَعْنَ بِالْقَوْلِ فَيَطْمَعَ الَّذِي فِي
قَلْبِهِ مَرَضٌ وَقُلْنَ قَوْلًا مَّعْرُوفًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yaa-Nisaaa-’an - Nabiy-yi lastun-na ka-’ahadim-minan-ni-saaa-’i
’init-taqaytun-na falaa takhza‘-na bil-qawli fayatma-‘al-lazii fii
qalbihii marazunw-wa qulna qawlam-ma‘ruufaa.

*32. O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any of the (other) women,
provided that you remain (truly) conscious of God. Hence, be not
over-soft in your speech, lest any whose heart is diseased should be
moved to desire (you): but, withal, speak in a kindly way.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَرْنَ فِي بُيُوتِكُنَّ وَلَا تَبَرَّجْنَ تَبَرُّجَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ
الْأُولَى وَأَقِمْنَ الصَّلَاةَ وَآتِينَ الزَّكَاةَ وَأَطِعْنَ اللَّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ
أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qarna fii buyuu-tikun-na wa laa tabar-rajna
tabar-rujal-Jaahi-liy-yatil-’uulaa wa aqim-nas-Salaata wa
’aatiinaz-Zakaata wa ’ati‘-nal-laha wa Rasuulah. ’In-namaa
yuriidul-laahuliyuz-hiba ‘ankumur-rijsa ’Ahlal-Bayti wa yutah-hirakum
tat-hiiraa.

*33. And abide quietly in your homes, and do not flaunt your charms as
they used to flaunt them in the old days of pagan ignorance; and be
constant in prayer, and render the purifying dues, and pay heed unto God
and His Apostle:* ***for God only wants to remove from you all that
might be loathsome, O you members of the (Prophet’s) household, and to
purify you to utmost purity.*****{Ayat-e-Tathir - The Ahlul-Bayt’s
(a)}**

The verses referring to the wives of the Holy Prophet (S), clearly
indicates that the wives of the Holy Prophet (S), were not of equal
footing in faith and fidelity. Of them were those inclined towards
worldly pleasures and some were inclined toward the external happiness
of the life in this world and no assurance had been granted to any of
them of their success in their life hereafter. The wives of the Holy
Prophet (S) during their wedlock was not free from the impurities of
mischief, envy, greed, intrigue, pride and prejudice.

There are incidents and even verses in the Qur’an which relates the Holy
Prophet’s (S) displeasure of this misconduct in his wives, where he even
goes to the extend of taking an oath not to go near them for a period of
time. This is the reason that they could not be included in the last
clause of the verse 33 above in which is given the highest standard of
purity referring to the Ahlul Bayt (a), i.e., the People of the House of
the Holy Prophet (S).

This is the reason that throughout these verses referring to the wives
of the Holy Prophet (S), the personal pronoun used is in plural in the
feminine gender, but in that celebrated verse 33, the pronoun used is
plural in the masculine gender. Always for a mixed assembly of men and
women, the Qur’an uses the masculine gender.

This transition in the grammatical use of the language, makes it quite
obvious that this clause is quite a different matter used for a
different group other than the previous one, and has been suitably
placed here to show a comparative position of the Ahlul Bayt in contrast
to the wives of the Holy Prophet (S).

When this verse (***Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:33***) was revealed, the Holy
Prophet (S) was in the house of Umme-Salema. At the revelation of:
***“Verily willeth God to keep away impurity from you O People of the
House! and He purifieth you with the perfect purification,”*** ***(Surah
al-Ahzaab, 33:33)*** the Holy Prophet (S) assembled his daughter Fatima
(a), her two sons Hasan (a) and Hussein (a) and her husband, his cousin
Ali (a) and covered the group including himself with his own mantle and
addressing God said:

“O God! These constitute my progeny! Keep them away from every kind of
impurity, purified with perfect purification.”

Umme Salma, who was indeed among the righteous wife of the Holy Prophet,
witnessing this marvellous occasion, humbly submitted to the Holy
Prophet (S) “O Apostle of God! May I also join the group?” to which the
Holy Prophet replied, “No, remain thou in thine own place, thou art in
goodness.”

Even Ummul Momineen Ayesha has reported this occasion.  
 There is not even a single, even inauthentic tradition to show that the
Holy Prophet (S) included the wives in the verse of ***Surah Ahzaab,
33:33.***

Assurance (To Holy Prophet (S)) of Tranquillity & Happiness after Trials and Tribulations
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah al-Inshira, 94:1-8**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ نَشْرَحْ لَكَ صَدْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Alam nash-rah laka sadrak?

*1. Have We not opened thy heart,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَضَعْنَا عَنكَ وِزْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa waza‘-naa ‘anka wizrak

*2. and lifted from thee the burden*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي أَنقَضَ ظَهْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-lazii ’anqaza zah-rak?

*3.that had weighed so heavily on thy back?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَرَفَعْنَا لَكَ ذِكْرَكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa rafa‘-naa laka zik-rak?

*4. And (have We not) raised thee high in dignity?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’in-na ma-‘al-‘usri yusraa.

*5. And, behold, with every hardship comes ease:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مَعَ الْعُسْرِ يُسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-na ma-‘al-‘usri yusraa

*6. verily, with every hardship comes ease!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا فَرَغْتَ فَانصَبْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Fa-’izaa faragh-ta fansab,

*7. Hence, when thou art freed (from distress), remain steadfast,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِلَى رَبِّكَ فَارْغَبْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’ilaa Rab-bika far-ghaab.

*8. and unto thy Sustainer turn with love.*

While this verse is an assertion from Allah (swt) that He has given the
heart of the Holy Prophet (S), the greatest expanse for knowledge, it is
also a prophetic announcement of the mention or the eminence of the Holy
Prophet (S) being raised to glorious heights both in this world and in
the hereafter, high above the mention of any one in the world. Bringing
into account the *‘Salawat’* or the salutation, every Muslim is obliged
to recite it at least in each of the five times daily prayer.

There is none in the world to be compared to the Holy Prophet (S) in
this regard for the name of no other apostle of God, is mentioned in
such abundance. This prophesy was made when the Prophet (S) was a
solitary figure, not much recognised even by the people of his own place
and when most of the people in his surroundings were hostile to him. The
whole life of the Holy Prophet (S) was of persecution, difficulties and
toil, dangers and worries. The repeated statement here is to give
emphasis to the promise and its assurance of the ultimate triumph of the
cause even though in the earlier stages the situation was utterly
hopeless and the survival of the Holy Prophet (S), the Muslims and the
very name of the faith, Islam, seemed to be an impossibility.

Reasons stated by Allah (swt) for making the Prophet (S) sign the Treaty of Hudaybiyyah
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Fath, 48:25**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا وَصَدُّوكُمْ عَنِ الْمَسْجِدِ الْحَرَامِ
وَالْهَدْيَ مَعْكُوفًا أَن يَبْلُغَ مَحِلَّهُ وَلَوْلَا رِجَالٌ
مُّؤْمِنُونَ وَنِسَاء مُّؤْمِنَاتٌ لَّمْ تَعْلَمُوهُمْ أَن تَطَؤُوهُمْ
فَتُصِيبَكُم مِّنْهُم مَّعَرَّةٌ بِغَيْرِ عِلْمٍ لِيُدْخِلَ اللَّهُ
فِي رَحْمَتِهِ مَن يَشَاء لَوْ تَزَيَّلُوا لَعَذَّبْنَا الَّذِينَ
كَفَرُوا مِنْهُمْ عَذَابًا أَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Humul-laziina kafaruu wa sad-duukum ‘anil-Masjidil - Haraami wal - hadya
ma‘kuufan ’ay - yablugha mahil-lah - Ha-raami wal - hayda ma‘kuufan
’an - yablugha mahil-lah. Wa lau laa rijaalum-Mu’-minuuna wa
nisaaa-’um-Mu’minaa-tul-lam ta‘-lamuuhum ’an-tata-’uu-hum
fatusii-bakum -minhum- ma-‘ar-ratum-bi-ghayri ‘ilm, li-yudkhilal-laahu
fii Rahmatihii may-yashaaa’. Lau tazay-yaluu la-‘az-zabnal-laziina
kafaruu minhum ‘azaaban ’aliimaa.

*25. [It was not for your enemies’ sake that He stayed your hands from
them: for] it was they who were bent on denying the truth, and who
debarred you from the Inviolable House of Worship and prevented your
offering from reaching its destination. And had it not been for the
believing men and believing women (in Mecca), whom you might have
unwittingly trampled underfoot, and on whose account you might have
become guilty, without knowing it, of a grievous wrong -: (had it not
been for this, you would have been allowed to fight your way into the
city: but you were forbidden to fight) so that (in time) God might admit
to His grace whomever He wills. Had they (who deserve Our mercy and they
whom we have condemned) been clearly discernible (to you), We would
indeed have imposed grievous suffering (at your hands) on such of them
as were bent on denying the truth.*

[^1]: do not allow your own desires to have precedence


