The Holy Qur'an
===============

The Holy Qur’an, Revelation from Allah (swt) only
-------------------------------------------------

**Surah Yunus, 10 :37-38**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ هَـذَا الْقُرْآنُ أَن يُفْتَرَى مِن دُونِ اللّهِ وَلَـكِن
تَصْدِيقَ الَّذِي بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ وَتَفْصِيلَ الْكِتَابِ لاَ رَيْبَ
فِيهِ مِن رَّبِّ الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maa kaana haazal-Qur-’aanu ’an yuf-taraa min-duunil-laahi wa
laakin-tasdii-qal-lazii bayna ya-dayhi wa tafsii-lal-Kitaabi laa ray-ba
fiihi mir-Rab-bil-‘Aala-miin.

*37. Now this Qur’an could not possibly have been devised by anyone save
God: nay indeed, it confirms the truth of whatever remains (of earlier
revelations) and clearly spells out the revelation (which comes) - let
there be no doubt about it - from the Sustainer of all the worlds.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ فَأْتُواْ بِسُورَةٍ مِّثْلِهِ
وَادْعُواْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُم مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ إِن كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Am yaquuluu-naf-taraah? Qul fa’-tuu bi-suuratim-mithlihii wad-‘uu
manistata‘-tum-min-duunil-laahi ’in-kuntum Saadi-qiin!

*38. And yet, they (who are bent on denying the truth) assert,
“(Muhammad) has invented it!”*

*Say (unto them): “Produce, then, a surah of similar merit; and (to this
end) call to your aid whomever you can, other than God, if what you say
is true!”*

God’s Unique Way of Sending His Messages to Mankind
---------------------------------------------------

**Surah Ash – Shura, 42:51**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا كَانَ لِبَشَرٍ أَن يُكَلِّمَهُ اللَّهُ إِلَّا وَحْيًا أَوْ مِن
وَرَاء حِجَابٍ أَوْ يُرْسِلَ رَسُولًا فَيُوحِيَ بِإِذْنِهِ مَا يَشَاء
إِنَّهُ عَلِيٌّ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maa kaana libasharin ’ay-yakal-limahul-laahu ‘il-laa Wahyan ’aw
minw-waraaa-’i hijaabin ’aw yursila rasuulan fayuhiya bi-’iznihii maa
yashaaa’ ’in-nahuu ‘Aliy-yun Hakiim.

*51. And it is not given to mortal man that God should speak unto him
otherwise than through sudden inspiration, or (by a voice, as it were)
from behind a veil, or by sending an apostle to reveal, by His leave,
whatever He wills (to reveal): for, verily, He is exalted, wise.*

The Holy Qur’an, a Book Complete in Every Aspect and Sent as a Grace From Almighty Allah (swt) and a Guide to Every Believer
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Az – Zumar, 39:23**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ نَزَّلَ أَحْسَنَ الْحَدِيثِ كِتَابًا مُّتَشَابِهًا مَّثَانِيَ
تَقْشَعِرُّ مِنْهُ جُلُودُ الَّذِينَ يَخْشَوْنَ رَبَّهُمْ ثُمَّ
تَلِينُ جُلُودُهُمْ وَقُلُوبُهُمْ إِلَى ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ذَلِكَ هُدَى
اللَّهِ يَهْدِي بِهِ مَنْ يَشَاء وَمَن يُضْلِلْ اللَّهُ فَمَا لَهُ
مِنْ هَادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-laahu naz-zala ’ahsanal-Hadiithi Kitaabam-mutashaabi-ham-mathaaniya
taq-sha-‘ir-ru minhu juluudul-laziina yakh-shawna Rab-bahum. Thum-ma
taliinu juluu-duhum wa quluu-buhum ’ilaa Zikril-laah. Zaa-lika
hudal-laahi yahdii bihii man-yashaaa’: wa man-yuzli-lil-laahu famaa
lahuu min haad

*23. God bestows from on high the best of all teachings in the shape of
a divine writ fully consistent within itself, repeating each statement
(of the truth) in manifold forms - (a divine writ) which do shivers the
skins of all who of their Sustainer stand in awe: (but) in the end their
skins and their hearts do soften at the remembrance of (the grace of)
God......*

*Such is God’s guidance: He guides therewith him that wills (to be
guided) - whereas he whom God lets go astray can never find any guide.*

The Holy Qur’an was revealed in parts on various occasions during the
wide span of twenty-thee (23) years. The greatest proof of the Holy Book
being the revealed Word of God is in its uniformity in all its parts
conforming to each other and constituting a perfect harmonious whole
without the least contradiction or inconsistency anywhere in it, though
the circumstances necessitating the revelations, were of varying nature
and yet all through the vicissitudes, there is found a perfect
uniformity.

As regards God’s guiding whomsoever He pleases and leaving whomsoever He
pleases, to stray, refer to ***Surah an-Nahl, 16:93***, ***Surah
al-Ibrahim, 14:4*** and ***Surah al-Baqarah, 2:26***.

Said the Holy Prophet (S):

“ If anyone trembles, fearing God’s wrath against his sins, it would
shed out his sins, off the individual’s account as the dried leaves are
dropped away from a tree.”

The Holy Qur’an, a Book of True Guidance but, only for the Believers
--------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Luqman, 31 :2-5**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ آيَاتُ الْكِتَابِ الْحَكِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tilka ’Aayaatul-Kitaabil-Hakiim,

*2. These are messages of the divine writ, full of wisdom,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُدًى وَرَحْمَةً لِّلْمُحْسِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hudanw-wa Rahmatal-lil-Muhsiniin,

*3. providing guidance and grace unto the doers of good*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُم
بِالْآخِرَةِ هُمْ يُوقِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-laziina yuqii-muunas-Salaata wa yu’tuunaz-Zakaata wa hum-bil
’Aakhiraati hum yuuqinuun.

*4. who are constant in prayer and dispense charity: for it is they,
they who in their innermost are certain of the life to come!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ عَلَى هُدًى مِّن رَّبِّهِمْ وَأُوْلَئِكَ هُمُ
الْمُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ulaaa-’ika ‘alaa Hudam-mir-Rab-bihim wa ’ulaaa-’ika humul-Muflihuun.

*5. It is they who follow the guidance ( that comes to them) from their
Sustainer; and it is they, they who shall attain to a happy state!*

The Holy Qur’an is termed as the Book of Wisdom for it contains factors
of the highest knowledge which a mortal of any standard of intellect,
from the average to the maximum degree, can possibly bear and which is
sufficient for man to raise himself from the abyss of material
degradation to the sublime heights of heavenly grace and eternal bliss.
The Holy Qur’an is a guidance from God and God’s mercy - for those who
are seeking to achieve goodness in their life on earth. Those who wish
goodness for themselves and for others, loving the good (*Tawallah*) and
discarding the evil (*Tabarra*). It is this quality, which is called
‘*Taqwa*’ i.e. piety.

In Hadith al Qudsi, Allah (swt) says:

“You have taken My Book and placed it under your feet, and you have
taken this world and placed it over your head.”

The Holy Qur’an : Its Protection Against any Distortion is Promised by Allah (swt)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Hijr, 15:9**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا نَحْنُ نَزَّلْنَا الذِّكْرَ وَإِنَّا لَهُ لَحَافِظُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-na Nahnu naz-zal-naz-Zikra wa ’in-naa lahuu la-Haafizuun.

*9. Behold, it is We Ourselves who have bestowed from on high, step by
step, this reminder: and, behold, it is We who shall truly guard it (
from all corruption).*

This prophecy has been strikingly confirmed by the fact that the text of
the Qur’an has remained free from all alterations, additions, or
deletions ever since it was enunciated by the Prophet (S) in the seventh
century of the Christian era; and there is no other instance of any
book, of whatever description, which has been similarly preserved over
such a length of time. The Holy Scriptures revealed through the several
other apostles of God in the past, were either corrupted or made all
together extinct. God would not allow a similar fate to befall His Final
Word, for no other apostle would again come nor any other Book will be
revealed. Hence the security of the Last and the Final Word of God
becomes necessary and it could be done by none save by God Himself.
Hence God Himself undertakes to see that it remains secure in its
originally revealed form forever.

Allah’s (swt) Challenge to Mankind to Produce a Like of The Qur'an
------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Isra’, 17:88**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لَّئِنِ اجْتَمَعَتِ الإِنسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى أَن يَأْتُواْ
بِمِثْلِ هَـذَا الْقُرْآنِ لاَ يَأْتُونَ بِمِثْلِهِ وَلَوْ كَانَ
بَعْضُهُمْ لِبَعْضٍ ظَهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Qul-la’inij-tama-‘atil-’Insu wal-Jin-nu ‘alaaa ’ay-ya’-tuu bi-mithli
haazal-Qur-’aani laa ya’-tuuna bi-mith-lihii wa lau kaana ba‘-zuhum
li -ba‘-zin-zahiiraa.

*88. Say: “If all mankind and invisible beings(i.e. .jinn) would come
together with a view to producing the like of this Qur’an, they could
not produce its like even though they were to exert all their strength
in aiding one another!”.*

Surah Baqarah, 2:23
-------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن كُنتُمْ فِي رَيْبٍ مِّمَّا نَزَّلْنَا عَلَى عَبْدِنَا فَأْتُواْ
بِسُورَةٍ مِّن مِّثْلِهِ وَادْعُواْ شُهَدَاءكُم مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ إِنْ
كُنْتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa ’in - kuntum fii ray-bim-mimmaa nazzal-naa ‘alaa ‘Abdinaa fa ’-tuu
bi-Suuratim-mim-mis-lih; wad- ‘uu shuha - daaa - ‘akum-min-duunillaahi
’in-kuntum saadi-qiin.

23. And if you are in doubt as to what we have revealed from time to time to Our servant, then produce a Surah like there unto; And call your witnesses or helpers (if there are any) besides Allah, if your (doubts) are true.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Hud, 11:13**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمْ يَقُولُونَ افْتَرَاهُ قُلْ فَأْتُواْ بِعَشْرِ سُوَرٍ مِّثْلِهِ
مُفْتَرَيَاتٍ وَادْعُواْ مَنِ اسْتَطَعْتُم مِّن دُونِ اللّهِ إِن
كُنتُمْ صَادِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Am yaquu - luunaf - taraah, Qul fa’tuu bi-ashri Suwarim - mislihii
muftara - yaatinw wad-’uu mamis - tata ‘-tum-min-duunil-laahi ’in -
kuntum saadiqiin

*13. Or they may say, “ He forged it.” Say, “ Bring ye then ten Surahs
forged, like unto it, and call (to your aid) whomsoever ye can, other
than Allah! - if you speak the truth!*

The First Revelation of the Qur’an
----------------------------------

**Surah Al – ‘Alaq, 96:1-5**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْرَأْ بِاسْمِ رَبِّكَ الَّذِي خَلَقَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Iqra’ bismi Rab-bikal-lazii khalaq,

*1. Read in the name of thy Sustainer, who has created*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ الْإِنسَانَ مِنْ عَلَقٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Khalaqal-’insaana min ‘alaq.

*2. created man out of a germ-cell!*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اقْرَأْ وَرَبُّكَ الْأَكْرَمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Iqra’ wa Rab-bukal-’ Akram

*3. Read - for thy Sustainer is the Most Bountiful One*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي عَلَّمَ بِالْقَلَمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Al-lazii ‘al-lama bil Qalam,

*4. who has taught (man) the use of the pen*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَّمَ الْإِنسَانَ مَا لَمْ يَعْلَمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Al-lamal-’insaana maa lam ya‘-lam.

*5. taught man what he did not know!*

These five verses revealed are the first revelation received by the Holy
Prophet (S) through the Messenger Angel Gabriel in the cave of Hira.
Formerly, it is reported that the Holy Prophet (S) used to receive the
communion through dreams and the voices while he was alone in lonely
places and did not see the speaker.

In the fortieth year of his life on the 27th night of the month of Rajab
when the Holy Prophet (S) was busy in his meditation and prayers in the
cave of the Mount Hira, in deep silence and the calm atmosphere, all of
a sudden he heard a voice calling him by name and a flood of light broke
in upon him with dazzling splendour. He composedly beheld a human form
approaching.

It was the Messenger Angel Gabriel, who, coming quite near, held a
silken scroll before him and asked him to read what was written thereon.
He felt his mind fully illumined with the Divine Light and his eyes were
opened to the writing on the scroll and he recited the first few verses
of this Surah ***(Surah al-Alaq, 96:1-5)***. when he finished the
recitation, the Angel announced “O Muhammad! Verily thou art the apostle
of God and I am His Angel Gabriel!”.

This address was a signal to start the ministry. The Angel saying this
disappeared. Besides the Holy Prophet (S) getting charged with the
reading of the Word of God, his memory was divinely conditioned with
retention and what he recited only once, before the Angel, remained
graven on his heart.

The story of the Holy Prophet (S) getting fright-stricken, returning
home trembling, and he being frightened like a child etc. are all mere
stories and wishful imagination of some Jewish fabrications against the
Holy Prophet (S).

The Holy Prophet (S) says:

“I was the Apostle of God when Adam was still amidst water and the
clay”.

Besides the one who was destined to be the Last Apostle or the Final
Warner and his advent was prophesied in all the ancient scriptures,
would never have been in the least perturbed at meeting the Angel.

Night of Qadr , The Night of Destiny , better than a 1000 Nights
----------------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Qadr, 97:1-5**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَنزَلْنَاهُ فِي لَيْلَةِ الْقَدْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’In-naaa ’anzal-naahu fii Laylatil-Qadr:

*1. Behold, from on high have We bestowed this (divine writ) on the
Night of Destiny.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ مَا لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa maaa ’ad-raaka maa Laylatul-Qadr?

*2. And what could make thee conceive what it is, that Night of
Destiny?*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْلَةُ الْقَدْرِ خَيْرٌ مِّنْ أَلْفِ شَهْرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Laylatul-Qadri khayrum-min ’alfi Shahr

*3. The Night of destiny is better than a thousand months:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنَزَّلُ الْمَلَائِكَةُ وَالرُّوحُ فِيهَا بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِم مِّن
كُلِّ أَمْرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Tanaz-zalul - malaaa - ’ikatu war-Ruuhu fiihaa
bi-’izni-Rab-bihim-min-kul-li’amr:

*4. in hosts descends in it the angels, bearing divine inspiration by
their Sustainer’s leave;*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَلَامٌ هِيَ حَتَّى مَطْلَعِ الْفَجْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Salaa-mun Hiya hat-taa mat-la-‘il-Fajr!

*5. from all (evil) that may happen does it make secure, until the rise
of dawn.*

This is a unique Night of Grandeur - a Mystic Night of special value and
worth allotted for men to spend the whole of it, awake and praying to
the Lord seeking His forgiveness for the sins and His grace and mercy.
It is said that it is announced in the heavens, *“Who is there among the
mankind to seek tonight the forgiveness and the grace of the Lord and
have it”*


