Parents
=======

The best deed before Allah (swt)
--------------------------------

**Surah Al – Ahqaf, 46:15-16**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ إِحْسَانًا حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ
كُرْهًا وَوَضَعَتْهُ كُرْهًا وَحَمْلُهُ وَفِصَالُهُ ثَلَاثُونَ شَهْرًا
حَتَّى إِذَا بَلَغَ أَشُدَّهُ وَبَلَغَ أَرْبَعِينَ سَنَةً قَالَ رَبِّ
أَوْزِعْنِي أَنْ أَشْكُرَ نِعْمَتَكَ الَّتِي أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيَّ
وَعَلَى وَالِدَيَّ وَأَنْ أَعْمَلَ صَالِحًا تَرْضَاهُ وَأَصْلِحْ لِي
فِي ذُرِّيَّتِي إِنِّي تُبْتُ إِلَيْكَ وَإِنِّي مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa was-say-nal-’insaana bi-waali-day-i’ ihsaanaa: hamalat-hu ’um-muhuu
kurhanw-wa waza-‘at-hu kurhaa. Wa hamluhuu wa fisaaluhuu thalaa-thuuna
shahraa. Hat-taaa ’izaa balagha ’ashud-dahuu wa balagha ’arba-‘iina
sana-tan-qaala Rab-bi ’awzi‘-niii ’an ’ashkura ni‘-matakal-latii
’an-‘amta ‘alay-ya wa ‘alaa waaliday-ya wa ’an ’a‘-mala
saalihan-tar-zaahu wa ’aslih lii fii zur-riy-yatii. ’In-nii tubtu
’ilay-ka wa in-ni- minal-Muslimiin.

*15. Now (among the best of the deeds which) We have enjoined upon man
is goodness towards his parents. In pain did his mother bear him, and in
pain did she give him birth; and her bearing him and his utter
dependence on her took thirty months. And so, when he attains to full
maturity and reaches forty years, he (that is righteous) prays: “O my
Sustainer! Inspire me so that I may forever be grateful for those
blessings of Thine with which Thou hast graced me and my parents, and
that I may do what is right (in a manner) that will meet with Thy goodly
acceptance; and grant me righteousness in my offspring (as well).
Verily, unto Thee have I turned in repentance: for, verily, I am of
those who have surrendered themselves unto Thee!”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ نَتَقَبَّلُ عَنْهُمْ أَحْسَنَ مَا عَمِلُوا
وَنَتَجاوَزُ عَن سَيِّئَاتِهِمْ فِي أَصْحَابِ الْجَنَّةِ وَعْدَ
الصِّدْقِ الَّذِي كَانُوا يُوعَدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

’Ulaaa-’ikal-laziina nataqab-balu ‘anhum ’ahsana maa-‘amiluu wa
natajaa-wazu ‘an say-yi-’aatihim fiii ’as-haabil-Jan-na:
wa‘-das-sidqil-lazii kaanuu yuu-‘aduun.

*16. It is (such as) these from whom We shall accept the best that they
ever did, and whose bad deeds We shall overlook: (they will find
themselves) among those who are destined for paradise, in fulfilment of
the true promise which they were given (in this world).*

Note the reasoning with which man is enjoined to regard, revere, honour,
and respect the parents. *‘Ihsan’* is not what is done in return or for
any good but the initiative in doing good without expecting any return
for it.

Status of Parents in Islam
--------------------------

**Surah Luqman, 13 :14**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَصَّيْنَا الْإِنسَانَ بِوَالِدَيْهِ حَمَلَتْهُ أُمُّهُ وَهْنًا
عَلَى وَهْنٍ وَفِصَالُهُ فِي عَامَيْنِ أَنِ اشْكُرْ لِي
وَلِوَالِدَيْكَ إِلَيَّ الْمَصِيرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa was-say-nal’ insaana biwaaliday: hamalat-hu ’um-muhuu wahnan ‘alaa
wahninw-wa fisaaluhuu fii ‘aamayni ’anish-kur lii wa li-waalidayk:
’ilay-yal-Masiir.

*14. And (God says:) “We have enjoined upon man goodness towards his
parents: his mother bore him by bearing strain upon strain, and his
utter dependence on her lasted two years: (hence, O man,) be grateful
towards Me and towards thy parents, (and remember that) with Me is all
journey’s end.*

Utmost respect and veneration to Parents, after Allah (swt)
-----------------------------------------------------------

**Surah Al – Isra’, 17:23**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَضَى رَبُّكَ أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُواْ إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ
إِحْسَانًا إِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِندَكَ الْكِبَرَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَحَدُهُمَا أَوْ كِلاَهُمَا فَلاَ تَقُل لَّهُمَا أُفٍّ وَلاَ
تَنْهَرْهُمَا وَقُل لَّهُمَا قَوْلاً كَرِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wa qazaa Rab-buka ’al-laa ta‘-buduuu ’il-laaa ’iy-yaahu wa
bil-waa-lidayni ’ihsaa-naa. ’Im-maa yablu-ghan-na ‘indakal-ki-bara
’ahadu-humaaa ’aw kilaa-humaa falaa taqul-lahumaa wa ’uf-finw-wa laa
tanhar-humaa wa qul-lahumaa qawlan-kariimaa.

***23. And your Lord has commanded that you shall not serve (any) but
Him, and do good to your parents. If either or both of them reach old
age with you, say not to them (so much as) “ugh” nor chide them, but
(always) speak to them reverent speech.***

Islam ranks the obedience to parents second only to God. The extent to
which one has to regard his parents and obey them is peculiar only to
Islam. None shall even raise his voice higher than the voice of his
parents - nor look towards them even eye to eye - nor walk in advance of
them - nor address them with their names. Nothing shall be done to bring
disrepute or blame on them from the people and if they be believers, the
children should pray for their salvation, and if they be disbeliever,
they might be gently invited towards the right belief and goodness. If
man cannot venerate the ones responsible in bringing him in this world,
he will never be able to acknowledge truly the Only One Creator of all
mankind.

Prayer for one’s parents
------------------------

**Surah Ibrahim, 14:41**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَوْمَ يَقُومُ
الْحِسَابُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rab-ba-nagh-fir lii wa li-waa-li-day-ya walil-Mu’mi-niina Yawma
yaquu-mul-Hisaab!

*41.Grant Thy forgiveness unto me, and my parents, and all the
believers, on the Day on which the (last) reckoning will come to pass!”*

**Surah Al-Isra’, 17:24**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِنَ الرَّحْمَةِ وَقُل رَّبِّ
ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَغِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wakh-fiz la-humaa janaa-haz-zul-li minar-rahmati wa
qur-Rab-bir-ham-humaa kamaa rab-ba-yaanii saghiiraa.

*24. And make yourself submissively gentle to them with compassion, and
say: “O my Lord! have compassion on them, as they brought me up (when I
was) a child.”*

These ayats are recited in *Salatul Walidain* which is a Salat prayed
for the well-being and blessing of Almighty onto one’s parents in this
world and the hereafter. This is a two rakaat Salat prayed similiar to
Salat al-Fajr. In the first rakaat, after ***Surah Al-Hamd, 1:1-7***,
***Surah al-Ibrahim, 14:41*** is recited ten times in Qunoot, and in the
second rakaat, after ***Surah Al Hamd, 1:1-7***, ***Surah Nooh, 71:28***
is recited ten times in Qunoot. After ending the Salat, ***Surah
al-Israa, 17:24*** is recited ten times and then plead to the Sustainer
of all the worlds for blessing for ones’ parents.

Dua for Parents and the Believers
---------------------------------

**Surah Nuh, 71:28**

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ اغْفِرْ لِي وَلِوَالِدَيَّ وَلِمَن دَخَلَ بَيْتِيَ مُؤْمِنًا
وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَالْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَلَا تَزِدِ الظَّالِمِينَ إِلَّا
تَبَارًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rab-bigh-fir lii wa liwaali-day-ya wa liman-dakhala bay-tiya Mu’-minaw
wa lil-mu‘miniina wal mo‘minaat; wa laa tazidiz - zaalimiina ’il-laa
tabaaraa!

*28. “O my Sustainer! Grant Thy forgiveness unto me and unto my parents,
and unto everyone who enters my house as a believer, and unto all
believing men and believing women (of later times); and grant Thou that
the doers of evil shall increasingly meet with destruction!”*

This verse is recited in the Qunoot of Salaat Hadiyan-e-Walidain.


