On Qur'anic Conversation
========================

Taken from: **Essence Of The Holy Qur’an The Eternal Light**,

by Ayatullah Agha Haji Mirza Mahdi Pooya, Edited by Syed Muhammad
Murtaza & Husain P Taylor

ISBN 0-944880-02-9 ( Hard Back ) 03-7 ( Paper Back )

*Contributed by Br.* *‘Ali Abbas,<abbas@seas.gwu.edu>*

The Muslims in the life time of the Prophet (S) were brought up to learn
the Qur'an as *Ibadat* (Devotion), to recite it as Devotion, to write it
down as Devotion, to teach their children and other people and make them
learn it by heart and understand it as Devotion. They became so familiar
with it that they used the verses of the Holy Qur’an in their daily
conversation.

History records that Janab e Fidah, the noble Abysinian housemaid of
Hazrat Fatima Az-Zahra, the Lady of Paradise, the daughter of the Holy
Prophet (S) was in the habit of using the verses and words of the Quran
in her conversation.

Abul Qasim Qashiri relates the dialogue between Fidah and Abdullah bin
Mubarak; I saw a woman passing through the desert who had fallen behind
the caravan, and asked her “Who are you and where are you from ?”

She said :

***“ Say Salaam! .... Soon shall ye know it .” ( Chapter 6 Verse 67 )***

I learned that she expected me to greet her and say Assalamu Alaikum
first, before any question. I did as she reminded, and inquired why she
was in this desert.

She answered :

***“ Whomesoever God guideth, then none shall beguille . “ (Chapter 39
Verse 37)***

I gathered that she was left behind and thus restless, so I asked again
are you a human being or a jinn?

She returned :

***“ O children of Adam! Be Ye adorned at every time of prostration …
“(Chapter 7 Verse 31)***

I discovered that she was a human being, so I continued my enquiry,
Where are you coming from?

She said :

***“.... Who are called to from a place far off. “ (Chapter 41 Verse 44
)***

I found out that she was coming from a place far off and inquired her
destination.

She immediately responded :

***“ ........ And for God is incumbent upon mankind the Pilgrimage of
the House..... “ (Chapter 3 Verse 97 )***

I realized that she was going for Hajj (Pilgrimage of the Kaaba ), and
asked her how many days she had been travelling?

She told me:

***“ Indeed created We ( God ) the heavens and the earth and what is
between them to in Six days .*** ***“ (Chapter 7 Verse 54) and (Chapter
50 Verse 38 )***

I concluded it was six days. I requested her to have food and water if
she was so inclined.

She politely indicated :

***“ We ( God ) made them not such bodies that do not eat food, and they
will not abide ( in this world ) for ever. “ (Chapter 21 Verse 8)***

She accepted my refreshment. Then to catch the caravan, I suggested her
to make haste.

She reminded me again :

***“ God tasks not any soul beyond ( individual ) ability...... “ (
Chapter 2 Verse 286 )***

I told her that if she couldn’t do so, let her ride on the back of my
camel behind me.

She recited another Qur’anic Verse :

***“ If there were therein gods besides Allah, then verily both ( the
heavens and the earth ) would have been disordered ....” ( Chapter 21
Verse 22 )***

It was a reminder of piety that when a man was not a husband of a woman,
it was un-lawful to ride together on the same animal. [ It is an Islamic
Law concerning the relatives of persons of prohibited degree - Namahiram
].

Qashiri says that he got down and requested her to ride the camel.

She occupied the seat and recited :

***“ Hallowed is He who subjected this ( animal ) unto us .” ( Chapter
43 Verse 13 ).***

She thanked Allah who brought the animal under her control. When we
reached the caravan, I asked her do you know any one among them?

She recounted :

***“ O Dawud ( David ), We have appointed thee a vicegerent in the earth
..........” ( Chapter 38 Verse 26 );***

***“ And Muhammad is not but an Apostle ...... “ ( Chapter 3 Verse 144
);***

***“O Yahya ( John the Baptist ) ! Hold thou the Book fast !......... .
“(Chapter 19 Verse 12 );***

***“O Musa ( Moses ) ! Verily it is, I am God the All-Mighty .” (
Chapter 27 Verse 9 )***

I understood that Dawud, Muhammad, Yahya and Musa were the names of her
sons. When the boys appeared, I asked her who they were?

She said in her habitual manner :

***“Wealth and Children are the adornment of this World ...............
“(Chapter 18 Verse 46)***

I recognized them as her sons. The woman looked at her sons with the
feeling of contentment and uttered,

***“ ... O my father ! Employ him verily the best of those who canst
employ is the strongman and trusted ones. “(Chapter 28 Verse 26)***

In these words of the Quran, she informed the sons indicating towards me
that

***“ ..... This man offered me a gift ( i.e. help ), so veiriy God
giveth manifold increase to whomsoever He willeth . “ ( Chapter 2 Verse
261 )***

The sons grasped their mother's indications, and so they paid me twice
as much as I ought to have been paid. To satisfy my curiosity I asked
the sons, who is this honorable Lady that speaks nothing but the Qur'an?
They responded that she was their mother, the housemaid of Hazrat Fatima
Al Zahra (peace be upon her and her progeny), the daughter of the Holy
Prophet (S) and the Wife of Amir Al Mu’mineen (as). She was raised under
the shade of supreme knowledge and piety of the daughter of the Prophet
(S). Since 20 years she spoke nothing but the Quran in her daily
conversations.

May Allah Bless her soul ( Amen ! ) ........


