Part 6: “Their Love And Respect Deter Them”
===========================================

It is highly unlikely that the coup leaders would assault the house of
Fatima (sa), being deterred by her status from doing any such thing.

He tries to provide evidence for such a status with many matters which,
in turn, are mere unsubstantiated claims or unfit to prove his point.

But he does not find it “unlikely” that they would threaten to burn the
house in order to psychologically coerce them to yield to their demands,
emphasizing that they only wanted to arrest the Commander of the
Faithful, peace with him. As for al-Zahra’ (sa) or others, they had no
business with them...!

In this Part, we are going to discuss these issues which he considers to
be sufficient to justify the doubt which he entertains and which does
not reach the degree of open rejection, although he tries to amass
proofs and evidences to sufficiently deny all of that, not to merely
cast some doubt. Here we are going to provide his proofs and evidences
and explain how they are unfit for such a role.

This Part’s Research
--------------------

Before entering into the details, we would like to point out to the
discussion in this Part to be centering around these points:

1. A dispute with one person does not prohibit him from respecting that
person’s wife for one reason or another.

2. Ali (as) taking Fatima (sa) to the houses of the Ansar to solicit
their support demonstrates the loftiness of her status and of the
respect which she enjoyed in the Islamic society.

3. Those brought by ‘’Umar to the house of al-Zahra’ (sa) objected when
he threatened to burn the house and everyone inside it, so they said to
him, “But Fatima (sa) is inside!” He said to them, “So what?!” This has
many implications:

One: al-Zahra’ (sa) enjoyed a status which could not be ignored.

Two: The hearts of those brought by ‘’Umar were filled with love for
al-Zahra’ (sa); so, how can we imagine that they would assault her?

Three: Even if they did not love al-Zahra’ (sa) nor respect her, they
went there only to subdue the opposition and to arrest Ali (sa) and had
no business with al-Zahra’ (sa) even if she was present there and then,
and this is what ‘’Umar meant when he said, “So what?!”

Four: There is more than one narrative discussing people’s respect for
al-Zahra’ (sa); so, how could anyone dare to assault her?

Five: Their going there, i.e. Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar going to the house of
al-Zahra’ (sa) and requesting her to forgive them, shows the greatness
of the status which she enjoyed in the Islamic society especially among
senior *sahabis*.

Six: al-Zahra’ (sa) was pleased with both senior *sahabis* when they
visited her seeking to appease her.

Seven: The reception awarded by al-Zahra’ (sa) to both senior *sahabis*
proves the invalidity of the tradition of hers which says, “It is best
for a woman that she neither sees men, nor men should see her.”

Their Dispute With Ali (as) and Respect for al-Zahra’ (sa)
----------------------------------------------------------

Someone says that the dispute of the assailants with Ali (as) did not
prohibit them from loving and respecting al-Zahra’ (sa) for there may be
one candidate competing with another to be elected and wishing to drop
him from the elections, but having a dispute with him does not stop him
from respecting the wife of his competitor for one reason or another.

The answer is that we notice many matters regarding this statement:

FIRST: The case of Ali (as) with those who assailed him and his house,
usurped his right and disobeyed Allah and His Messenger S, has no
similarity with the competition between two candidates. Rather, it is
similar to a military coup d’etat carried out by a sweeping and
devastating force, though it was not that obvious yet deeper in its
implications and indications.

SECOND: Respect for the competitor’s wife is not known by conjecture or
assumption. Rather, it is known by practice, stand, and movement on the
real grounds. We have seen these folks being very cruel and crude
against the wife of the person described by this same individual as a
“competitor”! It is the practice that lacks any mercy or compassion in
their hearts. So let the reader read the description of what went on in
various texts and legacies which we do not exaggerate if we say that
they are consecutively reported as the kind reader will see for himself.

THIRD: Even if we submit that the assailants respected her, or even
loved her (sa), respect and love did not stop them when she stood in
their faces and threatened them with her aspirations and was the reason
for the failure of their serious plan. All that did not stop them from
turning against her and treat her with utmost cruelty.

Even if the doers were their brothers and offspring, they would still
confront them with the same violence, for love for authority and the
seriousness of what they wanted to carry out would put them in a fateful
dilemma which would act as a catalyst for deciding the matter by force.
The matter for them was much more serious; it was stronger than and
ignoring such a respect.

Status of al-Zahra’ (sa) with the Ansar and with Her Assailants
---------------------------------------------------------------

Someone claims that those who assaulted the house of al-Zahra’ (sa)
loved and respected her, and that those brought by ‘’Umar had hearts
full of love for her; so, how could they have assaulted her?!

Then he seeks evidence from the following:

According to *Bihar al-Anwar* and many other references, Ali (as) used
to take al-Zahra’ (sa) around the houses of the Muhajirun and the Ansar
so that she might defend his right. She, then, wanted to take advantage
of her status and of the respect awarded to her to win their support;
so, how could anyone dare to assault her?!

Obviously, such talk is derived from al-Fadl ibn Roozbahan who used to
rebut *‘allama* al-Hilli by saying, “The chiefs of the Ansar and senior
*sahabis* were Muslims who were led by their love for the Messenger of
Allah S; so, could it be possible that they remained silent and did not
speak to Abu Bakr in this regard? Surely burning the house of the family
of the Prophet S is not permissible or commendable.”[^1]

The answer is as follows:

FIRST: There were three parties in Medina:

1. A party which nothing could deter, be it religion or ethics or civil
feelings, from harming Ahl al-Bayt (as), even burning their houses or
killing them and those who seek refuge with them with the fire.

2. Another party which sympathized a little with the oppressed group
which faced all these great calamities, but it preferred to remain safe
and was not ready to sacrifice anything for the oppressed, not even for
righteousness or for the religion to which they were invited.

All these elements combined, the love, respect, religion, oppression,
humanity, could not move it to take a decisive stand against the
assailing party aiming at forcing Ali (as) to swear the oath of
allegiance to him. Both Ali and al-Zahra’ (as) tried to stir this
particular party to action, but they could not; thus was the will of the
Messenger of Allah S lost.

3. A third party which stood beside al-Zahra’ (sa) ready to sacrifice
everything precious for the sake of effecting justice and equity and
putting an end to injustice when daring and courage were viable. The
members of this party was very small; they included Abu Tharr, Salman,
al-Miqdad, ‘Ammar...

Thus, it becomes obvious that there was no indication that the
assailants were members of the party that loved al-Zahra’ (sa) rather
than the third or the second party. We find their actions, assaults and
practices, as clear indications that they belonged to the party which
did not respect her but did hate her, and they did not hesitate to burn
her house with everyone who sought shelter in it.

They actually caused all of that to happen when they hit her and caused
her to miscarry, so she died a martyr in its aftermath, although they
were trying not to openly express such a hatred. Such was their policy.
Thus did they placate people so that the public might not lean more to
the family of Ali (as) and so that they would be convinced that he and
his Ahl al-Bayt (as) were, indeed, oppressed, and that their way was
more right.

To sum up, there is no meaning for pointing to the status enjoyed by
al-Zahra’ (sa) and to the respect which she enjoyed by the members of
the second party which liked its skins to remain safe and did not want
to enter the arena of struggle. There is no meaning for pointing out to
the status of and to the “respect” whereby she was held by the assailing
party which did not hesitate to attack al-Zahra’ (sa) and confront her
with evil and harm.

SECOND: Had the assailants really loved and respected al-Zahra’ (sa),
there would have been no need for Ali (as) to take her around the homes
of the Muhajirun and the Ansar to win their support and to convince them
to defend his right, peace with him. Rather, it would have been
sufficient for her to face the assailants in person and to use her
influence with them and her position in their hearts so that they might
retreat, or to disappoint those who enticed them to do what they wanted
them to do without achieving their objective or earn anything that went
against the wish of al-Zahra’ (sa) or which would have enraged her.

Asides from that, had they all loved al-Zahra’ (sa), would she still
have needed to seek the support of the Ansar to attack those who loved
her and to try to kill them?! Was al-Zahra’ (sa) the type of person who
would cause animosity among those who loved her, letting them fight
among themselves while she stood to watch both parties happy and
pleased?!

THIRD: If those folks loved al-Zahra’ (sa), why did she die turning away
from them and from those who brought them to her house?! Then she stated
in her will that neither of the two senior *sahabis* (Abu Bakr and
‘Umar)*,* nor any of those who oppressed her, should be present at her
funeral. Then she was buried, for this reason, in the darkness of the
night. It is for this reason that her grave is not known to people at
all, to all of them, the only daughter of the Messenger of Allah S that
she was and the Head of the Women of Mankind from the early generations
to the last ones.

How could she meet their love with such cold-heartedness while Allah,
Praised and Glorified is He, commands them to love her and to make her
pleased, while she turns away from them or feel angry with them?!

Who Said to ‘’Umar, “But Fatima (sa) is Inside...”?!
----------------------------------------------------

Someone says that those who objected to ‘’Umar, when he threatened to
set the house of al-Zahra’ (sa) to fire, were the same individuals whom
he had brought with him to assault her house, so they said to him, “But
Fatima (sa) is inside!" And he said to them, “So what?!”

Their objection is evidence that they loved al-Zahra’ (sa), venerated
and respected her, because it means that “The daughter of the Messenger
of Allah S was inside the house; so, how could we enter her house by
force, scare and terrorize her?”

It has already been stated that the individual says that the assailants
brought by ‘’Umar had hearts that were full of love for al-Zahra’ (sa),
so how can we imagine that they would attack her?!

Before answering this question, let us keep in mind two issues mentioned
by someone:

The first is that those who objected to ‘’Umar are the same individuals
whom he had brought to attack the house where revelation had descended.

The second is that their objection reflects the status al-Zahra’ (sa)
enjoyed in their hearts.

We would like to answer both points by saying:

FIRST: Who said that those who objected to ‘’Umar’s order were the same
assailants? And what is the evidence for that, if any? Fatima’s house
was located inside the Prophet’s Mosque itself, and people used to
frequent the Mosque and be present thereat most of the time. When they
assaulted the house of al-Zahra’ (sa), “... people assembled to watch,
and the streets of Medina were full of men”[^2]. So, why could those who
objected to the assailants not be among those assembling men who
gathered to watch what was going on or some of the good believers who
were present at the Mosque of the Prophet S? That would make more sense,
for it appears that the assailants did not consider any value for the
house, or for those inside it, or even to the Mosque or to the grave of
the Messenger of Allah S which was also inside the house of al-Zahra’
(sa).

SECOND: If we suppose that some men among the assailants said it, it is
evident that they did not respect al-Zahra’ (sa), nor did they venerate
her. Such a protest could have been prompted by their fear of the
consequences of committing something as serious as that... If people
accepted their conduct to attack Ali (as), since he was the sensitive
nucleus of the opposition to their schemes and to their ambitions to
take over the government, and if they excused them because Ali (as) had
killed their fathers and sons and brothers while defending the Cause of
Allah, al-Zahra’ (sa) did not do any such deeds. So, attacking her house
with the intention to burn it, the only daughter of the Messenger of
Allah S that she was, the one who was well known as such throughout the
entire Islamic world, could not have been justified at all by the
public, and it could have turned things against them if it appeared that
al-Zahra’ (sa) had been killed as a result.

THIRD: The assailants attacked al-Zahra’ (sa) by beating her and through
other means, causing her to miscarry. Nobody among the assailants, nor
among others who did what they did, objected to it. Had they been afraid
of ‘’Umar, were they afraid of Qunfath, or of al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah,
or of their likes?!

FOURTH: If the assailants respected al-Zahra’ (sa) to such an extent,
then the reason for her confronting them and for Ali (as) and Banu
Hashim to have a sit-in at the house becomes quite clear because her
confrontation in such a situation was to prevent the assailants from
reaching Ali (as) and arresting him, as the individual seeking evidence
for his statements says and according to his own criteria! Thus, the
reason why she, rather than Ali (as) or anyone else who was present
there and then, went in person to open the door. And we wish that it was
sufficient to deter them from forcing the door open, although it does
have an impact on safeguarding the truth from being lost and showing the
real face of the leaders of the coup.

FIFTH: The history and policies of those brought by ‘’Umar to attack the
house of al-Zahra’ (sa) point out to the fact that they did not love her
(sa) at all, and we have found no proof to the contrary. History has
informed us of the names of a number of the assailants such as:

Abu Bakr, ‘’Umar, Qunfath, Abu ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah, Salim slave of
Abu Huthayfah, al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah, Khalid ibn al-Walid, ‘Othman
(ibn ‘Affan), Assad ibn Hadar, Mu’ath ibn Jabal, ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn
‘Awf, ‘Abd ar-Rahman ibn Abu Bakr, Muhammed ibn Maslamah (who broke
al-Zubayr’s sword), Zaid ibn Aslam, ‘Ayyash ibn Raba’ah and others[^3]
who will be mentioned in the texts’ section.

How Much Respect Did the Sahaba Have For al-Zahra’ (sa)?
--------------------------------------------------------

Someone says that al-Zahra’ (sa) enjoyed a distinctive status among all
the Muslims; so, attacking her in such a horrible way could stir the
public opinion against the assailants. A proof for this great status is
that people treated her with utmost respect and regards, and this raises
many question marks about the accuracy of what is claimed about her
being allegedly assaulted.

The answer is as follows:

FIRST: Her father, the Messenger of Allah S, enjoyed a greater status in
the hearts of the Muslims than anyone else, yet this did not stop
someone (‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab) from confronting the Messenger of Allah
S with his famous statement, “The Prophet is hallucinating”[^4] or
something like that. The person who articulated this statement was the
head of those who assaulted the house of al-Zahra’ (sa).

We neither heard nor read anywhere that a single person from among those
who were present, when the said statement was articulated, protested or
expressed his displeasure and annoyance at such a rude statement. And a
group from among the *sahaba* disobeyed the Prophet’s order to enlist in
Usamah’s army. They did not provide any equipment for that army although
he (as) had condemned all those who lagged behind Usamah’s army as is
well known.[^5]

They also scared the she-camel on which the Messenger of Allah S was
riding in the night of ‘Aqaba and made a false charge against his wife
(‘A’isha), in addition to many other matters which they demonstrated
towards the Prophet S and his Purified *‘Itra*.

Add to the above their killing of al-Husayn (as) and taking his family
members captive. This, too, was a major crime which they committed and
which is no less heinous than their forceful entry into the house of
al-Zahra’ (sa) and their beating her. Those who killed al-Husayn were
the offspring of those who assaulted the house of al-Zahra’ (sa)...

They also conspired to kill Ali (as) as he was standing for the prayers
at the Mosque of the Messenger of Allah S at the hands of Khalid ibn
al-Walid had not Abu Bakr said, “Khalid should not do what I ordered him
to do” shortly before making his *tasleem*.[^6] Abu Hanifa issued a
verdict permitting speaking prior to the *tasleem* based on this
incident as is said.[^7] Sufyan al-Thawri, too, issued a verdict, based
on this incident, saying that the prayers of anyone who makes himself
unclean prior to pronouncing the *tashahhud* are valid.[^8]

SECOND: There is respect which manifests itself during ordinary
circumstances, when there is nothing to fear or to wish for, but when
the case is not so, people, as Imam al-Husayn (as) said, “are the slaves
of this world, and they give religion lip service; so, once they are
tested, few, indeed, prove to be the true followers of the
religion.”[^9]

Respect during the time of ease does not necessarily mean support during
the time of trials and tribulations when their interests are threatened,
and this fact is known to everyone.

THIRD: What proves the error of what they mentioned, that is, that all
those folks loved al-Zahra’ (sa) and respected her, and the fact that a
group of people dared to go to an unbelievable extent against her, is
what Shaikh al-Tusi narrates from Abul-’Abbas ibn ‘Uqdah from Muhammed
ibn al-Mufaddal from al-Hassan ibn Ali al-Washsha’ from ‘Abd al-Karam
ibn ‘Amr al-Khath’ami from ‘Abdullah ibn Abu Ya’far and Mu’alla ibn
Khunays from Abul Samit from Abu ‘Abdullah (Imam al-Sadiq ) who says
that there are seven of the greatest of sins..., etc., adding, “As for
charging innocent women, *they* even charged Fatima (sa) from the top of
their pulpits..., etc.”[^10]

“Ali (as) is a Dissenter Who had to be Subdued”
-----------------------------------------------

Someone offers a view saying that:

1. Those who assembled at the house of al-Zahra’ (sa), namely Ali (as)
and Banu Hashim, represented the opposition to the new government. The
nature of the matter required that when the opposition was assembled to
rebel against the caliphate, the rulers had to confront them and subdue
them. Their going there, then, was to arrest Ali (as) in order to put an
end to the opposition.

2. The purpose of the assailants was to arrest Ali (as); as for Fatima
(sa), they had no business with her because there was a public opinion
present then. ‘’Umar’s statement “So what?!” which he gave in answer to
those who said to him, “But Fatima (sa) is inside!” comes natural. It
means: “We have no business with Fatima (sa); we only want to put an end
to the opposition by arresting Ali (as). So, if al-Zahra’ (sa) is
present, we do not intend to have anything to do with her; our objective
is only to arrest Ali (as).”

The answer is:

FIRST: We are very surprised to see how Ali (as) is described as a rebel
and so are those with him from Banu Hashim as well as others. They are
all described as the “opposition”! Since when did the usurpers settle in
and establish their authority so that the others could be described as
an “opposition”?! The assault on the house of al-Zahra’ (sa) took place
immediately after Abu Bakr had already returned from Saqifat Banu Sa’ida
and went to the Mosque. It is there that Abu Bakr sat on the pulpit on
which the Prophet S used to sit, and it was then that the assault
started. Even after they had held the reins of authority in their hands,
is it right or wrong to label the person who has the legitimate right
with him, the one against whom the assailants initiated their attack in
order to usurp his right and position wherein Allah Almighty placed him
and to subdue him with force, coercion, trickery and other illegitimate
means, as an “opposition” or a rebel who had to be subdued? Should all
of this be done in order to render legitimacy to the oppressive usurper?

SECOND: Had all this been “right,” is it right for ‘’Umar to say, “You
shall get out or I burn the house and everyone inside it!” They said to
him, “But Fatima (sa) is inside!” He said, “So what?!” Does this
statement mean, “We have no business with Fatima (sa); we only want to
arrest Ali (as)”? Does this mean that they would save Fatima (sa) from
being burnt and direct the fire towards Ali (as) rather than anyone
else?! Is it thus that the assailants could express their respect for
Fatima (sa) in lieu of all the statements which her father, the
Messenger of Allah S, made about her?!

THIRD: Does the existence of a public opinion mean that it would stop
them from burning Fatima (sa)?! If this public opinion permitted the
burning of Ali (as), why did it not likewise permit the burning of
Fatima (sa) and both al-Hassan and al-Husayn, peace with them both, with
him, since they are his supporters?! Since the statements made by the
Prophet S in honour of al-Zahra’ (sa) served as a deterrent, why were
they not deterred by his statements in honour of Ali (as)?! What kind of
“public opinion” is this that allows arresting and assaulting Ali (as)?!

Had there really been a public opinion, why did it not deter someone
from saying that the Messenger of Allah S was “hallucinating”?! And why
was the speaker not punished or at least reprimanded?! We have not found
a shred of evidence testifying that they even frowned at him, which is
the least they should have done under the circumstance, except if this
same individual wanted to deny that the same man (‘’Umar) did not commit
such a rude insult against the Greatest Prophet, peace and blessings of
Allah be on him and his progeny! And why did this “public opinion” not
prohibit the hitting of Fatima (sa) and her miscarriage in its
aftermath?! Why did that “public opinion” not prohibit the killing of
Imam al-Husayn (as) and those with him from among the stars on earth of
Banu Hashim and of the elite from among the believers and sincere ones?!
Why did it not prohibit the taking of the daughters of the Messenger of
Allah S captive to be paraded in one country after another as men looked
on? And why, and why?...

FOURTH: It is quite obvious that “So what?!” serves to join a preceding
sentence to one that follows it, so it means: “So what if Fatima (sa) is
inside the house?! I shall burn the house and everyone inside it...!” It
does not at all mean, “We have no business with Fatima (sa). We have
only come to arrest Ali (as),” as the speaker claims. His claim is not
supported by any of the rules of Arabic grammar, and it is not
acceptable in the sciences of fluency or in any other.

As for his phrase “and everyone inside it,” it clearly refers to human
beings; it emphasizes his intention to burn the house and all people
inside it, namely Fatima (sa), her sons al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as), as
well as Ali (as). Had we accepted the interpreter’s viewpoint that they
had no business with Fatima (sa), then they had no business with those
inside her house, namely Banu Hashim, al-Zubayr and al-’Abbas who, the
speaker says, were also present there and then. Was the phrase “and
everyone inside it” linguistically applicable to only Ali (as) and not
to al-Hassan and al-Husayn, peace with them, nor to Fidda, al-Zubayr,
Banu Hashim, Fatima (sa), al-’Abbas..., etc.?

Add to the above this: If he had no concern about Fatima (sa), why did
he not ask her to leave the house for which he had brought firewood to
burn it and to burn everyone inside it?! Instead, he answered with “So
what?!” when told that Fatima (sa) was inside.

Asking For Fatima’s Forgiveness Denotes the Status of al-Zahra’ (sa)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Someone wonders: “Did not the request of both senior *sahabis*, ‘’Umar
and Abu Bakr, of al-Zahra’s forgiveness indicate that she (sa) enjoyed a
lofty status among major *sahabis*?” Here is our answer:

FIRST: Their request for forgiveness by itself proves that they had
harmed her and enraged her to the extent that they sought her
forgiveness even if through pretense.

SECOND: There is no doubt that al-Zahra’ (sa) maintained her value in
the Islamic society, and this is what forced those who harmed and
assaulted her to try to absorb the public anger against them and to
remove the negative impression caused by what they had committed against
her (sa).

THIRD: When they sought to appease her, they did not offer anything that
would prove that they were serious about such an appeasement. All
indications point out to their action as a media ploy and nothing else.
They did not return Fadak to her, nor did they take any practical steps
to remove the effects of their cruel assault on her, nor did they
retreat from their firm determination to usurp the caliphate from Ali
(as). Also, they did not publicly admit any wrongdoings, which they also
committed, before the *sahaba* in public.

FOURTH: Her maintaining her value did not stop them from assaulting her
with beating and with other means. Moreover, her father enjoyed a
greater value in the hearts of the people, and he was more holy, yet his
greatness, holiness and value did not stop them, when their ambitions
and interests prompted them, from directing the most cruel of crude
speech to him when one of them prohibited him from writing a book
appointing Ali (as) as his successor when he was on his bed feeling
sick. This is what is known as “Thursday’s Calamity.” Their man [‘’Umar]
said, “The Prophet is hallucinating,” or “overcome by pain.”[^11]

They had also confronted this great Prophet S with screaming loud noises
during the pilgrimage season[^12] when he said to them, “The Imams after
me..., etc,” till nobody could hear what the Messenger of Allah S was
saying after that, i.e. “all of them from Quraish,”[^13] when they had
the feeling that he was going to emphasize the Imamate and caliphate of
Ali (as) after him.

Also, the value, the greatness and the holiness of this Prophet S did
not prohibit them from insisting on disobeying his sure order to enlist
in Usamah’s army although he said to him, “The curse of Allah be on
anyone who lags behind Usamah’s army.”[^14] Nor did it stop them from
trying to assassinate him by scaring his she-camel at the ‘Aqaba.[^15]

FIFTH: What sort of status did she have in their hearts while ‘’Umar was
saying to Abu Bakr, who was crying on being rebuked by al-Zahra’ (sa)
when they both visited her to appease her, “Are you upset on account of
a woman being angry with you?”!

SIXTH: Historical events cannot be evaluated based on one factor in
formulating an event, such as the human factor, or the ethical, or the
religious, or the interest, or the economic, or the rational..., etc.,
although each one of them has a degree of affecting the formulation of
this event and determining its motives as well as outcomes.

Had such a statement been valid, it would have been mandatory to belie
that Yazid killed al-Husayn (as), for example, or Pharaoh claiming to be
a god, because all of this is not in harmony with the religion, nor with
the ethics, nor is it accepted by reason or conscience.

The fact is that the factor in formulating an event may be all those
afore-mentioned matters combined, and it may be the madness of desires,
too. Rather, an event may result from stupidity, or from an emotional
outburst, or from psychological diseases or complexes, or from right or
wrong ambitions. And it may be some of those factors in addition to one
more in addition to this or to that. So, deeming al-Zahra’ (sa) as great
and respecting her probably would not prohibit them from confiscating
Fadak, for example, if their policies, interests, the passion to rule,
or love for money, necessitated it.

We all know that one’s love for his son and his compassion towards him
does not stop the father from killing the son if the latter becomes his
rival for authority. We have heard many rulers say, “Authority is
sterile; it has no mercy.”[^16] One may beat his son very hard for a
personal reason or for standing between him and his ambitions and
desires. It is said that a woman during the Abbaside period killed her
son for the sake of power. Al-Ma’mun killed his brother (al-Amin) for
the same reason as we have already stated.

Thus, it becomes clear that there are factors and influences some of
which may be stronger than others, and some may cancel the effect of
others.

Was al-Zahra’ (sa) Pleased With Both Senior Sahabis?!
-----------------------------------------------------

The same individual adds saying that the issue came to a conclusion
during her lifetime, for she, peace and blessings of Allah be on her,
became pleased with Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar when they both sought to appease
her. We say the following:

FIRST: True, to please al-Zahra’ (sa) is the hope of the line which
attacked her (sa) out of concern for not seeming to be among those who
harmed the Messenger of Allah S and who incurred his anger, so they
would be held in public as those who harmed and angered Allah, Praise to
Him. Some of them made attempts to commit forgery in the narration which
mentioned that same issue for the benefit of those whom they loved; so,
they said that she was pleased with them[^17]; this is what al-Sha’bi
says, and his is a disputed *hadith* because he was not old enough to be
present at the time when the incident took place.

Another party took to silence, stating neither pleasure nor
displeasure.[^18] What is more strange than all of that is the claim of
some people that those who performed her funeral prayers were Abu
Bakr[^19] and Ali (as)!

But the scholars who agree with the same sectarian line of these folks
are the same who have accurately narrated this incident for us, paying
no heed to what these folks have added to it. Rather, they said that
when both men went to appease her, she did not grant them permission to
enter her house till they pleaded to Ali (as), who also approached her
on their behalf, and even then she refused to let them in but said to
him, “The house is yours,” that is, “You are free to let in anyone you
like according to the dictates of circumstances which are beyond your
control.” As for her, she maintained her view and stand, and there was
nothing else that would mandate anything on her. Ali (as) then permitted
them to go inside because he was the owner of the house; al-Zahra’ (sa)
did not permit them in.

Once they were both in, she refused to speak to them. She spoke to Ali
(as) and required both men to admit what they had heard the Messenger of
Allah S say, that is, “Fatima’s pleasure is from my own pleasure, and
her anger is from mine. Whoever loves Fatima (sa), my daughter, loves
me, and whoever pleases Fatima (sa), pleases me, and whoever incurs
Fatima’s anger incurs mine.” She said to them (after they had admitted
the above), “Then I plead to Allah and to His angels to testify that you
incurred my anger and never pleased me, and when I meet the Prophet, I
shall complain to him against you.”[^20]

When Abu Bakr wept because of that, ‘’Umar rebuked him saying, “Are you
upset on account of a woman being angry with you?!”[^21] As regarding
the text according to Sulaym ibn Qays, here it is:

Ali (as) was performing the five daily prayers at the (Prophet)’s
Mosque. After each prayer, Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar asked him, “How is the
daughter of the Messenger of Allah S doing?” till they felt tired of
saying it.

They asked about her once more saying (to Ali ), “Between us and her is
what you already know; so, could you please seek permission for us to
apologize to her for the sin which we have committed in her regard?” He
said, “I shall grant you that.” They stood up and sat at the door. Ali
(as) went inside to see Fatima (sa). He said to her, “O free lady!
So-and-so are at the door and they wish to greet you, so what do you
say?” She (sa) said, “The house is yours, and the free lady is your
wife; so, do whatever you please.” He said, “Tie your headpiece.” She
did, turning her face to the wall. They entered, greeted her then said,
“Be pleased with us, may Allah be pleased with you.” She said, “What
prompted you to do what you did?” They said, “We have admitted our
wrongdoing and hoped that you would forgive us and get out of your
displeasure with us.” She said, “If you were truthful, then provide me
with the answers to my questions, for I shall not ask you a question
except that I know that you are familiar with its answer.

If you tell the truth, I shall come to know that you are truthful as to
why you have both come here.” They said, “Ask whatever you please.” She
said, “I ask you in the Name of Allah, did you ever hear the Messenger
of Allah S saying, ‘Fatima is part of me; whoever harms her harms me’?”
They said, “Yes.” She, thereupon, raised her hand to the heavens and
said, “O Lord! They have both harmed me, so I am complaining to You and
to Your Messenger about them. No, by Allah, I shall never be pleased
with you till I meet my father, the Messenger of Allah, and tell him
about what you did to me, and he will judge you both.” It was then that
Abu Bakr was extremely upset and started wailing and weeping. ‘’Umar
said to him, “Are you, Caliph, upset on account of a woman being angry
with you?!”[^22]

We do not know why the man chose the version narrated by non-Shi’as
without taking the trouble to compare it with the other version. Nay! He
even makes no reference whatsoever to the other version although his
version is forged by those who wish to justify what those who assaulted
and harmed al-Zahra’ (sa) had committed despite the clear evidence
leading to such a forgery. Yes, he has accepted it, leaving the accurate
and the authentic version aside.

SECOND: Pardon[^23] comes from one who sincerely regrets and repents
what he has committed, and repentance means taking what is right to its
rightful owner, correcting the damage and repairing the harm done.
Otherwise, no repentance can be accepted from a usurper who holds on to
everything then says, “Forgive me and be pleased with me, and I shall
not return anything belonging to you back to you.” Forgiving someone
like that is more painful to one’s heart because it is uglier than the
sin which he committed. So, why and on what basis should she forgive
both men while they did not retreat even one step from what they had
committed against her?! They did not return Fadak to her, nor did they
return anything of her inheritance from the Messenger of Allah S or from
anything else except when one thinks that she was wrong in presenting
her claim.

They also did not admit their crime against Allah’s right and against
the nation when they usurped the caliphate from its rightful owner, nor
did either of them show any readiness to accept retribution for the
crime of assaulting her by beating her till she miscarried.

Those who did so were the cornerstones of the government and the aides
of the ruler who thus went seeking to apologize as his swords were
unsheathed against the necks of anyone who opposed him or who complained
against him. There was no repentance whatsoever. Rather, there was an
attempt at polishing their image, strengthening their position and
gaining more power to keep what they had confiscated.

Had the matter been contrariwise, and had they been serious about
seeking to be forgiven, what stopped Abu Bakr from punishing Qunfath or
al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah or ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab or others who violated
the privacy of her home, peace and blessings of Allah be on her?! If he
could not do any of that, the least he could have done was to reprimand
them or to frown in their faces or do something like that. Rather, he
added to it providing a cover for them and awarding them more care and
attention.

I do not know, did he give government jobs and money to so-and-so as a
reward for the assault which they had committed?!

As for Qunfath, they exempted him from paying any taxes on the wealth
which he amassed while working for them, as the Commander of the
Faithful (as) narrated, as his reward!

I do not know if al-Zahra’ (sa) wanted to take back from them what they
had confiscated from her, would they beat her anew, or would they
publicly sentence her to death?!

THIRD: Had she (sa) been pleased with them, why did she, then, state in
her will to be buried at night and that neither of them should be
present at her funeral?! Ali (as) carried out her will precisely, hiding
her grave site, so they both, and their supporters, were furious about
it and tried to exhume a number of graves which Ali (as) had dug up just
to divert others from the real one. Ali (as) confronted them with a
strong and decisive stand, so they both retreated.[^24]

If the government was strong and in full control, it was able to
circulate the rumor that she (sa) had been pleased after being
displeased, and nobody would have the courage to belie the government’s
claims. This rumor would have been accepted by many people. But when she
stated in her will to be buried during the night and neither of those
men should attend her funeral, nor any of those who oppressed her, she
foiled their chance to thus falsify the truth. She did so when she
provided the decisive evidence and the shining proof in the form of a
historical testimony to her anger with them embodied also in the fact
that nobody knew her grave (sa) across the ages, the Head of the Women
of Mankind that she was, the only daughter of the Seal of all Prophets
and Messengers of Allah S.

FOURTH: It is quite reasonable and acceptable that they both wanted from
trying to appease al-Zahra’ (sa) to make the point that it was merely a
personal matter which ended just as it began, and that now she was
pleased with them and there was no problem with her, as someone’s
statement suggests.

There was an insult against Fatima (sa), and there was an assault
committed against her holy person with beating or through other means.
An attempt like that may be interpreted as merely a rash action, or an
overwhelming anger which took the doers out of their normal moderation.

Was the reason for such an anger al-Zahra’ (sa) herself? Did she do
anything or say anything to cause it? Was it the tone of her voice? Or
were there any other reasons? They would surely close their eyes rather
than determine who was/were responsible for it.

The assailants themselves reverted to themselves and repented, and
al-Zahra’ (sa) supposedly was obligated to forgive and to overlook, for
this is exactly what Islamic ethics mandate and is emphasized by the
verses of the Qur’an, especially since she was the most worthy of all
people to uphold such ethics, the pious, purified and infallible woman
that she was.

This means that she thus rendered legitimacy to the aggression, to the
confiscation of the caliphate, and to the usurpation of the inheritance
which she had received from the Messenger of Allah S. So, nothing
remained except that they simply were too rash to beat her during the
confrontation, and they were to be excused for it because it came when
emotions reached their ebb and because of the state of suspension and
upheaval! And she herself may have been the reason for it anyway because
she (sa) was wrong when she stood in their face, and so was Ali (as) who
did not rush to recognize the new victorious ruler, nor was he in the
vanguard of those who rushed to swear the oath of allegiance and to
support! Thus will they regain the public’s respect, which is the most
precious of their aspirations.

But when al-Zahra’ (sa) refuses even their entry into her house,
rejecting their “repentance,” insisting on complaining against them to
the Messenger of Allah S, then she states in her will to be buried at
night, that both men should not attend her funeral, then she asks that
her grave be unknown to the public..., she surely spoils their plan.

Despite all the alteration and forgery, history records how she died
while being still angry with those who assaulted her, so Ali (as) buried
her at night. He did not even declare the *athan*, another fact which is
documented by respected and reliable references available with a large
mass of the Muslims.[^25]

Imam al-Rida (as) was asked once about both of these senior *sahabis*.
He said, “She was for us a kind mother who left this world angry with
both of them, and we shall never be pleased till she is pleased.”[^26]
Almost the same wording has been transmitted through ‘Abdullah son of
al-Hassan.[^27]

Thus, it becomes obvious that al-Zahra’ (sa) is an infallible and
purified woman; Allah is Pleased for her pleasure and is Wrathful when
she is angered. She, through her insightful stand, informed everyone in
the past or in the future, whoever enters the gateway of history, that
the issue was not a personal one, that it was the issue of the creed, of
Islam, of transgressing against Allah and His Messenger, peace and
blessings of Allah be on him and his progeny, against righteousness, and
against humanity.

It was an assault against Islam which she personified. Aggression
against her aimed at prohibiting her from defending the Imamate whereby
the faith stands and which is a decisive Divine edict; it is the
nation’s right, the right of man, every man, every human being.

She recorded her stand after she extracted their confession which
clearly indicted them. Such an indictment demonstrated the fact that the
aggression affected the Messenger of Allah S and, hence, it was an
aggression against Allah, Glory to Him, and it was *not* her privilege
to forgive one who transgressed the bounds of Allah, Glory to Him, and
those of His Glorious Messenger, peace and blessings of Allah be on him
and his progeny. She informed both men of this fact when she said to
them, “I shall complain against you to the Messenger of Allah S.”

In order to stop anyone from telling the public that al-Zahra’ (sa)
reverted to herself after that or sent them a message with so-and-so
that she was pleased with both of them, she stated in her will to be
buried at night.

Some may also claim that it is a Sunnah to bury the dead at night[^28],
as it actually happened, and it is legislated as such, she surmised that
doing so was not sufficient to prove the continuation of her anger with
them even after her demise, so she stated in her will that both men
should not attend her funeral, nor should they perform the funeral
prayers for her. Ali (as) prohibited them from doing any of these things
in compliance with her will.[^29]

Some references mention that “She took from the Commander of the
Faithful, Ali (as), a covenant for which Allah and His Messenger S are
the Witnesses, that nobody would attend her funeral except Umm Salimah,
Umm Ayman, Fidda, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as), Salman, ‘Ammar,
al-Miqdad, Abu Tharr and Huthayfah.”[^30] Ali (as) performed her funeral
prayers[^31], reciting the *takbar* fve times[^32].

There is no truth in their claim that Abu Bakr attended her funeral and
performed the funeral prayers[^33], for he never reached her grave, nor
did he do anything like that for the Messenger of Allah S himself
although he remained unburied for three days[^34]. The inauguration was
completed after his burial.[^35]

Let the fact that her grave site is not known to anyone till our time
and the inability of anyone at all to identify it precisely be a
glorious proof for such an exclusion which indicts them. All reliable
and authentic historical evidences underscore the lies of those who make
contrary claims from among those who forge history and who surely are
the enemies of the truth.

Thus it becomes quite clear that she (sa) made her death and funeral as
means of *jihad* in the Cause of Allah, for the sake of the religion,
and for the sake of explaining the facts to posterity.

The results of this *jihad* appeared from the very first moments. It is
narrated that when the report became public that al-Zahra’ (sa) had
passed away, “... there was a great deal of commotion among the people
who kept blaming each other and kept saying, ‘Your Prophet left behind
him only one single daughter, and when she dies and is buried, nobody
was present during her last moments, nor when she was buried, nor when
her funeral prayers were performed, nor do you even know where she is
buried so you can visit her grave...!”[^36]

Al-Fattani has said, “If we contemplate on what we have stated, let
alone what we have not, as well as the following evidences, you will
come to know that the origin of the pain from which Fatima, peace and
blessings of Allah be on her, was inflicted by both men (‘’Umar and Abu
Bakr) and by their followers in general, so much so that she died very
angry with them in a way which nobody can deny. Rather, it is a definite
conclusion reached by anyone who examines the truth minutely, one who
keeps aside denials and the norms of fanaticism as is the case with all
consecutively reported traditions.”[^37]

Unsuccessful Devious Attempts
-----------------------------

What is really strange is that we find someone trying to dissociate
himself from the fact that al-Zahra’ (sa) boycotted those who oppressed
her till she died by saying the following:

“The meaning of Fatima (sa) boycotting Abu Bakr and refusing to talk to
him till her death is that she did not discuss this issue (the wealth)
with him, that is, she did not ask him for anything, nor did she find
herself obligated to meet him, nor did anyone transmit anything about
their meeting together, so one would say that she neither greeted him
nor spoke to him because she was busy with her sickness and with other
things.”[^38]

Then they decide that al-Zahra’ (sa) was too pious to behave like that
and more God-fearing.[^39] We answer them as follows:

The same folks who say so have also said that she (sa) met both senior
*sahabis* when they went to meet her and to appease her during her
sickness. She spoke to them and was pleased by them, as they
allege.[^40]

Al-Shashi has rebutted this claim by saying that her anger connotes that
she (sa) abstained from saying anything to them which is clearly
boycotting them.[^41]

Is the Grave of al-Zahra’ (sa) Known to Anyone?
-----------------------------------------------

It is noteworthy that the Imams, peace with them, never acquainted their
Shi’as with the site of her grave (sa), as was the case with that of the
Commander of the Faithful whose grave site was identified by Imam
al-Sadiq (as), as is well known, and so is the case with all other Imams
who identified their grave sites to their Shi’as with the exception of
al-Zahra’ (sa). The Shi’as, who apply the Islamic tenets and Sunnah as
taught by Ahl al-Bayt (as), too, those who attended the funeral and the
burial, such as ‘Ammar, Abu Dharr, Salman, al-’Abbas, ‘Aqil and others
never acquainted anyone at all with her grave site in compliance with
her own will and in loving her. Ibn Abu Qara’ah, who died in 367
A.H./977 A.D., says the following verses of poetry:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولأي حال لحدت \* بالليل فاطمة الشريفة؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولما حمت شيخيكم \* عن وطئ حجرتها المنيفة؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوه لبنت محمد \* ماتت بغصتها أسيفة
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For what was Fatima, the Honorable One, buried at night?*

*And she didn’t allow your Shaikhs*[^42] *to set foot in her chamber.*

*Alas! Muhammed’s daughter died chocked with sorrow and grief.*[^43]

Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, may Allah have mercy on him, has said these
poetry lines:

*For what was she in the depth of the dark buried?*

*For what was she in secrecy placed in her grave?*

*Buried and none attended her funeral,*

*Nor do they know where her grave is*…[^44]

From the above you can come to know the fallacy of someone’s claim
alleging that the grave of al-Zahra’ (sa) is now well known, and we wish
he would lead us to it and explain for us the decisive proofs which
refute any excuse and dispel any doubt, and we will surely appreciate
his effort!

Yet we are sure that he just cannot do so.

Courage of al-Jahiz الجاحظ
--------------------------

How great the distance is between this man who specifically chooses a
tradition wherein clues of alteration and forgery are quite obvious,
claiming that al-Zahra’ (sa) was pleased with those who went to visit
her to appease her, despite all the factual and historical and tradition
evidences belying such a claim, and the other man who is very well known
as having deviated from the line of Ali (as) and of being especially
interested in denying the merits of Ali (as) while supporting his foes,
i.e. the famous writer, ‘Amr ibn Bahr al-Jahiz! The latter says the
following in his well known dissertation titled “Al-’Abbasiyya” as
transmitted from him by Shaikh al-Tusi, may Allah have mercy on him:

When he (Abu Bakr) deprived her of her inheritance and was unfair to her
and even assaulted her and committed a great sin against her, making her
taste oppression and losing all hope of justice, and when she realized
how weak she was, and how few her supporters were, she said to him, “By
Allah! I shall invoke Allah’s retribution against you.”

He said, “By Allah! I shall supplicate to Him for you.”

She said, “By Allah! I shall never speak to you.”

He said, “By Allah! I shall never renounce you.”

So, if they do not deny that Abu Bakr was truly rejected by her, then
the rejection of Fatima (sa) of him is by itself a proof testifying to
her claim. The least they could have done in such a situation was to
acquaint her with that of which she had no knowledge (if anything), or
reminding her of that which she had forgotten (if anything), or
correcting her mistake (if any), and exonerating her above anything
lowly or that she would say anything wrong, or oppress a just person, or
boycott someone who sought to remain attached to her.

So, if you find them blaming neither of the opponents, then the matters
are equal and the causes are straightforward, and reverting to the roots
of how Allah has decided regarding faring with one’s inheritance is
better for us and for yourselves and more obligatory on us and on you...
If they say, “How can anyone even think that Abu Bakr would be unfair to
her or assault her while whenever Fatima (sa) became more harsh with
him, he became more lenient and kind, and how so when she said to him,
“By Allah! I shall never speak to you,” he said, “By Allah! I shall
never renounce you,” then when she said, “By Allah! I shall invoke
Allah’s retribution against you,” he said, “By Allah! I shall supplicate
to Him for you”?[^45]

Then he tolerates all this harsh talk from her at the government’s
headquarters and in the company of the Quraishites and the *sahaba* when
the caliphate was in need of pride and prominence and the respect and
eminence it required? Yet all of that did not prohibit him from talking
to her as someone who was apologetic, seeking nearness to her,
safeguarding her honorable status, trying his best to get close to her
heart... saying, “Nobody in poverty is dearer to me than you, nor anyone
closer to my heart in ease, but I heard the Messenger of Allah (S) say,
‘We, prophets, do not leave inheritance; whatever we leave behind is
charity.’”

It was said to them that this is not evidence for innocence from
injustice, nor is it a way out of oppression. An oppressor may oppress,
and a cunning man may scheme, if he has a goal in mind and is used to
being disagreed with, he is used to speak in pretense the speech of the
oppressed one and fake the humility of one seeking equity and pretend to
be kind and to seek justice.[^46]

An Embarrassing Conclusion
--------------------------

Thus it becomes clear that al-Zahra’ (sa) never recognized the authority
nor the imamate of Abu Bakr since she passed away angry with him and
with his friend, dissociating herself from both of them, prohibiting
them from attending her funeral or even knowing where her grave was.

It is not possible at all to say that such an Infallible lady, who is
purified by token of the Verse of Purification (Qur’an, 33:33), the one
for whose anger Allah becomes angry, died the death of the days of
ignorance according to the sacred *hadith* saying, “Whoever dies without
knowing who the Imam of his time is, or who has not sworn the oath of
allegiance to such an Imam, dies the death of the days of
ignorance.”[^47]

The *‘allama* researcher, al-Khawajoo’i al-Mazandarani, has said, “Be
informed that those who follow their creed from among the Muslims,
regardless of their sects, have all endorsed the authenticity of the
statement made by the Prophet S wherein he said, ‘Anyone who dies
without knowing who the Imam of his time is dies the death of the days
of ignorance.”

There is no premise for the claim which some people make that this
tradition is above the level of criticism, and that what she was
expected to do was either acting contrarily to what the Prophet S had
brought, or that she had an Imam other than Abu Bakr; so, who could that
Imam be? Can anybody imagine him being anyone other than Ali (as)? And
can anyone imagine that al-Zahra’ (sa), who passed away without swearing
the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr, died the death of the days of
ignorance?!

Al-Zahra’ (sa) Meeting Men; the Veil Issue
------------------------------------------

By the way, we would like to state that someone has derived evidence for
the fallacy of the tradition saying, “It is better for the woman not to
see men nor men seeing her”[^48] from al-Zahra’ (sa) who made this
statement, meeting men and talking to them during the crisis while
confronting those who assaulted her home and confiscated Fadak.

After all, she did meet Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar when they both went to
appease her, and she talked to them in an ordinary manner. And she (sa)
used to go out with the ladies who went out to support the Prophet S as
he led the military campaigns to take care of war chores. The Prophet S
received women. Had it been better for the woman not to see men, the
Prophet S would have set up a barrier between him and each and every
woman who went to meet him, then he would have told her to speak from
behind the barrier. Our answer to all of this is as follows:

FIRST: This tradition, though weak in *isnad*, cannot be proven as a lie
through mentioning what has already been stated because her meeting (sa)
with men during the time of the crisis wherein she confronted Abu Bakr
and ‘’Umar does not mean that she let others see her face, and her
discourse with them may have taken place from behind a barrier or in a
way where they do not see her face.

It is not meant by her not seeing men and them not seeing her that she
was not visible to them or that each party does not see the shape and
size of the other. Some prefer to understand this tradition as being in
favor of the free mixing between men and women. Also, the fact that she
accompanied the Prophet S on his campaigns does not mean that men could
see her face or attractions. There is no proof that she (sa) used to
undertake any military affairs whatsoever. Her accompanying the Prophet
S like that does not connote what is alleged.

So is the case with regard to the Prophet S receiving women. It does not
mandate that he should set up a barrier between him and every woman who
came to have audience with him, nor did he set up a barrier for her to
talk to him from behind it. Sufficed her to take safeguards from
whatever means of veiling she had at her disposal, and she would talk to
him while observing the *hijab*. Speaking with someone does not obligate
any adorning or embellishment or sweet talking.

SECOND: When she (sa) delivered a speech before a crowd of the Muhajirun
and the Ansar and others, she was wrapped in her outer mantle as the
texts indicate.[^49]

THIRD: The subject of her preference not to be seen by men nor to see
men is not confirmed only by the said tradition. There are many other
traditions and texts such as the following:

1. One is narrated by Muhammed ibn Ya’qub from some of our men from
Ahmed ibn Abu ‘Abdullah saying, “Ibn Umm Maktam sought permission to
meet the Prophet S who had in his company ‘A’isha and Hafsa to whom he
said, ‘Get up and enter your chambers.’ They both said to him, ‘He is
blind!’ He said, ‘If he cannot see you, you surely can see him.’”[^50]

2. Umm Salamah is quoted as having said, “I was in the company of the
Messenger of Allah S who had with him Maymana. Ibn Umm Maktam came in
after the Prophet S had ordered the veil to be set up, so they both were
veiled from him. They said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! Is he not a blind man
who cannot see us?’ He said, ‘He is. Are you?! Can’t you see
him?!’”[^51]

What is odd is someone using this narrative of Ibn Umm Maktam entering
the residence of the Prophet S while he is in the chambers of his wives
which means his privacy, as he describes it. Then he builds on it the
revelation of Surat ‘Abas in his regard, and we have pointed out to the
error of such a statement if one studies the correct biography of the
Prophet (S) so let whoever wishes to refer to it to do so if he wishes.

If Ibn Umm Maktam, by thus entering once or twice to visit the Messenger
of Allah S, has produced for us this condition, we ought to verify the
deeper situation between the Prophet S and most, if not all, those whom
he met during his lifetime.

3. What is quoted from Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as): ‘Abdullah has told us
that Muhammed has said that Musa has said that his father quotes his
grandfather, Ja’far ibn Muhammed, quoting his father, peace with them,
saying that a blind man once sought permission to enter her house, so
she struck a veil between herself and him. The Prophet S asked her, “Why
did you wear a veil while he cannot see you?!” She said, “O Messenger of
Allah! If he cannot see me, I can see him, and he still breathes!” The
Prophet S said, “I testify that you are part of me.”

In *Da’a'im al-Islam*, Abu Ja’far (as) is quoted as saying the same. In
al-Rawandi’s *Nawadir*, the same is quoted by (Imam) Musa ibn Ja’far
(as).[^52]

4. Through the previously quoted *isnad*, Ja’far ibn Muhammed quotes his
father, peace with both of them, saying that Ali (as) entered the
chamber of Fatima (sa) daughter of the Messenger of Allah S, and he was
extremely upset. She asked him why, so he said to her that the Prophet S
asked people about woman when she is closest to her Lord, and they did
not know how to answer him.

She said to him, “Go back and tell him that she is closest to her Lord
when she stays at home.” He set out and told the Prophet S the same. The
Prophet S asked him, “What?! Is this your own answer, O Ali?!” Ali (as)
informed him that Fatima (sa) had informed him of it. He said, “Now you
have said the truth, for Fatima (sa) is part of me.” These incidents are
both narrated by Sayyid Fadlallah al-Rawandi in his *Nawadir* through an
*isnad* ending with him.[^53]

[^1]: Refer to Abtal Nahjul-Balagha (including in Dala’il al-Sidq), Vol.
3, Part 1, p. 47.

[^2]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Vol. 6, p. 50.

[^3]: Kanz al-\`Ummal, Vol. 5, p. 597. Al-Hakim, Al-Mustadrak, Vol. 3,
p. 66 who said that this is authentic according to the endorsement of
both Shaikhs (al-Bukhari and Muslim), and it is endorsed by al-Dhahbi.
Hayat al-Sahaba, Vol. 2, p. 18. Ibn Hamzah, Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, pp. 171,
173. Al-Ikhtisas, p. 186. Al-\`Ayyashi, Tafsir, Vol. 2, pp. 66, 67.
Al-Riyad al-Nadira, Vol. 2, p. 241. Many texts will be cited in a
forthcoming section which expose the identity of the participants in the
assault, and it is there that you will, Insha-Allah, find their sources
in detail.

[^4]: References for this incident will be cited in a section about
those who sought to appease al-Zahra’ (sa) which indicated the status
she used to enjoy.

[^5]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 27, p. 324. Al-Istighatha, p. 21.
Ibn Abul Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 6, pp. 11, 52, 50, and in
other places as well. Al-Bahrani, Manar al-Huda, p. 433. Muftah al-Bab
al-Hadi \`Ashar, p. 197, edited by Dr. Mahdi Muhaqqiq. Haqq al-Yaqin,
pp. 178, 182. Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. 2, pp. 343-46, quoting Minhaj
al-Karama and Nahj al-Haqq. Al-Shahristani, Al-Milal wal Nihal, Vol. 1,
p. 23. Sharh al-Mawqif, Vol. 8, p. 376. Al-Kaf\`ami, Majma\`
al-Ghara’ib, p. 288.

[^6]: Al-Qahba’i, Mujma\` al-Rijal, Vol. 2, p. 264 in a footnote. Ibn
Hamzah, Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, pp. 173, 202. It is said that al-Jahiz الجاحظ
narrated it in Al-Zaydiyya al-Kubra from a group of traditionists
including al-Zuhri. Ibn Shathan, Al-‘Izah, pp. 155-158. Jala' al-\`Uyun,
Vol. 1, p. 201. Refer to Vol. 2 of the book by Sulaym ibn Qays which
will soon be quoted as to Vol.2, p. 360 of Ithbat al-Hudat. Mir’at
al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, pp. 339-40. Al-Rasa’il al-I\`tiqadiyya, p. 455. Ibn
Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 17, p. 222. Al-Mustarshid, p. 451
(Iranian edition). Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 29, pp. 126, 133.
Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 234. \`Ilal al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, p.
182. Al-Kashshi, Rijal al-Hadith, p. 695 in the biography of Sufyan
al-Thawri.

[^7]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 1, p. 222.

[^8]: Al-Mustarshid fi Imamat \`Ali (A) p. 90. Al-‘adah, p. 190.

[^9]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 44, pp. 195-383, Vol. 75 p. 117.

[^10]: Tahthib al-Ahkam, Vol. 4, p. 149. Ma\`adin al-Hikma, Vol. 2, pp.
122, 123 quoting him and also quoting Man la Yahduruhu al-Faqih, Vol. 2,
p. 366 (Najaf edition).

[^11]: Al-‘Idah, p. 359. Tathkirat al-Khawass, p. 62. Sirr al-\`Alamin,
p. 21. Al-Bukhari, Sihah, Vol. 3, p. 60 and Vol. 4, pp. 5, 173 and Vol.
1, pp. 21, 22 and Vol. 2, p. 115. Al-Sam\`ani, Al-Musannaf, Vol. 6, p.
57 and Vol. 10, p. 361 and Vol. 5, p. 438. Al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, p. 107
(Najaf edition). Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 22, p. 498.
Al-Nu\`mani, Al-Ghayba, pp. 81, 82. \`Umdat al-Qari, Vol. 14, p. 298 and
Vol. 2, pp. 170, 171 and Vol. 25, p. 76. Fath al-Bari, Vol. 8, pp.
100-102, 186-87. Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Vol. 5, pp. 227, 251. Al-Bid’
wal-Tarikh, Vol. 5, p. 59. Al-Shahristani, Al-Milal wal Nihal, Vol. 1,
p. 22. Ibn Sa\`d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 244. Al-Tabari, Tarikh
al-Umam wal Muluk, Vol. 3, pp. 192-93. Al-Kamil fil Tarikh, Vol. 2, p.
320. Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 1, p. 562. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 6, p. 51 and Vol. 2, p. 55. Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol.
2, pp. 164, 182. Muslim, Sihah, Vol. 1, p. 75. Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 1,
pp. 355, 324, 222, 325, 332, 336, 362, 346. Ibn Hisham, Al-Sira
al-Halabiyya, Vol. 3, p. 344. Nahj al-Haqq, p. 273. Al-\`Ibar wa Dawan
al-Mubtada’ wal Khabar, Vol. 2, Part 2, p. 62. Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. 2,
pp. 344, 348, 399 and Vol. 1, p. 657. Al-Tirmithi, Al-Jami\` al-Sihah,
Vol. 3, p. 55. Nihaya al-Arab, Vol. 18, p. 375. Ibn Shahnah, Rawdat
al-Munazir, Vol. 7, p. 808 (as referred to in a footnote in Al-Kamil fil
Tarikh). Also refer to Haqq al-Yaqin, Vol. 1, pp. 181-82. Dala’il
al-Sidq, Vol. 3, part 1, pp. 63, 70. Al-Sirat al-Mustaqim, Vol. 3, pp.
3, 7. Sharif ad-Dan Sadr ad-Dan al-Musawi, Al-Muraja\`at, p. 353; Sharif
ad-Dan al-Musawi, Al-Nass wal Ijtihad, pp. 149, 163. Al-Mukhtasar fi
Akhbar al-Bashar, Vol. 1, p. 151. Al-Kaf\`ami, Majma\` al-Ghara’ib, p.
289. Minhaj al-Sunnah, Vol. 3, p. 135. Manaqib al Abu Talib, Vol. 1, p.
292. Tarikh al-Islam, Vol. 2, pp. 383-84. Kashf al-Mahajja, p. 64
(Haidari Press edition, 1370 A.H.). Al-Tara’if, pp. 432, 433. Refer to
Al-Taratab al-Idariyya, Vol. 2, p. 241. Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz
al-\`Ummal (Indian edition, 1381 A.H.), Vol. 7, p. 170. Al-Bayhaqi,
Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, Vol. 7, pp. 181, 184. Abu Ya\`li, Musnad, Vol. 5, p.
393 and Vol. 3, pp. 393-94 and Vol. 4, p. 299. Mujma\` al-Zawa’id, Vol.
4, p. 214.

[^12]: Refer to Ibn \`Awanah, Musnad, Vol. 4, pp. 394, 400. Ahmed,
Musnad, Vol. 5, pp. 99, 93, 90, 96, 98, 101. Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 4,
p. 106. Al-Nu\`mani, Al-Ghayba, pp. 121-24. Irshad al-Sari, Vol. 10, p.
273. Muslim, Sihah, Vol. 6, p. 4 (Mashkal edition). Shaikh al-Tasi,
Al-Ghayba, pp. 88-89. Fath al-Bari, Vol. 13, pp. 181-184. I\`lam
al-Wara, p. 38. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 36, pp. 235, 239, 240
and Vol. 63, p. 236. Muntakhab al-Athar, p. 20. Ikmal ad-Din, Vol. 1,
pp. 272-73. Tarikh al-Khulafa’, pp. 10-11. Ibn Hajar al-\`Asqalani,
Al-Sawa\`iq al-Muhriqa, p. 18. Al-Qanduzi, Yanabi\` al-Mawadda, pp.
444-45. Al-Khisal (in a chapter about the Twelve Imams); refer also to
Vol. 2, pp. 470, 472, 474 of it. Refer also to \`Uyun Akhbar al-Rida and
Mawaddat al-Qurba and to Vol. 13, p. 1 of Ihqaq al-Haqq (the
Appendices). Ibn al-Batriq, Al-\`Umda, p. 421. Refer to Al-Nihaya fil
Lugha, Vol. 3, p. 54. Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-\`Arab, Vol. 12, p. 343 and
to Al-Qarab fi Mahabbat al-\`Arab, p. 129.

[^13]: Regarding the narrator hearing the phrase “all of them from
Quraish,” or “from Banu Hashim,” refer to the following references:
Muslim, Sihah, Vol. 6, p. 3 through various venues (Mashkal edition).
Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 5, pp. 90, 92-101, 106-18. Abu \`Awanah, Musnad,
Vol. 4, p. 394. Hilyat al-Awliya’, Vol. 4, p. 333. I\`lam al-Wara, p.
382. Ibn al-Batriq, Al-\`Umda, pp. 416-22. Ikmal ad-Din, Vol. 1, pp.
272-73. Al-Khisal, Vol. 2, pp. 275, 469. Fath al-Bari, Vol. 13, pp.
181-85. Al-Nu\`mani, Al-Ghayba, pp. 119-25. Al-Bukhari, Sihah, Vol. 4,
p. 159. Al-Qanduzi, Yanabi\` al-Mawadda, pp. 444-46. Tarikh Baghdad,
Vol. 2, p. 126 and Vol. 14, p. 353. Al-Mustadrak \`alal Sihahain, Vol.
3, p. 618 and its Talkhis by al-Dhahbi (referred to in its footnote) on
the same page. Muntakhab al-Athar, pp. 10-23 which cites numerous
references. Al-Tirmithi, Al-Jami\` al-Sihah, Vol. 4, p. 501. Abu Dawud,
Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 116. Kifayat al-Athar, from p. 49 till the end of the
book. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 36, p. 231 till the end of the
chapter. Ihqaq al-Haqq (Appendices), Vol. 13, pp. 1-50, citing numerous
references.

[^14]: The references for this statement have already been cited.

[^15]: Refer to Al-Mustarshid fi Imamate Ali  p. 146 and p. 147 of
Al-Farq Baynal Firaq.

[^16]: Refer to the following references: Sharh Mamiyyat Abu Firas, pp.
73-74. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 48, p. 131. \`Uyun Akhbar
al-Rida, Vol. 1, p. 91. Al-Qanduzi, Yanabi\` al-Mawadda, p. 383. Maqatil
al-Talibiyyin, p. 453. Al-Khawarizmi, Manaqib Ali  ibn Abu Talib, p.
208. Ibn Sa\`d, Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, Vol. 5, p. 227 (Sadir’s edition).
Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Vol. 8, p. 316. Tatimmat al-Muntaha, p. 185. Qamus
al-Rijal, Vol. 10, p. 370.

[^17]: Refer to al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, Vol. 7, p. 281. Al-Riyad
al-Nadira, Vol. 1, p. 176. Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala’, Vol. 2, p. 121.
Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol. 2, p. 174 quoting Al-Wafa’ and al-Sammani in
Al-Muwafaqa and Vol. 6, p. 174 of Al-Sunan al-Kubra. Al-Sira
al-Halabiyya, Vol. 3, p. 361. Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 8, p. 72.
Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Vol. 5, p. 289. Hayat al-Sahaba, Vol. 2, p. 473.
Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 6, pp. 19, 49 and Vol. 2, p.
57. Fath al-Bari, Vol. 6, p. 139. Nuzhat al-Majalis, Vol. 2, p. 183.

[^18]: Refer to al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-\`Ummal, Vol. 12, p. 515
and Vol. 13, p. 687.

[^19]: Kanz al-\`Ummal, Vol. 5, p. 605 quoting al-Bayhaqi, adding, “This
tradition is taken for granted and its isnad is good.” Ibn Sa\`d,
Tabaqat, Vol. 8, p. 29.

[^20]: Al-Imama wal Siyasa, Vol. 1, pp. 14-15. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 36, p. 308 and Vol. 78, p. 254 and Vol. 43, pp. 170-71.
Dala’il al-Imama, p. 45. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, pp. 411, 445, 498,
499. Kifayat al-Athar, pp. 64-65. Al-Burhan, Vol. 3, p. 65. \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, pp. 186-189. Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, p. 213. Tawfiq Abu
\`Alam, Ahl al-Bayt, pp. 168-69, 174. Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, pp.
322-23. Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, pp. 85-87. Al-Manawi,
Al-Jami\` al-Saghir, Vol. 2, p. 122. Al-Rasa’il al-‘Itiqadiyya, p. 448.

[^21]: Refer to \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 500. \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, p. 187. Diya’ al-\`Alamin, Vol. 2, p. 87.

[^22]: The book of Sulaym ibn Qays (edited by al-Ansari), Vol. 2, p.
869. Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, pp. 212-13 with additional details.
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 197-203 and Vol. 28, p. 357.
\`Ilal al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, pp. 186-87.

[^23]: Reference to the same is made in Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript),
Vol. 2, p. 108.

[^24]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 30, pp. 286, 348-49 and Vol. 29,
p. 193. The author also transmitted her will in a footnote on p. 171,
Vol. 43, of his book from the following references: Hilyat al-Awliya’,
Vol. 2, p. 43. Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 162. Usd al-Ghaba, Vol.
5, p. 524. Al-Isaba, Vol. 4, pp. 379-80. Al-Imama wal Siyasa, Vol. 1, p.
14. A\`lam al-Nisa’, Vol. 3, p. 1214. Refer also to Ibn Abul Hadid,
Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 6, p. 50, where the author says, “I have
confirmed that she did died angry with both of them, etc.” \`Abd
al-Razzaq, Musanaff, Vol. 3, p. 521. Al-Isti\`ab, Vol. 2, p. 751.
Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 83. Dala’il al-Imama, p. 44.

[^25]: Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Vol. 5, pp. 250, 285-287, quoting
al-Bukhari, Ahmed and \`Abd al-Razzaq. Refer to al-Bukhari’s “Kitab
al-Maghazi” where Khaybar’s campaign is discussed and how the Messenger
of Allah (S) said, “We do not leave our inheritance as charity.” Ibn
Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 6, pp. 49-50 and Vol. 16, pp.
218, 232. Muslim, Sihah, “Kitab al-Jihad wal Siyar.” Ibn Hamzah,
Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, pp. 211, 205. Al-Thiqat, Vol. 2, pp. 164-65.
Al-Tabari, Tarikh Muluk, Vol. 3, p. 208 (Dar al-Ma\`arif edition).
Tawfiq Abu \`Alam, Ahl al-Bayt, p. 172. Mushkil al-‘Athar, Vol. 1, p.
48. Ibn al-Batrq, Al-\`Umdah, pp. 39-91. Al-Sunan al-Kubra, Vol. 6, pp.
300-01. Al-Tanbih wal Ishraf, p. 250. Al-Dhahbi, Tarikh al-Islam, p. 591
(published by Dar al-Kitab al-\`Arabi, the Prophet’s Biography Dept.),
and in its footnote there is a reference to many sources. Ibn Sa\`d,
Tabaqat, Vol. 8, pp. 28-29. Rawdat al-Muttaqin, Vol. 5, p. 349.
Al-Tara’if, pp. 257-58, 262, 269. Tahrar al-Afkar, p. 228. Alqab
al-Rasul wa \`Itratih, p. 44. Refer also to p. 370 of Kifayat al-Talib.
Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 162. Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. 2, p. 366.
Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 1, pp. 6-9. Al-Riyad al-Mustataba, p. 291. Tarikh
al-Khamis, Vol. 1, p. 174. Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, pp. 322-23.
Al-Sam\`ani, Musannaf, Vol. 5, p. 472 and Vol. 4, p. 141 and Vol. 3, p.
521. Taysar al-Wusal, Vol. 1, p. 209. Refer also to Diya’ al-\`Alamin
(manuscript), Vol. 2, pp. 65-66, 91.

[^26]: Alqab al-Rasul wa \`Itratih, p. 44. Al-Tara’if, p. 252.

[^27]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 16, p. 232 and Vol. 6,
p. 49.

[^28]: Judge \`Abd al-Jabbar, Al-Mughni, Vol. 20, p. 335.

[^29]: Refer to pp. 10-11 of Al-Istighatha. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11,
pp. 467, 505-06, 523, 508, 493, 411, 501-02, 504, 404, 534, 122, 515,
512. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 78, pp. 250, 253-256, 310, 387 and
Vol. 43, pp. 201, 207, 218, 181, 191, 214, 199, 182-83 and Vol. 28, p.
353 and Vol. 29, p. 192 (footnote), 193 and Vol. 30, pp. 348-49, 286.
Ibn Shahr Ashub, Al-Manaqib.

[^30]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 78, p. 310.

[^31]: Al-Hakim, Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 162. Al-Nawawi, Tahthib al-Asma’,
Vol. 2, p. 353. Sifat al-Safwa, Vol. 2, p. 14. Ibn Shabbah, Tarikh
al-Medina, Vol. 1, p. 197. Ibn Haban, Tarikh al-Sahaba, p. 208. Ibn
al-Batriq, Al-\`Umdah, pp. 390-91. In a footnote of the latter, it is
indicated that the text is quoted from p. 154, Vol. 5 of Muslim’s Sihah
and from al-Bukhari’s Sihah, in a chapter about the Khaybar campaign and
from al-\`\`Omari al-Musilli’s book Al-Rawda al-Fayha’, p. 252.
Al-Irbali, Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 128. Diya’ al-\`Alamin
(manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 3. Jami\` al-Usul, pp. 9-10.

[^32]: Refer to Ibn al-Sabbagh al-Maliki, Al-Fusal al-Muhimma, p. 131.
Jawahir al-Akhbar wal Athar al-Mustakhraja min Lujjat al-Bahr
al-Zakhkhar, Vol. 3, p. 118. Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 128.

[^33]: Refer to Al-Riyad al-Nadira, Vol. 1, p. 176. The author comments
saying, “This has been transmitted by al-Basri and is included by Ibn
al-Samman in Al-Muwafaqa. Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba. P. 54. Al-Isaba, Vol. 4,
p. 479. Tahthib al-Kamal, Vol. 35, p. 252. Tarikh al-Hijra al-Nabawiyya,
p. 58. Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 86. Tarikh al-Khamis,
Vol. 1, p. 278. Al-Sira al-Halabiyya, Vol. 3, p. 361. Judge \`Abd
al-Jabbar, Al-Mughni, Vol. 20, p. 335.

[^34]: Abu al-Salah, Taqrib al-Ma\`arif, p. 251. Ibn Shahr Ashub,
Al-Manaqib, Vol. 1, p. 297.

[^35]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 46. Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2,
pp. 94-94, quoting Al-Manaqib.

[^36]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 46. Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2,
pp. 93-94, quoting Al-Manaqib.

[^37]: Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 95. Al-Hidaya
al-Kubra, p. 179.

[^38]: Sharh Bahjat al-Mahafil, Vol. 1, p. 131, quoting al-Dhahbi. Fath
al-Bari, Vol. 6, p. 139. Al-Sira al-Halabiyya, Vol. 3, p. 361.

[^39]: Fath al-Bari, Vol. 6, p. 139.

[^40]: Al-Dhahbi, Tarikh al-Islam (the part discussing the righteous
caliphs), p. 47. Fath al-Bari, Vol. 6, p. 139.

[^41]: Fath al-Bari, Vol. 6, p. 139.

[^42]: Abu Bakr and \`’Umar are always referred to in history and
theology books as “the two Shaikhs,” senior sahabis. The word “shaikh”
has many meanings. One of them is “scholar” or “mentor” as exists in
many places throughout this book. The “two shaikhs,” scholars, are also
al-Bukhari and Muslim. Generally speaking, “shaikh” is used to identify
a man who has passed his mid-aged. It also conveys the meaning of a
tribal chief or chieftain. \_\_ Tr.

[^43]: “Abul-Hassan” Ali ibn \`Isa ibn Abul-Fath al-Arbili, Kashf
al-Ghumma fi Ma\`rifat al-A’imma, Vol. 2, p. 131.

[^44]: Al-Majalis al-Saniyya, Vol. 5, p. 120.

[^45]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 16, p. 214. Al-Shafi,
Talkhis, Vol. 3, p. 152 and other references.

[^46]: Al-Shafi, Talkhis, Vol. 3, pp. 152-53. A commentator said the
following commenting on p. 151 of Al-\`Abbasiyya by al-Jahiz: “The book
titled Al-\`Abbasiyya was published among letters compiled and verified
and explained by Hassan al-Sandubi which he called “Letters of Al-Jahiz”
and the number of this Letter is 12. It was published at the Rahmaniyya
Press in Egypt in 1352 A.H. Sayyid al-Qazwini quoted these same
paragraphs on p. 420 of his book Fatima al-Zahra’ minal Mahd ilal-Lahd
from pp. 300-03 of these said Letters.

[^47]: Refer to the wordings of this tradition on p. 390, Vol. 1, of
Al-Ghadir where al-Taftazani is quoted on p. 275, Vol. 2, of his book
titled Sharh al-Maqasid. Al-Karakchi, Kanz al-Fawa’id, p. 151. Ibn Shahr
Ashub, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 3, p. 304. Mujma\` al-Zawa’id, Vol. 5, pp.
219-18, 224-25. Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 4, p. 96 and Vol. 3, p. 446.
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 23, pp. 80, 88, 89, 92. Some of his
footnotes cite p. 269 of Al-Ikhtisas, pp. 230-31 of Ikmal ad-Din and p.
15 of Muntakhab al-Athar from Al-Jam\` Baynal Sihahain. Ibn Abul-Hadid,
Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 13, p. 242 from al-Iskafi in Naqd
al-\`Uthmaniyya and pp. 82-83 of Manar al-Huda by Shaikh Ali al-Bahrani.
Al-Muhalla, Vol. 1, p. 46. Al-Bukhari, Sihah (“Kitab al-Fitan,” in a
chapter titled “You shall see after me things which you shall abhor.”)
Muslim, Sihah (“Kitab al-Imara,” in a chapter about the obligation to be
with the majority), Vol. 4, p. 517 (Dar al-Sha\`ab edition).

[^48]: This tradition is narrated from the Prophet , from Imam
al-Sadiq (A) and from Ali (A); so, refer to Wasa'il al-Shi\`a, Vol. 20,
pp. 67, 232. Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 14, pp. 183, 289. Al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 48, 54, 84 and Vol. 100, p. 239 and Vol.
101, p. 36. Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 9, pp. 202-03 from al-Bazzar and Vol.
10, pp. 224, 226 from many references. Mujma\` al-Zawa’id, Vol. 4, p.
255. Kashf al-Astar, from p. 235, Vol. 3, of al-Bazzar’s Musnad. Fada’il
al-Khamsa minal Sihah al-Sitta, Vol. 3, pp. 153-54 quoting p. 315, Vol.
8, of Kanz al-\`Ummal. Al-Dhahbi, Al-Kaba’ir, p. 176. Da\`a’im al-Islam,
Vol. 2, pp. 124, 215. Is\`af al-Raghibin (as referred to in a footnote
in Nur al-Absar), pp. 171-72, 191. Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 92.
Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 233. Manaqib al Abu Talib, Vol. 3, p. 119.
\`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 197. Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn,
Vol. 1, p. 62. Hilyat al-Awliya’, Vol. 2, p. 41. Ibn al-Maghazli,
Manaqib al-Imam Ali (A) p. 381. There are other references mentioned in
the footnotes of Kitab al-\`Awalim. Manaqib Amir al-Mu’minin Ali  by
Judge Muhammed ibn Sulayman al-Kafi, Vol. 2, pp. 210-11. Diya’
al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 14 quoting Al-Manaqib and Al-Durra
al-Yatima fi Ba\`d Fada’il al-Sayyida al-\`Adima, p. 31. Da\`a’im
al-Islam, Vol. 2, pp. 214-15.

[^49]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 254. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 16, pp. 211, 250. Balaghat al-Nisa’, p. 24. A\`lam
al-Nisa’, Vol. 4, p. 116. Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 106. Ihqaq
al-Haqq, Vol. 10, p. 299. Al-Murtada, Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, pp. 69, 71.
Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 69. Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, p.
468. Sharh al-Akhbar, Vol. 3, p. 43. Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn 
Vol. 1, p. 77. Ibn Maytham, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 5, p. 105.

[^50]: Al-Wasa'il, Vol. 20, p. 232. Al-Kafi, Vol. 5, p. 534.

[^51]: Al-Wasa'il, Vol. 20, p. 232. Its footnotes quote p. 233 of
Makarim al-Akhlaq, Ahmed’s Musnad, al-Tirmithi’s Al-Jami\` al-Sihah,
Vol. 5, p. 102. Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 63 and al-Dhahbi’s
Al-Kaba’ir, p. 177.

[^52]: Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 14, p. 289, footnote on p. 95 of
Al-Ja\`fariyyat is quoted and so are the following: p. 214, Vol. 2, of
Da\`a’im al-Islam, p. 23, Vol. 11, of \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, and its
footnote p. 13 of al-Rawandi’s Nawadir is quoted. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 91. It is also narrated by al-Maghazli, pp.
380-81.

[^53]: Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 14, p. 182. Its footnote cites p. 95
of Al-Ja\`fariyyat and p. 14 of al-Rawandi’s Nawadir. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 92 and Vol. 100, p. 250. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol.
11, p. 123.


