Part 8: From Here And There
===========================

Did Medina’s Houses have Doors?!
--------------------------------

Someone quotes a history professor at Damascus University[^1] as saying
that during the time of the Messenger of Allah (S) and thereafter,
Medina’s homes did not have wooden doors. Rather, only curtains used to
be placed on entrances. Then he said that he discussed it with the
professor and that the latter had a proof. Then he follows his statement
by saying, “So, how was al-Zahra’ (sa) squeezed between the door and the
wall? And how did the fire burn the door’s wood?!”

The same transmitter produces two “proofs” to support his statement.
They are:

FIRST: The Prophet (S) returned from one of his trips and went to
Fatima’s house. He found on its entrance a curtain which Ali (as) had
given to her as a gift, so the Prophet (S) returned. Fatima (sa) knew
why he returned, so she gave the curtain to al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as)
to get it to her father to do with it whatever he pleased. He S said,
“May her father be her sacrifice!” This proves that the entrances had
only curtains.

SECOND: Narrating the incident when al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah committed
adultery saying that the witnesses saw him in action when the wind blew
away the entrance’s curtain, not that they entered the house and saw him
in such an abominable and uncompromising condition. This, too, proves
that the entrances had curtains, not wooden doors.

The answer to the above is:

FIRST: The same individual raises a case against the history professor
at Damascus University that Medina’s homes during the time of the
Messenger of Allah S did not have (wooden) doors, saying that he
discussed it with the man who had a proof.

We say to the same individual: “Did you rebut his proof or where you
convinced of it? If you rebutted it, how did you do that and by what
means? And if you accepted it, as seems to be the case, why didn’t you
publicly declare it rather than refer people to someone else?!”

SECOND: Perhaps the claim that Medina’s homes did not have doors was a
joke intended to tease Ikhwan al-Safa and to break the ice after a
period of shunning and avoiding!

This joke is the one that prompted us to collect scores, even hundreds,
of texts proving that Medina’s homes did have wooden doors with knobs to
open and to shut, to break or to burn, to lock or to knock, during the
time of the Prophet (S) and thereafter. They also had keys and locks as
well as latches and a knob ring whereby they were knocked at. Their wood
may have been either juniper or teak, as was the case with ‘A’isha’s
house door. Or they may have been made of palm leaves, or from wood.
Curtains may have been placed on them or any countless things which we
need not mention.

So, there is no harm if we take the dear reader back to the following
research titled “Medina’s Homes During the Time of the Messenger of
Allah S” where the reader will find his quest in numerous texts which we
have cited from many books and references especially from *Bihar
al-Anwar* and a host of references and also from the *Sihah* books, from
Ahmed’s *Musnad* and from Sunni collections of *hadith*.

THIRD: To seek evidence from the story that the Prophet (S) returned
from one of his trips, went to Fatima’s house and found on its entrance
a curtain which he did not like[^2] is insufficient to come to such a
conclusion, for the doors, generally speaking, had both wooden knobs as
well as curtains, and the door could be opened while the curtain
remained. The following points this fact out;

1. Abu Dharr  quotes the Messenger of Allah S as saying, “If a man
passes by a door which has no curtain and is not shut, and if he looked
(inside), the sin is not his but belongs to those who inhabit that
house.”[^3]

2. In a tradition by Imam al-Sadiq (as), it is stated that “... The
Prophet S ordered to get all those inside the house out except Ali (as)
and Fatima (sa) between the curtain and the door..., etc.”[^4]

3. Ali (as) is quoted as having said, “It is abominable for a man to
spend the night at a house with neither a door nor a curtain.”[^5]

4. The Prophet S has said, “Whenever any of you approaches his wife, he
should close his door, put up its curtain and seek Allah’s
covering...”[^6]

5. The Prophet S was asked once about a man who divorced his wife
thrice, then a man married her, so he closed his door and let the
curtain down then divorced her without having touched her, will she be
lawful for her first husband?” He said, “Not till she tastes her dower.”
And there are other variations of this tradition.[^7]

6. ‘A’isha has said, “The Messenger of Allah (S) opened a door between
himself and the public” or “unveiled a curtain.”[^8]

FOURTH: Regarding the incident involving al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah, using
it as evidence is not right because of the following:

1. Al-Tabari and other historians state that the house of Abu Bakrah
used to face that of al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah, and they are at watering
places facing each other. A group of men assembled at the watering place
of Abu Bakrah to chat. Wind blew, opening the door, so Abu Bakrah stood
up in order to close it. He then saw al-Mughirah, and the wind had
opened the door at his watering place. He was positioning himself
between a woman’s legs. Abu Bakrah said to the men, “Stand up and take a
look!” They stood up and looked. Then he said, “Bear witness to it...,
etc.”[^9]

2. We have already stated that the presence of a curtain does not mean
that there should be no wooden knobs for a door, and there is no
objection to al-Mughirah just lowering the curtain and leaving the door
open so that Allah might expose him through the wind!

They did not Enter the House, so How did they Beat al-Zahra’ (sa)?!
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Someone says that some narratives indicate that those who assailed the
house of al-Zahra’ (sa) did not enter it; so, how can it be right for
someone to say that they beat her and caused her to miscarry, etc.?!

Here is the answer:

FIRST: The trials and tribulations which al-Zahra’ (sa) had to undergo
do not need an entry into her house. Al-Zahra’ (sa) could have been
squeezed between the door and the wall, and the assailants could have
hit her without entering the house. This is clearly what the texts
discussing this issue indicate.

This is so if by entering he means what is obvious. But if he explained
by saying that he meant “assailing,” not “entering,” then the culprit
himself had said, “How I wish I never had to unveil Fatima’s door!”
Numerous texts indicate that they forcefully entered the house, refuting
such a claim.

SECOND: Why should this person confine himself to the narrative saying
that they did not open the house while she herself never said that they
did not enter, contending herself with silence and with mentioning some
of what went on.

If we accept such a narrative, it is contradicted by numerous narratives
enjoying a much better *isnad* and are more numerous. They all say that
the assailants forcefully entered her house, violating its sanctity and
her privacy.

THIRD: Beating al-Zahra’ (sa) and causing her to miscarry is not an
ordinary matter. It is a momentous event which cannot be accepted by any
Muslim whose conviction is true, and he will be vocal in protesting it
and in reprimanding them, only in the absence of the fear of the sword
or of the whip. It is surely not in the best interest of the rulers nor
that of those who love them that the public should circulate such an
event, nor to know its details. Hence, they permitted neither themselves
nor others to transmit it or circulate it. Rather, we have seen how some
people consider transmitting this issue as a crime whose transmitter is
held accountable, and here we would like to transmit to you some proofs
from the following:

### 1. “Do Not Quote me Saying it!

Ibn Abul-Hadid, the Mu’tazilite scholar, says that he read to his
mentor, Abu Ja’far al-Naqib, the story of Zainab when she was terrorized
by Habar ibn al-Aswad. Abu Ja’far said to him, “If the Messenger of
Allah (S) had permitted the killing of Habar because he terrorized (his
granddaughter) Zainab, so she miscarried, it is obvious that had he been
alive, he would have permitted the killing of those who terrorized [her
mother] Fatima (sa), so she miscarried.” He said to him, “Shall I quote
you a statement which some folks have been saying, that is, that Fatima
(sa) was terrorized, so she miscarried al-Muhsin?” He said, “Do not
quote me saying it, nor should you quote me saying that it did not
happen, for I remain in my stand due to the contradictions in its
narratives.”[^10]

So, Abu Ja’far al-Naqib quickly retracted his steps when the Mu’tazilite
scholar faces him with such a sensitive question, although he had
already and definitely passed his judgment in the very beginning.
Perhaps the reason for retracting was that it would cause him problems
which he wanted to avoid.

### 2. “Ali (as), Not I, Says So!”

Similar to this incident is another issue they mention which is equally
sensitive and weighty. Another mentor of the Mu’tazilite scholar made
the same retraction with him so that he would distance himself from
having to confront problems he could do without.

The Mu’tazilite Shafi’i scholar has stated that his mentor quoted Ali
(as) as saying that ‘A’isha was the one who ordered her father to lead
the people for the prayers when the Prophet S was suffering from his
sickness prior to his demise. He said, “I said to him (to my mentor),
may Allah have mercy on him, ‘Do you mean to say that ‘A’isha appointed
her father to lead the prayers while the Messenger of Allah S did not
appoint him to do that?!’” He said, “I do not say that, but Ali (as)
used to say it. My obligation differs from his. He was present there and
I was not. I have to stick to the narratives transmitted to me saying
that the Prophet S appointed Abu Bakr to lead the prayers, while Ali
(as) was obligated to say what he knew..., etc.”[^11]

### 3. He Dropped the Incident of Fatima (sa) Being Beaten!

They have said the following about the traditionist Ahmed ibn Muhammed
ibn al-Surri ibn Yahya ibn Abu Darim: “He was a straightforward person
most of his lifetime. During his last days, he used to be quoted most of
the time narrating the infamies which he witnessed, and a man used to
quote him as saying that ‘’Umar kicked Fatima (sa) till she miscarried
al-Muhsin.”[^12]

So, his being quoted saying so got him out of the path of
straightforwardness which he upheld most of his life! This became a
reason for his being attacked and chewed, and he eventually lost
recognition.

### 4. Finding Fault With the Ruling System

They consider what Fatima (sa) had to suffer as the most serious fault
which they could find against the ruling system. Al-Shahristani used to
quote one of the greatest Mu’tazilite mentors as saying, “‘’Umar hit
Fatima’s stomach on the day of swearing the oath of allegiance (to Abu
Bakr) till she miscarried. He used to shout: ‘Burn her house and
everyone inside it!’ Those inside it were Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and
al-Husayn (as).”[^13] Al-Baghdadi [the historian] considered ‘’Umar’s
admission that he hit Fatima (sa) and deprived her of her inheritance as
one of the ruling system’s deviations (from the *Shari’a* ).

### 5. Distorting the Book Titled Al-Ma’arif

Because of the issue of miscarrying the fetus of al-Muhsin, we find them
quite ready to distort books, too. They distorted the book titled
*Al-Ma’arif* by Ibn Qutaybah as we are told by Ibn Shahr Ashub who died
in 577 A.H./1181 A.D. Said he, “... And in Ibn Qutaybah’s book titled
*Al-Ma’arif*, it is stated that Muhsin was aborted because of the
stampede caused by Qunfath al-’Adawi.”[^14] Al-Kanji al-Shafi’i, who
died in 685 A.H./1286 A.D., quotes Shaikh al-Mufid as saying, “He added
telling the public that after the demise of the Prophet S, Fatima (sa)
miscarried a male stillborn whom the Messenger of Allah S had named
Muhsin. This is something which none from among the transmitters
transmits except Ibn Qutaybah.”[^15]

It seems that he meant that Ibn Qutaybah transmits in his book titled
*Al-Ma’arif*, not in *Al-Imama wal Siyasa*, by the token Ibn Shahr Ashub
says so as quoted above. But p. 92 of the present edition’s content of
the book titled *Al-Ma’arif*, which was published in 1353 A.H./1934
A.D., contains the following: “As for Muhsin, son of Ali (as), he died
when he was *young*...”

Thus, the distortion is carried on in all circulated editions; so, why
do some people resort thus to distortion, and why do they truly betray
the facts and the history [of Islam]?!

Qunfath’s Version Contradicts the Shaikh’s “Consensus”
------------------------------------------------------

Someone says, “Shaikh al-Tusi transmits the consensus of the Shi’a
regarding the ruling system’s statement, that is, that ‘’Umar hit Fatima
(sa) in the stomach till she miscarried, whereas the narratives,
according to the evidences gathered by the Imamites and by others, say
that it was Qunfath who did it.”

It is as if he wants to say, “These transmissions contradict one
another; therefore, they should be dropped.”

Our answer is as follows:

FIRST: Shi’as have all agreed on the first, but they did not discount
the possibility that Qunfath, too, did it. The narratives collected by
Imamites and others, many of which will be quoted, prove that the foul
deed did, indeed, take place. Al-Mughirah, too, took part in beating
al-Zahra’ (sa) till he caused her to bleed as will be discussed in the
part containing texts and legacies. There is no objection that all of
them took part in doing something like that, thus causing the
miscarriage. It is, then, accurate to attribute it to all of them, and
to each of them individually, because they were all behind it. Such an
attribution does not mean that each of them was a separate cause of the
miscarriage.

SECOND: Texts have clearly shown, as you will see, that the assault on
the house of Fatima (sa) was repeated, just as the ceremonies of
swearing the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr were repeated, too.[^16] One
such recurrence aimed at burning the house just as Abu Bakr was sitting
on the pulpit to receive people’s oath of allegiance and seeing what was
going on without opposing it or changing it, as al-Mufid, may Allah rest
his soul in peace, proves in his book titled *Al-Amali*. Repeated
assaults are documented in numerous narratives, sometimes quite openly.
This is the conclusion which one reaches from comparing the narratives
with one another where the particulars of the individuals and the norms
of their conduct distinguished one assault from another.

Some narratives assert that Abu Bakr himself used to issue orders to
attack. Prior to the assault, threats of burning were made, and firewood
was gathered. Then the fire was partly ignited, then the door was broken
open and the truthful lady, the purified al-Zahra’ (sa), was beaten by
more than one assailant. She fell on the ground and that man (‘’Umar)
kicked her with his foot, too. All of this will be detailed in the
texts’ part to come, by the Will of Allah Almighty.

Some narratives regarding miscarrying al-Muhsin enjoy authentic *isnad.*
Some other narratives, which prove the fact that the beating and the
like took place, are also authentic. The same contender pointed out to
the authenticity of the narrative by al-Tabari in *Dala’il al-Imama*.
The narratives, collectively, are consecutively reported from the venues
of the Household of Infallibility. If you add to them other texts, they
will be more than consecutively reported. The fact that non-Shi’as have
referred to this matter is regarded as noteworthy, knowing that they do
not wish to exonerate the doers from what they all committed.

This issue is detailed by many of their most prominent scholars such as
al-Juwayni, al-Kanji, al-Mas’udi, al-Nizam, Abu Ja’far al-Naqib, mentor
of the Mu’tazilite scholar, Ahmed ibn Muhammed ibn al-Surri and others
whose statements we will quote in a chapter set aside for them by the
Will of Allah Almighty.

Responding to some people who opposed him by saying that there is a
contradiction in the narratives, Ibn Hamzah al-Zaidi has stated that
there were several assaults.

One narrative says that Ali (as) remained at home and refrained from
swearing the oath of allegiance (to Abu Bakr), and he was joined by
Talhah and al-Zubayr. They did not leave the house till ‘’Umar went
there and wanted to burn them all as they were inside.

Another individual says that Abu Bakr went out to the Mosque to pray,
ordering Khalid ibn al-Walid to pray beside him then to kill Ali (as)
the moment he (Abu Bakr) was to recite the *tasleem* at the conclusion
of his prayers.

A third says that Ali (as) was brought in chains and he swore fealty
against his wish.

Ibn Hamzah answered his opponent saying, “All these incidents took place
at various times, and this does not mean that they contradict each
other, nor do they cancel one another.”[^17]

This means that the attempt to burn the house took place at a time and
during an assault separate from the one wherein Ali (as) was taken out
by force to swear fealty.

No Need to Assault al-Zahra’ (sa) While Ali (as) is Present
-----------------------------------------------------------

Someone says: Let us suppose they did enter the house. Why should they
assault al-Zahra’ (sa) in particular, beat her and leave Ali (as) alone?
They were supposed to assault him in his room where he and other Banu
Hashim were sitting, for the [area of the] house is not ten kilometers
[square] but only ten meters!

Here is our answer:

FIRST: We have already indicated that someone says that all Banu Hashim
were with Ali (as) inside the house; so, how could a small room
measuring ten meters be spacious enough for all of them?!

SECOND: They entered the house after they had finished assaulting
al-Zahra’ (sa) at the door, and she was no longer able to face and stop
them.

THIRD: It is as if this individual thinks that the home of al-Zahra’ was
made up of many rooms, or a house and at least one room; so, how did he
prove it and what texts did he rely on to draw such a conclusion?

FOURTH: The reason why they attacked her (sa) was not because she was
their target. Rather, they assaulted her because she tried to stop them
from reaching Ali (as), setting herself as a barrier between them and
him. Texts have made this quite clear, and that she tried to stop them
from opening the door, or at least she met them at the door.

Here, we would like to quote a sample from both sects:

From among the texts which have clearly stated that she tried to stop
them from reaching Ali (as), we would like to mention the following:

1. Al-Fayd al-Kashani has said, “Fatima (sa) intercepted them and tried
not to let them reach her husband saying, ‘By Allah! I shall not let you
drag my cousin oppressively!”[^18]

2. Al-Majlisi has quoted Ali (as) as saying that when they took him out,
Fatima (sa) intercepted them at the door, so Qunfath hit her with a whip
on her wrist, causing a mark on her wrist looking like a bracelet
because of Qunfath thus whipping her. He pushed her, breaking one of her
side ribs, and she miscarried a fetus in her womb.”[^19]

3. Ali (as) is quoted as having said that the reason why Qunfath escaped
being penalized by ‘’Umar is that he was the one who hit Fatima (sa)
with the whip when she tried to intercept them so that they might not
reach him (Ali (as)). So, she died, peace of Allah with her, and the
mark of the whip was still on her wrist looking like a bracelet.[^20]

Among the texts which have clearly indicated that she tried to stop them
from opening the door, we would like to mention the following:

1. Al-Balathiri and others have narrated that ‘’Umar went there
accompanied by Qays, so Fatima (sa) met him at the door and said, “O son
of al-Khattab! Are you really going to burn my door?!” He said, “Yes,
and it is stronger than that which your father had brought.”[^21]

2. The narrative by al-Mufaddal refers to Fatima (sa) coming out to face
them, addressing them from behind the door till she referred to Qunfath
the accursed stretching his hand to beat her when they forcefully broke
open her house door. Then she mentions how ‘’Umar kicked the door with
his foot till it hit her stomach..., etc.[^22]

3. In the book of Sulaym ibn Qays, it is stated that, “... [‘’Umar] came
out to the door behind which Fatima (sa) sat... ‘’Umar came, hit the
door and said, ‘O son of Abu Talib! Open the door!’ whereupon Fatima
(sa) said, ‘O ‘’Umar! What do we owe you?! Why don’t you leave us and
our problems alone?!’ He said to her, ‘Open the door; otherwise, we
shall burn it and burn you...’ Then he set the door ablaze. ‘’Umar
pushed the door and was met by Fatima (sa) who cried out, ‘وا أبتاه! O
father! ..., etc.”[^23]

4. ‘’Umar himself is quoted as having said, “So I kicked the door, and
she had stuck her belly on the door as a shield... I pushed the door and
entered, so she faced me with a look which caused my eyesight to go into
a trance...”[^24]

5. ‘’Umar is also quoted as having said, “When we reached the door,
Fatima (sa) saw them, closing the door in their faces. She did not think
that any of them would enter her house without her permission. ‘’Umar
kicked the door, breaking it open, and it was made of palm branches
(fronds), so they entered.”[^25]

6. She (sa) has said, “They brought the fire to burn the house and our
own selves, so I stood at the door’s latch and pleaded to them in the
Name of Allah..., etc.”[^26]

7. ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab is also quoted as having said

“Fatima clutched her hands on the door trying to stop me from opening
it. I sought to open it, but I found the challenge too great, so I hit
both her hands with the whip, and it caused her pain... I kicked the
door, and she had stuck her belly on the door to reinforce it... I
forced the door open and entered. She faced me with a look which caused
my vision to go into a trance, so I slapped her on her cheeks from
outside her face’s veil, breaking her earring which scattered on the
floor. Ali came out. When I felt his presence, I rushed to get out of
the house and said to Khalid (ibn al-Walid) and to Qunfath and those in
their company, ‘I surely have been spared a momentous event.’ I gathered
a large number of men not to subdue Ali but to make my heart more
daring. I went to him, and he was besieged at his house and took him out
of it..., etc.”[^27]

On the other hand, some texts point out to the fact that the assailants
were trying to pressure and scare Fatima (sa) so that she might not
intercept their way and keep them from reaching Ali (as) and those with
him. They actually wanted her to help them dissuade those assembled at
her house from their decision (not to swear the oath of allegiance to
Abu Bakr). Examples are:

1. When the assailants reached her house, ‘’Umar called out, “O Fatima
daughter of the Messenger of Allah! Get those who have sought shelter at
your house out so that they may swear the oath of allegiance and join
the other Muslims who have already done so; otherwise, I, by Allah,
shall set them all to fire.”[^28]

2. In another text, he is quoted as having said, “O daughter of the
Messenger of Allah! By Allah! Nobody is dearer to me than your father
and your own self! By Allah! This does not stop me from setting the door
of those who have assembled at your house ablaze!”[^29]

Confusion and Contradiction in the Narratives
---------------------------------------------

Someone expresses his bewilderment as he faces such “a great deal of
confusion in the narratives,” as he puts it, then says, “The narratives
referring to burning the house mentioned in the summary of *Al-Shafi*,
*Al-Ikhtisas*, al-Mufid’s *Amali*, contradict each another: Some state
the threats but not the actual burning, which are quite few, while
others refer to the actual burning.”

In answer, we would like to say that there is really no confusion in
these narratives, nor is there any contradiction for the following
reasons:

1. The traditions referring to the threat to burn did *not* deny that it
did not actually take place. In a previous answer, we stated that
everyone transmits what his political objective dictates to him, or his
sectarian bias, or whatever the circumstances permit him to transmit or
be acquainted with, especially during that cruel political epoch wherein
a narrator would be whipped on account of a narrative in favor of Ali
(as) as many as one thousand lashes.[^30] Even naming a newborn “Ali”
was sufficient to kill that newborn.[^31] In my book about the struggle
of freedom during al-Mufid’s time, I listed many weighty matters in this
regard, so there is no harm in referring to them.

To sum up, text transmission varies according to the objectives,
circumstances, etc. What is transmitted, too, varies in quantity, warmth
or coolness according to the circumstances, individuals, affiliations,
etc.

One may transmit the threat to burn. Another transmits gathering
firewood. A third transmits bringing a torch. A fourth transmits burning
the door or the house. A fifth transmits breaking the door. A sixth
transmits the forceful entry into the house, exposing it to strangers
and violating its privacy. A seventh transmits squeezing al-Zahra’ (sa)
between the door and the wall. An eighth transmits the miscarriage
because of beating. A ninth transmits hitting her on her fetus, or on
her side, or on her wrist till it looked like a bracelet, or hitting her
on her fingers so that she would leave the door alone to enable them to
open it. A tenth transmits breaking her rib, too.

On the other hand, one transmits that ‘’Umar hit her, while another
transmits al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah doing so, whereas a third transmits
Qunfath beating her..., etc.

So, there is no narrative which belies another, nor is there any
confusion in them. Each narrator transmits a portion of what went on
because he has a purpose relevant to it, or for any other reason, such
as taking into consideration a certain political circumstance, or due to
a sectarian or other biases. Shaikh Muhammed Hassan al-Muzaffar
explained all of this when he said,

One of them, who is more knowledgeable than others and who wishes to
narrate all facts, could not afford to leave this incident in its
entirety, so he narrates some of its introductions in order not to
distort it from all facets, and so that he does not under-estimate it,
as they did with the swearing of allegiance (to Ali (as)) at the Ghadir
and elsewhere.[^32]

2. Those who recorded history and documented *hadith* used to award a
special consideration to the political atmosphere. Rulers and others
wanted to underestimate what they had committed against the Household of
Infallibility and of the Prophetic Mission before the public. If they
could deny the incident entirely, they would do so, and they would show
that the assailants’ hearts were “full of love” for al-Zahra’ (sa). This
is what we find when someone attempted to show the warmth of the
relationship between al-Zahra’ (sa) and the assailants and deny any
misunderstanding in this regard. Refer to what is said by Ibn Kathir,
the Hanbali scholar, in his book *Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya* and in others.
What we have heard from someone, regarding their “love” for her, may
have been taken from some of these same folks.

It becomes quite obvious that transmitting the truth of what al-Zahra’
(sa) had to go through implies a very strong and irrevocable indictment
which has its effects on understanding history and evaluating events. It
affects those who covet the greatest post and status. Moreover, it has
certain effects on the level of feelings and sentiments as well as
emotional and religious affiliations of this party or that. Permission
to transmit something like that and tolerate it was not the best option
for many people.

3. The actual burning has been narrated through the venues of those who
follow the path of Ahl al-Bayt (as) in various ways some of which are
quite authentic and reliable; so, there is no need to underestimate
these narratives by saying that the traditions about the threat to burn
are quite a few and give the impression that others should be discarded.

Some texts which prove that the burning did take place have been stated
in a forthcoming part of this book dedicated to transmitting the
legacies and texts.

4. Some narrators are concerned about underestimating what took place.
They wish to distance those whom they love from this embarrassing
incident, even exonerating them from it, if possible. When these same
narrators transmit how the burning did, in fact, take place, this makes
us feel comfortable about the authenticity of the same when transmitted
through the venues of those who follow the path of Ahl al-Bayt (as).

5. As regarding the book by Shaikh al-Mufid, may Allah Almighty have
mercy on him, we have discussed in a previous chapter the methodology
which he applied in *Al-Irshad*, i.e. that he was reluctant to enter
into details of what went on at the *saqifa*, even stating so himself.
His time was extremely sensitive as I detailed in my book about the
struggle for freedom during al-Mufid’s time.

As regarding *Al-Amali*, it is a book with a limited objective and
direction. It was not to discuss historical events in detail and in
sequence. As for *Al-Ikhtisas*, the author mentioned in it important and
essential details which the opponent himself denies or at least tries to
cast some doubts about them.

Yet you have come to know that he, may Allah have mercy on him, detailed
in *Al-Mazar* and *Al-Muqanna’a* her *ziyarat* which includes: “Peace
with you, O Truthful Lady, O Martyr!” or “Peace with you, O Martyred
*Batul!*”

6. Finally, we say: If those who set out to burn the house wanted the
fire to consume the house and everyone inside it, but this did not
materialize for them, it is then accurate to say that they wanted to set
it ablaze or were about to burn it, or something like that. So, these
texts do not vary from those which say that they set it to fire, or the
like.

Negation Requires Evidence
--------------------------

Someone says that he does not deny the issue of breaking her rib but he
is not convinced.

Just as proving something requires evidence, denying something also
requires an evidence. Then he states his reasons why he is not
convinced.

We have stated all these reasons in this book, proving the invalidity of
relying on them, yet we would like to add here other issues:

FIRST: Let us say that he is not convinced that they broke her rib, but
we would like to ask him this question: “Are you convinced of all the
other things which took place to al-Zahra’ (sa), such as her being
beaten, her miscarriage, the threat to burn her house and everyone
inside it who were: her children and husband, then setting the fire on
with the intention to burn them all?”

If he is convinced of all of this, entertaining no doubts other than
their breaking her rib, there is no harm in it because all other matters
suffice to prove the indications that they did, indeed, break the rib of
al-Zahra’ (sa), especially the texts stating that she (sa) died as a
truthful martyr.

SECOND: There is no problem if someone is not convinced of a particular
issue, but the problem is this: One who announces that he is not
convinced of something exerts a serious effort to convince people that
it does not exist, gathering what he considers as evidences from
everywhere to prove such “non-existence” under the label of his being
unconvinced of its existence.

Someone saw a hunter once slaughtering a bird. The hunter’s eyes were
watering because he had an eye ailment. Someone said to another, “Look
at this hunter and see how kind his heart is! He is crying for the same
bird which he is slaughtering!” His companion said to him, “Do not look
at his tears; rather, look at what his hands are doing.” So, how can
someone convince us when he says that he does not deny that her rib was
broken while bringing “a thousand and one proofs,” as he claims, for
denying it and denying other issues?! This undermines the issue from its
very foundations.

THIRD: A scholar’s mission is to solve the problems faced by people in
their intellectual and educational lives, especially those relevant to
his own field of specialization and to falling in the heart of his
responsibilities. So, he has to make up his mind to either provide a
proof for an “Aye” or a “Nay”[^33] or simply withhold his answer till he
makes up his mind and comes to a decision. He has no right to “educate”
the people with what he doubts, with the issues which he could not
finish researching, or those which he is not quite sure about, or he did
not work hard to reach such a conviction. Otherwise, how can we explain
his own statement wherein he says, “I asked Sayyid Sharaf ad-Din in the
early 1950s during my study of the subject,” then he says in 1414 A.H.
(1993 A.D.), “I recently stumbled on a text in *Bihar al-Anwar*
saying..., etc.” So, did his “study” continue for more than forty years
till he was finally able to “stumble” on this text or that?! Can this be
accurately termed as a “study” or a “research” while he did not consult
except *Bihar al-Anwar*, and after so many years, and yet he “stumbles”
on only one single orphan text despite the many, many texts of which
*Bihar al-Anwar* is full as we will, *Insha-Allah*, demonstrate?!

If he “stumbled” on this text which he wants to show us as solving the
problem, why did he not revert to doubting and to raising questions?

FOURTH: One who raises questions may be an ordinary uneducated person
who neither graduated from a university nor attended a theological
center, so he can be excused, and the knowledgeable scholar has to untie
the knot for him and answer this question or questions. But what if the
one raising such questions is the same scholar who answers people’s
questions?! People understand from his abstention to answer their
questions that he upholds the content of the question and all its
requirements and outcomes.

Jumping to Conclusions: Have You Proven that Her Rib was Broken?!
-----------------------------------------------------------------

We find someone, on being asked to provide his view in the subject of
assaulting al-Zahra’ (sa) and breaking her rib, taking the initiative to
ask the inquirer, “Have you proven that her rib was, indeed, broken?! If
so, what is your proof?!”

We say the following in answer:

FIRST: It is not appropriate for someone who considers himself a man of
knowledge, regarding himself responsible for providing guidance to the
public, to confront an ordinary person with this question except if he
intends to raise doubts in his mind in order to easily control his way
of thinking and subject him to what he wants in the easiest way.

SECOND: The texts proving what al-Zahra’ (sa) went through are numerous,
and the books written in the previous centuries are continuously
reprinted, while manuscripts are discovered here and there. In all of
these, we find more that supports and underscores this issue.

We do not want to insist that this man accept the narratives regarding
how al-Zahra’ (sa) was wounded and her rib broken and how she (sa) was
martyred through numerous and diverse ways, but we would like to provide
the kind reader with samples of them here; so, let us say the following:

1. Al-Tibrisi has said, “Al-Zahra’, Fatima (sa), acted as a barrier
between them and her husband at the house’s door, so Qunfath whipped
her... Abu Bakr had sent a message to Qunfath to beat her, so he
cornered her at the latch of her house’s door, pushed her and broke one
of her side ribs, and she miscarried her fetus.”[^34]

In the Introduction of his book, *Al-Ihtijaj*, al-Tibrisi states the
following:

Most of the narratives are quoted here due to their *isnad* or the
existence of consensus in their regard or agreement with what many
people have thought, or due to fame in biography books between those who
agree or who disagree about them except what I have quoted from Abu
Muhammed, (Imam) al-Hassan al-’Askari (as).”[^35]

2. Sayyid Tawus, may Allah have mercy on him, narrates the text of the
*ziyara* wherein he says, “... the Lady who was deprived of her
inheritance, whose rib was broken, whose husband was oppressed, whose
[unborn] son was killed...”[^36]

3. Al-Kulayni narrates from Muhammed ibn Yahya from al-’Amraki bn Ali
from Ali ibn Ja’far from his brother from the father of al-Hassan (as)
as saying, “Fatima (sa) is a truthful martyr, and the Prophets’
daughters do not menstruate.”[^37]

4. Al-Saduq narrates from Ali ibn Ahmed ibn Musa ibn ‘Imran al-Nakh’i
from al-Nawfali from al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abu Hamzah from his father
from Sa’id ibn Jubayr from Ibn ‘Abbas saying that the Messenger of Allah
(S) was once sitting when al-Hassan (as) came. He (S) said, “As for my
daughter Fatima..., when I saw her, I recalled what she will have to
endure after me. It is as though I see ignominy entering her house, her
privacy violated, her right confiscated, her inheritance inaccessible,
her side broken, her fetus miscarried..., etc.”[^38]

The same tradition is narrated by al-Daylami[^39] and al-Juwayni[^40],
too.

5. Sulaym ibn Qays al-Hilali has narrated saying, “Qunfath, the curse of
Allah be on him, forced her to the door knob of her house and pushed
her, breaking one of her side ribs. She miscarried her fetus and
remained sick, bed-ridden, till she died, peace and blessings of Allah
with her, as a martyr.”[^41]

6. Ibn Shahr Ashub has cited Ibn Qutaybah as saying that she (sa)
miscarried al-Muhsin because of the wound inflicted on her by Qunfath
al-’Adawi.

7. Al-Sayyid al-Himyari, may Allah have mercy on him, has composed the
following verses of poetry:

*She was beaten and deprived of her rights*

*And after him was made to taste of wounds.*

*May Allah sever the hand that hit her,*

*And the hand of whoever is pleased thereby*

*And that of whoever followed the latter.*

Al-Himyari’s poetry indicates how widespread the knowledge of this
matter was during the time of Imam al-Sadiq (as), so much so that poets
referred to it, denouncing it, condemning the perpetrators.

8. Imam al-Hassan (as) said that al-Mughirah hit al-Zahra’ (sa) till she
bled.

9. We find the Shi’as during the time of al-Saduq, may Allah have mercy
on him, insisting on reciting her *ziyara* which includes calling her “a
truthful martyr.” This book will cite such texts and also texts proving
that she (sa) was martyred.

SECOND: If the breaking of her rib is not proven, this does not mean
that it never happened, and it is not appropriate to prohibit the
recitation of the commemoration containing reference to it, especially
since the historians have narrated it and cited its traditions.

THIRD: Should there be an authentic *isnad* for each and every
historical issue?! How many issues have been thus proven? Does the
confirmation of any historical incident hinge on the existence of an
authentic *isnad* for it according to the criterion applied for
*hadith*?! Why does the inquirer demand an authentic *isnad* for this
issue in particular especially since he is the one who has said, “We do
not authenticate *isnad* in proving issues; suffices us to ascertain
that they did happen.” He actually is satisfied with the fact that there
is no need to tell a lie to prove the authenticity and acceptance of a
particular narrative even from non-Shi’a Imamite books, although he
tries to cast doubts about the narratives of Ahl al-Bayt (as) by
continuously stressing that there are false and fabricated narratives
without pointing out to scholars’ efforts to distinguish what is false
and acceptable and what is not.

To sum up, it is not possible, taking into consideration what we have
stated above, to label this issue as a lie so long as evidences abound
that they did, indeed, assault her, beat her and cause her to miscarry.
Texts have clearly described her as a “martyr,” something which makes
breaking her rib plausible and acceptable as a fact; so, what if it is
narrated in both Shi’i and Sunni books, and even poets referred to it,
especially ancient ones?

FOURTH: If we suppose there is no proof that they broke her rib, why
should anyone take it as a pretext to cast doubt about beating al-Zahra’
(sa), her miscarriage, and the invasion of her privacy, facts which have
already been proven, keeping in mind that this is the consensus of the
Shi’a Imamites whose narratives in its regard abound and are narrated by
a host of historians and traditionists from the rest of Islamic sects?

Or does the subjective research require concentration on a particular
issue which someone regards as the weakest point, so he wants to use it
as a tool to cast doubt about everything else, applying the style of
issuing a judgment on the whole, discussing in general terms and dealing
with ambiguities where people do not pay attention to the details? He
will then have been able to undermine what have already been proven and
fixed, things regarding which there is a consensus among the sect’s
scholars and are consecutively narrated and detailed, even others
reported them as well, those who were not happy at all to prove them
because they bring shame to those whom they love and in whose footsteps
they follow.

Miscarriage of al-Muhsin Due to a Natural Cause!
------------------------------------------------

Someone even dares to say that miscarrying Muhsin may have happened due
to a natural accident and was not the result of an assault! Here is our
answer:

Numerous texts, actually consecutively reported ones, as well as the
consensus of the Shi’as, is that al-Muhsin was miscarried because
al-Zahra’ (sa) was assaulted as Shaikh al-Tusi, may Allah have mercy on
him, says. He actually narrates it, and it is reported also by many
others from among the followers and supporters of the assailants, those
who are not happy to even remotely attribute it to those whom they love
from among the assailants. Despite all of this, they do so. Why, then,
should someone exonerate the assailants from this matter, and how do we
permit ourselves to judge more than what the judge himself has decreed?!

Is there any scholarly justification for such insistence, especially
since the person who used to advocate it says that denial requires
evidence just as affirmation?! There is a definite proof for the excuse
which stands on affirmation; so, should we reject it and insist on
denying it without any evidence at all?!

What is noteworthy is that some other people went beyond that to deny
that Fatima (sa) had a son named Muhsin...!

Some others kept silent and refrained from pointing to it, either to
confirm or to deny, as if they want to give the impression, by thus
remaining silent, that such a child with such a name never had any
kinship to al-Zahra’ (sa)!

But others, once they have noticed that denying this matter is not
possible, feeling incapable of admitting what those folks had committed
against him, got rid of the whole issue by claiming that he “died
young,” refraining from referring to his being miscarried. But they
hinted at the same when they said that he “died young.”

A fourth group did, indeed, mention this child, and that he was
miscarried, but they refrained from telling the truth of what actually
took place.

There is a party that has declared the bitter truth and explained it,
and we have quoted some of their statements in the part dedicated to
texts, so refer to it.

It was not in the best interest of those who oppressed, harmed, beat,
caused the miscarriage of the fetus carried by al-Zahra’ (sa) to
publicize something like this about them because it would undermine
their image, and it might even undermine their stands in the long run.
They, therefore, had no choice except to hide the truth, forge history
and force a cruel and bitter hegemony on the media.

They had to shut people’s mouths by any possible means. Nothing has
reached us except what slipped from their clutches, carried to us by
true commandos who traded their blood for the Pleasure of Allah, Glory
is His, sacrificing everything precious, just as slipped to us from the
clutches of spiteful arrogant people a great deal of good, rather an
ocean over-brimming with virtues and stands and *jihad* of Ali (as).
Even the Ghadir tradition, the tradition of the two weighty things, the
tradition of Ahl al-Bayt (as) being compared to the ark of Noah, and the
tradition of the status…, all this slipped from their clutches despite
all the wounds and in spite of all the bleeding and suffering.

They slipped to us covered with heavy wounds, drowned in blood,
overwhelmed by pains in order to deeply and truthfully deepen for us the
truth of the divine care and concern abut this nation, its future
generations and religion.

Every call fought by the rulers vanished and was buried except the call
of the truth. This has continued, maintaining its originality and
characteristics despite the passage of generations since the inception
of this devastating war, although it challenges the rulers’ bases for
ruling and legitimacy. Its creed, in as far as an Imam is concerned, is
to deny such legitimacy, pointing a finger of accusation at the usurping
rulers and at their oppression, at how they fought the teachings of
Allah and His Messenger S.

The best evidence for all of this against the determination to justify,
to forge and to oppress, and the best proof that the Almighty has been
kind enough to safeguard the truth, is relevant to the status of Ali
(as) and to how al-Zahra’ (sa) was oppressed, the lady who was presented
by the Messenger of Allah S as the criterion for distinguishing right
from wrong. This is what made her role, after his demise, effective and
influential, decisive and strong. Through it, what was right became
distinguished from what was wrong, what was distorted or forged was
distinguished from what was sound and straightforward.

Did al-Zahra’ (sa) Cry Because of Impatience?!
----------------------------------------------

Someone says that he cannot imagine al-Zahra’ (sa), the lady who
receives Allah’s destiny with an open heart and mind, as being one from
the intensity of whose weeping the people of Medina felt irritated[^42],
as those who recite her commemorative mourning do, even if the deceased
is on the level of the Messenger of Allah (S).

Our answer is:

We cannot imagine that mourning her father was the reason why the
opponents were annoyed, nor was it the cause of their concern. What made
them concerned, what annoyed them, was the result of the presence of
al-Zahra’ (sa) at her father’s grave. Such a result is profound grief
and dismay which would remind people of the tragedy to which she (sa)
was exposed immediately following the demise of her father (S). This
represented a state of continuous agitation in the hearts of good,
believing and sincere Muslims, and it was an indictment of the line
which never ceased doing anything at all to get what it wanted.

Her weeping over the person of the Messenger of Allah (S) was not the
cause, although it personified the tragedy which engulfed Islam in its
symbols as soon as he died, peace and blessings of Allah with him and
his progeny.

Her weeping, then, was not on account of being impatient while facing
the calamity and for the magnanimity of the loss of that great person,
so one may say that all of this contradicts the acceptance of whatever
Allah decrees, as the claimant insinuates, except if the same person
considers surrendering to destiny and remaining silent about oppression
as acceptance of destiny!

The “House of Grief” and People Annoyed by Her Weeping
------------------------------------------------------

Someone sees no need for the “house of grief” (*bayt al-ahzan*) so that
al-Zahra’ (sa) could weep therein. He cannot imagine her mourning her
father to the extent that she bothered the people of Medina, so they
asked her to take to silence, implying that she used to cry very loudly
in the alleys! And such crying and annoyance were not compatible with
her status. Here is our answer:

FIRST: There is a narrative mentioned by al-Majlisi[^43], which he
considers as “weak” because he did not transmit it, as he says, from an
original reference on which he depends. He transmits it from Fidda
(house maid of al-Zahra’ (sa)) saying that Fatima (sa) went out during
the night on the second day after the death of her father (S). She wept,
and people wept with her. When the people of Medina saw the extent of
her grief, they requested Ali (as) to ask her to weep either during the
night or during the day, so he set up for her the “house of sorrow بيت
الأحزان” at al-Baqi’. Reference to other sources of this incident have
already been stated.

It is quite obvious that Fidda’s narrative cannot be relied on as
al-Maqdisi, may Allah have mercy on him, says, neither from the *isnad*
standpoint nor from the context, as anyone who reviews it may conclude.

As regarding the “house of sorrow,” it is “... remaining till our time,
and it is the place known as Fatima’s Mosque in the direction of the
mausoleum of al-Hassan (as) and al-’Abbas. Ibn Jubayr refers to it
saying, ‘Next to the ‘Abbasi dome lies the house of Fatima (sa) daughter
of the Messenger of Allah S, and it is known as *bayt al-huzn* بيت
الحزن, the house of greif, sorrow, mourning... It is said that she took
to it and observed her grief since the demise of her father S.’”[^44]

SECOND: Her nightly mourning was more annoying to people who dispersed
during the day to go to work at their farms, to look after their flocks,
to take care of their chores, so it would have been more appropriate for
her to stay at the “house of sorrow” during the night rather than during
the day.

THIRD: The fact is that the weeping of al-Zahra’ (sa) did not annoy the
people of Medina. Rather, it annoyed the ruling clique which needed to
be present at the Mosque of the Prophet S beside his holy pulpit which
was only a few meters (counted on one hand), so the said clique
prohibited her from so grieving.[^45]

People used to go to that Mosque in particular and assemble thereat from
dawn till a late hour of the night to pray and to stay informed of what
events transpired.

The Mosque is the center of the city the population of which, relatively
speaking, was at the time small, just a few thousands. Mecca was much
larger than Medina, and it used to be called the “mother town” which was
capable of raising four thousand warriors as happened during the
Campaign of al-Ahzab (coalitions) wherein Mecca enlisted men to its full
capacity[^46]. The Ahzab campaign started on Thul-Qi’da 8, 5 A.H./March
31, 627 A.D. and involved every man capable of carrying arms, from
teenagers to middle-aged men. As for Medina, the maximum number of
troops it could raise was about or a lot less than a thousand[^47].

A census of the Muslim population was carried out in 6 A.H./628 A.D.
when non-Muslims had no human bases of any significance, and the figure
came as one thousand and five hundred or one thousand and six hundred.

In another narrative, the following is cited: “... We were between a
thousand and six hundred to a thousand and seven hundred when the
Messenger of Allah S said to them, ‘Write down for me the names of all
those who have accepted Islam.’ Al-Damamini has said, ‘It is said that
this took place during the Year of Hudaybiya (Treaty), i.e. 6 A.H. (628
A.D.).’”[^48]

Let us suppose that all those whom they included in the census were men,
and that they all were married and had children, how many would have
been the total residents of Medina?

The people of Medina used to go to the Mosque to pray behind the
Messenger of Allah S in the morning, at noon, and in the evening. Some
of them came from outside Medina, walking for miles on foot, yet the
Mosque absorbed their number, all of them. Then the Messenger of Allah S
expanded its area in the latter phase of his holy life.

So, the Mosque was the center of this small town whose streets were no
more than narrow alleys, and its houses were very close to each other.
They are not spacious at all because this was a security requirement due
to the domestic wars. People did not put their weapons down neither
during the day nor during the night[^49].

The people of Medina had set up a ditch around a large area of their
town for fear of the polytheists, during the war of the coalitions,
would not be able to reach them, and it took them six days to dig
despite its [modest] width and depth.

All of this disproves what Ibn Mardawayh had mentioned while discussing
the marriage of Fatima (sa), i.e. that the Prophet S had invited all of
them, and they all responded to his invitation “And they were more than
four thousand men”[^50] for Medina at the time did not have even half as
many men.

What also disproves this figure is another narrative which discusses the
same issue. It states that those who had attended numbered three
thousand and three hundred men who came in a total of three days[^51].
Counting them as four thousand may include these men, too.

In a town of this size, when an ordinary person dies, it will undergo
something like an emergency situation. Its residents will go to offer
their condolences to the family of the deceased and will try to cheer
them up and distance them from the environments of grief. If the
deceased enjoys a special social status, more attention will be paid.

So, what would you say when the deceased is the greatest person created
by Allah, the best of all created beings, the most honorable Prophet S,
the one who took them out of the darkness and into the light? The town
will be turned upside down. People will not tend to their businesses or
farms. They will be living a state charged with emotion, apprehension
and expectation.

The center of assembling and decision making and all other movements
will then be the Mosque. From it will the troops set out to war. It is
the place where problems are solved and emissaries received. It is the
starting point of a trip and its final destination. The Mosque is the
center of the government, the leadership, the applied juristic system.
The Prophet’s pulpit is the place where the ruler sits, and it is only a
few meters from the place where the Messenger of Allah S is buried.

Within the atmosphere of the demise of the Prophet S, the number of
those who go to or return from the Mosque doubles. The first thing they
start doing is to visit the grave of their Prophet S, greet him and
greet those at his house, for he was buried inside Fatima’s house[^52].
All doors (opening into the Mosque’s courtyard) had been closed except
hers.

They will ask the truthful and purified lady how she is doing, knowing
that she is the only daughter of the greatest of all prophets, and she
is not an ordinary woman. Rather, she is the Head of the Women of
Mankind from the early generations to the last. Allah is pleased when
she is pleased and is angry when she is angered.

The atmosphere of grief which dominated that house and overwhelmed
al-Zahra’ (sa), due to what the rulers and their supporters had
committed against her immediately following the burial of her father S,
the burial which was not attended by the assailants, nor did they care
to prepare him for it, the man who had taken them out of the darkness
and into the light, from death to life. Ali (as) had said to them, “You
used to follow the worst of all creeds and live the most evil life,
drinking dirty water and eating leather.”[^53]

Instead of offering their condolences to her, their respect and regards,
they confronted her not only with their sharp tongues but also with
cruel and violent behavior. So, it was not in the interest of the ruling
clique that people would see al-Zahra’ (sa) every day looking sad and
depressed even if al-Zahra’ (sa) kept silent and did not cry or condemn
those who oppressed her and violated her privacy.

Anyone who went to the Mosque and saw her depressed and in pain,
enjoying no rest and feeling very upset, then he would go to sit at the
caliph’s meeting place only a few meters from her, would remain aware of
the pain and the tragedy from which she suffered and of what she had to
undergo, and his conscience would in the end wake up.

So, her grief and bitterness would make those rulers sleepless, and it
would confound them to a great and serious degree. Many would regret
having neglected to honor her because her weeping, bitterness and grief
would wake up the conscience, stir the feelings and cause agitation
among the public. People have feelings and emotions, and all of this
would weaken the authority of the rulers and their influence, especially
when they rule the public in the name of her father and according to his
teachings, as they allege.

If ‘’Umar ibn Sa’d wept when the human *huri*, Zainab, spoke to him
after he had killed al-Husayn (as) a few moments earlier, what about
those women whose hearts were not as cruel, as is the case of hearts
like those of Harmalah and al-Shimr ibn Thul-Jawshan (who killed Imam
al-Husayn (as)) and Ibn Sa’d, although they vary in their conviction
according to their mentality, awareness and deeds?

Although they remained silent, for one reason or another, when the
calamitous deed took place, they might have undergone some awareness and
found an opportunity to express their true feelings and what went on in
their minds. It was, therefore, necessary to get al-Zahra’ (sa) out of
such a condition and distance her from people’s eyes. These people will
increase in awareness and will regret a great deal more when things
settle down and they revert to themselves, contemplate on what went on
and remember what the Messenger of Allah S had told them in praise of
al-Zahra’ (sa) and of Ali (as).

There is no need, then, for her to scream in the streets or to bother
people like that. It is not far-fetched that they pushed some people to
demand that al-Zahra’ (sa) leave her house, providing more than one
pretext, then they took the house as their possession indefinitely.

Bayt al-Ahzan Harmed Rather than Benefitted them
------------------------------------------------

But was this *bayt al-ahzan* in the best interest of those rulers?! Did
it achieve some of what they wanted to or thought they would achieve?!

The clear and frank answer to these questions is NO! In fact, it brought
them a much more calamity than they had expected. People did not find it
easy to accept to get al-Zahra’ (sa) out of her house and prohibit her
from expressing her grief and from openly declaring her being oppressed.
This indeed is a greater oppression, more effective and serious, and a
clearer evidence about the extent of the oppression from which she had
to suffer.

What makes this picture clearer is that people would see that what she
went through took place immediately as soon as her father S passed away.
Instead of offering their condolences or consoling her, the only
daughter of her father and the Head of all the Women of Mankind that she
was, they exposed her to a greater and a more bitter calamity. All of
this they did while regarding themselves as adherents to this religion,
recognizing her father as their Prophet S… They were supposed to respect
and sanctify him. Yet those folks went in their oppression as far as
persecuting the closest of all people to him, namely his daughter, a
woman of feelings, forbidding her from grieving for a father whom she
just lost. All this they did so that she would not publicly expose how
they oppressed her.

Prohibition of Grieving over Falsehood, not over Weeping
--------------------------------------------------------

During the Uhud Campaign, Ibn Ishaq said, “The Messenger of Allah S
passed by the homes of the Ansar on his way back to Medina and heard
them mourning their dead. The eyes of the Messenger of Allah S were soon
overflowing with tears. Then he said, ‘But Hamzah has none to mourn
him...,’ whereon Sa’d ibn Mu’ath (or, some say, Assad ibn Hadar) ordered
the women of Banu ‘Abd al-Ashhal to go and mourn Hamzah first then to
mourn their own dead thereafter.

When he heard them thus mourning, and they were sitting at his Mosque’s
door, he ordered them to go home, forbidding them from mourning there.
The Ansar women went to him early the next morning and said, ‘It has
come to our knowledge, O Messenger of Allah, that you prohibited (some
women) from mourning.

We only weep over our dead and thus find some relief; so, please grant
us permission to do so.’ He said, ‘If you do it, do not slap your
cheeks, nor should you scratch your faces with your nails, nor shave
your hair nor tear your clothes.’[^54] The mother of Sa’d ibn Mu’ath
said, ‘No woman from among us ever mourned anyone without first mourning
al-Hamzah till now.’”

In another text, the women wept when Ruqayya died, so ‘’Umar kept
hitting them with his whip. He (S) took the whip from ‘’Umar’s hand and
said, “Leave them alone, O ‘’Umar!” He (S) also said, “Do not wail like
the wailing of Satan...” Then the narrator adds saying, “Fatima (sa)
wept as she sat at the grave’s side (Ruqayya’s grave), so the Prophet S
kept wiping her tears with the end of his garment.”[^55]

Prohibition of Weeping Over the Dead
------------------------------------

The Prophet S wept when Hamzah was martyred and said, “As for Hamzah,
there are none to mourn him.” and he S wept when Ja’far (al-Tayyar) was
martyred and said, “It is for a man like you that mourners should
mourn.” He S also wept when his son Ibrahim died and said, “The eyes are
tearful, and the heart is grieved, and we do not say except what pleases
the Lord.” He also wept over ‘Othman ibn Maz’un, Sa’d ibn Mu’ath and
Zaid ibn Harithah. The *sahaba*, too, wept. Jabir wept when his father
died. Bashir ibn ‘Afra’ mourned his father, too. Such incidents abound
in the books of *hadith* and history.[^56]

All this proves that there is no prohibition of weeping but on demanding
the tears to be shed and to the desire of the Prophet S that they should
do just that.

Yet, in contrast, we find ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab prohibiting (women) from
mourning the dead, beating them with his whip for weeping and doing
whatever he liked to prohibit them.

‘’Umar cites a tradition of the Prophet S supposedly stating that the
deceased is in pain when his family mourns him.[^57] We even find ‘’Umar
beating Umm Farwah, sister of Abu Bakr, when she mourned her
father,[^58] while we find him ordering people in person to weep over
Khalid ibn al-Walid[^59]… And ‘A’isha wept when Ibrahim[^60] (son of the
Prophet (S)) died. Abu Hurayra wept over ‘Othman (ibn ‘Affan), al-Hajjaj
over his son[^61], Sahab over ‘’Umar[^62], and they even use what all
these did as arguments.

‘’Umar himself wept over al-Nu’man ibn Muqrin and over others[^63] and
the Prophet S prohibited him from bothering those who mourned their
dead[^64].

‘A’isha objected to ‘’Umar and to his son ‘Abdullah reporting such a
“tradition” which he upheld, while she attributed it to ‘’Umar’s own
forgetfulness, saying, “May Allah have mercy on ‘’Umar! By Allah! The
Messenger of Allah S never said that Allah would torture any believer on
account of his family mourning him. Rather, the Messenger of Allah S
said that Allah will increase the penalty of the unbeliever through his
family weeping over him.” Then she added saying, “Suffices you the
Qur’an: ‘No bearer of sin bears the sin of another.’”[^65]

In another narrative, she is quoted as having said, “The Messenger of
Allah S passed by a Jewess being mourned. He said, ‘They are weeping
over her and she is surely being tortured inside her grave.’”[^66]

What ‘’Umar said is disputed also by Ibn ‘Abbas. A number of Imams from
Ahl al-Bayt (as) rejected his “tradition,” too, and anyone who wishes to
research it further is advised to consult the references.[^67]

The Torah and the Prohibition of Weeping over the Dead
------------------------------------------------------

It seems to us that the prohibition of weeping over the dead is taken
from the teachings of the People of the Book. ‘’Umar tried to implement
such a prohibition during the lifetime of the Prophet S in particular,
and he did not desist from doing so, as the Prophet S required him to
do, except outwardly. When the Prophet S passed away, and there was
nothing to fear, the stand became political, requiring reverting to what
the People of the Book teach, hence prohibiting al-Zahra’ (sa) from
mourning her father S as has been indicated. This came in sync with
inclinations, with the theological as well as political objectives. What
proves that it is taken from the teachings of the People of the Book is
the following verse in the Torah:

בן! אני לוקח את רצונו של העיניים שלך ממך עם להיט אחד, ולכן, לא לילל, ולא
לבכות, ולא נותן לך את העיניים לשפוך את דמעות. נאנח בשקט. אל תעשו האבל
לשמוע על המתים

“Son! I am taking the desire of your eyes away from you with one hit;
so, do not wail, and do not weep, and do not let your eyes pour down
tears. Sigh silently. Do not make an audible mourning over the
dead.”[^68]

Politics! What do You Know About Politics?!
-------------------------------------------

Here we would like to point out to a statement made by Imam Sharaf
ad-Din, may Allah have mercy on him. He has said, “Here we would like to
attract the attention of rational people to research the reason why
al-Zahra’ (sa) was displaced from home only because she was mourning her
father S, and why she had to go out, escorted by both her sons and some
of her women, to al-Baqi’ in order to mourn the Messenger of Allah S in
the shade of a lote tree there which, once cut down, was replaced by Ali
(as) with a shed at al-Baqi’ to which she used to go to mourn him called
*bayt al-ahzan*. A *ziyara* used to be observed to it by the past
generations of this nation.”[^69]

I say that it is quite possible that the tradition stating that “The
deceased person is tortured by the cries of the living” was distorted
from the incident involving weeping over the Jewess, to which reference
has already been made above, for obvious political reasons. The ruling
authority paid a particular attention to prohibiting Fatima (sa) from
crying over her father S.

So it is obvious that such a prohibition continued till the ruling
authority was settled. This is why ‘’Umar was not concerned about
‘A’isha being angry with him on its account. ‘A’isha even prohibited
‘’Umar from entering her house when Abu Bakr (her father, the first
caliph) died, so he hit Umm Farwah, sister of Abu Bakr. He assaulted the
house of ‘A’isha, hitting Abu Bakr’s sister. Before then, he used to pay
a special attention to ‘A’isha and had a lot of respect for her. He held
her in high esteem, and he was the one who very highly respected (her
father) Abu Bakr with whom he used to seek refuge, showing utmost
respect for his household.

Yes, ‘’Umar did all of that because people had not yet forgotten how the
ruling authority prohibited Fatima (sa) from mourning her father S. They
had not forgotten what she went through following his demise. Let us
suppose that the weeping was only because of the death of her father.
What a great stand it was, then, not to mention the environments of
cruelty and crudeness, that a woman is prohibited from grieving for her
father! What if this father is the Glorious Prophet S, the greatest, the
most perfect and the very best human being who ever walked on the face
of earth?

When the cause was no more, after many years had passed by since the
death of the Head of the Women of the World (sa), and when people almost
forgot this issue, the prohibition was lifted by ‘’Umar himself who wept
over al-Nu’man ibn Muqrin who died in 21 A.H./642 A.D. and over another
Shaikh. He permitted the weeping over Khalid ibn al-Walid who died in 21
or 22 A.H. (642 or 643 A.D.) as indicated above.

Prohibition from weeping over the dead varies in the way it was
documented from one reference to another. Some say there was prohibition
from scratching the face, tearing clothes, self-slapping, or wailing for
falsehood. All these are different from the outbursts of natural human
emotions. The first does, indeed, conflict with complete submission to
Allah, the most Exalted, the Sublime, and surrendering to His will,
whereas the other is a requirement of the human nature and a proof of
the balance of such nature, and surely the distance between them both is
quite vast.

[^1]: The same individual claims that the said professor is Dr. Suhayl
Zakir.

[^2]: Refer to the following references: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 43, pp. 20, 83, 86, 89 and Vol. 85, p. 94. Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 95
(1392 A.H. edition). Al-Saduq, Al-Amali, p. 194 (1400 A.H., al-A\`lami
edition). Al-Irbali, Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 76. Nihaya al-Arab,
Vol. 5, p. 264. Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, p. 51, citing Ahmed. Al-Qanduzi,
Yanabi\` al-Mawadda (Al-A\`lami edition), Vol. 2, p. 52. Nazm Durar
al-Simtayn, p. 177. Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 5, p. 275. Mukhtasar Sunan Abu
Dawud, Vol. 6, p. 108. Ihqaq al-Haqq (Appendices), Vol. 10, pp. 234,
291-293, and Vol. 19, pp. 106-07 from some of the references listed
above and from numerous others.

[^3]: Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 5, p. 153.

[^4]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 22, pp. 479-80.

[^5]: Qurb al-Isnad (published by Ahl al-Bayt (as) Foundation), p. 146.
Al-Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 533. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 73, p. 157.
Al-Wasa'il, Vol. 5, p. 325.

[^6]: Abu Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 1, pp. 234-35 (published by Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-\`Arabi).

[^7]: Imam Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 2, p. 62. Refer also to al-Nisa’i, Sunan,
Vol. 6, p. 149.

[^8]: Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 1, p. 510.

[^9]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh Muluk (published by Dar Swaydan), Vol. 4, p. 70,
in the events of the year 17 A.H. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 30,
p. 640. Refer also to Futah al-Buldan, Vol. 3, p. 352. Al-Bayhaqi,
Sunan, Vol. 8, p. 235. Ibn al-Athir, Al-Kamil fil Tarikh, Vol. 2, pp.
540-41. Wafiyyat al-A\`yan, Vol. 2, p. 455. Al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, Vol.
7, p. 81. \`Umdat al-Qari, Vol. 6, p. 340. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 12, pp. 234-37. Al-Jahiz, Al-Aghani (published by
Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-\`Arabi), Vol. 16, pp. 331-332. Al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi, Kanz al-\`Ummal.

[^10]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 14, p. 193.
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 28, p. 323. Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. 2,
pp. 360, 337-38.

[^11]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 9, p. 198.

[^12]: Mizan al-I\`tidal, Vol. 1, p. 139. Lisan al-Mizan, Vol. 1, p.
268. Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala’, Vol. 15, p. 578.

[^13]: Al-Milal wal Nihal, Vol. 1, p. 57. Other references will
Insha-Allah be cited in the texts’ section.

[^14]: Manaqib al Abu Talib, Vol. 3, p. 407 (published by Dar al-Adwa’).
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 233.

[^15]: Kifayat al-Talib, p. 413.

[^16]: Ibn Hamzah, Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, p. 188.

[^17]: Ibid.; Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, p. 202.

[^18]: \`Ilm al-Yaqin fi Usul ad-Din, pp. 686-87, Chapter 20.

[^19]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 212. Fatima Bahjat al-Mustafa,
p. 529, quoting Mir’at al-\`Uqul.

[^20]: Sulaym ibn Qays’s book, p. 134.

[^21]: Refer for documentation of this [blasphemous] statement the
following references: Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 28, pp. 389, 411 and what is
mentioned in a footnote on p. 268. Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 1, p. 586.
Sayyid al-Murtada, Al-Shafi, Vol. 3, p. 241. Al-\`Iqd al-Farid, Vol. 4,
pp. 259-60. Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-\`Ummal, Vol. 3, p. 149.
Al-Riyad al-Nadira, Vol. 1, p. 167. Al-Tara’if, p. 239. Tarikh
al-Khamis, Vol. 1, p. 178. Nahj al-Haqq, p. 271. Nafahat al-Lahut, p.
79. Abul-Fida’, Tarikh, Vol. 1, p. 156 and other references which will
be forthcoming.

[^22]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 53, pp. 14, 17, 19.

[^23]: Ibid., Vol. 43, pp. 43, 197-98 and Vol. 28, p. 299. The book by
Sulaym ibn Qays, p. 250 (published by al-A\`lami).

[^24]: Ibid., Vol. 8, pp. 220-27, quoting Dala’il al-Imamate.

[^25]: Al-\`Ayyashi, Tafsir, Vol. 2, p. 67. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 28, p. 227. Al-Ikhtisas, pp. 185-86. Tafsir al-Burhan, Vol. 2, p.
93.

[^26]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 30, p. 348, citing Irshad
al-Qulub by al-Daylami.

[^27]: Ibid., Vol. 30, pp. 293-95.

[^28]: Al-Jamal, pp. 117-18 (new edition). Nahj al-Haqq, p. 271.
Al-Imama wal Siyasa, Vol. 1, p. 12. Ibn Shuhnah, Tarikh (referred to in
a footnote in Al-Kamil), Vol. 7, p. 164. Abul-Fida’, Tarikh, Vol. 1, p.
156. Al-\`Iqd al-Farid, Vol. 4, p. 259. Al-Ya\`qubi, Tarikh, Vol. 2, p.
126.

[^29]: Muntakhab Kanz al-\`Ummal (referred to in a footnote in Ahmed’s
Musnad), Vol. 2, p. 174, from Ibn Abu Shaybah. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 2, p. 45 from al-Jawhari and al-Mughni to the judge
\`Abdullah, Part 20, Section 1, p. 335. Al-Murtada, Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, p.
110.

[^30]: Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. 13, pp. 387-88. Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala’,
Vol. 11, p. 135. Tahthib al-Tahthib, Vol. 10, p. 430.

[^31]: Refer to Al-Wafa bil Wafiyyat, Vol. 21, p. 104.

[^32]: Dala’il al-Sidq, Vol. 3, part 1, p. 53.

[^33]: This is so especially since he himself says, “Negating, too,
requires evidence.”

[^34]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 212. Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5,
p. 320.

[^35]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Introduction, p. 4.

[^36]: Iqbal al-A\`mal, p. 625. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 97, p.
200.

[^37]: Ibid.

[^38]: Al-Saduq, Al-Amali, pp. 100-01. Al-Daylami, Irshad al-Qulub, p.
295. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 28, pp. 37-39 and Vol. 43, pp.
172-73. Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, p. 391 (the section dealing with al-Zahra’
(sa)). Other references will be cited as well.

[^39]: In his book Irshad al-Qulub, Vol. 2, p. 295.

[^40]: In his book Fara’id al-Simtayn, Vol. 2, p. 35.

[^41]: Refer to the book by Salam as edited by Muhammed Baqir al-Ansari,
Vol. 2, p. 588.

[^42]: Refer to the people of Medina feeling annoyed by al-Zahra’ (sa)
weeping (over the demise of her father, the Messenger of Allah (S)) in
the following references: Al-Khisal, Vol. 1, p. 272. Al-Saduq, Amali, p.
121. Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, p. 449 where the previous references are
cited in some of its footnotes in addition to the following: al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 35, 155, 177 and Vol. 46, p. 35 and Vol.
11, pp. 204, 311 and Vol. 12, p. 264 and Vol. 82, p. 86. Irshad
al-Qulub, p. 95. Al-\`Ayyashi, Tafsir, Vol. 2, p. 188. Rawdat
al-Wa\`izin, p. 520. Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 335. Manaqib al Abu Talib
(printed at the \`Ilmiyya Press), Vol. 3, p. 322. Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol.
2, p. 124.

[^43]: A reference to al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 174-180.

[^44]: Tawfiq Abu \`Alam, Ahl al-Bayt, pp. 167-68. Refer also to
Al-Wafa’, Vol. 3, p. 918. Refer to the footnote on p. 489 of \`Awalim
al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, Ihqaq al-Haqq (Appendices), Vol. 10, p. 476, and
Fatima al-Zahra’ (sa) fil Ahadith al-Qudsiyya, pp. 184-85.

[^45]: Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, Part 3, p. 140.

[^46]: Refer to my book titled Al-Sihah min Sirat al-Nabiyy al-A\`zam
(S), Vol. 9.

[^47]: Ibid.

[^48]: Al-Bukhari, Sihah, Vol. 2, p. 116. Muslim, Sihah, Vol. 1, p. 91.
Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 5, p. 384. Ibn Majah, Sunan, Vol. 2, p. 1337.
Al-Taratib al-Idariyya, Vol. 2, pp. 251-52 and Vol. 1, pp. 220-23. Ibn
Abu Shaybah, Al-Musannaf, Vol. 15, p. 69.

[^49]: I\`lam al-Wara, p. 55. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp.
8-10.

[^50]: \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, pp. 298, 340. Refer to Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 94, 114. Al-Tusi, Amali, Vol. 1, p. 39.

[^51]: \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 345. Dala’il al-Imama, p. 21.

[^52]: Refer to my article in Dirasat wa Buhuth fil Tarikh wal Islam
(studies and researches in history and Islamics), Vol. 1, p. 169 and the
following pages.

[^53]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Sermon 26.

[^54]: Al-Sira al-Halabiyya, Vol. 2, p. 254. Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol. 1,
p. 444 quoting Al-Muntaqa. Refer to Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 2, p. 167.
Al-Tabari, Tarikh, Vol. 2, p. 210. Al-\`Iqd al-Farid, Al-Bidaya wal
Nihaya, Vol. 4, p. 48. Ahmed, Musnad, Vol. 2, pp. 40, 84, 92.
Al-Isti\`ab (in the biography of al-Hamzah). Abu Ya\`li, Musnad, Vol. 6,
pp. 272, 293-94 and its footnotes cite the following: p. 120, Vol. 6, of
Mujma\` al-Zawa’id, p. 10, Part 1, Vol. 3, of Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra. Ibn
Majah, Sunan, Vol. 3, p. 94. In the book of the Prophet’s biography, and
in the discussion of funerals, it is hadith number 1591. Al-Hakim,
Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 195. Ibn Hisham, Sira, Vol. 1, p. 103. Al-Isaba,
Vol. 4 (in the biography of Ruqayya).

[^55]: Ibn Shaybah, Tarikh al-Medina, Vol. 1, p. 103. Al-Isaba, Vol. 4,
in the biography of Ruqayya.

[^56]: Refer to Al-Nass wal Ijtihad, pp. 230-34. Al-Amini, Al-Ghadir,
Vol. 6, pp. 159-67. Dala’il al-Sidq, Vol. 3, Part 1, pp. 134-36 citing
scores of reliable references. Al-Isti\`ab (as referred to in a footnote
in Al-Isaba) in the biography of Ja\`far (al-Tayyar), Vol. 1, p. 211.
Minhat al-Ma\`bud, Vol. 1, p. 159. Kashf al-Astar, Vol. 1, pp. 381-83.
Al-Isaba, Vol. 2, p. 464. Al-Majruhun, Vol. 2, p. 92. Al-Sira
al-Halabiyya, Vol. 2, p. 89. Refer also to p. 251 as well. Wafa’
al-Wafa’, Vol. 3, pp. 894-95. Refer also to pp. 932-33. Hayat al-Sahaba,
Vol. 1, p. 571. Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, p. 396 and Vol. 2, p. 313.

[^57]: Refer to Al-\`Iqd al-Farid, Vol. 4, p. 264 and other books.

[^58]: Refer to the above stated references and others and to Al-Ghadir
and scores of other references as well as p. 158, Vol. 1, of Minhat
al-Ma\`bud and while discussing Isfahan on p. 61, Vol. 1, quoting Ibn
Musa. Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, pp. 209, 346, 362. Refer to the
explanation of various traditions on p. 245.

[^59]: Al-Taratib al-Idariyya, Vol. 2, p. 375. Al-Isaba, Vol. 1, p. 415.
Sifat al-Safwah, Vol. 1, p. 655. Usd al-Ghaba, Vol. 2, p. 96. Hayat
al-Sahaba, Vol. 1, p. 465 quoting Al-Isaba. Al-Musannaf, Vol. 3, p. 559
in the footnotes of which al-Bukhari, Ibn Sa\`d and Ibn Abu Shaybah are
quoted. Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol. 2, p. 247. Fath al-Bari, Vol. 7, p. 79.
Al-Fa’iq, Vol. 4, p. 19. Al-Qanduzi, Rabi\` al-Abrar, Vol. 3, p. 330.
Tarikh al-Khulafa’, p. 88. Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-\`Arab, Vol. 8, p. 363.

[^60]: Minhat al-Ma\`bud, Vol. 1, p. 159.

[^61]: Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3 (Dar Sadir’s edition), p. 81. Rabi\`
al-Abrar, Vol. 2, p. 586.

[^62]: Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, p. 362. Minhat al-Ma\`bud, Vol. 1, p.
159.

[^63]: Al-Amini, Al-Ghadir, Vol. 1, pp. 54, 155, 164. Refer to the
biography of al-Nu\`man ibn Muqrin in Al-Isti\`ab. Refer also to pp.
328-29, Vol. 2, of Al-Riyad al-Nadira about how \`’Umar wept over that
bedouin till he wetted his beard!

[^64]: Refer to Al-Ghadir where the following references are cited:
Ahmed’s Musnad, Vol. 1, pp. 235, 237 and Vol. 2, pp. 333, 408;
al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, Vol. 3, pp. 190, 381, where both al-Dhahbi, in his
Talkhis, and he label this tradition as authentic; Mujma\` al-Zawa’id,
Vol. 3, p. 17; Al-Isti\`ab in the biography of \`Othman ibn Maz\`un;
al-Tayalisi’s Musnad, p. 351; al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan, Vol. 4, p. 70; \`Umdat
al-Qari, Vol. 4, p. 87 citing al-Nisa’i, Ibn Majah; Ibn Majah, Sunan,
Vol. 1, p. 481; al-Hindi, Kanz al-\`Ummal, Vol. 1, p. 117; Ansab
al-Ashraf, Vol. 1, p. 157. Ibn Sa\`d, Tabaqat, Vol. 3, pp. 399, 429;
Minhat al-Ma\`bud, Vol. 1, p. 159.

[^65]: Al-Bukhari, Sahih, Vol. 1, p. 146 (1039 A.H. edition). Al-Hakim,
Mustadrak, Vol. 3, p. 381. A reference to al-Shafi\`i disagreeing with
this “tradition” is recorded on p. 266, Vol. 7, of Al-Umm. Jami\` Bayan
al-\`Ilm, Vol. 2, p. 105. Minhat al-Ma\`bud, Vol. 1, p. 158. Ibn Sa\`d,
Tabaqat, Vol. 3, p. 346. Al-Mazni, Mukhtasar as referred to on p. 187,
Vol. 1, of Al-Umm. Al-Amini, Al-Ghadir, Vol. 6, p. 163 from the above
cited references. Muslim, Sahih, Vol. 1, pp. 342-44. Ahmed, Musnad, Vol.
1, p. 41. Al-Nisa’i, Sunan, Vol. 4, pp. 17-18. Al-Bayhaqi, Sunan, Vol.
4, pp. 72-73. Ibn Dawud, Sunan, Vol. 2, p. 59. Ibn Malik, Al-Muatta’,
Vol. 1, p. 96.

[^66]: Al-Bukhari, Sihah, Vol. 1, p. 147.

[^67]: Refer to Al-Ghadir, Dala’il al-Sidq, Al-Nass wal Ijtihad and
others.

[^68]: Ezekiel, 24:16-18.

[^69]: Al-Musawi, Al-Nass wal Ijtihad, p. 234.


