Texts And Legacies From The Fourteen Infallible Ones
====================================================

Traditions Regarding How al-Zahra’ (sa) was Persecuted
------------------------------------------------------

There are numerous traditions cited by the Infallible Ones clearly
outlining how al-Zahra’ (sa) was persecuted. They deal with how her
house was assaulted with the intention to burn it, how the burning did
actually take place, how she was hit, how she miscarried, and many other
details of what she went through during the said assault. These
narrations are consecutively reported (*mutawatir*) even if we do not
add to them what others narrated and what the historians and others
recorded in their books as facts. The latter is also quite numerous,
even consecutively reported, as we have already pointed out.

We would like here to cite a large number of texts narrated by the
Infallible Ones (as) in particular so that this matter becomes quite
clear; so, let us set out to explore the following narratives and sacred
legacies, and surely Allah is the One Who grants success.

Two Narratives Before the Reader
--------------------------------

In al-Tusi’s *Amali*, the author states the following:

Relying on his *isnad*, from his mentor, from his father, may Allah be
pleased with him, he is quoted as having said, “We were told by Muhammed
ibn Muhammed as saying that ‘Abu ‘Abdullah, Muhammed ibn ‘Imran,
informed me saying that al-Zayyat said that Ahmed ibn Muhammed
al-Jawhari said that al-Hassan ibn ‘Alal al-’Anzi said that ‘Abd
al-Karam ibn Muhammed said that Muhammed ibn Ali said that Muhammed ibn
Munqir cites Ziyad ibn al-Munthir saying that Shurahbil quotes Umm
al-Fadl daughter of al-’Abbas said: When the Messenger of Allah S was
under the weight of the sickness whereby he passed away, he once woke
up, and we were weeping. He said: What causes you to weep? We said: O
Messenger of Allah! We weep not to gain anything but to our departure
from us; we weep for the cessation of the report from Heaven, and we
weep over the nation after you. He said: You surely will be the
oppressed and the downtrodden after me.”[^1]

What Sacred Texts Narrate
-------------------------

1. Abu Bakr al-Shirazi, with regards to what is revealed in the Qur’an
with reference to the Commander of the Faithful (as), quotes Muqatil
quoting ‘Ata’ regarding the verse saying, “Verily, We granted Moses the
Book” saying that the Torah used to have the following: “O Moses! I have
chosen you and chosen a vizier for you who is your brother (Aaron) by
your father and mother just as I chose for Muhammed Eleya who is his
brother, vizier, *wasi* and successor. Congratulations to both of you
for having such brothers, and congratulations to them for having you for
brothers: Eleya, father of two grandsons, al-Hassan and al-Husayn and of
a third one, al-Muhsin, one of his offspring, just as I created for your
brother, Aaron, Shabar, Shubayr and Mushabbar.”[^2]

Note:

We started with both of these narratives despite our knowledge that the
first is general to the degree that there is no room to count it among
the narratives which we are in the process of presenting to you. The
second is not narrated by the Infallible Ones (as).

FIRST: We would like to point out to the existence of many texts
containing this same meaning, i.e. the persecution of the Household of
the Prophet S and their being oppressed.

SECOND: We would like to prepare the reader to enter and be acquainted
with the environments of transgression, humiliation, oppression and
treating the family of the Prophet S as weaklings.

THIRD: This second tradition is narrated in some of Allah’s revealed
Books. For this reason, we included it on the list of such traditions.
It also testifies to the oppression to which al-Muhsin was exposed and
which some people try to deny.

What is Narrated From the Messenger of Allah (S)
------------------------------------------------

2. Sulaym ibn Qays has quoted ‘Abdullah ibn al-’Abbas, when Jabir ibn
‘Abdullah [al-Ansari] was sitting next to him, as saying that the
Prophet S said to Ali (as) at the conclusion of a lengthy sermon,
“Quraish will revolt against all of you, and they will be unanimous in
oppressing you. So, if you find supporters, you should fight them back.
But if you do not find supporters, hold your hand away and do not shed
your blood. Martyrdom is behind you, and may Allah condemn your killer.”
Then the Prophet S faced his daughter (sa) and said, “You will be the
first to join me from among my Ahl al-Bayt, and you are the Head of the
Women of Paradise. You will face oppression and malice, so much so that
you will be hit, and one of your ribs will be broken; may Allah condemn
your killer...”[^3]

3. Ibrahim ibn Muhammed al-Juwayni al-Shafi’i, relying on the *isnad* of
Ali bin Ahmed ibn Musa al-Daqqaq from Muhammed ibn Abu ‘Abdullah al-Kufi
from Musa ibn ‘Imran al-Nakh’i from al-Nawfali from al-Hassan ibn Ali
ibn Abu Hamzah from his father from Sa’id ibn Jubayr from Ibn ‘Abbas,
has narrated saying that the Messenger of Allah S was once sitting when
al-Hassan (as) came. Seeing him, the Prophet (S) wept.

Then he said, “Come to me, come to me, O son!” Then al-Husayn (as) came
followed by Fatima (sa). After that the Commander of the Faithful (as)
came. His companions asked him, and he answered them. Among what he said
to them was: “As for my daughter Fatima (sa), she is the Head of the
Women of Mankind... When I saw her, I remembered what she will have to
endure after me. It is as if humiliation entered her house, violating
her privacy, confiscating her rights, depriving her of her inheritance,
breaking her side, causing her to miscarry as she will call our: ‘O
Muhammed!’ but there will be none to respond to her.

She will seek help, but she will not be helped. She will remain after me
grieved, depressed, tearful... Then she will see herself humiliated
after being, during her father’s lifetime, honored and dignified... She
will be the first to rejoin me from among my Ahl al-Bayt. She will come
to me sad, depressed, usurped, murdered. It will then be said by the
Messenger of Allah S, ‘O Lord! Condemn whoever condemned her! Punish
whoever confiscated what belonged to her! Humiliate whoever humiliated
her! And keep in Your Fire whoever hit her on her side till she
miscarried her son!’ The angels will at that time say, ‘Ameen!’”[^4]

Shaikh al-Islam, *‘allama* al-Majlisi, wile citing this narrative, says,
“This is narrated by al-Saduq in his *Amali* depending on a reliable
*isnad* from Ibn ‘Abbas.”

4. ‘Allama al-Majlisi has said: “I have found something handwritten by
Shaikh Muhammed ibn Ali al-Jib’i, grandfather of Shaikh al-Baha’i,
transmitted via the handwriting of the martyr, may Allah raise his
status, who cites the *Musbah* of Shaikh Abu Mansur, may Allah make his
resting-place good, saying that it has been narrated that the Prophet S
entered once the house of Fatima (sa) who prepared for him some food
comprised of dates, a round loaf of bread and some oil. They all sat
down to eat, he, Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as). Once they
have finished eating, the Messenger of Allah S prostrated.

Then he smiled. Then he wept. Then he sat. The one who had the most
courage to speak was Ali (as) who said, ‘O Messenger of Allah S! We have
seen you today doing what we have never seen you doing before!’ He S
said, “When I ate with you, I was pleased and felt happy for your safety
and your assembling together, so I prostrated to Allah to thank Him.

It was then that Gabriel (as) descended and asked me, ‘Have you
prostrated for being happy with your family?’ ‘Yes,’ I said. He said,
‘shall I inform you of what will happen to them after you?’ I said,
‘Yes, O my Brother, Gabriel! Do so.’ He said, ‘As for your daughter, she
will be the first to rejoin you after being oppressed, what belongs to
her will be taken away from her, and she will be deprived of her
inheritance, and her husband will be dealt with unjustly. Her rib will
be broken.

As regarding your cousin, he will be dealt with unjustly, he will be
deprived of his right (to the caliphate), and he will be killed. As for
al-Hassan (as), he will be dealt with unjustly; he will be deprived of
his right and will be poisoned. As for al-Husayn (as), he will be dealt
with unjustly; he will be deprived of his right, his progeny will be
killed, and his body will be crushed under the horses’ hoofs.

His belongings will be plundered; his women and offspring will be taken
captive; he will be buried shrouded by his blood, and strangers will
bury him.’ I, therefore, wept and asked him, ‘Will anyone visit his
grave?’ He said, ‘Strangers will visit it.’ I asked him, ‘What rewards
will be received by those who visit it?’ He said, ‘For each of them will
be written down in his/her book of deeds the rewards of performing the
pilgrimage a thousand times and the *‘umra* a thousand times, all in
your own company,’ so I smiled.”[^5]

5. ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab asked Huthayfan ibn al-Yaman about a statement
made by the Prophet S regarding a dissension that would treat people as
the raging waves treat a ship in the sea. Huthayfah said, “It is a
dissension between which and yourself there is a closed door.” ‘’Umar
said, “Will the door, O Huthayfah, be opened or will it be broken?”
Huthayfah said, “It will be broken.” ‘’Umar said, “If the door is
broken, then it ought not to be closed till the Day of Judgment.”[^6]

Then they attributed to Huthayfah the statement that what is meant by
the broken door is the assassination of ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab and by the
gate of dissension is ‘Othman taking charge.[^7]

We say the following:

Had Huthayfah really said so, such *ijtihad* is not precise because the
“shura” which ‘’Umar invented was the one that brought ‘Othman to power,
albeit whether ‘’Umar was to be killed or to die naturally. He invented
it after someone stabbed him in the stomach.

Installing ‘Othman as the caliph was not the cause of the dissension
which still remains till our time and will continue till the Judgment
Day. Rather, it was the issue of Imamate which was usurped through the
violence that manifested itself by the assault on Fatima’s house, by
breaking her door and taking Ali (as) out by force to swear the oath of
allegiance against his will. It is well known that the most serious
dissension among the nation is the one regarding the issue of Imamate.
No sword was ever taken out of its scabbard based on a theological basis
like the one taken out against the Imamate in every time and clime, as
al-Shahristani and others have stated.

What is Narrated from Imam Ali (as)
-----------------------------------

6. Sulaym ibn Qays has narrated saying that ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab once
fined all his governors half of their salaries, exempting Qunfath
al-’Adawi from having to pay such a fine, and he was one of those
governors. He even returned to him what he had taken away from him, the
sum of twenty thousand dirhams.

Nor did he deduct the tilth, nor half the tilth. Aban said that Salim
has said, “I met Ali (as) and asked him about what he thought regarding
what ‘’Umar had done. He said, ‘Do you know why he (‘’Umar) exempted
Qunfath and did not fine him or deduct anything from his salary?’ I
said, ‘No.’ He said, ‘Because he is the one who hit Fatima, peace and
blessings of Allah with her, with the whip when she came to act as a
barrier between me and them. So she died, peace and blessings of Allah
with her, and there was still a mark on her wrist like a bracelet.’”[^8]

7. Aban has said that Salim said, “I went to a study circle at the
Mosque of the Messenger of Allah S. The non-Hashemites were Salman, Abu
Dharr, al-Miqdad, Muhammed ibn Abu Bakr, ‘’Umar ibn Abu Salamah and Qays
ibn Sa’d ibn ‘Abadah. Al-’Abbas said to Ali (as), ‘I wonder what stopped
‘’Umar from fining Qunfath as he did to all his other governors.’ Ali
(as) looked around him, then his eyes were filled with tears. He then
said, ‘He did so in appreciation of his hitting Fatima (sa) with the
whip, so she died and her wrist bore the mark of the hit like a
bracelet.’”[^9]

8. Salim quotes Ibn ‘Abbas as saying, “I visited Ali (as) at Thi Qar. He
took out a tablet and said to me, ‘O son of ‘Abbas! This is a tablet
written according to what the Messenger of Allah (S) dictated to me, and
it is in my own handwriting.’ I said, ‘O Commander of the Faithful!
Please read it for me.’ He read it, and it contained a narrative of the
events from the demise of the Messenger of Allah S to the martyrdom of
al-Husayn (as), detailing how he would be killed, the name of his
killer, the names of his supporters, and who would be martyred in his
company. He wept profusely, causing me to weep, too. Among what he read
to me was what would happen to him (to Ali (as)), how Fatima (sa) would
be martyred, how al-Hassan (as) would be betrayed by the nation then be
martyred, etc.”[^10]

9. Ali (as) is quoted, at the time when he buried al-Zahra’ (sa), as
saying, “... And your daughter shall inform you of how the nation
assisted each other in oppressing her, so inquire of her and ask her
about the conditions, for there are many agonies filling her chest for
which she found no outlet...”[^11]

His speech, peace with him, above, although free of frankly stating what
took place to al-Zahra’ (sa), is indicative of the fact that there were
many injustices that remained inside her chest, peace with her, for
which she found no outlet. Among such injustices are: the confiscation
of Fadak, the confiscation of her inheritance, the usurpation of the
caliphate that belonged to her husband, because these issues she did
publicly and clearly announce, using them as proofs indicting the
oppressors, delivering a great sermon while explaining them.

10. Refer to what is mentioned by the mentor al-Kaf’ami, who died in 905
A.H./1499 A.D., in his book titled *Al-Misbah* which he compiled from
about two hundred and forty references. He states that he compiled it
“... from books the authenticity of which is reliable and upholding
which is mandated, and this cannot be altered by the evil efforts of
time or by the endeavor of those with twisted minds.”

*Books, like the sun, whose light*

*Is written above the most high of height*.[^12]

He, may Allah have mercy on him, recorded a supplication transmitted by
Ibn ‘Abbas which Ali (as) used to recite in his *qunut*. In a footnote,
he described it as, “a great supplication, one of a lofty status.” About
this supplication, Ali (as) says, “One who recites it is like one who
shot a million[^13] arrows in defense of the Prophet S during the
battles of Badr and of Hunain.”

Among the text of that supplication is the following with reference to
the Household of the Prophet S: “... And they both killed his children,
vacated his pulpit from his *wasi* and the heir of his knowledge,
reneging from their fealty to his Imamate... and a womb which they cut
open, and a fetus which they caused to miscarry, and a rib which they
crushed, and a covenant which they tore to pieces..., etc.”[^14]

In a comment which he made about it and which he included in a footnote
of his book, *Misbah*, and which is cited by *‘allama* al-Majlisi, “The
mentor/scholar As’ad ibn ‘Abd al-Qahir said the following in his book
titled *Rashh al-Bala’*: ‘When he referred to their demolition of the
House of the Prophetic Mission, he was referring to the harm inflicted
by the first (caliph) and the second against Ali and Fatima (as), their
desire to burn Ali’s house, how they led him away like a wounded camel,
how they squeezed Fatima at her door till she miscarried al-Muhsin...
She ordered to be buried at night and that neither the first nor the
second [caliph] should be present at her funeral.’”[^15]

He also referred to the rib that was crushed, the covenant that was torn
to pieces, to what they committed against Fatima (sa), how they tore her
property’s title (of the Fadak real estate) to pieces, and how her rib
was crushed.[^16]

11. Muhammed ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmed ibn al-Walid cites Ahmed ibn Idris,
Muhammed ibn Yahya al-’Attar, who all quote Muhammed ibn Ahmed ibn Abu
Hamzah al-Bata’ini quoting Ibn ‘Umayrah quoting Muhammed ibn ‘Utbah
quoting Muhammed ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman quoting his father quoting Ali ibn
Abu Talib (as) as saying, “While I, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as)
were all in the company of the Messenger of Allah (S), he turned to us
and wept. I asked him, ‘What is that for, O Messenger of Allah S?!’ He
said, ‘I weep for you and how you will be hit on the head with the
sword, and I weep for Fatima (sa) and how she will be slapped on the
cheek.”[^17]

Al-Majlisi describes this narrative as reliable; so refer to his
work.[^18]

12. Ahmed ibn al-Khasab, citing Ja’far ibn Muhammed al-Mufaddal quoting
Muhammed ibn Sinan al-Zahiri quoting ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd ar-Rahman
al-Asam quoting Madah ibn Harun ibn Sa’d saying, “I heard the father of
al-Tufayl, namely ‘amir ibn Wa’ilah citing the Commander of the Faithful
(as) saying to ‘’Umar, among other things, the following:

“It is the fire that you ignited at the door of my house in order to
burn me and burn Fatima (sa), daughter of the Messenger of Allah S, and
burn my sons, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as) and also burn my daughters
Zainab and Umm Kulthum..., etc.”[^19]

13. What proves violence against Ali (as) and that he was forced to
swear fealty is a letter which Mu’awiyah wrote him as well as his answer
to it. Mu’awiyah said to him that he was too slow to swear fealty to the
“caliphs,” so he was taken to swear it against his wish as a run-away
camel is taken.[^20]

Among what he said to him was, “You envied Abu Bakr, swerved from his
path, wished his attempt would fail, kept sitting at home and attracted
a group of people to you till they lagged behind rather than swear
fealty to him.” He went on to say, “None of these men except that you
sought the upper hand over him and were sluggish to swear fealty to him
till you were taken to him by force like a frightened camel.”[^21]

The Commander of the Faithful (as) answered him with a letter wherein he
said, “And you said that I was led like a frightened camel in order to
swear fealty. By Allah! You intended to speak ill of me but you praised
me, and to expose me but exposed your own self. There is no harm in a
Muslim being oppressed so long as he does not entertain any doubts about
his religion..., etc.”[^22]

This narrative proves that they entered his house and took him out by
force, underscoring the fact that they did not have any respect for the
privacy of al-Zahra’ (sa) who tried to keep them away from him as much
as she could as indicated in many narratives although this particular
narrative did not disclose how they were directly involved in harming
al-Zahra’ (sa).

14. Al-Daylami has stated that al-Zahra’ (sa) detailed what she had to
go through. Among what she said was the following:

“... Then they sent to our house Qunfath accompanied by ‘’Umar ibn
al-Khattab and Khalid ibn al-Walid in order to get my cousin Ali (as) to
the *saqifa* of Bani Sa’idah for their lost-cause fealty, but he would
not go out to meet them, being busy carrying out the will of the
Messenger of Allah S and with his wives, with compiling the Qur’an and
with the repayment of eighty thousand dirhams which he Shad instructed
him to pay on his behalf: the price of [military] equipment and payment
of debt [incurred against the Prophet S].

They collected plenty of firewood at our door. Then they brought a torch
to set it ablaze and to burn us. I stood at the door’s knob and pleaded
to them in the Name of Allah to leave us alone and to come to our aid.
‘’Umar took the whip from the hand of Qunfath, slave of Abu Bakr, and
hit me with it on the wrist. The whip twisted itself around my wrist,
leaving a mark like a bracelet on it. He kicked the door with his foot.
Ali (as) shut it back, and I was pregnant. I fell on my face as the fire
kept burning, parching my face. He [‘’Umar] slapped me with his hand,
causing my ear-ring to fall on the ground into bits and pieces. Labor
overtook me, so I miscarried al-Muhsin who was killed without having
committed any crime. Is this a nation that blesses me?! Allah and His
Messenger disowned them and I, too, disowned them.”

The Commander of the Faithful (as) carried out her will. He did not
inform anyone about her demise. At al-Baqi’, he dug up forty graves
during the night in one of which he buried Fatima (sa).

Then the Muslims, having come to know about the death and burial of
Fatima (sa), went to the Commander of the Faithful (as) to offer their
condolences. They said, “O Brother of the Messenger of Allah S! Order us
to prepare her for burial and to dig up her grave.” He said, “She has
already been buried, joining her father S.” They said, “We belong to
Allah, and to Him shall we return. How can the daughter of our Prophet
Muhammed S, his only offspring, die and we do not perform her funeral
prayers?! This is truly very serious!” He said, “Suffices you what you
have committed against Allah, the Messenger of Allah S and his Progeny.

By Allah! I would not violate her will which she entrusted to me, that
is, that none of you should perform her funeral prayers, and there is no
blame on one who carries out someone’s will.” Those folks shook the dust
off their clothes and said, “We have to perform the funeral prayers for
the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S).” They immediately went to
al-Baqi’ and found forty graves freshly dug up. They could not tell
which one of them was hers. People exchanged blame and accusations and
said, “You did not witness the demise of the daughter of your Prophet,
nor did you perform the funeral prayers for her, and now you do not even
know where her grave is so you may visit it!”

Abu Bakr said, “Let a number of trustworthy Muslims dig up these graves
till you find her grave so that we may perform her funeral prayers and
visit it.”

The Commander of the Faithful (as) heard about it, so he went out of his
house angrily. His face was red with anger, his eyes burning, his cheeks
puffed up, and he was carrying on his hand his yellow outer garment
which he never put on except on an ill-fated day. He was using his
sword, Thul-Fiqar, like a walking stick till he reached al-Baqi’. Prior
to his arrival, report reached people that he was going there. A warner
said to them, “Here is Ali (as) coming as you can see swearing by Allah
that no brick of these graves will be moved from its place except that
he will let his sword do its business against the unlucky ones from
among this nation.” People fled away in hordes.[^23]

15. Among the verses of poetry which were narrated by traditionists and
historians and which were composed by al-Zahra’ (sa) eulogizing the
greatest of all Prophets (as) are the following:

*Why should one who sniffs the earth*

*Where Ahmed is buried that he shall not*

*As long as he lives sniff musk at all?*

*Calamities were poured over me had they*

*Been poured on the light of day,*

*They would have turned it into night.*

*So today I am submitting to humiliation*

*Shunning the oppression,*

*Defending myself against the oppressor*

*Even with my own outer garment*.[^24]

Had the calamities to which she refers in these lines been one relevant
to the demise of her father, she would not have used the plural, nor has
she resorted to submitting to humiliation or to defending herself with
her outer garment. Another verse of poetry refers to her defending
herself against her oppressor with her own mantle, referring to the
oppression which was not confined to usurping her inheritance, and to
Fadak, for these do not need to defend against the oppressor with her
outer mantle, but she went out and demanded restitution, providing
arguments.

Add to all the above the fact that one who used her outer mantle to
defend against oppression is one who exerts a physical endeavor which
she, peace with her, had to exert. She did not confine herself to
delivering a speech and to provide arguments supporting her claims.

What Imam al-Hassan al-Mujtaba (as) Narrates
--------------------------------------------

16. It is narrated from al-Sha’bi, Abu Mikhnaf, Yazid ibn Habib al-Misri
the tradition of Imam al-Hassan al-Mujtaba (as) in which he argued with
‘Amr ibn al-’As, al-Walid ibn ‘Uqbah, ‘Amr ibn ‘Othman and ‘Utbah ibn
Abu Sufyan in the presence of Mu’awiyah, and it is quite a lengthy
tradition. In it, the Imam (as) says to al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah, “You
are the one who hit Fatima (sa) daughter of the Messenger of Allah S,
causing her to bleed and she miscarried, thus humiliating the Messenger
of Allah S, disobeying his order and violating his sanctity since the
Messenger of Allah S had said to her, ‘O Fatima! You are the Head of all
the women of Paradise.’”[^25]

The great *‘allama* and mentor Shaikh al-Tibrisi, in his Introduction to
his book *Al-Ihtijaj*, has said, “Most of what we cite of any report we
quote it according to its own *isnad* either because there is a
consensus in its regard, or it agrees with what other thinkers have
pointed out, or it is famous in biography books of those who disagree as
well as those who agree with us except the speech of the father of
Muhammed, namely (Imam) al-Hassan al-’Askari (as), which I have cited,
for nothing is more famous than it, although it contains the same as we
have already introduced. For this reason, I mentioned its *isnad* at the
beginning of each report of the same...”[^26]

The researching *‘allama* and mentor, al-Tehrani, has said the following
in *Al-Thari’a* الذريعة, “This statement of his is quite clear in that
everything he has cited in this regard is famous as agreed on by those
who disagree as well as by those who agree with us. It is one of the
highly regarded books on which scholars such as *‘allama* al-Majlisi and
the traditionist al-Hurr al-’Amili and their peers depend.”[^27]

What is Narrated by al-Sajjad (as)
----------------------------------

17. Muhammed ibn Jarir ibn Rustam al-Tabari has recorded the following:
“We have been informed by Makhal ibn Ibrahim al-Nahdi who says that
Matar ibn Arqam has said that Abu Hamzah al-Thumali has said that Ali
ibn al-Husayn (as) has said the following:

When he (S) passed away, and when Abu Bakr received the oath of
allegiacne, Ali (as) lagged behind, so ‘’Umar said to Abu Bakr, “Are you
not going to send someone to this lagging man to come and swear the oath
of allegiance to you?” He (Abu Bakr) said, “Qunfath! Go to Ali and tell
him that the successor of the Messenger of Allah S tells you to come and
swear the oath of allegiacne.” Ali (as) raised his voice saying, “Praise
to Allah! How quickly you have told lies about the Messenger of Allah
S!” He returned and informed Abu Bakr of it. ‘’Umar again said, “Are you
not going to send someone to this lagging man to come and swear the oath
of allegiance to you?” He (Abu Bakr) said to Qunfath, “Go to Ali and
tell him that the commander of the faithful tells you to come and swear
the oath of allegiance.” Qunfath went there and knocked at the door. He
said, “Who is it?” He said, “It is I, Qunfath.” He said, “What brought
you here?” He said, “The commander of the faithful tells you to go and
swear fealty.” Ali (as) raised his voice as he said, “Glory to Allah! He
claims what is not his!” Qunfath returned and told Abu Bakr everything.
‘’Umar stood up and said, “Let us go to this man to bring him here.” A
group of men went with him.

They knocked at the door. When Ali (as) heard their voices, he said
nothing. A woman spoke and inquired who they were. They said, “Tell Ali
to come out and swear fealty.” Fatima (sa) raised her voice as she said,
“O Messenger of Allah S! What have we suffered at the hands of Abu Bakr
and ‘’Umar after you?!” When the men heard her voice and words, many of
them wept.

Then they went away. ‘’Umar remained, accompanied by a number of men.
They took Ali (as) out and led him to Abu Bakr till they seated him in
front of the latter. Abu Bakr said to him, “Swear fealty (to me).” Ali
(as) said, “What if I don’t?” Abu Bakr said, “Then, by Allah, the One
and only God, your neck shall be struck with the sword.” Ali (as) said,
“You do that to me although I am a servant of Allah S and the Brother of
His Messenger?!” Abu Bakr said, “Swear it.” Ali (as) said, “What if I
don’t?!” Abu Bakr said, “Then, by Allah, the One and only God, your neck
shall be struck with the sword.” Ali (as) turned to the grave (of the
Messenger of Allah (S)) and said, “O Brother! The people deem me weak,
and they almost killed me.” He swore fealty then left.[^28]

What Either al-Baqir or al-Sadiq (as) has Narrated
--------------------------------------------------

18. *‘Allama* al-’Ayyashi, may Allah have mercy on him, has cited one of
these Imams (as) narrating a lengthy tradition at the end of which he
said,

Abu Bakr sent him a message to go there to swear the oath of allegiance
to him. Ali (as) said, “I shall not come out till I finish compiling the
Qur’an.” He sent for him again. He said, “I shall not come out till I am
through.” Abu Bakr sent for him a third time a cousin of his called
Qunfath. Fatima (sa) daughter of the Messenger of Allah S went out to
act as a barrier between the men and Ali (as). Qunfath hit her,
returning without Ali (as). It was feared that he would amass a group of
opponents. Abu Bakr ordered firewood to be brought and placed around
Ali’s house. Then ‘’Umar set out with a torch in his hand and wanted to
burn Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as). When Ali (as) saw all of
that, he was forced to come out to swear fealty against his wish.[^29]

19. Muhammed ibn Yahya quotes Muhammed ibn al-Husayn quoting Muhammed
ibn Isma’il quoting Salih ibn ‘Uqbah quoting ‘Abdullah ibn Muhammed
al-Ju’fi quoting Abu Ja’far and Abu ‘Abdullah (as) as saying, “When they
did what they did, Fatima (sa) seized ‘’Umar by the collar, pulled him
and said, ‘O son of al-Khattab! Had I not feared that some innocent
people would be hurt, I would have submitted a plea to Allah to which He
will respond swiftly.’”[^30]

The mentor of the Muslims, Shaikh al-Majlisi, has said the following
while explaining the beginning of the quotation of the Imam cited above,
“He means their forceful entry into Fatima’s house.”[^31]

What is Narrated from Imam al-Baqir (as)
----------------------------------------

20. Ibrahim ibn Ahmed al-Tabari, relying on Ali ibn ‘’Umar ibn Hassan
ibn Ali al-Siyari who cites Muhammed ibn Zakariyya al-Ghulabi citing
Ja’far ibn Muhammed ibn ‘Imarah citing his father citing Jabir al-Ju’fi
citing Abu Ja’far Muhammed ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) citing his father
citing his grandfather citing Muhammed ibn ‘Ammar ibn Yasir  in a
tradition saying the following:

... She was pregnant with al-Hassan (as). Having given birth to him, she
conceived forty days thereafter with al-Husayn (as), then she was
blessed with Zainab and Umm Kulthum. Then she was big with al-Muhsin.
When the Messenger of Allah S passed away, and when the folks did what
they did on that day, forcefully entering her house and taking her
cousin, the Commander of the Faithful (as), out by force. After the harm
dealt to her by that man (‘’Umar), she miscarried her son. That was the
original cause of her sickness then subsequently death, peace and
blessings of Allah with her.[^32]

21. Muhammed ibn Jarir ibn Rustam al-Tabari stated that Ali (as) lagged
behind when Abu Bakr received the people’s oath of allegiance, so they
went to his house and intended to set it to fire. They wanted to burn
him and Fatima (sa), so al-Zubayr came out with his sword unsheathed,
and they broke his sword. Muhammed ibn Harun has narrated from Aban ibn
‘Othman saying that Sa’d ibn Qudamah cites Za’ida saying that Abu Bakr
invited Ali (as) to swear the oath of allegiance to him, but he refused.
Then the narrator details how Ali (as) argued with them and goes on to
say, “I asked Za’idah ibn Qudamah, ‘Who did you hear this from?’ He
said, ‘I heard it from Abu Ja’far Muhammed ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn
(as).’”[^33]

22. Abu al-Jarud is cited quoting Abu Ja’far being asked about when
al-Qa’im (as) will come out (of his occultation). He provided a lengthy
answer wherein he referred to “the firewood which they collected in
order to burn Ali, Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as). And this is the
firewood which we keep inheriting...”[^34]

What Imam al-Sadiq (as) is Quoted Narrating
-------------------------------------------

23. Muhammed ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Ja’far al-Himyari quotes his father
quoting Ali ibn Muhammed ibn Salim quoting Muhammed ibn Khalid quoting
‘Abdullah ibn Hammad al-Basri quoting ‘Abdullah ibn Ali ibn Abd
al-Rahman al-Asam quoting Hammad ibn ‘Othman quoting Abu ‘Abdullah (as)
saying,

When the Prophet S was taken for the night journey, it was said to him
that Allah would test him in three instances. So the angel kept counting
them till he said, “As for your daughter Fatima (sa), she will be
oppressed and deprived and her right will be confiscated, the
inheritance which you will leave her. And she will be hit while she is
pregnant; insults and humiliation will affect her, then she will
miscarry what is in her womb and be beaten, and she will die from such
beating... The first to raise a complaint against his killer (on the Day
of Judgment) will be Muhsin son of Ali (as), then Qunfath and his fellow
(Abu Bakr) will be brought...”[^35]

24. Abul-Hassan ibn Shathan quotes his father quoting Muham-med ibn
al-Hassan ibn al-Walid quoting Muhammed ibn al-Husayn ibn al-Saffar
quoting Muhammed ibn Ziyad from Mufaddal ibn ‘’Umar from Yunus ibn
Ya’qub from al-Sadiq (as) saying the following in a lengthy tradition:
“O Yunus! My grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (S), said, ‘Cursed is
whoever oppresses my daughter Fatima (sa) and confiscates what belongs
to her and kills her.’”[^36]

25. The author of *Al-Kafi* cites some of our folks citing Ahmed ibn
Muhammed from al-Qasim from his grandfather from Abu Busayr from Abu
‘Abdullah (as) quoting his forefathers saying, “The Commander of the
Faithful (as) has said, ‘When the ones you miscarry meet you on the Day
of Judgment, they will ask their parents why they did not give them
names. The Messenger of Allah (S) had named Muhsin before his
birth.”[^37] This narrative is also included among the 400 *ahadith*.
Refer also to al-Saduq’s book titled *Al-Khisal*.

Regarding the *isnad* of this tradition, al-Majlisi has said that it is
reliable.[^38]

26. Ibrahim ibn Sa’d al-Thaqafi has said, “Ahmed ibn ‘Amr al-Bijli has
told me that we have been told by Ahmed ibn Habib al-’Amiri who quotes
Hamran ibn A’yan quoting Abu ‘Abdullah Ja’far ibn Muhammed S as saying,
‘By Allah! Ali (as) did not swear the oath of allegiance (to Abu Bakr)
except after the smoke had entered his house.’”[^39]

27. Al-Husayn ibn Hamdan quotes Muhammed ibn Isma’il and Ali ibn
‘Abdullah al-Husayni citing Abu Shu’ayb and Muhammed ibn Nasir quoting
‘’Umar ibn al-Furat quoting Muhammed ibn al-Mufaddal ibn ‘’Umar as
saying,

I asked my master, al-Sadiq (as), “Is there a particular time for the
reappearance of the Awaited One, al-Mahdi (as), which people know?” He
(as) said, “Far, it is, from Allah to time his reappearance to one known
by our Shi’as...” The narrative continues till it refers to how Salman
al-Farisi was beaten, how the fire was set at the house door of the
Commander of the Faithul and Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as) in
order to burn them, how the hand of the Truthful Lady, Fatima (sa), was
whipped, how her stomach was kicked, and how she miscarried
al-Muhsin..., the story of Abu Bakr and how he sent out Khalid ibn
al-Walid, Qunfath (his slave) and ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab, how the latter
gathered people to get the Commander of the Faithful (as) out of his
house in order to swear fealty to Abu Bakr at the *saqifa* of Bani
Sa’idah... ‘’Umar said, “Come out, Ali, and join what the Muslims have
all done; otherwise, we shall kill you.” Fidda, maid of Fatima (sa),
said to them, “The Commander of the Faithful (as) is busy, and it will
be a good deed if you are true to your own selves and be fair to him”
(and how ‘’Umar taunted her in response). They gathered plenty of
firewood at the door in order to burn the house of the Commander of the
Faithful (as) as well as Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as), as well
as Zainab, Umm Kulthum and Fidda. They set the door to fire. Fatima (sa)
went out to address them from behind the door. She said to them, ‘Woe
unto you, O ‘’Umar! How dare you thus offend Allah and the Messenger of
Allah S?! Do you want to put an end to his (Prophet’s) offspring in this
world, exile him and put out the *noor* of Allah? Yet Allah shall
complete His *noor*.’ ‘’Umar rebuked Fatima (sa). He said to her,
“Fatima! Enough of that! Neither Muhammed is present nor are the angels
bringing orders from Allah to do or not to do! Ali is like any other
Muslim. You have the option either to get him out to swear fealty to Abu
Bakr, or I shall burn you all.” Crying, Fatima (sa) supplicated thus:
“Lord! I complain to You about how I miss Your Prophet, Messenger and
chosen one, how Your nation has turned its back on us, and how they have
confiscated what belongs to us and which You thus stated in the Book You
revealed to the Prophet You sent!” ‘’Umar said to her, “Abandon, O
Fatima, the *foolishness* of women, for Allah will not let both
Prophetic Mission and caliphate be yours.” As he spoke these words, fire
had already consumed the door’s wood. Qunfath the accursed stretched his
damned hand in order to open the door (from inside). ‘’Umar hit Fatima’s
hand with his whip. The whip left a mark on her wrist like a black
bracelet. He kicked the door with his foot, and the door hit Fatima’s
stomach. She was six months big with al-Muhsin whom she miscarried...

‘’Umar attacked, and so did Qunfath and Khalid ibn al-Walid. ‘’Umar
slapped Fatima (sa) on her cheek, breaking her ear-ring under her veil,
and she was crying loudly as she said, “O father! O Messenger of Allah!
Your daughter Fatima is treated as a liar, is hit, and her fetus is
killed in her womb!” The Commander of the Faithful (as) came out of the
house with red eyes, wearing nothing on his head. He put his outer
mantle on Fatima (sa), hugged her and said, “O daughter of the Messenger
of Allah (S)! You already know that your father was sent as a mercy to
the whole world...” Then he turned to ‘’Umar and said, “O son of
al-Khattab! Woe unto you from this day of yours and from the day
thereafter and the ones that follow! Get out (of my house) before I
unsheathe my sword and annihilate the bygone of the nation!” ‘’Umar went
out and so did Khalid ibn al-Walid, Qunfath, and Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu
Bakr. They were outside when the Commander of the Faithful (as) called
on Fidda to tend to her mistress who was undergoing the pain of
miscarriage... Fatima (sa) miscarried al-Muhsin, so Ali (as) said, “He
is joining his grandfather, the Messenger of Allah (S), to whom he will
lodge a complaint. And al-Muhsin will come out (on the Judgment Day)
carried by (his maternal grandmother) Khadija daughter of Khuwaylid and
(his paternal grandmother) Fatima daughter of Assad, mother of the
Commander of the Faithful (as), and they shall be wailing. His mother
shall say, ‘This is the Day about which you were warned.’”

Al-Mufaddal asked the Imam (as), “Master! What do you say about the
verse that says, ‘When the female infant buried alive is asked for what
sin she was killed’ (Qur’an, 81:8-9)?” The Imam (as) said, “O Mufaddal!
The infant buried alive, by Allah, is Muhsin, because he is one of us.
Anyone who says otherwise is a liar.” Al-Mufaddal said, “Master! Then
what?” Imam al-Sadiq (as) said, “Fatima (sa) daughter of the Messenger
of Allah S will stand and say, ‘Lord! Carry out Your promise to me and
regarding myself against whoever oppressed me, confiscated what belonged
to me, hit me and killed all my sons!’”[^40]

28. In another tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (as) said to al-Mufaddal, “There
is no tragedy like ours at Kerbala’ despite what happened one day at the
*saqifa* and how the fire was set at the door of the Commander of the
Faithful (as), thus endangering him, al-Hassan, al-Husayn, Fatima,
Zainab and Umm Kulthum (as) as well as Fidda. And the killing of Muhsin,
when someone kicked his mother in the stomach, is greater, more tragic
and more bitter because it is the origin of the Day of Torment.”[^41]

29. The head of the Shi’a, namely Shaikh al-Mufid, has said the
following in his book titled *Al-Ikhtisas* where he cites Ahmed ibn
Muhammed ibn ‘Isa quoting his father, and also from al-’Abbas ibn Ma’ruf
from ‘Abdullah ibn al-Mughirah saying that ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman
al-Asam cited ‘Abdullah ibn Bakr al-Arjani as saying, “I accompanied Abu
‘Abdullah (as) on his way from Mecca to Medina...,” then he narrated a
lengthy discourse wherein he quoted Abu ‘Abdullah (as) as saying, “...
killer of the Commander of the Faithful (as), killer of Fatima (sa),
killer of al-Muhsin, killer of al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as)..., etc.”

This is narrated in *Kamil al-Ziyarat* from another *isnad* from
‘Abdullah ibn al-Asam from ‘Abdullah ibn Bakr al-Arjani. In it, the Imam
(as) is quoted as saying, “... and the killer of Fatima (sa) and
Muhsin..., etc.,” so you may refer to it.[^42]

30. Ali ibn Ibrahim quotes his father quoting Sulayman al-Daylami
quoting Abu Busayr quoting Abu ‘Abdullah (as) as saying, “On the Day of
Judgment, Prophet Muhammed S shall be called on, and he will be clad in
a rosy outfit... Then it will be called from the depths of the ‘Arsh by
the Lord of Glory and the Sublime Horizon, ‘How good your father, O
Muhammed, is, who is Ibrahim, and how good your brother is, who is Ali
ibn Abu Talib (as), and how good your grandsons are, and they are
al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as), and how good your fetus is, and he is
Muhsin, and how good the rightly guided Imams (as) are..., etc.”[^43]

31. Abu Muhammed, citing ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan from Abu ‘Abdullah (as)
says the following:

When the Messenger of Allah (S) passed away, Abu Bakr took his seat on
his pulpit. He sent for the [business] agent of Fatima (sa) and expelled
him... Abu Bakr then wrote her a property title, returning Fadak to her
possession. But ‘’Umar met her and asked her, “O Daughter of Muhammed!
What is this sheet in your hand?” She said, “A property title which Abu
Bakr wrote me, returning Fadak to my possession.” He said, “Give it to
me.” She refused, so he kicked her with his foot in the stomach, and she
was pregnant with a son named al-Muhsin whom she instantly miscarried.
‘’Umar then slapped her on her cheek, causing her ear-ring to break into
bits and pieces. Then he took the property title and tore it to pieces.
Fatima (sa) went away. For seventy-five days from the time ‘’Umar kicked
her, she remained sick, then she passed away. On her death-bed, she
called Ali (as) to her presence and said to him, “You may either
guarantee to carry out what I shall say to you or I shall ask al-Zubayr
[to do so].” Ali (as) said, “I guarantee to carry out your will, O
Daughter of Muhammed!” She said to him, “I ask you in the right of the
Messenger of Allah S that if I die, both men (‘’Umar and Abu Bakr)
should not be present near me, nor should they attend my funeral
prayers.” He said, “You will have what you desire.” When she passed
away, he buried her at night. In the morning, the people of Medina,
including Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar, wanted to attend her funeral. Ali (as)
went out and was met by both men. They asked him, “What have you done to
the daughter of Muhammed S regarding preparing her for her burial, O
father of al-Hassan?” Ali (as) said, “By Allah, I have already buried
her.” They said, “What caused you to bury her without informing us that
she had died?” He (as) said, “She had ordered me to do just that.”
‘’Umar said, “By Allah! I am about to dig up her grave and perform the
funeral prayers for her.” Ali (as) said, “By Allah! As long as my heart
is still resting inside my rib cage, and as long as I can hold (my
sword) Thul-Fiqar in my hand, you shall never be able to dig her body
out, and you know best what I can do!” Abu Bakr said (to ‘’Umar), “Go,
for he is more worthy of her than we are.” People then dispersed.[^44]

32. Muhammed ibn Harran al-Tal’akbari cites his father as saying that
“Abu Ali,” Muhammed ibn Humam ibn Suhail, has said that Ahmed ibn
Muhammed al-Barqi has cited Ahmed ibn Muhammed al-Ash’ari al-Qummi
citing ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Abu Najran citing ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan citing
Ibn Maskan citing Abu Busayr quoting Abu ‘Abdullah (as) saying the
following:

Fatima (sa) was born on the 20th of Jumada al-ãkhira, when the Prophet S
was forty-five years old... The reason for her death is that Qunfath,
slave of the man (Abu Bakr), poked her with the sword’s scabbard as
ordered by his master, so she miscarried Muhsin. She fell seriously sick
because of the incident, and she did not any of those who harmed her
enter her house. Two men (Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar) from among the companions
of the Prophet S requested the Commander of the Faithful (as) to
intercede on their behalf with her. He requested her, and she agreed.
When they entered, they asked her, “O daughter of the Messenger of Allah
S! How do you feel?” She said, “Well, all Praise is due to Allah.” Then
she said to them, “Did you not hear the Prophet S say, ‘Fatima (sa) is
part of me; whoever harms her harms me, and whoever harms me harms
Allah’?” They answered in the affirmative. She said, “By Allah! You both
have harmed me.” They went out while she was still angry with them.[^45]

The *isnad* of this narrative is authentic.

33. Shaikh al-Tusi has said that Imam al-Sadiq (as) is quoted as saying
that when the Commander of the Faithful (as) was taken forcefully out of
his house, Fatima (sa) went out behind him. All women from Banu Hashim
went out with her and they all were near the grave (of the Prophet (S)
which was inside the room nearby). Fatima (sa) said to them, “Leave my
cousin alone for, by Allah, if you do not leave him alone..., etc.”[^46]

This narrative, too, proves that they entered his house by force and
took him out by force although Fatima (sa) was there, demonstrating a
total lack of respect for her and for her privacy.

34. Judge ‘Abd al-Jabbar, who died in 415 A.H./1024 A.D. and who was
contemporary to Shaikh al-Mufid (d. 413 A.H./1022 A.D.), may Allah have
mercy on him, has said that the Shi’a put forth claims on a narrative by
Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammed [al-Sadiq] (as) and others which says that
‘’Umar (ibn al-Khattab) hit Fatima (sa) with his whip.[^47]

We do not know if he is referring to the narratives which we have been
citing or to others, so we set his quoted statement aside for this
reason.

What is Narrated from Imam al-Kazim (as)
----------------------------------------

*‘Allama* al-Majlisi, may Allah Almighty have mercy on him, has
transmitted from *Kitab al-Tara’f* *fi Ma’rifat Mathahib al-Tawa’if*
الطرائف في معرفة مذاهب الطوائف by the great *‘allama* Sayyid Ibn
Tawus[^48], from *Kitab al-Wasiyya* by Shaikh ‘Isa ibn al-Mustafad
al-Darar from Musa ibn Ja’far from his father saying that when the
Messenger of Allah S was about to leave this world for the next, he
said, “O men of the Ansar! Parting is opportune... The door of Fatima
(sa) is my door, her house is mine; so, whoever violates its sanctity
violates the sanctity of Allah’s barrier.” ‘Isa goes on to say that the
father of al-Hassan (as) wept for a long time. He discontinued his
narrative then said, “By Allah! Allah’s barrier was violated! By Allah!
Allah’s barrier was violated! By Allah! Allah’s barrier was violated, O
nation blessed by Allah!”[^49]

36. Harun ibn Musa is quoted by Ahmed ibn Muhammed ibn ‘Ammar al-’Ijli
al-Kufi quoting ‘Isa al-Darar quoting Imam al-Kazim (as) saying, “I
asked my father, ‘What happened after the departure of the angels from
the Messenger of Allah S?’ He said, ‘He called to his presence Ali,
Fatima, al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as) and told all others to leave them
alone... He then said to Ali (as), ‘Be informed, O Ali, that I am
pleased with whomsoever my daughter Fatima is pleased with, and so is my
Lord and His angels. O Ali! Woe unto whoever oppresses her! Woe unto
whoever confiscates what belongs to her! Woe unto whoever violates her
sanctity! Woe unto whoever burns her door! Woe unto whoever harms her
friend! Woe unto whoever exposes her to hardship or antagonizes her!
Lord! I am clear of all of them, and they are clear of me.’ Then the
Messenger of Allah S named them, hugged Fatima, Ali, al-Hassan and
al-Husayn (as) and said, ‘Lord! I am peace with them and with whoever
follows them, and I hope they will all enter Paradise. And I am a foe
and war against anyone who antagonizes them, who oppresses them, who
goes ahead of them or lags behind them and behind their followers
(Shi’as), and I hope all these will enter the Fire! O Fatima! I shall
never be pleased except when you are pleased! No, by Allah! I shall
never be pleased except when *you* are pleased! I shall never be pleased
except when *you* are pleased!’”[^50]

37. Muhammed ibn Yahya quotes al-’Amraki quoting Ali quoting Ali ibn
Ja’far quoting his brother quoting the father of al-Hassan (as) as
saying, “Fatima (sa) is a truthful lady and a martyr, and daughters of
prophets do not menstruate.”[^51]

Both al-Majlisi I and II, who are among the greatest of our scholars,
have commented about the above-quoted tradition saying that it is
authentic.[^52]

38. The great *‘allama* and ascetic worshipper, Sayyid Ibn Tawus,
through his *isnad* from Imam al-Kazim (as) who quotes his father (as)
as saying, “The Messenger of Allah S said, ‘O Ali! What are you going to
do when certain people plot against you after me and push themselves
over you, and (so-and-so) will call on you to swear fealty, then you
will be covered with your garment and led like a fleeting camel,
humiliated and despised, grieved and depressed, and thereafter
humiliation will descend...?’”[^53]

What is Narrated From Imam al-Rida (as)
---------------------------------------

39. The great *‘allama* and ascetic worshipper, Sayyid Ibn Tawus, may
Allah have mercy on him, has transmitted a supplication by our master,
Imam al-Rida (as), to be recited during *sajdat al-shukr* (prostration
of thanksgiving) which he narrates through *isnad* to Sa’d ibn ‘Abdullah
in a book detailing the rewards of supplication. He cites Abu Ja’far
quoting Muhammed S ibn Isma’il ibn Bazee’ quoting Imam al-Rida (as) and
also Bakar ibn Salih from Sulayman ibn Ja’far from al-Rida (as). Both
men say that they visited him once as he was performing the thanksgiving
prostration. He prolonged his prostration then raised his head. They
said to him, “You surely have prolonged your prostration!” He said,
“Anyone who supplicates to Allah reciting this plea will be regarded as
though he had shot arrows during the battle of Badr in the company of
the Messenger of Allah S.” They asked him if they should write it down.
He said, “Write down that once you are prostrating during *sajdat
al-shukr*, you should say..., etc.” He cited the supplication which
contains the following: “... and they both ridiculed Your Messenger and
killed the son of Your Prophet S..., etc.”[^54]

What is Narrated from Imam al-Jawad (as)
----------------------------------------

40. Citing his father, Muhammed ibn Harun ibn Musa transmits from
Muhammed ibn al-Hassan ibn Ahmed ibn al-Walid, from Ahmed ibn Abu
‘Abdullah al-Barqi from Zakariyya ibn Adam saying,

I was in the company of al-Rida (as) when Abu Ja’far, peace with him,
was brought in. He was not yet forty years old. He hit the ground with
his hand then raised his head to the sky and contemplated for a long
time. Al-Rida (as) said to him, ‘May I be your sacrifice! About what
have you prolonged your contemplation?!’ He said, ‘About what was done
to my mother Fatima (sa)..., by Allah..., etc.’ Then he, peace with him,
stated how those who did so would be punished.”[^55]

We say that this narrative, though not detailing what took place, also
considers her, peace with her, as having been exposed to a great
injustice.

What is Narrated from Imam al-’Askari (as)

41. Sayyid Ibn Tawus, in his work titled *Zawa’id al-Fawa’id*, citing
*Kitab al-Mukhtasar* by Shaikh Hassan ibn Sulayman, a copy handwritten
by Ali ibn Muz*a*hir al-W*a*siti, through a continuous chain of *isnad*
that ends with Muhammed ibn al-’Al*a*’ al-Hamad*a*ni al-W*a*siti. Then
he cites it from *Kitab al-Mukhtasar* at the conclusion of which he says
that he copied it from an edition handwritten by Muhammed ibn Ali ibn
Tay. In it, it is stated that Ibn Abul-’Al*a*’ al-Hamadani and Yahya ibn
Muhammed ibn Haweej disputed with each other regarding ‘’Umar ibn
al-Khattab, so they sought the arbitration of Ahmed ibn Ish*a*q
al-Qummi, a friend of Imam al-Hassan al-’Askari (as). He narrated to
them from what he had learned from Imam al-’Askari (as) who cites his
father (as) saying that Huthayfah narrated a lengthy tradition about the
Prophet S wherein he informed Huthayfan ibn al-Yaman a number of events
that would take place after his demise. Huthayfah, seeing how what he
had heard came true, said, “... And the Qur’an was distorted, and the
house where revelation used to descend was burnt... and the face of the
Lady of Virtue was slapped...”[^56]

[^1]: Al-Tusi, Amali, Vol. 1, p. 122. Refer to p. 191 of this edition
published by Al-Wafa’ Establishment of Beirut, Lebanon. Ibn Sa\`d,
Tabaqat, Vol. 8, p. 278. Ansab al-Ashraf, Vol. 1, p. 551. Ahmed, Musnad,
Vol. 6, p. 339. Al-Khasa’is al-Kubra, Vol. 2, p. 135. Al-Mufid, Amali,
p. 215. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 28, p. 40.

[^2]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 38, p. 145, citing Al-Manaqib.

[^3]: Cited from the book of Sulaym ibn Qays (al-Hilali) (edited by
al-Ansari), Vol. 2, p. 907.

[^4]: Fara’id al-Simtayn, Vol. 2, pp. 34-35. Al-Saduq, Amali, pp.
99-101. Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. 1, pp. 280-81. Irshad al-Qulub, p. 295.
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 28, pp. 37, 39 and Vol. 43, pp. 172-73.
Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, pp. 391-92 in the footnote of which a citation of
p. 48 of Ghayat al-Maram, p. 48 and p. 109 of Al-Muhtadir. Al-Majlisi,
Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 2, pp. 186-88.

[^5]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 98, p. 44.

[^6]: Ibn Salam al-Abazi, Bid’ al-Islam wa Shara'i\` ad-Din, p. 107.
Al-Bukhari, Sihah, Vol. 1, pp. 67, 164, 212 (1309 A.H. edition). Ibn
Majah, Sunan, Vol. 2, p. 1306. Al-Bayhaqi, Dala’il al-Nubuwwa, Vol. 6,
p. 386.

[^7]: Refer to the references listed in the previous footnote.

[^8]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 30, pp. 302-03 and the book of
Sulaym ibn Qays, Vol. 2, pp. 674-75. Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, p. 413.

[^9]: Refer to the references listed in the previous footnote.

[^10]: Refer to the book of Sulaym ibn Qays as edited by al-Ansari, Vol.
2, p. 915. Ibn Shathan, Al-Fada’il, p. 141. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 28, p. 73.

[^11]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 459. Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, p.
329. Nahjul-Balagha (Sermon No. 202).

[^12]: Al-Kaf\`ami, Misbah, p. 4.

[^13]: The word “million” does not exist in classical Arabic. Instead,
Arabs say “a thousand thousands.” \_\_ Tr.

[^14]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 82, p. 261. Al-Kaf\`ami, Misbah,
p. 553. Al-Balad al-Amin, pp. 551-52. \`Ilm al-Yaqin, p. 701.

[^15]: Refer to the footnotes of p. 553 of Al-Misbah by al-Kaf\`ami, to
pp. 551-52 of Al-Balad al-Amin and to p. 701 of \`Ilm al-Yaqin.

[^16]: Refer to p. 555 of the previous reference and to p. 261, Vol. 82,
of Bihar al-Anwar.

[^17]: Shaikh al-Saduq, Amali, p. 118. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.
28, p. 51; also refer to Vol. 44, p. 149. Ithbat al-Hudat, Vol. 1, p.
281. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 397. Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, p.
189. \`Abd ar-Razzaq al-Muqarram, Wafat al-Siddiqa al-Zahra’ (sa), p.
60. Ibn Shahr Ashub, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 2, p. 209 (published by Intisharat
\`Alamah, Qum).

[^18]: Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, p. 189.

[^19]: Al-Hidaya al-Kubra, p. 163.

[^20]: Ibn A\`tham, Al-Futuh, Vol. 3, p. 474.

[^21]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 15, p. 186.
Al-Tasatturi, Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 2, pp. 368-69.

[^22]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 28. Refer also to Nahj
al-Sa\`da and p. 369, Vol. 2, of Ihqaq al-Haqq.

[^23]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 30, pp. 348-50, citing Irshad
al-Qulub by al-Daylami.

[^24]: References of this poetry are numerous among the Muslims’ books,
so we find it sufficient to point out to p. 299, Vol. 1, of Al-Manaqib
by Ibn Shahr Ashub.

[^25]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 414. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 197. Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, p. 321. Diya’
al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 64.

[^26]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 4.

[^27]: Al-Thari\`a, Vol. 1, p. 282.

[^28]: Al-Mustarshid fi Imamate Ali ibn Abu Talib, pp. 65-66.

[^29]: Al-\`Ayyashi, Tafsir, Vol. 2, pp. 307-08. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 28, p. 231. Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, Vol. 2, p.
434.

[^30]: Al-\`Ayyashi, Tafsir, Vol. 2, pp. 307-08. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 28, p. 231. Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, Vol. 2, p.
434.

[^31]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 460.

[^32]: Dala’il al-Imama, pp. 26-27. Refer to Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, p.
504.

[^33]: Al-Mustarshid fi Imamat Ali ibn Abu Talib (as), pp. 64-65.

[^34]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 242.

[^35]: Kamil al-Ziyarat, pp. 232-35. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.
28, pp. 62-64. Refer also to Vol. 53, p. 23 of the same. \`Awalim
al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 398. Al-Majlisi, Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, pp.
184-86.

[^36]: Kanz al-Fawa’id, Vol. 1, pp. 149-50. Rawdat al-Jannat, Vol. 6, p.
182.

[^37]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 6, p. 18. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 411.
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 195 and Vol. 101, p. 128 and
Vol. 10, p. 112. Al-Khisal, Vol. 2, p. 434. \`Ilal al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 2,
p. 464. Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, p. 222.

[^38]: Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, p. 222.

[^39]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 28, pp. 269, 390, 411. On its
footnote, it is stated that it cites al-Thaqafi’s book Al-Gharat.

[^40]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 53, pp. 14, 18, 19, 23.
Al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, pp. 441-43. Al-Khasibi, Al-Hidaya al-Kubra, pp.
392, 407-08, 417. Hilyat al-Abrar, Vol. 2, p. 652. Refer also to Fatima
al-Zahra’ Bahjat Qalb al-Mustafa, Vol. 2, p. 532 from Nawa’ib al-Duhur
by Sayyid al-Meerjahani, p. 192.

[^41]: Fatima al-Zahra’ Bahjat Qalb al-Mustafa, Vol. 2, p. 532, quoting
Nawa’ib al-Duhur by Sayyid al-Meerjahani, p. 194. Al-Khasibi, Al-Hidaya
al-Kubra, p. 417 (Beirut edition).

[^42]: Shaikh al-Mufid, Al-Ikhtisas, pp. 343-44. Kamil al-Ziyarat, pp.
326-27. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 8, p. 213. Refer also to
Basa’ir al-Darajat.

[^43]: Al-Qummi, Tafsir, Vol. 1, p. 128. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 7, pp. 328-29 and Vol. 23, pp. 130-31 and Vol. 12, pp. 6-7. Nar
al-Thaqalayn, Vol. 1, p. 348. Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, Vol. 1, pp.
328-29.

[^44]: Al-Mufid, Al-Ikhtisas, pp. 184-85. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 29, p. 192. Abd al-Razzaq al-Muqarram, Wafat al-Siddaqa al-Zahra’,
p. 78.

[^45]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 45. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p.
170. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, pp. 411, 504.

[^46]: Al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 1, p. 222. Al-Mustarshid fi Imamat
Ali ibn Abu Talib , p. 67.

[^47]: Judge \`Abd al-Jabbar, Al-Mughni, Vol. 20, p. 335. Sayyid
al-Murtada, Al-Shafi, Vol. 4, pp. 110-19. Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 16, p. 271.

[^48]: Following is a list of some of the works of Ibn Tawus: 1- الإقبال
Al-Iqbal ؛ 2- التحصين Al-Tahseen؛ 3- الأمان من أخطار الأسفار Al-Aman min
Akhtar al-Asfar ؛ 4- فلاح السائل Falah al-Sa’il ؛ 5- الدروع الواقية
Al-Duroo\` al-Waqiya 6-جمال الأسبوع Jamal al-Usboo\`؛ 7- المجتنى من دعاء
المجتبىAl-Mujtana min Du\`a al-Mujtaba؛ 8- فتح الأبوابFath al-Abwab ؛9-
اليقينAl-Yaqin ؛ 10- الطرائف في معرفة مذاهب الطوائف Al-Tara’if fi
Ma\`rifat Mathahib al-Tawa’if ؛ 11- اللهوف في قتلى الطفوف Al-Luhuf fi
Qatla al-Tufuf ؛ 12- الملاحم والفتن Al-Malahim wal Fitan ؛ 13- بناء
المقالة الفاطمية Bina’ al-Maqala al-Fatimiyya ؛14-سعد السعودSa\`d
al-Sa\`ud ؛ 15-فرج المهموم Faraj al-Mahmum ؛ 16- فرحة الغري Farhat
al-Ghari ؛ 17-قبس من غياث سلطان الورى Qabas min Ghiyath Sultan al-Wara ؛
18-كشف المحجة لثمرة المهجة Kashf al-Mahajja li Thamarat al-Muhja . –Tr.

[^49]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 22, pp. 476-77. In its footnote,
it cites pp. 18-21 of Al-Tara’if by Ibn Tawus.

[^50]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 22, pp. 484-85. In its footnote,
p. 72 of Khasa’is al-A’imma is cited and so is p. 400, Vol. 11, of
\`Awalim al-\`Ulum as well as pp. 92-34 of Al-Tara’if and also Musbah
al-Anwar.

[^51]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 458. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11,
p. 260. Al-Khawajoo’i, Al-Rasa’il al-‘I\`tiqadiyya, pp. 301-02.

[^52]: Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, p. 315. Rawdat al-Muttaqin, Vol. 5, p.
342.

[^53]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 458. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11,
p. 260. Al-Khawajoo’i, Al-Rasa’il al-I‘tiqadiyya, pp. 301-02.

[^54]: Muhaj al-Da\`awat, pp. 257-58. Shaikh al-Kaf\`ami, Al-Misbah, pp.
553-54. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 30, p. 393 and Vol. 83, p. 223.
Al-\`Ataridi, Musnad al-Imam al-Rida , Vol. 2, p. 65.

[^55]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 50, p. 59, citing Dala’il
al-Imama by al-Tabari.

[^56]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 95, pp. 351, 353-54 and Vol. 31,
p. 126. Shaikh Hassan ibn Sulayman, Al-Muhtadir, pp. 44-55 (as referred
to in a footnote in Bihar al-Anwar). Also in the same footnote, it is
stated that al-Tabari had narrated it in Dala’il al-Imama in the Part
relevant to the Commander of the Faithful  and is narrated by Shaikh
Hashim ibn Muhammed (one of the sixth century A.H. scholars) in Misbah
al-Anwar and by al-Jaza’iri in Al-Anwar al-Nu\`maniyya through a
different chain of isnad; so, you may refer to it.


