Choosing the Tragedy of al-Zahra’ as a Topic
============================================

There are two reasons behind choosing the tragedy of al-Zahra’ (sa) as
the subject-matter with which I will deal in a series of many topics the
right wherein I would like to bring forth; they affect the issues of the
creed and the sect; these are:

FIRST: This single issue, the tragedy of al-Zahra’ (sa), demands an
explanation and a clarification in order to remove whatever doubts that
may entertain some people’s minds, procedural or scientific inquiries,
as some people label them, which they have frequently encountered during
scores of radio interviews, in the printed press, or in many meetings,
correspondence or debates during a lengthy period of time. Many various
“evidences” were provided to deny that any violence took place against
al-Zahra’ (sa) at her home, or against Ali (as) at the home of al-Zahra’
(sa). Such “evidences” and “proofs” were granted “modern ideological
labels” such as “provocations,” “question marks,” or “researched
doubts,” up to the end of such expressions which have all become well
known.

For this reason, I wanted to study this subject by dealing with such
“provocations” in detail in order to be able to absorb all issues
causing such doubts, and so that I may then be able to dismiss the
“question marks” in their regard. Thus, I will perhaps deserve to be
thanked as promised by someone who said once to me, “We appreciate the
effort of those who respond to the question marks which we have
made,”[^1] hoping that the subject will thus come to a conclusion and
the doubts will be dispelled.

The “appreciation” promised by some people is actually distinguished in
its type and is unique in its classification as we, by the will of
Allah, will point out.

SECOND: The issue of al-Zahra’ (sa), due to certain circumstances,
transcended its specific scholarly nature, becoming a label pointing out
to a general trend that goes beyond history’s sphere to other aspects of
Islamic concerns, such as issues relevant to the creed, scholastic
theology, *usul, hadith, fiqh*, exegesis, and even linguistics, in
addition to many other doctrinal and non-doctrinal issues. Yes, the
issue of al-Zahra’ (sa) has become the symbol, or the guiding title,
that sums up its own diction and has its own specific stamp. It has its
own spheres and characteristics, what it permits and what it abandons.

For the sake of all the above, I wished that my discussion of the said
subject-matter be a contribution to accomplishing the duty realized by
every believing Muslim, one who finds no justification in aimlessly
standing by, a spectator witnessing the attempts launched against the
beliefs and tenets of this creed the impact of which affects its aspects
and renown personalities.

I shall do so *not* based on upholding the “holy legacy” of the faith of
the forefathers, as some people accuse us of doing while also accusing
all adherents of the creed of Ahl al-Bayt (as) and righteous Shi’ite
scholars.[^2] Rather, I shall uphold the criterion of any decisive
scholarly evidence that leaves no excuse whatsoever, thus laying the
firm foundations of the truth.

When all such statements are made in order to raise doubts about
theological issues, shaking their very foundations, everyone will have
the right and the freedom to appropriately and scholarly respond to
them, no matter from what source, without any compromise. Such is the
responsibility of anyone who possesses the means of knowledge and
scholarship that enable him to do so. This is what we actually witnessed
when the foremost scholars of theology, in addition to many other
scholars of the nation, did in order to denounce what someone has
stated, declaring their rejection of the latter’s statements. We expect
them to continue to carry out their religious duty in this regard, and
we shall remain steadfast with them on the same path.

[^1]: \_\_, Fikr and Thaqafi newsletter, No. 18 (October 19, 1996).

[^2]: \_\_, Bayyinat (October 25, 1996).


