To The Reader
=============

All praise belongs to Allah; peace and blessings with Muhammad, the
Messenger of Allah, and with his pure Progeny.

The events which al-Zahra’ (sa) had to undergo and the tribulations were
not directed against just her own self, or against her personality as an
individual, as much as transgressing firm Islamic principles in order to
reach what those who carried them out could not otherwise reach or
achieve, matters which they had no right to attain. Al-Zahra’ (sa) in
fact, was a mighty bulwark that stood in the way of the achievement of
such unjustified and illegitimate ambitions. This issue emphasized and
confirmed the illegitimacy and illegality of such ambitions according to
the nation’s level of awareness, in her conscience, and in the Islamic
and human consciousness as well.

One may find, as he tries to comprehend the historic sequence of events,
that one may pretend that he lives a state of hesitation in accepting
any reasonable justification for them, or at least subjective
opportunities, for such events to take place at all. This stirs many
questions in his mind about how accurate, or how precise, those who
transmitted such events actually were. For this reason, he is not too
embarrassed to cast doubts even if he cannot reject the issue or openly
and publicly declare it as being unacceptable.

Yet the stand of such sort of people instills within them something
which they take for granted, one in which they do not doubt. It says
that the answer to such inquiries, then the verification of the
authenticity of those events with seriousness and precision…, will by
necessity imply a straightforward indictment and an open rejection of
the “legitimacy” of all the events that took place in its aftermath. He
will openly and bitterly find those who coined those events and who
caused all those catastrophes that surrounded the truthful al-Zahra’
(sa) as being wrong, and this is something which they wish to avoid
falling into.

This brief review aims at displaying those inquiries which produced some
sort of doubts among some people then register observations and provide
explanations which clarify things and, God willing, polish the right
image and perfect its necessary characteristics, providing explanations
or answers to other questions or doubts raised about other issues
relevant to al-Zahra’ (sa).

We provide all the above with the emphasis that we respect and
appreciate everyone’s individuality, that a different view and the
recording of issues as significant as these should not spoil any
friendly relationship.

It is from Allah that we derive strength and seek help. We ask the most
Exalted One to inspire us to say what is right, to aspire what is right,
to make our intention pure, and to help us act with the purity of
intention. He is our Master and the One Who guides us to the Straight
Path.

Ja’far Murtada al-’Amili
Sha’ban 10, 1417 A.H./December 8, 1996 A.D.
Beirut, Lebanon


