Part 1: Al-Zahra’ (sa) And Her Tragedy
======================================

Status and Infallibility of al-Zahra’ (sa)
------------------------------------------

We shall start our discourse in this Part by narrating the biography of
al-Zahra’ (sa) since some people try to avoid, or even refuse to uphold
or be bound by what the glorious Prophet (S) has stated, or by what the
Purified Imams (as) have said, that is, that she (sa) was born out of
the fruit of Paradise following the *isra’* and *mi’raj*[^1], and that
she (sa) married Ali (as) when she was quite young.

Such person senses a degree of embarrassment, so he avoids being
convinced, preferring not to expose himself to such issues. It may
neither be this possibility nor that. It may be something else which
prompts him to make such a stand, and surely Allah knows the facts of
all issues and knows what the hearts conceal.

Then we discuss issues closely connected to the infallibility of the
purified one, peace of Allah with her and His blessings.

This discussion of infallibility is an acceptable introduction to the
stations of eminence and the degrees of nearness to the Head of all
Women of the World, peace and blessings with her, under the divine care
and upbringing, without neglecting to point out to the subject of her
connection with the unknown on account of the attributes, merits and
divine boons which Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His, has bestowed on
her, distinguishing her from all other women of mankind.

She was the woman on the occasion of whose marriage with Ali (as) the
heavens celebrated before the earth, the woman who was pure and purified
from all irreverence, uncleanness or shortcoming, so much so that Allah
exempted her from whatever afflicts women of particular things relevant
only to them without letting any of that have a negative effect on her
personality in as far as pregnancy and childbirth are concerned.

Before exiting the circle of her eminent divine boons, supreme merits
and attributes, we have quickly been acquainted with what Allah blessed
her: knowledge relevant to the world of the unknown, with what Allah
granted her, through a great angel who used to talk to her and to
console her after the demise of her father S, the thing which resulted
in a very serious book about which the purified Imams, peace with them,
were very concerned and of which they were very proud. They used to read
it and quote it, and it is known as “Mushaf Fatima,” the book of Fatima
(sa), in addition to other books with which she, peace and blessings of
Allah with her, was blessed.

We shall read glimpses of all of these matters in this Part, paying a
special attention to making a good selection and to being as brief as
possible. Success comes from Allah, and so does guidance.

When was al-Zahra’ (sa) Born?
-----------------------------

The first that we come across, with regard to the biography of this
truthful and purified one, is the date of her birth. Some people claim
that she (sa) was born five years before the Prophetic mission. We say
that this is incorrect. Accurate is what the followers of Ahl al-Bayt
(as) know from their Imams[^2] (as); the people of the House know best
what is therein. They are followed suit by many others. She (sa) was
born five years after the inception of the Prophetic mission, i.e. in
the year when the migration to Ethiopia took place (615 A.D.), and she
died at the age of 19 (in roughly 13 A.H. or 634 A.D.). This is narrated
by our Imams (as) according to authentic narrations[^3].

Let us add to the above that this date can be reached or supported by
the following:

1. A number of historians have mentioned that the total number of the
children of Khadija, may Allah shower her with His mercy and blessings,
were born after the inception of the Prophetic mission, and that Fatima
(sa) was their youngest.

2. There are many traditions narrated by a number of the Prophet’s
companions, such as ‘A’isha, ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab, Sa’d ibn Malik, Ibn
‘Abbas, and others, proving that Fatima’s seed came as the result of the
fruit of Paradise which the Prophet S had eaten during the *isra’* and
*mi’raj*[^4], the event which we proven as having taken place during the
early period of such mission[^5].

If there is anyone who argues about the premises of some of these
narrations in his own way, there is no argument about the others even if
the same method is applied.

If anyone claims that this narration cannot be authentic because
al-Zahra’ (sa) was born five years before the inception of the Prophetic
mission, he actually circumvents the outcome because these traditions,
which we are discussing, have been narrated by various narrators, and
this is the strongest evidence testifying to the fallacy of such a
claim.

3. Al-Nisa’i has narrated saying that when Abu Bakr and ‘’Umar sought
the hand of Fatima (sa) in marriage, the Prophet S rejected them saying
that she was too young to marry[^6]. Had their claim been that she was
born five years prior to the Prophetic mission, her age after the
Migration, when both men sought her hand, according to the consensus of
historians, she would have been about 18 or 19. Nobody can say that such
a person is too young to marry.

4. It is narrated that the women of Quraish abandoned Khadija, may Allah
have mercy on her, when she was pregnant with Fatima (sa), so Fatima
(sa) used to talk to her and urge her to be patient[^7].

Some people may find it unlikely that Khadija could have been pregnant
with Fatima (sa) five years after the inception of the Prophetic mission
because Khadija (may Allah be pleased with her) was too old to get
pregnant. But this supposition is inappropriate because I have proven in
my book titled *Al-Sahih min Sirat al-Nabiyy al-A’zam* (S) that her age
then was about 50 years or, according to the strongest arguments, even
less than that, although there is a great deal of disagreement in this
regard. It is also possible that her birth after her mother was past the
child-bearing age was a blessing unto Khadija and unto the Messenger of
Allah S, one similar to the woman who said, “Shall I bear a son while I
am a very old woman and this husband of mine is a very old man?!”
(Qur’an, 11:72). This is out of place because had it been so, it would
have become widespread, but we find no references to it anywhere.

5. Another evidence is the Abundance of traditions explaining why she
was named Fatima, among other names given her, which point out and prove
that her name came from the heavens according to the orders of Allah,
Exalted and Great is He. These are many in number, and they exist in
many references, so refer to them[^8].

Who is Superior: Maryam or Fatima, peace with them both?
--------------------------------------------------------

The question of who is superior, Maryam daughter of ‘Imran (sa) or
Fatima (sa) daughter of Muhammed S, may be answered by some this way:
“Such is useless knowledge. It neither benefits those who know it nor
harms those who do not. It is an intellectual luxury item, or even
nonsense or backwardness.” Then one may add saying, “Since there is no
dispute in this regard between Maryam and Fatima, why should we dispute
about it? Fatima has her merits, and so does Maryam, and we see no
problem here.”

To me, I would like to say the following:

FIRST: There is no doubt that al-Zahra’ (sa) is the best of all
womankind, of the early generations as well as the later ones. As for
Maryam, she was the head of the women of her time. Such is narrated
about the Messenger of Allah S himself as well as the Imams, peace with
them[^9].

This proves that since she is the head of the women of Paradise, she is
superior to Maryam, and Maryam is superior to such women[^10]. Another
proof of her superiority is narrated by Imam al-Sadiq (as) who has said,
“Had Allah, Exalted and Glorified is He, not created the Commander of
the Faithful for Fatima (as a husband), nobody else on the face of earth
would have been qualified to be her husband, be he from among the
descendants of Adam or from among those of anyone else.”[^11] This
tradition proves the superiority of the Commander of the Faithful (as)
as well.

SECOND: Our inquiry about the superiority does not mean that we seek to
be different; rather, it is the question of someone who seeks to know
more about the status of those who enjoy nearness to Allah Almighty. We
are urged to seek more knowledge about them because it requires us to
know more about Allah Almighty. If we differ at all, it is not
dissension or animosity. Rather, it is a difference of opinion which
leads us to research the truth, to increase our knowledge, and to
correct what is wrong or what is misunderstood by this party or that.

THIRD: We have to realize, each according to his ability, that we have
to know the minute details of all contents of the Book of Allah, and all
what was said by the Messenger of Allah S and his *wasis*, peace with
them, which they conveyed to us, if we find a way to do it at all. It is
knowledge of a great deal of significance. Those who are ignorant of it
will be harmed, and those who know it will be benefitted thereby.
Knowing it is not confined to political, material, social or
organizational matters or to our daily practice of rituals and the like.

Mankind moves on the path of perfection, a movement which he carries out
willingly and energetically and through his persistent effort. He sets
out in such a movement prompted by his conviction, relying on the degree
of his faith.

Such conviction and faith are nourished by knowing the secrets of life
and its minute details, knowledge of the domain of Allah, Glory to Him,
of the secrets of creation, of knowing Allah, the praised One, of His
Attributes, of Prophets and *walis* whom He chose from among His
servants, and knowing their high status and degree of nearness to Allah,
such as our knowledge that Allah, Glory to Him, is the One Who chose a
name for Fatima[^12], that He joined her in marriage in the heavens
before doing so on earth[^13], that she used to talk to her mother when
she was in her womb[^14], and such things.

All such knowledge increases the purity of the soul and deepens
conviction. It leads to self-knowledge that leads to knowing the Lord,
Glory to Him.

It is, then, quite obvious that the status of the prophets, *wasis* and
the *walis*, and the degrees of their distinction varies in sublimity
and differs according to their level of knowledge of all the above.

Yet, some branches of knowledge may require introductions so that we may
absorb them and qualify ourselves to properly benefit from them. It will
then be necessary to be gradual in undergoing the stages of such a path,
just as a first grade pupil is not usually satisfactorily capable of
absorbing the material given to a student of a higher grade like a
university student. Instead, he has to go through stages that will
prepare him to comprehend and absorb all of that so he may benefit from
it.

Whenever one gets closer to Allah, he will be more in need of new
branches of knowledge which suit his new station of nearness to Allah,
and he will need to be more pure, more cleansed, and to formulate his
feelings and emotions, rather, all his condition, accordingly. Such a
matter has its originality and reality, and it does not agree with one
who says that this is knowledge which does not benefit those who know it
nor harms those who do not.

If Imam al-Sadiq (as) did feel above delving into a topic like this,
when he was asked about it, and when he did provide an answer, are we,
then, right in feeling above an issue which the Imam addressed without
having to, while he is our role model?! So, we, indeed, need to know the
lofty status and the station of nearness to Allah which Fatima (sa)
enjoys and knowing her superiority over other beings. We need to know
that she is the head of all women of the world, of the early generations
and of the last ones, and that she is superior to Maryam (sa), head of
the women of her time.

We are in need of all of this because it deepens our relationship with
Fatima (sa) and it permits Fatima (sa) into our hearts, incorporating
her into the soul, the feelings, the emotions, so that we may be more
aware of what she says or does, so we may feel what she feels, like what
she likes and hate what she hates. We are in pain when her soul
agonizes, and we are happy when her soul is pleased. This increases our
sincerity and purity, and it increases our knowledge of the facts
relevant to those who oppressed her and transgressed against her. It
makes us acquainted with the magnanimity of the injustice to which she
was exposed, with how bad and how ugly it was.

Worthiness of al-Zahra’ (sa)
----------------------------

Some people may wonder saying, “The participation of al-Zahra’ (sa) in
the Mubahala issue does not indicate the greatness of her value and
distinction because her father, the Prophet (S), had raised all his
family members since they were the dearest to him, the ones he loved the
most, in order to prove that he was ready to sacrifice them for the sake
of the religion, and it does not have any other implication.”

In answer, we would like to say that Allah, Glory to Him, involved
al-Zahra’ (sa) in an issue that had something to do with the permanence
of the religion and with its being the truth. She affects the essence of
believing in it till the Day of Judgment because the Mubahala was to
prove that Jesus (as) was only a human being, not a god.

The Holy Qur’an has immortalized her participation in the Mubahala in
order to demonstrate that she (sa) had reached the pinnacle in her
perfection, eminence and distinction, so much so that Allah, the most
Glorified One, made her, in addition to the Prophet (S), the *wasi* and
both grandsons (as) of the Prophet (S)the evident proof that the
Prophet (S)was truthful in everything he said. Allah, Glory to Him, was
the One Who ordered His Prophet (S) to use these individuals to invoke
His curse on the liars; he (S) did not do it on his own.

Therefore, it was not done because they were his family members, his Ahl
al-Bayt (as). Rather, it was done because Fatima, peace of Allah and His
blessings with her, the Prophet (S), Ali and both grandsons of the
Prophet, peace with them all, were, as such, the most precious of
everyone in existence and the most distinguished among all of Allah’s
creation.

It became quite clear that the most Exalted One wanted all people to
realize that sacrificing those chosen elite ones meant sacrificing
everything, that there was no value for existence without them, and the
sacred *hadith* carries the same meaning.[^15]

The exclusion of more than one man, and the restriction of the female
gender to only al-Zahra’ (sa) in this issue, points out to the fact that
no other woman came close to the status of eminence and nearness to
Allah, Glory to Him, than did al-Zahra’ (sa). So, there is no room to
attribute any merit to anyone else besides her (sa) by way of
distinction over all other women. Some people attribute status and
distinction to some wives of the Prophet (S), such as ‘A’isha, regarding
her as superior to the nation’s women.

This cannot be right especially when we see how ‘A’isha behaved after
the demise of the Messenger of Allah (S), how she declared mutiny
against the Imam, the Commander of the Faithful (as), how she set out to
fight the *wasi* of the Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds, causing the
death of a very large number of innocent people from among those who
stood tall in their conviction and service to Islam. Satan did, indeed,
show its horns from where the Prophet (S) had pointed; Allah, the Great,
said the truth, and so did His glorious Prophet (S).

What ‘A’isha did, then, how she disobeyed Allah, can never be used as a
justification for women’s political activity, as some people may claim,
nor does it prove that Islam sanctions it or that it does not.

As regarding the conduct of al-Zahra’ (sa), it is but the criterion and
the scales because such conduct was in obedience of Allah, for she was
the purified and the infallible woman whose statements and actions are
relied on when a verdict is to be derived from the Shari’a , be it
relevant to a political or an apolitical issue.

Head of the Women of Mankind
----------------------------

What is evident is that discerning, providing an ideological
restriction, or issuing verdicts does not grant the verdict, the
ideology or the restriction strength or firmness in the hearts as much
as when it is personified and formed into a living and moving reality.
This is so because the rational or instinctive evidence, for example,
may not convince someone or take hold of him. But the personification of
an ideology makes one pleased and overwhelmed thereby, feeling contended
and satisfied with it, following in the principle of the Qur’anic verse
saying,

***“He said: What! And do you not believe?! He said: Yes, but so that my
heart may be at ease” (Qur’an, 2:260).***

Mental, rational and practical satisfaction is based on clear and
sufficient evidence free from any shortcoming or defect. But the soul’s
tranquility may need a personification of the idea in the outside world
so that the psychological tranquility may be in sync with the firm
mental, rational and intellectual conviction; perhaps they may both form
the rich fountainhead of feelings and emotions.

Al-Zahra’ (sa) was the very first woman in whom the role model and the
most exemplary conduct for all women of the world were personified. This
happened after humanity marched a great deal. During such march, many
women achieved perfection till Fatima (sa) became the pinnacle of such
perfection. Just as perfect man was first personified in Adam (as) so
that it would be a living reality, a man living his well-balanced
humanity wherein nothing happens arbitrarily, a humanity that he lived
in all its characteristics and attributes, sincerity, purity and energy
in reason, intellect, conduct, wisdom, and management, so much so that
he became the role model for all human beings. He was Adam the prophet
and the man, not Adam the dust. Rather, the dust that became a perfect
human being in the true sense of the word.

The march for humanity’s perfection went on; therefore, many prophets
(as) were perfect human beings, and many women achieved perfection, too,
such as Asiya daughter of Muzahim, Maryam (Mary) and Khadija (as). Then
perfection reached the highest pinnacle in the person of the Messenger
of Allah S the man, and in al-Zahra’ (sa) the woman. Whims and desires,
ambitions and instincts, as well as challenges, etc. could not prohibit
man from personifying his humanity, live a life of conviction, the life
of complete perfection and peace, not the one of environmental or social
pressures.

Humans’ role models are those who stand and are able to convince man
that he has to defy, to face, and to tread his path forcefully, that he
can achieve victory so long as his highest examples are the Prophet S
and the *walis*, starting from Adam and ending with the Messenger of
Allah S and his purified progeny (as). He does not only receive from
them an ideology, he sees the movement and the stand in the Messenger,
the *wasi* and the *wali*. He, therefore, was not satisfied with just
bidding or forbidding, as in the verse saying,

***“... Whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it, and from whatever
he forbids you, keep back” (Qur’an, 59:7).***

Rather, He went beyond it to say,

***“Certainly you have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent example
for him who sets his hopes on Allah and the latter day and remembers
Allah much” (Qur’an, 33:21).***

He (God) shows him the movement, the stand and the purity personified
before him in the person of the Prophet and the *wasi*, and in women who
faced the greatest trials and tribulations, such as Pharaoh’s wife and
al-Zahra’, Fatima (sa), who had to face people’s deviation from the
right course. She faced hardship and oppression. And so is the case of
Maryam daughter of ‘Imran who had to face pressures around her in
matters that were most sensitive to woman’s gender in general.

The Social Activity of al-Zahra’ (sa)
-------------------------------------

Some people may bring about a point with a loaded meaning. It says, “We
do not find anything in history that points out to a social activity
undertaken by Lady Fatima al-Zahra’ in the Islamic society except in one
or two traditions.”

Commenting on the above, I would like to say the following:

Each generation has its own requirements, technicalities and frameworks.
A man or a woman is demanded to be or is judged accordingly. His/her
activities, too, are evaluated on the same basis in as far as the size
of their impact on the Islamic reality as a whole is concerned.

During the time of the Prophet S, al-Zahra’ (sa) taught women how to
recite the Holy Qur’an; she educated them in the injunctions of the
Shari’a and in the necessary theological branches of knowledge. She
actively and effectively took part in the call to Allah, Glory and
Exaltation are His, in various situations, including the Mubahala
incident involving the Christians. She had a leading role in defending
the issues of the fate of the nation, including that of the Imamate.

Add to this her magnificent statement which she delivered at the
(Prophet’s) Mosque which by itself is considered as a school and as a
fountainhead which nourishes the generations with knowledge. Add to all
of this her participation, which suited her personality and abilities,
during Islam’s decisive wars, in addition to her treatment of the needy,
such as the orphans, the captives and the indigent, something which
Allah, Glory to Him, has immortalized in a Qur’an that is to be recited
till the Day of Judgment.

Greater than all the above is her powerful and effective stance wherein
she played her role, including her demise and burial, in order to
safeguard the fruits of Jihad for Islam’s greatest cause, just as her
daughter Zainab (sa) did within the framework of her powerful and
effective safeguarding of the fruits of Jihad and momentous sacrifices
of Imam Husayn (as) and his companions in Kerbala’.

Yes, all of this and its likes prove that al-Zahra’ (sa) did, indeed,
participate in civil activities, in political, educational and doctrinal
fields as suited the reality, the dictates and the circumstances of her
time and within the frameworks of its activities according to the then
prevalent values.

She made essential achievements on the level of having an impact on
protecting the Call, its dissemination, deepening the understanding of
its concepts and filling the gaps in various fields within which the
circumstances of that age permitted her to move. Such achievements may
not be equaled by that of any other woman in history, no matter how
great her activity might have been, how branched out its fields, and how
diverse its particulars, because it aimed at firming the roots [of our
Islamic faith]. It, therefore, has the greatest impact in safeguarding
the tree of Islam and in granting it more strength, stability and power,
and in making its fruits richer, more pleasing and more delightful.

All the above makes it clear that the difference in the fields of
activity, its conditions and norms between the generation of al-Zahra’
(sa) and this generation does not place al-Zahra’ (sa) in the circle of
backwardness, deficiency or shortcoming, nor does it make the
achievement of woman in this generation of a greater influence, even
when the demands of life are wider and the fields of activity and
movement are more diverse.

It is only natural that the age of firming the foundations of the creed,
of properly setting up the facts of conviction, of determining the
issues that shape man’s fate as the most important, the most weighty,
and the achievement therein being greater and more serious.

Thus, it becomes obvious that there is no sense in judging al-Zahra’
(sa) as having conducted a very small social activity during her time
and base such a judgment on the fields of activity of women in this
generation.

Having introduced all the above to the kind reader, I would like to
remind him of the following matters:

FIRST: We wish that the same individual had mentioned to us the
tradition or two to which he referred so that we might know what he
meant by “social activity.” Does he mean that she fell short of carrying
out her mission and did not fulfil her obligation as an infallible lady
and as the daughter of a Prophet and the wife of a *wali*?

If her opponents find this to be her fault, her father and husband were
then obligated to lead her to the right course in this regard. But if by
“social activity” he means establishing schools, charities, educational
societies, philanthropic organizations, or holding discussion circles,
delivering speeches, writing books to give away or to sell..., it is
then quite possible that al-Zahra’ (sa) did not do many of such
activities which some women nowadays do, and this was not confined to
only al-Zahra’ (sa).

It applies to all women of that generation and of the generations that
followed. The nature of the social life and its potentials, and also the
nature of woman’s life-style at that time, restricted the activity in
which she could participate except in certain fields which are different
from today’s, regardless of the legislative justifications about which
some people talk in one way or another.

But if he means that history has not mentioned that she used to publicly
declare the truth, for those who wanted to know the truth, nor did she
carry out her obligation in teaching and directing women and in
safeguarding the creed, on the level of the major Islamic issues, and on
that of others, especially the branches of knowledge which she
disseminated, even within the framework of those of her deeds that were
relevant to worship..., what she has achieved in this field is as clear
to the eyes of the beholder as the rays of the sun.

Her speech, which she delivered at the Mosque of the Prophet (peace and
blessings of Allah with him and his progeny), and with the women of the
Ansar, is regarded as a school for the generations and as the
fountainhead of knowledge across history only when it is well understood
and benefitted from. This she did despite the presence of her father,
the Messenger of Allah (S) and her cousin, the Commander of the Faithful
(as), who were the axes of the social, human and Islamic activity. Her
activity (sa) was part of the whole general activity of the time.

Yet his claim that there are only one or two traditions (referring to
her social activities) remains unclear and imprecise. There are many
traditions which have referred to her participation in various
activities, be they social, political, or educational, and we have
already mentioned some of them. Actually, some narrations state that she
used to participate even in non-Muslim [social] functions when some Jews
invited her to attend one of their weddings.

There is an incident narrating how she gave a bedouin her necklace and a
bed on which al-Hassan and al-Husayn (as) used to sleep, so ‘Ammar ibn
Yasir  bought them back. This is well documented.

Even Allah, Glory to Him, tells us how she and her Ahl al-Bayt (as) are
of the habit of feeding the indigent, the orphan and the newly released
captive seeking His Pleasure.

When she delivered her famous speech at the Mosque, she went there
accompanied by a crowd of women who supported her demands. Some
historians discuss the presence of a bloc of women who supported her
(sa) versus *others* who opposed her. Besides, she is famous for
admonishing her children to look after the neighbor before looking after
their own family.

This provides us with a picture depicting the nature of her concerns.
Had she found any opportunity to carry out any social, civil or
educational activity, she would have set out swiftly with full awareness
and interest.

SECOND: The Prophet (S) continuously stressed her status and role, her
position in Islam, belief and knowledge. This granted her a special
status; she became an authority for the people who referred to her. Her
house was often frequented by women coming in and out all the time[^16].
The women of Medina [in general], as well as her neighbors [in
particular] used to quite often visit her.[^17] People sought her to
teach them from the knowledge that she had with her.[^18]

The Prophet (S) used to personally send people who were in need of
something materialistic to go to the house of Fatima (sa) as in the
story of the bedouin whom she gave her necklace and a bed belonging to
both her sons as we have just stated.

People used to frequent her house seeking knowledge, too. All this must
have filled her life with movement and activity, in addition to her
domestic activity, during a time when she used to use the grind-stone
till her hands bled.

THIRD: Nobody, no matter who he/she is, can be evaluated based on
his/her social achievements and activities or political shrewdness, for
there are many politicians who are quite shrewd and who are not adorned
by the true value of humanity. A social activity or shrewdness does not
provide any value for a politician or a political stance.

Politics are ruled by their own principles and interests, and they are
to be derived from an infallible person such as a prophet or a *wasi*,
and from al-Zahra’ (sa), too. She (sa) defines for us where the
political value lies, or the value of any other action, be it social or
non-social. Al-Zahra’ (sa) does not derive her worthiness from her
policies or social activities; otherwise, some criminals or deviators
would have been valued as greater than prophets, *walis* or *wasis*, if
one of them had conducted a huge social or political activity due to the
Abundance of wealth, prominence and authority at the disposal of a
prophet or a *wali*, peace with them all.

The truth is that the worthiness of a human being stems from within him,
from the values which he personifies, from his ideals and
humanitarianism, from his useful knowledge which produces piety and fear
of Allah, Glory to Him. Anything other than these falls in the category
of causes and outcomes, and it may be found on the other side of the
equation.

FOURTH: We have first to verify the status of al-Zahra’ (sa) with
relevance to the conviction of any Muslim and also verify the reality of
the responsibilities expected to be undertaken in support of this
religion and its structure. So, let us say the following:

The loyalty of a Muslim to the Prophet (S), to the Imams and to
al-Zahra’ (sa), plays a major and crucial role in crystallizing his
conviction and realizing his identity, personality and humanity. The
presence of al-Zahra’, the woman, who is neither an Imam nor a prophet,
being a woman perfect in her humanity, is what we need by necessity to
be mandated by life, belief, conduct and daily process. As regarding her
social or political activity, this does not have the same degree of
significance or sensitivity in the presence of her father and husband.

We need such a presence so that we may be linked to it, so that our
hearts may lean towards it, for it embodies for us values and principles
and the human perfection which we need, too, so that our hearts may
embrace it through embracing al-Zahra’ (sa), then it participates in
building our creed and firming the Islamic concepts, the values and the
principles in our hearts and minds…, so that it may coin our feelings
and emotions, actually our existence altogether. Such is the role of
Fatima (sa). Her role or theirs is not to establish foundations, civil
organizations or charities, etc.

FIFTH: There is no doubt that al-Zahra’ (sa) plays a serious and
sensitive role in keeping this religion alive and pure. Had it not been
for her, it would have been distorted and become a thing of the past.
Al-Zahra’ (sa) is the window of light, the proof of righteousness, the
mirror of Islam that reflects its teachings, injunctions, concepts and
outlooks towards the cosmos and life itself, as is the case with her
husband, the Commander of the Faithful (sa). She and the truth are
inseparable companions.

She is the criterion and the scales whereby people’s conviction is
weighed, and so is their uprightness on the path of guidance, goodness,
honesty and sincerity. We know thereby whether Allah and His Messenger
(S) are pleased or displeased. This is referred to by the tradition of
the Prophet (S) wherein he says, “She is part of me; she is my heart
within my ribs; whoever harms her harms me, and whoever harms me in fact
harms Allah,” or “I am pleased with whoever pleases her, and I am
angered by anything/anyone which/who angers her,” or some such wording.

Notice how he has made her part of him, the very criterion for his
pleasure with whatever/whoever pleases her and his displeasure with
whatever/whoever displeases or harms her.[^19]

It is quite evident that her being part of his physical body, being his
daughter, is not the reason that whatever pleases her pleases him for
two reasons:

FIRST: He does not set out from a point of bias towards his kinship or
blood relation, etc. Rather, he wishes that all the particularities and
privileges, material or immaterial abilities, should be at the service
of this religion.

SECOND: Being the biological or non-biological father is insufficient by
nature to win privileges of such a level of significance, though they
may be important since they refer to the purity of the element and the
purification of the kind, since she (sa) was a *nur* in the lofty loins
and the purified wombs. When the son of Noah (as) who, according to some
traditions, was adopted[^20], did not exert such an effort, he strayed
and perished, so much so that Allah said the following about him to his
father Noah,

***“O Noah! Surely he is not of your family; surely he is (the doer of)
other than good deeds; therefore, do not ask of Me that of which you
have no knowledge; surely I admonish you lest you should be among the
ignorant” (Qur’an, 11:46).***

Thereupon, the pleasure of Noah’s son was surely not the Pleasure of
Allah and His Messenger, nor was his anger theirs.

What is intended, in as far as her being part of him is concerned,
should be a meaning hinging on her pleasure being also his, and her
being harmed is his harm, especially since we know that he said so when
she answered the following question: “What is the best for a woman?” She
said, “That she does not see men, nor do men see her,” as will be
discussed, God willing. Or it may have been said to Ali (as) in the
presence of those who harmed Fatima (sa) when they told her that he had
sought the hand of the daughter of Abu Jahl. Ali (as) said to him, “By
the One Who sent you with the truth as a Prophet, there is no truth
whatsoever in what she was told that I have done, nor did I ever
contemplate doing anything like that.” The Prophet S said to him, “You
have said the truth, and you are the truthful one.” Fatima (sa) then
felt glad about it. She smiled till her father saw her teeth. One of the
two men said to his companion, “What caused you to call on me during a
time such as this?”

The Prophet S, then, wanted to tell the person who brought that false
news to Fatima that he had caused her and him harm. No matter what, the
meaning of this statement harmonizes with: harming her means harming
him. Her characteristics are derived from those of the Messenger of
Allah S and so is her perfection. Discussing her connotes that she is
part of the Prophet S and his human and prophetic existence in all its
attributes, in its particularities, minute characteristics, as a
perfectly holy human being who represents humanity, perfection, purity,
truth and righteousness, in the most precise and manifest of such means
and in their most sublime.

Obviously, when Fatima (sa) is angry, she is angered when humanity is
belittled, and when values and principles are violated. She is pleased
when humanity is honored and values are firmed. Her being exposed to
oppression does not anger her as an individual; it angers her because it
is an aggression against humanity, spiritual perfection and ideological
sublimity, and because it is an attempt to belittle this sacred
existence.

To assault Fatima (sa) is to assault righteousness, natural disposition
and honor, and this is what angers her and angers Allah and His
Messenger. Every deed which is done according to natural disposition,
safeguarding this existence, pleases her and pleases the Messenger and
Allah.

Thus, she fits to be a criterion and a scale when she is pleased and
when angered. We may make this meaning clearer when we refer to the
Qur’anic verse saying, “Whoever slays a soul, unless it be for
manslaughter or for mischief in the land, it is as though he slew all
men; and whoever keeps it alive, it is as though he kept all men alive”
(Qur’an, 5:32). The body, which is composed of flesh and bones, remains
present, and what is missing is its power of will, the ability to
choose, reason as well as human characteristics of nobility, generosity,
feelings, emotions... The body is emptied of its contents when the soul
is separated from it.

Al-Zahra’ : Her Father’s Mother
-------------------------------

One of the most strange of what we have ever heard is a statement
someone made claiming that al-Zahra’ (sa) compensated the Prophet S for
his mother who had died when he was still a child, and that for this
reason, she was called “mother of her father.”

The same individual says the following verbatim: “The Prophet started
his life complaining about having lost his mother’s love because such
love could not be provided by a wet nurse or a governess... So she
[al-Zahra’ (sa)]provided him with her maternal affection by embracing
him, and the Messenger of Allah said to her that the gap which he had
felt through the loss of his mother he could now fill through his
daughter.”[^21]

I would like to say to him that such talk is not acceptable, for we
cannot agree that the Prophet (S) used to suffer from an inferiority
complex resulting from losing his mother, so he needed someone to
compensate him for what he had lost. Rather, it simply means that
al-Zahra’ (sa) used to take care of her father like a mother taking care
of her son. This does not mean that doing so was a compensation for the
Prophet (S) for an emotion which he missed, nor was it to complement a
shortcoming.

Can this person accept that someone else other than al-Zahra’ (sa) was
able to fill that “gap” had she cared for the Messenger of Allah (S) and
given him the emotion which he needed?!

Finally, “mother of her father” explains only the fact and the dimension
of how Lady al-Zahra’ (sa) treated her father. It does not connote any
“filling of a gap” or untying an inferiority complex in the sacred
personality of the Prophet, God forbid.

Does Infallibility Force One Not to Commit Sins?!
-------------------------------------------------

1. The same individual says that the infallibility which manifested
itself in al-Zahra’ (sa) was the result of the environment and the
*iman* surrounding her wherein she lived and grew up because it was an
environment of belief, purity, virtue and righteousness.

It is clear that this statement implies something which requires a bold
and sensitive question: What if al-Zahra’ (sa) had lived in another
environment, in one stained with vices and abominations?! What if
someone else other than her had lived in the same environment? Will the
result be the same? Some women did, indeed, live in such a stained
environment, so why was the case not so?

2. Despite all of this, we find the same person talking about the
“forming” of infallibility, implying endorsement of the theory saying
that the Almighty “forces” some people (to be infallible), a theory the
error of which has been proven and which Ahl al-Bayt (as) rejected,
saying that there is neither forcing nor commissioning but something
in-between.

I say that I do not wish to go into detail in making a distinction
between obedience and disobedience. Rather, I contend myself with
referring to the following:

FIRST: Leaving aside acts of obedience is by itself an act of
disobedience. One, therefore, cannot afford to leave them out. How can
he, then, have a choice in doing or not doing them, and what do you mean
when you say that he has the option regarding certain acts of
obedience?!

SECOND: Such a distinction lacks evidence, and nothing leads to it.
Rather, it is merely judging things. Why not reverse the case and give
him the option to leave aside disobedience while being obligated to do
acts of obedience...?

What is noteworthy here is that when the writer had to face these
questions, he resorted once to citing al-Balkhi, who says that rewards
for obedience are granted out of God’s favors, not because His servant
deserves them, and once to what some claim that one who deserves to be
rewarded is, indeed, rewarded out of God’s favors. This, like
al-Balkhi’s, is a statement unworthy of anyone’s attention due to the
evidence that obedience is earned when one deserves it, not due to
preference.

The evidence referred to above is this: Obedience is a hardship mandated
by Allah on His servant. If there is no purpose behind it, it is then
oppression, it is senseless, something too ugly to be attributed to the
all-Wise One. But if there is a purpose behind it, if it comes from Him,
the most Exalted One, it is false because He is not in need of anything
at all. But if it is relevant to the obligated person, and if the
purpose is to harm him, it would be ugly oppression. But if it is for
one’s own benefit, it must have been right for the Almighty to initiate
it for the benefit of His servant; obligation will then become
senseless. But if it is not initiated by the Almighty, and it requires
obligating so that one may be worthy of its benefit, it will then be
exactly what is required.

The outcome is this: Rewards are granted because someone earns them, not
because they come due to preference.

As regarding al-Balkhi’s statement, it is wrong from its foundations
because he derives his conclusion from the assumption that an obligation
is mandated as means to thank the Almighty for His blessing, so one does
not deserve, because of it, any rewards. Rewards are granted as a favor
from the most Exalted One. There is no doubt that this statement is
erroneous.

What we are discussing is what is pleasant and what is ugly. Wise people
consider it ugly for someone to be preferred over another by receiving a
blessing, then he is obligated to thank the Giver for it without
receiving any rewards for carrying out the same obligation. They
consider it a shortcoming and attribute it to love for power and
authority and such ugly meanings which do not come from the all-Wise
One; so, we have to say that rewards are earned, deserved.

The ultimate goal is that it can be said, though this statement does not
agree with what al-Balkhi says who also contradicts it and rejects it,
that although Allah, Praise belongs to Him, is the Owner of everything,
and His ownership makes Him the Originator in deciding the initiation of
the rewards for those whom He owns for their good deeds, but, having
determined this under the label of “wages,” granting them for it many
times its worth, making it a divine law, it enters the circle of
deserved rewards after it had not been there.

Because of the above, reason does not permit that Allah should grant
those who disobey Him and withhold it from those who obey him. Had
rewards been initiated out of His favors, this would have been
permissible. This is similar to the case of a man who decided to grant
his son a prize if he passed his school examination. If the son passes,
he will demand his father to give him the prize, considering himself
wronged and insulted if he does not receive it, let alone if his father
gives it to his brother who did not pass.

Do Environment and Surroundings Affect Infallibility?
-----------------------------------------------------

As regarding what is said about the effect of the environment and the
surrounding atmosphere of conviction on the personality of al-Zahra’
(sa), we would like to say the following:

Al-Zahra’ (sa) is the *noor* that was created from the fruit of
Paradise; she used to talk to her mother when she was inside her womb
before she was born. She is among the best of the creation of Allah,
Praise belongs to Him. He chose her to be infallible[^22], the purified
one, the selected elite one, prior to her entering the environment which
some people discuss, claiming that it is the main reason for the status
and prestige enjoyed by al-Zahra’ (sa).

The individual’s statement implies that had al-Zahra’ (sa) lived in
another environment, one which lacks righteousness, goodness, and piety,
she would then have been stamped by its particular stamp, becoming an
evil and a deviated woman, and we seek Allah’s protection against making
such assumptions! Is this acceptable or rational?!

I insist that the environment wherein al-Zahra’ (sa) lived was not the
reason for reaching a station of nearness to Allah, nor did it formulate
and crystallize her believing personality or caused her infallibility or
human perfection. Rather, her sound inner self, her pure soul, her wise
mind, her balanced characteristics and human perfection, in addition to
the care with which Allah Almighty surrounded her, being kind to her,
guiding her and granting her success, and also her own individual and
voluntary effort to attain more sincerity, purity and purification so
that she could reach the degrees of nearness to Allah and to achieve His
Pleasure. All that produced the personality of al-Zahra’ (sa), the
infallible lady, the purified one.

Infallibility does not mean the inability to do something [prohibitive].
It means the ability and the knowledge, making the right option, the
strong and the effective will that works with the great mind, in
addition to the divine kindness, care and support. Being a senior or a
junior or the amount of bodily growth are not the criteria in the purity
of the soul or the perfection of faculties and human attributes, nor is
it in giving the lead to reason, or the power of reason and realization,
or in vast knowledge and being worthy of attaining the stations of
divinely-granted glory.

Allah granted wisdom to Yahya [John the Baptist (as)] when he was a
child, and Jesus (as) spoke even when he was in the cradle thus: “Surely
I am a servant of Allah; He has given me the Book and made me a prophet;
and He has made me blessed wherever I may be, and He has enjoined on me
prayer and *zakat* as long as I live and [to be] dutiful to my mother,
and He has not made me insolent, unblessed” (Qur’an, 19:30-32).

Al-Zahra’ (sa) in no time had the mentality of a child, nor was she ever
on the level of abilities, realizations or ambitions of a child. Ali
spoke, and so did al-Zahra’, peace with both of them, at the time of
their birth, and al-Zahra’ (sa) spoke to her mother before her birth.
Narratives and history books, and others, of both parties, mentioned for
us all of this and its likes in relevance to Ahl al-Bayt, peace with
them. This proves that she and they were as such; may Allah shower them
with His blessings and shower her Shi’as and those who love her till the
Day of Judgment.

The Ability to Revolt Against the Environment And the Surroundings
------------------------------------------------------------------

As regarding what is related to the environment and the surroundings, we
do not deny their effects on one’s soul, psychology and moral code. But
we say that this is not the absolute rule with all people, nor is it
inevitable to the degree that one loses with it his power of will,
confining him and preventing him from choosing, prohibiting him from
making options, chaining him against moving in the right direction, the
direction of goodness, righteousness, success and salvation.

The Holy Qur’an has made all of this clear for us in a way that leaves
no room for doubt when it told us about women who were role models such
as Maryam daughter of ‘Imran and Asiya daughter of Muzahim. Then it
talked about others from whom we may derive admonishment and warning
such as the wives of Noah and Lot.

Referring to one of the wives of the Prophet (S) to whom he confided
about a very important matter and who revealed that confidential matter,
adding to it something from her own self, the Holy Qur’an states the
following:

***“Allah sets forth an example to those who disbelieve the wife of Noah
and the wife of Lot: They were both under two of Our righteous servants,
but they acted treacherously towards them so they (their husbands, the
prophets) availed them naught against Allah, and it was said: ‘Enter,
both of you, into the Fire with those who enter’. And Allah sets forth
the example for those who believe the wife of Pharaoh when she said:
‘Lord! Build for me a house with Thee in the Garden and deliver me from
Pharaoh and his deeds, and deliver me from the unjust people’. And
Maryam, the daughter of ‘Imran, who guarded her chastity, so We breathed
into her of Our inspiration, and she accepted the truth of the words of
her Lord and His books, and she was of the obedient ones” (Qur’an,
66:12).***

We find Him, Glory to Him, providing an exemplary conduct for those who
believe, not specifically for believing women, of that of Asiya daughter
of Muzahim and Maryam daughter of ‘Imran. For those who disbelieve, not
specifically for disbelieving women, He provides the example of the
wives of Noah and Lot. In order to explain all of this, let us say the
following:

Wives of Prophets Noah and Lot (as)
-----------------------------------

What aids in clarifying what we want to explain as the meaning of the
verses cited above is to observe the following matters:

1. He has pointed out in the verse how a woman stood in the face of a
man. Perhaps some people see men as having a distinction over women in
certain areas. This distinction provides preference and precedence in
many matters.

2. Both men (prophets) are husbands, and a husband enjoys a strong
position, at least in his wife’s house.

3. Regardless of the above, a husband usually is the most knowledgeable
of all people, including the parents, of the conditions of his wife, of
her habits, of the points of her weakness or strength, because he is
practically in continuous contact with her, and she usually lives with
him. Such knowledge is most clear to him and is held in the highest
degree.

4. This man possesses attributes of perfection and means of power,
especially in his awareness, management, mind and wisdom, in his
intellectual level and the soundness of such mentality, as well as in
his ability to convince, let alone other things. He actually is the
pinnacle in all of that, so much so that he has deserved to be a
prophet, even a messenger of Allah. One of them, namely Noah (as), is
one of “ulul-’azm” who possess the highest degrees of firmness, immunity
and power. Who else more than a prophet/messenger who knows the means of
convincing others, its methods and tools? Or is there anyone else more
than him in his acquisition of the intellectual diction or anything else
needed to do so?!

5. Moreover, this woman lived in an environment of guidance, in the
atmospheres of purity, cleanliness, straightforwardness, virtue,
conviction, goodness and righteousness where all of this is personified
as a concrete reality which could be directly felt, rather than being
mere abstracts.

As regarding deviation, evil and apostasy, these will be in such an
environment strange, rejected, outcast, having no freedom of movement,
and they will never be accepted.

6. Both of these men/prophets (as), one of whom belongs to “ulul-’azm,”
had to bear the responsibility of guiding the nation, defending it,
distancing it from the slippery venues of deviation and their ills.
Providing such guidance is their primary and basic responsibility, and
it is everything in their lives as a guiding message. It is not
something casual, such as money which can be compensated, or authority
which one can live without, nor is it power nor influence, nor house
management. And it is not a materialistic interest, nor is it any of
life’s affairs which can be overlooked. Rather, undermining it means
undermining destiny and existence, the future, this life and the life
hereafter. This mission is regarded and treated as a sacred thing from
the standpoint of worship and adoration.

His wife defies him although she does not possess any of what we have
listed above, rebelling against him in the depth of his responsibility
and in the most precious thing which he had had.

7. Such defiance was a defiance of the environment and the surroundings
because it sprung up from within the environment of righteousness,
conviction, goodness and guidance.

8. What increases the pain is that she defied him in something towards
which he aimed instinctively, something to which his heart and
conscience were tied, and so were his feelings, soul and existence.

Yet even more bitter is that she wants to be the antithesis which is not
confined to mere deviation, but she tries to demolish what he was
building, taking advantage of the deviating environment which could help
her achieve her objective, grant her a boost and enhance her
determination.

On the other hand, this matter is not confined to one source which can
be regarded as incidental or as the exception to the rule, for this same
matter repeated itself and involved Noah and Lot, peace with them both,
whom Allah puts forth as examples for what happened to them.

Maryam (sa) Facing the Challenge
--------------------------------

As for the challenge in the case of Maryam (sa) it, too, is harsh and
bitter. It is a challenge in a matter that touches her own person and
being, a most sensitive challenge for a female who regards herself as
the pioneer of purity and virtue, deploring her people’s sins and
deviation. It is a challenge regarding chastity and purity. It came in a
way wherein she lost with it all the means of self-defense.

How can a woman bring her people her newborn then claim that she never
committed a sin nor had she had a relationship with any man? She claims
that she was big with child without having been touched by a man,
insisting that she preserved the meaning of virtue and purity in the
precise sense of the word. She accepts no other interpretation in that
regard, not even one wherein a forceful action (such as rape) is applied
and because of which a woman is excused.

Even when a married woman gives birth, she is shy during the first days
to a high degree especially before those who knew her and whom she knew.
So, how is it if she goes to her people carrying a newborn to whom she
had given birth without having gotten married, insisting that she was
not touched by any man at all?! Could she not expect them to think or
imagine that something else must have taken place?!

Yet Maryam’s belief was not shaken, nor did she retreat, nor did she
hide that infant, nor did she send him away or dissociate herself from
him. Rather, she accepted and was pleased, and she persevered and
tolerated everything, seeking to please Allah, Praise is His. She was
rightfully the head of the women of her time, and she was quite worthy
of it, because she believed in the Words of Allah, and she supplicated
to Him.

As for the truthful and pure lady, Fatima al-Zahra’, peace of Allah and
His blessings with her, the greatest Messenger of Allah S had said that
she was better than all the women of mankind from the early generations
to the last ones, including Maryam, Asiya and others despite what the
latter had been through, and despite what they had to face. This informs
you of how great her status is and how tremendous her trial and
tribulation based on the *hadith* saying, “The most to be afflicted with
trials are the prophets, then those who are less than them in status,
then the most exemplary, and so on.”[^23]

Deductions from the Above
-------------------------

Many results have become clear from what is stated above; among them
are:

1. From the examples provided by Allah, it has become clear that the
environment and the surroundings do not make up one’s personality
although they may sometimes have an influence on him, in the absence of
an aware self-supervision, when man surrenders to submission and
bondage.

There is no room, then, for anyone to say that the personality of
al-Zahra’ (sa) is the outcome of the environment and the surroundings
wherein she lived, and we will never accept anyone’s statement that had
she (sa) lived in other surroundings, i.e. corrupt ones, she, too, would
have lived the realities of her corrupt environment.

2. Maryam faced the pressures of the deviated environment surrounding
her regarding the most sensitive and serious issue relevant to her
without having any known means to defend herself except her pure
conviction and great trust in Allah, the most Exalted One. Asiya
daughter of Muzahim moved around in the depth of the den of deviation
and apostasy, in the midst of its surroundings, facing the most powerful
man, the one with the most means of oppression, enticement, challenge,
injustice, iniquity and arrogance. Both of these examples prove that
there is no room to justify the deviation that results from the
pressures of the environment and the surroundings or the authority, nor
to succumbing to the will of the husband, etc.

3. All the above has made it clear that a woman, as well as a man,
possesses a real power and strength to determine the final decision
regarding any issue. This stands on the same level with the Divine call,
and it can reach the highest degrees that qualify her for the most
sublime status within the scope of dignity and divine care.

4. The impulse to support justice, the upholding of the laws of Allah,
the acting on His commandments, the upholding of the path of guidance
and righteousness..., is undoubtedly something conducive to nature and
reason. To deviate from it is nothing short of lagging behind the
requirements of nature, taking rational thinking lightly and sacrificing
the meanings of humanity, straight-forwardness and guidance.

[^1]: Refer to my book titled Al-Sihah min Sirat al-Nabiyy al-A\`zam
(a), Vol. 3, in the chapter discussing the isra’ and mi\`raj.

[^2]: Refer to Diya’ al-\`Alamin, Vol. 2, p. 2 (manuscript). Ibn
al-Athir, Jami\` al-Usul, Vol. 12, pp. 9-10.

[^3]: al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 101, quoting Al-Kafi
through an authentic tradition, and also Al-Misbah al-Kabir, Dala’il
al-Imama, Misbah al-Kaf\`ami, Al-Rawda, Ibn Shahr Ashub, Kashf
al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 75, and Ithbat al-Wasiyya. Refer also to Thakha’ir
al-\`Uqba, p. 52, Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol. 1, p. 278 quoting the book
about the dates of the births of Ahl al-Bayt (as) by Imam Ahmed ibn Nasr
ibn \`Abdullah al-Darra\`. Refer also to al-Mas\`udi’s Muruj al-Dhahab,
Vol. 2, p. 289, and to other books.

[^4]: You can find such narrations in the books of the Shi\`as such as:
al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 4-6; al-Saduq’s Amali, as well
as \`Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, Ma\`ani al-Akhbar, \`Ilal al-Shara’i\`,
al-Qummi, Tafsir; al-Tibrisi, Al-Ihtijaj, and in others. Refer also to
Al-Anwar al-Nu\`maniyya, Vol. 1, p. 80 or any other book, modern or
classic, which discusses al-Zahra’ (sa).

[^5]: In non-Shi\`a books, you can find them in works such as
Al-Mustadrak \`Alal Sahihihayn, Vol. 3, p. 156; al-Dhahbi, Talkhis
al-Mustadrak (as referred to in a footnote in Al-Mustadrak); Nuzul
al-Abrar, p. 88; Al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. 4, p. 153; al-Khatib
al-Baghdadi, Tarikh Baghdad, Vol. 5, p. 87; Ibn al-Maghazli, Manaqib
al-Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib, p. 357; Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol. 1, p. 277;
Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, p. 36; Lisan al-Mizan , Vol. 1, p. 134; Al-La’ali’
al-Masnu\`a, Vol. 1, p. 392; and Al-Durra al-Yatima fi Ba\`d Fada’il
al-Sayyida al-\`Azima, p. 31. In the Appendices Section of Ihqaq
al-Haqq, Vol. 10, pp. 1-10, they are quoted from some of the references
cited above as well as from Mizan al-I\`tidal, Al-Rawd al-Fa’iq, Nuzhat
al-Majalis, Mujma\` al-Zawa’id, Kanz al-\`Ummal, Muhadarat al-Awa’il,
al-Khawarizmi’s Maqtal al-Husayn; Miftah al-Najat, Al-Manaqib by
\`Abdullah al-Shafi\`i, I\`rab Thalathin Sura, and Akhbar al-Duwal. The
author of Diya’ al-\`Alamin discusses it on pp. 4-5, Vol. 4, of his work
and in his manuscript, citing a large number of references. There are
other references which we mentioned while discussing the isra’ and
mi\`raj, while discussing the biography of the Greatest Prophet (S) to
which you may refer.

[^6]: Refer to Khasa’is Amir al-Mu\`minin Ali ibn Abu Talib, p. 228,
critiqued by al-Mahmudi; p. 393, Vol. 3, of Al-Manaqib by Ibn Shahr
Ashub (Dar al-Adwa’ edition); Tathkirat al-Khawass, pp. 306-307; and
Diya’ al-\`Alamin, Vol. 2, p. 36 (manuscript).

[^7]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 2.

[^8]: Refer to Yanabi\` al-Mawadda and to p. 219, Vol. 6, of Kanz
al-\`Ummal by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi; to pp. 221 & 229 of Al-Manaqib by Ibn
al-Maghazli; to Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 4, pp. 6 & 9, where
there is a plenty of researched material. Refer also to al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 13 and to its footnotes citing \`Ilal
al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, p. 178. Refer also to Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, p. 26;
to Vol. 2, p. 400 as well as Vol. 3, p. 439 of Mizan al-I\`tidal; to
Lisan al-Mizan, Vol. 3, p. 267; to Tawali\` al-Anwar, pp. 112-113
(Tabriz, 1395); to p. 51 (Dar al-I\`tisam, Beirut, 1392) of Ma\`rifat ma
Yajib li Al al-Bayt al-Nabawi by Ahmed ibn Ali al-Maqrizi, and to Ahmed
Fahmi’s book titled Al-Batul al-Tahira, pp. 11 & 15.

[^9]: Refer to Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, p. 43; to Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala’,
Vol. 2, p. 126; to Al-Jawhara, p. 17; to Al-Isti\`ab (as referred to in
a footnote in Al-Isaba), Vol. 4, p. 376; to Tarikh Dimashq (to the
section dealing with the biography of Imam Ali and researched by
al-Mahmudi), Vol. 1, pp. 247-248; to Al-Majalis al-Saniyya, Vol. 5, p.
63 citing al-Saduq’s Amuli; to Al-Istu\`ab and p. 56, Vol. 3, of Sharh
al-Akhbar; to p. 79, Vol. 1, of Maqtal al-Husayn by al-Khawarizmi; to
pp. 178-179 of Nazm Durar al-Simtayn; to Ma\`ani al-Akhbar, pl. 107; to
p. 182, Vol. 1, of \`Ilal al-Shara’i\`; to al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 43, p. 37, Vol. 39, p. 278 and p. 68, Vol. 37; and to Ibn Shahr
Ashub’s Manaqib.

[^10]: Refer to p. 459 of Al-Rasa’il al-I\`tiqadiyya, citing p. 36, Vol.
5, of al-Bukhari’s Sahih and also p. 262 of Al-Tara’if, citing Al-Jam\`
Baynal Sihah al-Sitta, and p. 61, Vol. 1, of Mir’at al-Jinan, and pp.
19-21, Vol. 2, of Diya\` al-\`Alamin.

[^11]: Refer to p. 461, Vol. 1, of Al-Kafi, to pp. 10 & 107, Vol. 43, of
Bihar al-Anwar; to p. 11, Vol. 2, of Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript)
citing \`Uyun al-Mu\`jizat; and to p. 48 of Kitab al-Firdaws.

[^12]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 13 citing p. 178, Vol. 1,
of \`Ilal al-Shara’i\`.

[^13]: Refer to p. 31 of Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba; p. 98, Vol. 2, of Kashf
al-Ghumma. Refer also to Kunuz al-Haqa’iq by al-Mannawi in a footnote on
p. 75, Vol. 2, of Al-Jami\` al-Saghir; and to pp. 141 & 145, Vol. 43, of
al-Majlisi’s Bihar al-Anwar.

[^14]: Al-Qazwini, Fatima al-Zahra’ Minal Mahd ilal Lahd, p. 49;
al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 2; p. 227, Vol. 2, of Nuzhat
al-Majalis; and pp. 27, 38, Vol. 2, of Diya’ al-\`Alamin.

[^15]: Refer to pp. 179 and 198 of Al-Kafi; and to pp. 138-139 of
al-Nu\`mani’s Ghayba; to pp. 488-489 of Basa’ir al-Darajat. Refer also
to p. 359, Vol. 8, of Al-Sihah min Sirat al-Nabiyy al-A\`zam (S) where
they are quoted.

[^16]: Ibn Abul-Hadid al-Mu\`tazilite al-Shafi\`i, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha,
Vol. 9, p. 198.

[^17]: Ibid., Vol. 9, p. 193.

[^18]: The story of how someone went to her seeking to learn from her,
so she asked for a book which the Messenger of Allah (S) had given her
will come later in this book. When she [actually her maid, Fidda] did
not first find it, the man had to wait.

[^19]: There is no doubt in the consecutive reporting of this tradition
or in its authenticity. Shaikh Ja\`far Kashif al-Ghita’, on p. 12 of his
famous book Kashf a-Ghita’, has noted its being consecutively reported
by both parties, so refer to it. Since this tradition is mentioned in
various references which discuss al-Zahra’ (sa), listing its references
is very hard, even impossible, and we find no need to do so here. We,
however, will contend ourselves by mentioning some of them. Anyone who
wishes to know more should review the books which discuss the biography
of al-Zahra’ (sa), her miracles or merits. He will find this tradition
cited wherever he goes. The references to which we would like to point
out here are: Fara’id al-Simtayn, Vol. 2, p. 46; Mujma\` al-Zawa’id,
Vol. 9, p. 203; al-Khawarizmi’s Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, pp. 52-53;
Kifayat al-Talib, pp. 364-365; Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, pp. 37-39; Usd
al-Ghaba, Vol. 5, p. 522; al-Bukhari’s Sahih, Muslim’s Sahih; Yanabi\`
al-Mawadda, pp. 173-174, 179, 198; Nazm Durar al-Simtayn, pp. 176-177;
al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, Vol. 3, pp. 154, 158-159 and its Talkhis by
al-Dhahbi as referred to in the latter’s footnote; Kanz al-\`Ummal, Vol.
13, pp. 93 & 96 and Vol. 6, p. 219 and Vol. 7, p. 111; Al-Ghadir, Vol.
7, pp. 231 & 236; Siyar A\`lam al-Nubala’, Vol. 2, p. 132; Al-Sawa\`iq
al-Muhriqa, pp. 186 & 188; al-Zarqani’s Sharh al-Mawahib, Vol. 4, p.
335; in addition to many others.

[^20]: It does not make any sense when some people say that Noah’s
paternal feelings affected him, so he followed his emotions, not paying
attention to Allah’s address in this regard. Refer to Vol. 2, p. 220, of
Al-Burhan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an.

[^21]: Kitab al-Nadwa, p. 58.

[^22]: Infallibility in prophets and wasis is fixed by reason because
the station of the Prophetic Mission and Imamate requires it. It is
supported by narrations which may also explain its limits, scopes and
other particulars. As regarding the infallibility of al-Zahra’ (sa), it
is fixed by authentic traditions of the Messenger of Allah (S) and by
Qur’anic texts, and it is one of the necessities of the sect and its
fixed tenets. It goes without saying that infallibility cannot be known
except from such traditions because the divine orders to do or not to do
are not confined to deeds of the senses but transcend them to
incorporate the heart, the self, the soul, and to coining the
characteristics of a human being, his feelings, emotions such as
courage, generosity, jealousy, love, hatred, belief, hypocrisy,
intentions and other things with which we cannot be familiar without
traditions quoting the infallible person.

[^23]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 64, p. 200.


