Part 2: Al-Zahra’ (sa) And The Unknown
======================================

Someone says that we have no need for whatever historical data is
available regarding the marriage of al-Zahra’ (sa) and its unknown
aspects, in the heavens celebrating it or in other such relevant things.
He also raises reservations about the tradition saying that there were
unknown elements or unnatural particulars in the personality of
al-Zahra’ (sa), wondering what we could gain or lose, as he puts it,
whether she is a *noor* or not, for such is “knowledge which does not
benefit anyone who is familiar with it, nor does it hurt anyone who is
ignorant thereof.”

Then he adds saying that we find nothing particular except the
circumstances that guaranteed her spiritual and intellectual growth and
her practical upholding on the level wherein the elements of one’s
personality are balanced naturally in the issue of the personal growth,
and that we cannot take for granted the tradition in question saying
that there are certain unknown elements which get her out of the level
of an ordinary woman because this is *not* subject to any “undisputable
proof”.

We, in as far as the necessity of the education of the unknown is
concerned, would like to record the following:

FIRST: Raising issues in such a way may be the catalyst for setting off
a “domestic dispute,” since it aims at casting doubt about the
importantce of learning about the knowledge of the unknown, something
which is not acceptable, nor is it rational, for it is one of the issues
of the faith and of the creed. Such issues are unreservedly accepted.
There is no doubt that distancing a very important aspect of theological
issues from the circle of interest through weakening them or taking them
lightly is considered as undermining an important foundation of the
creed. It is a genuine confusion of the leading Islamic ideology, and it
implies raising question marks about the diction of other theological
branches of knowledge, something which will lead to the weakening of
people’s conviction, to diverting their interest from Allah, Praise and
Exaltation are His, from his Messengers (as) and elite ones.

Their conviction of the facts of Islam and belief will be shaken, and it
will raise many question marks about matters which ought not be
subjected to a debate which is not based on a procedure or science, for
it will then produce nothing but confusion in the general state. It will
divert people’s interest to directions which are further from the
reality, further from seriously contemplating on their fate issues, from
whatever threatens their future and very existence. It will distance
them from planning and confronting huge dangers awaiting them in their
arena where they face the powers of grudge and haughtiness against which
we should all unite. May Allah protect us from losing our minds or
deviating in our thinking or action; He is the omni-Potent One, the
Able, the One most capable of responding.

SECOND: There is no doubt that there are texts proving the Divine care
of al-Zahra’ (sa) even to many of her miracles[^1] and attributes which
were particularly hers and which are all too many in number to deny.
They are justified both scientifically and ideologically.

If such size of texts does not prove one’s distinction, status, or
Divine care, then there is no room to prove any other Islamic reality.
The Mu’tazilites have preceded this man in denying that a miracle can be
performed by a *wali* in the pretext they look like those performed by
prophets, so much so that one prophet cannot then be distinguished from
another[^2]. They did not pay any heed to the fact that a miracle is
performed by a *wali* only when he upholds the line of the faith in a
way whereby he does not claim to be a prophet; otherwise, he would not
have been a *wali*, nor would he have been worthy of Divine care from
Allah, nor will Allah enable him to perform one at all.

THIRD: Allah, the most Exalted and Sublime, has said, “*Alif Lam, Mim*.
This Book, there is no doubt in it, is a guide to those who guard
(themselves against evil). Those who believe in the unseen and keep up
prayer and spend out of what We have given them” (Qur’an, 2:1-3). There
is no doubt that matters relevant to the unknown have a strong impact on
a Muslim’s conviction, and that the unknown is one of the essential
matters in the subject of conviction which Allah, the Praised One,
requires of His servants.

Also undoubted is that it is insufficient to believe in the unknown by
simply experiencing an ambiguous and mysterious sense of the existence
of ambiguities and mysteries in some aspects of life then feeling
incapable of attaining them, then developing a sense of fear and awe of
them.

Nor is it sufficient to bring conviction, in its essence, in all its
circumstances and vocabulary, unknown or otherwise, to reality in order
to attain dry ideological satisfaction and arithmetic equation settling
in the mind and in the consciousness of man, so that he may draw on such
basis the map of his conduct or a life separated from the unknown, or
one not in harmony therewith at all.

Neither this nor that suffices, for conviction is an option. It renews
itself and continues, for Allah, Glory to Him, has said, “They believe.”
He has not said, “They believed.” This is so because the present
continuous verb conveys the meaning of renewal and continuity. That is,
they choose this conviction, causing it to happen, to exist,
personifying it continuously.

Since it is also obvious that fearing the unknown and ambiguously
sensing the matters which are absent from our senses is not conviction,
it contradicts the belief which sets the heart on an issue, embracing it
affectionately, loving and understanding it, then feeling at ease in the
heart in feeling comfortable with what it embraces; it feels comfortable
with it, being pleased thereby:

***“Surely by remembering Allah do hearts find rest” (Qur’an, 13:28); “O
soul that is at rest! Return to your Lord, well-pleased (with Him),
well-pleasing (Him)” (Qur’an, 89:27-28).***

If the matter is as such, and since we can neither embrace the vacuum,
nor feel at ease, nor be pleased thereby, there has to be an evidence
leading to what is ambiguous, personifying it in man’s awareness, so
that it may get out of its unknown status and into the reality of
conviction and consciousness, becoming an evidence for conviction, even
if it may be in its reality and existence not conducive with the senses,
nor does it appear to them but remains separated and absent therefrom.

From such a junction, there is a justification for tying this unknown to
the subjective reality so that it may become more effective in
consciousness, deeper and more firmly settled in one’s beliefs. Such
vocabulary words, which express it and lead to it, take it out of its
state of cloudiness and uncertainty, making it more firm and more
defined to the degree of realistic personification of the unknown
meaning which prepares man to set his heart on it, so that the believing
Muslim may be convinced about the unknown according to the Will of
Allah, Glory to Him.

All this is accomplished according to the divine plan for its
realization. Thus, we can understand, in depth, the statement by Ali
(as) wherein he says, “Had the veil been removed from me, it would not
have increased my conviction.”[^3] And when he was asked how he
worshiped a God Whom he never saw, he said, “I am not one who worships a
God Whom he does not see. Eyes never saw Him, but the hearts saw him
through convincing facts.”[^4]

Likewise, hearts do find rest in the remembrance of Allah, Praise to
Him:

***“Surely when remembering Allah, hearts find rest” (Qur’an, 13:28),***

for the heart does not touch on the Divine reality itself; rather, it
touches on its effects and actions, finding comfort in the remembrance
of Allah. The Almighty has also said,

***“And Allah’s are the best names, so call on Him thereby” (Qur’an,
7:180);***

***“Read in the name of your Lord Who created…” (Qur’an, 96:1); “In the
Name of Allah, the most Gracious, the most Merciful.”***

It becomes clear from all the above that when Islam mandated belief in
the unknown, it did not intend it to be cloudy and without a direction,
empty and ambiguous. Rather, it wanted it as an objective and conscious
unknown which is personified on the page of the heart and the soul. It
becomes more clear, more deeply rooted and firm through the means
whereby Allah, Praised is He, wanted to transmit the unknown element to
our consciousness so that it may be its ever-present companion,
depending and leaning on it.

The knowledge of the unknown, then, distances belief in the unknown from
being a state of fear of the unknown, so that it may be a true vision of
the heart on which one sets his mind, strengthening his conviction,
subjecting his feelings thereto, setting out to be the life and the
awareness of the conscience, and so that it may become a stand, a
movement, a conduct, an attitude and a spontaneous norm of conduct which
is honest and sincere.

At the same time, such unknown remains independent of the senses which
cannot fathom it, remaining helpless towards it, for it is connected to
what is superior to them, to what makes it independent of them,
upholding its own means, setting out in its own sphere.

If we cast a general look at the means and proofs which personify this
unknown in man’s heart, transforming him into an effective element of
belief, we find out that Islam, in its treatment of this sensitive
aspect, has intended the unknown to free itself from the bondage of
reason and awareness, so it may settle in the heart, and so that such a
heart may embrace it with affection, so that it may find with it
pleasure and tranquility, and so that it may, thereafter, wander in the
sphere of the soul, in an amalgamation of feelings, and so that it may
be a shining and overwhelming feeling.

And it flows in man’s existence to coin his feelings and sentiments, and
so that it may become his hearing, vision, intellect, character,
language, attitude, conduct, stand and everything in his life.

For the sake of all the above, the intellect has to be incorporated into
the feeling, so the tragedy of al-Zahra’ (sa) the memory of al-Husayn
(as) during ‘Ashura’, and the tragedy of his infant son..., etc., may
become part of the ideological fact. Thus, everything uttered by the
Messenger of Allah S and by the Purified Imams (as) represents an
educational necessity to complement the belief in the facts of Islam,
including believing in the unknown.

No wonder, then, that such a meaning given to the unknown is personified
as a divine miracle and a living reality that influences man’s
awareness. It is personified in the Black Stone to which Allah gave the
trusts of the creations, in the *isra’* and *mi’raj*, in the settling of
Yunus (Jonah) in the belly of the whale, in the speech of the ant about
which Solomon smiled, in the transporting of the throne of Balqees from
Yemen [to Jerusalem] in a blink of an eye, in Fatima’s talk to her
mother while she was in her womb, in the heavenly bridal when she was
wedded to Ali (as) and in the angel’s talk to her which Ali (as) called
“Mushaf Fatima,” and that the angels used to call on her just as they
used to call on Maryam daughter of ‘Imran saying, “O Fatima! Allah has
chosen you and purified you..., etc.,” so she was for this reason called
“muhaddatha محدثة.”[^5]

No wonder, then, when such unknown is personified in the fact that
Fatima is a *noor*, and that she is a human *huri* created from the
fruit of Paradise[^6] which is different from worldly fruits in its
purity and purification.

Fatima increased this purity and purification due to the effort which
she exerted and which was crowned with success through her knowledge of
Allah and to what she achieved of seeing the secrets of creation and the
laws of life. She, hence, earned the prize of being divinely guided, so
she was the infallible woman: Allah is pleased when she is pleased and
is wrathful when she is angry. She became the Head of the women of
mankind, from the early generations and the last. All these matters
prove that she (sa) was strongly linked to the unknown due to her status
and to the divine bliss which she earned, one which our minds cannot
grasp and our comprehension falls short of.

It becomes quite obvious from all the above that if the unknown is
personified in certain symbols such as the prophets of Allah, or His
chosen ones, His friends and those who enjoy a special status with Him
due to the blessings which He bestowed on them, and in many other
symbols, our hearts will then embrace her and will embrace with her the
known deposited in her, so she becomes the axis of conviction and the
hope of the hearts so that our souls may live in tranquility and
pleasure, and our emotions may yearn for her, tickling our senses.
Knowledge will then become useful for those familiar with it, and those
who are ignorant of it will be grievously harmed by their ignorance.

The vocabulary of the unknown being personified in certain individuals,
such as the prophets, the *wasis* and the *walis*, does not necessarily
cause us to prefer this person over that. On the contrary; the nature of
the stage or certain circumstances may be the ones that mandate such a
particularity of the unknown.

As regarding making a preference, it has its own criteria. These have
been mentioned in the Holy Qur’an and by the Honored Prophet (S). This
is not one of them. All such knowledge of the unknown relevant to
al-Zahra’ (sa) and to others is part of this religion.

It enjoys a great deal of significance in formulating one’s belief,
humanity and awareness of the message due to the attributes that bring
about one’s humanity, existence, uniqueness, distinction and grants him
a high degree of purity and purification. It also brings about a degree
of connection with the friends of Allah and His elite, making him love
them more and feeling a conscious interaction with everything which they
say and do.

The Imams (as) have informed some of their close followers about some
knowledge of the unknown. Among such followers are: Maytham al-Tammar,
Zurarah, Muhammed ibn Muslim, and others. Surely useful is the knowledge
of the unknown for those who learn it, and how magnificent the esteem,
how great and how effective, and how badly we need it! How magnificent
the Great Qur’an is as it depends on many terms in this procedure,
announcing their extreme significance in building the civil and
believing character that bears a message!

Ideological Connection is Insufficient
--------------------------------------

It is not accurate, then, what is repeated by some people who claim that
we need to ideologically be connected with them through our knowledge of
their policies, the norms of their personal conduct, and their social
activities so that they may be our role models to emulate and in whose
footsteps to follow, and so that this will make us feel happy, admiring
them as individuals as we admire many a genius and many a thinker such
as Addison or Ibn Sina (Avicenna).

No; what we need is an ideological, conscientious and emotional
connection wherein the feelings participate and to which the senses
respond spontaneously and willingly, one that causes shakes the whole
being of a man, stressing the depth of his existence, willingly and
unconditionally. What is needed is that these elite ones enter our
hearts to be the life that sustains them. What is needed is that they
enter our souls so that they may more intensely shine and glitter. What
is needed is that they enter our being so that they may become more
pure, serene and sincere.

What is needed is that they should have the greatest share in coining
our believing personality, and that they participate in coining our
feelings and formulating our senses.

Let us forever dismiss the argument of those who say that this is
knowledge which does not benefit those who know it, nor does it harm
those who do not. It surely is a harmful statement which certainly
brings us loss and disappointment.

If we overlook all of this, the scales of benefit and harm about which
they talk is not clearly defined. It varies in conditions and sources.
To talk about medicine to a carpenter may not be of any benefit for his
career. So is to talk about astronomy to the smith, or to the weaver, or
to the administrator, each in his own career. But the matter relevant to
the issues of belief and conduct do not necessarily fall in this
category, although the degrees of knowledge of them and of their
requirements varies from one to another, following the principle of, “We
have been ordered to talk to people, each according to his level of
understanding.”

Al-Zahra’ (sa) was above Menstruation and Postpartum
----------------------------------------------------

Someone says that the fact that Lady al-Zahra’ (sa) did not menstruate
is considered a health problem which needed treatment, or at least it
was a deficiency in her womanhood or in her personality as a woman, and
it cannot be counted among her esteems or merits, and so is the case
with her postpartum. He even labels such a condition as “nonsense.”

We say:

FIRST: It may happen to some women, though rarely, that one does not
bleed while delivering, or she may bleed a little, and this is not seen
as a deficiency in her womanhood or personality as a woman. As regarding
al-Zahra’ (sa) having no menstruation, we say that slipping out of the
straits of nature is not regarded as a deficiency. Rather, it is an
esteem for her and a trait just like that bestowed on Mary (Maryam) (sa)
who was pregnant by Jesus (as) although no man had ever touched her
before, and like the wife of Abraham (as) who became pregnant at a very
advanced age, and like the wife of Zacharias (Zakariyya) (as) who also
became pregnant although she was sterile. There are many such
super-natural esteems and blessings.

The fact that al-Zahra’ (sa) was above menstruation points out to her
lofty status, to her uniqueness and distinction from all others since
menstruation is a discomfort as described by the One Who has all the
Glory[^7].

Such a “discomfort” causes the woman to be embarrassed, to feel
psychologically and physically out of the ordinoory. It is an indication
of a woman’s bad health, according to some traditions, and a sick
condition, according to the physicians’ researches in this subject. It
invalidates her fast and prayers and forbids her from entering mosques
and from doing other things which point out to the woman being unable to
live the spiritual environments with all her energy, tranquility, purity
and strength...

Such a continuous condition, which neither ablution nor *ghusul* nor
*tayammum* can remove till it is no more, was removed by Allah, Glory is
His, from the Head of the Women of Mankind whom He purified from all
filth with a perfect purification. She was chosen by Allah, Glory to
Him, for His favour and esteem without in any way altering her feminine
nature. Allah, the most Exalted One, is the One Who causes all
causation, the omni-Potent Who can override the law of cause and
causation not by “violating” it or annihilating it but through the law
of causation itself. He, the most Exalted One, is the One Who brings
about the miracles of His prophets through causes for them, the
knowledge of which is with Him, and only with Him, and humans are not
familiar with it, nor is it well known to them. This is the meaning of
the super-natural which they discuss in the subject of miracles and
super-natural phenomena. This may be more clear than needing additional
explanations, proofs or evidences.

SECOND: Labelling the exemption of al-Zahra’ (sa) from menstruation and
postpartum as “nonsense” is unacceptable from one who follows the
statements of the Prophet (S) and the purified Imams (as) because
everything articulated by the Prophet S and by the purified Imams (as)
can never be nonsense, nor can it be useless knowledge for those who
know it.

Such an exemption has been narrated by Shi’as and Sunnis who cite the
Messenger of Allah S and the purified Imams (as) in numerous texts which
are so many, they reach the degree of consecutive reporting. They all
prove that Allah, Glory and Exaltation are His, exempted al-Zahra’ (sa)
from going through menstruation or postpartum. Among such narrations are
the following:

1. The Prophet S has said, “Fatima is called ‘al-batul’ because she was
exempted from menstruation and postpartum.”[^8]

2. He S has also said, “My daughter, Fatima, is a *huri* who never
menstruated nor went through postpartum.”[^9]

3. Al-Saduq, through his own *isnad*, has cited ‘’Umar ibn Ali quoting
his father saying that the Prophet S was asked, “What is ‘batul’? We
have heard you, O Messenger of Allah, saying that Maryam is *batul* and
Fatima is *batul*.” He said, “*Batul* بتول is a woman who never
menstruates, for it is contemptible for the daughters of prophets to
menstruate.”[^10]

4. Al-Qattan, quoting al-Sukkari quoting al-Jawahiri quoting al-’Abbas
ibn Bakar from Abdullah ibn al-Muthanna from his uncle Thumamah ibn
‘Abdullah from Anas ibn Malik who quotes his mother saying that Fatima
never saw any blood in any menstruation, nor did she undergo any
postpartum.[^11]

5. Abu Ja’far has cited his forefathers saying that she (sa) was called
“al-Tahira” (the pure one) for many reasons one of which is that she
never underwent any menstruation or postpartum.[^12]

6. Imam al-Sadiq (as) has said, “Do you know what the meaning of
‘Fatima’ is? She was weaned from evil, and it is said that she is named
so because she was weaned from menstruation.”[^13]

7. The Prophet S said once to ‘A’isha, “O Humayra’! Fatima is not like
other women; she does not suffer from (green) sickness like they
do.”[^14]

8. Abu ‘Abdullah al-Sadiq (as) is quoted as having said, “Allah forbade
Ali (as) from taking another wife as long as Fatima was alive because
she was purified and never menstruated.”[^15]

The author/compiler of *Bihar al-Anwar*, Shaikh al-Islam *‘allama*
al-Majlisi II, has spoken very well about this issue; so, refer to him.

9. ‘A’isha is quoted as having said, “Whenever Fatima came along, her
gait was similar to that of the Messenger of Allah (S), and she never
menstruated because she was created from the apple of Paradise.”[^16]

10. The author of *Dala’il al-Imama*, through his own *isnad* going back
to Asma' daughter of ‘Umays, cites the latter saying, “I have been
around Fatima and she had given birth to some of her children. The
Messenger of Allah said to me, ‘O Asma'! Fatima was created as a human
*huri*.’”[^17]

11. Ali (as) is quoted as having said that the Messenger of Allah (S)
said to him that Fatima was created as a *huri* in human form, and that
the daughters of prophets do not menstruate.[^18]

12. In a tradition from Abu Ja’far (as) he said, “So He called her
Fatima (sa). Then He said, ‘I have weaned you with knowledge and weaned
you from menstruation.’” Then Abu Ja’far (as) continued to say, “By
Allah! Allah, the most Exalted and Sublime, weaned her with knowledge
and from menstruation according to His covenant.”[^19]

Al-Majlisi I described this tradition as strong.[^20]

13. Al-Saduq, may Allah have mercy on him, has cited his father quoting
Sa’d from Ibn ‘Isa from Ali ibn al-Hakam from Abu Jameela from Abu
Ja’far (as) saying, “Daughters of the prophets, peace and blessings of
Allah be on them, do not menstruate, for menstruation is a penalty,
etc.”[^21]

14. Abu ‘Abdullah (as) is quoted as having said, “Daughters of the
prophets do not menstruate.”[^22]

15. Al-Sayyuti has said, “One of the characteristics of Fatima (sa) is
that she never menstruated.”[^23]

16. Al-Sabban has said, “She was called al-Zahra’, which means the
purified one, because she never bled in a menstruation nor during
childbirth.”[^24]

17. The Prophet S is cited in a tradition as saying, “Fatima was called
*batul* because she was exempted from women’s ordinoory monthly
periods.”[^25]

18. Asma' daughter of ‘Umays has said, “I acted as the midwife for
Fatima (sa) and I never noticed any bleeding, so I said, ‘O Messenger of
Allah! I never noticed any bleeding in Fatima during a menstruation or
postpartum.’” The Messenger of Allah (as) said to her, “Have you not
come to know that my daughter is pure and purified and she undergoes no
bleeding during any menstruation or childbirth?”[^26]

19. The author of *‘Umdat al-Akhbar* has said, “Al-Hassan son of Ali
(as) was born in the middle of the month of Ramadan. His mother
conceived al-Husayn (as) after having given birth to al-Hassan (as)
because Fatima (sa) never underwent any menstruation or
postpartum.”[^27]

20. Ibn ‘Abbas has said, “The Messenger of Allah (S) has said, ‘My
daughter Fatima is a *huri*; she has never menstruated, nor has she ever
been through postpartum.’”

21. In the *Sihah* books, Ali ibn Ja’far quotes his brother Abul-Hassan
(as) saying, “Fatima is a truthful woman, a Witness, and the daughters
of prophets do not menstruate.”[^28]

22. Anas ibn Malik quotes Umm Salamah wife of Abu Talhah al-Ansari as
saying that she never saw Fatima (sa) suffering from bleeding during
menstruation or childbirth, that she was created of the water of
Paradise, and that when the Messenger of Allah (S) went during his
*isra’* journey and entered Paradise, he ate of the fruit of Paradise
and drank of its water. He also narrated the same from the Prophet.[^29]

23. Ahl al-Bayt (as) are also quoted as having said that the way with
the mothers of all the Imams, peace with them, is the same like that
with Fatima: menstruation was removed from them.[^30]

24. It is agreed on that the Prophet S is quoted as having said, “Fatima
is not like any of you; she never sees any bleeding during menstruation
or childbirth, like a *huri*.”[^31]

Interpreting Texts
------------------

When someone has to face such numerous texts, he is puzzled and unable
to reject them because they are consecutively reported or almost so. He
will then tell you that we have simply to “interpret” these texts just
as the case with those relevant to the *raj’a* (return) or other
beliefs.

We say that there is no room here for interpretation, neither of these
texts nor of those. Rather, we have, if our comprehension cannot absorb
them, to render their knowledge to Allah, just as al-Khawajoo’i
al-Mazandarani[^32] has said when he discussed the subject of *raj’a*,
and here is his statement:

“We ought not express our astonishment at it, for the issues whose
causes are unknown should not be regarded as odd. Have you not heard
that our master, the Commander of the Faithful, peace and blessings be
on him, saying, ‘This is knowledge of which people are vastly ignorant;
refer its knowledge to Allah’? Yet some of such knowledge, like the
*walis* winning the honour of being the supporters and the helpers (of
Imam al-Mahdi (as)) and their elation at the inception of his State and
Government, and like seeking revenge against the enemies and their
punishment and the chastisement which they deserve, in addition to other
matters all of which are recorded.”[^33]

Yes, there is no room here for interpretation due to the following
considerations:

1. If the text contains a binding order which is not subject to
rationalizing, nor does it violate what is theologically or rationally
fixed, it has to be accepted as is.

2. If we do not comprehend such a text, nor can we understand the wisdom
behind it, we have no right to reject it, nor are we permitted to
interpret it. Time may come when our intellectual power, our minds,
ascend the ladder of supremacy, a time when our knowledge increases, and
it will be then that we understand the wisdom behind it. Scores of
years, even centuries, may pass for mankind to take a stride in his
intellectual and scholarly progress so we may ascertain the secret in it
or the wisdom behind it or the precise meaning of some texts.

Many meanings of the verses of the Qur’an, such as those dealing with
the cosmos, and others, have been grasped in the twentieth century,
especially during the last couple of decades. Those which we do not yet
comprehend are many more.

3. Interpreting the text takes place if it superficially appears to
contradict reason or differs from what is already agreed on or taken for
granted by the Shari’a or others provided such an interpretation is
acceptable, reasonable and plausible.

4. If the text does not permit an interpretation acceptable to
linguists, and it is one which clearly contradicts what is taken for
granted, to reason and to the Shari’a , while contradicting the clear
text of the Qur’an, it will then have to be rejected and thrown out of
the window since no infallible person has stated or articulated it.

Hence, it becomes obvious that relying on what is far-fetched and what
is recommended in issues relevant to the unknown, to what we cannot see,
and also the lack of ability to rationalize or comprehend some issues
which the text contains, does not justify rejecting such a text, nor
does it obligate us to interpret it, and this is quite obvious and
clear.[^34]

Sayyid al-Murtada, may Allah have mercy on his soul, then, says that:

1. The *raj’a* is fixed among the consensus beliefs of Imamites.

2. Consensus is a rational proof and, as such, it is not subject to
interpretation because it is not among the texts which accept
interpretation.

3. Those who act contrariwise have done so after verifying that the
Imamites have collectively agreed on it. Their action does not harm the
consensus. Rather, it is an evidence which indicts them and obligates
them to accept it and to rely on it.

4. *Raj’a* is not among what can be conceived rationally, so that one
may resort to reason to comprehend it. Rather, it is something unknown
recognized by citation or by consensus from an Infallible one who
conveys it to the public. The consensus, according to Sayyid al-Murtada,
has revealed to us their knowledge of such a binding issue which they
learned from the Infallible Ones (A).

If the *raj’a* is already fixed through consecutively reported
traditions, then the transmissions relevant thereto must not be
subjected to interpretation, as we have suggested above, except when
they collide with a rational instinctive judgment. Yet even this does
not justify its interpretation, as we have indicated.

What we have mentioned applies here, and there is no room to deny it.

In order to provide evidence for what we have stated, that is, that the
*raj’a* is unequivocally proven through irrefutable evidence, we would
like to quote here some of what prominent people have said:

On p. 250 of his book titled *Jawahir al-Fiqh*, Ibn al-Barraj, counting
the beliefs of the Ja’faris, says, “Our Prophet and Infallible Imams
have indicated that during the time of al-Mahdi, a sect of past and
future nations will be resurrected in order to declare their State and
rights, and this has been fixed in consecutively reported traditions and
verses.”

Sayyid ‘Abdullah Shubbar, on pp. 2-3 of his book titled *Haqq al-Yaqin*,
says the following:

“Be informed that the *raj’a* is agreed on by true Shi’as, the rightful
sect. Nay! It is one of the basics of their sect. ‘Allama al-Majlisi,
may Allah have mercy on his soul, has said, ‘The Shi’as have all agreed
about the reality of the *raj’a* in all periods and is famous among them
like the sun at midday, so much so that they composed poetry about it
and used to argue with those who differ from them in their views,
asserting the same in their books and chronicles. Among them is al-Razi
and al-Naishapuri and others.

How can a believer cast doubt about the truthfulness of the Purified
Imams in this regard despite more than two hundred clear traditions
narrated by more than 40 trusted renown scholars in more than fifty of
their books? Among the latter are: Thiqatul-Islam al-Kulayni, al-Saduq
Muhammed ibn Babawayh, Shaikh Abu Ja’far al-Tasi, Sayyid al-Murtada,
al-Najjashi, al-Kashshi, al-’Ayyashi, Ali ibn Ibraham, Salam al-Hilali,
Shaikh al-Mufid, al-Karakchi, al-Nu’mani, al-Saffar, Sa’d ibn ‘Abdullah,
Ibn Qawlawayh, Ali ibn ‘Abd al-Hamad, Sayyid Ali ibn Tawus and his son,
the writer of *Kitab al-Tanzal wal-Tahraf*, Abul-Fadl al-Tibrisi, Abu
Talib al-Tibrisi, Ibraham ibn Muhammed al-Thaqafi, Muhammed ibn
al-’Abbas ibn Marwan, al-Barqi, Ibn Shahr Ashub, al-Hassan ibn Sulayman,
al-Qutub al-Rawandi, *‘allama* al-Hilli, Sayyid Baha’ ad-Dan Ali ibn
‘Abd al-Karam, Ahmed ibn Dawud ibn Sa’d, al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abu
Hamzah, al-Fadl ibn Shathan, the martyred Shaikh Muhammed ibn Mekki,
al-Husayn ibn Hamdan, al-Hassan ibn Muhammed ibn Jumhar, al-Hassan ibn
Mahbab, Ja’far ibn Muhammed ibn Malik al-Kafi, Tahr ibn ‘Abdullah,
Shathan ibn Jibra’il, the author of the book titled *Kitab al-Fada’il*,
the author of the book titled *Al-’Ataq*, the author of the book titled
*Kitab al-Khutab*, and many other authors of books anonymously written.

‘If such is not regarded as consecutively reported, then what is,
despite what is narrated by all Shi’a scholars, sons from fathers? I
think that anyone who doubts these personalities and doubts the Imams of
the creed and yet is unable to come out with a justification for such
doubt resorts to the annihilation of the straight faith by stating what
feeble minds state of the doubts of pedants and atheists:

***‘They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but
Allah will perfect His light, though the unbelievers may be averse
thereto’ (Qur’an, 61:8).***

A sect of ancient scholars categorized books and proved the [concept of
the] *raj’a*. Among them is Ahmed ibn Dawud ibn Sa’d al-Jurjani. The
Shaikh has said in his table of contents that al-Jurjani has written a
book about the *mut’a* and another about the *raj’a*. Also among them is
al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn Abu Hamzah al-Bata’ini. A book about the *raj’a*
is counted among the works of al-Najjashi. Also among them is al-Fadl
ibn Shathan al-Naishapuri. The Shaikh, in his table of contents, stated
that al-Najjashi had a book proving the *raj’a*. Also among them is
al-Saduq Muhammed ibn Ali ibn Babawayh who has listed a book about the
*raj’a* as belonging to al-Najjashi. Also among them is Muhammed Ibn
Mas’ud al-Najjashi. The Shaikh has referred to al-Najjashi in his table
of contents, stating that the latter has a book about the *raj’a*. Also
among them is al-Hassan ibn Sulayman who will soon be quoted.’”

I say that transmissions supporting each other from the Purified Imams
(as) say: “None of us is one who does not believe in our *raj’a*.”
Al-Faqah quotes al-Sadiq (as) as saying, “None of us is one who neither
believes in our return nor considers our *mut’a* as permissible.”

The *raj’a* means that some people from among those who have already
died and who follow and support al-Mahdi (as) will be resurrected during
the time when al-Qa’im (as) comes out in order to win the rewards of
supporting him and assisting him, and so that they may feel elated at
the inception of his State.

Likewise, some of his own enemies will be resurrected so that he may
seek revenge against them, and so that they may receive some of the pain
which they deserve and be killed at the hands of his Shi’as and be
insulted and humiliated when they see how lofty his word is. This,
according to us, is restricted to those whose conviction or the lack
thereof has been ascertained, whereas the others will be ignored,
according to many texts. The Book of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger (S), in addition to consensus, prove its necessity for the
sect.

Is al-Zahra’ (sa) the First Author in Islam?
--------------------------------------------

It may be said that al-Zahra’ (sa) is the first to write a book in
Islam. Narrations have proven that she used to have a book to which she
would refer, namely “mushaf Fatima”. Such a title proves our suggestion.
This means that she had a role in writing and authoring this book. In
other words, attributing the book to Fatima (sa) proves that she is its
owner, just as attributing another to Ali (as) means that he is its
author, as the Imams (as) have told us.

To sum up, there is no objection to saying that she is the first author
in Islam.

In response to skeptics, we would like to say that attributing the
*mushaf* to Fatima (sa) and labeling it as “mushaf Fatima (sa)” does not
necessarily mean that she was the one who wrote and authored it. You may
say, “This is the book of so-and-so” if the latter has some connection
with that book, such as owning it. And you may say, “This is the watch
of so-and-so” or his shirt, house, etc., but this does not mean that he
is the one who made that watch or built or owned that house, nor is he
the one who tailored the shirt, etc. A tradition says that a woman’s
mosque is her home. It is also said that a woman is not supposed to
leave the house without her husband’s permission although she has the
right only to live in it. For this reason, it is also said “The Psalms
of David,” “The Torah of Moses,” “The Bible of Jesus,” “The Du’a of
Kumayl,” “The Covenant of al-Ashtar,” etc. Allah Almighty has said,

***“Most surely this is in the earlier scriptures, the scriptures of
Abraham and Moses” (Qur’an, 87:18-19).***

Does this mean that these scriptures were written by them, peace with
them?! Or does it mean that they were the ones who wrote them with their
own hands?!

The same inquirer has said that “Mushaf Fatima (sa)” was written during
the time of the Messenger of Allah (S), and after his death in the
handwriting of Ali (as) and the dictation of an angel, or it was
dictated by the Prophet S; so, what does he mean when he says that there
is no objection to saying that she is the first author in Islam?

The *mushaf*, then, was written for her and because of her, and she is
the one to benefit from it; its ownership belongs to her, and it
contains her will..., does all this not suffice to accurately attribute
the *mushaf* to her (sa) without the need of her to participate in
writing and authoring it? Add to this the lack of evidence proving her
participation in writing it from a historical or narrative standpoint
and the lack of necessity mandating proving the same. There is no need
also to insist on its being inspired by her, etc.

As regarding apologizing for that by saying that what is meant is to
project the image of the Muslim woman in a way which earns her
admiration, this is not acceptable, for it suggests something which is
not factual. Add to this the fact that the life and purity, as well as
knowledge, which consecutively reported narrations have proven,
especially the sermon at the Mosque, etc., of al-Zahra’ (sa)…, more than
makes up for holding to an imaginary issue which has no basis of the
truth; so, there is no need to mislead people by saying that she (sa)
was, or she was not, an author.

Are There in “Mushaf Fatima” Judicial Injunctions?

Someone claims that “mushaf Fatima” contains judicial injunctions. He
relies on a narration by Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) saying, “I have with
me the white cipher.” I asked him, “What does it contain?!” He said,
“The Psalms of David, the Torah of Moses, the Bible of Jesus, the
Tablets of Abraham, peace with them all, and it contains what is
permissible and what is prohibitive, and Mushaf Fatima, and I do not
claim that there is any Qur’an in it. It contains what people need, so
they come to us seeking it, while we do not need anyone. It even
contains the whip, half the whip and quarter of the whip, even the tiny
scratch on one’s cheek.”[^35]

We say the following:

FIRST: His statement “It contains what people need” is not conjoint with
the one saying, “I do not claim that there is any Qur’an in it” so that
it may explain what the contents of the *mushaf* are. Rather, it is
conjoint with the one saying, “The Psalms of David, the Torah of Moses,
the Bible of Jesus, the Tablets of Abraham, ...etc.,” that is, the white
cipher contains the Psalms of David, the Torah of Moses, the Mushaf of
Fatima, and it contains what is permissible and what is not plus
everything people need.

Another narration from ‘Anbasah ibn Mis’ab states that by the “cipher”
are meant: the weapons of the Messenger of Allah, the (divinely
revealed) books, and Mushaf Fatima.[^36]

SECOND: Al-Kulayni has quoted a number of our own folks quoting Ahmed
ibn Muhammed from ‘’Umar ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz from Hammad ibn ‘Othman from
Imam al-Sadiq (as) a tradition wherein he stated that an angel used to
talk to al-Zahra’ (sa) and entertain her, so she expressed her concerns
about that to the Commander of the Faithful (as) who said to her (sa)
“If you feel any such thing, and if you hear the sound, tell me,” so I
let him know, and the Commander of the Faithful (as) kept writing
everything he heard till he compiled a whole book of it. Then he said,
“There is nothing in it about what is permissible or prohibitive, but
there is in it the knowledge of what will be.”[^37]

Someone discussed this tradition saying, “It is supposed that the angel
went to her to talk to her and to entertain her in order to cheer her up
[following the loss of her most revered father (S)]; so, how could she
complain about this to the Commander of the Faithful? This implies that
she was not comfortable with it. It is also apparent that the Imam (as)
did not know about it and that the whole issue was hearing the angel’s
voice rather than seeing him.”

We say that there is no problem with seeing the angel or only hearing
his voice, nor in whether or not the Commander of the Faithful (as) knew
about it. This is not the focal point although proving it is quite easy,
but it has nothing to do with proving or disproving anything about
“Mushaf Fatima” nor in her being or not being the first author in Islam;
so, there is no need to inject such a statement like that.

As regarding her concern, it was not with regard to her talk with the
angel. Rather, it was due to the angel mentioning to her what will be
endured by her offspring. In the book titled *Al-Muhtadir*, it is stated
that when her Father (S) passed away, Fatima (sa) said to the Commander
of the Faithful (sa) “I hear someone telling me about things and events
which will happen to my offspring.” He said, “If you hear it, dictate it
to me,” so she kept dictating it to him, and he kept writing it down. It
is narrated that its bulk is three times the size of the text of the
Holy Qur’an without containing anything of the Qur’an itself.

When he finished it, he named it “Mushaf Fatima” because she was the one
who was addressed by the angels.[^38] The same confused person,
immediately after having stated the above, mentions a tradition by Abu
‘Ubaydah containing the statement that “Gabriel used to visit her in
order to console her following the demise of her father and to remove
distress from her, telling her about her father and his place (in
Paradise), informing her of what will happen to her offspring. He used
to write all of that. Such is Fatima’s *mushaf*.”[^39]

Al-Majlisi I [the first, the father] has described this narration as
authentic.[^40]

Someone passed his own judgment on this narration, labeling it as “weak
and should be examined and ascertained” although apparently Abu ‘Ubaydah
al-Haththa’ (shoemaker), namely Ziyad ibn Abu Raja’, is a trusted
authority. We do not know why someone thought that he was al-Mada’ini,
although we could not find any narration by Ibn Ri’ab from this
Mada’ini, nor did he narrate from al-Mada’ini except apparently one
single narration. This could be the cause of narrators being confused
(about the last names of these narrators).

If the name of Abu ‘Ubaydah is mentioned, he must be al-Haththa’ الحذاء
especially since Ibn Ri’ab ابن رئاب has quoted more than one narration
by him despite the fact that there was nothing serious which he could
narrate from al-Mada’ini.[^41]

What is also noteworthy is that this same individual has made a comment
about this tradition saying, “It is apparently relevant to knowledge of
only what will happen to her progeny, whereas the other narration talks
about what is much more general to the extent that it discusses the
appearance of the atheists in the year 128 A.H./746 A.D. which is what
the Imam (as) read in Fatima’s *Mushaf*.”

We say that the whole matter is as follows: The narrative has proved
that Gabriel (as) was speaking to Fatima (sa) regarding what would
happen to her offspring, and it does not contain anything negating the
existence of other things related to the unknown. It is obvious that
confirming something does not negate other things.

Nor does the narrative contain any evidence denying the existence of
other branches of knowledge or other things in the *mushaf*. But she
wanted to point out to something which made her (sa) very concerned and
which she mentioned to Ali (as) because it was relevant to what would
happen to their offspring.

THIRD: There is one *hadith* by Habab al-Khath’ami حباب الخثعمي stating
that al-Mansur once wrote Muhammed ibn Khalid requiring him to ask the
people of Medina, including Imam al-Sadiq, peace with him, a question
relevant to *zakat*. The Imam (as) answered the question, so ‘Abdullah
ibn al-Hassan asked him, “Where did you get this knowledge from?” The
Imam (as) said, “I obtained it from the book of our mother, Fatima
(sa).”[^42]

The individual [who is critiqued throughout this book] commented about
this narrative saying, “This tradition apparently indicates that
Fatima’s book, i.e. “mushaf Fatima,” contains what is permissible and
what is prohibitive.”

We say:

FIRST: This tradition is weak.

SECOND: The term “Fatima’s book” also exists in a narrative by Fudayl
ibn Sakrah who quotes Imam al-Sadiq (as) and it is not necessarily
“mushaf Fatima” which is the focal point of the research, let alone
emphatically insisting on it, then taking that for granted, for Fatima
might have had other books besides the *mushaf*:

1. Al-Kulayni, in his book titled *Al-Kafi*, has quoted Ali citing his
father quoting Ibn Abu ‘Omayr quoting Ishaq ibn ‘Abd al-’Aziz quoting
Zurarah quoting Abu ‘Abdullah (as) as saying[^43], “Fatima (sa) came
once to the Messenger of Allah (S) complaining about something. The
Messenger of Allah (S) gave her the wide tip of a palm leaf and said to
her, ‘Learn what is written on it.’ Its contents stated the following:
‘Anyone who believes in Allah and in the Last Day should not harm his
neighbor, and anyone who believes in Allah and in the Last Day should be
generous to his guest, and anyone who believes in Allah and in the Last
Day should should say what is right or remain silent.’” [^44]

2. In *Dala’il al-Imama*, Ibn Mas’ud narrated saying, “A man went to
Fatima (sa) and said, ‘O daughter of the Messenger of Allah! Has the
Messenger of Allah left anything with you with which you would provide
us as something of a unique interest?’ She ordered her bondmaid [Fidda
فضه] to bring her something which she had wrapped. When the bondmaid
told her that she could not find it, Fatima (sa) said to her, ‘Woe unto
you! Find it, for it is to me equal to (my sons) Hassan and Husayn.’ The
bondmaid searched for it and found it wrapped. It contained the
following: ‘One is not counted among the believers if his neighbor does
not feel secure from his mischief. One who believes in Allah and in the
Last Day does not harm his neighbor. One who believes in Allah and in
the Last Day should either say what is right or remain silent. Allah
loves one who is righteous, clement, above following his desires, and He
hates the sinner, the miser, the argumentative and the one who
incessantly asks people to help him. Modesty is an indication of good
belief, and good belief is rewarded with Paradise. Vulgarity stems from
obscenity, and what is obscene is in the Fire.’”[^45]

This narrative and its precedent indicate that she (sa) was the one who
wrote and authored. In the first narrative, there is evidence to the
contrary because she stated that he gave her the upper wider tip of the
palm leaf with writing already written on it and told her to memorize
it.

3. Al-Saduq relies on Abu Nadrah who quotes Jabir in a narrative
indicating that he visited Fatima (sa) to congratulate her on the
occasion of the birth of al-Husayn (as) and found her holding a white
tablet. He asked her about it and she told him that it contained the
names of the Imams from among her offspring, and that nobody was
permitted to touch it except a prophet, a *wasi,* or a member of the
prophet’s immediate family, but it was permissible to know its contents
from the outside. He looked at it and read it, then he told others what
he had read.[^46]

There is No Contradiction in Traditions about Fatima’s Mushaf
-------------------------------------------------------------

This same individual has claimed that the traditions relevant to
Fatima’s *mushaf* contradict each other because some of them refer to
its being the dictation of the Messenger of Allah and the writing of
Ali[^47] (as) whereas others state that an angel used to visit her after
the demise of her father (S) to talk to her and that Ali (as) was the
one who wrote down what went on, hence it was Fatima’s *mushaf*.[^48]

In response, we would like to state the following:

The meaning of “contradiction” in the narratives is that each apparently
belies the other; one confirms something while the other denies it, or
*vice versa*. If there are no common grounds among them, some of them
have to be eliminated if there is a reason.

The traditions which refer to “Mushaf Fatima” are not like that. There
are common grounds among them. The book referred to as “mushaf” may have
been called so because it combined tablets together some of which were
dictated by the Messenger of Allah (S) and handwritten by Ali (as),
while the other part was dictated by the angel to Fatima (sa) and
handwritten by Ali (as). It was written after the demise of the
Messenger of Allah (S) when that angel used to visit her and entertain
her, and this *mushaf* also contains the will of Fatima (sa); so,
examine such texts.[^49]

To sum up, the purpose may simply be the fact that the Messenger of
Allah (S) undertook the dictation of some of the contents of the book in
order to prove that it is accepted and endorsed by him (as) in order to
confirm the authenticity of what the book contains and its significance.

As regarding the tradition which states that Gabriel (as) was the one
who entertained Fatima (sa), it does not contradict the tradition saying
that an angel used to talk to her and entertain her, for this angel may
be Gabriel himself[^50], yet al-Majlisi has described this tradition as
authentic[^51], so refer to it.

Portraying Contradiction Differently
------------------------------------

Someone has indicated another contradiction in the narrations that refer
to “mushaf Fatima” saying, “There are two narrations saying that it is
in the handwriting of Ali (as) and deals with what the angel told
al-Zahra’ (sa), but the other narrations do not give such an indication.
These [traditions] refer to what is permissible and what is prohibitive
and to Fa tima’s will; so, one of them only has to be preferred over the
other.”

We say that we have already commented on what the man has said in this
regard, and let us add here our comment on his latest statement, that
is, that one of them only has to be accepted in preference over the
other: We say that his statement suggests that both narrations
contradict each other. This cannot be accepted at all. One of them has
to be eliminated while the other accepted according to the norms of
preference. Such argument is not acceptable because:

FIRST: The existence of two narratives indicating that the handwriting
was that of Ali (as) does not mean that the other, which is silent about
this issue, denies it. It simply did not deal with it because it dealt
with other fronts where there was no need to obligate anyone to mention
the name of the one who wrote or who dictated.

If there are two narrations, both declaring that Ali (as) was the one
who wrote the *mushaf*, is there even one single narration declaring
that Fatima (sa) was the one who wrote and authored it?! So, why
emphasize that “mushaf Fatima” was in her own handwriting although this
contradicts the conclusion that it was handwritten by Ali, peace with
him?!

SECOND: We do not know how there can be any contradiction among the
narrations some of which have stated that the writer of the *mushaf* is
Ali (as) while the others state that what Ali (as) wrote contained what
was permissible and prohibitive, then other narrations have stated that
in this *mushaf* there is the will of Fatima (sa)! So, the fact that
both latest categories of narrations do not name Ali (as) as the writer,
should they both be looked on as contradicting those that say that Ali
(as) was the one who wrote the *mushaf*?! Where is the contradiction?!
How can one be the opposite of the other?!

THIRD: When we reviewed the narrations, we found the one by Hammad ibn
‘Othman saying that “mushaf Fatima” does not contain anything about what
is permissible and what is prohibitive. Then we reviewed that of
al-Husayn ibn Abul ‘Ala' and found the reference to people needing such
text was not relevant to “mushaf Fatima” but to the cipher. The outcome
of this review is that reference to what is permissible and what is
prohibitive is in neither the cipher nor the *mushaf*. Then we reviewed
al-Khath’ami’s narration and found it discussing Fatima’s book, not
“mushaf Fatima.” We have already stated that she (sa) had other writings
besides the *mushaf*.

What we have mentioned regarding the difference in the objectives behind
narrateing certain particulars is, in some of its aspects, similar to
transmitting the events that took place to al-Zahra’ (sa); so, we find
out that some folks threatened to burn the house...

Another narrateor transmits how the firewood was gathered...

A third transmits how a fire torch was brought...

A fourth transmits the burning of the door and the igniting of the
fire...

A fifth transmits breaking the door and entering the house by force...

A sixth transmits how al-Zahra’ (sa) was squeezed between the door and
the wall, and how she miscarried...

A seventh transmits how she was slapped on her cheek, or how she was hit
on her hand, or on her forehead, or on her back, or on her wrist, till
the mark looked like a bracelet...

An eight transmits how her rib was broken...

A ninth transmits that ‘’Umar [ibn al-Khattab] hit her...

A tenth transmits how al-Mughirah, too, hit her...

An eleventh transmits how Qunfath hit her by order of his master,
‘’Umar...

A twelfth transmits how Khalid ibn al-Walid hit her..., etc.

None of these transmissions belies the rest. Each transmits a piece of
fact of what took place either because there was a reason for
transmitting it or because this is what became confirmed to the
transmitter as having taken place, or due to a political circumstance,
etc., and there is nothing unusual in all of this.

Yet the differences among the particulars of transmission does not harm
the fact that the incident did, indeed, take place; rather, it
underscores it. If many do not pay attention to small details, then it
is a fact that Fatima (sa) was, indeed, hit. And the transmitters
differed regarding who the hitter was with the open possibility that
they all may have taken part in such a horrible and abominable act. The
matters got mixed up during the melee.

Such is the case regarding “mushaf Fatima,” peace of Allah with her,
with one exception: The reason why there is a variety of transmission of
what took place is mostly rendered to political, sectarian or other
inclinations. As regarding Fatima’s *mushaf*, the reason is to clarify
something relevant to the status of al-Zahra’ (sa) or to the
significance of the *mushaf* attributed to her and to its authenticity,
or something like that.

But we could not at all confirm the motives behind “mushaf Fatima”
containing juristic injunctions, nor could we understand the reasons or
the justifications for many issues stated in this regard and in other
numerous and diverse issues.

[^1]: Abul-Salah al-Halabi, as stated on pp. 102-103 of Al-Kafi, says
that miracles happen to also those who are not prophets, and that they
are not confined to the prophets facing challenges to their mission, as
some people claim. He provides an example for this from the story of
Asif ibn Barkhiya and how he brought the throne of Balqees in less than
the blink of an eye, in addition to the miracles which appeared for Mary
(sa), such as her obtaining sustenance, and the miracles of the
disciples of Jesus, and others.

[^2]: Al-Taftazani, Sharh \`Aqa’id al-Nasfiyya, p. 177.

[^3]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 40, p. 153 and Vol. 46, p. 135.

[^4]: Ibid., Vol. 4, pp. 27, 32, 33, 44, 52, 54, 304, and Vol. 10, p.
118, and Vol. 36, p. 406.

[^5]: Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 94. Dala’il al-Imama, p. 56. Refer to
Vol. 1, pp. 182-183 of \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` and Vol. 5, p. 345 of Rawdat
al-Muttaqin.

[^6]: Refer to Vol. 1, pp. 183-184 of \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` and numerous
other references too many to count here.

[^7]: The Almighty has said, “They ask you about menstruation. Say: It
is a discomfort; therefore, stay away from women during menstrual
discharge and do not go near them unil they have become clean” (Qur’an,
2:222).

[^8]: Al-Qanduzi, Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah, p. 260. Ihqaq al-Haqq (in the
Appendices section), Vol. 10, p. 25, where it is quoted from the
previous reference and from p. 103 of Mawaddat al-Qurba.

[^9]: Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, p. 26. Sharh Bahjat al-Mahafil, Vol. 2, p.
138. Refer to Vol. 11, p. 54 of \`Awalim al\`Ulum and in one of its
footnotes citing Vol. 12, p. 331 of Tarikh Baghdad and Vol. 12, p. 109
of Kanz al-\`Ummal and many other references. Refer also to Is\`af
al-Raghibin as cited in a footnote on p. 173 of Nur al-Absar.

[^10]: Ma\`ani al-Akhbar, p. 64. Manaqib al Abu Talib, Vol. 3, p. 330,
citing Abu Salih, the caller to prayers, in Al-Arba\`een. Taj
al-Mawalid, p. 20. Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2,p. 90. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 15-16; also refer to Vol. 78, p. 112. Al-Qanduzi,
Yanabi\` al-Mawaddah, p. 260. Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 37.
\`Ilal al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, p. 181. Musbah al-Anwar, p. 223.
Al-Kaf\`ami, Musbah, p. 659. Rawdat al-Wa\`izin, p. 149. Dala’il
al-‘Imama, p. 55. Al-Rawda al-Fayha’ fi Tarikh al-Nisa’, p. 252. Habib
al-Siyar, Vol. 1, p. 433. Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 7.
Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 10, pp. 25, 310 and Vol. 19, p. 11, citing other
references. Tarikh al-\`Awalim, Vol. 11, p. 153 in the footnote of which
there are many references.

[^11]: Al-Saduq, Al-Amali, p. 154. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43,
p. 21. Refer also to Tarikh al-\`Awalim, Vol. 1, p. 153 in the footnote
of which there are many references.

[^12]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 19 citing Musbah
al-Anwar. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 66.

[^13]: Manaqib al Abu Talib, Vol. 3, p. 330. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 43, p. 16.

[^14]: Refer to both above-cited references and to Vol. 9, p. 202 of
Mujma\` al-Zawa’id citing al-Tabrani. I\`lam al-Wara, p. 148. Mir’at
al-\`Uqul, Vol. 5, p. 345. Al-Tara’if, p. 111. Al-\`Awalim (in a section
about the biography of al-Zahra’), p. 64. Diya’ al-\`Alamin
(manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 7.

[^15]: Al-Khawarizmi, Maqtal al-Husayn, Vol. 1, p. 64. Manaqib al Abu
Talib, Vol. 3, p. 330. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, pp. 16, 153
where the latter reference is cited and so is al-Tusi’s Amali, Vol. 1,
p. 42. Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 42. Refer to Al-Tahthib, Vol. 7,
p. 475 and Bisharat al-Mustafa, p. 306. Refer also to \`Awalim
al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, pp. 66 &387 and Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol.
2, p. 7.

[^16]: Akhbar al-Duwal, p. 87 (Baghdad edition) according to the
contents of the Appendices of Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 10, p. 244. Refer to
\`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 60.

[^17]: Dala’il al-Imama, pp. 53, 55. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.
78, p. 112. Refer to Vol. 43, p. 7 of Kashf al-Ghumma.

[^18]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 52. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 78, p.
112. Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 37.

[^19]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 13 citing Misbah
al-Anwar. Kashf al-Ghumma, Vol. 2, p. 89. \`Ilal al-Shara'i\`, p. 179.
\`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 55 and in its footnote are the following
references: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 46; Al-Muhtadir, pp. 132, 138;
Al-Mukhtasar, pp. 172, 218 and others.

[^20]: Rawdat al-Muttaqin, Vol. 5, p. 439.

[^21]: \`Ial al-Shara'i\`, Vol. 1, p. 290. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 43, p. 25 and Vol. 12, p. 107 and Vol. 81, p. 81. \`Awalim
al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 153. Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, Vol. 2, p. 38.

[^22]: Al-Khara’ij wal Jara’ih, Vol. 2, p. 527.

[^23]: Ihqaq al-Haqq (Appendices), Vol. 10, p. 309 from al-Sayyuti’s
Al-Sharif al-Mu’abbad. Refer to \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 63.

[^24]: Refer to Is\`af al-Raghibin (as appears in a footnote in Nur
al-Absar), p. 172, which is attributed to al-Muhibb al-Tabari and to the
Hanafi author of Al-Fatawa al-Zahariyya.

[^25]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 10, p. 25 from Al-Manaqib al-Murtadawiyya, p.
78 and from \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 64.

[^26]: Refer to Al-\`Awalim (in the biography of al-Zahra’), pp. 66, 153
from Sahifat al-Rida (as) and Thakha’ir al-\`Uqba, p. 44, and Ithaf
al-Sa’il, p. 90, and Tarikh al-Khamis, Vol. 1, p. 417, and Nuzhat
al-Majalis, Vol. 2, p. 183, and Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2,
p. 7.

[^27]: Al-\`Awalim (in the biography of al-Zahra’), p. 66 from \`Umdat
al-Akhbar, p. 349.

[^28]: Rawdat al-Muttaqin, Vol. 5, p. 342. Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 458.

[^29]: I\`lam al-Wara, p. 148.

[^30]: Al-Tibrisi, Taj al-Mawalid, p. 20, where it is included among a
sect of precious letters and is published by Intisharat Baseerti, Qum,
Iran.

[^31]: Al-Saduq has narrated this tradition in his Faqah book in a
chapter about taking a bath following menstruation in “Kitab al-Tahara”
(the book of purification).

[^32]: According to p. 401, Vol. 3, of A\`yan al-Shi\`a encyclopedia of
Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin, his full name is Isma\`il al-Mazandarani
al-Isfahani, one of the scholars of many sciences. He distinguished
himself in the science of logic, fiqh (jurisprudence), tafsir (exegesis)
and hadith (traditions of the Prophet (S)), in particular. He memorized
the entire text of the Holy Qur’an and wrote a number of books that
discuss logic and wisdom. He died in 1177 A.H./1763 A.D. – Tr.

[^33]: Al-Rasa’il al-I\`tiqadiyya, p. 115.

[^34]: The raj\`a is another example. Similar to what we say is said by
someone else because there are issues which prove consensus or through
rational evidence. Both are rational proofs, and there is no room to
interpret a rational proof as stated by Sayyid Murtada (may Allah
sanctify him) when he responded to someone who said that the traditions
relevant to the raj\`a have to be interpreted as the return of the
Government (to its rightful owners), to bid and to forbid. He said:
“Some Shi\`as, having felt incapable of supporting the concept of the
raj\`a and explain how it is possible and that it does not contradict
what is obligatory, resorted to such an interpretation of statements
regarding the raj\`a. This is not correct. The raj\`a was not proven by
transmitted traditions, so it could be interpreted. How can what is
already proven as authentic be proven by traditions which do not
necessitate knowing? What is relied upon, in order to prove the raj\`a,
are the consensus of the Imamites regarding what it means, that is, that
Allah Almighty will bring back to life some of those who are already
deceased at the time when al-Qa’im (as) comes out of his occultation,
from among his followers as well as from among his foes as we explained;
so, how can there be any interpretation of what is already known?” This
is recorded on p. 126, Vol. 1, of the messages of al-Sharif al-Murtada.

[^35]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 240. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 26, p. 37. Basa’ir al-Darajat, p. 150.

[^36]: Basa’ir al-Darajat, pp. 154, 156. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 26, pp. 42, 45, and Vol. 47, p 271.

[^37]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 240. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 26, pp.
42, 45; Vol. 47, p. 271.

[^38]: \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, p. 583 (Fatima’s Musnad).
Al-Muhtadir, p. 132.

[^39]: Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, pp. 240, 241, 457, 458. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 22, p. 545. Refer to Ibn Shahr Ashub, Al-Manaqib, Vol. 3,
p. 337 (published by the scholarly press at Qum, Iran).

[^40]: Rawdat al-Muttaqin, Vol. 5, p. 342. Mir’at al-\`Uqul, Vol. 3, pp.
59 and Vol. 5, p. 314.

[^41]: There is no harm in consulting Mu\`jam Rijal al-Hadith, Vol. 21,
pp. 233-236.

[^42]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 47, p. 227.

[^43]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 242.

[^44]: \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11 (this volume deals in its entirety
with al-Zahra’ (sa) p. 187. Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 2, p. 667. Consult
also Vol. 1, p. 285 of the same reference. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
Vol. 43, p. 51. Al-Wasa'il, Vol. 8, p. 487. Al-Junna al-Waqiya, p. 508.

[^45]: Dala’il al-Imama, p. 1. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum, Vol. 11, pp. 188,
620, 621 (the part relevant to al-Zahra’ (sa) in the footnotes of p. 113
there is reference to the Musnad of Fatima (A). Consult Mustadrak
al-Wasa'il, Vol. 18 and Safinat al-Bihar, Vol. 1, pp. 229, 231.
Al-Tabrani, Al-Mu\`jam al-Kabir, Vol. 22, p. 413 where there is a slight
difference in wording from the above reference.

[^46]: \`Uyun Akhbar al-Rida, Vol. 1, pp. 40, 44, 46. Al-Ikhtisas, p.
210. Al-Tasi, Al-Amali, Vol. 1, p. 297. Al-Khisal, Vol. 2, pp. 477-478.
Kamal ad-Din, pp. 305, 313.

[^47]: Refer to Basa’ir al-Darajat, pp. 153, 155, 161. Al-Majlisi, Bihar
al-Anwar, Vol. 46, pp. 41, 42, 47, 48, 49, 271.

[^48]: Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, pp. 41, 240, 457, 458. Basa’ir
al-Darajat, pp. 157, 153, 159. Al-Khara’ij wal-Jara’ih, Vol. 2, p. 526.
Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 26, pp. 41, 240, and Vol. 43, pp.
79-80, and Vol. 22, pp. 545-546. Refer also to Vol. 47, p. 65. There are
numerous references recorded on the footnotes of Al-Khara’ij
wal-Jara’ih. \`Awalim al-\`Ulum (in the section dedicated entirely to
al-Zahra’ (sa)), Vol. 11, pp. 483, 447 citing p. 132 of Al-Muhtadir.
Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, pp. 38-39.

[^49]: Basa’ir al-Darajat, pp. 157-158. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.
26, p. 43. Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 241.

[^50]: Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 43, p. 79 and Vol. 26, p. 41.
Basa’ir al-Darajat, p. 153. Al-Kulayni, Al-Kafi, Vol. 1, p. 241.
Al-Khara’ij wal Jara’ih, Vol. 2, p. 526. There are numerous references
in its footnotes. Diya’ al-\`Alamin (manuscript), Vol. 2, p. 38.

[^51]: Refer to Vol. 5, p. 342 of Rawdat al-Muttaqin. Mir’at al-\`Uqul,
Vol. 3, p. 59. Jala' al-\`Uyun, Vol. 1, p. 183.


