Part 4: What Al-Mufid Says
==========================

Someone has been trying to cast doubt about everything which took place
to al-Zahra’ (sa) with the exception of setting her house to fire and
the confiscation of Fadak. The reader will read about Fadak later in
this book. He even tries to underestimate the effect of the threats,
labeling them as “mock threats,” claiming that “Those who were brought
by the second caliph to assault al-Zahra’ (sa) had hearts filled with
love for her; so, how can we imagine that they would assault her?”

He adds saying, “People respected and venerated her, so it would not be
easy to believe that they would do anything against her.” He means that
the threats would become “mock threats.” Then he adds saying, “The head
of the assailants had made an exception with regard to al-Zahra’ (sa)
taking her out of the circle of the threat.” He interpreted “So what?”
in the answer of one who said to him, “But Fatima is inside it!” saying,
“What he meant by ‘So What?’ is: We have no business with Fatima; we
have come to arrest Ali.’” He provides “proofs” for all of this which we
have enumerated in the previous Part and which we will mention in this
Part and in the one to follow.

What we would like to deliberate in this part is what the man considered
as supportive of his view and is derived from the statements of some
prominent personalities of the sect and the pioneers of knowledge. He
cited as proofs statements by three such personalities; they are:

1. Imam Shaikh al-Mufid, may Allah sanctify his soul,

2. Ayatollah Shaikh Muhammed Husayn Kashifal-Ghita’, may Allah have
mercy on him,

3. Ayatollah Sayyid ‘Abd al-Husayn Sharifud-Din, may Allah make his
resting place good.

Let us first cite what al-Mufid (may Allah sanctify him) has stated,
then we will explain how it does not benefit the man in his attempt to
prove what he aspires to prove due to the following:

Relying on What Scholars Say
----------------------------

We have indicated how this man cites as “proofs” for casting doubt about
what actually took place to al-Zahra’ (sa) of trials and tribulations
from statements some of which are attributed to major scholars such as
al-Mufid, Kashifal-Ghita’ and Sharifud-Din. But before we enter into a
discussion of the accuracy of what is attributed to them, we would like
to remind you of a very serious issue relevant to seeking testimony from
the statements of scholars in general; so let me say the following:

Someone may seek an excuse for himself as he quite often violates
religious matters by describing how the pioneers of knowledge are, how
this scholar or that says such and such, and so on... He may not confine
his excuse to issues relevant to *fiqh* but goes on to the tenets of the
faith, to history, to *Tafsir*, etc. He may sometimes need, before
publicly stating his conviction, to pave the way for the latter with
norms of introductions by distancing them from being taken with derision
and amazement.

So he “smuggles” his view through some of those who are close to him,
then he announces on successive occasions that he is still studying the
subject, hinting at the same time at opportunities to produce the
anticipated view in one way or another. When he finds no *Faqih* to
agree with him, he resorts to obligatory precaution by saying the
opposite of what he had said before, hinting or pointing at his future
agreement with the *fatwa*. Saying that it is precautionary to prohibit
the shaving of the beard, for example, is regarded as a step on the path
to making it permissible, and it is acceptable to use it as evidence...!

Then you may find him saying that so-and-so scholars and renown *Faqih*
are the first to thus advise. But if you consult their books and
encyclopedia of *fiqh*, you will find the case being not so at all.
Rather, many other *Faqihs* had already stated the same.

For example, you may be told on many occasions that the great religious
authority Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, may Allah have mercy on his soul, is
the one to issue a *fatwa* that a Follower of the Book (i.e. Christian
or Jewish) is *tahir* (clean), thus contradicting the consensus. The
objective of this statement is to justify the contradiction of consensus
by those concerned about such justifications. The fact is that Ibn Abu
‘Aqal, Ibn al-Junayd and Shaikh al-Mufid may have attributed the same
statement to Shaikh al-Tusi. All these men are major *Faqihs* of the
Imamite Shi’as who have all issued *fatawa* prior to Sayyid al-Hakim,
may Allah have mercy on him, that the People of the Book are *tahir*.

Another example, which we would like to cite here, is that when this
individual is asked about the reason why he justifies gambling, he
immediately seeks to justify it by saying that Imam al-Khomeini (aa)
contradicted the consensus when he regarded playing chess as
permissible, and that chess is gambling...!

But the Sayyid Imam did not declare chess, which is a gambling game, as
permissible; rather, he, may Allah have mercy on him, said, “Chess, if
it is outside the gambling tools, may be played.” This issue is
conditional. Satisfying the condition does not mean satisfying both of
its ends.

Yet it is quite obvious that issuing a verdict by saying something is
permissible if it satisfies a condition does not mean that it
contradicts those who issue a verdict without tying it to a condition.

When someone hoards a heap of verdicts which are quite unusual to a
noticeable extent, we find him justifying all of that by claiming that
so-and-so from among the scholars has issued such a verdict and that the
other scholar said such-and-such about it, and so on...!

But we do not know why such an individual can be right with regard to
specific issues wherein he became the exception to the rule and
regarding which he agreed with other scholars, yet some make errors in
their verdicts and this famous individual goes along with their error in
other verdicts the judgment in which is contrary to his own, let alone
their error in what they became the exception to the known rule and were
not endorsed by the same individual!

Yet the collection of many odd verdicts issued by one person may lead to
this person getting out of the circle of the sect’s *fiqh*, the sect to
which he belongs. One *Faqih* may be endorsed in some of his odd
verdicts which are very few in number and which are harmless and do not
get him out of the mainstream of the sect to which he belongs.

Such is this introduction, and now let us enter the subject on which we
must focus and say:

Consensus Regarding Oppression
------------------------------

There are some people who say that there is a consensus of some sort
that al-Zahra’ (sa) was oppressed, beaten and even caused to miscarry,
but someone cast doubt about such a consensus and was not convinced by
the summary provided by al-Shafi derived from the text of the sect’s
Shaikh (mentor), namely al-Tusi, that there is no argument among the
Shi’as that Fatima (sa) was subjected to beating and miscarriage.

Nor was he convinced by many narratives which appear in the works of
those who follow the path of Ahl al-Bayt (sa) in addition of many
details in non-Shi’a references as well. The narratives provided by the
Shi’as who quote the Infallible ones, as well as others, regarding her
being oppressed are numerous and diversified, so one can say that they
are consecutively reported.

We would like here to quote what Shaikh al-Tusi and *‘allama*
Kashifal-Ghita’ have said in this regard, then we will follow it by
discussing what this individual has said about it; so, let us say the
following:

1. The sect’s Shaikh, Imam Muhammed ibn al-Hassan al-Tusi, who died in
460 A.H., and who was a student of Shaikh al-Mufid and of al-Sharif
al-Radi, said: “... And what he was criticized for is their beating
Fatima (sa) who is reported as having been beaten with whips. What is
famous and what is the consensus among the Shi’as is that ‘’Umar (ibn
al-Khattab) hit her on her stomach till she miscarried, and the child
whom she miscarried was named Muhsin. Such a narrative is quite famous
among them. Add to this their desire to set her house to fire when
people sought refuge with her and refused to swear the oath of
allegiance to him (to Abu Bakr). Nobody denies this narrative because we
have explained the narrative as reported by the Sunnis through
al-Balathiri and others. Shi’as provide more details, and they do not
differ in this regard.”[^1]

2. Here is a statement by *‘allama* Shaikh Muhammed Husayn
Kashifal-Ghita’:

Numerous accounts in the books of the Shi’as, since the inception of
Islam, from the first century, such as the book by Sulaym ibn Qays and
of those who succeeded him till the eleventh century and beyond,
actually till our time, state so. It is recorded in all Shi’a books
which dealt with what the Imams and their father, the great *aya*, and
their truthful mother, peace of Allah be on all of them, had to go
through.

Those who documented their biographies and wrote about them have all
agreed with one another, or their researches agreed with each other,
regarding the trials and tribulations that divinely purified part of the
Prophet S had to undergo after the demise of her father, the Chosen One
S, how the oppressors slapped her on her face, hit her cheek till her
eyes became red and her ear-ring scattered on the ground in bits and
pieces, and how she was squeezed with the door till her rib was broken
and she miscarried till in the end she died and her wrist carried a
black mark like a bracelet. Poets who follow Ahl al-Bayt, peace of Allah
be on them, dealt with this issue and with these shameful acts, using
them as the material for their poems and eulogies, taking these details
as agreed on. Among them are: al-Kumait, Sayyid al-Himyari, Du’bal
al-Khuza’i, al-Numayri, al-Salimi, Deek al-Jinn and those who came after
them as well as those who preceded them till this century...[^2]

3. Al-Maqdisi has said, “... then Muhsin was born, and he is the one,
the Shi’as claim, whom she miscarried because of ‘’Umar beating
her.”[^3]

4. The Mu’tazilite Shafi’i scholar has attributed the incident of her
being beaten, and which caused her to miscarry, to the Shi’as and that
only the Shi’as make such a claim.[^4]

5. *‘Allama* al-Muzaffar says, “Suffices the truth of the intention of
the deliberate burning the mass of its narration by their scholars; nay,
the narration of even one of them of it, especially since the Shi’as
report it consecutively.”[^5]

Al-Maqdisi and the Mu’tazilite Shafi’i scholars, then, attribute the
oppression (suffered by Fatima (sa)) to a sect from among the Shi’as,
not to their masses, or to those famous from among the followers of this
sect. This points to the consensus to which al-Tusi and Kashifal-Ghita’,
may Allah have mercy on them, point out.

Having stated all the above, I would like to say that someone tried to
cast doubt about the said consensus based on three issues:

FIRST: That Shaikh al-Mufid does not endorse it. Rather, he says in his
book titled *Al-Irshad* what contradicts this consensus.

SECOND: That Shaikh Muhammed Husayn Kashifal-Ghita’ did not endorse its
gist.

THIRD: That Sayyid Sharifud-Din also did not uphold its meaning.

On the following pages of this Part, and in the one that follows it, we
will quote their statements and discuss them with the intention to be
brief and restrictive; so, let us say the following:

What Shaikh al-Mufid Intended to Say in His Book Titled
-------------------------------------------------------

*Al-Irshad*

Someone says that Shaikh al-Mufid, may Allah sanctify his resting place,
has said the following: “There are among the Shi’as those who say that
Fatima, peace and blessings of Allah be on her, miscarried a boy after
the demise of the Prophet S whom the Messenger of Allah S named, when he
was in his mother’s womb, as ‘Muhsin.’ So, according to this sect, the
children of the Commander of the Faithful (as) are twenty-eight in
number, and Allah knows best.”[^6]

Sayyid al-Amin has cited this statement by Shaikh al-Mufid in his book
titled *A’yan Al-Shi’ah*, and so did al-Majlisi in his book titled
*Bihar al-Anwar* as well as others.

If Shaikh al-Tusi was transmitting the consensus of the Shi’as that
‘’Umar hit Fatima’s stomach till she miscarried Muhsin, and the
narrative is famous among them[^7], Shaikh al-Mufid, then, contradicts
al-Tusi, his contemporary and professor, and his statement gives the
impression that he basically does not adopt the notion of such a
miscarriage.

The answer to the above is as follows:
--------------------------------------

FIRST: The said statement does not indicate that al-Mufid contradicted
al-Tusi in this regard because the word “Shi’a” used to be applied
during al-Mufid’s time to many sects such as the Zaidis, Isma’ilites,
Imamites and others, actually even the Mu’tazilites who used to rule
Baghdad and who permitted the commemoration of ‘Ashura’ in the well
known way since then. The opponents of the Shi’as used to call the
latter “Rafidis.”

Al-Nawbakhti, in his book titled *Firaq al-Shi’a*, al-Ash’ari in his
book titled *Al-Maqalat wal Firaq*, and Shaikh al-Mufid himself in
*Al-Fusal al-Mukhtara*, have all discussed this issue; so, whoever
wishes to see the details should refer to them and to other books
dealing with schisms and sects. The honorable *‘allama* al-Mazandarani
al-Khawajoo’i has rebutted those who claimed that the word “Shi’a” was
applied particularly to those who believed in Ali’s Imamate even if he
does not believe in other Imams saying, “This is strange and is
indicative of the limited knowledge of one’s research. There is an
indication in many narratives that the Zaidis, Waqfis and their likes
were also called Shi’as.”[^8]

Imam al-Sadiq, peace with him, is quoted as having said, “‘’Umar ibn
Yazid talked about the Shi’as in detail,” adding, “‘There will be among
the Shi’as after us those who are worse than the Nasibis.’ I said, ‘May
I be your sacrifice! Don’t they claim that they love you and dissociate
themselves from your enemy?’ He said, ‘Yes..., etc.’”[^9]

Al-Mufid here does not want to attribute the narrative of al-Muhsin’s
miscarriage to all the Shi’as in the general sense but rather to the
Imamites in particular. He, may Allah have mercy on him, may have chosen
the term “sect” after that to identify a sect from among the Shi’as that
narrates the same, not all the sects labelled as “Shi’as.”

What is noteworthy is that he, may Allah have mercy on him, did not say,
“Some Shi’as narrate a tradition...,” but he rather said, “Among the
Shi’as are those who state that Fatima, peace of Allah be on her,
miscarried after the demise of the Prophet S..., etc.” He, may Allah be
merciful to him, did not point out to one *hadith* or more, nor did he
point out to the size of the sect that says so from among the Shi’as in
as far as their number is concerned. Rather, he pointed out to the fact
that it is accurate to call them a “sect” when he said, “According to
what this sect says..., etc.”

Shaikh al-Tusi, may Allah have mercy on him, is called the sect’s
Mentor, meaning the sect of the Imamites, not of all the Shi’as.

SECOND: The time during which al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him,
lived was very precarious and one of the harshest of all centuries in
the history of the Shi’as of Ahl al-Bayt (as). Dissensions broke out
anew every year on the anniversary of Al-Ghadir and particularly on the
occasion of ‘Ashura’ when the Shi’as commemorated events which their
opponents, from among the fanatical Hanbalites of Baghdad, could not
tolerate. Those opponents, therefore, used to assault them and many
calamities and catastrophes as well as massacres resulted as we
explained in the first part of our book titled *Sira’ al-Hurriyya fa
‘Asr al-Mufid*. In some years, they set fire to the homes of the Shi’as
in the Karkh area, killing eighteen thousand or, according to Ibn
Khaldan, twenty thousand children, youths and women.

He, may Allah have mercy on him, wanted to deal with the issues wisely
and be precise. He aspired to write his book titled *Al-Irshad*, which
he wrote near the close of his life, as a book containing, in addition
to precision and scholarly honesty, historical accounts accepted by
everyone, so that everyone would benefit from it. He did not want it to
be anything but defining an event by its details, away from
sectarianism. He even transcends the sectarian limitations and
fanaticism in order to make it a book for all people.

It is for this reason that he did not mention in it noteworthy
provocative and sensitive issues. He even did not include anything about
the details of the incident of the *saqifa* or anything relevant to
swearing the oath of allegiance to Abu Bakr[^10]. It seems that he did
not include the said incident in the realm of his balanced policies
which contemplated on the circumstances and environments and dealt with
them realistically, with responsibility and awareness.

As regarding Shaikh al-Tusi, he had a book to defend specifically
Imamite Shi’as because *Al-Shafi* contains the rebuttal by Sayyid
al-Murtada to what the Mu’tazilite judge ‘Abd al-Jabbar had stated, so
al-Tusi, may Allah have mercy on him, summarized it. Al-Tusi, then, like
Sayyid al-Murtada, had written a book as an Imamite defending his sect,
proving its validity. He wanted to get to the defining line that
separated him from others. But Shaikh al-Mufid wanted his book,
*Al-Irshad*, to transcend such lines to be a book of chronicles for
everyone who could take a look at it and benefit from it without feeling
any embarrassment or being charged.

If the Imamites are the only ones with such consensus, rather than all
others from among Shi’a sects, such as the Isma’ilites, Zaidis, etc., it
is not then right that al-Mufid should attribute it to non-Imamite sects
which have no consensus in its regard.

It is noteworthy that al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him, avoided
stirring fanaticism on one hand, and on the other he tried to point out
to a very sensitive issue in a very indirect and clever way, proving the
existence of a stillborn whom the Prophet S named “Muhsin,” leaving to
the reader the task to research the fate of that boy...

THIRD: The claim that al-Mufid contradicts al-Tusi in this regard will
be dealt with when we answer the following question and prove that he
did not contradict him at all but agreed with him; so, there is no need
to rush it now.

FOURTH: Shaikh al-Tusi was a student of al-Mufid, and al-Mufid, may
Allah have mercy on him, was the Number One man among the Shi’as then;
so, it is not conceivable that al-Tusi should claim that there was a
consensus among the Shi’as in such emphasis, decisiveness and clarity
then contradict his professor and the greatest man among the Shi’as! At
least, he was supposed to tell us that his professor contradicted such
consensus, or that his professor denied the existence of such a
consensus!

Could al-Tusi have decided a consensus which his professor openly denied
and rejected then say that only some Shi’as make such a claim?! Or was
al-Tusi not familiar with his professor’s view?! Or did he arbitrarily
claim such a consensus without verifying it first?! Any of these
hypotheses cannot be accepted. This emphasizes al-Mufid’s objective in
what he stated in *Al-Irshad* to be just what we have indicated above,
and he did not at all intend it to contradict or reject the consensus
which al-Tusi discusses.

Al-Mufid Did Not Mention What al-Tusi Mentioned
-----------------------------------------------

Someone says, “If Shaikh al-Tusi transmits the consensus of the Shi’as
regarding the beating and the miscarriage suffered by al-Zahra’ (sa),
then Shaikh al-Mufid is the man who was adamant in his rebuttal of those
who disagreed with him in his sect contemporary to al-Tusi, and he did
not mention anything in his books, other than in *Al-Ikhtisas*, where
there is doubt cast about its attribution to him, about the issue of
breaking her rib or anything else said in this regard at all.”

Then he adds saying, “I have traced the references cited in his
(al-Mufid’s) books and which discuss al-Zahra’ (sa) and could not find
any tradition regarding breaking the rib, the miscarriage, or things
like that..., and I do not know if my investigation is precise
(enough).”

In respond to this statement, we would like, first and foremost, to
record the following observation:

This same individual insists on making a reference to the breaking of
the rib although he rebuts what al-Tusi said by citing al-Mufid’s first
statement proving that he undertook the task of denying everything which
al-Tusi stated regarding beating al-Zahra’ (sa) and her miscarrying
Muhsin. Al-Tusi did not discuss breaking the rib when he decided the
said consensus and his report that many traditions support each other in
its regard; so, what is the justification of cramming the issue of
breaking the rib in this regard?!

Having stated such an observation, we would like to say that Shaikh
al-Mufid did, indeed, discuss the oppression suffered by al-Zahra’ (sa)
and much of what she had to undergo in his books.

In the field of discussing what the same individual said about this
issue, I would like to state the following:

FIRST: I could not understand what is meant by the issues referred to by
this speaker with the use of the phrase “things like that” which he adds
to the issue of breaking her rib. Does he mean beating her (sa) or her
miscarriage, or burning her house till the fire consumed the door’s
wood?!

SECOND: Since al-Mufid did not mention any of these things in his books,
if we say that this is true at all, it does not mean that he denied that
it took place. Remaining silent and not mentioning something does not
prove basically denying it. Rather, we have said that the report of
al-Tusi, student of al-Mufid, regarding the consensus, and his taking it
for granted, proves that his professor was on the top of the list of
those who advocated it and were enthusiastic about it. It cannot be true
that Shaikh al-Tusi should thus mention this issue in such an emphasis,
with firmness, and with complete clarity, if one of his professors, whom
nobody, those who agree or disagree with him, doubts his in-depth
knowledge of these issues, contradicts others in this issue and denies
that there was a fundamental consensus.

But if this professor, namely al-Mufid, says that very few made such a
claim, the issue, i.e. the claim of consensus, becomes a lot more
complicated because al-Tusi’s claim regarding the consensus becomes an
open proof of lying and false attribution to the dignitaries of the sect
and its symbols, and al-Tusi is much, much greater than anyone can level
such a charge against him.

THIRD: When al-Mufid wants to address the Shi’as and write a book about
this sect, he never hesitates to openly declare the details of what the
truthful Lady, al-Zahra’ (sa), had to undergo. He narrates in his book
titled *Al-Ikhtisas* from ‘Abdullah ibn Sinan who cites Imam al-Sadiq
(as) saying the following:

Abu Bakr wrote a title of her ownership of Fadak, so she went out and
the title was in her hand. ‘’Umar [ibn al-Khattab] met her. He said to
her, “What is this piece of paper which you are holding, O Daughter of
Muhammed?” She said, “A title written for me by Abu Bakr whereby he
restored my ownership of Fadak.” He said, “Give it to me.” She refused
to give it to him, so he kicked her with his foot, and she was big with
Muhsin, causing her to miscarry. Then he slapped her. It is as though I
can see an earring in her ear being broken. Then he took the title and
tore it to pieces. She left, and she remained sick for seventy-five days
because of ‘’Umar thus beating her, following which incident she
died.[^11]

What the Fadak Story?
---------------------

Most readers, non-Shi’ites of course, know little or none about Fadak,
so it is appropriate here to introduce them to Fadak and to narrate its
story to them:

Fatima (sa) After The Prophet’s Demise
--------------------------------------

The Prophet of Islam (S) left us only one single offspring: his daughter
Fatima (sa), the personification of human perfection. He S taught Fatima
(sa) divine knowledge and endowed her with special intellectual
brilliance, so much so that she realized the true meaning of faith,
piety, and the reality of Islam. But Fatima (sa) also was a witness to
sorrow and a life of anguish from the very beginning of her life. She
constantly saw how her revered father was mistreated by the unbelievers
and later how she herself fell a victim to the same abuse, only this
time by some Muslims.

This book cannot be complete without shedding more light on her life and
on the way some Muslims mistreated her, so much so that nobody knows for
sure where her grave is. When you read her biography, you will glorify
the Almighty and get to know Him better by seeing how He bestowed on
this great lady what He did not bestow on any other woman in the history
of mankind. To know Allah, is to know His creation, and one of the very
best of His creation is this great lady; so, let us review some pages of
Islamic history and see how some Muslims, even during the first Islamic
century, had a shallow idea of their creed and how their conviction did
not settle deeply in their hearts as their actions clearly demonstrate
to those who have eyes.

> قال ابن الجوزي ، أبو الفرج عبد الرحمن بن أبي الحسن علي بن محمد القرشي
> التيمي البكري، الفقيه الحنبلي الحافظ المفسر الواعظ المؤرخ الأديب
> المعروف بابن الجوزي، رحمه الله رحمة واسعة، وأدخله فسيح جناته، فقيه
> حنبلي محدث ومؤرخ ومتكلم 510) هـ 1116/ م - 12 رمضان 592 هـ/16 آب (1196
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
؛ ولد وتوفي في بغداد) روي عن علي( عليه السلام قال: لما مات رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وآله وسلم، جاءت فاطمة عليها السلام فأخذت قبضة من تراب
القبر فوضعته على عينيها، فبكت وأنشأت تقول:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نفسي على زفراتها محبوسة يا ليتها خرجت مع الزفرات
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا خير بعدك في الحياة وإنما أبكي مخافة أن تطول حياتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-Jawzi, namely Abul-Faraj Abdur-Rahman ibn Abul-Hassan Ali ibn
Muhammed al-Qarashi (or Quraishi, of Quraish tribe) al-Taymi al-Bakri,
was a Hanbali *faqih* who knew the Holy Qur'an by heart, an orator,
historian and a man of letters. He was born in Baghdad in 510
A.H./1116-7 A.D. and died there on the 12th of the month of Ramadan of
592 A.H. which coincided with August 16, 1196 A.D. according to the
Gregorian Christian calendar or the 9th of the same month and year
according to the Julian calendar. May the Almighty shower him with His
spacious mercy and admit him into His spacious Paradise, *Allahomma
Ameen*. He quotes Imam Ali saying that when the Messenger of Allah S
died, Fatima (as) went to his gravesite, took a handful of its dust, put
it on her eyes, wept and composed these verses of poetry:

*My soul is confined with every sigh,*

*How I wish it departed as sighs depart.*

*No good is there in life after you so I*

*For fear my life will prolong do I cry.*

Fadak
-----

In 628 A.D., the Prophet of Islam found himself fighting the Jewish
tribes in Medina who had violated the terms of a pact which they had
signed with the Prophet. Those Jews were not originally residents of
Medina but had migrated to it from Yemen and Palestine in order to be
the first to testify to the truth of the new Arabian Prophet, but they
ended up fighting him. In that year, the Prophet expelled Banu Nadir and
Banu Qinaqa’ from Medina and dispatched Ali ibn Abu Talib on an
expedition to a Jewish tribe living in Fadak, one of the oases of
Khaybar.

It was inhabited by Arab Jews (tribes that spoke Arabic and were
following the Jewish faith) who pioneered the cultivation of the Fadak
oasis and made their living growing date palm trees, as well as through
commerce and craftsmanship, accumulating considerable wealth. This oasis
was divided into three regions: al-Natat, al-Shiqq الشِّق, and al-Katiba
الكتيبة, probably separated by natural diversions such as the desert,
lava drifts, and swamps. Each of these regions contained several
fortresses or redoubts containing homes, storehouses and stables. Each
fortress was occupied by a clan and surrounded by cultivated fields and
palm-groves. In order to improve their defensive capabilities, the
fortresses were raised up on hills or basalt rocks.

Ali ibn Abu Talib without any battle, they agreed to the same terms as
the people of Khaybar had.

The income from Khaybar was for all Muslims in general, whereas the
income from Fadak was exclusively for the Prophet because it was taken
without any use of force. Jalaluddin al-Sayyuti states in *Ad-Durr
al-Manthur* on the authority of Bazar, Abu Ya*c*li and Ibn Abu µatim who
have learned the tradition from Abu Sa’eed al-Khudri that when the
verse: ***Wa ati thal-Qurba µaqqahu "And give thy kinsfolk their dues”
(Qur’an, Chap. 17, V. 26)*** was revealed, the Prophet gave the property
of Fadak as a gift to Fatima. Also, Ibn Abbas has narrated that when the
verse "And give thy kinsfolk their dues” was revealed, the Prophet
assigned the Fadak property to Fatima.

The Prophet S taught Fatima (sa) divine knowledge and endowed her with
special intellectual brilliance, so much so that she realized the true
meaning of faith, piety, and the reality of Islam. But Fatima (sa) also
was a witness to sorrow and a life of anguish from the very beginning of
her life. She constantly saw how her revered father was mistreated by
the unbelievers and later how she herself fell a victim to the same
abuse, only this time by some Muslims.

Khutba of Fatima al-Zahra' (sa) Demanding Fadak
-----------------------------------------------

> خطبة فاطمة الزهراء (sa) بنت النبي محمد في مسجد أبيها S) عند مطالبتها
> بفدك و ميراثها من أبيها S):

> روى عبد الله بن الحسن باسناده عن آبائه ، أنه لما أجمع أبوبكر وعمر على
> منع فاطمة عليها السلام فدكا و بلغها ذلك لاثت خمارها على رأسها و اشتملت
> بجلبابها وأقبلت في لمةٍ من حفدتها ونساء قومها تطأ ذيولها، ما تخرم
> مشيتها مشية رسول الله S)، حتى دخلت على أبي بكر وهو في حشد من المهاجرين
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والأنصار وغيرهم فنيطت دونها ملاءة فجلست ثم أنَت أنَةً أجهش القوم لها
بالبكاء فأرتج المجلس ثم أمهلت هنيئة حتى إذا كن نشيج القوم وهدأت فورتهم
افتتحت الكلام بحمد الله و الثناء عليه والصلاة على رسوله فعاد القوم في
بكائهم فلما أمسكوا عادت في كلامها فقالت عليها السلام:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> الحمد لله على ما أنعم وله الشكر على ما ألهم والثناء بما قدم من عموم
> نعم ابتداها وسبوغ آلاء أسداها وتمام منن أولاها جم عن الإحصاء عددها
> ونأى عن الجزاء أمدها وتفاوت عن الإدراك أبدها وندبهم لاستزادتها بالشكر
> لاتصالها واستحمد إلى الخلائق بإجزالها وثنى بالندب إلى أمثالها وأشهد أن
> لا إله إلا الله وحده لا شريك له كلمة جعل الإخلاص تأويلها وضمن القلوب
> موصولها وأنار في التفكر معقولها الممتنع من الأبصار رؤيته ومن الألسن
> صفته ومن الأوهام كيفيته ابتدع الأشياء لا من شي ء كان قبلها وأنشأها بلا
> احتذاء أمثلة امتثلها كونها بقدرته وذرأها بمشيته من غير حاجة منه إلى
> تكوينها ولا فائدة له في تصويرها إلا تثبيتا لحكمته وتنبيها على طاعته
> وإظهارا لقدرته تعبدا لبريته وإعزازا لدعوته ثم جعل الثواب على طاعته
> ووضع العقاب على معصيته ذيادة لعباده من نقمته وحياشة لهم إلى جنته وأشهد
> أن أبي محمدا عبده ورسوله اختاره قبل أن أرسله وسماه قبل أن اجتباه
> واصطفاه قبل أن ابتعثه إذ الخلائق بالغيب مكنونة وبستر الأهاويل مصونة
> وبنهاية العدم مقرونة علما من الله تعالى بمآيل الأمور وإحاطة بحوادث
> الدهور ومعرفة بمواقع الأمور ابتعثه الله إتماما لأمره وعزيمة على إمضاء
> حكمه وإنفاذا لمقادير رحمته فرأى الأمم فرقا في أديانها عكفا على نيرانها
> عابدة لأوثانها منكرة لله مع عرفانها فأنار الله بأبي محمد ص ظلمها وكشف
> عن القلوب بهمها وجلى عن الأبصار غممها وقام في الناس بالهداية فأنقذهم
> من الغواية وبصرهم من العماية وهداهم إلى الدين القويم ودعاهم إلى الطريق
> المستقيم ثم قبضه الله إليه قبض رأفة واختيار ورغبة وإيثار فمحمد S) من
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تعب هذه الدار في راحة قد حف بالملائكة الأبرار ورضوان الرب الغفار
ومجاورة الملك الجبار صلى الله على أبي نبيه وأمينه وخيرته من الخلق
وصفيه والسلام عليه ورحمة الله وبركاته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم التفتت إلى أهل المجلس وقالت : أنتم عباد الله نصب أمره ونهيه وحملة
دينه ووحيه وأمناء الله على أنفسكم وبلغاءه إلى الأمم زعيم حق له فيكم
وعهد قدمه إليكم وبقية استخلفها عليكم كتاب الله الناطق والقرآن الصادق
والنور الساطع والضياء اللامع بينة بصائره منكشفة سرائره منجلية ظواهره
مغتبطة به أشياعه قائدا إلى الرضوان اتباعه مؤد إلى النجاة استماعه به
تنال حجج الله المنورة وعزائمه المفسرة ومحارمه المحذرة وبيناته الجالية
وبراهينه الكافية وفضائله المندوبة ورخصه الموهوبة وشرائعه المكتوبة فجعل
الله الإيمان تطهيرا لكم من الشرك والصلاة تنزيها لكم عن الكبر والزكاة
تزكية للنفس ونماء في الرزق والصيام تثبيتا للإخلاص والحج تشييدا للدين
والعدل تنسيقا للقلوب وطاعتنا نظاما للملة وإمامتنا أمانا للفرقة والجهاد
عزا للإسلام والصبر معونة على استيجاب الأجر والأمر بالمعروف مصلحة
للعامة وبر الوالدين وقاية من السخط وصلة الأرحام منسأة في العمر ومنماة
للعدد والقصاص حقنا للدماء والوفاء بالنذر تعريضا للمغفرة وتوفية
المكاييل والموازين تغييرا للبخس والنهي عن شرب الخمر تنزيها عن الرجس
واجتناب القذف حجابا عن اللعنة وترك السرقة إيجابا للعفة وحرم الله الشرك
إخلاصا له بالربوبية فاتقوا الله حق تقاته ولا تموتن إلا وأنتم مسلمون
وأطيعوا الله فيما أمركم به ونهاكم عنه فإنه إنما يخشى الله من عباده
العلماء.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم قالت: أيها الناس اعلموا أني فاطمة و أبي محمد ص أقول عودا وبدوا ولا
أقول ما أقول غلطا ولا أفعل ما أفعل شططا ، لَقَدْ جاءَكُمْ رَسُولٌ مِنْ
أَنْفُسِكُمْ عَزِيزٌ عَلَيْهِ ما عَنِتُّمْ حَرِيصٌ عَلَيْكُمْ
بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ رَؤُفٌ رَحِيمٌ ، فإن تعزوه وتعرفوه تجدوه أبي دون
نسائكم وأخا ابن عمي دون رجالكم ، ولنعم المعزى إليه ص فبلغ الرسالة
صادعا بالنذارة مائلا عن مدرجة المشركين ضاربا ثبجهم آخذا بأكظامهم داعيا
إلى سبيل ربه بالحكمة والموعظة الحسنة يجف الأصنام وينكث الهام حتى انهزم
الجمع وولوا الدبر حتى تفرى الليل عن صبحه وأسفر الحق عن محضه ونطق زعيم
الدين وخرست شقاشق الشياطين وطاح وشيظ النفاق وانحلت عقد الكفر والشقاق
وفهتم بكلمة الإخلاص في نفر من البيض الخماص وكنتم على شفا حفرة من النار
مذقة الشارب ونهزة الطامع وقبسة العجلان وموطئ الأقدام تشربون الطرق
وتقتاتون القد و الورق أذلة خاسئين تخافون أن يتخطفكم الناس من حولكم
فأنقذكم الله تبارك وتعالى بمحمد ص بعد اللتيا واللتي وبعد أن مني ببهم
الرجال وذؤبان العرب ومردة أهل الكتاب كلما أوقدوانارا للحرب أطفأها الله
أو نجم قرن الشيطان أو فغرت فاغرة من المشركين قذف أخاه في لهواتها فلا
ينكفئ حتى يطأ جناحها بأخمصه ويخمد لهبها بسيفه مكدودا في ذات الله
مجتهدا في أمر الله قريبا من رسول الله سيدا في أولياء الله مشمرا ناصحا
مجدا كادحا لا تأخذه في الله لومة لائم وأنتم في رفاهية من العيش وادعون
فاكهون آمنون تتربصون بنا الدوائر وتتوكفون الأخبار وتنكصون عند النزال
وتفرون من القتال. فلما اختار الله لنبيه دار أنبيائه ومأوى أصفيائه ظهر
فيكم حسكة النفاق وسمل جلباب الدين ونطق كاظم الغاوين ونبغ خامل الأقلين
وهدر فنيق المبطلين فخطر في عرصاتكم وأطلع الشيطان رأسه من مغرزه هاتفا
بكم فألفاكم لدعوته مستجيبين وللعزة فيه ملاحظين ثم استنهضكم فوجدكم
خفافا وأحمشكم فألفاكم غضابا فوسمتم غير إبلكم ووردتم غير مشربكم هذا
والعهد قريب والكلم رحيب والجرح لما يندمل والرسول لما يقبر ابتدارا
زعمتم خوف الفتنة ألا في الفتنة سقطوا وإن جهنم لمحيطة بالكافرين فهيهات
منكم وكيف بكم وأنى تؤفكون وكتاب الله بين أظهركم أموره ظاهرة وأحكامه
زاهرة وأعلامه باهرة وزواجره لائحة وأوامره واضحة وقد خلفتموه وراء
ظهوركم أرغبة عنه تريدون أم بغيره تحكمون بئس للظالمين بدلا ومن يتبع غير
الإسلام دينا فلن يقبل منه وهو في الآخرة من الخاسرين ثم لم تلبثوا إلا
ريث أن تسكن نفرتها ويسلس قيادها ثم أخذتم تورون وقدتها وتهيجون جمرتها
وتستجيبون لهتاف الشيطان الغوي وإطفاء أنوار الدين الجلي وإهمال سنن
النبي الصفي تشربون حسوا في ارتغاء وتمشون لأهله وولده في الخمرة والضراء
ويصير منكم على مثل حز المدى ووخز السنان في الحشا وأنتم الآن تزعمون أن
لا إرث لنا ، أ فحكم الجاهلية تبغون ومن أحسن من الله حكما لقوم يوقنون
أفلا تعلمون ، بلى قد تجلى لكم كالشمس الضاحية أني ابنته أيها المسلمون
أأغلب على إرثي يا ابن أبي قحافة أفي كتاب الله ترث أباك ولا أرث أبي؟
لقد جئت شيئا فريا أفعلى عمد تركتم كتاب الله ونبذتموه وراء ظهوركم إذ
يقول: ”وَوَرِثَ سُلَيْمانُ داوُد"َ وقال فيما اقتص من خبر يحيى بن زكريا
إذ قال : "فَهَبْ لِي مِنْ لَدُنْكَ وَلِيًّا يَرِثُنِي وَ يَرِثُ مِنْ
آلِ يَعْقُوبَ" وقال” : وَ أُولُوا الْأَرْحامِ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلى
بِبَعْضٍ فِي كِتابِ اللَّهِ" وقال” :يُوصِيكُمُ اللَّهُ فِي
أَوْلادِكُمْ لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ الْأُنْثَيَيْنِ" وقال:” إِنْ
تَرَكَ خَيْراً الْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوالِدَيْنِ وَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ
بِالْمَعْرُوفِ حَقًّا عَلَى الْمُتَّقِينَ"، وزعمتم أن لا حظوة لي ولا
إرث من أبي ولا رحم بيننا أفخصكم الله بآية أخرج أبي منها أم هل تقولون
إن أهل ملتين لا يتوارثان أو لست أنا وأبي من أهل ملة واحدة أم أنتم أعلم
بخصوص القرآن وعمومه من أبي وابن عمي؟ فدونكموها مخطومة مرحولة تلقاكم
يوم حشركم، فنعم الحكم الله والزعيم محمد والموعد القيامة، وعند الساعة
يخسر المبطلون، ولا ينفعكم إذ تندمون، ولكل نبأ مستقر وسوف تعلمون من
يأتيه عذاب يخزيه ويحل عليه عذاب مقيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم رمت بطرفها نحو الأنصار فقالت:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> يا معشر النقيبة وأعضاد الملة وحضنة الإسلام، ما هذه الغميزة في حقي
> والسنة عن ظلامتي؟ أما كان رسول الله أبي يقول: المرء يحفظ في ولده؟
> سرعان ما أحدثتم وعجلان ذا إهالة ولكم طاقة بما أحاول وقوة على ما أطلب و
> أزاول. أتقولون مات محمد S) فخطب جليل استوسع وهنه واستنهر فتقه وانفتق
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رتقه وأظلمت الأرض لغيبته وكسفت الشمس والقمر وانتثرت النجوم لمصيبته
وأكدت الآمال وخشعت الجبال وأضيع الحريم وأزيلت الحرمة عند مماته؟ فتلك
والله النازلة الكبرى والمصيبة العظمى لا مثلها نازلة ولا بائقة عاجلة،
أعلن بها كتاب الله جل ثناؤه في أفنيتكم وفي ممساكم ومصبحكم، يهتف في
أفنيتكم هتافا وصراخا وتلاوة وألحانا، ولقبله ما حل بأنبياء الله ورسله،
حكم فصل وقضاء حتم "وَ ما مُحَمَّدٌ إِلَّا رَسُولٌ قَدْ خَلَتْ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِ الرُّسُلُ أَ فَإِنْ ماتَ أَوْ قُتِلَ انْقَلَبْتُمْ عَلى
أَعْقابِكُمْ؟ وَ مَنْ يَنْقَلِبْ عَلى عَقِبَيْهِ فَلَنْ يَضُرَّ
اللَّهَ شَيْئاً، وَ سَيَجْزِي اللَّهُ الشَّاكِرِينَ . "إيها بني قيله،
أأهضم تراث أبي وأنتم بمرأى مني ومسمع ومنتدى ومجمع، تلبسكم الدعوة
وتشملكم الخبرة وأنتم ذوو العدد والعدة والأداة والقوة وعندكم السلاح
والجنة توافيكم الدعوة فلا تجيبون وتأتيكم الصرخة فلا تغيثون؟ أنتم
موصوفون بالكفاح، معروفون بالخير والصلاح، والنخبة التي انتخبت والخيرة
التي اختيرت لنا أهل البيت، قاتلتم العرب وتحملتم الكد والتعب وناطحتم
الأمم، و كافحتم البهم، لا نبرح أو تبرحون، نأمركم فتأتمرون؛ حتى إذا
دارت بنا رحى الإسلام ودر حلب الأيام وخضعت ثغرة الشرك وسكنت فورة الإفك
وخمدت نيران الكفر وهدأت دعوة الهرج واستوسق نظام الدين، فأنى حزتم بعد
البيان وأسررتم بعد الإعلان ونكصتم بعد الإقدام وأشركتم بعد الإيمان؟
بؤسا لقوم نكثوا أيمانهم من بعد عهدهم وهموا بإخراج الرسول وهم بدءوكم
أول مرة؛ أ تخشونهم؟ فالله أحق أن تخشوه إن كنتم مؤمنين. ألا وقد أرى أن
قد أخلدتم إلى الخفض وأبعدتم من هو أحق بالبسط والقبض وخلوتم بالدعة
ونجوتم بالضيق من السعة فمججتم ما وعيتم ودسعتم الذي تسوغتم فإن تكفروا
أنتم ومن في الأرض جميعا فإن الله لغني حميد ألا وقد قلت ما قلت هذا على
معرفة مني بالجذلة التي خامرتكم والغدرة التي استشعرتها قلوبكم ولكنها
فيضة النفس ونفثة الغيظ وخور القناة وبثة الصدر وتقدمة الحجة فدونكموها
فاحتقبوها دبرة الظهر نقبة الخف باقية العار موسومة بغضب الجبار وشنار
الأبد موصولة بنار الله الموقدة التي تطلع على الأفئدة ، فبعين الله ما
تفعلون وسيعلم الذين ظلموا أي منقلب ينقلبون وأنا ابنة نذير لكم بين يدي
عذاب شديد فاعملوا إنا عاملون و انتظروا إنا منتظرون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abullah son of Imam al-Hassan (as) quotes his forefathers saying that
Abu Bakr and ‘Umar decided to prevent Fatima (sa) from her Fadak
property. When she came to know about it, she put her veil on her head,
wrapped herself with her outer cloak and, accompanied by some of her
relatives and men of her folks, stepping on her gown, her gait not
differing from that of the Messenger of Allah (S), she went and entered
[the Mosque of the Prophet] where Abu Bakr was.

Abu Bakr was in the company of a crowd of the Muhajirun, Ansar and
others. A curtain was placed behind which she sat and moaned. Hearing
her thus moaning, everyone present there and then burst in tears, so
much so that the meeting place shook. She waited for a moment till the
sobbing stopped and the fervor abated. She started her speech by
praising Allah and lauding Him, sending blessings to His Messenger,
whereon people resumed their cries. When they stopped, she resumed her
speech saying,

"Praise to Allah for that which He bestowed (on us). We thank and laud
Him for all that which He inspired and offered, for the abundant boons
which He initiated, the perfect grants which He presented. Such boons
are too many to compute, too vast to measure. Their limit is too distant
to grasp. He commended them (to His beings) so they would gain more by
being grateful for their continuity. He ordained Himself praiseworthy by
giving generously to His creatures. I testify that there is no God but
Allah , the One without a partner, a statement which sincere devotion is
its interpretation, the hearts guarantee its continuation, and in the
minds and hearts is its perpetuation. He is the One Who cannot be
perceived with vision, nor can He be described by tongues, nor can
imagination comprehend how He is. He originated things but not from
anything that existed before, created them without pre-existing
examples. Rather, He created them with His might and spread them
according to His will. He did so not for a need for which He created
them, nor for a benefit (for Him) did He shape them, but to establish
His wisdom, bring attention to His obedience, manifest His might, lead
His creatures to humbly venerate Him and exalt His decrees. He then made
the reward for obedience to Him and punishment for disobedience so as to
protect His creatures from His Wrath and lodge them into His Paradise.

"I also testify that my Father, Muhammed S, is His servant and messenger
whom He chose. Prior to sending him, the [souls of all] beings were
still concealed in that which was transcendental, protected from
anything appalling, associated with termination and nonexistence. Allah
the Exalted One knew that which was to follow, comprehended that which
would come to pass and realized the place of every event. Allah sent him
(Muhammed S) to perfect His commands, accomplish His decree and
implement the dictates of His Mercy. So he (Muhammed S) found nations
differing in their creeds, obsessed by their fires [Zoroastrians],
worshipping their idols [Pagans], and denying Allah [atheists] despite
their knowledge of Him. Therefore, Allah illuminated their darkness with
my Father, Muhammed S, uncovered obscurity from their hearts, and
cleared the clouds from their insights. He revealed guidance to the
people. He delivered them from being led astray, taking them away from
misguidance, showing them the right religion and inviting them to the
Straight Path (*as-ˉirat al-Mustaqeem*).

"Allah then chose to recall him mercifully, with love and preference.
So, Muhammed S is now in comfort, released from the burden of this
world, surrounded by angels of devotion, satisfied with the Merciful
Lord and with being near the powerful King. So, peace of Allah with my
Father, His Prophet, the trusted one, the one whom He chose from among
His servants, His sincere friend, and peace and blessings of Allah with
him.”

Fatima (sa) then turned to the crowd and said:

'surely you (people) are Allah 's servants at His command and
prohibition, bearers of His creed and revelation. You are the ones whom
Allah entrusted to fare with your own selves, His messengers to the
nations. Amongst you does He have the right authority, a covenant which
He brought forth to you and a legacy which He left to guard you: the
eloquent Book of Allah , the Qur’an of the truth, the brilliant light,
the shining beam. Its insights are indisputable, its secrets are
revealed, its indications are manifest and those who follow it are
surely blessed. (The Qur’an ) leads its adherents to righteousness;
listening (and acting on) it leads to salvation. Through it are the
enlightening divine arguments achieved, His manifest determination
acquired, His prohibited decrees avoided, His manifest evidence
recognized, His convincing proofs made apparent, His permissions granted
and His laws written. So Allah made belief (in Islam) an act of
purification for you from (the filth of) polytheism.

He made prayers an exaltation for you from conceit, *zakat* an act of
purification for the soul and a (cause of) growth in subsistence,
fasting an implantation of devotion, pilgrimage a construction of the
creed and justice (*‘Adl*) the harmony of the hearts. And He made
obedience to us (Ahl al-Bayt (as)) the management of the affairs of the
nation and our leadership (Ahl al-Bayt (as)) a protection from disunity.
He made *jihad* a way for strengthening Islam and patience a helping
course for deserving (divine) rewards. He made commending what is right
(*al-’Amr bil ma’ruf*) a cause for public welfare, kindness to parents a
safeguard from (His) wrath, the maintaining of close ties with one's kin
a cause for a longer life and for multiplying the number of offspring,
in-kind reprisal (*qisas* قصاص) for saving lives, fulfilling vows the
earning of mercy, the completing of weights and measures a cause for
avoiding neglecting the rights of others, forbidding drinking wines an
exaltation from atrocity, avoiding slander a veil from curse, and the
abandonment of stealing a reason for deserving chastity. Allah has also
prohibited polytheism so that one can devote himself to His Mastership.
Therefore; Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not except in a
state of Islam. Obey Allah in that which He has commanded you to do and
that which He has forbidden, for surely those who truly fear Him from
among His servants are those who have knowledge.'

"O People! Be informed that I am Fatima , and my father is Muhammad ; I
say so repeatedly and initiate it continually. I do not utter
mistakenly, nor do I do what I do aimlessly. Now has come unto you a
Prophet from amongst yourselves; it grieves him that you should perish;
ardently anxious is he over you; to the believers he is most kind and
merciful. Thus, if you identify and recognize him, you shall realize
that he is my father and not the father of any of your women; the
brother of my cousin (Ali (as) ) rather than any of your men. What an
excellent identity he was, may the peace and blessings of Allah be with
him and his descendants

Thus, he propagated the Message, coming out openly with the warning,
inclining away from the path of the polytheists, (he) struck their
strength and seized their throats, while he invited (everyone) to the
way of his Lord with wisdom and beautiful preaching. He destroyed idols
and defeated heroes until their group fled and turned on their heels. So
night revealed its dawn; righteousness uncovered its genuineness; the
voice of the religious authority spoke out loud; the evil discords were
silenced; the crown of hypocrisy was diminished; the tying of (the knots
of) infidelity and desertion were untied, so you spoke the statement of
devotion amongst a band of starved ones, and you were on the edge of a
pit of the fire. (You were) the drink of the thirsty; the opportunity of
the desiring ones; the fire brand of one who passes in haste; the step
for feet. You used to drink of stagnant water gathered on roads; eat dry
jerked meat. (Lady Fatima (sa) was stating their miserable living
conditions before Islam). You were despised outcasts always in fear of
being abducted by those around you.

Yet, Allah rescued you through my father, Muhammad after much ado, and
after he was confronted by mighty men, Arab beasts, and demons of the
people of the Book Who, whenever they ignited the fire of war, Allah
extinguished it; and whenever the thorn of the devil appeared, or a
mouth of the polytheists opened wide in defiance, he would strike its
discords with his brother (Ali (as)), who comes not back until he treads
its wing with the sole of his feet, and extinguishes its flames with his
sword. (Ali (as) is) diligent in Allah 's affair, near to the Messenger
of Allah S, a master among Allah 's worshippers, setting to work
briskly, sincere in his advice, earnest and exerting himself (in serving
Islam), while you were calm, cheerful and feeling safe in your lives of
ease, waiting for us to face disasters, awaiting the spread of news. You
fell back during every battle and took to your heels at times of
fighting.

Yet, When Allah chose His Prophet to Him from the abode of His prophets,
the abode of His sincere (servants), the thorns of hypocrisy appeared on
you, the garment of faith became worn out, the misguided ignorant ones
from among you spoke out, the sluggish ignorant ones came out to the
front and brayed. The vain camel wiggled its tail in your courtyards and
the devil stuck its head out of its hideout calling on you, finding you
responsive to his invitation and observant of his deceits. He then
excited you and found you quick (to answer him), inviting you to wrath;
therefore, you branded other than your camels and proceeded to other
than your drinking places.

Then, while the era of the Prophet was still near, the gap was still
wide, the scar had not yet healed, and the Messenger was not yet
buried…, a (quick) undertaking you claimed, saying that you aimed at
preventing discord. Surely they have fallen into trial already! And
indeed Hell surrounds the unbelievers. How preposterous! What a notion!
What falsehood! Allah 's Book is still amongst you; its affairs are
apparent; its rules are manifest; its signs are dazzling; its
restrictions are visible, and its commands are evident.

Yet, indeed you have cast it behind your backs! What?! Do you detest it?
Or according to something else do you wish to rule? Evil would be such a
barter for the wrongdoers! And if anyone desires a religion other than
Islam, it will never be accepted from him, and in the hereafter he will
be in the ranks of those who have lost. Surely you have not waited until
its stampede stopped and it became easier to deal with. You started
fueling its flames, feeding its coal, complying with the call of the
misled devil, putting out the light of the manifest religion, and
extinguishing the light of the sincere Prophet. You concealed sips on
froth and proceeded towards his (Prophet’s) kin and children in swamps
and forests [i.e. you plotted against them in deceitful ways]. But we
are patient with you as if we are being notched with knives and stung by
spearheads in our abdomens.

'still, you now claim that there is not inheritance for us! What?! "Do
they, then, seek the ruling of (the Days of) ignorance? But how so for
people whose faith is assured? Can you give a better ruling than Allah ?
Do you not know? Yes, indeed it is obvious to you that I am his
daughter. O Muslims! Will my inheritance be usurped? O son of Abu Quhafa
(Abu Bakr)! Where is it in the Book of Allah that you inherit your
father and I do not inherit mine? Surely you have come up with an
unprecedented thing. Do you intentionally abandon the Book of Allah and
cast it behind your back? Do you not read where it says: ***‘And Solomon
(Sulayman) inherited David (Dawud)' (Qur’an, 27:16)?***

And when it narrates the story of Zacharias, it says: ***‘So grant me (O
Lord!) one (heir) who will inherit me and inherit the posterity of Jacob
' (19:16)*** And: ***‘Blood relatives are nearer to each other in the
Book of Allah ' (Qur’an, 8:75).*** And: ***‘Allah (thus) directs you
regarding your children's (inheritance): to the male is a portion equal
to that of two*** ***females' (Qur’an, 4:11).*** And: ***‘It is
prescribed for you that when death approaches any of you, if he leaves
behind any goods, that he make a bequest to parents and next of kin in
goodness, a duty incumbent on the pious' (Qur’an, 2:180).***

You (O Abu Bakr!) claim that I have no share! And that I do not inherit
my father! What?! Did Allah reveal a (Qur’an ic) verse regarding you
from which He excluded my father? Or do you say that these (Fatima (sa)
and her father S) are from people of two (different) faiths, so they do
not inherit each other?!' Are we not, I and my father, people adhering
to one and the same faith? Or is it that you have knowledge about the
specifications and generalizations of the Qur’an *more* than my father
and my cousin (Imam Ali (as))? So, here you are! Take it! (Ready with)
its nose rope and saddle! But it shall encounter you on the Day of
Gathering: How Great a judge Allah is when the claimant is Muhammad !
What what a day it shall be, the Day of Rising! At the time of the Hour
shall the wrongdoers lose, and it shall not benefit you to regret (your
actions) then! For every Message, there is a time limit, and soon shall
you all know who will be inflicted with torture that will humiliate him,
and who will be confronted by an everlasting punishment.

(Fatima (sa) then turned towards the Ansar and said:)

"O you people of intellect! The strong supporters of the nation! And
those who embraced Islam: What is this shortcoming in defending my
right? And what is this slumber (while you see) injustice (being done to
me)? Did not the Messenger of Allah S, my father, use to say: ‘A man is
upheld (remembered) by his children’? O how quick have you violated (his
orders)?! How soon have you plotted against us? But you still are
capable (of helping me in) my attempt, and powerful (enough to help me)
in that which I request and (in) my pursuit (of it). Or do you say:
‘Muhammad has perished’? Surely this is a great calamity; its damage is
excessive, its injury is great, its wound (is much too deep) to heal.
The Earth became darkened with his departure; the stars eclipsed for his
calamity; hopes were dashed; mountains submitted; sanctity violated, and
holiness encroached on after his death.

Therefore, this, by Allah , is the great affliction, and the momentous
calamity; there is not an affliction-which is the like of it; nor will
there be a sudden misfortune (as surprising as this). The Book of Allah
—excellent in praising him—announced in the courtyards (of your houses)
in the place where you spend your evenings and mornings, a call, a cry,
a recitation and (verses) placed in order. It (death) had previously
come on His (Allah 's) Prophets and Messengers; (for it is) a decree
final, and predestination fulfilled: ‘Muhammed is but a Prophet: Many
were the Prophets that passed away before him. If he dies or is slain,
will you all then turn back on your heels? If any did turn back on his
heels, not the least harm will he do to Allah ; but Allah (on the other
hand) will swiftly reward those who (serve Him) with gratitude.’

O you people of reflection! Will I be usurped of the inheritance of my
father while you hear and see me?! (And while) You are sitting and
gathered around me? You hear my call and are included in the (outcome of
the) affair? (But) You are numerous and well equipped! (You have) the
means and the power, the weapons and the shields. Yet, the call reaches
you but you do not answer; the cry comes to you but you do not come to
help? (This happens) while you are characterized by struggle, known for
goodness and welfare, the selected group, and the best ones chosen by
the Messenger for us, we Ahlul-Bayt (as). You fought the Arabs, bore
with pain and exhaustion, struggled against the nations and resisted
their heroes. We were still, so were you in ordering you, and you in
obeying us.

So Islam triumphed, the accomplishment of the days came near, the fort
of polytheism was subjected, its outburst was quelled, the outburst of
infidelity calmed down, and the system of religion was well-ordered.
Thus, (why have you) become confused after clearness, concealing matters
after announcing them? Do you thus turn on your heels after charging,
associating (others with Allah ) after believing? Will you not fight
people who violated their oaths, plotted to expel the Prophet and became
aggressive by being the first (to assault) you? Do you fear them? Nay,
it is Allah Whom you should more justly fear, if you believe! Now I see
that you are inclined to easy living, having dismissed one who is more
worthy of guardianship [referring to Ali (as)].

You secluded yourselves with meekness and dismissed that which you
accepted. Yet, if you show ingratitude, you and all those on earth put
together, Allah is free of all want, worthy of all praise. Surely I have
said all that I have said with full knowledge that you intend to forsake
me, and knowing the betrayal that your hearts sensed. But it is the
state of the soul, the effusion of fury, the dissemination of (what is
in) the chest and the presentation of the proof. Hence, here it is!

Bag it (leadership and) put it on the back of an ill she-camel which has
a thin hump with everlasting grace, marked with the wrath of Allah and
the blame of ever (which leads to) the Fire of (the wrath of Allah
kindled (to a blaze), that which mounts (right) on the hearts. Allah
witnesses what you do, and soon will the unjust assailants come to know
what vicissitudes their affairs will take! And I am the daughter of a
warner (Prophet ) to you against a severe punishment. So, act and so
will we, and wait, and we, too, shall wait.'”

> فأجابها أبو بكر وقال: يا بنت رسول الله، لقد كان أبوك بالمؤمنين عطوفا
> كريما رءوفا رحيما وعلى الكافرين عذابا أليما وعقابا عظيما، إن عزوناه
> وجدناه أباك دون النساء وأخا إلفك دون الأخلاء، آثره على كل حميم وساعده
> في كل أمر جسيم، لا يحبكم إلا سعيد ولا يبغضكم إلا شقي بعيد، فأنتم عترة
> رسول الله الطيبون الخيرة المنتجبون على الخير، أدلتنا وإلى الجنة
> مسالكنا. وأنت يا خيرة النساء وابنة خير الأنبياء صادقة في قولك سابقة في
> وفور عقلك غير مردودة عن حقك ولا مصدودة عن صدقك، والله ما عدوت رأي رسول
> الله ولا عملت إلا بإذنه والرائد لا يكذب أهله، وإني أشهد الله وكفى به
> شهيدا أني سمعت رسول الله S) يقول: نحن معاشر الأنبياء لا نورث ذهبا و لا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فضة و لا دارا و لا عقارا و إنما نورث الكتاب والحكمة والعلم والنبوة وما
كان لنا من طعمة فلولي الأمر بعدنا أن يحكم فيه بحكمه، وقد جعلنا ما
حاولته في الكراع والسلاح يقاتل بها المسلمون ويجاهدون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> فقالت عليها السلام: سبحان الله! ما كان أبي رسول الله S) عن كتاب الله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صادفا ولا لأحكامه مخالفا، بل كان يتبع أثره ويقفو سوره؛ أفتجمعون إلى
الغدر اعتلالا عليه بالزور وهذا بعد وفاته شبيه بما بغي له من الغوائل في
حياته؟ هذا كتاب الله حكما عدلا وناطقا فصلا يقول: يَرِثُنِي وَ يَرِثُ
مِنْ آلِ يَعْقُوبَ و يقول وَ وَرِثَ سُلَيْمانُ داوُد، وبين عز وجل
فيما وزع من الأقساط وشرع من الفرائض والميراث وأباح من حظ الذكران
والإناث ما أزاح به علة المبطلين وأزال التظني والشبهات في الغابرين؛
كلا؛ بل سولت لكم أنفسكم أمرا فصبر جميل، والله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المستعان على ما تصفون .
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال أبو بكر: صدق الله ورسوله وصدقت ابنته معدن الحكمة وموطن الهدى
والرحمة وركن الدين وعين الحجة، لا أبعد صوابك ولا أنكر خطابك، هؤلاء
المسلمون بيني وبينك قلدوني ما تقلدت وباتفاق منهم أخذت ما أخذت، غير
مكابر ولا مستبد ولا مستأثر، وهم بذلك شهود.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فالتفتت فاطمة عليها السلام إلى الناس و قالت:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معاشر المسلمين المسرعة إلى قيل الباطل المغضية على الفعل القبيح الخاسر،
أفلا تتدبرون القرآن أم على قلوب أقفالها؟ كلا بل ران على قلوبكم ما
أسأتم من أعمالكم فأخذ بسمعكم وأبصاركم ولبئس ما تأولتم وساء ما به أشرتم
وشر ما منه اغتصبتم، لتجدن والله محمله ثقيلا وغبه وبيلا إذا كشف لكم
الغطاء وبان بإورائه الضراء وبدا لكم من ربكم ما لم تكونوا تحتسبون و خسر
هنا لك المبطلون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr responded to her by saying, "O daughter of the Messenger of
Allah ! Your father was always affectionate with the believers,
generous, kind and merciful, and towards the unbelievers was he a
painful torment and a great punishment. Surely the Prophet is your
father, not anyone else's, the brother of your husband, not of any other
man's; he surely preferred him over all his friends and (Ali (as))
supported him in every important matter. No one loves you save the lucky
and no one hates you save the wretch. You are the blessed progeny of
Allah 's Messenger, the chosen ones, our guides to goodness, our path to
Paradise.

And you, O the best of women, the daughter of the best of prophets, are
truthful is your statements, excelling in reasoning. You shall not be
driven back from your right... But I surely heard your father saying:
‘We, group of prophets, do not inherit, nor are we inherited. Yet, this
is my situation and property, it is yours (if you wish); it shall not be
concealed from you, nor will it be stored away from you. You are the
Mistress of your father's nation, and the blessed tree of your
descendants. Your property shall not be usurped against your will nor
can your name be defamed. Your judgment shall be executed in all that
which I possess. Do you think that I would violate your father's
(will)?"

Fatima then refuted Abu Bakr's claim that the Prophet had stated that
prophets could not be inherited. She said: "Glory to Allah !! Surely
Allah 's Messenger did not abandon Allah 's Book, nor did he violate His
commands. Rather, he followed its decrees and adhered to its chapters.
So do you unite with treachery justifying your acts with fabrications?
Indeed this—after his departure—is similar to the disasters which were
*plotted against him during his* *lifetime*. But behold! This is Allah
's Book, a just judge and a decisive speaker, saying***: ‘… One who will
inherit Me and inherit the posterity of Jacob (Ya’qub),' (Qur’an,
19:6)*** and ***'Sulayman (Solomon) inherited Dawood (David).'
(Qur’an,27: 16)***

Thus, He (Glory to Him) made clear that which He made all heirs share,
decreed from the amounts of inheritance, allowed for males and females
and eradicated all doubts and ambiguities (pertaining to this issue
which existed with the) bygones. Nay! But your minds have made up a tale
(that may pass) with you, but (for me) patience is most fitting against
that which you assert. It is Allah (alone) whose help can be sought."

It is apparent that Abu Bakr seized the moment when he was addressed
Lady Fatima (sa) after delivering her speech to defend himself. Listen
to his following speech which is his reply to Fatima 's speech.

Abu Bakr said: 'surely Allah and His Prophet are truthful, and so has
his (the Prophet's) daughter told the truth. Surely you are the source
of wisdom, the element of faith, and the sole authority. May Allah not
refute your righteous argument, nor invalidate your decisive speech. But
these are the Muslims among us who have entrusted me with leadership,
and it was according to their satisfaction that I received what
(authority) I have undertaken. I am not being arrogant, autocratic or
selfish, and they are my witnesses." On hearing Abu Bakr speak of the
people's support for him, Lady Fatima al-Zahra’ (sa) turned towards them
and said:

"O people who rush towards uttering falsehood and are indifferent to
disgraceful and lost actions! Do you not earnestly seek to reflect on
the Qur’an , or are your hearts isolated with locks? But on your hearts
is the stain of the evil which you committed; it has seized your hearing
and your sight. Evil is that which you justified, cursed is that which
you reckoned, and wicked is that which you have taken for an exchange!
You shall, by Allah, find bearing it (to be a great) burden, and its
consequence disastrous. (That is) on the Day when the cover is removed
and what is behind it of wrath appears to you. When you will be
confronted by Allah with that which you can never expect, there and
then, those who stood on falsehoods will perish."

Although parts of Abu Bakr's speeches cannot be verified with authentic
evidence, and despite the fact that we have already mentioned part of
the actual speech, which Abu Bakr delivered after Lady Fatima's
arguments, it appears certain that Abu Bakr was finally persuaded to
return Fadak to her. Nevertheless, when Fatima was leaving Abu Bakr's
house, ‘Umar suddenly appeared and exclaimed: "What is it that you hold
in your hand?"

Abu Bakr replied: “It is a decree I have written for Fatima (sa) in
which I returned Fadak and her father's inheritance to her." ‘Umar then
said: "With what will you spend on the Muslims if the Arabs decide to
fight you?!"

> وفي سيرة الحلبي ج 3 ص :- 391أن عمر أخذ الكتاب فشقه.

According to p. 391, Vol. 3, of al-Halabi’s *Seera* book, ‘Umar [ibn
al-Khattab] seized the decree and tore it to pieces…

In some reports, Abu Bakr, a longtime *sahabi* of the Prophet and one of
the earliest men to embrace Islam, honored Fatima’s request and returned
Fadak to her. He wrote her a deed of the Fadak property in his own hand
and gave it to her, whereon she (sa) left the Prophet’s Mosque, which
Abu Bakr had made the seat of his government, feeling happy. She
happened to be seen by ‘Umar who asked her what she was carrying in her
hand. When she told him what it was, he grabbed it from her hand in a
rude way and with force, spitted in it then tore it to pieces.

> ثم عطفت على قبر النبي (S) و قالت:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان بعدك انباء و هنبثة لو كنت شاهدها لم تكثر الخطب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انا فقدناك فقد الارض وابلها و اختل قومك فاشهدهم فقد نكبوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قد رُزينا بما لم يرزه أحد من البرية لا عجم و لا عرب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سيعلم المتولي ظلم حامتنا يوم القيامة أنى سوف ينقلب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ضاقت عليَّ بلادي بعدما رحبت و سيم سبطاك خسفاً فيه لي نصب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و كل أهل له قربى و منزلة عند الاله على الأدنين مقترب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبدت رجال لنا نجوى صدورهم لما مضيت و حالت دونك الترب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تجهمتنا رجال و آستخف بنا اذ غبت عنا فنحن اليوم نغتصب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكنت بدرا و نورا يستضاء به عليك ينزل من ذي العزة الكتب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كان جبريل بالآيات يؤنسنا فقد فقدت و كل الخير محتجب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فليت قبلك كان الموت صادفنا لما مضيت و حالت دونك الكثب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فسوف نبكيك ما عشنا وما بقيت من العيون بتهمال لها سكب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قد رزينا به محضا خليقته صافي الضرائب و الأعراق و النسب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأنت خير عباد الله كلهم و أصدق الناسحين الصدق و الكذب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*After you, reports and momentous chaotic events we found,*

*If you witnessed them, calamities would not abound.*

*We missed you as sorely as earth would miss its rain,*

*Your folks lost balance, see how from the creed they did refrain,*

*We, like no others, have suffered affliction,*

*Unlike all Arabs, or others from among Allah ’s creation.*

*One who has oppressed us will come on Judgment Day*

*To know what fate will be awaiting him.*

*My homeland is now narrow after its great expanse indeed,*

*Both your grandsons have been wronged, so my heart is grieved,*

*Every family has relatives and a place*

*With the Almighty Who is close to those of grace,*

*Certain men what their chests hid did they to us reveal,*

*When you went, and now you from our sights did a grave conceal,*

*Men assaulted and slighted us, when you became far away*

*So, now what rightfully belongs to us is being taken away.*

*You were the moon, your light showed us what we should heed,*

*Messages from the Exalted One were to you revealed.*

*With the Verses did Gabriel make our day,*

*Now you are gone, every good thing is kept away.*

*How we wish in our direction death did the Almighty guide*

*Before you left us, and you did the dunes from us hide.*

*We shall cry over you so long as our tears can pour,*

*So long as floods of tears can withstand and endure.*

*We have been afflicted with tragedy on his account*

*One who is pure in peers, folks and lineage,*

*For you are the best of Allah ’s creation and*

> Most truthful of those who only the truth defend.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ـ من أشار إلى خطبة الصديقة فاطمة (عليها السلام( أو روى شيئاً منها نذكر
بعضاً منهم على سبيل المثال لا الحصر، وهم كالتالي:
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 1 ـ الخليل بن أحمد الفراهيدي (ت 175 هـ) في كتاب العين: 8 / 323 في كلمة
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللمّة، قال: وفي الحديث جاءت فاطمة (عليها السلام) إلى أبي بكر في
لُميمة من حفدتها ونساء قومها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 2 ـ جار الله محمد بن عمر الزمخشري (ت 538 هـ) في الفائق: 3 / 331 في
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مادة اللمة أيضاً قال: وفي حديث فاطمة )عليها السلام): إنّها خرجت في لمة
من نسائها تتوطّأ ذيلها، حتى دخلت على أبي بكر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 3 ـ أبو الفرج عبد الرحمن بن علي بن الجوزي، (ت 597 هـ( في غريب الحديث:
> 2 / 333 وقال : وفي الحديث: أنّ فاطمة )عليها السلام) خرجت في لمة من
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نسائها إلى أبي بكر فعاتبته. أي في جماعة؛ وقيل: من الثلاث إلى العشر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 4 ـ مجد الدين أبو السعادات ابن الأثير (ت 606 هـ(. في النهاية في غريب
> الحديث والأثر: 4 / 273 وقال في حديث فاطمة )عليها السلام : (إنّها خرجت
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في لمة من نسائها تتوطّأ ذيلها، إلى أبي بكر فعاتبته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 5 ـ أبو الفضل جمال الدين بن منظور )ت 711 هـ (في لسان العرب: 12 / 548
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال: وفي حديث فاطمة (عليها السلام : (إنّها خرجت في لمة من نسائها
تتوطّأ ذيلها إلى أبي بكر فعاتبته. ذكرها في مادة لمم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

References to this speech by the Truthful One, Fatima , peace with her,
including some who cited excerpts of it, include the following:

Al-Khalil ibn Ahmed al-Farahidi الخليل بن أحمد الفراهيدي (d. 175
A.H./792 A.D.) on p. 323, Vol. 8, of *Kitab al-’Ayn*,

Jarallah Muhammed ibn ‘Umar al-Zamakhshari, الزمخشري (d. 538 A.H./1144
A.D.) on p. 331, Vol. 3, of Al-Fa’iq;

Abul-Faraj Abdur-Rahman ibn Ali ibn al-Jawzi ابن الجوزي (d. 597
A.H./1201 A.D.),

Majd ad-Din Abu al-Sa’adat Ibn al-Athir ابن الأثير (d. 606 A.H./1210
A.D.) on p. 273, Vol. 4 of his book titled *An-Nihaya*,

Abul-Fa¤l Jamal ad-Din ibn Man¨our ابن منظور (d. 711 A.H./1312 A.D.) on
p. 548, Vol. 12 (old edition) of his lexicon titled *Lisan al-’Arab*.

A Brief History of Fadak After Fatima's Death
---------------------------------------------

The motive which prompts us to pursue the history of Fadak and to
extract the series of events after it for a period of three centuries
from the texts of historical books is to clarify three issues:

a. The truth about the rule of annulment of inheritance from prophets
allegedly made by the Holy Prophet S; in other words, the claim that
property of the Holy Prophet S is part of the public treasury,
*baytul-mal*, and belongs to all Muslims. This was claimed by the first
caliph, Abu Bakr, and it was rejected by his successors, i.e. by both
next caliphs (‘’Umar and ‘Othman), by the Umayyads and the Abbassids,
*all of them*. We must consider that the lawfulness and rightfulness of
their caliphate depended on the "correctness"and "lawfulness" of the
caliphate of the first caliph and his actions.

b. Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) and the descendants of Fatima (sa) never
had any hesitation regarding the rightfulness and justification of their
claim. They emphasized and confirmed that Fatima (sa) had always been
right and that Abu Bakr's claim had always been rejected; they did not
yield to false claims.

c. Whenever a caliph made a decision to put Allah's command into effect,
with regard to Fadak, to observe justice and equity and to restore the
right to the entitled one in conformity with Islamic rules, he used to
return Fadak to the descendants of Fatima (sa). ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab
was the most harsh person in depriving Fatima (sa) of her Fadak estate
as he himself later confessed, probably with remorse, thus: "When the
Messenger of Allah S died, I came along with Abu Bakr to Ali ibn Abu
Talib (as) and said, "What do you say about what has been left by the
Messenger of Allah S?" He replied, "We have the most rights with the
Holy Prophet S." I (‘’Umar) said, "Even those properties of Khaybar?" He
said, "Yes, even those of Khaybar." I said, "Even those of Fadak?" He
replied, "Yes, even those of Fadak."

Then I said, "By Allah! We say NO even if you cut our necks with saws"
as recorded in *Majma’ al-Zawa'id*, Vol. 9, pp. 39 - 40. As it has
already been mentioned, ‘’Umar then took the document (deed of
ownership) of Fadak and tore it up. But when ‘’Umar became caliph (13 -
23 A.H./634 - 644 A.D.), he gave Fadak back to heirs of the Holy Prophet
S. Discussing the Fadak issue, Yaqut al-Hamawi (574 - 626 A.H./1178 -
1229 A.D.), the famous historian and geographer, says the following:
"When ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab became caliph and gained victories and the
Muslims secured abundant wealth (i.e. the public treasury satisfied the
caliphate's needs), he made a judgment contrary to that of his
predecessor. He gave it (Fadak) back to the Prophet's heirs. At the
time, Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) and Abbas ibn Abdul-Muttalib disputed about
Fadak."

?
Ali said that the Holy Prophet S had bestowed it on Fatima (sa) during
his lifetime. Abbas denied this and used to say, "This was in the
possession of the Holy Prophet S and I have a share in this
inheritance." They were disputing this with each other and asked ‘’Umar
to settle the case. He refused to judge between them and said, "Both of
you are more conscious and aware of your problem; but I only give it
[Fadak] to you" (*Mu’jam al-Buldan*, Vol. 4, pp. 238 -239; *Wafa'
al-Wafa'*, Vol. 3, p. 999; *Tahdhib al-Lughah*, Vol. 10, p. 124; *Lisan
al-Arab*, Vol. 10, p. 473; *Taj al-’Arus*, Vol. 7, p. 166).

The reason why ‘’Umar and Abu Bakr were trying to seize Fadak was
economic and political, not merely a religious one, as the previous
episode shows. When the economic and political conditions of the
caliphate improved, and when there was no need for the income obtained
from Fadak, ‘’Umar reversed his own decision.

The last part of this historic event has been inserted afterwards to
demonstrate the matter of inheritance by the brother or paternal uncle
of the deceased when the latter had no sons. This problem is a matter of
dispute among Islamic sects. The judicial and jurisprudential discussion
is separate from our own goal in the writing of this book. We are only
discussing the matter historically.

Abbas had no claim in this case because he had not proven that he had a
share in this property, nor did his descendants consider it to be among
their own assets even when they [the Abbasides] became caliphs and were
ruling the Islamic lands. They either considered themselves as owners of
this estate in their capacity as caliphs, or they used to return it to
the descendants of Fatima (sa) when they had decided to be just rulers.

When ‘Othman ibn ‘Affan became caliph, following the death of ‘’Umar
(23 - 35 A.H./644 - 656 A.D.), he granted Fadak to Marwan ibn al-Hakam,
his cousin (see *Al-Sunan al-Kubra*, Vol. 6, p. 301; *Wafa' al-Wafa'*,
Vol. 3, p. 1000; Ibn Abul-Hadid, Vol. 1, p. 198) and this was one of the
causes of hostile feelings among the Muslims against ‘Othman: Refer to
*Al-Ma’arif*, Ibn Qutaybah, p. 195; *Al-’Iqd al-Farid*, Vol. 4, pp. 283,
435; Abul-Fida', *Tarikh,*Vol. 1, p. 168; Ibn al-Wardi, *Tarikh,* Vol.
1, p. 204.

These hostile sentiments ended in the rebellion against him and,
subsequently, in his murder. "While previously Fatima (sa) used to claim
it, sometimes as her inheritance and sometimes as a gift (from her
father), she was driven away from it (Fadak)," as Ibn Abul-Hadid has
said in *Sharh Nahjul-Balagha*. In this way, Fadak fell into the
possession of Marwan. He used to sell its crops, fruits and products for
at least ten thousand dinars per year. If in some years its income
decreased, this drop was not made public. This was its usual profit till
the time of the caliphate of ‘’Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz (in 100 A.H./718
A.D.) (Ibn Sa’d, Vol. 5, pp. 286, 287; Subh al-A’sha, Vol. 4, p. 291).

When Mu’awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan (41 - 60 A.H./661 - 680 A.D.) declared
himself ruler of Syria, he became partner in Fadak with Marwan ibn
al-Hakam and others, allotting one third of it to Marwan, one third to
‘Amr son of ‘Othman ibn ‘Affan, and one third to his own son Yazid, as
if it were their personal property. This was after the death of Imam
al-Hassan ibn Ali (as). "In order to enrage the progeny of the Holy
Prophet (S), as al-Ya’qubi states on p. 199, Vol. 2 of his *Tarikh*, it
remained in the possession of the three above-mentioned individuals till
Marwan became monarch for less than a couple of years (64 - 65
A.H./684 - 685 A.D.); he took full possession of it. Then he doled it
out to his two sons, Abdul-Malik and Abdul-Aziz. Then Abdul-Aziz doled
out his share to his son (‘’Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz).

When ‘’Umar ibn Abdul-Aziz became caliph (99 - 101 A.H./717 - 720 A.D.)
for this shorter period, he delivered a sermon once in which he said,
"Verily, Fadak was among the things which Allah had bestowed on His
Messenger and neither horse nor camel was stirred for its
acquisition."He mentioned the history of the Fadak case during the past
monarchies till he said the following: "Then Marwan [ibn al-Hakam] gave
it (Fadak) to my father and to Abdul-Malik.

It became mine as well as al-Walid's and Sulayman's (Marwan's two sons).
When al-Walid became ruler (86 - 96 A.H./705 - 715 A.D.), I asked him
for his share and he gave it to me. I also asked for Sulayman's share
and he, too, gave it to me. Then I gathered the three parts and I
possessed no property more dear to me than it. Do testify that I have
returned it to its original status (as property of Fatima's
descendants)."He wrote to his governor over Medina, Abu Bakr ibn
Muhammed ibn ‘Amr ibn Hazm, ordering him to carry out what he had
declared in this sermon.

Then Fadak went back to the possession of the children of Fatima (sa).
"This was the first removal of oppression through the returningof Fadak
to the children of Ali ," Abu Hilal al-’Askari writes on p. 209 of his
work titled *Al-Awa'il*. They possessed it during the rule of ‘’Umar ibn
Abdul-Aziz.

When Yazid ibn Abdul-Malik became caliph (101 - 105 A.H./720 - 724
A.D.), he seized Fadak and they (Ali's children) were again
dispossessed, robbed of their property. It fell into the possession of
the children of Marwan ibn al-Hakam, cousin of ‘Othman ibn Affan, as it
had previously used to be. They passed it from one to another till their
authority came to an end. It was then that it passed to the hands of
Banu al-Abbas, the Abbasids or Abbasides or Abbasis.

When "Abul-Abbas" Abdullah as-Saffah became the first caliph of the
Abbasid dynasty (132 - 136 A.H./749 - 754 A.D.), he returned Fadak to
the children of Fatima (sa), handing it over to Abdullah ibn al-Hassan
ibn al-Hassan [known as al-Hassan al-Muthanna or al-Hassan II] son of
Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as). When "Abu Ja’far" Abdullah al-Mansur
ad-Dawaniqi (136 - 158 A.H./754 -775 A.D.) became caliph, he confiscated
Fadak from the offspring of Imam al-Hassan C. When Muhammed al-Mahdi,
son of al-Mansur, became caliph (158 - 169 A.H./775 - 785 A.D.), he
returned Fadak to the children of Fatima (sa). Then Musa al-Hadi ibn
al-Mahdi (169 - 170 A.H./785 - 786 A.D.) and his brother Harun ar-Rashid
(170 - 193 A.H./786 - 809 A.D.) confiscated it from the descendants of
Fatima (sa). It found itself in the possession of Banu al-Abbas till the
time when al-Ma’mun became caliph (193 - 218 A.H./813 - 833 A.D.).
Al-Ma’mun al-Abbasi gave it back to the descendants of Fatima (sa) in
210 A.H./826 A.D.).

It is narrated through al-Mahdi ibn Sabiq that al-Ma’mun one day sat to
hear the complaints of the people and to judge in their disputes. The
first complaint which he received caused him to weep on considering it.
When he asked where the defending representative of the children of
Fatima (sa) daughter of the Holy Prophet (S) was, an old man stood up
and came forth. He argued with him about Fadak, and al-Ma’mun, too,
argued till the first won the argument over al-Ma’mun, as we read on p.
209 of *Al-Awa'il*. Al-Ma’mun summoned the *faqihs* and questioned them
about the claim of the descendants of Fatima (sa).

They narrated to al-Ma’mun saying that the Holy Prophet (S) gave Fadak
to Fatima (sa) as a gift and that after the death of the Holy Prophet
(S), Fatima (sa) demanded Abu Bakr to return it to her. He asked her to
bring witnesses to her claim regarding this gift. She brought Ali,
al-Hassan, al-Husayn (as) and Umm Ayman  as her witnesses.

They testified in the case in her favor. Abu Bakr rejected their
testimony. Then al-Ma’mun asked the *faqihs*: "What is your view about
Umm Ayman?" They replied, 'she is a woman to whom the Holy Prophet (S)
testified that she is a resident of Paradise."Al-Ma’mun disputed at
length with them and forced them to accept his argument. They finally
confessed that Ali, al-Hassan, al-Husayn (as) and Umm Ayman  had
testified only to the truth. When they unanimously adopted this stand,
he restored Fadak to the descendants of Fatima (sa) as we read on pp.
195-96 of Vol. 3 of the famous history book, *Tarikh*, by the earliest
historian, al-Ya’qubi.

Then al-Ma’mun ordered the Fadak estate to be registered as the property
of the descendants of Fatima (sa). Once it was registered, al-Ma’mun
signed the deed in person. Then he wrote a letter to his governor in
Medina, Qutham ibn Ja’far, as follows:

"Be informed that Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as), exercising the authority
vested on him by the divine religion as the caliph, successor and
kinsman of the Holy Prophet (S), considered himself more worthy of
following the precedent of the Holy Prophet (S) and of carrying out his
commands. And (the chief is more entitled) to restore to the rightful
persons any endowment gifted by the Holy Prophet (S) or anything which
the Holy Prophet (S) had gifted to anyone.

The success and safeguarding of Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) is done by
Allah, and he is particularly anxious to act in a way which will win the
pleasure of the Almighty for him. Verily, the Holy Prophet (S) had
gifted the estate of Fadak to his daughter, Fatima (sa). He had
transferred its ownership to her. It is a clear and an established fact.
None of the kindred of the Holy Prophet (S) has any difference of view
in this regard. Fatima (sa) always claimed that which was more worthy
(to be justified) than the person (Abu Bakr) whose word was accepted.

Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) considers it right and proper to restore
Fadak to the heirs of Fatima (sa). He will hereby win nearness to Allah
Almighty by establishing His justice and right. It will win the
appreciation of the Holy Prophet (S) by carrying his commandments into
effect. Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) has commanded that this restoration
of Fadak should duly be registered. This command should be transmitted
to all officials.

"As it was a custom to proclaim on every annual *hajj* gathering after
the death of the Holy Prophet (S), anyone to whom the Holy Prophet had
promised by way of a gift or a present should come forward. His
statement will be accepted and the promise will thus be fulfilled.
Certainly, Fatima (sa) had a superior right to have her statements
accepted in the matter of the gifting of Fadak by the Holy Prophet to
her.

"Verily, Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) has commanded his servant, Mubarak
al-Tabari, to restore Fadak to the descendants of Fatima (sa) the
daughter of the Holy Prophet (S), in all its borders, rights and
servants attached thereto, cereal crops and other things.

"The same has been restored to Muhammed ibn Yahya ibn al-Hassan ibn Zaid
ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) and Muhammed ibn
Abdullah ibn al-Hassan ibn Ali ibn al-Husayn ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (as).

"Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) appointed both of them as agents
representing the owners of the lands: the heirs of Fatima (sa). Be then
informed that this is the view of Imam Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) and that
Allah has inspired him to obey the order of Allah and to win His
pleasure and the pleasure of the Holy Prophet (S). Let also your
subordinates know this. Behave towards Muhammed ibn Yahya and Muhammed
ibn Abdullah in the same manner as you used to behave towards Mubarak
al-Tabari. Help them both in everything which has anything to do with
its flourishing and prosperity, its improvement in abundance of cereals
by Allah's will, and that is the end of the matter."

This document was dated Wednesday, two nights past Dhul-Qi’dah, of the
year 210 A.H. which coincided with February 14, 826 A.D.

During the period of al-Ma’mun's government, Fadak was in the possession
of Fatima's descendants. This continued during the caliphate of
al-Mu’tasim (218 - 227 A.H./833 - 842 A.D.) and that of al-Wathiq (227 -
232 A.H./842 - 847 A.D.).

When Ja’far al-Mutawakkil became caliph (232 - 247 A.H./847 - 861 A.D.),
the one among them who was marked as an arch-enemy of the progeny of the
Holy Prophet (S), both of those alive and of those dead, gave the order
to again confiscate Fadak from the descendants of Fatima (sa). He seized
it and gave it to his poet Harmalah al-Hajjam (the cupper).

After the death of al-Hajjam, he gave it to al-Bazyar (the falconer, a
native of Tabaristan), according to *Kashf al-Ghumma*, Vol. 2, pp. 121 -
122; *Bihar al-Anwar* [1st old ed.], Vol. 8, p. 108 and *Safinat
al-Bihar*, Vol. 2, p. 351. Abu Hilal al-’Askari stated that his name was
Abdullah ibn ‘’Umar al-Bazyar and added: "... And there were in it
(Fadak) eleven date-palm trees which the Holy Prophet (S) had planted
with his own hands.

The descendants of Abu Talib used to pick these dates. When pilgrims
(*hujjaj*) entered Medina, these descendants donated the dates to them.
Through this, they received a considerable return. This news reached
al-Mutawakkil. He ordered Abdullah ibn ‘’Umar to pick the produce and to
squeeze it into juice. Abdullah ibn ‘’Umar sent a man named Bishr ibn
Umayyah ath-Thaqafi who squeezed the produce into juice. It was reported
that he made it into wine..., *Astaghfirullah*"! It had not reached
Basra, on its way to this Mutawakkil despot, before decaying. By then
al-Mutawakkil was killed, as we read on p. 209 of *Al-Awa'il*.

When al-Mutawakkil was killed and al-Muntasir (his son) succeeded him
(247 - 248 A.H./861 - 862 A.D.), the latter issued an order to restore
Fadak to its rightful owners, the descendants of al-Hassan and al-Husayn
C, awarding grants to them in order to mitigate them. This took place in
248 A.H./862 A.D. according to the following references:*Fath
al-Buldan*, Vol. 1, pp. 33 - 38; *Mu’jam al-Buldan*, Vol. 4, pp. 238 -
240; *Tarikh*, al-Ya’qubi, Vol. 2, p. 199; Vol. 3, pp. 48, 195 - 196;
*Al-Tarikh Al-Kamil*, Ibn al-Athir, Vol. 2, pp. 224 - 225; Vol. 3, pp.
457, 497; Vol. 5, p. 63; Vol. 7, p. 116; *Al-’Iqd al-Farid*, Vol. 4, pp.
216, 283, 435; *Wafa' al-Wafa'*, Vol. 3, pp. 999 - 1000; Ibn Sa’d,
*Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra*, Vol. 5, pp. 286 - 287; *Tarikh al-Khulafa'*, pp.
231 - 232, 356; *Muruj al-Dhahab*, Vol. 4, p. 82; *Sirat ‘’Umar ibn
Abdul-Aziz*, Ibn al-Jawzi, p. 110; *Subh al-A’sha*, Vol. 4, p. 291;
*Jamharat Rasa"il al-’Arab*, Vol. 2, pp. 331 - 332; Vol. 3, pp. 509 -
510; *A’lam an-Nisa'*, Vol. 3, pp. 1211 - 1212; Ibn Abul-Hadid, *Sharh
Nahjul-Balagha*, Vol. 16, pp. 277 - 278; *Al-Awa'il*, p. 209; *Kashf
al-Ghumma*, Vol. 2, pp. 120 - 122; *Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 8, pp. 107 -
108.

It seemed that Fadak was re-seized from the descendants of Fatima (sa)
after the death of Abdul-Nasir "al-Muntasir Billah", which took place in
248 A.H./862 A.D., because "Abul-Hassan"Ali ibn Isa al-Irbili (d. 692
A.H./1293 A.D.) stated that al-Mu’tadid (279 - 289 A.H./892 - 902 A.D.)
returned Fadak to the descendants of Fatima (sa). Then he mentioned that
al-Muqtafi (289 - 295 A.H./902 - 908 A.D.) seized it from them. It is
said also that al-Muqtadir (295 - 320 A.H./908 - 932 A.D.) returned it
to them (to the descendants of Fatima [Ø¹]), according to *Kashf
al-Ghumma*, Vol. 2, p. 122; *Bihar al-Anwar*, Vol. 8, p. 108 and
*Safinat al-Bihar*, Vol. 2, p. 351.

After this long period of re-seizing and restoring, Fadak was returned
to the possession of the usurpers and their heirs. It seems there is no
further mention that such changing hands was ever made in history, and
the curtain fell. ***"Is it then that the judgment of (the times of
pagan) ignorance that they desire? And who (else) can be better than
Allah to judge for a people of assured faith?" (Qur"an, 5:50).***

Back to the Ikhtisas Book
-------------------------

He, may Allah have mercy on him, has also narrated in the same book, I
mean *Al-Ikhtisas*, another incident stating that the “second caliph”
kicked her house door with his foot, breaking it, then he kicked Fatima
(sa) with his foot, causing her to miscarry Muhsin.[^12]

He has also narrated another tradition at the end of the same book
wherein he quotes Abu ‘Abdullah (as) as saying, “... and [God condemns]
the killer of the Commander of the Faithful, the killer of Fatima, the
killer of al-Muhsin, the killer of al-Hassan, and the killer of
al-Husayn..., etc.”[^13]

As regarding the accuracy of attributing the book titled *Al-Ikhtisas*
to Shaikh al-Mufid, we have stated in a query to follow that doubting
the accuracy of attributing it to Shaikh al-Mufid is out of question in
the absence of an acceptable or a reasonable justification. We also said
that it appears that al-Mufid chose this part of the book from
*Al-Ikhtisas* by Ibn ‘Imran; thereupon, his choice of this tradition in
particular, may Allah have mercy on him, is due to a merit which he saw
and which caused him to prefer it over others.

FOURTH: Shaikh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him, discussed what
al-Zahra’ (sa) had to go through in more than one place in his other
books as well. So, notice the following:

1. Al-Kanji al-Shafi’i has cited Shaikh al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy
on him, saying that the latter added to what is narrated by the mass of
others the following: Fatima (sa) miscarried a boy after the demise of
the Prophet S, one who had been named by the Messenger of Allah S as
Muhsin. This is something which is not reported by transmitters with the
exception of Ibn Qutaybah.”[^14]

Al-Kanji, then, attributes to specifically al-Mufid, may Allah have
mercy on him, the claim that al-Muhsin was miscarried, apparently with
the intention to point out to what he, may Allah have mercy on him,
stated in *Al-Irshad*. There is a strong possibility that he had pointed
out to what *Al-Ikhtisas* has stated. But we would like to say the
following to al-Kanji in this regard: A simple review of the transmitted
texts will demonstrate that many, besides Ibn Qutaybah, had also
transmitted the same, and we will, Insha-Allah, mention many of such
texts in the parts of this book.

2. Shaikh al-Mufid has stated in his book titled *Al-Muqanna’a*, which
deals with Shi’i *fiqh*, and also in the book titled *Al-Mazar*, a
particular *ziyara* of the truthful one and the pure, which states that
she (sa) is a martyr. In it, we read the following: “Peace with you, the
*batul*, the pure martyr.”[^15] What was the reason behind her martyrdom
other than what those folks put her through? Was she (sa) martyred
because of an ailment that afflicted her? Or did she have an accident
such as falling from her house’s rooftop?! Or was she anonymously
assassinated?! Texts will be cited which al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy
on him, recorded as they fit in the section dedicated to texts by the
will of Allah.

3. Al-Mufid, may Allah sanctify him, recorded the attempts to set the
house of al-Zahra’ (sa) to fire in his book titled *Al-Amali* from
al-Ji’abi from al-’Abbas ibn al-Mughirah from Ahmed ibn Mansur al-Ramadi
from Sa’d ibn ‘Afar from Ibn Lahi’ah from Khalid ibn Yazid from Abu
Hilal from Marwan ibn ‘Othman saying, “When people swore the oath of
allegiance to Abu Bakr, Ali (as), together with al-Zubayr and al-Miqdad,
remained at the house of Fatima (sa) and refused to get out (to swear
it). ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab said, ‘Set the house on fire.’ Al-Zubayr came
out with his sword unsheathed... Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) came out and was
met by Thabit ibn Qays ibn Shammas who asked him, ‘What are you going to
do, O Father of al-Hassan?’ He said, ‘They wanted to set my house to
fire while Abu Bakr is sitting on the pulpit as people swear the oath of
allegiance to him, and he is neither defending us nor finding fault with
the assault...’ Thabit said to him, ‘My hand shall never part from yours
till I am killed defending you.’ They all went out and returned to
Medina. Fatima was standing at her door. There was nobody inside her
house at the moment. She said, ‘I have never seen people whose presence
is worse than yours. You abandoned the corpse of the Messenger of Allah
S inside the coffin lying in front of us and settled your own affair
among you without granting us any authority, then you did what you did,
safeguarding no right for us.’”[^16]

This tradition is quite clear in its indication that an attempt was made
to enter her house by force and that they assaulted its residents
because Ali (as) said, “... while Abu Bakr is sitting on the pulpit as
people swear the oath of allegiance to him, and he is neither defending
us nor finding fault with the assault...’ There was an assault going on
which needed to be stopped and an oppression which needed to be
denounced. Also, the sentence saying “They wanted to set my house to
fire” implies that they did make such an attempt such as gathering
firewood, especially when he described how Abu Bakr was “... neither
defending us nor finding fault with the assault,” that is, he neither
objected to, nor did he stop, what they wanted to do, i.e. burning his
house. So, the issue was not merely an empty threat. This is supported
by his saying “... They wanted...” instead of saying “They threatened to
set my house to fire.”

This narrative is clearly indicative of the house which they were going
to assault was inside the Mosque facing the pulpit of the Messenger of
Allah S where Abu Bakr was sitting to receive the oath of allegiance
after he had returned from the *saqifa* accompanied by his supporters
who were escorting him to the Mosque and who were forcing people to
swear the oath of allegiance to him. What was going on did go on before
his very eyes; he neither stopped it nor even denounced it.

It is quite obvious that the grave of the Messenger of Allah S was at
the house of Fatima (sa), not at the house of ‘A’isha, as we
investigated and verified[^17]. They neither respected the sanctity of
the grave, nor that of the Mosque, nor that of the house, nor that of
al-Zahra’ (sa)...

4. Al-Mufid has also said the following in his book titled *Al-Jamal*:
“When people from Bana Hashim and others assembled at Fatima’s house to
demonstrate their objection to the authority of Abu Bakr and to show
their differences with him, ‘’Umar ibn al-Khattab sent Qunfath and said
to him, ‘Get them out of the house. If they do not get out, collect
firewood at its door and tell them that if they do not get out to swear
the oath of allegiance, you will set the house to fire.’ Then he
(‘’Umar) went with a group of men which included al-Mughirah ibn Shu’bah
al-Thaqafi and Salim slave of Abu Huthayfah till they reached the door
of Ali, peace with him. He (‘’Umar) called out: ‘O Fatima daughter of
the Messenger of Allah! Get those who have sought shelter in your house
out so that they may swear the oath of allegiance and join the Muslims
in what they have agreed on, otherwise, by Allah, I shall set them all
to fire!’”[^18] This narrative is quite famous. What he (al-Mufid), may
Allah have mercy on him, has written in his book titled *Al-Irshad* what
we have already quoted above, so there is no need to quote it again
here.

Al-Ikhtisas Book by Shaikh al-Mufid
-----------------------------------

We have already stated that someone has made casting some doubt about
the attribution of the book titled *Al-Ikhtisas* to Shaikh al-Mufid an
excuse for refusing to rely on what he narrates of the oppression to
which al-Zahra’ (sa) was subjected and to refuse to attribute narrating
it to al-Mufid, may Allah have mercy on him.

We say that after having taken into consideration what is said about
*Al-Ikhtisas* by Shaikh al-Mufid, we have found such questions to be
unreliable to cast doubt about the accuracy of attributing all of this
to such a great man of knowledge. We are here briefly answering some of
the issues which were raised about this book, so let us say the
following:

1. There are many traditions in the book which start thus: “I was told
by Ja’far ibn al-Husayn, the believer..., etc.,” so, some people thought
that the book was written by this man!

But, mind you, there are many other traditions in the book which do not
start with the name of this man but with the names of others, or they
may add other individuals with the use of a conjunction pronoun. So, all
of this contradicts the attribution of the book to the said individual.

2. Authors of encyclopedias, such as al-Najjashi’s *Rijal*, al-Tusi’s
*Fahrist* and Ibn Shahr Ashub’s *Ma’alim al-’Ulema’,* do not refer to
this book as being among those authored by al-Mufid.

The answer to this is that all these compilers did not mention all what
al-Mufid had written. Rather, each author listed some of them, and
*Al-Ikhtisas* is one book which they did not list. We will *Insha-Allah*
discuss why they did not list it among his works.

3. The handwritten copies of this book contain a great deal of
confusion: The book’s sermon in one copy is found at the end of all its
pages in another!

The answer is that the pages of some copies may have become out of
order, so the compilers put them together the best that they could.

4. Here is another question: “Muhammed ibn ‘Abd al-Rahman said..., etc.”
“Who is this man?!”

The answer is derived from what the author himself says, as was
customary among ancient authors, and not the statement of others who
transmitted him, may Allah have mercy on him.

It is possible that this statement was written by some people as
explanatory, then the copyists inserted it in the original through an
inserious mistake which needs no proving. His choice of al-Mufid rather
than anyone else was due to the reference to some of al-Mufid’s mentors
in the book. It is said to him: “Just as these were his mentors, they
were the mentors of others as well.” But there are in the book others
who are not known to be al-Mufid’s mentors, that the book is al-Mufid’s,
and that the other possibilities were not taken into consideration, and
they are more numerous!

5. The book is formatted more like a collection of narratives most of
which deal with the virtues of Ahl al-Bayt, peace with them. It does not
follow its sequence, according to a logical and harmonious procedure,
whereas al-Mufid is characterized by precision and innovation.

We say that this is not a fault in the book. The objective of some
authors may be to write collections of narratives or something else.
Al-Mufid himself is the writer of the book titled *Al-Amali*, a modern
book which is also formatted like a collection of narratives. Shaikh
al-Mufid’s precision and innovation do not have to manifest themselves
in his modern books as is obvious. Regardless of this fact, the book is
a selection by Shaikh al-Mufid of citations from the book titled
*Al-Ikhtisas* by Ibn ‘Imran as we shall see.

6. There are researches in the book which are not in sync with
al-Mufid’s views in all his books, nor does the general framework of the
book itself indicate that it is authored by an intellectual such as
Shaikh al-Mufid; rather, it is closer to the writing of a modernist such
as Shaikh al-Saduq, for example.

The answer to this is already known from what we have already stated,
that is, the objective may have been to safeguard some traditions within
a collection of narratives as is the case with *Al-Amali*, for example,
one of which was written by Shaikh al-Mufid. Add to this the possibility
that the compilation of these traditions may have taken place before
al-Mufid became an *imam* in tenets, *fiq*, etc.

The objective behind compiling them may not have been to put them
together as a book artistically arranged which people handle and on
which they rely. Add to this the fact that the view relevant to the
traditions or to the creed does not prohibit the importation of what may
contradict it, such as the traditions which may agree therewith.

A scholar is characterized by conforming to the rules of the research of
*hadith* when he studies it and to also uphold all the restrictions and
follow the procedures adhered to with regard to traditions and to
transmitting and selecting them while assuming the role of a
traditionist. For this reason, we find the traditionists narrating
contradictory incidents in their books despite their adoption and
acceptance of a particular group thereof, especially in the area of
*fiqh*, and this can be seen from reviewing the books of al-Kulayni and
al-Saduq as well as those of others.

We have seen how a scholar writes assuming the role of a traditionist,
as is the case with al-Tusi, may Allah sanctify him, who wrote
*Al-Nihaya*, which is a collection of narratives. A philosopher may
write like those who introduce their ideas tot the public, as happened
to Shaikh Nasir ad-Din al-Tusi in some of his letters. Or a traditionist
may write like a philosopher, as happened to al-Fakhr al-Razi. A *sufi*
may assume the role of a philosopher, as is the case with al-Ghazali,
and those like them are quite few.

On the other hand, we say that some views may change as time goes by
especially if a scholar holds a view and enjoys an intellectual vitality
and treads the path of perfection in his awareness, intellect and
knowledge. The degrees of an author’s awareness of certain
considerations which he observes as he from time to time writes. Yet we
shall mention that the contents of this book are selections by al-Mufid
from another book.

7. Another observation is recorded about *Al-Ikhtisas* which is: the
existence of fault or sometimes ambiguity in referring to some pronouns
in it, or the existence of a large gap between the pronoun and what it
denotes.

This point has been answered by saying that such is not confined only to
this book but does exist in various ones such as *Al-Kafi, Al-Tahthib*
and *Al-Wasa'il* as well.

This issue is rendered to various reasons; among them is that the author
may come across a narrative, so he places it somewhere in his book,
paying no attention to the necessity of reconsidering the sequence which
is supposed to be observed in placing the pronoun and what it denotes
between two narratives separated by a new tradition or a new statement.

8. One of their criticism about this book is that its author once quotes
from books like those of al-Saduq, or from *Basa’ir al-Darajat* or from
other Shaikhs.

If we discern the Shaikhs (mentors) whom he has quoted, we will find
five of them to be mentors of al-Mufid and sixteen others for whom
al-Mufid does not quote a single narrative except in his book titled
*Al-Ikhtisas*. On the other hand, there are mentors of al-Mufid who
enjoy a distinctive status, while there is not a single narration about
them in *Al-Ikhtisas*, such as al-Ji’abi, Ahmed ibn Muhammed ibn
al-Hassan ibn al-Walad, al-Sayrafi, and others.

The answer to this point is that the author of the book is apparently
Ibn ‘Imran who was chosen by al-Mufid who quoted what he liked from him.
The book’s sources are, then, the mentors of Ibn ‘Imran, not those of
al-Mufid. There will be more to back this fact by the will of Allah
Almighty.

SECOND: It is possible that the author of the book wrote it before he
had many mentors. He, may Allah have mercy on him, may have selected all
or some of its narratives from the books which he had with him, and
there is nothing wrong with that.

THIRD: The (critics) say that some of those quoted by the author of the
book are not quoted by al-Mufid in his books. This cannot serve as
evidence to deny his authorship of the book. He may in one place quote a
mentor who was not quoted by his own other mentors. He may learn from
new mentors, so he writes about them then leaves them to take other
mentors for reasons varying along the passage of time according to
conditions, circumstances and objectives.

Is there among the scholars of *hadith* anyone who preconditions the
narrator to quote in all his book each and every mentor of his from whom
he learned during his lengthy scholarly history?!

Having stated all the above, there are many copies of *Al-Ikhtisas*
which are as follows:

1. The copy written from the one by Shaikh al-Hurr[^19] which has
attributed the writing of the book to Shaikh al-Mufid without any
ambiguity about its being written by him. The following had been written
on it: The Book of *Al-Ikhtisas* by Shaikh al-Mufid, Muhammed ibn
Muhammed ibn al-Nu’man, selected from *Al-Ikhtisas* by Ahmed ibn
al-Husayn ibn ‘Imran.” At its conclusion, he wrote the following: “This
is the complete text of the book *Al-Ikhtisas* by Shaikh al-Mufid, may
Allah sanctify him.”

As regarding the copy of Shaikh al-Hurr himself, it was written on it
that it was the property of Shaikh al-Hurr, may Allah have mercy on him,
in 1087 A.H. The date of its writing is not known, and it is available
at the Library of Ayatollah [Muhsin] al-Hakim, may Allah have mercy on
him, in Najaf al-Ashraf (Iraq).

2. There is another copy at Library Spah Salar-Tehran with the date of
its writing as 1118 A.H. Its scribe has written down saying that the
book is abridged from *Al-Ikhtisas* by Ahmed ibn al-Husayn ibn ‘Imran.
This statement is not different from what is written on the copy of
Shaikh al-Hurr because what is meant by it is that *Al-Ikhtisas* itself
if Ibn ‘Imran’s, and this does not contradict its abridged version to be
Shaikh al-Mufid’s as well.

3. There is an old copy at the Library of the mausoleum of Imam al-Rida
(as) with the date of its writing indicated as 1055 A.H. After several
pages, the following statement is written:

“This book is extracted from the book titled *Al-Ikhtisas* by Abu Ali,
Ahmed ibn al-Husayn ibn Ahmed ibn ‘Imran, may Allah have mercy on him.”

This statement, too, does not contradict what is written on the copy of
Shaikh al-Hurr himself for the same afore-mentioned reason, that is,
*Al-Ikhtisas* itself is written by Ibn ‘Imran while its abridged version
is Shaikh al-Mufid’s.

It seems that some of the pages of this copy are ahead of or following
those of other versions, as it appears from observing it closely, and
this happens for many reasons.

So, there is no objection to attributing the printed book,
*Al-Ikhtisas*, which agrees with the first two editions, to Shaikh
al-Mufid since he selected its contents from Ibn ‘Imran’s book, so much
so that he sets out to select its precious legacies and jewels of
narratives. The testimony to this is the fact that the book titled
*Al-Fusul al-Mukhtara*, which is selections by al-Sharif al-Radi from
the contents of *Al-’Uyun wal Mahasin* by al-Mufid, is not counted among
the works of al-Sharif. Rather, its attribution to al-Mufid is more
obvious and clear and is still counted among his works as is well known.

[^1]: Al-Shafi, Talkhis, Vol. 3, p. 156.

[^2]: Jannat al-Ma’wa, pp. 78-81.

[^3]: Al-Bid’ wal-Tarikh, Vol. 5, p. 20.

[^4]: Ibn Abul-Hadid, Sharh Nahjul-Balagha, Vol. 2, p. 60.

[^5]: Dala’il al-Sidq, Vol. 3, section 1.

[^6]: Al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, Vol. 1, p. 355 (edition published by the al
al-Bayt for the revival of the legacy of Beirut, Lebanon, in 1416
A.H./1995 A.D.).

[^7]: Al-Shafi, Talkhis, Vol. 3, p. 156.

[^8]: Ibid.

[^9]: Ibid.

[^10]: Al-Mufid, Al-Irshad, Vol. 1, p. 189 (published by the al al-Bayt
(as) Foundation)

[^11]: Al-Mufid, Al-Ikhtisas, p. 185. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol.
29, p. 192.

[^12]: Refer to Al-Ikhtisas, p. 344 and Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 29, pp. 192
and Vol. 28, p. 227 and Vol. 7, p. 270.

[^13]: Al-Mufid, Al-Ikhtisas, p. 344. Kamil al-Ziyarat, p. 327, through
another isnad. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 7, p. 270 and Vol. 8, p.
213. He also cited al-Saffar’s book titled Basa’ir al-Darajat.

[^14]: Kifayat al-Talib, p. 413.

[^15]: Al-Muqanna\`a, p. 459. Al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 97, p.
195. Al-Balad al-Amin, p. 198.

[^16]: Al-Mufid, Al-Amali, pp. 50-59.

[^17]: Refer to my book titled Dirasat wa Buhuth fal Tarikh wal Islam
(studies and researches in history and Islam), Vol. 1, p. 169, the
research titled “Where was the Prophet buried: at the House of \`A’isha
or at Fatima’s House?”

[^18]: Al-Jamal (new edition), pp. 117-18.

[^19]: This copy is available at the sacred mausoleum of Imam al-Rida
(as) in the city of Mash-had, Iran, written in either 1085 or 1087 A.H.
(1674 or 1676 A.D.).


