Lesson 33: The Need to Hold the Tongue and Censure Its Defects
==============================================================

“O Abu Dharr! A person who does not guard his tongue renders his good
deeds useless. O Abu Dharr! Do not be a fault-finder, bootlicker,
flatterer or argumentative person. Abu Dharr! Man is remote from Allah
for as long as he is bad mannered.”

The Reciprocal Effects of Deeds or Annulment [Ihbat] and Proscription [Takfir]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In these explanations, the Noble Prophet (S) explains the importance of
watching over the tongue in a different manner. The reason for this is
that man ought not to leave his tongue free to say whatever his heart
desires but he has to hold his tongue and reflect over what he says.
Because talking is very easy and sometimes minor motivations become a
cause for too much talking or speaking ill of other people, the
prominent religious scholars have tried by the use of different
expressions and various methods to advise us to take care and not let
our tongues reign freely.

One of those is the Noble Prophet’s (S) expression that anyone that does
not guard his tongue has squandered his deeds and leaves no good works
to his account. Perhaps, the point of this expression is that the tongue
leaves calamitous effects in the heart and soul of man and breeds
mischief as well as depravity which exterminates the rest of man’s deeds
because as has been recorded in the verses of the Qur’an and
successively narrated *hadith*s, man’s deeds affect one another:
sometimes man does a certain deed but later on he does another act that
changes the quality of his previous deed and leaves such an effect on it
that it wipes it out.

In books of theology a discussion has been held under the title
‘annulment and proscription [or excommunication of deeds]’ [*ihbat* *wa*
*takfir*]. Annulment [*habt*] means good deeds becoming ineffective;
that is to say the bad deeds of man annul his good deeds and make them
useless and ineffective while proscription [or excommunication]
[*takfir*] denotes compensation of sins in such a way that good and
decent deeds make up for the breach of previous deeds. And, because the
root of all our deeds is belief and disbelief, the most delicate
instance of annulment and proscription [or excommunication] is faith and
infidelity.

Faith and decent deeds which man acquires after sinning and perpetrating
indecent deeds compensate for previous infidelity and bad deeds and like
a very bright light, wipe out previous darkness, but the opposite is
also true. Disbelief and indecent deeds at the end of man’s life can
wipe out the effects of previous faith and good deeds and darken man’s
record and his destiny and, like fire which falls on a harvested yield,
they burn everything suddenly. In other words, faith is like a very
luminous light which brightens the heart and irradiates the psyche and
eliminates darkness and infidelity.

As long as the psyche of man is in this material abode—the world of
changes and transformations—it is always on the verge of brightness and
darkness as well as increase and decrease of the light and darkness,
until it wears the garment of the transient abode and when the
opportunity for the choice of belief and disbelief is closed to him
there will be no chance left for him no matter how much he hopes to
return to the world once again and embark upon ridding himself of the
darkness:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّى إِذَا جَاءَ أَحَدَهُمُ الْمَوْتُ قَالَ رَبِّ ارْجِعُونِ \*
لَعَلِّي أَعْمَلُ صَالِحًا فِيمَا تَرَكْتُ كَلاَّ إِنَّهَا كَلِمَةٌ
هُوَ قَائِلُهَا وَمِنْ وَرَائِهِمْ بَرْزَخٌ إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When death comes to one of them, he says, ‘My Lord! Take me back,
that I may act righteously in what I have left behind.’ ‘By no means!
These are mere words that he says.’ And ahead of them is a barrier until
the day they will be resurrected.”***[^1]

In the viewpoint of the Qur’an, there is no room for the least doubt in
regard to the influence between faith and infidelity and there are many
verses denoting this issue, amongst them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ بِاللَّهِ وَيَعْمَلْ صَالِحًا يُكَفِّرْ عَنْهُ
سَيِّئَاتِهِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever has faith in Allah and acts righteously, He shall
absolve him of his misdeeds.”***[^2]

Elsewhere, it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَمَنْ يَرْتَدِدْ مِنْكُمْ عَنْ دِينِهِ فَيَمُتْ وَهُوَ كَافِرٌ
فَأُوْلَئِكَ حَبِطَتْ أَعْمَالُهُمْ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ
وَأُوْلَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ النَّارِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever of you turns away from his religion and dies
faithless—they are the ones whose works have failed in this world and
the hereafter. They shall be the inmates of the Fire, and they shall
remain in it forever.”***[^3]

The relationship between faith and infidelity exists between good deeds
and bad deeds but not in a general sense and not in such a way that
whenever a good deed is recorded on man’s record of deeds, a previous
bad deed is erased or that whenever a bad deed is recorded, a previous
good and decent deed is blotted out; however, in regard to deeds we have
to believe in a detailed exposition in this sense that some good
deeds—if they are done in an acceptable and worthy manner—wipe out the
effects of previous bad deeds. For example, repentance causes sins to be
forgiven if it is done correctly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يَعْمَلْ سُوءًا أَوْ يَظْلِمْ نَفْسَهُ ثُمَّ يَسْتَغْفِرِ
اللّهَ يَجِد اللّهَ غَفُورًا رَحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever commits evil or wrongs himself and then pleads to Allah for
forgiveness, will find Allah All-forgiving, All-merciful.”***[^4]

Elsewhere, it also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ إِذَا فَعَلُوا فَاحِشَةً أَوْ ظَلَمُوا أَنْفُسَهُمْ
ذَكَرُوا اللّهَ فَاسْتَغْفَرُوا لِذُنُوبِهِمْ وَمَنْ يَغْفِرُ
الذُّنُوبَ إِلاَّ اللّهُ وَلَمْ يُصِرُّوا عَلَى مَا فَعَلُوا وَهُمْ
يَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who, when they commit an indecent act or wrong themselves,
remember Allah, and plead for [Allah’s] forgiveness for their sins—and
who forgives sins except Allah?—and who do not persist in what they have
committed while they know.”***[^5]

Therefore, repentance is like a ray of light which shines on a dark spot
and makes it bright. It is not true though that every good deed wipes
out the effects of every sin. For this reason, it is possible for a
believer to initially taste divine retribution before finally finding
his way to eternal paradise.

The soul of man has various aspects and every group of good and bad
deeds is related to one of its cases, for example the good deeds which
are related to ‘case A’ do not wipe out the effects of sin related to
‘case B’ unless the good deed is so bright that it permeates the other
aspects of the soul too, or the sin is so polluting that it contaminates
the other aspects of the soul, too. For instance, in regard to prayer,
the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمْ الصَّلاَةَ طَرَفَيِ النَّهَارِ وَزُلْفًا مِن اللَّيْلِ إِنَّ
الْحَسَنَاتِ يُذْهِبْنَ السَّيِّئَاتِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Maintain the prayer at the two ends of the day and during the early
hours of the night. Indeed good deeds efface misdeeds.”***[^6]

Some of the sins such as bad conduct in regard to parents and drinking
alcohol are a hindrance to the admittance of worship. In regard to the
ill effects of drinking alcohol, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“My Lord swore and then stated, ‘My slave does not drink alcohol in the
world save that on the Day of Resurrection I will make him drink boiling
water equivalent to the amount of alcohol which he drank’.”[^7]

It is worth mentioning that good and bad deeds sometimes have effects
with regard to joys and sorrows or bestowal and negation of graces in
this very world, especially good deeds done towards one’s father and
mother, which can be a cause of long life and repulsion of calamities
and afflictions. On the contrary, lack of respect to other people
(especially teachers and mentors) can result in deprivation of graces.

Yes, sometimes good deeds make up for previous bad deeds and sometimes
bad deeds wipe out prior good actions. For as long as man is in this
world, these influences exist between our endeavors. Allegorically, the
heart or soul of man is like a room which is sometimes dark and becomes
bright once light shines in it—sometimes the room is bright and becomes
dark once the light is switched off.

Therefore, for as long as man lives in this world, he is exposed to
these changes and transformations and it is not true that if man does a
good deed the effects thereof remain forever, but it is possible for
those good deeds to go to waste as the result of doing inappropriate
deeds.

Therefore, the mutual effects of deeds upon one another is a general
principle on the basis of which some sins wipe out the effects of some
previous good deeds or even become a hindrance for the admittance of
good deeds which will be done in the future. It has been recorded in the
*hadith*s that some sins prevent the acceptance and admittance of good
deeds and prayers even for up to forty days:

“For up to forty days Allah does not accept the prayers and fasting of a
person who gossips about a Muslim man and woman unless the person
gossiped about forgives the gossiper.”[^8]

In another *hadith*, it has been recorded that the Noble Prophet (S)
stated:

“Purify your income in order for your supplication to be granted; verily
the supplication of a man who eats illicit food is not granted for up to
forty days.”[^9]

In regard to drinking alcohol, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“For forty days the prayers of a person who drinks alcohol are not
accepted.”[^10]

The purport of the Noble Prophet’s (S) sayings in this section of the
*hadith* is that if a person is not careful of his tongue, does not hold
it, and says whatever flows across it, no good deeds may remain for him;
that is to say, the tongue is so influential that it can eliminate all
the previous good deeds. This is a warning to man not to lightly
perceive this small appendage in the mouth and reflect before talking in
order to fathom the possible effects the words he wants to say might
have and whether Allah will be pleased with those words or not. Will
those words leave beneficial effects on the souls of others or not?

After this general advice and recommendation, the Noble Prophet (S)
enumerates some of the specific sins of the tongue. Of course,
mentioning these sins of the tongue is due to the substantial role they
play in changing the personality of a person and in causing his downfall
and also for the reason that man is constantly in danger of being
contaminated by them.

Censuring of Fault-Finding
--------------------------

One of the mean attributes which the Noble Prophet (S) enumerates is the
act of looking for faults in other people. Without the least doubt
fault-finding is one of the unacceptable and inappropriate qualities.

The fault-finder, on account of jealousy and enmity, is always searching
for the defects and weaknesses of other people and thereafter exposing
them to others deriving pleasure from doing this. This mean quality has
been censured in the verses of the Qur’an and the *hadith*s and after
examining them we understand that a person who is always looking for the
faults of Muslims and stigmatizing them is one of the most wicked and
evil of people. Allah, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُحِبُّونَ أَنْ تَشِيعَ الْفَاحِشَةُ فِي الَّذِينَ
آمَنُوا لَهُمْ عَذَابٌ أَلِيمٌ فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالآخِرَةِ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed for those who want indecency to spread among the faithful,
there is a painful punishment in the world and the hereafter.”***[^11]

And the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Every person who spreads and makes apparent the indecent deeds of other
people is like the one who has done that same indecent deed he is
spreading rumors about and every person who searches for the secret
defects of a believer will not die before being afflicted by and
perpetrating that same fault.”[^12]

One of the inducements which impel man to be constantly looking for the
faults of other people is the feeling of lowliness and inferiority. When
man has deficiencies, a low and inferior personality and no assets, he
cannot see the perfections of other people and it is for this reason
that he embarks upon looking for blemishes and damaging the
personalities of others to make their perfections less apparent. He
tries to find the weak points of other people so as to publicize them.
Whenever talk about someone arises, instead of talking about the bright
and positive points of that person, he always talks about their defects.

In a gathering of believers once someone mentions the name of another
believer, on the basis of Islamic manners, some people try only to
mention the good and praiseworthy attributes of the man named but other
people, on account of their weakness in faith, jealousy and inferiority
complex, mention the weak and negative points which they know about that
person and the misdeeds he has committed. Sometimes, they go a step
further and talk about dubious things related to him with much surety
and may even accuse him falsely.

It is a bad habit for man to always endeavor at mentioning the
weaknesses of other people and unfortunately there are a lot of people
who are afflicted with this blight. Every person can test himself when
there is talk about another believer—especially one with whom he is in
competition. Does he praise him or is he pleased when mentioning his
weak points? Does he try by various means to make others aware that
another person has faults?

In a natural manner, a person has to see whether when the name of an
individual is mentioned he loves to mention the good qualities of the
individual and praise and respect him in the presence of other people or
he embarks upon enumerating his weaknesses and bad qualities and makes
him appear small and inferior. This is a very bad habit and its roots,
as has already been said, is jealousy and a feeling of lowliness and
inferiority. He feels pain because of what other people have and he
cannot bear to see other people have what he does not have.

We have to bear in mind that it is very good for us to be such that
whenever the name of a believer is mentioned, we enumerate his good
attributes even if sometimes the conditions and stimulus call for us to
mention the person’s defects, like when man is advising and consulting
with someone in regard to a fault which they are investigating in regard
to a certain individual—which is a special case.

We should not to be bothered by the things other people have and we need
to comprehend that the greatest asset of a believer is his connection
with Allah. A believer does not perceive any other asset save that
connection and, if man comes to possess this asset, he feels greatness
in his soul such that all other great things and assets become inferior
in his eyes.

He has attained a high level and has gotten drowned in the boundless
ocean of greatness and he enjoys the benefits of indescribable pleasure
and gratification and it does not make any difference to him whether
other people respect him or not, or whether they praise him or curse
him. Without the least doubt, such an individual, on whose heart the ray
of faith has shone, is preoccupied with honoring and respecting the
believers because this deed is pleasing to Allah and brings about
proximity to Him.

In contrast to the believer whose asset is only faith and attention to
Allah and who neither becomes pleased by the respect of other people nor
becomes saddened by their disrespect, people who have deficiencies and
do not have the asset of faith perceive the highness of their
personality according to the measure of respect that other people accord
to them. This is what is today termed as ‘social status’.

They conceive their personality according to their social standing and
the opinions of other people in regard to them and their capital is the
positive opinion of other people and their high social standing. They
perceive themselves as having a lofty personality when other people
praise them and being rejected and lacking in personality when they are
reproached and blamed, and they think that the world has come to an end
when others see them in any negative way.

Unfortunately, people who have material and spiritual deficiencies—like
deficiencies in knowledge, spiritual perfections, wealth and material
amenities—cannot see and appreciate the superiorities of other people,
and it is for this reason that they embark upon casting doubt on the
perfections of others to damage their personalities. This is the
attribute of the soul of the fault-finder who is preoccupied with
looking and searching for the faults of other people. Such an individual
puts his worldly and heavenly prosperity in danger and becomes afflicted
by the wrath of Allah as a result of divulging and narrating the defects
of other people.

Regarding the prohibition of fault-finding and gossiping about other
people, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“O servant of Allah! Do not be quick in exposing a person’s fault for he
may be forgiven for it, and do not think yourself safe even for a small
defect because you may be punished for it. Therefore, every one of you
who comes to know the faults of others should not expose them in view of
what he knows about his own faults.”[^13]

Elsewhere, he states that paying attention to one’s own defects prevents
man from looking for the faults of others:

“He who sees his own shortcomings abstains from looking into other
people’s shortcomings.”[^14]

With regard to what has been mentioned, it is befitting that we refrain
from searching for and talking about other people’s defects as well as
damaging the personality of other people and bear in mind that with the
prevalence of the disease of fault-finding in the society, the spirit of
unity, oneness and brotherhood loses its place to the spirit of disunity
and in this case the foundations of the community shake and the
structure of social affairs crumbles.

Likewise, fault-finding gives rise to suspicion, enmity and hatred in
the society and also causes the personality of some individuals to be
trampled underfoot by the whims and caprice of people of weak
personality whose greatness lies only in destroying the personalities of
other people and likewise as a result of the spread of the disease of
fault-finding in the society, ethical bounds disintegrate. Also, this
disease incites and strengthens a spirit of sin and depravity in people
who might have refrained from a great many sins on account of social
considerations.

Censuring of Flattery and Sycophancy
------------------------------------

One of the unsuitable attributes which Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) enumerates is
flattery. The spirit of flattery and sycophancy, like fault-finding,
derives from man’s weakness of character and inferiority complex. In
reality, this is a quality of people with deficiencies of character who
try to make up for their defects by attracting the attention of other
people by flattering them, imagining that perhaps by doing so they may
secure a higher position for themselves.

This is an attribute of people of weak character who do not conceive the
infinite power and dominion of Allah and, as a result, set their greedy
and covetous eyes on other human beings and seek their honor and
greatness from they who themselves are need of Allah. If man sets his
eyes of the Absolute Self-sufficient and seeks help from the Source of
existence, he no longer has any need to flatter other people. In regard
to the fact that only Allah, the Exalted, is worthy of praise, Amir
al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“O my Allah! You deserve handsome description and the highest esteem. If
wish is directed towards Thee, Thou art the best to be wished for. If
hope is reposed in Thee, Thou art the Most Honored to be hoped from. O
my Allah! Thou hast bestowed on me such power that I do not praise any
other than Thee, and I do not eulogize anyone save Thee. I do not direct
my praise towards others who are sources of disappointment and centers
of misgivings. Thou hast kept my tongue away from the praises of human
beings and eulogies of the created and sustained. O my Allah! Every
acclaimer has on whom he praises the right of reward and recompense.
Certainly I have turned to Thee with my eye at the treasure of Thy mercy
and stores of forgiveness…”[^15]

Sometimes, man praises and enumerates the good qualities of a believer
for the sake of pleasing Allah and honoring a believer, but sometimes he
praises other people as a result of covetousness and carnal desires in
order to attract their attention so that they may provide him with
material help whenever he needs them.

The spirit of sycophancy and flattery is one of man’s disagreeable
traits and it is not compatible with faith in Allah because although he
ought to perceive his destiny in the hands of Allah, he conceives his
destiny to be in the hands of others and, in order for them to grant him
good, he embarks upon flattery.

As has been said, the psychological and spiritual source of this
attribute is an inferiority complex; that is to say, man feels
empty-handed and makes himself dependent on others and to earn some good
under the auspices of reliance on them he may stoop to the means of
flattery.

It is worthwhile to pay attention to the repercussions of the spread of
the spirit of flattery in the society and see what effects too much
flattery and praise has on people: beyond the shadow of doubt excessive
praise gives rise to pride and vainglory and produces pampered,
self-satisfied and over-expectant people and incites the feeling of
self-praise and big-headedness and in regard to oppressors. Flattery is
a kind of practical approval and encouragement of their deeds.

Sycophancy and praising of others can give rise to their considering
this praise as a portion of their good attributes and deeds and as a
result of this forget their weak points and, from the opposite side,
make the ugly and illicit deeds which they have committed appear
acceptable in their point of view.

Flattery, besides being a hindrance to some kinds of ethical
edification, changes the course of less capable and selfish individuals
as well as making them daring in displaying their weak moral points and
oppressive, illogical and evil methods. It is for this reason that the
leaders of religion detested this blameworthy method and would warn
their followers to strive their utmost against it. In this regard, the
Noble Prophet (S) stated:

“Throw dirt in the faces of the sycophants.”[^16]

This saying is related to a person who flatters a Muslim; otherwise, the
judgment of someone who flatters an infidel is even harsher. This
expression is meant to prevent the spread and increase of the mentality
of sycophancy in the society. We even know that a person like Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*), who was the perfect image of all human virtues and ideals and
was higher than ordinary human beings and the manifestation of divine
majesty and beauty, never used to permit anyone to praise and compliment
him in his presence.

Once a group of people praised Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) in his presence, the
Imam stated:

“O my Allah! You know me better than myself, and I know myself more than
they know me. O my Allah! Make me better than what they imagine and
forgive whatever they do not know.”[^17]

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) wanted to make them know that he had no need of their
praise and did not permit them to praise him so that this objectionable
quality, that is to say flattery, would not spread in the Islamic
community because if on that day they were permitted to praise Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*), on another day they would have praised another ruler and not all
people are infallible so as not to be deceived by such flattery; on the
contrary, some people are gradually affected by these false compliments
and imagine that what other people say in regard to them is correct and
this is a great blight that can mislead others into ignorance and cause
people to perceive themselves as higher than who or what they actually
are and bit by bit believe that which is said in regard to them. Such
wrong beliefs result in people deviating from the course of equilibrium
and imagining themselves as higher than what they actually are and this
can become a great calamity. In addition to this, improper praise is a
sign of hypocrisy and guile. As Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“To praise more than what is due is sycophancy; to do it less is either
because of inability to speak or envy.”[^18]

Elsewhere, he states:

“If a person falsely praises you for a virtue which you do not have, it
is befitting that on another day he reproaches you for a bad attribute
for which you are blameless.”[^19]

The Imam intends to make this point apparent that flattery and
sycophancy never aim at telling the truth and reality, but personal
interests compel man to falsely praise other human beings; for this
reason, if one day things change for the worse and a person sees his
benefit lying in weakening an individual whom he previously used to
praise regarding a virtue that was actually absent in his personality,
he will embark upon censuring and reproaching that person by attributing
to him ugly qualities which are not in his character imagining that
perhaps he will earn some benefit in this way.

Therefore, Islam does not permit man to be a flatterer for the reason
that the spirit of sycophancy produces ugly effects both in the spirit
of the flatterer and the flattered as well as in the community. In
reality, the sycophant has to bring himself low in order to pronounce
those false praises and Allah, the Exalted, is not pleased to see a
believer trample his own greatness and honor underfoot and conceive
himself so inferior as to embark upon insincere praise of others. The
effects of sycophancy on the spirit of the flattered is that he forgets
himself and imagines that he possesses such a high personality and lofty
character that he is entitled to the respect and praise of other people
and in the end he disregards the deficiencies and weaknesses of his
character and conjectures his life and conduct as filled with lofty and
positive points.

The Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Whenever you praise your brother in his presence, it is as though you
have stuck a thorn in his neck.”[^20]

Besides what has been mentioned, praising wicked and corrupt people
results in their becoming daring to abuse and encroach upon other
people’s rights. A flattering person, besides being guilty of hypocrisy
and lies, by means of his false praise and compliments, prepares a
suitable ground for perversity, extravagance licentiousness and
aggression of the corrupt, especially false leaders and rulers and in
reality this in itself is a cause of corruption and partnership in grave
and destructive crimes which are committed by oppressors against other
human beings. It is for this reason that the Noble Prophet (S) stated:

“When a rich person is praised, the Throne of Allah trembles and Allah
becomes wrathful.”[^21]

The Noble Prophet (S) states that a person should not be a fault-finder
who looks for and recites the weak points of other people and thus
defames other human beings because Allah is not pleased at the
defamation of people’s repute or even at the disclosure of their
defects. He Himself has concealed the defects of people so that they may
live with one another with affection and love. He does not permit the
believers to divulge the defects of one another or even reveal one’s own
faults because man does not even have the right to defame himself.
Likewise, the Noble Prophet (S) states not to falsely attribute
qualities to people that they do not have due to flattery. In reality,
going to extremes in both instances [of praise and fault-finding] is
harmful for the believer and a person must not abandon moderation. If
one wants to mention the good qualities of other people, he must content
himself with that extent that is acceptable for sake of goodness and
expediency and not mention people’s good attributes for the sake of
worldly gain in a way that forsakes moderation.

Censuring of Sarcasm and Verbal Abuse
-------------------------------------

One of the indecent attributes which the Noble Prophet (S) enumerates is
being sarcastic and verbally abusive. Offending the believers with
biting and acrimonious words is termed as taunting. Taunting is when
someone endeavors to mention the defects and weaknesses of people to
them and thus wound or provoke them. It is befitting for a person to
endeavor at consoling other people for their failures and to try to
pronounce words which serve as salve on their wounds, not to speak as
though those people deserve and are entitled to their troubles and
failures. Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“The sharpness and incisiveness of the tongue is more than that of the
spear.”[^22]

The source of spiteful words is enmity and vindictiveness which impels
one who taunts to use virulent and venomous words when talking to
another person. It is likely for the appearance and contents of his
words to be correct, but he utters them acrimoniously and cruelly which
causes pain and sadness for the other person. When discussing academic
issues with another person, he could use soft words to make the other
understand that he has not understood something correctly, but instead
he makes him understand by means of an indirect statement, a hint and
biting words.

When a person seeks to help others become aware of their faults, he
should say it with words that are going to be effective and help them
understand their mistakes in such a way that they will concede and not
become angry and persistent in their mistakes and in addition to the
first mistake, make a second mistake due to obstinacy and consequently
cascade into ignorance and stubbornness because a wrong method of
mentioning the fault and thereafter correction becomes more difficult.

In order to enjoin the good and forbid the evil, some people behave in
such a manner that not only is the other person not corrected and not
attracted to recommended things, but is prompted to more evil by means
of bad methods of advising and sometimes by censuring and repeated
reproaching. It is for this reason that Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“Refrain from censuring and reproach because it makes sin appear big and
renders advice ineffective.”[^23]

Reprimanding people who repeatedly censure and reproach other people,
Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“Excessive reproach and blame flames the fire of stubbornness.”[^24]

“Refrain from repeated censuring of people for the reason that
reproaching the wrongdoer over and over again makes him audacious and
stubbornly persistent in his misdeeds; in addition, it renders advice
ineffective.”[^25]

Therefore, when you want to remind someone about his weaknesses,
encounter him with cheerfulness, kindness and consolation. Your tongue
ought not to be as stinging as a scorpion’s bite. Speak in such a way
that will persuade that person to embark upon correcting and edifying
their weakness.

If one says that the other person has made a mistake or that he does not
understand and other expressions like this, it is natural for him not to
be pleased and become angry. If we were in his position and were talked
to in a stinging manner, would we not become annoyed? Every person
becomes angry and reacts once he is talked to in an improper manner,
affronted or treated rudely unless one is so pious that he graciously
keeps quiet and does not respond.

That being the case, when we ourselves do not tolerate rude encounters,
how do we hope to incite other people to edify their characters by means
of our biting words? If we always intend to do good to other people, our
behavior and conduct will always be the expression of good human morals
with which we have been endowed.

Censuring of Obstinance [Mara’] and Insistence on One’s Opinion
---------------------------------------------------------------

The fourth undesirable quality which the Noble Prophet (S) mentions is
obstinacy in one’s errors. Obstinate behavior denotes rejection of the
another person’s words and proving one’s own superiority in such a way
that a person is not willing to admit one’s own mistake when he commits
it and he justifies his own words with explanations with the intention
of rectifying his own error and he does this repeatedly because every
time he insists on his mistake, the other side also sees that the
adamant person is trying to portray as right that which is wrong.

When the spirit of contention and bickering is aroused in man, he tries
to impose his ideas on others and this attitude derives from egotism and
selfishness; that is to say, man cannot easily admit his errors and say
that he has made a mistake because he conceives it as demeaning to his
position. Although he knows that he has made a mistake, he does not want
other people to know that he has committed an error. It is for this
reason that once others explain a person’s mistakes to him and make him
conceive his errors, he stubbornly rejects their explanations and tries
to portray his ideas as right and insists that what he has said is
correct!

There is no doubt that uncompromising behavior is not devoid of injury
to other people and incites their anger and protest. It is for this
reason that obstinacy causes stubborn people to attack one another and
each one of them tries to prove that his opinion is superior. The Noble
Prophet (S) states:

“Rid yourselves of obstinacy because there is no wisdom in it and no man
remains safe from its evil.”[^26]

Obstinacy and stubborn insistence on one’s opinion is not a desirable
quality and unfortunately some educated people become corrupted by it.
When they put forward a wrong opinion during academic debate, they
stubbornly insist on their opinion and feel as if they have lost if they
concede to the opinion of their friend.

Even worse, if there is a third person overseeing the debate, they try
even harder to defend their assertion in order to protect their repute;
especially if that third person is a student and disciple! In short, all
these are incentives for man not to admit the truth and to prefer
untruthfulness over the truth.

With regard to the consequences of stubbornness and obstinacy which are
directed at man, it is worthwhile for a person to embark upon fighting
this quality. One of the calamities which stubbornness breeds in man is
presenting unreal and untruthful opinions.

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“Stubborn insistence on one’s own opinion corrupts man.”[^27]

One of the calamities of stubbornness mentioned in the words of Imam
‘Ali (*‘a*) is that man’s soul becomes sick and diseased:

“Stubbornness and obstinacy impairs the soul.”[^28]

One of the calamities mentioned in the words of Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) is the
degeneration of man’s mind and the decadence of his thoughts:

“The obstinate person does not have a correct opinion.”[^29]

The way of curing and fighting stubborn insistence on one’s incorrect
opinion is for man to uproot pride which gives rise to a false
manifestation of virtue and knowledge from his inner being and know that
obstinacy causes enmity and hatred and destroys affection and
brotherhood.

Likewise, it is befitting of students to try to get rid of obstinacy by
adopting a negative stand against it and always conceding to correct
opinions and speaking good and correct words so that consequently the
spirit of magnanimity and conceding to the truth becomes their habit and
second nature and the quality of stubbornness and obstinacy is uprooted
from their hearts.

In order to get rid of stubbornness and obstinacy, man has to convince
that every person, whether he likes it or not, makes mistakes and errors
and it is not true that any human being is immune from error. Only the
Infallibles are immune from errors and all the others are likely to make
mistakes. People make mistakes either in explaining and narrating things
or in understanding and conceiving them. This is not something
unexpected and happens for everyone, and for this reason it should not
be construed as a defect. Of course, man should strive to make fewer
mistakes, especially in his lessons and academic debates by studying
longer and harder. However, when one makes a mistake he ought not to
construe it as a great personal defect and think that he has lost his
repute and is a failure.

Secondly, once he understands that he has made a mistake, he has to
immediately admit his mistake and admit that the other person is right.
Of course, it is hard to admit one’s errors the first time, but after
one tastes the sweetness of admitting his mistakes and comprehends that
making mistakes regarding his views and opinions is not a defect, it
becomes easy for him. He tells himself that he is a human being and is
not immune from error and sometimes people make mistakes and others
understand, and at other times the opposite is true.

How good it is also that he should thank his friend who has made him
aware of his error and has shown him the right way and the correct
opinion. One should not content himself with keeping silent because if
we want to be set free from the attribute of stubbornness and obstinacy,
we have to try to adopt a position opposite to it and the position
opposite to obstinacy is admitting one’s mistakes. Man has to tell his
friend, “You understood the matter very well and I did not comprehend
it.”

As a result of this sweet and good conduct, not only does one not feel
like a failure or feel deficient, but this suitable behavior brings
about a sweet life full of intimacy and sincerity and man becomes more
beloved and trusted by other people.

On the other hand, when a person tries to justify his erroneous words
and conceal his mistakes, other people’s confidence in him is taken away
and they will not pay any attention to him even when he wants to say
something worthwhile and true. However, when one admits his mistakes and
concedes to the correct opinion of the other person, they put their
confidence in what he says because they know that he does not utter
careless remarks and, as a result of this conduct, his social standing
also rises.

Of course, one should not seek after and be pleased with a better social
position, but conceding to the truth has such an effect and result. Both
the trust that other people have in him increases and their love for him
as well, and also his social rank improves. In addition to that, he is
delivered from the ugly attribute of obstinate behavior. Of course, one
must not fall in love with his social standing and must put his trust in
Allah and that which is pleasing to Him and in every deed one’s
incentive has to be winning the pleasure of Allah, the Exalted, and
other good effects are subsidiary rewards of man’s conduct.

[^1]: Surat al-Mu’minun 23:99-100.

[^2]: Surat al-Taghabun 64:9.

[^3]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:217.

[^4]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:110.

[^5]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:135.

[^6]: Surat Hud 11:114.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 126.

[^8]: Mustadrik al-Wasa’il, vol. 9, p.122.

[^9]: Ibid., vol. 1, p. 166.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 76, p. 126.

[^11]: Surat al-Nur 24:19.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 73, p. 384.

[^13]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 429, sermon [khutbah] 140, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^14]: Ibid., p. 1249, pithy aphorisms 341.

[^15]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 269, sermon [khutbah] 91, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 73, p. 294.

[^17]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1131, wisdom [hikmat] 96, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^18]: Ibid., wisdom [hikmat] 339, trans. Fayd al-Islam.

[^19]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p. 671.

[^20]: Jami‘ al-Sa‘adat, vol. 2, p. 327.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 152.

[^22]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p. 382.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 216.

[^24]: Ibid., p. 232.

[^25]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p. 278.

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p.138.

[^27]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p. 36.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 17.

[^29]: Ibid., p. 31.


