Lesson 36: Forbearance, Moderateness and Trust in Allah as Stated by the Prophet (S)
====================================================================================

Sentences which were examined in the previous session centered on piety
and self-restraint. In this section of the Noble Prophet’s (S) *hadith*,
in addition to self-restraint and abstinence, forbearance and the
station of trust in Allah have also been mentioned. The Noble Prophet
(S) stated:

“O Abu Dharr! Whoever on the Day of Resurrection is devoid of three
things is a loser.” Abu Dharr asked, “May my father and mother be
sacrificed for you. What are those three things?” In response, the Noble
Prophet (S) stated, “Self-restraint [*wara‘*] with which he abstains
from forbidden things, forbearance [*hilm*] with which he encounters
fools, and good morals with which he coexists harmoniously with people.”

Self-restraint [*wara‘*] is the first quality that will cause loss for a
person on the Day of Resurrection if not obtained. In the previous
section, we said that usually self-restraint is applied to a habit of
piety and merely abstaining from one sin cannot be considered to be
self-restraint. The Noble Prophet’s (S) expression in this section
confirms that interpretation and clearly explains that self-restraint is
applied to a spiritual nature or habit which inhibits man from
committing sin; for this reason, the characteristic of self-restraint is
that it prevents man from committing forbidden acts and it is natural
that a man that is not endowed with this attribute becomes tainted by
sin and consequently meets with defeat and failure and ends up in hell.

The Lofty Status of Forbearance
-------------------------------

The second attribute that is necessary to be endowed with and protects
man from loss and failure on the Day of Resurrection is forbearance
[*hilm*]. It has been asserted that forbearance means controlling the
self and not allowing incitement of the faculty of anger. Without the
least doubt, patience and forbearance are commendable and invaluable
attributes and can be considered to be soldiers of intellect, and anger
[*ghadab*]—which is in opposition to forbearance [*hilm*]—can be
considered to be a soldier of ignorance.

It is well known that man has been advised not to make decisions,
discipline someone nor take action on something while in a state of
anger because he will likely later regret his deeds. That is so because
man’s intellect does not function well when he is in a state of wrath.
It has been recorded in a *hadith* that Qanbar was insulted by an
ignorant man and he wanted to respond when Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) stated:

“O Qanbar! Ignore your defamer so that you may please Allah, the
Merciful, and so that you may anger the devil and thus punish your enemy
because retribution for him is not worse than ignoring and turning a
blind eye to him. I swear upon the Allah who split the seed and created
human beings that a believer does not please his Lord more than by
having patience and forbearance and he does not annoy the devil more
than by repressing anger and he does not punish a fool more than with
silence.”[^1]

Elsewhere, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“No honor is like knowledge, no power is like forbearance.”[^2]

With regard to the loftiness of the quality of forbearance and its
invaluable role in preserving proper social relations and reciprocal
respect, it is necessary for every individual in the society to be
endowed with it and to strive to attain it, especially religious
scholars who occupy the role of reforming and training people. When a
religious scholar, who is a reformer and a guide of the people,
retaliates vis-à-vis the unbecoming conduct of the ignorant, he renders
his work ineffective.

Therefore, we must accompany our knowledge with forbearance in order to
have a desirable outcome and be patient and enthusiastic when explaining
religious truths. In regard to the fact that the viability of knowledge
is not feasible without forbearance, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“I swear upon Allah in whose hands my life lies, no two things have
joined and supplemented one another better than forbearance and
knowledge.”[^3]

Truly, forbearance is in the highest category of personal perfection
after knowledge and, as we have already stated, knowledge without
forbearance is not beneficial. It is for this reason that in some
instances when knowledge is praised, forbearance too is praised and in
reality forbearance and knowledge are mentioned as two invaluable
elements which are conjoined and supplementary. The Noble Prophet (S)
states:

“O my Lord! Free me from want on account of knowledge and beautify me
with forbearance.”[^4]

Without the least doubt a person who beautifies himself with patience
and forbearance has adopted the most merciful and compassionate method
in critical circumstances when enmity and hatred become inflamed in
people’s hearts. Forbearance helps one to extinguish the fire of hatred
and enmity and does not allow the carnal self to gain control. Instead,
it compels the self to extinguish the fire of hatred.

In history we observe that despite the different kinds of torture and
torment which the polytheists inflicted on the Noble Prophet (S) and his
companions, after the conquest of Mecca the Noble Prophet (S) displayed
utmost forbearance by forgiving the defeated polytheists.

At that time, the enemies expected the Noble Prophet (S) to slaughter
them and even some of the standard-bearers of Islam who were seeking
revenge addressed Abu Sufiyan saying, “Today is the day of bitter
fighting and revenge.” However, the Noble Prophet (S) forbade this
vengeful slogan and substituted it with the motto:

“Today is the day of mercy and good relations. Today, Allah has granted
honor to the Quraysh.”[^5]

Without any doubt, man is forced by necessity to have relations with
other people in his life. Allah, the Exalted, has created him is such a
way that he is left with no option but to accept social life and if he
wants to live alone and far from other people, he will be deprived of a
great deal of the blessings of this world, he cannot progress towards
perfection and perhaps he cannot even continue living his life.

For this reason, he is compelled by necessity to accept social life and
have relations with other people in order to continue his life and also
to seek perfection and ascendancy. On the other hand, every person is
different with regard to mentality, personality, morals, understanding
and knowledge and therefore people encounter others who are unwise and
foolish in conduct. Sometimes, a person comes in contact with foolish
individuals whose improper behavior is insulting and demeaning.

Not all people have reached the peak of human perfection and knowledge
nor do they possess the intelligence to compel themselves to behave in a
suitable and courteous manner. It is for this reason that sometimes a
person must interact with others that are not self-built who, due to
lack of knowledge or existence of family problems and pressures, behave
improperly and neither observe proper rules of conduct nor respect
others.

It is natural that if a person retaliates in tit for tat manner and
becomes angry quickly when faced with such people, differences increase
and negative consequences arise from those differences. In addition,
time is wasted, the person loses his peace of mind and he cannot attain
his goals in life. Therefore, in order for man to derive great benefit
from the world and remain safe from its blights, he has to develop the
spirit of forbearance in order to control himself when faced with such
people.

In addition to the fact that human beings ought to practice
self-restraint in order to avoid committing sin, they also have to be
forbearing in order to derive benefit from social life and not create
losses because if man gains distance from the society, he becomes
deprived of the benefits of social life. If man wants to derive benefit
from the society for the sake of securing the life of the hereafter, in
order to remain sound when confronted by unwise people, he must have
self-restraint and forbearance.

He has to practice forbearance so that when he is confronted by
demeaning and insulting circumstances, he pays a deaf ear and turns a
blind eye to them so that he can carry out his duties and derive benefit
from the society and unbecoming conduct does not become a hurdle on the
road to perfection. In the words of hadith: “Have forbearance in order
to repel the ignorant.”

In contrast to the common impression that ignorance is only applied to a
lack of acquired knowledge, ignorance is also absence of wisdom,
foolishness and stupidity. For this reason, ignorance includes behaving
in an unwise, foolish or senseless manner and this sense has been
employed in many verses of the Qur’an. For example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَإِلاَّ تَصْرِفْ عَنِّي كَيدَهُنَّ أَصْبُ إِلَيهِنَّ وَأَكُنْ مِن
الْجَاهِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If You do not turn away their schemes from me, I will incline
towards them and become one of the ignorant.”***[^6]

Yusuf (Joseph) is saying, if Allah does not turn away the deceptive
schemes of the women around him, he might commit an unwise deed. In such
verses interpreting ignorance [*jahl*] as the lack of knowledge is
incorrect and furthermore in most cases lack of knowledge is an excuse.
Whereas this word is mostly used for reproach and in inexcusable
instances such as when Allah reproaches the brothers of Joseph:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَلْ عَلِمْتُمْ مَا فَعَلْتُمْ بِيوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ إِذْ أَنْتُمْ
جَاهِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did you realize what you did to Joseph and his brother when you were
ignorant?”***[^7]

It is doubtless that the brothers of Joseph were not ignorant of their
deeds and actions. They knew who Joseph was and they were aware that
their deeds were not good but still behaved in a senseless manner and
their deeds were foolish; that is to say, their deeds were not
consistent with sound reason and intellect.

In addition, when Prophet Moses (*‘a*) told his people that Allah has
given you orders to slaughter a cow, they asked him if he was deriding
them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ مُوسَى لِقَوْمِهِ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يأْمُرُكُمْ أَنْ
تَذْبَحُوا بَقَرَةً قَالُوا أَتَتَّخِذُنَا هُزُوًا قَالَ أَعُوذُ
بِاللَّهِ أَنْ أَكُونَ مِنْ الْجَاهِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when Moses said to his people, ‘Indeed Allah commands you to
slaughter a cow,’ they said, ‘Do you take us in derision?’ He said, ‘I
seek refuge in Allah lest I should be one of the ignorant!’”***[^8]

In this verse also ignorance means foolishness, not lack of knowledge.
Prophet Moses (*‘a*) did not seek refuge in Allah from lack of knowledge
but from deficiency of wisdom, imprudence, and behavior in opposition to
wisdom and truth. In the book “*Usul al-Kafi*” one section is dedicated
to ‘knowledge’ and another to ‘reason and ignorance’ and this was done
because in that section ignorance is opposed to reason not knowledge,
and as we have said, often ignorance is used to mean foolish and unwise
conduct and is used as the opposite of reason not knowledge.

Forbearance, Befitting of the Saints [Awliya’] of Allah
-------------------------------------------------------

In his advice the Noble Prophet (S) warns that sometimes in personal
life man is confronted by unwise people whose behavior is foolish, and
he recommends that the best method of interaction with those who lack
manners is forbearance so that one may both derive good benefits from
the society as well as free himself from becoming entangled in quarrels
and adopt a sound path despite enmity and thus become beloved by Allah:

“Allah loves a person who is forbearing, modest, chaste and
high-minded.”[^9]

The Gracious Qur’an explains the way of fighting a foolish enemy in the
following way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلاَ تَسْتَوِي الْحَسَنَةُ وَلاَ السَّيئَةُ ادْفَعْ بِالَّتِي هِيَ
أَحْسَنُ فَإِذَا الَّذِي بَيْنَكَ وَبَيْنَهُ عَدَاوَةٌ كَأَنَّهُ
وَلِيٌّ حَمِيمٌ \* وَمَا يلَقَّاهَا إِلاَّ الَّذِينَ صَبَرُوا وَمَا
يلَقَّاهَا إِلاَّ ذُو حَظٍّ عَظِيمٍ \* وَإِمَّا يَنْزَغَنَّكَ مِن
الشَّيطَانِ نَزْغٌ فَاسْتَعِذْ بِاللَّهِ إِنَّهُ هُوَ السَّمِيعُ
الْعَلِيمُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And not alike are good and evil. Repel [evil] with what is best. [If
you do so,] behold, he between whom and you was enmity, will be as
though he were a sympathetic friend. But none is granted it except those
who are patient, and none is granted it except the greatly endowed.
Should a temptation from Satan disturb you, seek the protection of
Allah. Indeed He is the All-hearing, the All-knowing.”***[^10]

This is the method which the Qur’an introduces in regard to encountering
stubborn and foolish people and is one of finest and best ways of
instruction for the reason that every person who behaves badly expects
the injured person to retaliate, but when he sees the offended person
encounters him in a good and constructive manner which is contrary to
his expectations, he becomes transformed and as a result of the pressure
of his conscience feels inferior and consequently changes his
unacceptable ways of conduct.

It is for this reason that we see that a great deal of people used to
surround the Noble Prophet (S) seeking to be in his presence. On the
basis of the words of Allah, the reason for this was the attributes of
mercy and forbearance which the Noble Prophet (S) possessed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَبِمَا رَحْمَةٍ مِن اللّهِ لِنْتَ لَهُمْ وَلَوْ كُنْتَ فَظًّا غَلِيظَ
الْقَلْبِ لاَنفَضُّوا مِنْ حَوْلِكَ فَاعْفُ عَنْهُمْ وَاسْتَغْفِرْ
لَهُمْ وَشَاوِرْهُمْ فِي الأَمْرِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is by Allah’s mercy that you are gentle to them; and had you been
harsh and hardhearted, surely they would have scattered from around you.
So excuse them and plead for forgiveness from them, and consult them in
their affairs…”***[^11]

And also in regard to the logic of the conduct of the righteous servants
of Allah, the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الأَرْضِ هَوْنًا
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلاَمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The servants of the All-Beneficent are those who walk humbly on the
earth, and when the ignorant address them, say ‘Peace.”***[^12]

A story has been narrated that there once lived a wise man who invited
his friend to his house. The wise man brought some food for his friend,
but the badly behaved wife of the wise man came forward and took the
food from the wise man’s visitor, insulting the wise man. The visitor
got very angry and left the wise man’s house in protest.

The wise man followed his friend and when he got close to him, said, “Do
you remember one day when we were busy eating some food and a chicken
came forward and spoilt the whole food and neither of us became angry?
Imagine that this badly behaved wife of mine is like a chicken!” After
hearing this, that man swallowed his anger and said, “The wise man is
right. Patience and forbearance are a cure for every pain.”

They have also narrated that one day Imam al-Hasan al-Mujtaba (*‘a*) was
confronted in an alley in Medina by a man from Syria who was heavily
under the influence of the inimical propaganda of Bani Umayyah and began
insulting Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*). After patiently and quietly bearing his
words Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) said, “I think you are a stranger in this
town and you are under the wrong impression. If you have nowhere to
sleep, you are welcome in my house. If you are indebted, I will repay
your debts. If you are hungry, I will give you food to satiate you.”

The conduct of Imam al-Hasan (*‘a*) was very surprising to that man and
a dramatic change overtook his heart. He was so impressed by Imam
al-Hasan (*‘a*) that he said, “O son of the Prophet! If before this
meeting they had asked me who the worst men under the sky were, I would
have answered that you and your father are the worst people on earth,
but now I believe that you and your father are the best people on
earth.”

A perfect man who has attained the loftiest levels of spiritual service
and devotion to Allah is not expected to behave otherwise and if they
did not handle ignorant and foolish people with patience and
forbearance, they would not have been fit to be the representatives of
Allah on earth.

It has been narrated in regard to Khwajah Nasir al-Din Tusi that a man
brought a letter to him in which he was insulted by the enemy. In that
letter, Khwajah had been called “Dog son of Dog”.

In response to such insults, Khwajah kindly and wisely said, “It is not
true that I am a dog, because a dog has four legs, fur and it barks
while I neither have four legs nor have I fur nor do I bark. A dog has
long nails and I have short nails, a dog is short and bent while I am
tall and straight. I laugh but a dog does not. I think but a dog does
not. In short, none of the characteristics of the dog are found in me.
So, none of the claims of the writer of this letter are true.”

Explaining the social benefits of patience and forbearance, Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*) states:

“The first reward the exerciser of forbearance acquires is that others
become his helpers against the ignorant.”[^13]

Moderateness and the Difference between It and Lenience and Compromise
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The third quality which, if attained, protects man from loss and failure
on the Day of Resurrection is moderateness in his dealings with others.
Moderateness [*mudara*] includes soft-heartedness, gentle behavior,
sociability, friendliness and tolerance of the bothersome behavior of
others. There are a lot of *hadith*s praising moderateness and its
benefits in the hereafter. One of those *hadith*s is the Noble Prophet’s
(S) saying:

“Moderateness with the people is half of faith.”

He also stated:

“There are three things which if they are lacking in man, his deeds do
not become complete: self-restraint [wara‘] which discourages one from
sin, good ethics with which one coexists with others in moderation, and
forbearance [hilm] which repels the unwise and foolish.”[^14]

Elsewhere, he considers tolerance to be on par with discharging
obligatory and incumbent duties:

“We the prophets have been charged to practice moderateness with the
people in the same way that we have been charged to perform obligatory
duties.”[^15]

Man is always confronted by individuals who for various personal motives
behave improperly. Sometimes, jealousy or other unbecoming traits impel
one to behave in such a manner that he hurts other human beings. What is
under discussion is how must one behave and when confronted by such
people? If a person retaliates and conducts himself in a tit for tat
manner when faced with the unwise and foolish, he usually complicates
the situation.

In such circumstances, he should abstain from retaliation and adopt
moderateness. He has to try to overlook the inappropriate behavior of
the antagonists and practice tolerance and not react very fast. In some
instances, a person has to turn a blind eye to the unsuitable behavior
of other people and not confront them with enmity despite their malice.
In addition to that, one may have to help them and be at their service.
If during his life a person is such that he is moderate and patient with
malicious antagonists, he can reap very desirable results and succeed in
life.

However, if he desires to retaliate for every hostile act perpetrated
against him or for every one of his rights that is abused, he will be
wasting his energies and time in addition to torturing his own heart and
losing his own peace of mind. In addition to all this, he would only be
increasing enmity and grudges. For this reason, the best way to deal
with inimical human beings is to be moderate because moderation when
dealing with other people is the way of the intelligent and wise as well
as being a key to righteousness and salvation.

“Be moderate with others because that is the key to righteousness and it
is the method of the wise.”[^16]

What is worth discussing is that sometimes moderateness is mistakenly
interpreted to mean lenience and compromise. Compromise is making
concessions with those who have deviated and with the opponents of the
truth and denotes that a person is negligent when propagating the truths
of the religion of Allah or not protesting when he witnesses deviations.
In this regard, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“By my life there will be no regard for anyone or slackening from me in
fighting against one who opposes right or gropes in misguidance…”[^17]

Elsewhere, while complaining about those of weak determination of his
time who refrained from the truth and chose the way of compromise and
ease, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“Know that—may Allah have mercy upon you—you are living at a time when
those who speak about truth are few, when tongues are loath to utter the
truth and those who stick to the right are considered lowly. The people
of this time are engaged in disobedience. Their youths are wicked, their
old men are sinful, their learned men are hypocrites and their speakers
are sycophants. Their young people do not respect their elders and their
rich men do not support the destitute…”[^18]

As we can observe Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) has reproached compromise, weakness
and sycophancy with the people who oppose the truth and he perceives
flattery as a mean and reproachable quality and a cause of social
corruption and collapse of the pillars of honor and glory.

In the society, there are calm and imperturbable people who do not show
any reaction to the events taking place around them and they pay no
attention to the problems of others and the problems of religion and
society.

This insensitive group of people has a lazy, weak and indulgent spirit
and they desire to be in a place where they can recline and remain
apathetic enjoying ease and joy. If sometimes war arises and they are
called upon to go to the battle front, they pull themselves aside and
take flight to secure places.

Naturally, this group has justifications for their deeds because no one
is prepared to admit that he is a bad person that does bad deeds; on the
contrary, they even devise apparently good excuses for their actions.
Usually, their justification is that they have to be moderate with the
enemy and should not to be strict because harsh reactions are fruitless.

Sometimes, they refer to *hadith*s which assert that the cause of
prosperity is moderateness with other people. If this way of thinking
were allowed to spread in the society, fighting would never take place,
no movement would occur and the way of *jihad* would be closed. As has
been explained, this kind of negligence seeks to justify lenience and
compromise and is created by self-indulgent people who seek to shirk
social responsibility and avoid war and fighting under the auspices of
religious law. This is an extremely undesirable pretext which brings
about unfortunate results and the Glorious Qur’an explicitly reproaches
it.

The Prophet’s (S) Lack of Lenience in Regard to the Polytheists
---------------------------------------------------------------

In the early days of Islam, time and again the polytheists used to ask
the Noble Prophet (S) to show leniency in regard to his religion so that
they too could be flexible in their conduct. In reality, they wanted the
Noble Prophet (S) to make concessions so that they might obtain
privileges from him and the result would be the Noble Prophet (S) coming
to terms and acceding to their demands. They wanted him, just like
worldly leaders, to relinquish firmness in accomplishing his goals and
to show compromise and pliability with his enemies. In regard to their
demands, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ تُطِعْ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ \* وَدُّوا لَوْ تُدْهِنُ فَيُدْهِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So do not yield to the rejecters, who are eager that you should be
pliant, so that they (too) may be pliant.”***[^19]

Definitely moderateness and tractability vis-à-vis the enemy and making
concessions in regard to enforcing the laws of Allah, propagating divine
values and waging war against corruption is not desirable. This is in
fact compromise with the enemy, and it is for this reason that Allah
strongly prohibits this action and asks the Noble Prophet (S) to
strictly enforce His laws on this matter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَن احْكُمْ بَيْنَهُمْ بِمَا أَنْزَلَ اللَّهُ وَلاَ تَتَّبِعْ
أَهْوَاءَهُمْ وَاحْذَرْهُمْ أَنْ يفْتِنُوكَ عَنْ بَعْضِ مَا أَنْزَلَ
اللَّهُ إِلَيْكَ فَإِنْ تَوَلَّوْا فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يرِيدُ اللَّهُ
أَنْ يصِيبَهُمْ بِبَعْضِ ذُنُوبِهِمْ وَإِنَّ كَثِيرًا مِن النَّاسِ
لَفَاسِقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Judge between them by what Allah has sent down, and do not follow
their low desires. Beware of them lest they should beguile you from part
of what Allah has sent down to you. But if they turn their backs [on
you], then know that Allah desires to punish them for some of their
sins, and indeed many of the people are transgressors.”***[^20]

Every kind of compromise and pliability is not to be considered to be
moderateness. Moderateness is applicable to circumstances where rational
and correct goals are conceived as well as achieved in the sense that
man patiently bears some of the problems which some people cause for him
in order to attain higher aims, not that man should not react to every
person and every kind of behavior out of nonchalance and compromise with
the enemies in the name of tolerance.

We must differentiate between moderateness and compromise and understand
that, with regard to Islamic goals and religious issues, overlooking
transgressions, make concessions, or display flexibility with regard to
theoretical and practical principles is quite unacceptable. When divine
duty is incumbent upon man, he must discharge it with utmost firmness,
be resolute and unwavering in executing it and refrain from every kind
of negligence and carelessness.

It is not advisable for man to always show compromise and make
concessions with every person and be pliable in enforcing divine goals.
A person has to resist, stand firm on his feet and fight to the last
breath to carry out divine duties and not show any lenience. When we
listen to the whispers of the propaganda machine of the enemy, we hear
them calling us fundamentalists.

Of course, their aim in using this term is to weaken our nation and
present our people as having a harsh and merciless character, but when
we pay attention to this label we see that it is a very proper and
dignified name and we should warmly welcome it.

Indeed, we are fundamentalists—we always protect our fundamentals, we
believe that we must not give up our fundamental ideals and aims, and we
must not bargain them for anything. Yes, sometimes it is necessary to
make temporary and tactical compromises and yield in regard to issues
that are not fateful and ideal, but we must never make concessions in
regard to fundamental ideals and goals.

During the difficult days in Mecca when the Noble Prophet (S) was under
intense pressure from the Quraysh and he and his followers were being
tortured and persecuted by the polytheists to the extent that serious
limitations were placed in the way of Islamic propagation and
fulfillment of the role of the prophetic mission, every once in a while
one of the Prophet’s followers was slaughtered for the sake of love for
the Divine as well as due to their goals and ideals and naturally in
this turmoil the greatest need of the oppressed and tortured Muslims was
liberation from these persecutions and winning the support of people who
would harm them against the Quraysh and hence prepare the means of their
redemption.

Historians have said that during that sensitive time the people of Ta’if
proposed to help as well as support the Noble Prophet (S) and stand by
the Muslims in wars and conflicts together with protecting the Muslims
with their money and lives on the condition that they would not be
obliged to perform the daily prayers because they did not perceive it
befitting of their status to prostrate on the ground and place their
foreheads on clay; in fact, their culture did not allow them to do this.

This proposal was offered to the Noble Prophet (S) at a time when he was
in the worst of hardships and difficulties in addition to being under
constant pressure of the enemies who had surrounded him on every side.
Had the Noble Prophet (S) been like other social leaders, he might have
accepted these proposals, taken advantage of the situation, entered into
an agreement and derived benefit from his allies while waiting for a
suitable moment to gradually make these people acquainted with prayer
and other acts of worship and servitude while teaching them cultural
activities. Some interpreters of the Qur’an say that the following verse
was revealed in this regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْلاَ أَنْ ثَبَّتْنَاكَ لَقَدْ كِدْتَ تَرْكَنُ إِلَيْهِمْ شَيْئًا
قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And had it not been that We had established you, you would certainly
have been near to incline to them a little.”***[^21]

Allah warns the Muslims against being inclined to the polytheists and
making concessions in regard to religion. All the programs, wars and
struggles were in the cause of religion and for the sake of making
people worship Allah and have connection with Him; therefore, how can
one make concessions or bargain with them before they become Muslims and
worshipers of Allah? The Noble Prophet (S) thus responded to the
proposals of the people of Ta’if:

“There is no benefit in a religion devoid of genuflection and
prostration.”[^22]

They would have loved to see the Noble Prophet (S) compromise with them
and give up his ideals in order to win their support and assistance, but
never would Allah grant such permission nor the Noble Prophet (S) engage
in such bargaining, so he told them that he would not compromise for a
religion that is devoid of prostration and he did not need their
support. He explained that his religion was dependent on prayer and
connection with Allah and the original aim of religion and the prophetic
mission was establishing the sovereignty of Allah and divine worship.

The necessity of guarding the fundamentals and basic ideals in all
situations has been proven, including such cases as leadership and the
management of society. The leader has to be firm in the cause of
protecting fundamentals and basic ideals and never compromise. However,
he can compromise and make concessions in subsidiary matters if he deems
it expedient to protect the fundamentals.

Therefore, social leaders must sometimes show firmness and decisiveness
and at other times flexibility and forgiveness. Again, that which must
be persistently and firmly safeguarded are the religious fundamentals
and the high divine ideals. These cannot be overlooked nor compromised
at whatever cost, but in subordinate issues it is possible for man to
make concessions and bargains and for a leader to overlook certain
things on the basis of expediency.

The preceding explanation has been to emphasize caution in not mistaking
moderateness for compromise and to distinguish the limits of the two. Of
course, it is very difficult to discern the bounds between acceptable
moderation and reproachable compromise.

A person has to be very careful to be able to detect in what
circumstances to use moderateness and when not to be moderate as well as
discern when overlooking something is tantamount to compromise. One of
the ways to distinguish compromise from moderateness is to observe
whether overlooking or turning a blind eye to something will result in
trampling the basic and important religious issues underfoot or not.

If it tramples fundamental religious ideals underfoot, then one ought to
know that he is engaging in reproachable compromise. However, when one
puts his own personal interests aside and sacrifices in order to acquire
greater goals, he has interacted with moderateness with his adversary.
Of course, one must be aware that there are dubious and complicated
instances which call for much accuracy.

“O Abu Dharr! If you desire to be the strongest of men, completely trust
in Allah. If you want to be the most esteemed of men, have piety and if
you want to be the wealthiest of men, have more certainty in that which
is with Allah than that which is in your hands.”

In this section of the *hadith* once again discussion about piety has
arisen and as can be observed, there is no definite relationship between
this subject and the previous discussions, although other issues which
are in conformity with piety have been mentioned. In the above quotation
the Noble Prophet (S) reminds us about three points. The first point is
that if you want to have strength and find the capacity to better attain
your goals and aims and not experience weakness and easy defeat in
pursuing your objectives, you must have complete trust in Allah. The
second point is that if you want to be beloved and honorable, you must
have piety. Allah, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Indeed the noblest of you in the sight of Allah is the most pious
among you…”***[^23]

The third point is that if you want to be free from want, you must have
more confidence in that which is in the hands of Allah than that which
is in your hands. Every person derives benefit from the graces of Allah
to some extent and has some kind of capital at his disposal. Sometimes,
he has enough money and wealth which make him free from need of other
people and he does not have turn to anyone in order to earn money. Or,
he has enough food and bread and hence he does not need to borrow food
from other human beings. This in itself is freedom from want.

However, we should realize to what extent we can put faith in our
wealth. Money is likely to be lost or stolen by a thief just as any
other blessing is likely to disappear such that man finds no chance to
continue to derive benefit from it. It is possible that a person finds
he cannot continue to have access to his wealth and use it when he needs
it, but that which is in the hands of Allah can never be lost at all and
there is nothing beyond His reach in the universe.

Therefore, with regard to the all-encompassing nature of Allah and His
power and to the fact that His ownership of all things and existents and
whatever He wills is never breached, even if something were on the
planet of Mars and Allah wills that it should reach a person, it will
not violate His command.

If we attain such awareness that the whole of existence and inner as
well as outward powers are under the control of Allah, truly believe
that there is nothing outside His authority, and know that His ownership
and encompassment is over all things, our belief in Allah will increase
and we will have more confidence in that which is in His hands than that
which is in our hands. It is natural that a person who has faith in the
power of Allah will be the richest man because Divine will is never
breached and there is nothing outside His power.

The Station of Trust in Allah
-----------------------------

As has been observed, the Noble Prophet (S) regards trust in Allah
[*tawakkul*] as the essence of power and strength. Taking into
consideration the importance of trust in Allah and its significant role
in life especially at times of difficulty as well as wrong
interpretations which occur in regard to it, it is necessary to have a
short discussion about this topic.

*Tawakkul* is derived from the word “*wikalah*” and in the culture of
Islam, it means that man ought to take Allah as his sure support and
entrust all his affairs to Him. It has been related that the Noble
Prophet (S) asked the Archangel Gabriel about the purport of reliance on
Allah. In response, the Archangel Gabriel said:

“Trust in Allah means that creations do not cause harm or benefit to man
nor do they grant anything to him nor do they prevent him from anything.
Also, trust in Allah is losing hope in created things. When a servant
attains such knowledge, he does not do anything for other than Allah,
does not put his trust in other than Allah, does not fear other than
Him, and does not covet other than Him. This is the meaning of trust in
Allah.”[^24]

In the Gracious Qur’an, there are many verses with regard to trust in
Allah, amongst which is this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَعَلَى اللّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And in Allah let all the faithful put their trust.”***[^25]

(In this verse Allah, the Exalted, introduces total trust in Him as
essentially inseparable from faith.)

In the same way that man usually chooses a lawyer for his worldly
affairs and entrusts many of his activities to him in order to reap
beneficial results, it is befitting for Allah’s servants to rely on Him
alone in all worldly affairs and consider Him as their lawyer in order
to secure their needs without stress and anxiety. In other words, a
person who intends to solve his problems has three ways at his disposal:
to rely on his own power, to trust in other people to help him, or to
put his hopes in Allah and turn a blind eye to all other than Him.

Meanwhile, total trust and complete reliance on Allah derives from man’s
knowledge about the Lordship of Allah because if man conceives Allah as
the Owner and Possessor of jurisdiction as well as the One in whose
hands all existence lies, he no longer sees any need to beg from anyone.
In one of his supplications, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

“O my Allah! Thou art the most attached to Thy lovers and the most ready
to assist those who trust in Thee. You know their hidden secrets, are
aware of whatever is in their consciences and know the extent of their
intelligence. Consequently, their secrets are open to Thee and their
hearts are eager to see Thee. If loneliness bores them, Thy remembrance
gives them solace. If distresses befall them, they beseech Thy
protection, because they know that the reigns of affairs are in Thy
hands, and that their movements depend on Thy commands.”[^26]

In regard to the benefits of complete reliance on Allah, Imam al-Baqir
(*‘a*) states:

“A person who trusts in Allah will not be dominated and whoever seeks
refuge in Allah will not be defeated.”[^27]

At the opening of the tablets of many prophets was engraved the message
to believe in Allah and completely rely on Him because one of the signs
of belief in Allah is total trust in Him. If man has faith in the
Lordship of Allah and believes that the whole of the existing world is
under His domination and lordship, and the only worthwhile object of
worship is Allah, he will never permit himself to go after any other and
seek their help; on the contrary, he will always put his hope in the
Divine Essence of Allah and only ask for help from Him.

Trust in Allah and Making Use of Material and Spiritual Means
-------------------------------------------------------------

Trust in Allah is a matter of the heart and not an outward mode of
conduct; for this reason, complete reliance does not mean that man has
to seclude himself from the people or live as a recluse in the mosque
and only busy himself with worship and invocation of Allah or quit work
thinking he can earn a living with the hope that Allah will grant
sustenance. Without the least doubt, this interpretation is wrong and a
person who takes this approach has detoured and not attained the real
meaning and purport of trust in Allah. It has been narrated in a
*hadith*:

“The Noble Prophet (S) saw people who never engaged in farming and
cultivation. He asked them, ‘Who are you.’ They replied, ‘We are those
who rely on Allah.’ The Noble Prophet responded, ‘No, [you are not those
people put their trust in Allah] but burdens [and parasites] on other
human beings’.”[^28]

People who do not have the right conception of divine knowledge vainly
imagine that trust in Allah means that a person should not derive
benefit from material means and facilities and that one who makes use of
material conveniences and facilities does not have complete reliance on
Allah. Not every person who derives benefit from material means is
devoid of reliance and not every human being who does not make use of
material conveniences has trust in Allah. There are lazy and indolent
people who wait for bread to be provided to them and they are pleased
with just that and they do not have the vigor to work. When it is asked
of them why they do not work, they say that they rely on Allah,
sustenance is in His hands and only He can provide it! In reality, this
so-called justification is an excuse and a cover for laziness and they
do not really have reliance on Allah. Of course, some of these people
truly have reliance but, in any case, this interpretation of not
deriving benefit on the pretext of trust is incorrect.

As we have already said, reliance is a matter of the heart and it
denotes dependence on Allah in such a way that man has to derive support
from Allah. For this reason, it is possible for man to attain the
highest levels of reliance on Allah and at the same time derive benefit
from material means and conveniences in order to fulfill divine duties
and responsibilities. It is possible for man to make more effort than
other people and be more earnest at work and still rely only on Allah
for Allah is disgusted with lazy and indolent people and he has enjoined
work on man because divine wisdom necessitates that the affairs of this
world have to traverse a natural course.

A person that has knowledge of Allah fundamentally knows that divine
wisdom necessitates that affairs ought to take place by means of
material mediums. Divine wisdom also necessitates that every phenomenon
reaches fulfillment through its own mechanism. Therefore, because we
know Allah has perfect wisdom, we can understand that which His wisdom
necessitates, which is establishment of the system of causality. In the
end, human perfection depends on this very system by means of which
human beings are placed in the crucible of tests and trials without
which humanity would not move towards perfection.

Man’s perfection is dependent upon performance of duties of servitude
towards Allah which is in turn dependent upon the system of human
relations which is governed by the system of causality. Therefore, if
man seeks the path of ease and secludes himself from other human beings
in order to preoccupy himself with worship and he fails to work and make
effort, and acts in opposition to divine wisdom, reliance on Allah will
not make sense.

On this basis, divine wisdom necessitates that man must make use of
means to attain his needs and desires. If it were such that only
requesting sustenance from Allah were enough for bread to fall from
heaven, then no one would ever work for a living and people would never
be tried.

However, when it is said that we ought to derive benefit from means in
order to attain our needs, it does not signify that our providers of
sustenance are the earth and our work. These are from Allah and their
management are in His hands, and therefore subsistence too is in His
hands. Man has the duty to go after the means in order for divine goals
to reach fulfillment in the universe and those goals are for the purpose
of man’s perfection.

Therefore, the one who relies on Allah has to work and not be negligent
like those who do not trust in Allah; of course, the difference between
these two lies in their inner states and the conditions of their hearts.
The one who relies on Allah is motivated by obedience to the will of
Allah and he makes effort while depending on Allah.

However, a person that is not monotheistic and does not rely on Allah
seeks his sustenance in his work and efforts and/or from other people. A
believer is a person who puts his hope in none other than Allah and
perceives all facilities as coming from Him and if even he were deprived
of all his material things, he does not lose even the slightest hope in
his Lord because he knows that whatever Allah does for his servant is
out of wisdom, for the good of His servant and He never deprives his
slave of that which is beneficial and good for him.

On the one hand, the cosmic order has been formed on the basis of
causality and man has to attain his needs by making effort within that
system; on the other hand, work, seeking a livelihood and interaction
with others are for the sake of preparing the ground for tests and
trials because if man is not tried, he cannot move towards perfection.
There has to be employment, the relationship between worker and employer
and observance of their mutual rights in order for the ground for man’s
perfection to be prepared under the auspices of work, effort and respect
of mutual rights.

For this reason, man has the duty to work but at the same time he has to
believe that his sustenance is provided by Allah and he has to rely on
Him. True trust in Allah does not mean that one ought not to work but
that his heart has to be with Allah. He has to believe that his
sustenance is provided ultimately by Allah not by his work. It is in
this case that he becomes successful and overcomes the problems and
hardships of life because he has put his hope in the Eternal Divine
Essence.

It has been narrated that on an occasion when Prophet Moses (*‘a*)
became ill, the children of Israel came to visit him and told him that
if he were to take a particular herbal medicine, he would feel better.
Prophet Moses (*‘a*) responded, “I will not take any medicine until
Allah cures me.” Some period elapsed and Prophet Moses (*‘a*) did not
get well.

Then, inspiration was revealed to him, “I swear upon My honor and glory
that I will not cure you unless you take that herbal medicine which the
Children of Israel said would cure you.” After that Moses used that
medicine and became well, but he was worried about what he had told the
Children of Israel. Inspiration was once again sent to him, “O Moses!
Did you want to invalidate My wisdom with your reliance on Me? Who
besides Me placed that medicinal benefit and effect in the roots of the
herbs?”

In addition, it has been narrated that an ascetics left the city to live
in the mountains. He decided not to ask for anything from anyone until
Allah directly provided sustenance for him. Seven days and nights
elapsed and no food came for him. The ascetic was about to die when he
supplicated to Allah, “O my Lord! I will die if you do not provide my
sustenance!” Allah responded, “I swear upon My honor and glory! I will
not grant you livelihood until you return to the people and live in
society.” The ascetic left the hill and went into the city. When he
arrived in the city, some people brought him water while others brought
him food and bread. At that moment, Allah said to him, “O ascetic! Did
you want to invalidate my wisdom with your asceticism? Do you not know
that it is more beloved to me to provide livelihood to my servants by
means of other servants than to provide it directly without any
intermediaries?”

Sustenance does not only comprise food, but also includes spiritual and
material benefits such as knowledge. Therefore, one should not be lazy
about acquisition of knowledge and fail to attend classes on the pretext
that he relies on Allah to provide him with knowledge. According to a
*hadith*:

“Knowledge is not attained by studying; knowledge is a light which Allah
places in the heart of whomever He wishes.”[^29]

True, knowledge is provided by Allah and He grants it to whomever He
wishes, but we are duty-bound to learn and be earnest in acquiring
knowledge and make use of every opportunity in its attainment. It is not
true that a person can become a scholar without hard work in the same
way that a person cannot earn worldly wealth without making effort and
undergoing hardships.

All the blessings which man desires to attain are at the disposal of
Allah and the means are not the original determiners but are tools which
Allah has assigned for acquiring blessings and, because Allah wants to
grant His sustenance by these very means and facilities, we are
duty-bound to derive benefit from them even though it is possible for
Allah to grant us unimaginable blessings and favors without our having
to make any effort and also when we lack necessary means and facilities.

In contrast, it is also possible for us to fail to attain our desired
goals even after much effort and access to all the necessary means and
this is indicative of the fact that we ought not to put our hopes in
worldly agencies. In essence, people must rely only on Allah while
making use of material facilities and conveniences.

As the Noble Prophet (S) states, if one wants to be the strongest
person, he must put his hope in Allah. He must make his inner
relationship with Him strong so that he may attain inner peace and under
the auspices this relationship rely on His eternal power because He is
able to do all things and is the best helper in hardships and problems.

Indeed, it is with regard to this trust and firm relationship with Allah
that the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*)—that perfect man
who used to tremble when praying and supplicating Allah, faint and fall
on the ground as a result of fear of Allah—would never bend to the enemy
nor fear and the enemies used to flee from him like ants and locusts and
they could not stand face to face with him because he had the help of
Allah, the Exalted, and His eternal power and he had the Supporter who
is never weak and powerless and everything is managed by His will.
During the war of Jamal, he gave the standard to his son Muhammad
Hanafiyyah and ordered him:

“Mountains may move from their position but you should not move from
yours. Grit your teeth. Lend to Allah your head (in fighting for Allah,
give yourself completely to Allah). Plant your feet firmly on the
ground; have your eye on the remotest foe and close your eyes (to their
numerical majority). And keep sure that succor is but from Allah, the
Glorified.”[^30]

If man does not have trust in Allah, his conscience is always anxious
that his life will be filled with distress and agitation because he
believes he will not derive benefit. He is heedless of the genuine and
sure support and he relies on false and shaky supports. Therefore, in
order to have power, we have to have total trust and reliance on Allah.

The Relationship between Piety and Trust in Allah
-------------------------------------------------

In continuation, the Holy Prophet states:

“O Abu Dharr! If all people observe this verse it would suffice them:
‘And whoever practices piety, He shall make a way out for him from
whence he shall not reckon. And whosoever puts his trust in Allah, He
shall suffice him. Allah attains His purpose. Allah has set a measure
for all things’.”

(In this holy verse both piety [*taqwa*] and trust [*tawakkul*] in Allah
have been mentioned. This shows that there is a profound relationship
between them and they cannot be separated. Maybe the reason piety was
mentioned first is that attaining piety is the prelude to realization of
trust in Allah. Thus, a person cannot reach the truth of trust in Allah
without first being pious.)

There is no doubt that all heavenly and earthly affairs lie in the hands
of Allah and there is no other power vis-à-vis the power of Allah and it
is He who manages the created world with His will and everything happens
according to His desire and resolution. For this reason, we must only
put our hope in Him and ask only from Him and feel free from want from
all others.

Because Allah has given us orders to respect other human beings and be
thankful for their good deeds to us, we have to show due regard to
others on the basis of divine duty, but we must refrain from flattery
and improper tribute in the vain imagination that a thing will be
provided to us by another human being. A person who trusts and believes
in Allah conceives sustenance as coming from Allah; for this reason, he
does not see the need to compliment other people and bow down to them in
the hope that they will help him. Flattery and bowing down are not
compatible with man’s self-esteem.

Allah, the Exalted, and the divine *awliya’* of religion (*‘a*) have
ordered us to be humble to some people such us our parents and mentors
who have great rights upon us and likewise they have advised us to be
modest and polite to the progeny and descendants of the Noble Prophet
(S) because of their closeness to the Noble Prophet (S) and due to our
desire to obey Allah and show respect to the Prophet of Allah, not on
account of coveting the world or for material rewards.

Allah, the Exalted, mentions humility and respect towards parents after
mentioning worship and servitude to Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَضَى رَبُّكَ أَلاَّ تَعْبُدُوا إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ وَبِالْوَالِدَيْنِ
إِحْسَانًا إِمَّا يَبْلُغَنَّ عِنْدَكَ الْكِبَرَ أَحَدُهُمَا أَوْ
كِلاَهُمَا فَلاَ تَقُلْ لَهُمَا أُفٍّ وَلاَ تَنْهَرْهُمَا وَقُلْ
لَهُمَا قَوْلاً كَرِيمًا \* وَاخْفِضْ لَهُمَا جَنَاحَ الذُّلِّ مِن
الرَّحْمَةِ وَقُلْ رَبِّ ارْحَمْهُمَا كَمَا رَبَّيَانِي صَغِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your Lord has decreed that you shall not worship anyone except Him,
and [He has enjoined] kindness to parents, should they reach old age at
your side—one of them or both of them—do not say to them, ‘Fie!’ And do
not chide them, but speak to them noble words. Lower the wing of
humility to them out of mercy, and say, ‘My Lord! Have mercy on them,
just as they reared me when I was [a] small [child]’.”***[^31]

In regard to the rights of teachers and mentors, Imam al-Sajjad (*‘a*)
states:

“The right of the one who educates you and nourishes your soul is that
you must respect him, venerate his gatherings, listen to his words with
honor, look at him and never speak loudly in his presence. If someone
asks him a question, never respond to that question before he himself
answers it nor talk in his class and never gossip about anyone in his
presence.”[^32]

If a person humbles himself before someone and compliments another human
being on account of coveting worldly and material benefit, the reality
of his deeds is polytheism and the truth is that he conceives Allah, the
Exalted, as incapable and so covets what other people have.

A person that knows Allah, whose awareness of Him is perfect and pays
heed to His word: ***“Does not Allah suffice His servant?”***[^33] does
not hope in any other save Him to solve his problems. He only trusts
Allah, the Exalted, and at the same time discharges his duties. If his
duty is to work, he works and if his duty is to study, he studies and if
his duty is to fight in the way of Allah, he fights and puts the rest in
Allah’s hands.

Imam Khomeini, may Allah be pleased with him, used to repeatedly say,
“We are duty-bound to fight; however, with regard to whether we will win
or not, that is up to Him. Whatever He desires and deems expedient will
come to pass.”

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 424.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1139, wisdom [hikmat] 109, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 46.

[^4]: Ibid., vol. 97, p. 368.

[^5]: Ibid., vol. 21, p. 109.

[^6]: Surat Yusuf 12:33.

[^7]: Surat Yusuf 12:89.

[^8]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:67.

[^9]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 174.

[^10]: Surat Fussilat 41:34-36.

[^11]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:159.

[^12]: Surat al-Furqan 25:63.

[^13]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 1179, wisdom [hikmat] 197, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^14]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 179.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, p. 53.

[^16]: Ghurar al-Hikam, p. 479, trans, Muhammad ‘Ali Ansari.

[^17]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 87, sermon [khutbah] 24, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^18]: Ibid., p. 729, sermon [khutbah] 224, trans. Fayd al-Islam.

[^19]: Surat al-Qalam 68:8-9.

[^20]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:49.

[^21]: Surat al-Isra’ 17:74.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 21, p. 153.

[^23]: Surat al-Hujurat 49:13.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 138.

[^25]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:122.

[^26]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 719, sermon [khutbah] 218, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^27]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 151.

[^28]: Mustadrik al-Wasa’il, vol. 11, p. 217.

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 225.

[^30]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 62, sermon [khutbah] 11, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^31]: Surat al-Isra’ 17:23-24.

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 42.

[^33]: Surat al-Zumar 39:36.


