Lesson 39:  The Criteria of Value In the Words of Allah, the Exalted
====================================================================

As has been observed, the central point of the previous discussions was
piety. In those discussions the importance of piety as well as its
effects in the life of man and also its benefits in the hereafter were
mentioned and because it is possible for some to develop wrong
conceptions about piety and not distinguish real piety from outward or
pretensive piety, in this discussion the criteria for evaluating deeds
and behavior will be discussed.

A lot of people are used to judging people on the basis of their outward
appearance. If a person prays and recites invocations and the Glorious
Qur’an often especially if he performs his obligatory prayers on time
and observes issues of ritual purification, he is considered to be
pious. This conception is superficial and incorrect and in order for the
criteria of the value and superiority of man to be known, scholars of
ethics have put forward a theoretical and fundamental discussion in
regard to the criteria of the goodness and badness of deeds and the
value of man that will be dealt with in this section.

Faith and Good Deeds, The Criteria of Man’s Superiority
-------------------------------------------------------

The value of man from the viewpoint of the Qur’an lies in faith and
righteous deeds and perhaps there are very few pages in the Qur’an where
these two issues have not been mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ آمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلَهُ جَزَاءً الْحُسْنَى
وَسَنَقُولُ لَهُ مِنْ أَمْرِنَا يُسْرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But as for him who has faith and acts righteously, he shall have the
best reward, and we will speak to him gently of our command.”***[^1]

Elsewhere, it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاَّ مَنْ تَابَ وَآمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَأُوْلَئِكَ يَدْخُلُونَ
الْجَنَّةَ وَلاَ يُظْلَمُونَ شَيْئًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…except those who repent, believe, and act righteously. Such will
enter paradise, and they will not be wronged in the least.”***[^2]

Human beings have two reciprocal stations: one station is related to the
pious and possessors of virtue; that is to say the prophets, the
righteous [*salihan*], the saints [*awliya’*], the sincere [*siddiqin*]
and the martyrs, and it is because of this station that the Prophet Adam
(*‘a*) became the object of prostration for the angels and that man
attains a position where he is described thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَهَرٍ \* فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ
عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the pious shall be in gardens and rivers, in the abode of
truthfulness with an Omnipotent King.”***[^3]

The reciprocal station is the position of downfall, degradation and
remoteness from Allah. When an individual refrains from servitude and
worshiping Allah and discharging personal and social duties and, in
short, once he abstains from fulfilling his human role and traverses the
course of decadence, he reaches a position lower than animals:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لاَ يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لاَ
يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ آذَانٌ لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا أُوْلَئِكَ
كَالأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They have hearts with which they do not understand, and they have
eyes with which they do not see, and they have ears with which they do
not hear; They are like cattle; rather, they are more astray.”***[^4]

Therefore, the value of man lies in paying heed to the divine and
spiritual aspects of his self which spring from the heart and incline to
the other members of the body. The tongue has a share in remembrance of
Allah, the eyes have a share in reciting the verses of the Glorious
Qur’an, the ears have a share in listening to the truth and the hands as
well as legs have a share in moving along the path of Allah.

Accordingly, if we notice that in the Glorious Qur’an many
recommendations have been made about remembrance of Allah, it is because
human life does not have value without remembrance of Allah and it is
only by this means that a person can attain the status of nearness to
Allah.

Islam and all the divine religions believe in these two infinite
opposing positive and negative values. This is something that is not
conceivable by means of ordinary human standards and can only be
understood and justified according to divine criteria. In addition,
Islam believes not only in these criteria for man’s lifetime but also
for every moment of one’s life; that is to say, Islam says that within
one hour man can make the value of his life reach its peak. Within one
hour man can make himself prosperous forever and attain eternal and
infinite bliss or can make himself villainous and wretched within that
same hour.

Therefore, the criterion of value in Islam, is the competence and
worthiness of an individual and his righteous intention and from the
viewpoint of Islam even the benefits that a person grants to society are
not a standard of measure even if the value that the society has placed
on that person is equal to the benefits that the person has imparted to
the society. All too often, it is possible that the value which a
society grants to an individual is not only refuted by Islam, but Islam
may also grant that person negative value due to the fact that the
individual is corrupt inside and has a reprehensible and contaminated
interior covered by a deceptive outward appearance.

For this reason, it is possible for an individual to confer many
benefits upon the society, but to be ill-fated himself, like a scholar
that teaches religious sciences and from whom others derive benefit and
attain prosperity but he himself suffers misfortune because he does not
practice what he preaches and ends up in the hellfire. Or a rich man who
spends his wealth for the society and alleviates the needs of the
deprived with the intention of attaining fame, power and position.

Without the least doubt, from the viewpoint of Islam his deeds have no
value whatsoever. That which grants value to man’s existence and deeds
is his relationship with eternity and the infinite world. This
relationship is a relationship that comes from the heart and is attained
under the auspices of a righteous intention and attentiveness of the
heart to Allah.

Therefore, if deeds are performed for the sake of Allah, they have
infinite value whether they are visibly small or large. In addition, it
is natural that the more man’s knowledge about Allah increases and the
purer his intention becomes, the greater his own value becomes.

Reciprocally, the more the purity of his intention decreases and the
more his intention is to draw the attention of people and popularity as
well as gain social position, the more the value of his deeds decreases
even if his deeds are innumerable. We draw the conclusion that that
which grants value to man is in reality attentiveness to Allah. If a
person remembers Allah, his deeds have been performed for Him but in
other than this case, it is not possible for him to do anything for
Allah and as a result his acts are not valuable.

Worthwhile Deeds from the Viewpoint of Islam
--------------------------------------------

A lot of people imagine that the more value a deed has for the society,
the more its spiritual value and the more effective it is for spiritual
ascendance and perfection of man. They imagine that a deed that has
benefit for human beings has also been done for Allah or has been
performed in Allah’s way and for this reason they pay more attention to
the ‘bigness’ of a deed.

They say that such and such a person has spent so much from his wealth
to build a hospital or mosque. This conception is very superficial. It
is true that one of the criteria of a good deed is for it to be
beneficial for people, but it is not true that every good deed that is
beneficial for the people leads to a person’s perfection. A deed leads
to perfection when, in addition to being beneficial, the motive and
intention of the performer of that deed are sound, constructive and
totally for the sake of Allah.

From the viewpoint of Islam, the standard for a Godly deed that is
effective in the spiritual ascendance and perfection of man is not
simply being beneficial. The criterion for such a deed is that it ought
to be done for the pleasure of Allah, and divine motivation has to
compel one to do the deed.

Even so, one of the criteria for the goodness and soundness of a deed is
its being beneficial for others and every person’s deeds are more
valuable when they serve the society.

What is meant by the assertion that a deed ought to be done in the way
of Allah is that a deed has to be set on a path and direction whose
destination is Allah and as long as the goal is not Allah, the means or
process is also not Divine. If the aim is to draw the attention of
people, the course also is for the sake of attracting the attention of
people. A deed is done for Allah and in His way when the performer pays
attention to Allah at the time of performing it and this is feasible for
one who knows Allah and understands the value of nearness to Him.

By accurately studying the verses of the Gracious Qur’an, we realize
that often deeds which are good in our point of view have not only been
reproached by the Qur’an, but have been considered as lowly and mean.
One of those deeds is spending on other people, which we consider to be
a good deed and we praise a man when we see him providing philanthropic
services to the poor.

However, philanthropists that do not have a pure intention have been
reproached in the Gracious Qur’an. They will be remorseful on the Day of
Resurrection and will regret that they spent their wealth to draw the
attention of others. It is possible that people praise someone in the
world and stick his picture on doors and walls or even build a statue in
his memory in order for all the people to remember him as a
philanthropist, but the Holy Qur’an states in his regard:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لاَ تُبْطِلُوا صَدَقَاتِكُم بِالْمَنِّ
وَالأذَى كَالَّذِي يُنْفِقُ مَالَهُ رِئَاءَ النَّاسِ وَلاَ يُؤْمِنُ
بِاللّهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ فَمَثَلُهُ كَمَثَلِ صَفْوَانٍ عَلَيْهِ
تُرَابٌ فَأَصَابَهُ وَابِلٌ فَتَرَكَهُ صَلْدًا لاَ يَقْدِرُونَ عَلَى
شَيْءٍ مِمَّا كَسَبُوا وَاللّهُ لاَ يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Do not render your charities void by
reproaches and affronts, like those who spend their wealth to be seen by
people and have no faith in Allah and the Last Day. Their parable is
that of a rock covered with soil: a downpour strikes it, leaving it
bare. They have no power over anything of what they have earned, and
Allah does not guide the faithless lot.”***[^5]

If spending on other human beings is done for ostentation and sanctimony
and not on the basis of faith in Allah and the Last Day, it has no value
whatsoever and the example of such a sanctimonious person is like that
of a person who instead of planting his seeds on fertile land, sows it
on a hard rock and covers it with a handful of soil and waits for it to
grow, become green and reap produce from it!

He is heedless of the fact that once a violent wind or heavy rain falls,
his seeds will be wiped off the rock and taken away. As such, these
philanthropists do not reap anything from the money and efforts they
have spent for the reason that it was not spent on the basis of faith
and in the way of Allah and the hereafter.

This group spends and serves the society to show off and compete with
others in order to be remembered and praised in the minds of other human
beings. If they have a position or appointment such as being a people’s
lawyer or representative, they serve in order to be elected for another
term and if they work in an office, they exert themselves to be promoted
to a higher position. In this case, the services of such people do not
have the least value and they are not effective in their prosperity in
the hereafter.

However, the criterion and standard of good and sound deeds which are a
cause of man’s prosperity in the hereafter is that the deed must be
related to faith and spring from faith and it is for this reason that in
the Holy Qur’an, Allah, the Exalted, has conjoined faith and good deeds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَبَشِّرِ الَّذِين آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أَنَّ لَهُمْ
جَنَّاتٍ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِهَا الأَنْهَارُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And give good news to those who have faith and do righteous deeds
that for them shall be gardens with streams running in them…”***[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ أُولَئِكَ أَصْحَابُ
الْجَنَّةِ هُمْ فِيهَا خَالِدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who have faith and do righteous deeds, they shall be the
inhabitants of paradise; they shall remain in it [forever].”***[^7]

And elsewhere, it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُمْ
بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever acts righteously, [whether] male or female, and is a
believer, We shall revive him with a good life and pay them their reward
by the best of what they used to do.”***[^8]

Therefore, the relationship between faith and deeds has to be
safeguarded because only deeds that spring from faith and belief in
Allah can be directed towards Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي يُؤْتِي مَالَهُ يَتَزَكَّى \* وَمَا لأَحَدٍ عِنْدَهُ مِنْ
نِعْمَةٍ تُجْزَى \* إِلاَّ ابْتِغَاء وَجْهِ رَبِّهِ الأَعْلَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He who gives wealth to purify himself and does not expect any reward
from anyone, but seeks the pleasure of His Lord, the Most
Exalted.”***[^9]

Some people spend and give charity, but do not have the intention of
sanctimony and attracting the attention of other human beings or seeking
their gratitude. Even if the people speak ill of this person, he does
not quit his work and spends as Allah has commanded him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَى حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا
وَأَسِيرًا \* إِنَّمَا نُطْعِمُكُمْ لِوَجْهِ اللَّهِ لاَ نُرِيدُ
مِنْكُمْ جَزَاء وَلاَ شُكُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They give food, for the love of Him, to the needy, the orphan and
the prisoner [saying,] ‘We feed you only for the sake of Allah. We do
not want any reward from you nor any thanks’.”***[^10]

Therefore, our deeds are sound if they spring from faith and if they are
done for Allah, but if they are done without the intention of gaining
nearness to Him and they are accompanied by non-divine intentions, they
are like a body without a soul whose shape is nicely made but it lacks a
soul to give it movement and growth. In addition to not growing, deeds
that have no soul breed corruption.

Consequently, it is not correct to believe that every deed that is
beneficial to people and is considered as service to the society ought
to be perceived as good and commendable without considering its
motivation and intention.

That which has been stated is not only characteristic perception of the
general population. Some of the educated also consider the criterion of
the value and merit of deeds to be outward justice and the deed having
been done for the sake of benefiting and serving people although the
standard of merit and value of deeds and their effects on human
prosperity is something quite different.

A shallow and superficial person conceives the bulk and social effects
of a deed as the criterion of judgment but this standard is not divine
and Allah does not look at the bulk of deeds. He does not look at how
much money has been spent or how much movement and energy has been used.
Allah sees how much a deed was performed for Him and it in turn brings
about prosperity to that same measure that it is intended for Him.

However, in acts of worship contingent on the intention to gain
proximity to Allah, deeds become corrupt even if there is an iota of
non-divine intention in them and if someone else is set as a partner
with Allah. Obligatory and recommended devotional deeds have to be
completely purified for Allah and if an individual is sanctimonious in
these deeds and observes such rites of worship to please people, not
only are his deeds corrupt but prohibited and a cause of reproach. Even
that part of the deed that is done for Allah will not be accepted. As
Allah states:

“I am the best of partners; I do not accept the deeds of a person who
sets up another one to be my partner in his deeds.”[^11]

Consequently, if a person sets up a partner to Allah in deeds of
servitude, Allah gives up his share to that partner and because the deed
was not purely for Him the deed goes to waste. It is possible,
therefore, for a person to become wretched and ill-fated after years of
effort and endeavor. He spends a lifetime acquiring knowledge with the
imagination that he is doing it for Allah but when he carefully examines
his intentions, he perceives that he was studying for position or social
status—striving for fame and popularity among people.

If such an individual says that he served the people, saved a lot of
poor people from destitution, provided medical services to many needy
people, built schools and hospitals, Allah will tell him that none of
his deeds will grant him benefit because the reward and profit of his
deeds is the same praise which the people heaped upon him. The reward of
such a person is the hanging of his picture on walls and printing it in
magazines and newspapers and the praise which he was paid as a
philanthropist and doer of good.

Ultimately, the criterion of value and merit for deeds is connected with
the heart—we have to observe the source of the motivation of the deed.
Was it on account of love of this world or love of Allah? If it was done
for Allah and with purity of intention, it will bring about spiritual
ascendance and human perfection, but in other than this case it is
likely to cause decadence and downfall and hindrance of spiritual
ascendancy and human perfection.

If that deed is an act of worship, it becomes nullified by hypocrisy and
if it is a type of cajolery and not for the intention of gaining
proximity to Allah, it loses its value and reward. Hence, the value of
every deed is not based on its benefit for people or the society,
whether an Islamic or non-Islamic society.

What is more, the merit of deeds is not only that they ought to be
beneficial for the religion and the believers, because all too often man
does a deed which is beneficial for the religion but harmful for himself
because it was done without purity of intention. In the entire history
of Islam, a lot of people did deeds which were good for the religion and
sometimes brought about the spread and expansion of religion but these
deeds were not beneficial for them because they were not done with pure
intentions.

Their intention was perhaps to acquire more land or become more popular
and beloved among the people, neither of which brings about spiritual
ascendancy or human perfection. It has been narrated in a *hadith* that:

“Allah sometimes confirms his religion through corrupt people.”[^12]

It is possible for corrupt and libertine rulers, for the sake of
personal motives and seeking fame as well as expansion of the realm of
their rule, to have embarked upon conquests in the course of history
which resulted in the spread of religion; however, even if their actions
were beneficial for the religion and Islam, they would still not bring
any reward to them in the hereafter. For this reason, we have to observe
the role of motives and inner intentions and know that value and
superiority of deeds derive from divine intentions and that it is
possible for a deed to be apparently small but be divine and valuable on
account of being done with worthwhile and pure intentions.

The Importance of Integrity in Cultural and Religious Programs
--------------------------------------------------------------

In accordance with this issue, the propagators and exponents of religion
have to be attentive to the fact that in the propagation as well as
execution of religious programs and the establishment of religious
centers and encouragement of others in these issues, their motives and
intentions have to be pure. It is possible for them to guide other human
beings to the correct way by means of their propagation and advice and
to attract people to religious and cultural issues as well as to provide
suitable grounds for the promotion of cultural activities and bring
about quantitative and qualitative growth in cultural affairs of the
society as a result of their efforts at building mosques and
establishing religious centers, but they must not imagine that their
efforts are always beneficial and that they certainly reap heavenly
reward from them.

Such activities are only beneficial and result in spiritual ascendance
and human perfection when the aim is Allah. Movement and effort have to
be only for the sake of promoting religion and one ought not to have
personal intentions in these endeavors. It is in this case that great
prosperity will be granted.

However, if a person is impelled to move and make effort by personal and
worldly motives, he must not expect any reward from Allah. This point
must not be forgotten or a false image developed that a deed is
beneficial because it has very good results, causing a person to become
proud. On the contrary, intentions must be scrutinized so that one not
only does not become proud but becomes modest. Explaining this point,
the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! Allah the Glorified and Honored states, “I do not accept
the speech of a wise person, but that which is in his heart; his
intention and aim. If he devotes his will and intention to that which I
like and please, I accept his silence as My invocation and praise, even
if he has not uttered a word.”’

People who have learned wisdom and explain it to others are praised and
lauded by human beings and people look upon them with respect. Of
course, it is true that people ought to have favorable opinions in
regard to others, but the preacher has to observe to what extent he is
sure about his own deeds. Are his words accepted by Allah and do they
result in his gaining proximity to Him or not? Allah Himself has given
the response to this question: He does not have anything to do with wise
sayings but with the motive and intention which is concealed behind
words.

Allah looks at the inclinations and tendencies of human beings. He looks
at whether man’s heart is preoccupied by people and winning their praise
and pleasure or whether a person only thinks about performing his duty
and doing what is expected of him by Allah. People ought not to be
concerned with whether others are pleased or not. They must not be
remiss in discharging obligations even if the people dislike what they
say.

Therefore, if one’s inclination and tendency is to please Allah, even
his silence receives the reward of invocation and praise because his
heart is directed at Allah and he wants to do only that which pleases
Him. He keeps silence because he conceives the pleasure of Allah is in
silence and for this reason, his silence is considered to be worship and
all too often silence has more reward than other people’s acts of
worship and has greater effects in man’s spiritual perfection.

A person whose words and deeds are for people and whose heart is
directed at them does not attain virtue and rewards whatsoever and his
reward is that same praise and laudation which the people heap on him
because he has not done anything for which Allah should grant him
reward.

With regard to what has been said and knowledge of the pivotal effects
of inner motives and inclinations in the essence of deeds, if we observe
that a person says what he distinguishes as his duty, even if the people
are averse to it, we ought to know that he has divine motivation and for
this reason his deeds and words have merit.

However, if he pays heed to people when talking and avoids saying what
is pleasing to Allah because he does not perceive social conditions as
favorable and he fears that the people will be displeased with what he
says, his motivation is not divine and hence his acts are devoid of
value and merit because his attention is on the people.

The Importance of Intention and Inner Inclinations
--------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Allah, the Exalted and Honored, does not look at your
outer appearance and possessions [and what you say], but he looks at
your hearts and deeds.”

Allah does not look at the appearances of people nor does He look at
what they say and the claims they make. He does not look at the calluses
which develop on people’s foreheads due to prostration nor the clothes
which they wear, but he looks at the extent to which their hearts and
deeds confirm their claims. He looks at whether that which is in their
hearts is better than their outward appearances or, God forbid, their
hearts are polluted and contaminated. If their inside is polluted, they
are considered to be hypocrites and do not receive any reward from
Allah.

This section of the *hadith* is both shocking and admonishing and serves
as a warning that must be taken seriously to cause us to change our
opinions about ourselves. [Again, we have to hold favorable opinions in
regard to others.] If a person scrutinizes his intentions, he sees that
a great deal of his intentions are not divine and pure, or at least that
a portion of his intentions are not divine and he has set another as a
partner with Allah and Allah has Himself stated that if another is set
as His partner, He relinquishes His share to that partner.

We ought to observe the intentions and motivations of the words which we
utter, the work that we do, the prayers that we perform as well as the
advice that we give to other human beings. Do we attend congregational
prayers because Allah loves it or do we have other motivations? If our
acts of servitude are not pure and non-divine motivations interfere in
them, our intentions will not be pure in the rest of our deeds either.
In addition to this, if our deeds and devotional responsibilities are
not pure, they will basically be null and void.

Such cankers as hypocrisy, pretense and including motivations of the
carnal soul in acts of worship are often found to a greater extent in
people that have the duty to guide and lead others than in the general
population: a laborer and butcher who performs shortened prayers after
his daily duties at the end of the day because of being tired does not
usually do so out of hypocrisy.

However, for a person that is charged with leading the prayers as an
*imam* and counsels, teaches religious sciences and guides people, the
issue of sanctimony and being contaminated by non-divine motivations is
a serious danger; in the case that such people become contaminated by
hypocrisy, they become doomed both in this world and the hereafter.

Thereafter, in order to express that the apparent conduct, deeds and
claims do not denote that a person has piety and that piety is an
attribute that is found in the hearts of human beings and that the
criterion of the superiority of deeds is pure intentions and
motivations, the Noble Prophet (S) points at his chest and states:

“O Abu Dharr! Piety is in here. Piety is in here.”

Not every person who outwardly does good deeds, performs prayers a lot,
recites invocations and provides services to people is pious. His
intention and motivation must be assessed, if they are for Allah, that
person is pious; otherwise, he only simulates piety.

Previously we mentioned that sometimes doing good deeds and performing
religious and obligatory duties and refraining from forbidden actions is
termed as piety and at other times the permanent habit of the soul which
is the fountainhead of worthy and good deeds is called piety. Taking
this perception into consideration, our acts of worship and good deeds
are considered instances of piety when their source and fountainhead is
love of Allah and divine intentions. For this reason, we need to have
more accurate attention to the foundations of deeds because no deed is
done without an intention.

Man’s volitional deeds spring from motivations and intentions. It is
those motivations that give man the desire to perform deeds and, in
reality, those deeds and words are the crystallization of our will and
intention. Of course, it is possible for a person to have the intention
to perform some deed and to prepare himself to discharge it, but the
requisites for doing the deed hinder him from doing it. In that case,
the spiritual effects of the deed remain in his heart even though in the
external world no effect of the deed comes into appearance. That
spiritual effect is a result of those inner intentions and inclinations.

The Noble Prophet (S) states that man ought to pay attention to where
the motivation of his deeds spring from and where his inner inclination
is directed. Is it directed towards Allah and His will or at people and
worldly reward?

If a deed is done with non-divine intentions, even if it is a good and
recommendable deed, it will be devoid of spiritual and divine reward and
it will not grant man prosperity even if it results in the promotion and
expansion of the religion because it is not done with divine intentions
which bring about proximity to Allah. Allah looks at the essence of
actions and inner intentions for doing deeds. If deeds are divine, He
accepts them; otherwise, He rejects those deeds and He does not have
anything to do with the exterior of deeds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَنْ يَنَالَ اللَّهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلاَ دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَكِنْ يَنَالُهُ
التَّقْوَى مِنكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is not their flesh or their blood that reaches Allah. Rather, it
is your piety that reaches Him…”***[^13]

The Way to Purify Motives and Intentions
----------------------------------------

Misdeeds have no connection with Allah, but are connected with human
beings and the natural world and that which connects a deed to Allah is
a person’s intention. With regard to the Noble Prophet’s (S) sayings, it
is befitting to observe what motivation impels us to do whatever deed we
do and in the case that intentions are not pure, we have to embark upon
purifying those intentions; of course, purifying intentions is a
difficult task and calls for preparing the grounds and prerequisites.

Along this path, we have to seek the help of Allah first of all and
diligently strive to edify our souls and cleanse them of impurities and
non-divine inclinations in order for this important issue to be attained
by means of ascetic discipline and self-building.

When a person discerns that his intention is not pure and there are
non-divine impurities in it, it is likely that he may give up altogether
instead of cleansing his intentions. This too is the devil’s trap which
hinders man from carrying out his duties. For instance, if he intends to
go on a mission of religious propagation, he may perceive that his
intentions are not pure and become dissuaded from going as a result. He
tells himself that he will not go on the mission of propagation because
his intentions are not pure.

This is exactly what the devil wants because man’s duty is to go and
propagate the religion and guide people to the truth and if we put aside
this obligation as a consequence of the devil’s insinuations, a suitable
opportunity is provided for the devil to misguide people even more. For
this reason, when we realize that our intentions are not pure, we must
not just give up on our duties and responsibilities; on the contrary, we
should even more diligently strive to purify our intentions.

[^1]: Surat al-Kahf 18:88.

[^2]: Surat Maryam 19:60.

[^3]: Surat al-Qamar 54:54-55.

[^4]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:179.

[^5]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:264.

[^6]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:25.

[^7]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:82.

[^8]: Surat al-Nahl 16:97.

[^9]: Surat al-Layl 92:18-20.

[^10]: Surat al-Insan 76:8-9.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p. 243.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 5, p. 19.

[^13]: Surat al-Hajj 22:37.


