Lesson 25: The Path towards Paradise and Manifestations of Divine Modesty
=========================================================================

The Noble Prophet (S)[^1] once more reminds us about the importance of
modesty and decency and tells Abu Dharr:

“O Abu Dharr! Would you like to enter paradise?”

Abu Dharr responds, “Yes, may my father be sacrificed for you.”

The Noble Prophet (S) mentions three fundamental conditions with the
intention of inviting Abu Dharr to heaven and eternal bliss:

“Cast long-drawn-out dreams out of your mind. Always perceive your death
as close at hand. Have proper modesty towards Allah.”

Disapproval of Long-Drawn-Out Dreams and the Difference between Them and Positive Hope
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the subjects upon which a lot of emphasis has been laid in the
*hadith*s is that a believer ought to abstain from long and protracted
wishes. Endless desires are a hindrance to man’s fulfilling his divine
duties and pursuing his spiritual goals and impel him to abandon his
religious obligations and sacred aims in the hope of attaining his
cravings.

Long-drawn-out dreams cause man to become heedless about the present,
thus not perceive currently available opportunities. Because of the
unbecoming role of endless wishes in keeping perfection and the sublime
prosperity of the hereafter at a far distance, the devil uses them as
effective tools to mislead the servants of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ يَدْعُونَ مِنْ دُونِهِ إِلاَّ إِنَاثًا وَإِنْ يَدْعُونَ إِلاَّ
شَيْطَانًا مَرِيدًا \* لَعَنَهُ اللّهُ وَقَالَ لأََتَّخِذَنَّ مِنْ
عِبَادِكَ نَصِيبًا مَفْرُوضًا \* وَلأُضِلَّنَّهُمْ
وَلأُمَنِّيَنَّهُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They invoke none but female (deities) besides Him, and invoke none
but a rebellious Satan, whom Allah has cursed, and who said, ‘I will
surely take of your servants a settled share, and I will lead them
astray and give them false hopes…’”***[^2]

It is in connection with this danger of interminable yearnings and
because they infect man with erroneous doubts and thereafter impel him
to perpetrate minor sins and later greater sins and crimes that Imam
‘Ali (*‘a*)[^3] perceives them as a threat:

“O people! What I fear most for you are two things—acting according to
desires and extending of hopes. As regards acting according to desires,
this hinders one from the truth; and as regards extending of hopes, it
makes one forget the next world.”[^4]

In order to differentiate between positive hope and interminable vain
wishes, the notion of endless cravings ought to be explained, especially
when we take into consideration the fact that the concept of ambition is
somehow associated with the notion of hope and that which is the essence
of life and making effort—whether in connection with material matters or
spiritual issues—is positive hope.

If one were to have no hope in regard to improving his state of affairs
and in worthy benefits which derive from good deeds, he would neither
fulfill his worldly nor eschatological duties, and to quote the words of
the Gracious Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَ يَظُنُّ أَنْ لَنْ يَنصُرَهُ اللَّهُ فِي الدُّنْيَا
وَالآخِرَةِ فَلْيَمْدُدْ بِسَبَبٍ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ ثُمَّ لِيَقْطَعْ
فَلْيَنظُرْ هَلْ يُذْهِبَنَّ كَيْدُهُ مَا يَغِيظُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever thinks that Allah will not help him in this world and the
hereafter let him extend a rope to the ceiling and cut (himself) off,
and let him see whether his plan would remove that which enrages
(him).”***[^5]

On the basis of this translation, when a man has no hope in the help of
Allah, he is always entrapped and caught up in a state of anger, wrath,
wavering of the mind and hopelessness and he is perpetually restless and
anxious. As a result of this excessive lack of hope, he is not able to
take steps forward towards either his own well-being or that of others.
He may not commit sin and crime, but he will not take positive action
either. It is for this reason that positive hope and protracted futile
aspirations are different—positive hope is the incentive for man’s
development in life.

Hope in Allah gives fruit to rewards in the hereafter and hope in the
graces of Allah is one of the ethical virtues. In this same
aforementioned *hadith* the Noble Prophet (S) asks Abu Dharr if he would
like to go to paradise; that is to say, does Abu Dharr have the hope and
aspiration to go to the garden of bliss? This question drives home the
point that hope is acceptable and praiseworthy and that which is not
proper and undesirable is interminable deceptive wishes and vain worldly
cravings.

Therefore, a believer is not one who is devoid of hope nor is he one who
lends his faculty of reasoning to inferior worldly yearnings because
this faculty is more honorable than that it should be pre-occupied with
thinking about low worldly ambitions; on the contrary, his hope is
totally focused on Allah and on gaining proximity to Him.

The World: Means Or Goal?
-------------------------

The world is not beneficial by nature. It is beneficial only to the
extent that it is an instrument or means; that is to say, man should
strive for the world, but not such that the world becomes his final
goal. Worldly effort should be a means of attaining the bliss of the
hereafter; otherwise, if the hereafter were not the aim, ordinary
worldly efforts would not have an intelligible and correct
justification—even worse is a situation where a person nurtures
protracted wishes in his mind.

Man’s efforts in the world have to be concentrated on fulfilling his
duties and obligations, whether in the domain of individual issues or in
the realm of social matters, and these obligations should be done for
the pleasure of Allah and success in the hereafter; otherwise, from the
Islamic point of view, his endeavors and actions will not be acceptable
and they will be subjected to reproach. In the same manner, placing hope
in the world ought to be with the intention of attaining the afterworld.

If man intends to make his worldly deeds a means of attaining the
happiness of the hereafter, he ought to bear in mind that those worldly
activities which play a role in achieving the bliss of the otherworld,
and are not a hurdle to spiritual matters, are limited. For this reason,
he ought not to preoccupy his thoughts and mind with worldly affairs,
because the capacity of man’s mind, thinking as well as creative powers,
is limited: once man is preoccupied with pondering about one topic, he
is hindered from reflection about other issues.

When his attention is captivated by one thing, he is held back from
thinking about other matters. If round-the-clock man is absorbed in
contemplating about earthly matters most of the time—he is immersed in
thinking about his house, wife, food, clothing and he is obsessed with
his social status and, in short, he is absorbed with that which is
connected with the world—his mind becomes so preoccupied that he has no
opportunity to think about the hereafter. He even dreams about worldly
matters when he sleeps.

If one is a career person or a businessman, he dreams about checks and
promissory notes. Or, we see the architect that is always absorbed with
building affairs and the problems of architectural work who dreams about
these issues in his sleep, too. A person who has not married is
preoccupied with the thought of selecting a wife, or if he is married
but has no child, he is absorbed in thinking about having a child and
with these mental preoccupations, he can no longer think about the
hereafter, spiritual matters and the aim of creation and his future.

These daily duties preoccupy man’s mind in such a way that he no longer
has the time to accomplish his obligatory [*wajib*] duties, and when he
is through with his daily affairs, he begins thinking about the next
hundred years and what will happen to his grandchildren and great
grandchildren and all his descendants!

How will his children marry and settle down? How will he make a living?
Without the least doubt such a mind and heart cannot engage in thinking
about spiritual matters, pains of the afterworld, diseases of the soul,
cankers of the heart, nor social issues, all of which are associated
with the pleasure of Allah.

It is very unfortunate and saddening that at times even spiritual
matters are often used as tools for attaining the world. This is another
loss and calamity for mankind. It is not surprising at all when a career
person uses his income as a means for securing worldly cravings, but
what is amazing is that a person might use religion as a means of
securing worldly aspirations, meaning that he makes religion a trade for
attaining earthly goals.

Such a person is a traitor to religion and, in the words of the
*hadith*s, he acquires his daily bread by means of selling his religion.
What a loss! How unfortunate and ill-fated is a person that uses his
religion as a means of securing his worldly ambitions and carnal
yearnings. As one of the Infallibles (*‘a*) has stated, the benefit of
such a person from religion is equivalent to the income which he earns
and he gains no other benefit from religion.

“One who makes his religion as a means of attaining worldly desires will
derive no benefit from his religion but that which will lead to his
perdition.”[^6]

Attention to the Absolute Self-sufficient Results in Freedom from Want from Other than Allah
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once a believer is set on the course of knowledge and awareness of Allah
as well as executing his divine duties, he no longer thinks about his
worldly affairs for the reason that Allah is his guardian, providing his
earthly needs. Of course, this does not mean that he ought not to work
but that he should not preoccupy his mind with the world: the trader,
farmer and craftsman who undertake effort to make money do so for the
sake of securing the pleasure of Allah not for the sake of merely
securing their worldly desires.

Blessed is the tradesman who uses the world as means for attaining the
hereafter and woe upon him who trades the hereafter to achieve only his
worldly aspirations.

Definitely such a person will not attain his ambitions in life and his
soul will be traumatized and full of stress all the time because,
despite perceiving himself as attached to religion and familiar with it,
he lacks real faith in religious and divine values, has not conformed
his knowledge with his deeds and does not have faith in what he says.

Such a person becomes an object of Allah’s wrath and Allah does not
provide him with the tools and means of attaining his worldly aims. It
is for this reason that we see that such people experience failures and
become unsuccessful in life and neither derive benefit from the world
nor from the hereafter.

However, when a believer trudges the course of faith and sets foot on
the path of propagating divine beliefs and sciences, Allah opens the way
for him in connection with the life of the world and manages his life in
such a way that man does not even need to think about the world and
there will not be the least worry in his mind with regard to material
life. As Allah stated to the Noble Prophet (S) on the Night of the
Ascension [*laylat al-mi‘raj*]:

“He (Allah’s servant) keeps trying to get closer to Me by means of
optional prayers [*nafilah*] until I love him. [After] loving him, I
will become his ears with which he hears, his eyes with which he sees,
his tongue with which he speaks and his hand with which he strikes. When
he asks from Me I answer, and if he demands from Me I will give
him…”[^7]

The chain of transmission of this authentic *hadith* has been recorded
in books like “*Al-Kafi*” and its purport has also been inscribed in
other *hadith*s. Various interpretations have been put forward for the
expressions which have been recorded in this *hadith*, one expression
being that Allah stated, “I become his ears… eyes… hands…” Eminent
scholars like Shaykh Baha’i and Imam Khomeini (may Allah be pleased with
them) have put forward several interpretations in this regard.

Imam Khomeini’s (may Allah be pleased with him) interpretation in his
book entitled “*Forty hadith*s” is as follows: “The more the heart is
pre-occupied with all else besides *Haqq* (i.e. Allah) and is engaged
with the edifices of the world, the more will be its need and longing
for the world.”

However, the need of the heart and the longing of the soul are very
apparent, because its attachment and affection to the world has filled
all the corners of the heart. It is natural that its external need too
should increase because there is no person who can manage all his
affairs alone. Perhaps the rich are apparently considered to be without
want, but a precise glance at their affairs makes it clear that their
needs increase with the increment of their riches. For this reason rich
people are poor people in the semblance of the self-sufficient and they
are needy people dressed in the clothing of the affluent.

The more the heart is engrossed in managing worldly affairs and the more
it is absorbed with the fanfare of the world, the more man is overcome
by the pain of abasement and humiliation and the more he is overwhelmed
by the abysmal darkness of disgrace and need.

In contrast, once a person tramples the inferior world underfoot and
concentrates his heart and soul’s attention on the Absolute
Self-Sufficient and believes in the essential need [or natural poverty]
of all existents and comprehends that no being is self-sufficient in and
of itself and that there is no power, glory and majesty save for Allah,
he becomes free from want of both worlds—so free from want that the
kingdom of Solomon is worthless in his point of view.

If the keys to the treasures of the world were given to him, he would
not pay any attention to them; as has been recorded in the *hadith* that
the Archangel Gabriel brought the keys of the treasures of the world
from Allah, the Exalted, to the Seal of the Prophets (S) and that holy
man showed humility and did not consent to the offer and instead chose
poverty as his pride.[^8] Also, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) told Ibn ‘Abbas, “This
world of yours is more inferior to me than this worn out shoe.”[^9]

They know that being absorbed in the treasures of the world and its
wealth and riches and companionship with the lovers of the world gives
rise to darkness and opacity of the heart, weakens man’s will and
determination, makes the heart needy and destitute, and hinders it from
concentrating on the Absolutely Perfect.

However, when the heart has been put under the care of its Owner and the
house has been submitted to the Landlord and has not been surrendered to
a usurper, Allah manifests Himself in it. Of course, the manifestation
of the Absolute Self-Sufficient brings about absolute self-sufficiency
and submerges the heart into the sea of honor and riches and fills it
with freedom from want:

“Yet all might belongs to Allah, His Apostle, and the faithful.”[^10]

It is natural that once the affairs of the house are managed by the
Owner of the house, He does not leave man to himself and He Himself
takes possession of all the affairs of His servant and even becomes his
ears, eyes, hands and legs… in this state, the poverty and need of His
slave becomes completely obviated and he becomes free from want of both
worlds and, of course, in this manifestation of the *Haqq* his fear of
all existents is precluded and dread of Allah, the Exalted, takes its
place and the greatness and eminence of the *Haqq* fills his heart to
the brim. Besides the *Haqq*, he does not perceive anyone as great,
eminent and possessor.[^11]

The simplest interpretation that can be put forward for the *hadith*
which says “… I become his ears and his eyes and…” is that Allah
performs the duties that the ears, eyes, hands and legs of His slave do.
Allah’s servants ought to do deeds which settle their material affairs
and remedy their needs; but Allah arranges the daily affairs of His
servants in such a way that they become automatically available and
everything is put in order such that there is no need to exert pressure
on one’s mind about what will have to be done the following day.

As soon as one steps out of the house, tasks are fulfilled by the will
of Allah, by means of agents which He makes available and perhaps also
through other servants of Allah. Individuals need help and Allah makes
that aid reach them from the unseen world [*‘alam al-ghayb*]. It is not
such that affairs are settled directly from the unseen supernatural
world, but that the management of all undertakings and the capacity for
all affairs lie in His Hands. Allah arranges agents and means in such a
way that all affairs go well without man being in need of anything and
without his needing to think and plan.

In order to advance his affairs and duties, a believer does not have
need of satanic plans. Once he believes that his short term needs are
provided by Allah, he no longer nurtures long-drawn-out aspirations. His
task is only to fulfill the responsibilities that lie on his shoulders.

In contrast, if a person is only preoccupied with amassing riches and
wealth and the acquisition of more income in order to increase worldly
allurements and attractions—changing household decorations as often as
possible, buying new cars, etc.—his aspirations will not come to an end
because this domain is endless and to quote Imam Khomeini (may Allah be
pleased with him), “If he were given the whole of the planet earth, he
would not be contented with it and would begin planning how to conquer
and subjugate other planets as well.”

Remembrance of Death and Manifestations of Divine Modesty
---------------------------------------------------------

With regard to what has previously been alluded to, the Noble Prophet
(S) has mentioned three conditions for man to enter paradise: the first
condition is that man ought to curtail his aspirations, not attach his
heart to the world, not worry about the future and only preoccupy his
mind with the hereafter. The second condition is that he ought to
remember death all the time. Referring to this condition after the first
condition is indicative of the close connection between these two
because one ought to think about death constantly if he intends to keep
interminable hopes outside the realm of his thoughts.

The reason for this is that when one takes death into consideration, the
end and consequences of worldly ambitions and their futility become
apparent; therefore, there is a close relationship between wiping out
endless hopes and contemplation of death.

Having hopes and aspirations are not entirely voluntary. When man is
brought up in circumstances which are governed by a materialistic
culture, what he sees and hears have an effect on him and the eyes and
ears make him pay heed to the world. Whether he likes it or not worldly
ambitions find their way to his heart.

Under the circumstances, what must one do to avoid being attracted by
the allurements of the world and to refrain from long-drawn-out hopes?
It is in regard to this important issue that the Noble Prophet (S)
advises Abu Dharr to persistently contemplate death: if man is
continually attentive to the fact that the end of this life is death, he
comprehends that this world is not a worthy place for him to attach his
heart. That which is worthy of love is eternal, never ending and never
decreases—and that is the pure life of the hereafter.

If man is consistently preoccupied with the thought of death, he is not
afflicted by false expectations, greed and a great deal of other mean
qualities. For this reason, the remembrance of death is an effective
remedy for curing spiritual diseases. Paying attention to death is very
easy: man can create manifestations of death in his surroundings; for
example, he can hang a writing or poster about death in his room or at
his place of work, or he can put it in the inner folds of a book so that
he is reminded about death by seeing it.

In a *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

*“The most intelligent person is he who meditates upon death
more.”*[^12]

Without the least doubt, an intelligent person is not deceived and he
chooses the best between the world and the hereafter. Once a clever
person conceives that the world is destined to destruction, he does not
believe that it is worthwhile. In any case, remembrance of death is an
effective remedy for breaking free from love of the world and
interminable false hopes.

The third condition for entering the garden of eternal bliss
(paradise)—which was referred to in a different way in the previous
lesson—is divine modesty. Because the Noble Prophet (S) repeatedly
alludes to the need to be decent and modest in the presence of Allah,
Abu Dharr understands that the issue of modesty enjoys special status
and importance, and that is the reason why the Noble Prophet (S)
continues to lay a great deal of emphasis upon it. For this reason a
question arises for him about why the Noble Prophet (S) lays so much
emphasis on this issue and grants it so much importance. He considers it
probable that the Noble Prophet (S) has a special intention in mind, and
thus asks:

*“O Prophet of Allah, we are all modest before Allah. (What do you
mean?)”*

Because he does not consider the normal amount of modesty to be
sufficient, the Noble Prophet (S) cites three manifestations of divine
modesty:

*“Modesty is not that which it appears to be; rather, modesty before
Allah is that you must not forget the graves and ruins of former
generations.”*

The first manifestation of divine modesty mentioned by the Noble Prophet
(S) is that man should not forget graveyards and ancient constructions.
Of course, the intention here is not places like decorated cemeteries
which do not remind man of the hereafter, but desolate and ruined graves
to which little or no attention at all is paid. Previously it was
mentioned that the mind of man is limited and when he is preoccupied
with one set of issues he is hindered from paying attention to others.

If man wants to produce desirable spiritual states like modesty, fear
[*khawf*] and eagerness for Allah, which are considered pre-eminent in
the Islamic order and emphasized in ethics, it is necessary to prepare
the proper foundation: in order to bring about that level of modesty
which has been alluded to in the words of the Noble Prophet (S), a
person ought to forgo the allurements of the world and become
affectionate towards desolate graveyards and old ruined buildings.

When man’s attention is focused on grand, beautiful and attractive
buildings which are being built and if every day his eyes are set upon
new decorations and colorful curtains, the attractions of the world
manifest themselves more and more in his eyes. If he wants to reduce a
bit of this attention to the deceptive manifestations of this world, he
must turn his attention to graveyards, the destination of humanity, and
the dead lying under the earth. He ought to look at ruined desolate
buildings and observe what the end of stones, metal and cement which are
laid one on top of the other will be.

It should not be mistakenly understood that what is meant is that we
should build our houses with clay so that they fall whenever it rains.
On the contrary, the order of Islam is that man ought to do every act
correctly; if he is building a house, he ought to build a strong one.
The intention is that man must not give his heart to the allurements and
attractions of the world and must not be deceived by the world. The
purport is not that he ought not to perform his work correctly.

Man has a duty to be earnest in his deeds, but not to fall in love with
the world. When man sees the attractive beauties of the world, it is
natural for his heart to be captivated by them. This state is not
volitional: when he sees his neighbor has a car and exchanges it for a
more luxurious car, he becomes tempted and asks himself why others
should be able to exchange their cars so often while he doesn’t even own
a dilapidated car!

When he himself does buy a car, the following day he is tempted to buy
the newest and latest model. Therefore, the Noble Prophet’s (S) advice
is that man ought to sometimes visit graves and desolate or ruined
places. Ethical scholars, too, counsel their students to go to graves on
a daily basis; at the minimum, they ought to visit graves once a week,
which is recommended in Islamic law, so that their hearts become
cleansed of love for the world and material affections and so that at
least a balance is struck between love of the world and the hereafter.

It is not possible that man be infatuated with the world and love of the
world cast a shadow over his heart and at the same time feel fear
[*khawf*] of Allah, be an early riser for prayer and shed tears when he
hears the name of Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*). It is natural that the world
and love of it would occupy the place of these affairs. A heart that is
filled with love of the world no longer has any room for love of Imam
al-Husayn (*‘a*) and Her Holiness Fatimah al-Zahra’ (*‘a*). Of course,
these Infallibles (*‘a*) are so luminous that when our dead hearts
remember them, they leave an effect, but because our hearts are
contaminated, their remembrance does not have the necessary effect.

“And that do not forget the stomach and that which is in it.”

The second manifestation of divine modesty is that people should be
careful about what they eat. If people make use of everything that falls
into their hands and are not afraid of eating prohibited [*haram*]
foods, little by little they become afflicted by hardheartedness and
their hearts become devoid of divine light. People must be careful not
to eat doubtful or forbidden foods which can cause hardness of the heart
and from then on they do not find the inclination to worship, fear
Allah, desire paradise and encounter the beatific vision [*liqa’*] of
Allah. For this reason, in order to have divine modesty, it is incumbent
to pay heed to the stomach and be cautious about the food that is placed
into it. The Noble Qur’an advises man to be careful what food he eats:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنْظُرِ الإِنسَانُ إِلَى طَعَامِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**“So let man observe his food.”**[^13]

Man has to follow all the aspects of nutrition and examine his food from
all points of view and take care that it is sound, hygienic, lawful
[*halal*] and pure. The Companions of the Cave [*ashab al-kahf*] who, as
the best of Allah’s servants, had forsaken the polytheistic order and
idol worship and liberated themselves from the trap of atheistic beliefs
during the reign of Diqyanus, according to the saying of the Qur’an,
used to select the purest and most lawful [*halal*] of foods. After
narrating the events that came to pass for the Companions of the Cave in
the grotto and their waking up from sleep after a hundred years and the
course of their conversation, the Glorious Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلْيَنْظُرْ أَيُّهَا أَزْكَى طَعَامًا فَلْيَأْتِكُم بِرِزْقٍ مِنْهُ
...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Send one of you to the city with this money.*** ***Let him observe
which of them has the purest food, and bring you provisions from
there.”***[^14]

It is in view of the effects of unlawful possessions in misleading man
and keeping him aloof from what is right and in propelling him towards
sinning against Allah and against the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah that
Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) said to the atheistic army when they did not
listen to his words:

“All of you are sinning and disobeying me and opposing my orders and are
not listening to my words. Yes, your stomachs are filled with haram food
and a seal has been put over your hearts.”[^15]

Yes, *haram* food impels a person to be so hard-hearted and cold-hearted
that he even becomes ready to pull out a sword against the son of the
Noble Prophet (S). It is for this reason that the Noble Prophet (S)
believes that modesty is guaranteed by man being careful about what he
eats and eating *halal* foods.

“And that he ought to control the head and its parts.” (That is to say,
the eyes, the ears and the tongue.)

The third manifestation of divine modesty is that man ought to observe
the thoughts and ideas he nurtures in his mind and the hopes and dreams
that exist therein. If he purifies his imagination, casts null and void
thoughts out of his brain and also embarks upon purifying his inner
self, he can attain desirable modesty.

Neatness, A Practice of the Saints [Awliya’] of Islam
-----------------------------------------------------

In continuation, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Any human being who desires nobility and dignity in the hereafter has
to give up the ornaments of the world. Whenever you have done this, you
have attained the station of the friend of Allah.”

When man has detached his self from the world and has become heedless
with regard to it, he falls in love with the hereafter and its unending
blessings and yearns to encounter the beatific vision [*liqa’*] of Allah
and he becomes beloved and honorable in the hereafter. In contrast, if
the world appears great in the sight of man, the hereafter appears small
from his point of view.

Of course, reflecting about the hereafter, death and going to the graves
is effective; however, man has to think well also in regard to his
conduct. In order not to fall into the trap of the world, he ought to
rid himself of its ornaments and attractions, in which case he will
become honorable and dignified in the hereafter.

It must be stated, however, that some adornments are recommended, so
much so that if man pursues them, because of their religious
desirability, not only is he not considered to be a seeker of the world
but a pursuer of the hereafter. It is religiously desirable and
recommended in divine law that a wife should beautify herself for her
husband and that the husband ought to do the same for his wife, and it
is recommendable for believers in gatherings to wear clean clothes,
perfume themselves, brush their teeth, comb their hair and apply oil to
their bodies. Believers must be so clean that people delight in
socializing with them.

Beyond the shadow of doubt if these affairs are done with the intention
of gaining nearness and proximity to Allah, they are considered to be
worship and not counted as ornamentation for the world. Ornamentation
for the world takes place when a human being beautifies himself for the
sake of carnal desires and in order to derive pleasure from it and not
for the sake of Allah and the hereafter.

Man likes to wear stylish and fashionable clothes, to eat delicious and
diverse foods, and to have a beautiful and grand house. Such adornment
is desirable if it is done for the sake of the hereafter and for
conforming to the orders of Allah. The Noble Prophet (S) used to
consistently clean and perfume himself:

“The Noble Prophet’s (S) habit was such that he used to look at himself
in the mirror, clean his head and face, and comb his hair and often he
did this with water. Besides doing this in front of his family, he used
to groom himself in front of his companions too and say, ‘Allah loves
the servant who cleans and adorns himself when going out of his house to
visit his brothers’.”[^16]

A believer ought to be clean and have an orderly outward appearance all
the time; he ought not to be disheveled and dirty because this results
in other people being disgusted with him. In the past there used to be
dirty, soiled carpets in mosques and some people used to enter them with
grimy clothes and smelly bodies and, in contrast, places of moral
corruption used to be clean and perfumed.

The assemblies of the believers ought to be the best, cleanest and most
fragrant places of gathering. We must imitate the way of the Noble
Prophet (S) and adopt the conduct of the Infallible Imams (*‘a*) as our
role models.

A considerable amount of the Noble Prophet’s (S) income used to be spent
on buying perfume. We ought to take lessons and know that these
ornamentations and adornments are not undesirable, for the reason that
they are orders of the divine law and, if they are performed with the
intention of gaining nearness to Allah, they are considered to be
worship. The wisdom underlying these injunctions is that the believers
become affectionate towards each other, derive pleasure from one another
and get benefit from the light of each other.

[^1]: The abbreviation, “S”, stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
sallallahu ‘alayhi wa alihi wa sallam [may God’s blessings and peace be
upon him and his progeny], which is mentioned after the name of the Holy
Prophet Muhammad (S). [Trans.]

[^2]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:117-119.

[^3]: The abbreviation, “‘a” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
‘alayhi’s-salam, ‘alayhim’us-salam, or ‘alayha’s-salam [may peace be
upon him/them/her], which is mentioned after the names of the prophets,
angels, Imams from the Prophet’s progeny, and saints (‘a). [Trans.]

[^4]: Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon [khutbah] 42, trans. Fayd al-Islam. [For
English translation see http://www.al-islam.org/nahj, ed.]

[^5]: Surat al-Hajj 22:15.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 63.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 54, hadiths 7-8.

[^8]: One of the angels of Allah who had never come down to the earth
descended with the Archangel Gabriel carrying the keys to the treasures
of the world and addressed the Noble Prophet (S), “O Muhammad! Your Lord
sends his peace and states, ‘These are the keys to the treasures of the
world. If you want, you can be a prophet who is poor and if you desire,
you can be a prophet possessing power and a kingdom’.” Then after that
Gabriel made a sign to him and said, “O Muhammad! Show humility!” The
Prophet (S) stated, “I will be a poor prophet.” Thereafter the angel
accompanying Gabriel returned to the sky… (Amali Saduq, majlis 69,
p.365, hadith 2)

[^9]: ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Abbas says that when Amir al-Mu’minin set out for
war with the people of Basrah, he went to his audience at Dhi Qar and
saw that he was stitching his shoe. Amir al-Mu’minin said to me, “What
is the price of this shoe?” I said, “It has no value now.” He then said,
“By Allah! It is dearer to me than ruling over you, except that I may
establish right and ward off wrong.” Nahj al-Balaghah, sermon [khutbah]
33.

[^10]: Surat al-Munafiqun 63:8.

[^11]: Imam Khomeini, Fourty hadiths: An Exposition of Ethical and
Mystical Traditions, The Institute for Compilation and Publication of
Imam Khomeini’s Works (International Affairs Department), 4th printing
1373 AHS, pp. 444-445.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6, p. 130.

[^13]: Surat ‘Abasa 80:24.

[^14]: Surat al-Kahf 18:19.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 8.

[^16]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 6, p. 330.


