Lesson 28: The Greatness of Worship and Servitude and its Existential Effects
=============================================================================

In this section of the *hadith*, the greatness and superiority of
worship and devotion to Allah, the Exalted, has been mentioned and also
the fact that man’s deeds—whether righteous or unrighteous—do not remain
hidden from the eyes of witnesses and vigilantes; to the extent that the
earth, on which we worship or perform unbecoming acts will even give
witness either in our favor or against us on the Judgment Day.

It is not possible that our deeds and conduct could be without effects
and consequences, but in addition to worldly repercussions the fruits of
our deeds will become manifest in the hereafter also. In the hereafter,
the ground on which we perform worship shall bear positive witness in
regard to our worship, or will bear witness against us and even curse us
if we do unbecoming deeds upon it.

The Witnessing of the Earth in regard to Man’s Deeds
----------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! There is no man who places his forehead on a part of the
earth save that it bears witness on the Day of Resurrection in regard to
that, and there is no house in which people meet but that it blesses or
curses them.”

Some great people would recite their prayers in different parts of the
mosque instead of in one place, or when they entered a house they would
initially recite two *rak‘at*s (cycles) of prayer. The reason they did
this was to have more witnesses in their favor on the Day of
Resurrection. This in itself is cleverness, which is beneficial and
praiseworthy for a believer.

With regard to the superiority and value which has been mentioned in
this and other *hadith*s for prayer, persistence in reciting prayer in
different places is an acknowledgement of submission and confidence in
the sayings of the Noble Prophet (S) and the Pure Imams (*‘a*).

As can be observed, this section and the other parts of this same
*hadith* are expressive of this fact that the earth, the trees and other
inanimate creatures which we conjecture as lacking perception and
awareness do have conception and cognizance and comprehend our deeds and
bless us for our good deeds and curse us for our bad actions; in
addition, they will bear witness either in our favor or against us on
the Day of Resurrection.

Characteristics of the Praise of the Earth and Inanimate Objects
----------------------------------------------------------------

About this section of the *hadith*, where perception and awareness is
characterized for the earth as well as inanimate objects, and also
Qur’anic verses and other *hadith*s which have similar subject matter,
great scholars have presented three points of view:

**The first point of view:** A number of scholars believe that these
expressions are metaphorical and the intention is not their literal
meaning and they mention allegorical interpretations for every instance
correspondent with it. Perhaps the majority of exegetes have chosen this
method in their interpretations of this type of verse and *hadith*.

**The second point of view:** The gnostics and mystical philosophers,
like Sadr al-Muta’allihin[^1] and their students believe that these
existents truly have perception and awareness and glorify Allah and have
fear of Allah, but we are unable to comprehend this reality.

These are the real meanings which they deduce from the Qur’anic verses
and *hadith*s and assert that the trees, earth, stones and… have
awareness and glorify Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ
وَإِنْ مِن شَيْءٍ إِلاَّ يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدَهِ وَلَكِنْ لاَ تَفْقَهُونَ
تَسْبِيحَهُمْ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The seven heavens glorify Him, and the earth [too], and whoever is
in them. There is not a thing but celebrates His praise, but you do not
understand their glorification…”***[^2]

In the exegesis of the aforementioned verse, ‘Allamah Tabataba’i says,
“This verse proves the glorification of material particles of the
cosmos—that they glorify Allah and that they exempt Him from having any
partners. Glorification means establishing the transcendence of Allah
through speech.

Speech is essentially the unveiling of one’s inner intentions through
signs and indicators. Because man has not found an existential way to
express his intent, he is compelled to make use of words, which are
sounds that have been established to signify various meanings and thus
make intentions known. From then onwards, this method of explaining and
understanding has become standard. In addition, man makes use of hand
and head signals and sometimes writes or posts signs.

In short, that which unveils intentions is speech. The result of one’s
endeavors to convey their intentions is that person’s speech, even
though that inner intention is not in the form of sounds and words. The
proof of this point is that terms such as word, speech, command and
revelation have been attributed to Allah in the Qur’an and without any
doubt the way Allah conveys meaning is in no way similar to words and
sayings uttered by human beings.

Beyond the shadow of a doubt, in the heavens and the earth and that
which exists within them, something exists that openly declares the
Oneness and Unity of Allah and exonerates Him from all defects and
imperfections. This is that all existents are in absolute need and want.
This need is proof of the existence of the Being whom everything and
everyone is in need and there is no thing independent and needless of
Him. Therefore, all existents proclaim the presence of a Self-sufficient
Creator by means of their existential need and natural imperfections.

In continuation, ‘Allamah Tabataba’i states:

The word of Allah, the Exalted, is indicative of this fact that by
creating existents, knowledge and awareness too have been spread in them
and every one of them derives benefit from knowledge to the extent that
they derive benefit from existence and being. This is not to say that
they all have knowledge to the same extent and also not that the
knowledge and awareness of all creatures is of one kind.

It is not true that the knowledge of all of the creatures is like the
knowledge of man and/or that man is informed of the knowledge and
awareness of every one of the creatures. For this reason, every created
existent is in some way aware of itself and manifests its need and
imperfection by means of its being and existence, which has become
encompassed in the needlessness of Allah and that He has perfection and
there is no lord save Him. Therefore, every created existent glorifies
its Lord and exempts Him from every partner and imperfection.[^3]

**The third point of view:** All existents have a spiritual form in
addition to their material forms which they possess in this world and in
reality perception and awareness are a part of that spiritual and inner
form and that same spiritual form becomes manifest on the Day of
Resurrection and gives witness.

We do not comprehend that spiritual form in this world, that is why we
do not conceive the glorification of things and do not perceive the
effects of awareness and knowledge in them; but that [spiritual] form is
existent and becomes manifest in the hereafter and the realities which
it comprehends will appear and give witness.

According to the clear explanation of the Qur’an, on the Day of
Resurrection even the skin of man bears witness against him, and the
tongue, hands and legs all give witness against him. If these limbs did
not have any perception, their evidence would be meaningless. In regard
to the evidence of the limbs of the body, the Gracious Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا لِجُلُودِهِمْ لِمَ شَهِدْتُمْ عَلَيْنَا قَالُوا أَنْطَقَنَا
اللَّهُ الَّذِي أَنْطَقَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They will say to their skins, ‘Why did you bear witness against us?’
They will say, ‘We were given speech by Allah, who gave speech to all
things’.”***[^4]

If the skin of man does not have perception by which it conceives at the
time of committing sins, how can it to give evidence on the Day of
Resurrection in regard to sin which it was incapable of perceiving at
the time it was committed? Evidence is meaningful once the witness has
conceived and experienced the scene of sin; otherwise, testimony is
useless.

If it is said that Allah, the Exalted, will compel the limbs and parts
of the body to give evidence on the Day of Resurrection without their
having perceived sin, it ought to be answered that in that case there is
no evidence applicable and ascription of the term evidence on such an
instance is purposeless. For this reason, the bearing of witness by the
limbs of the body takes place after perception and experience and a kind
of knowledge of the deed and in other than this case, giving evidence
does not take place.

Therefore, according to the second and third points of view, there is no
doubt in regard to the primary principle of the existence of perception,
experience and a kind of knowledge and awareness in the order of
creation.

However, differences of opinion exist in regard to the quality: is this
knowledge accompanied by the transcendental soul of things? Or, do they
themselves truly have perception and awareness? Of course, the
proponents of the first point of view assert that when the limbs and
members of a human being manifest on the Day of Resurrection, the
effects of man’s conduct that abide in the limbs are the same as their
testimony.

The Intelligence and Consciousness of Creatures and How they are Influenced
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Perhaps among the above three points of view, the third perspective is
the best. In any case, it can be gathered from the *hadith*s and the
Qur’anic verses that material things and creatures have a kind of
perception and awareness. Not only is their existential awareness
constant, but they are affected by events which take place around them
and these events that affect them consequently bring about new
conceptions in them: when worship is performed in a place, it has a good
effect, and the place becomes delighted and expresses pride.

In contrast, if sin is committed in a place, it leaves a bad effect on
it and the earth becomes upset and curses the sinner. Of course, we are
not able to comprehend these kinds of notions and the subject matter of
these verses and *hadith*s has not become precisely clear to us, but we
have to admit that there are unknown truths in the cosmos that are
outside the realm of conception and understanding and our knowledge of
them is meager. As the Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَمَا أُوتِيتُمْ مِن الْعِلْمِ إِلاَّ قَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And you have not been given of knowledge except a little.”***[^5]

There are a great number of truths in the universe of which we have no
knowledge. We have come to know some of these truths by means of
revelation or because the great Prophets (*‘a*) and the Pure Imams
(*‘a*) have explained them to us and we have confidence in their
sayings, so we must be thankful to them that they have clarified these
realities for us because, if they had not, our intellects would not have
attained them and it would not have been possible for us to conceive
such truths with our imperfect intellects:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَمَا أَرْسَلْنَا فِيكُمْ رَسُولاً مِنكُمْ يَتْلُوا عَلَيْكُمْ
آيَاتِنَا وَيُزَكِّيكُمْ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ
وَيُعَلِّمُكُمْ مَا لَمْ تَكُونُوا تَعْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“As We sent to you an apostle from among yourselves, who recites to
you Our signs, and purifies you, and teaches you the Book and wisdom,
and teaches you what you did not know.”***[^6]

With regard to what has been mentioned, two points have become clear:
the first point being that even if one attains a huge amount of
knowledge and awareness and knows all the available scholarship of
mankind, still what he knows is less than that which is unknown and his
knowledge is still a drop in the bucket compared to that which exists in
the universe; for this reason, one ought not to be proud and boastful.
In addition, it is not even possible for an individual to acquire all
the knowledge of mankind.

Every individual attains only a part of the existing knowledge—a drop
from the boundless ocean of knowledge is allotted to him. The second
point is that we ought not to imagine that we live in a world where no
one sees us when we do something in a secluded place: even if the earth
does not conceive and understand, the angels who witness our deeds do
perceive and write our deeds and also there are those who do have
complete predominance over this universe and nothing remains hidden from
their eyes.

The Expansive Domain of the Light of the Pure Imams (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------------

On the basis of our belief as Shi‘ah, the light of the Immaculate Imams
(*‘a*) is present everywhere, although we do not all comprehend their
light as is befitting. The holy presence of the ‘the Final Successor’,
Imam al-Mahdi, may Allah hasten his reappearance, is present everywhere,
especially in the gatherings of the Shi‘ahs, so much so that he replies
to the greetings of an individual who greets him, but our ears are
incapable of hearing what he says. If an individual shouts out for his
help, he responds to that person.

If a lost one in the wilderness calls upon him, he hastens to help that
individual and guides him, and he cures the sick who have lost hope in
getting well. It is clear that he is present and he listens because, if
he were not present and did not listen, how would he hasten to help and
save a person who calls for his help once caught up at the bottom of the
sea or lost in the wilderness?

The late ‘Allamah Majlisi narrates from his father that one of the
righteous people of his age who had great piety and knowledge and went
to *hajj* often, was well known for his ability of instantaneous
transportation between places [*tayy al-ard*] came to Isfahan where I
met him and asked him how he attained this ability.

He said, “One year I was traveling to the House of Allah with other
pilgrims. I arrived at a place eight or nine stops away from honorable
Mecca. I fell back and lost the caravan. I lost the way and went astray
and became so thirsty that I lost all hope of ever remaining alive. In
that state, I shouted out, ‘O Aba Salih! Show me the way!’ All of a
sudden, I saw a man mounted on a camel coming my way. When he got near,
I saw that he was a very handsome youth in splendid clothes with the
appearance of a great person carrying a vessel of water.

“I greeted him and he responded to my greeting and asked, ‘Are you
thirsty?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ He gave me the water and I drank it. After that
he said, ‘Would you like me to take you to the caravan to join your
companions?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘Get on the back of my camel.’ I
got on the back of his camel and he started moving towards Mecca. I
started reciting the supplication of ‘Hirz Yamani’ as was my habit and
after reciting a few words, that Arab youth taught me to recite it
correctly.

“After a little while, he asked me, ‘Do you know this place?’ I looked
and saw that I was at a place very close to Mecca. He told me to
disembark from the camel. As soon as I disembarked from the camel, he
disappeared from my sight. It was then that I realized that that
handsome youth was the Imam of the Age, may Allah hasten his
reappearance.”[^7]

Therefore, the light of the Imam (*‘a*) is present everywhere even
though we do not perceive it; however, comprehension of this truth is
difficult for everyone and such realities if openly narrated without any
constraints, may cause some to become afflicted with hyperbolic
exaggeration.

Therefore, the lower levels of this issue have been explained and this
is that the records of our deeds are presented to the Imam (*‘a*), or as
has been recorded in some *hadith*s that the records of our deeds are
presented to the Noble Prophet (S) and Allah. It has been recorded in a
*hadith* that on one occasion talk about the days of the week was
brought up, and when Thursday was mentioned, Imam al-Rida (*‘a*) stated:

*“… The day when the deeds of Allah’s servants are presented to Allah,
the Noble Prophet (S) and the Imams is Thursday.”*[^8]

It has been recorded in some of the *hadith*s that the angels take the
deeds of man to the Throne in the evening after recording them and
present them to Allah. Now, perhaps one might ask: is Allah not present
in all places that the angels take the records of man’s deeds to His
Throne? However, it must be understood that the levels of existence have
special needs and the presentation of deeds also has a particular
discipline which is suitable with the order of Divine Lordship and this
is not contradictory with the fact that Allah is present in every place.

Deeds do not Remain Hidden from the Eyes of Witnesses
-----------------------------------------------------

With regard to what has been mentioned, we have to be aware that we do
not live in a world devoid of comprehension and perception: in this
world seeing eyes and listening ears exist which bear witness to our
actions and words and on the basis of the apparent meanings of some
Qur’anic verses and *hadith*s, even the earth, the trees and the birds
have perception and do understand, and of course we are unaware of this
fact.

Even if this is not so, at least there are angels who bear witness to
our deeds, and higher than this is the holy presence of the Imam of the
Age, may Allah hasten his reappearance, who sees our actions and even
higher than all is the Divine Essence of Allah watching over our deeds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Indeed Allah is witness to all things.”***[^9]

In regard to His awareness about the apparent and hidden deeds of man
and also the watching of the angels over the actions of man, Allah, the
Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الإِنسَانَ وَنَعْلَمُ مَا تُوَسْوِسُ بِهِ نَفْسُهُ
وَنَحْنُ أَقْرَبُ إِلَيْهِ مِنْ حَبْلِ الْوَرِيدِ \* إِذْ يَتَلَقَّى
الْمُتَلَقِّيَانِ عَن الْيَمِينِ وَعَن الشِّمَالِ قَعِيدٌ \* مَا
يَلْفِظُ مِنْ قَوْلٍ إِلاَّ لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We have created man and We know to what his soul
tempts him, and we are nearer to him than his jugular vein. When the
twin recorders record [his deeds] seated on the right hand and on the
left, he says no word but that there is a ready observer beside
him.”***[^10]

Elsewhere, in regard to the witnessing of the Noble Prophet (S) on the
Day of Resurrection, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكَيْفَ إِذَا جِئْنَا مِنْ كُلِّ أمَّةٍ بِشَهِيدٍ وَجِئْنَا بِكَ
عَلَى هَؤُلاءِ شَهِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So how shall it be, when we bring from every nation a witness, and
We bring you as a witness to them?”***[^11]

From these verses which state the witnessing of the Prophet of Allah (S)
and the other witnesses, it can be deduced that those witnesses observe
the deeds of Allah’s servants in this world; otherwise, how would they
bear witness if they did not witness the actions of people in this
world? Is it possible for a person to bear witness to an event he has
not seen?!

If we pay heed to this point that the world which we live in is not dead
and is not devoid of awareness and perception, but instead there are
beings who see us and observe and witness over our deeds even though we
do not see them, we will be alert and think twice in regard to our
conduct and modesty and this will be a hindrance to our doing indecent
deeds.

If people pay heed to the fact that when they commit sin, the earth and
the sky will bear witness to their deeds, that there are books in which
lists of man’s deeds are recorded and that all actions will become
apparent on the Day of Resurrection, they will abstain from perpetrating
wrongdoing and not commit sin even in seclusion. As Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*)
states:

*“Beware of disobeying Allah in solitude, because the witness (of that)
situation is also the judge.”*[^12]

If you are in a condition you are not willing to be seen by anyone and
someone takes a picture of you, you make every effort to destroy that
picture lest in the future that photo is seen by others. Without the
least doubt, man does not want a picture which will bring about shame
and embarrassment to be taken of him. At the time of taking pictures, a
person adorns himself, wears clean clothes and tries to show an
attractive appearance so as to make the picture appear as charming as
possible.

Again, it is not pleasing for a picture to be taken which will cause one
shame. With regard to this similitude, we must understand that natural
causes like the earth, the sky, doors and walls are always taking
pictures of us and on the Day of Resurrection those pictures will be
made apparent for all to see. For this reason, we ought to try not to
let them get pictures of us in ugly and shameful circumstances in order
not to become embarrassed on the Day of Resurrection when all our deeds
and thoughts will become apparent:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِنْ سُوَءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The day when every soul will find present what it has done of good
and what it has done of evil, it will wish there were a far distance
between it and that (evil).”***[^13]

Sincerity of Intention in Allah’s Servants Brings about Joy and Pride
---------------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! There is no morning and evening that passes save that the
different points of the earth ask each other, ‘O my neighbor! Has a
person glorifying Allah passed by?’ or ‘Has one of His servants placed
his forehead on you in prostration for Allah?’ Some points of the earth
say ‘Yes!’ and some other points say, ‘No.’ Every point which says
‘Yes’, takes pride in itself and becomes happy, and considers itself
higher than the other points.”

Another issue which has been discussed in this noble *hadith* is that
the point of the earth on which Allah’s servant worships and prostrates
takes pride in itself. We must consider what the secret of this boasting
is. Its secret is that principally that which is valuable in the
presence of Allah is attention to Him and all deeds only become
worthwhile when they are accompanied by this attention and performed
with the intention of winning Allah’s favor.

A deed is done for the sake of winning Allah’s favor when it is
performed with attentive remembrance of Allah. The actions of a person
that is negligent of Allah cannot be done with the intention of winning
His favor. Such a deed is done either with the intention of pleasing
one’s own heart or for the purpose of gratifying the hearts of human
beings and has no value whatsoever in the eyes of Allah.

Therefore, remembrance of Allah and paying heed to Him and anything
which connects man to the eternal world has validity, and everything
else becomes valuable in the shadow of heedful remembrance of Allah and
is worthless without His remembrance.

For this reason, man’s true perfection is attained through attention to
Allah and if this is suffused like a soul into all the deeds of man,
those deeds acquire value. In other than this case, without paying heed
to Allah and without accompanying deeds and worship and divine and
sincere intention, they become like a dead body devoid of spirit.
Therefore, it is befitting that all our deeds and acts of worship are
done for Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي أُمِرْتُ أَنْ أَعْبُدَ اللَّهَ مُخْلِصًا لَهُ الدِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘Indeed I have been commanded to worship Allah with exclusive
faith in Him, and I have been commanded to be the first of those who
submit [to Him]’.”***[^14]

The Noble Prophet’s (S) emphasis on sincerity, especially sincerity in
religion, is because man is Allah’s servant, he has been created for
devotional servitude to Allah and he ought to pursue perfection,
prosperity and spiritual growth in all the stages of his life and
because this important issue is not attainable except under the auspices
of sincerity and being attentive to Allah.

Therefore, purifying acts of worship and sincere devotion to Allah is
the most important religious order because it is an important cause for
man’s gaining proximity to Allah, the Exalted, and attaining desirable
perfection. For this reason, Allah, the Exalted, in the Gracious Qur’an
has invited the believers to sincerity. It should be understood that man
can attain levels where Allah, the Exalted, purifies him for Himself, as
praise has been heaped upon the sincere in various instances in the
Qur’an, for example, in regard to Moses (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ مُوسَى إِنَّهُ كَانَ مُخْلَصًا وَكَانَ
رَسُولاً نَبِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And mention in the Book Moses. Indeed he was exclusively dedicated
[to Allah], and an apostle and a prophet.”***[^15]

Naturally, the purified [*mukhlas*] needs a purifier [*mukhlis*] and
beyond the shadow of doubt it is Allah who purifies the pure, to the
extent that the devil cannot ensnare them towards perversions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ \* إِلاَّ عِبَادَكَ
مِنْهُمْ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said, ‘By Your might, I will surely pervert them, except your
exclusive servants among them.”***[^16]

In explanation of this Qur’anic verse it ought to be said that the pure
and sincere person has a mental, spiritual and divine power which is a
hurdle against his falling in the trap of the devils and Satan cannot
have a bad effect on them. Of course, the sincere derive benefit of such
power by the grace and mercy of Allah. In regard to Prophet Joseph
(*‘a*), Allah, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ هَمَّتْ بِهِ وَهَمَّ بِهَا لَوْ لا أَنْ رَأَى بُرْهَانَ
رَبِّهِ كَذَلِكَ لِنَصْرِفَ عَنْهُ السُّوءَ وَالْفَحْشَاءَ إِنَّهُ
مِنْ عِبَادِنَا الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly she made for him; and he would certainly have made for
her [too] had he not beheld the proof of his Lord; so it was, that We
might turn away from him all evil and indecency. He was indeed one of
Our dedicated servants.”***[^17]

It has been emphasized in this verse that Joseph (*‘a*) was not
afflicted by sin and wrong-doing, despite the fact that suitable and
tempting conditions had been made available to him; circumstances in
which any other person might have fallen in the trap of the devil.

Prophet Joseph (*‘a*) was at that time at the peak of maturity and the
blossoming of sexual desire and the circumstances in the house of the
King of Egypt were filled with welfare and comfort. In addition, the
wife of the King of Egypt had created a situation such that, if Joseph
had not perceived the proof of Allah, he would have fallen into
temptation.

Sincerity of Intention Brings about Superiority in Works
--------------------------------------------------------

Regarding the previous discussion, that which adds value to the deeds of
human beings and is a cause for redemption from the implicit and
explicit traps of the devil is purity of intention and attention to
Allah, the Exalted; therefore, even the best and greatest of deeds lack
any value and worth if they are not done for Allah. In the words of the
*hadith*s and Qur’anic verses, the best of deeds is *jihad* (striving in
the way of Allah), to the extent that Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... فَضَّلَ اللّهُ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ بِأَمْوَالِهِمْ وَأَنفُسِهِمْ عَلَى
الْقَاعِدِينَ دَرَجَةً وَكُلاًّ وَعَدَ اللّهُ الْحُسْنَى وَفَضَّلَ
اللّهُ الْمُجَاهِدِينَ عَلَى الْقَاعِدِينَ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah has graced those who wage jihad with their possessions and
their persons by a degree over those who sit back; and to each Allah has
promised the best of reward, and Allah has graced those who wage jihad
over those who sit back with a great reward.”***[^18]

Now this very *jihad*, despite all its superiority and excellence, is
devoid of any value if it is carried out without any attention to Allah
and without a divine intention. According to some narrations, in one of
the wars during the early days of Islam, one man on the battlefield
fought with utmost bravery and valiance and finally was killed. The
fighting and bravery of that man aroused the admiration of the other
Muslim soldiers.

For this reason, they addressed the Noble Prophet (S), “Surely, that man
has a very high position in the eyes of Allah on account of his brave
and courageous fighting.” The Noble Prophet (S) responded, “He has not
been killed in the way of Allah, but in the way of his horse!” (That
man’s horse had become entrapped in the army of the enemy as a result of
fear and dread, and that man fought very hard in order to rescue his
horse from the enemy until he finally was killed.)

Of course, not every *jihad*, endeavor in Allah’s cause or martyrdom
brings about perfection. Only martyrdom which is accompanied by
attention to Allah can result in perfection, like our beloved martyrs
who made vows [*nadhr*] to become martyred during the Iran-Iraq war.
Some would go to the Mosque of Jamkaran for forty nights on Fridays
and/or Thursdays and ask Allah to grant them their wish of martyrdom.
This kind of martyrdom is valuable because it is accompanied by
remembrance and attention to Allah.

The superiority and value or inferiority of man’s deeds and conduct are
related to one’s intention: a person’s deeds are valuable if his
intention is pure and his deeds are done for the sake of Allah. The more
one’s remembrance of Allah and the more his love and knowledge increase,
the more the value of his deeds increases. In contrast, if man’s deeds
are done without knowledge and love of Allah and without attention to
and remembrance of Him, they are like a dead body devoid of vital force
and benefit.

When the various points of the earth ask from each other, they do not
enquire, “Has anyone done the *jihad* or spent his property in the way
of Allah upon you?” On the contrary, they ask, “Has anyone remembered
Allah upon you or not?” Therefore, the deeds of man are considered as
worship if they are done with attention to Allah. One’s *jihad*,
prayers, and spending property in the way of Allah are all considered to
be worship if they are done with a sincere intention for Allah.

Acquisition of knowledge, teaching, academic discussion and even
listening to speeches are considered to be worship once done with a pure
intention for Allah. However, if sincerity of intention is absent, not
only are one’s deeds not worship, they are also a means of attracting
the attention of other human beings. Hence, the thing that is important
and worthy of attention, to the extent that even elements of the earth
have conceived it, is attention to Allah and the Divine Presence.

When we turn the pages of the Glorious Qur’an, we do not find any scene
in which the invocation and glorification of Allah has not been
mentioned. One of the statements of Allah, the Exalted, is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ ذِكْرًا كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Remember Allah with frequent
remembrance.”***[^19]

In another place, after citing for the wise reasons for creating the
sky, the earth and the rotation of the night and day, Allah, the
Exalted, thus introduces those who possess wisdom:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىَ جُنُوبِهِمْ
وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who remember Allah standing, sitting, and lying on their
sides, and reflect on the creation of the heavens and the earth [and
say], ‘Our Lord, You have not created this in vain!’…”***[^20]

Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) says that Prophet Moses (*‘a*) thus requested from
Allah, the Exalted:

“O Allah! There are times and states in which I feel embarrassed to
invoke You!” (Perhaps he meant the time of easing nature.) Allah
responded, “O Moses! My invocation is good and acceptable in all
states.”[^21]

It is for this reason that supplications have been recorded even for
times of using the toilet and when easing nature, so that man does not
become forgetful of worshiping Allah even in that state because Allah is
never pleased that even one moment of our lives is passed in
forgetfulness or that we become negligent of worshiping Him and it is
for this reason that man’s perfection is attained under the auspices of
devotion and servitude to Allah.

Therefore, we must strive to be attentive to Allah, the Exalted, at all
times, even though that attention may be weak. Invocation and
remembrance of Allah is an alchemy which, added to a valueless item,
causes the item to acquire the highest value; this alchemy bestows value
and purpose to our lives.

[^1]: Mulla Sadra.

[^2]: Surat al-Isra’ 17:44.

[^3]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 13, pp. 114-116.

[^4]: Surat Fussilat 41:21.

[^5]: Surat al-Isra’ 17:85.

[^6]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:151.

[^7]: Tabari Nuri, Kifayat al-Muwahhidin, vol. 2, p. 182.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 346.

[^9]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:33.

[^10]: Surat Qaf 16-18.

[^11]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:41.

[^12]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 420, trans. Shahidi.

[^13]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:30.

[^14]: Surat al-Zumar 39:11.

[^15]: Surat Maryam 19:51.

[^16]: Surat Sad 38:82-83.

[^17]: Surat Yusuf 12:24.

[^18]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:95.

[^19]: Surat al-Ahzab 33:41.

[^20]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:191.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, p. 343.


