Lesson 29: Devotion and Worship, the Greatest Assets for Humanity
=================================================================

“O Abu Dharr! Any youth who, for the sake of Allah, abstains from the
world and its vanity and spends his youth in obedience to Allah until he
reaches old age, Allah grants him the reward and bounty equivalent to
the reward and bounty of seventy two of His most sincere and honest
servants.”

The Parasitic Nature of the World
---------------------------------

In this section of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) embarks upon
expounding the importance of seeking excellence and the superiority of a
person who has traversed the path of perfection, because it can be
gathered from the Qur’anic verses and *hadith*s that the world, with all
its expansiveness and greatness, has been created for the perfection of
humanity. In reality, the main reason for the creation of this world is
humanity, and the rest of the creatures are at the service of human
beings. Allah, the Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُوَ الَّذِي خَلَق السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالأَرْضَ فِي سِتَّةِ أَيَّامٍ
وَكَانَ عَرْشُهُ عَلَى الْمَاء لِيَبْلُوَكُمْ أَيُّكُمْ أَحْسَنُ
عَمَلاً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six periods—and
His dominion (extends) upon the waters—that He may test you [to see]
which of you is best in conduct.”***[^1]

The purport of the blessed verse is that Allah, the Exalted, created the
heavens, the earth and the natural world to prepare the basis for the
creation of human beings, and He created human beings to test them. The
meaning of this verse is wonderful and understanding it deeply can have
positive effects on people’s thoughts and conduct.

This reality that Allah, the Exalted, has created the cosmos with all
its greatness for the purpose of bringing man into existence so that he
can attain perfection by making use of the existential capacities in the
world is indicative of the degree of man’s value and the profoundness of
his responsibilities.

Mentioning the aforesaid is necessary for the reason that human beings,
from among the rest of the existing creatures, ought to perceive their
existential value and realize that they are not simple creatures like
the worm, the frog or others of these types; on the contrary, humans are
esteemed and invaluable creatures and magnificent existential capital
has been provided in order to bring about and facilitate the conditions
of their lives.

The world has been created in its entire splendor so that the basis for
the creation of an intelligent, self-willed and determined existent
could be provided. Therefore, man’s obligation, as an intelligent and
thinking existent, is to initially perceive his existential value.
However, conceiving this point is not enough in itself despite all its
importance; rather, he ought to comprehend his responsibilities, too, in
the created world and realize that he has not been created for vanity,
futility, purposelessness and uselessness.

Among all the creatures of the world, man has characteristics which are
not found in other existents; that is to say, man has been blessed with
the intellect. When we say that man has superiority and prominence over
the rest of the creatures this is not only in regard to the intellect;
man is higher than the rest of the existents in regard to the other
attributes and qualities as well.

Whatever perfection is found in the other creatures, it is found in man
in the best sense of the word. This asserted meaning becomes completely
clear when man is compared with the rest of the creatures and when his
discoveries with regard to food, clothing, accommodation and marriage
are pondered.

We see that the adaptations and discoveries which man puts to use in the
order and management of his social activities are not found in any other
creature. In addition to this, people employ other creatures in order to
attain their goals, but the rest of the animals and the vegetables and
other than these are not like this; on the contrary, they have simple
effects and activities especially reserved for them: from the day that
they were created up to now, they have not gone a step further than
their own situations and have not had any transformations for
themselves. On the other hand, man has taken great strides towards
perfection in all the aspects of his life and continues to take even
further steps.

In short, the progeny of Adam enjoys the benefit of a certain
characteristic and it is because of that very quality, that is to say
the intellect, that it has attained distinction over the rest of the
creatures and distinguishes right from wrong, good from evil and
beneficial from harmful.

The Pre-eminence of the Complete Human Being
--------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ
وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُمْ مِنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى
كَثِيرٍ مِمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We have honored the Children of Adam, and carried them
over land and sea, and provided them with all the good things, and given
them an advantage over many of those We have created with complete
preference.”***[^2]

In interpretation of this verse, ‘Allamah Tabataba’i, may Allah be
pleased with him, states:

This verse is in the form of obligation of indebtedness for favors; of
course, obligation mixed with reproof. Indeed, after Allah, the Exalted,
mentions the abundance of His graces and His successive granting of
blessings and virtues to man, including mounts to cross the deserts and
the seas in order for him to acquire those graces and necessary
subsistence in order to better manage his life, He mentions the point
that man has forgotten his Lord, shunned Him, has not asked from Him and
has once again returned to his previous ways after being saved from the
sea even though he has always been immersed in Allah’s graces.

Allah, the Exalted, lists a summary of His graces and favors in this
verse so that people may understand that their Lord has provided them
numerous favors and realize that it is very unfortunate that they are
ungrateful for these favors and other divine graces.[^3]

We see that there is much room for human beings to realize the value of
the gem or pearl of existence and not sell it in exchange for the vain
and valueless merchandise of this world.

Man needs special conditions and facilities in order to attain human
perfection and the world with all its transformations and developments
is placed at his disposal. We know to some extent that if the constant
transformations and order of the natural world were not existent, man’s
volitional life would either not take place or it would take place in an
incomplete form.

In brief, it is known that the world has an orderly system and its
various factors are in need of one another. An example of one of those
factors is the attraction that exists among planets in the heavens such
that if that determined and precise attraction were to be interfered
with and one of those spheres were to leave its orbit, the order of the
planets would be thrown into disarray and a catastrophe would take
place.

As has been indicated, the universe with all its magnificence is a
prerequisite for the creation and perfection of humanity, and the
perfection that humans must attain is so valuable that the universe with
all its expansiveness and majesty is made to be their stepping stone. Of
course, among human beings, there are few individuals who attain
ultimate perfections and the rest of the people achieve certain benefits
under the auspices of the existence of those few individuals and the
merit of their existence is dependent on the existence of the chosen
ones.

As a simile, in order to find a few diamonds in a great mine of fifty
square kilometers with a great depth, miners must do a lot of
exploration and searching. The aim of all this probing is to find a few
precious diamonds, even if besides diamonds, coal, which does not have
as much value, is dug up too, it does not matter so much. Therefore,
besides diamonds, which are the main aim of opening up a mine, other
substances too are found, which have secondary value, and in addition
worthless stones, which do not have any value at all and thus are cast
aside.

The object of creating the cosmos is the pure lights, the most prominent
and outstanding of them being the lights of the Fourteen Infallibles
(*‘a*) and after them the rest of the Prophets (*‘a*) and the people who
join their category on account of the level of their excellence and
purification. (There have been approximately one hundred and twenty four
thousand Prophets (*‘a*) and saints [*awliya’*] of Allah (*‘a*) and some
of the Prophets (*‘a*) and saints [*awliya’*] (*‘a*) are higher in
status than the others but we do not know their numbers.)

The highest human ideals have been summed up in the Noble Prophet (S)
and his Pure and Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and the lowest levels
of excellence are found in people who will enter paradise after everyone
else. The rest of the human beings whose hearts are devoid of the light
of faith are like the worthless stones and are burnt in the infernal
fire of divine wrath:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ذَرَأْنَا لِجَهَنَّمَ كَثِيرًا مِنَ الْجِنِّ وَالإِنْسِ
لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لاَ يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لاَ يُبْصِرُونَ
بِهَا وَلَهُمْ آذَانٌ لاَ يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Certainly We have created for hell many of the jinn and humans: they
have hearts with which they do not understand, they have eyes with which
they do not see, they have ears with which they do not hear…”***[^4]

The dwellers of hell are the wastes of this world and the main aim of
creating this cosmos is the Noble Prophet (S), Fatimah al-Zahra’ (*‘a*)
and the Infallible Imams (*‘a*). The whole world, despite all its
expansiveness and magnificence as well as perfection and excellence, is
not comparable to the existence of any one of them! On the contrary, one
day of their being has more worth than this whole universe. The real
owners of this cosmos are people who have attained prosperity in the
eyes of Allah and have set up their abodes in His proximity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَهَرٍ \* فِي مَقْعَدِ صِدْقٍ
عِنْدَ مَلِيكٍ مُقْتَدِرٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed the pious will be amid gardens and rivers in the abode of
truthfulness with an Omnipotent Sovereign.”***[^5]

Paradise, the Dwelling of the Believers and the Friends of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Muslims believe that the people who die in a state of faith and belief
go to the garden of eternal bliss, namely paradise; even if they have
the lowest levels of faith and on condition that at the time of death
that conviction is not transformed into disbelief (they enter paradise
after passing through the state of purgatory).

There is no doubt that ideal faith is procured under the auspices of
loving and believing in the Pure and Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*); as
the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Verily a person who dies loving the family of Muhammad (S) in his heart
has passed away as a believer possessing complete faith; truly the angel
of death gives the glad tidings of paradise to a person who dies loving
the family of Muhammad (S)…”[^6]

For this reason a Shi‘ah who is a lover of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and
is humbly submissive and obedient to the orders and wishes of Allah and
His saints [*awliya’*] (*‘a*) does not have any misgivings in regard to
death because in the viewpoint of a believer death is a bridge for
attaining the pleasure of Allah, the Exalted.

Addressing his companions on the day of ‘Ashura, Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*)
says:

“O people of noble birth! Be patient because death is nothing but a
bridge which delivers you from hardships and tribulations to expansive
gardens and eternal bliss. Verily who among you does not like to leave
the prison and go to the palace?”[^7]

In regard to the ardent desire of the God-fearing to meet their Lord,
Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) says:

“If there were no appointed hour for their (i.e. the God-fearing ones’)
death, their souls would not for a single moment remain in their bodies
on account of their ardent desire for divine reward and their fear of
divine retribution. The Creator is great in their souls; it is for this
reason that everyone [and everything else] is small in their eyes.”[^8]

A person asked Abu Dharr, “Why do we [human beings] have an aversion of
death?”

Abu Dharr responded:

“Because you have cultivated and developed your material world but have
devastated your hereafter. Therefore, you are not willing to leave
prosperity to go to your ruin.”[^9]

Individuals will derive benefit from paradise in relation to their faith
and their deeds: some people will enter purgatory after death and
thereafter find their way to heaven. However, some people who were
sinners, even if faint light of faith shines from their being, will only
enter paradise after being requited by divine retribution and all too
often they will enter paradise after long years of torture and
punishment and after being cleansed from their sins and contaminations
like gold which is placed in a furnace in order to be purified from
impurities to be transformed into pure gold. Without the least doubt,
these are not the companions of paradise, but are guests who have been
admitted into heaven on account of the intercession of the real masters
of paradise and as a result of the grace and mercy of Allah, the
Exalted.

The Companions of Paradise
--------------------------

Allah, the Exalted, thus describes the real masters of paradise in His
book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ يُطِعِ اللّهَ وَالرَّسُولَ فَأُوْلَئِكَ مَعَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمَ
اللّهُ عَلَيْهِم مِنَ النَّبِيِّينَ وَالصِّدِّيقِينَ وَالشُّهَدَاءَ
وَالصَّالِحِينَ وَحَسُنَ أُولَئِكَ رَفِيقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever obeys Allah and the Apostle—they are with those whom Allah
has blessed, including the prophets and the truthful, the martyrs and
the righteous, and excellent companions are they!”***[^10]

In this blessed verse four groups of people have been mentioned as the
true dwellers of heaven. The rest of the people will only enter paradise
by means of following them and as a result of their intercession and in
reality they are the hosts and owners of the house and the others are
guests. The owners of paradise, that is to say the prophets (*‘a*), the
truthful, the martyrs and the righteous are people upon whom Allah has
completed His favor and He has ordered us to request in our prayers that
He guide us to their way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ المُسْتَقِيمَ \* صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ
عَلَيْهِمْ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Guide us on the straight path; the path of those upon whom You have
bestowed favors.”***[^11]

It is worth mentioning that the purport of ‘martyrs’ in the above verse
is those who bear witness to man’s deeds on the Day of Resurrection
whose status is much higher than the rest of the martyrs, such that
‘Allamah Tabataba’i states: the meaning of *shahadat* (in some Qur’anic
verses) is to bear witness to the deeds of human beings. What is meant
by this is to endure and see the truth of deeds which people perform in
the world, whether that truth is prosperity or wretchedness. Therefore,
the witness on the Day of Resurrection bears testimony on the basis of
what he has seen. The Day of Resurrection is a day when Allah asks all
things to bear witness, even the limbs of the body. The Day of Reckoning
is the day when the Noble Prophet (S) will say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... يَا رَبِّ إِنَّ قَوْمِي اتَّخَذُوا هَذَا الْقُرْآنَ مَهْجُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…O my Lord! Indeed my people have treated this Qur’an as a forsaken
thing.”***[^12]

It is quite apparent that such a noble minded spirit and generous
station is not allotted to all people in the Islamic community, because
this is special nobility particularly reserved and befitting of the
saints [*awliya’*] of Allah… the lowest level which these witnesses
(witnesses of our deeds) possess is that they are under the guardianship
of Allah, under the auspices of His grace and followers of the straight
path.[^13]

We have concluded that the most superior servants of Allah, those in
whose right He has completed His favor and has appointed them the
companions of paradise, are the prophets (*‘a*), the truthful, the
martyrs and the righteous and the rest of the worshipers of Allah attain
paradise on account of following these four groups of people. Of course,
the people who find their way into paradise by means of following these
four groups of chosen servants of Allah are varied in regard to their
levels and are not all in one station, and even those among the four
groups of Allah’s chosen ones are not all on the same level and some are
higher than the others.

### a) The Station of the Prophets (‘a) and the Great Prophet of Islam (S)

On the basis of Allah’s statement, the Prophets (*‘a*) have been
allotted higher positions than the rest of the people:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَى آدَمَ وَنُوحًا وَآلَ إِبْرَاهِيمَ وَآلَ
عِمْرَانَ عَلَى الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed Allah chose Adam and Noah, and the progeny of Abraham and the
progeny of ‘Imran above all the nations.”***[^14]

In addition to this, He has made some of the prophets (*‘a*) higher than
the others:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تِلْكَ الرُّسُلُ فَضَّلْنَا بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“These are the apostles, some of whom We gave an advantage over
others…”***[^15]

From among the hundred and twenty four thousand prophets who Allah sent
for the guidance of mankind, only three hundred thirteen had an
apostolic mission. Even then, not all the apostles possessed divine law.
Only five of them were given divine law. Those who possessed divine law
were Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and the Noble Prophet Muhammad (S).
These legislator prophets (*‘a*) have a higher status than the rest of
the apostles (*‘a*) and, according to our belief, the Last Prophet (S)
is distinguished above all the prophets (*‘a*). As he himself stated:

“O ‘Ali! Allah, the Blessed, the Exalted, has made His prophets (‘a)
higher than the angels in His proximity and He has made me superior to
all the prophets (‘a) and messengers (‘a) and after me superiority
belongs to you and the Imams (‘a) after you; and verily the angels are
our servants and they are the servants of our friends.”[^16]

This proves that the main aim of creating humanity is the chosen ones of
Allah and in the same way that ordinary people are different in ranks
and perfections, there are differences too among the prophets (*‘a*) and
the righteous and the friends of Allah in regard to high human
perfections and levels although this is not comprehensible for us and
only Allah is aware of everyone’s ranks.

The divine prophets (*‘a*) and the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah (*‘a*)
were not contaminated by polytheism and sin even for the time it takes
for the blink of an eye. This refers to polytheism in the real sense of
being preoccupied by other than Allah; thus, they could never at all
have been idol-worshippers. Their object of desire and goal was Allah
and they did not have any other goal except Him.

If they had any attention to other than Allah, it was out of duty for
the purpose of obeying His orders that had been requested of them, in
order not to be heedless the servants of Allah and in order to attain
their principle aims; of course, they would make use of material means
in order to attain their aims, but their goal was Allah and nothing
more.

We only have a weak conception of the high level of the prophets (*‘a*).
We cannot perceive the depth of their superior station and all too often
our intellects become bewildered when we try to contemplate their rank.
Only they and their Lord are aware of their station and the rest of the
people are incapable of knowing their human level and that which they
have attained:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلاَ تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَا أُخْفِيَ لَهُمْ مِنْ قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ
جَزَاءًا بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So no one knows what has been kept hidden for them of that which
will refresh the eyes as a reward for what they used to do.”***[^17]

### b) The Station of the Righteous [Salihin]

One of the high levels of human beings that has been mentioned is the
station of the righteous [*salihin*]. In regard to their high level and
the superiority of their station, Allah quotes Prophet Moses (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ هَبْ لِي حُكْمًا وَأَلْحِقْنِي بِالصَّالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“My Lord! Grant me [unerring] judgment, and unite me with the
righteous.”***[^18]

Elsewhere, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوَهَبْنَا لَهُ إِسْحَقَ وَيَعْقُوبَ نَافِلَةً وَكُلاًّ جَعَلْنَا
صَالِحِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We gave him Isaac, and Jacob as well for a grandson, and each of
them We made righteous.”***[^19]

### c) The Station of the Truthful [Siddiqin]

Another lofty human level is the station of the truthful [*siddiqin*].
The word ‘*siddiqin*’ denotes extreme truthfulness and sincerity; that
is to say, people who are very truthful. What is worthy of mentioning is
that truthfulness is not only confined to the tongue; one of the
instances of truthfulness is the words which man utters and another is
the deeds which he does. A man is truthful once his deeds conform to his
words because deeds make the inner belief known and man is truthful in
the relating of his inner belief once he makes known what is in his
conscience in a complete manner and nothing remains hidden; such a deed
is correct and truthful.

True speech too is that word which corresponds with reality and the
external world and because talking too is an action, a person that is
truthful in his action will inevitably not speak except what he knows to
be correct and he is also aware that words must be well-timed,
well-suited and correct. For this reason, such speech is indicative of
the truthfulness of the report and is also expressive of the
truthfulness of the speaker.

Therefore, a truthful person is one who never lies at all and does not
do what he is not certain to be correct, no matter how much it suits his
carnal desires. Likewise, he does not say what he is not sure about and
does not do what is not compatible with devotional servitude to Allah.
Describing himself, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“Certainly, I belong to the group of people who care not for the
reproach of anybody in matters concerning Allah. Their countenance is
the countenance of the truthful and their speech is the speech of the
virtuous.”[^20]

The station of the truthful is such a superior station that when Allah,
the Exalted, wants to describe the ranks of some of his prophets (*‘a*),
He states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ إِبْرَاهِيمَ إِنَّهُ كَانَ صِدِّيقًا نَبِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And mention Abraham in the book. Indeed he was a truthful one, a
Prophet.”***[^21]

Or in regard to Mary, the mother of Jesus Christ (*‘a*), He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُمُّهُ صِدِّيقَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And his mother was a truthful one.”***[^22]

Of course, we do not covet to attain such a lofty station as the
stations of the righteous and truthful, but in any case man’s ambition
does not have to be low. He ought to strive according to his aptitudes
and capacities and endeavor to arrive at the highest levels possible.
Man ought to try to attain levels which fallible people are capable of
attaining.

There were people among the Islamic scholars who attained high human
levels and we have known and seen with our own eyes some of them and
many prominent people have reached the peak of perfection which is
befitting of exalted people but we are not aware. Without the least
doubt, these high ranks are only attainable under the auspices of high
ambition and relentless effort.

The Station of Infallibility Especially Reserved for the Chosen Ones of Allah
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allah has not placed any hindrances in humanity’s way to perfection and
completion; human beings can arrive at high levels like the station of
the righteous if they have motivation to do so, although they cannot
become one of the Infallibles. The station of the truthful and the
righteous is lower than the station of the Infallibles.

Therefore, every human being can arrive at those stations; every person
can manage not to commit sin in his life and in truth a person who
strives to avoid the contamination of sin and abstain from the desires
of the carnal soul and only do that which is pleasing to Allah is
practically infallible even though the term ‘infallible’ cannot
technically be applied to him. To explain this issue, it ought to be
said:

“*‘Ismah*” (infallibility) literally means holding and being a
hindrance, and in technical terms it means a habit of the soul, man’s
second nature so to speak, which prevents a person possessing it from
committing sin or even mistakes and errors. Now the question is: is this
second nature a hindrance and that is why they call it infallibility or
is it that Allah prevents the person having this habit and second nature
from committing sin, mistakes and error?

In essence, both meanings are correct: we are not mistaken whether we
say the infallible individual is a person who has a second nature and
hindrance which prevents him from committing sin and error or when we
say that an infallible person is a man whom Allah prevents from sin and
error because He protects him by means of this same second nature.
Therefore, one who is infallible is a person who is immune from error
and sin or one who is immune from sin.

The first kind of infallibility is related to one’s works, but the
second type of infallibility is broader than just deeds; that is to say,
it also includes the levels of perception and distinguishing right from
wrong because the infallible person in the second sense of the word is
an individual who not only is practically exempted from sin but also
does not make errors in perceiving and distinguishing what is right from
what is wrong. In other words, he understands and explains correctly as
well as practically acting flawlessly.

In regard to the infallibility of the prophets (*‘a*) and the Infallible
Imams (*‘a*), ‘Allamah Tabataba’i, may Allah be pleased with him,
asserts, “The Gracious Qur’an clearly states that Allah has selected and
chosen them for Himself and has purified them for Himself, as the Qur’an
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آبَائِهِمْ وَذُرِّيَّاتِهِمْ وَإِخْوَانِهِمْ وَاجْتَبَيْنَاهُمْ
وَهَدَيْنَاهُمْ إِلَى صِرَاطٍ مُسْتَقِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And from among their fathers, their descendants and brethren, and We
chose them and guided them to the straight path.”***[^23]

Allah has granted them such a high level of knowledge that it prevents
them from committing sins and offenses. As a result of having that
second nature, perpetrating sin (even minor sins) is inconceivable for
them. Though infallibility and justice both prevent the perpetration of
sin, their difference is that infallibility, as second nature, makes the
perpetuation of sin impossible whereas justice as a second nature does
not make it impossible.

Even though infallibility as a second nature cannot be violated and its
effects are definite and permanent, it does not alter human nature—which
is self-determination in voluntary actions—and does not force a person
to be infallible. How can it compel while knowledge is the foundation of
free will and the strengthening of knowledge results in the
strengthening of resolution. For example, if a person that desires
health is certain that a particular thing is a deadly poison, his
certainty does not force him to abstain from consuming the poison rather
it impels him to abstain from it out of his own volition.”[^24]

According to what has been said, even people like Abu al-Fadl al-‘Abbas
(*‘a*), ‘Ali Akbar (*‘a*) and a great deal of the progeny of the Imams
(*‘a*), even though they did not commit sin in the entire course of
their lives, do not have the type of infallibility which is exclusive of
the prophets (*‘a*), the Imams (*‘a*) and Fatimah al-Zahra’ (*‘a*). Of
course, there is no doubt that the rank of such prominent people is
higher than that of the rest of the people and they had a kind of
infallibility, but it is also certain that they did not have the
infallibility exclusively guaranteed to the prophets (*‘a*) and the
Imams (*‘a*).

In conclusion, human beings can have practical infallibility in regard
to abstaining from sin and can attain the station of the truthful if
they have high objectives and embark upon edification, repression of
carnal desires of the soul and strengthen their relationship with Allah.
Therefore, people have to move along the path of spiritual perfection
and inspire themselves to become truthful and righteous.

There is not the least doubt that if human beings make effort and attain
the necessary capacities and befitting capabilities, Allah is by no
means niggardly in granting high stations. Basically, Allah Himself
encourages His worshipers to arrive at lofty levels and Islam has urged
the believers to have high ambitions. Allah wants the faithful to have
high aspirations in this regard and not to be content with less. A
believer ought to set his eyes on the station of the prophets (*‘a*) and
endeavor to imitate them.

If we cannot attain the station of the prophets (*‘a*) and their
infallibility, we can at least become truthful and righteous because the
infallibility that is exclusively for the prophets (*‘a*) and the Imams
(*‘a*) is not a condition for those two stations.

As has previously been stated, *siddiq* (sincere) denotes excessive
truthfulness and honesty, that is to say a person who does not entertain
lies throughout his or her life. A truthful person does not entertain
lies in words, deeds or thoughts and does not harbor wrong and indecent
thoughts.

The Importance of Sincere Faith and the Means of Attaining It
-------------------------------------------------------------

In regard to the value of sincerity and truthfulness, the Noble Prophet
(S) states:

“Sincerity leads to righteousness and righteousness guides to paradise,
and man does not say the truth save that he is recognized to be sincere
in the eyes of Allah.”[^25]

Perhaps we may imagine that attaining sincerity in speech, thoughts and
conduct is not a hard undertaking and we may believe that we can manage
not to tell lies, not to nurture indecent thoughts in our minds and not
to behave badly; however, the truth is that being honest is a very hard
thing. We all claim to have faith in Allah and conceive Him to be
present and seeing at all times, but do our words and deeds validate our
claims?

Sometimes we do deeds in private that would make us feel ashamed if a
small child were present witnessing our actions, and we would never do
those things in that case. Now, how can we believe that Allah is present
and seeing us and at the same time do ugly deeds? In reality, we
perceive Allah to be less than a small child and we are not sincere in
our belief. The taint of falsehood is in our belief. At the same time,
we believe that if human beings obey Allah in the whole course of their
lives, Allah grants them rewards for every second of their lives—rewards
which are greater than the universe and everything that is in it, but
are we honest in this belief and conviction? Does our conduct conform to
this belief?

If a person has a small bag of gold, does he aimlessly drop it in a
well? Does an intelligent man ever do such a thing? Even if he only has
one piece of gold, he hides it in a very secret place so as not to lose
it or so that it may not become stolen. A person never easily loses
material wealth and capital because he knows it is not a wise deed. Now,
if we believe that the moments of our lives are more precious than
jewels like diamonds, are we ready to let them easily slip out of our
hands? Even supposing that we do not sin, do we not waste our lives
pursuing many vain and worthless activities?

If we truly believed that a reward higher than this world existed for
every moment of our lives, we would not be willing to lose it for
anything in the same way that we do not lose material things of the
world without something in return. When we lose a hundred *tuman*s,[^26]
we become worried out of our wits and even during recitation of our
prayers we become preoccupied with thinking about how to find it.
(During prayer some people involuntarily begin thinking about their lost
items and easily remember things they have forgotten!)

If a person acquires wealth by means of a great deal of effort and
endeavor, he is not willing to easily place that wealth at the disposal
of others and he well knows its value because he has taken a lot of
pains to acquire it, but it is possible for him to spend hours of his
life pointlessly without feeling the least loss.

In other words, it is likely that a person is miserly in expending his
material wealth, but he is not at all cautious in spending the moments
of his life in spite of the fact that the value of wealth is clearly not
equal to the value of a lifetime. Therefore, we are not really truthful
to our claims of faith in the hereafter and heavenly reward which may be
granted to us for every second of our lives because if we truly had
sincere faith, we would not spend our lives pursing vanity or, even
worse, squander our lives in sin!

In truth, our lives are mixed with these false claims. If, Allah forbid,
this deceitfulness infiltrates our practical ways of life and words too,
we can become afflicted by even worse sin. In the Gracious Qur’an, Allah
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا يُؤْمِنُ أَكْثَرُهُمْ بِاللّهِ إِلاَّ وَهُمْ مُشْرِكُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And most of them do not believe in Allah without ascribing partners
to Him.”***[^27]

Perhaps in this Qur’anic verse Allah would like to make us understand
the point that the faith of most believing people is intertwined with
polytheism and thus not pure. If man only has one Object of Worship and
is not polytheistic, there will never be room for carnal desires,
worship of power and, in short, there will be no room for love of this
world in his heart. The presence of all these vain inclinations and
worldly affections is a sign that that man has several objects of
worship, not one.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنْ اتَّخَذَ إِلَهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأَضَلَّهُ اللَّهُ عَلَى
عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلَى سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَى بَصَرِهِ
غِشَاوَةً فَمَنْ يَهْدِيهِ مِنْ بَعْدِ اللَّهِ أَفَلاَ تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you seen him who has taken his desire to be his god and whom
Allah has led astray knowingly and set a seal upon his hearing and his
heart and put a blindfold on his sight? So who will guide him after
Allah? Will you then not take admonition?”***[^28]

Yes, people who harbor carnal desires have set their sensual passions as
their object of worship and are in fact polytheists. In truth, faith
which is intermixed with carnal desire is not pure and is contaminated
with polytheism. Of course, the faiths of different people are not
intertwined with polytheism on the same level. Sometimes ninety nine
percent of faith is mixed with one percent polytheism and at other times
polytheism is so high that it completely destroys belief in Allah.

There is no doubt that we have all been contaminated by sin, but is it
possible for a person who has spent all their lives in sin and vanity to
decide to quit sin and become truly faithful and sincere in his beliefs?
Beyond the shadow of doubt, this is possible and even after sixty years
of living in sin and vanity, a person can become truthful if he firmly
decides to, on the condition that he repents for his past and makes up
his mind to spend the rest of his life obeying Allah. He has to conduct
himself in a way that is pleasing to Allah; his sleep, his wakefulness,
his association with people outside and with his family at home all have
to be done for the sake of pleasing Allah. This is possible, but it is
not to be attained in a short period of time and a person does not
become sincerely faithful quickly. Sincerity is a habit that is
attainable by means of long and continuous effort.

A person who makes up his mind to become a sincere believer after many
years of living in sin has to strive very hard to acquire the habit of
sincerity in the same precise meaning that we have explained. It is
possible that an individual may have to practice and exert constant
effort for two years before he can acquire the habit of sincerity, in
which case if he becomes truthful his rank will be higher than the rank
of one who practiced for one year to attain this level and the reward
and recompense of a person who strove for four years is as well more.

In the same manner, the rank and reward of a man who spends even more
years attaining sincerity of faith would be higher than that of the one
who spends less time and effort, and certainly the rank of one who
decides to be obedient to Allah from the time of puberty would have a
higher rank than the rest of the people. He truly decides to traverse no
other path save the way of Allah and to think of nothing except divine
thoughts and not even imagine committing sin.

It is hard for us to accept the point that man can arrive at a level
where he does not even think or even imagine committing sin, but there
have been people among our scholars who attained this station. They have
narrated that the deceased Sayyid Radi and Sayyid Murtada, may Allah be
pleased with them, wanted to recite congregational prayers. Sayyid
Murtada—who was the elder brother of Sayyid Radi—wanted to allusively
and implicitly tell his younger brother there was not the least doubt in
his being a just man and thus fully qualified to lead the congregational
prayers.

He addressed his younger brother, “The one between us who has not
committed sin yet should lead the congregational prayers.” He wanted to
implicitly tell his younger brother that he had not committed sin since
the days of his puberty. Sayyid Radi responded, “The one who has not
imagined [or thought about] committing sin should lead the prayers.”
That is to say, Sayyid Radi had not even imagined committing sin.

Such an individual who has not contaminated himself with sin from the
early years of his youth and has only set eyes on Allah and has always
endeavored to discharge his divine duties is without the least doubt not
far from the station of the truthful.

[^1]: Surat Hud 11:7.

[^2]: Surat al-Isra’ 17:70.

[^3]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 13, p. 165, third ed., Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah Publications.

[^4]: Surat al-A‘raf 7:179.

[^5]: Surat al-Qamar 54:54-55.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 233.

[^7]: Shaykh Saduq, Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, p. 289.

[^8]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 612, sermon [khutbah] 184, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^9]: Fayd Kashani, Muhajjah al-Bayda’, vol. 8, p. 258.

[^10]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:69.

[^11]: Surat al-Fatihah 1:6-7.

[^12]: Surat al-Furqan 25:30.

[^13]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 1, pp. 324 -325, third ed., Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah Publications.

[^14]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:33.

[^15]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:253.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 18, p. 345.

[^17]: Surat al-Sajdah 32:17.

[^18]: Surat al-Shu‘ara’ 26:83.

[^19]: Surat al-Anbiya’ 21:72.

[^20]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 224, sermon [khutbah] 192, trans. Shahidi.

[^21]: Surat Maryam 19:41.

[^22]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:75.

[^23]: Surat al-An‘am 6:87.

[^24]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 11, pp. 177-189, third ed., Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah Publications.

[^25]: Fayd Kashani, Muhajjah al-Bayda’, vol. 8, p. 14.

[^26]: Iranian currency.

[^27]: Surat Yusuf 12:106.

[^28]: Surat al-Jathiyah 45:23.


