Lesson 30: The Significance of Invocation of Allah, Constructive Social Interaction and the Criteria for Choosing Friends
=========================================================================================================================

This section of the Noble Prophet’s (S) advice to Abu Dharr is related
to socializing and associating with other people. One of the issues
which the scholars of ethics have mentioned in their books and about
which there are differences, to a greater or lesser extent, is whether
it is better in the viewpoint of Islam to associate and socialize with
other people or seek seclusion and solitude. There are a great deal of
*hadith*s in regard to the importance of socializing with other people,
one of these is that Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) stated:

“At the time of his martyrdom, Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (‘a) called his
children al-Hasan, al-Husayn, Muhammad Hanafiyyah and also his younger
children and pronounced his last will and testament to them; at the end
of his will, he stated, ‘O my children! Associate with people in such a
way that they will miss you when you are absent from them and cry for
you when you die’.”[^1]

The scholars of ethics have also made mention of a number of benefits
deriving from reclusion and solitude; benefits which appear to suggest
that it is distasteful to associate with other people. In contrast, they
have also alluded to the rewards of socializing with people and have
enumerated harms resulting from solitude.

The Benefits of Reclusion and Solitude
--------------------------------------

Some of the benefits of reclusion and solitude which have been
enumerated include the following:

a) Secluding oneself from the society helps a person find free time to
worship, meditate about worldly and heavenly affairs, fall in love with
invocation of Allah, conceive divine secrets and reflect about the
wonders of Allah’s creatures. Associating with people prevents man from
procuring these superior graces. It has been said that it was due to the
invaluable role of self-reclusion in edification of the soul that
Prophet Muhammad (S) used to go alone to the mountain of Hira’ at the
threshold of his prophetic mission and would embark upon invocation of
Allah and seclude himself from the people until the light of prophethood
shined upon his soul and, after that, the people no longer prevented him
from Allah.

Even though he existed physically among the people, his heart was
constantly with Allah and invocation and remembrance of Him was always
alive in his soul. Without the divine power of the prophetic mission and
without attaining the station of proximity to Allah, man cannot strike a
balance between association with the people and constant supplication of
Allah.

b) As a result of seclusion from the people, man extricates himself from
a great deal of sins, like 1) gossip and 2) sanctimony, which usually
occur on account of associating with people. The reason is that man
becomes afflicted by ostentation and hypocrisy as a result of mingling
with people. This occurs because the people will hurt or aggrieve a man
who does not compromise with them and who makes up his mind to prevent
them from ugly deeds and indecent speech. In contrast, he becomes
afflicted with sanctimony once he compromises with them and quietly
concedes to their ugly deeds. 3) Silence in regard to bidding good and
forbidding evil; 4) not purifying the human nature and disposition from
mean ethical qualities and indecent deeds which derive from ardent
desire for the world. Ardent desire for the world itself is aroused on
account of mixing with people.

It is natural that when a person is not self-built and has not reached a
level where he can harness and control his appetitive soul and restrain
it from error, he commits sin whilst in a group; and most often
conversation and associating with others provides the background for
becoming tainted by sin.

c) It is for the purpose of liberating oneself from quarrels and
disputes, protecting one’s religion and restraining one’s heart from
social deception (because there are no gatherings devoid of bigotry,
hatred and animosity) that a person avoids groups and assemblies and
becomes immune from deviations.

d) Freedom from harm from others: sometimes people aggrieve others by
means of gossip. At other times they distress other people by way of
being suspicious towards them, making false accusations or by means of
covetousness. It is for this reason that when man abstains from the
presence of other people, he becomes free from these issues, but he will
not be free from the evil of their jealousies and enmity as long as he
associates and socializes with people or takes part in their activities.
At every moment sedition and intrigue is being plotted with the aim of
striking a blow to him so as to bring him down from his rank and status.

e) Solitude and seclusion from the people results in man not coveting
what other people own and in other people not begrudging what he owns.
Man’s tranquility and comfort is guaranteed in severing people’s grudges
against him because man can never please everyone’s expectations. It is
for this reason that embarking on edification of character is better
than striving to please people.

If man wants to discharge all of the people’s rights such as burying the
dead, visiting the sick and taking part in various ceremonies, he will
spend much of his time and not fulfill his more important duties and if
he decides to discharge some of his social duties and neglect others,
those people whose functions he did not attend to will complain and not
accept whatever excuses he has to offer. Thus, he feels indebted to
people and this in itself is cause of enmity and ill-feeling. However, a
person who completely secludes himself from these issues is less likely
to be entangled by them.

f) A person who lives in reclusion and solitude is liberated from
witnessing proud, stubborn and foolish people, all of whom cause
irritation. A certain man was asked, “Why do you look sad?” He
responded, “Because I was looking at the rich and the proud.” Therefore,
from the worldly perspective, witnessing the rich and the proud affects
man in an undesirable manner and from the point of view of the
hereafter, man does not hesitate to talk about them in their absence
once he has been vexed by them. In addition to that, once man has been
hurt by other people’s gossip, false accusation and jealousies, he does
not hesitate to retaliate and all these result in the corruption of
man’s religion and faith; it is for this reason that a man who secludes
himself from people remains safe from all these calamities.

The Benefits of Association and Coexistence with Others
-------------------------------------------------------

A great deal of religious as well as worldly goals and needs are
attained with the help of other people and cannot be achieved without
association and coexistence with other human beings. Therefore, that
which is attained by associating with other people is lost by reclusion
and seclusion and it is natural that losing those benefits is one of the
detriments of reclusion. With regard to what has been mentioned, some of
the benefits of associating with people must thus be enumerated:

### a) Teaching and learning from other people

The importance of teaching and learning from other people is very clear
to everyone and is one of the superior forms of worship which cannot be
attained except by mixing and associating with others. A person who
chooses to live in reclusion and solitude is inhibited from the
important duties of acquisition of knowledge and its dissemination and
without the least doubt man is afflicted by irreparable losses and
privations if he lags behind in religious and secular knowledge as a
result of living in seclusion from knowledgeable people and does not
learn the divine laws.

### b) Deriving benefit from other people and helping other people

 It is natural that deriving benefit from other people can only be
attained by associating, affiliating and conversing with them and this
is not feasible except by mixing with others and a person who wants to
derive benefit from other people cannot be a recluse and must have
relations with people through coexistence with others. Of course, one’s
endeavors and deeds have to be carried out in the way of Allah’s
pleasure.

Helping other people or acting in their interests implies that an
individual must do so by means of his property, through his actions and
through his advice to solve the problems of others. In truth, rising to
help other people has a lot of divine rewards and these divine rewards
cannot be attained except by mixing and associating with other people. A
person who can help other people bear their loads and solve their
problems has attained great virtue and this cannot be achieved in
solitude. A person who is in seclusion can only manage to perform
personal worship like recommendable prayers and other individual duties.

### c) Training and educating other people as well as self-edification

Self-edification and refinement of the soul denote endeavor and struggle
to cure diseases of the heart and bearing with patience the bad habits
of people and the harm they inflict for the sake of repressing the soul
and controlling its carnal desires and appetites. This matter can only
be achieved under the auspices of coexisting with other human beings.
Constructive association with people is better than seclusion and
reclusion for a person who has not yet embarked on edification of
character and refinement of the soul and who cannot control the passions
by observing divine injunctions.

Educating and training other people implies warning them about the
consequences of ill deeds and restraining them from sinning in the same
way that a teacher behaves with his student. The fruits of reclusion
have to be compared with the results of associating with people before
the best way of life can be selected.

### d) Friendship and affection with other people

This important issue is achieved by attending gatherings, socializing
and fraternizing with other people. Of course, we ought to abstain from
friendship and affection which results in doing prohibited deeds and
make friendships on the basis of Allah’s desires and the injunctions of
divine law.

We should make friends with those who increase our perfection and
knowledge, not those who cause us to waste time on vain pursuits and
squander our material and spiritual aptitudes. Most often, a friend and
companion play an important role in the attainment of prosperity and
perfection or misfortune and villainy. It is for this reason that one
must take the utmost caution and care.

The Noble Prophet (S) states:

“A person plays a vital role in his friend’s religion. Therefore, every
one of you ought to be cautious with whom he becomes friends.”[^2]

In regard to the importance of companionship with divine scholars,
Luqman, the Wise, thus told his son:

“O my son! Associate with divine scholars and be humble towards them.
Verily hearts become lively under the auspices of wisdom, in the same
way that raindrops bring the earth to life.”[^3]

### e) To derive and bring divine reward

Another benefit of associating with other people is that man derives
divine reward from being at their service and other human beings too
gain divine reward from being at the service of man. Deriving divine
reward is attained by taking part in the burial rites of the dead,
visiting the sick in hospitals, going to the homes of acquaintances and
friends and taking part in their sorrows and joys.

Most often, these issues result in strong brotherly ties and making the
hearts of Muslims cheerful and this in itself has a lot of divine
reward. However, doing good deeds towards others even takes place when
one’s door is open to other people so that they may come to his home in
times of hardship and loss to express their condolences and congratulate
him at times of joy and celebration. All these things make other people
derive divine benefit. In the same way, the people derive divine benefit
if a religious scholar opens his door to them so that they can visit
him.

### f) Humility and modesty

The superior quality of humility and modesty arises in man as a result
associating with other people and in all truthfulness this is one of the
highest stations which man can attain and doubtless that it cannot be
attained in solitude and seclusion because sometimes the result of
reclusion is self-pride. A story has been narrated that there once lived
a wise scholar who had authored three hundred and sixty philosophical
works. As a result, he conjectured that he had attained a very high
position in the eyes of Allah.

Allah inspired the prophet of his time to tell that wise man that he had
filled the earth with hypocrisy and sorrow and that Allah was not
pleased with his literary works. After hearing this, the scholar chose
to live in solitude and reclusion and distanced himself from the people
and went to live in a hole underground and said to himself, “Now Allah
has become pleased with me.”

Allah once again inspired His prophet to tell that scholar that He was
still not pleased with him. Allah would only be pleased with him once he
associated with the people and bore their injuries with patience.
Thereafter, that wise man attached himself to the people and mixed with
them in the streets and the bazaar and would associate with them and eat
food with them until Allah finally inspired his prophet to tell that
wise man that now He was pleased with him.

There are many people who have chosen to remain at home and seclude
themselves from others and this same seclusion from people becomes a
cause of pride. Again, this pride becomes a cause of their not attending
social functions because they conceive themselves to be higher than the
rest of the people.

### g) Acquisition of experience

Experience is attained by associating with others because man becomes
aware of the states, thoughts and deeds of people after becoming
acquainted with their actions and the leaps and lapses which they have
in the courses of their lives. As a result of this, he chooses the
provisions he needs in order to traverse the correct path in life. With
all certainty, innate intellect is not enough to comprehend the
advisable or expedient things of religion and the world on its own and
experience helps it in this direction and someone who has not had enough
experience cannot derive benefit from solitude and reclusion.

It has become clear from the previous discussion that solitude and
reclusion cannot be denied in totality and associating with people at
all times cannot be said to be entirely advisable, but the ruling or
decision is dependent on the spirit and states of every individual and
the spirit of his companions and the motive for friendship and
companionship. In short, seclusion from people causes enmity and hatred
and excessive mixture with them can result in bad deeds; therefore, man
ought to observe moderation between solitude and association with
others.

Fondness and Brotherhood, Blessings of Allah
--------------------------------------------

Without the least doubt, whatever Allah, the Exalted, has
created—ranging from the mountains, the valleys and the seas to man and
the animals—all are blessings. In technical terms, this cosmos has a
coordinated order and its components are in relation and harmony with
each other. In truth, a perfect order rules over the universe and
everything is exactly where it must be and all creatures derive benefit
from one another as a result of the close relationships which exist
among them.

According to this principle, human beings have to be useful to one
another and help one another to move in the direction of the aim for
which Allah, the Exalted, has created them; and that goal is termed
‘perfection’. From another perspective, although Allah, the Exalted, has
principally created human beings to be blessings to one another so that
they can traverse the course of perfection, man is able to change these
blessings of Allah into calamities and villainy because he is a
free-willed agent. As Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ إِلَى الَّذِينَ بَدَّلُوا نِعْمَةَ اللّهِ كُفْرًا
وَأَحَلُّوا قَوْمَهُمْ دَارَ الْبَوَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have you not regarded those who have changed Allah’s blessings with
ingratitude, and landed their people in the house of ruin?”***[^4]

With regard to what has been mentioned, people can make themselves a
blessing for other human beings in order for others to derive benefit
from them or they can become a cause of trouble and problems for other
people. Association, brotherhood and fraternity are among the greatest
divine blessings in which Allah has placed particular grace; as He has
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... وَاذْكُرُوا نِعْمَةَ اللّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ كُنْتُمْ أَعْدَاءً
فَأَلَّفَ بَيْنَ قُلُوبِكُمْ فَأَصْبَحْتُمْ بِنِعْمَتِهِ إِخْوَانًا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…And remember Allah’s blessings upon you when you were enemies. Then
He brought your hearts together, so you became brothers with His
blessing…”***[^5]

Therefore, the value of brotherly love and affection, which is a
blessing of Allah, must be understood and also steps must be taken to
strengthen this intimacy and a Muslim must try to be a helper, confidant
and sympathizer of his Muslim brother and not to be the cause of his
displeasure or become an oppressor to him.

Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states:

“A Muslim is the brother of his fellow Muslim; he is his brother’s eyes,
mirror and guide. A Muslim neither betrays a fellow Muslim nor does he
oppress him. A Muslim does not lie to his brother and does not gossip
about him.”[^6]

However, it cannot be asserted that association and social intercourse
with all human beings is beneficial, and in contrast it cannot be said
that socializing with people is entirely harmful so that man must not
associate with anyone; therefore, certain criteria have to be taken into
consideration by means of which constructive and productive
socialization will be separated from unproductive and harmful
fraternization. Man has to know with whom to associate in order to be
helped in attaining divine and spiritual goals—man needs to distinguish
with which people he ought to socialize in order to procure spiritual
perfection as well as to be successful in carrying out his duties.

Man has to discern with which people to associate so as to be able to
positively influence and constructively impress them because productive
guidance of other human beings gives fruit to human perfection. A person
himself achieves prosperity once he realizes his responsibility to help
other human beings—whether materially or spiritually, and of course
spiritual help is more valuable than material help—and undertakes the
encouragement of others to perform their duties and guides them to
pursue the path of bliss and prosperity because he has worshipped Allah
by means of discharging his responsibilities and consequently has become
more complete.

In reality in this world, whatever service we do for other human beings,
especially if that assistance is done with a correct and sincere
intention as well as according to divine legal criteria, we have
actually done service to ourselves; that is to say, we have worshipped
Allah and its reward will be granted to us. Therefore, social
intercourse is invaluable for human beings if it becomes the cause of
aiding others and/or deriving spiritual good from them and thereby
becoming more focused on one’s goals. Without doubt, socialization is
beneficial if as a result of it man’s knowledge increases and his soul
grows more complete.

In contrast, social intercourse with people who not only do not remind
man about Allah but also lead him towards negligence and invite him by
means of their words and deeds towards spiritual collapse, moral decline
and all sorts of deviation is neither desirable nor constructive. It is
for this reason that not just any person should be chosen for friendship
and intimacy. High qualities and valuable attributes have to be the
criteria for selecting friends and companions and of course the
prominent qualities of a friend and companion have the most beneficial
effects. Sometimes perhaps there are worldly and material benefits such
as wealth and position to be derived from friends, but the best rewards
to be derived from friendship are religious blessings.

The Criteria for Choosing Friends and Associates
------------------------------------------------

In regard to the hardships of selecting suitable friends and the
positive and negative influences of good and bad friends, Islamic
sources have topics specially dedicated to explaining the criteria of
choosing companions, and the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah have enumerated
the attributes and qualities of suitable friends. One of the instances
where the qualities of a suitable friend were expounded was when the
Noble Prophet (S) was asked in regard to who the best associate was. He
responded:

“The best friend is a person whom looking at reminds you about Allah,
whose words increase your knowledge and whose deeds remind you about the
hereafter.”[^7]

Or when the companions of Prophet Jesus (*‘a*) asked him with which
people to associate, he responded:

“Associate with a person whom looking at reminds you about Allah, whose
deeds make you desirous of the hereafter and whose knowledge increase
your logic and intelligence.” Then he also commanded them, “Become close
to Allah by abstaining from sinners and become friends with Allah by
making enmity with evil-doers and please Allah by annoying the
iniquitous.”[^8]

The Gracious Qur’an quotes a man who met with calamity as a result of
deviating from the right path and the way of the prophets of Allah and
thus oppressed himself and on this account became caught up in the fire
of divine wrath and bit his fingers in regret and sorrow, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا وَيْلَتَى لَيْتَنِي لَمْ أَتَّخِذْ فُلاَنًا خَلِيلاً \* لَقَدْ
أَضَلَّنِي عَنْ الذِّكْرِ بَعْدَ إِذْ جَاءَنِي وَكَانَ الشَّيْطَانُ
لِلإِنسَانِ خَذُولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Woe to me! I wish I had not taken such a one as a friend! Certainly
he led me astray from the Reminder after it had come to me, and Satan is
a deserter of man.”***[^9]

This kind of verse denotes the fact that one of the causes of becoming
misled is unsuitable friends and companionship with those who are
misled; therefore, a believer ought to abstain from unsuitable
friendships and refrain from unhealthy gatherings. Of course, people are
not the same: some individuals are so built and have such strong wills
that they do not fall under the influence of other people no matter what
the circumstances but instead influence those around them, but there are
others who are influenced by whoever they associate with as a result of
weak determination and shaky faith and are easily impressed by the
conduct and morals of those around them. Therefore, man has to be
cautious with whom he associates and who influences him. Those who are
stronger, even if they are not influenced by other people, have to
observe from whom they derive more benefit and set priorities in their
social intercourse.

Therefore, in whatever condition, if we are in a group of people who
remind us more about Allah and the hereafter, increase our knowledge,
encourage us to do more good deeds, act in the service of other people,
and we easily find ourselves traversing the right path as a result of
their help, such association is certainly correct and productive;
however, in other than this case association with people could produce
undesirable and bad results. Therefore, it cannot be asserted that all
assemblies are definitely good and man has to go into every gathering
and associate with every person on the pretext that amiability and
amicability are good; in reality man deceives himself with such fanciful
thoughts.

Association with every person is not beneficial—most often a person
initially enters a gathering with a pure intention and thereafter
comprehends that association at that place is not in his interests
because the people present are gossiping, lying, talking vanity, making
obscene jokes and encouraging him to be a mammon, or their conduct is
such that it attracts a person to the world and makes him heedless of
the hereafter. In this case, one ought not to take part in the gathering
on the pretext of amicability and amiability unless he has such
spiritual strength that he can influence the others and unless despite
knowing that their conduct is indecent, he still is sure that he can
guide them with advice and admonition. Such association, which is an
instance of bidding the good and forbidding the evil and encouraging
others towards what is right, enjoys special importance in the divine
law of Islam, is desirable and productive.

In a certain *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Be cautious with whom you talk, because a man’s friends are brought
together and embodied before him once he dies; if they were good people,
he is placed in the group of the good ones and if they were bad
individuals, he is put in the group of bad people.”[^10]

Therefore, if the question is asked about what is advisable according to
the Islamic point of view, whether socialization with people or
seclusion from them is preferable, the response would be thus: it is not
true that keeping company with people is advisable in all instances nor
that solitude and reclusion are undesirable, but secluding oneself from
a person who encourages man to sin and causes one to deviate from the
right path, separation from a person who causes man’s faith to become
weak, dissociation from a person who incites polytheism and doubt in
man’s inner soul is very proper and necessary.

On the other hand, abstaining from socialization and adopting solitude
deprives man of social issues and graces which Allah has allotted to man
in the different arenas of man’s social life and prevents man from
discharging his communal duties. In reality, the negative effects of
solitude are that it becomes a cause of leaving aside a great deal of
incumbent duties. Man is held back from acquiring knowledge and other
perfections which can only be attained under the auspices of social
life. He becomes dispossessed of healthy ethics and habits as well as
the material and spiritual help of other human beings which are
beneficial for him in this world and the hereafter. If it were a basic
principle that every person ought to live in solitude and busy oneself
with worship in seclusion and not associate with other people, a lot of
the social laws of Islam would be suspended and abandoned. It is for
this reason that both solitude and socialization are advisable in their
proper instances.

Living in reclusion is not automatically advisable, except for the sake
of performing acts of worship with the intention of keeping aloof from
sanctimony and for the sake of having more attention and concentration
and so that day to day encumbrances and association with the people do
not become an impediment for worship which must be done either in
solitude or at night because the night is a suitable opportunity for
worship and invocation of Allah since man finds time to meditate about
himself after being relieved from daily duties and dedicate his heart to
the remembrance and invocation of Allah. Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ نَاشِئَةَ اللَّيْلِ هِيَ أَشَدُّ وَطْأً وَأَقْوَمُ قِيلاً \*
إِنَّ لَكَ فِي النَّهَارِ سَبْحًا طَوِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Indeed the rising by night is the firmest way to tread and the best
corrective of speech, for indeed during the day you have drawn out
engagements.”***[^11]

Man ought not to pick up the rosary during the day and sit in a secluded
corner busy glorifying the Lord, but he has to be engaged in the social
functions of people and discharge his duties alongside them. There will
not be teaching and learning as well as no preaching and admonishing if
we avoid socialization and association with the people by sitting alone
in a room at home or spending all our time alone in a mosque; likewise,
calling towards righteousness and helping of the poor and needy will not
be feasible by living in seclusion from the people.

Even worse, political duties on the local and international arena and
helping the rest of the Muslims who live in other Muslim countries will
not be discharged. On the other hand, man ought not to think that
because these good blessings and virtues are found in socialization with
the people, every gathering and mixing with every person in any form
imaginable is advisable; such thoughts result in the deviation and
misguidance of man. As has previously been explained, man has to try to
observe divine expediencies and the legal aspects of socialization so as
not to be prevented from his main goal of eternal bliss.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) thus advised one of his companions by the name of
Salih:

“Follow a person who makes you cry and gives you instructional advice,
and do not follow one who makes you laugh and deceives you; verily soon
you will meet Allah and you will be aware of your deeds.”[^12]

The Greatness of Invocation of Allah while among the Heedless
-------------------------------------------------------------

If man unfortunately finds himself in a group of people who are
negligent of the hereafter and inattentive to Allah, what ought he to do
in order to remain safe from being contaminated by sin? If he leaves the
group, they will not react decently towards him, and most often they
wrongly conceive that he fancies himself as being purer and higher than
they are.

According to Islamic ethics, man ought not to perceive himself as better
than other people and his deeds too ought not to leave such an
impression on others. As the Noble Prophet (S) stated to Abu Dharr in
one of his pieces of advice which has previously been discussed:

“Man does not attain the level of religious scholarship unless he
conceives all human beings vis-à-vis Allah, the Exalted, as camels
devoid of comprehension and thereafter look at himself and perceive
himself as lower than the rest of the people.”

Even a righteous man ought not to conceive himself as higher than a
corrupt human being; all too often it occurs that a corrupt man repents
and his sins become forgiven while that believing man remains
self-contented with his acts of worship thus becoming afflicted by pride
and self-conceit which cause his perdition!

Therefore, sometimes there exist conditions which necessitate that a
person ought not to seclude himself from the community in order that he
may not react negatively and so that he may not bear ill thoughts in
regard to others. In addition to that, sometimes it is necessary to
remain in a group of sinners and evil-doers in order to enjoin the good
and forbid the evil as well as to warn them about the ill consequences
of their deeds; for this reason, presence among them is a means of
bidding righteousness and forbidding sin.

However, things do not always happen in this way. That is to say,
sometimes a group of people are not doers of good and benevolence, but
they are negligent and speak vanity; nonetheless, they do not commit sin
and do not do forbidden deeds. They act in such a way that admonishing
them is not incumbent. In regard to this group of people, the Noble
Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! A person who invokes Allah among the negligent is like a
person who continues to fight after everyone has run away from the
jihad.”

In the case that man is in the midst of negligent people from whom he
does not derive benefit and reward, he ought to try to make his heart
attentive to Allah, the Exalted, in order to be like a person who
remains alone on the battlefield fighting and resisting the enemy after
everyone has fled from the *jihad*. It has previously been said that
Allah boasts to the angels and takes pride in a person who remains alone
on the battleground fighting and resisting the enemy after everyone has
taken flight.

Likewise, Allah, the Exalted, takes pride in a believer whose heart is
permanently attentive to Allah whilst in a group that is negligent of
Him and preoccupied by mean worldly affairs which are not pleasing to
Allah.

Man’s Responsibilities regarding His Speech
-------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! A good companion is better than solitude and solitude is
better than a bad associate and good words are better than silence and
silence is better than evil words.”

Naturally, the conditions for discussion are prepared when one
associates with other people. What is better in this case—silence or
speech? As we have already stated in regard to the principle of
socialization and solitude, the criteria are various. Sometimes
socialization is advisable and at other times solitude is better. In
regard to silence and talking as well, we do not have a stable measure.
We ought to observe with what motive we speak. Talking is beneficial and
good when it is done with a divine motive and for the sake of benefiting
other human beings as well as reminding them about Allah or for
instruction of divine laws and issues.

In any case, good speech is that which is made for the purpose of
guiding and leading other people towards desirable perfection, whether
it is directly in relation to spiritual perfection and to the hereafter
or it is a prerequisite for attaining spiritual perfection and eternal
bliss despite being related to worldly affairs because the intention of
the speaker is to make the listener aware and show him the way of
spiritual growth and ascendancy by way of material means and channels
for the reason that man is impelled to make use of material means while
traversing the path of humanity and perfection. However, when neither he
nor other human beings derive benefit from his speech, it is better for
him to remain silent.

What is interesting is that the word used in this *hadith* is
‘dictation’ [*imla’*], not ‘speaking’ [*takallum*]. Dictation denotes
that once someone is talking, the other has to be writing and noting
down what the speaker is saying. Whatever man says is not dictation,
because he does not always speak in order for the others to write down
what he says. Therefore, why did the Noble Prophet (S) not say good talk
is better than silence? There are two points which can be mentioned for
using the term dictation:

**The first point:** When man speaks, his words become recorded in the
mind of the listener and it becomes one of the stockpiles of the
listener’s brain. Therefore, we have to be cautious what we record in
the mind of the listener and the effects that remain in his mind. We
have to mind that speaking does not only mean that we expel and utter
words from our mouths, but that speech is the source of an effect and it
can be said that when a person talks, the listeners are writing and
noting down that which is being said in their minds. For this reason,
man must be cautious in regard to what effects he produces in the hearts
and souls of other human beings. If what he says is good, then his
speech is proper and it leaves a good effect but if his speech is not
good, why should he cause objectionable things to be recorded in the
minds of other people?!

**The second point:** There are two angels recording whatever man says
and that is why the term dictation has been employed. Allah, the
Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ يَتَلَقَّى الْمُتَلَقِّيَانِ عَنِ الْيَمِينِ وَعَنِ الشِّمَالِ
قَعِيدٌ \* مَا يَلْفِظُ مِنْ قَوْلٍ إِلاَّ لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When the twin recorders record [his deeds], seated on the right hand
and on the left—he says no word but that there is a ready observer
beside him.”***[^13]

Elsewhere, Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلاَّ بَلْ تُكَذِّبُونَ بِالدِّينِ \* وَإِنَّ عَلَيْكُمْ
لَحَافِظِينَ \* كِرَامًا كَاتِبِينَ \* يَعْلَمُونَ مَا تَفْعَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“No indeed! Rather you deny the Retribution. Indeed, there are over
you watchers, noble writers; they are aware of what you do.”***[^14]

The Virtue of Sharing Food with a Believer and Abstaining from the Food of Corrupt People
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

“O Abu Dharr! Do not befriend save a man of faith, nor share your food
save with a believing man, nor eat the food of the corrupt.”

In this section of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) initially
mentions the issue of socialization and after that hints at some of its
necessities. One of the necessities and effects of socialization
mentioned was speaking with one another, now he mentions eating together
with other people. The reason is that under the auspices of socializing
with other people, man is obliged to eat with his associates. The Noble
Prophet (S) states that man ought not to associate and eat with anyone
except believers.

The first effect of eating the food of a corrupt man is being indebted
and obliged to him. When a person is a guest of the iniquitous and he
eats their food, in return, the sinful person also makes illicit demands
which he expects the believer to fulfill. He expects the believer to
grant him certain improper favors.

In contrast, when a person does not have any relationship with the
corrupt and does not partake of their food, he does not become indebted
to them and they cannot have any expectations from him. If one does not
have any ties with the iniquitous, he rejects their illicit requests
with utmost courage because he conceives their requests as lying beyond
the realm of his duties. From another point of view, there is no
certainty that the food of the sinner is *halal* (permissible by divine
law).

There is no certainty whether the money with which he buys his food is
*halal* or not because he is not committed and devoted to the divine
laws of Islam. There is no surety as to whether he has acquired that
money by means of bribery or not. Man can have complete trust in a
believer that he has earned his income in a lawful manner but he cannot
have the same confidence in a sinner. Most often man partakes of the
sinner’s food and later finds out that it was not acquired in a
legitimate manner.

In addition to what has been mentioned, and as can be derived from
certain *hadith*, dubious food leaves negative effects in the soul of a
person even if the person that eats it is not aware that the food he has
eaten was not *halal*. In this regard, prominent scholars have narrated
surprising stories. It is said that one of the scholars told his wife
that he felt as if he was eating the rotten meat of an animal which had
died on its own. His wife became surprised at her husband’s words. She
embarked upon investigation and found out that an animal had fallen in
the well from which they used to draw water in Najaf during those days
and they were drinking water from that well unaware that it was impure
and contaminated. That great scholar felt the natural effects of that
water on his soul!

Some of the great scholars never used to accept certain invitations to
social gatherings and did not have a habit of eating whatever was
offered to them. There is a famous story in regard to a man called
Karbala’i Kazim who miraculously and by the special grace of Allah had
memorized the Noble Qur’an. During the early days of religious
studentship, he used to come to the Madrasah we were residing in as
boarders called Hujjatiyyah.

There the religious students used to test him in order to see whether he
had truly memorized the Qur’an or not. Karbala’i Kazim was a very
surprising memorizer of the Qur’an. He could even recite the Qur’an in
reverse order, from the end to the beginning. He even used to know the
number of full stops in the Qur’an. This man would not attend just any
social gathering he was invited to; however, he would attend some
invitations and refuse others. He used to say that after attending some
social gatherings, he would feel a heaviness and darkness in his heart
that was not there before attending those gatherings. (This story is
doubtless beyond our conception, but it is true).

The late Ayatullah Haj Aqa Murtada Ha’iri, may Allah be pleased with
him, narrates that he had placed a book mixed with verses of the Qur’an
and non-Qur’anic words in front of Karbala’i Kazim. Karbala’i Kazim was
an illiterate man who could not tell the difference between one letter
of the alphabet and the other, but he used to place a finger over the
words and tell which one was a verse of the Qur’an and which one was
not. Aqa Ha’iri said to him, “How do you manage to distinguish the
verses of the Qur’an despite being unlearned?” He responded, “The verses
of the Qur’an have the light and I distinguish them by means of that
light.” Yes, such realities exist and we cannot deny them just because
of our incapacity to perceive them.

We should try to associate with and to eat with pious people as well as
to use the property and accept the gifts of faithful people. Likewise,
man has to try to use whatever wealth Allah grants him in the best
possible manner because it is a divine blessing. If one buys food with
his money, he has to give that food to a man of faith and belief in
order for his deeds to be pleasing to Allah and so that, in addition to
being eaten, it becomes a cause of establishing a divine connection—not
so that the eating and reception become a cause of vanity.

“O Abu Dharr! Give your food to a person whom you love in the way of
Allah and eat the food of a person who loves you in the way of Allah.”

People should give food to a person and also eat the food of a person
with whom they enjoy a relationship of friendship and intimacy and that
friendship has a divine root and source. When man gives food to someone,
it is clear that he loves that person, but we should observe whether he
loves that person for the sake of Allah or for other causes?

The Noble Prophet (S) advises us to hold gatherings for the sake of
Allah so that we may derive the best benefit from them and strengthen
divine relationships between people. So often the relationship between
people becomes strengthened by means of get-togethers and as divine love
grows among Allah’s servants, the ranks of the believers also grow; in
contrast, if love is not divine and is instead evil, its growth becomes
the cause of man’s fall.

In addition to the orders to observe the outward laws of *halal*
(permissible) and *haram* (forbidden)—which are among the emphatic
injunctions of divine law—the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah used to
observe more delicate and sensitive issues and used to recommend those
same issues to their friends because discharging the *wajib*
(obligatory) and abstaining from the *haram* (forbidden) is not enough
for the growth and ascendancy of man and discharging these duties is
only the first step (though unfortunately most of us have contented
ourselves with this step). A believer has to have high ambitions and not
imagine that he has arrived at the final destination by observing the
*wajib* and *haram*, but has to know that the second step is observing
the legal etiquettes and the recommendable acts of divine law some of
which have been mentioned, amongst them the etiquette of socializing,
the etiquette of speech, the etiquette of eating and amiability and
abstaining from dubious acts.

After traversing this stage and taking the second step, there still
remains a long way to go for one to attain human perfection. He has to
scrutinize the intentions of his heart and see what things he harbors in
it. What are the motives of his conduct? Even if he does a good and
commendable deed, he has to observe what his intention is.

Finally, inspecting the heart and scrutinizing the soul are among the
levels of man’s perfection and one whose outward deeds have not yet been
purified and cleansed have not attained that level yet. The last level
is that the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah try to concentrate their hearts
only on Allah and to make their hearts the manifestation of Allah’s
love. Their hope is in Him and they fear none but Him. They live in such
a way that it seems as though they have nothing to do with anyone save
Allah despite the fact that they associate with everyone and talk to
other human beings and attend to their social lives.

In the *Hadith* *al-Mi‘raj*[^15], in regard to the soul of the believer
who has been guided to the divine presence, Allah states:

“That soul will be asked, ‘How did you abstain from the world?’ It will
respond, ‘O my Lord! By Your glory and Honor, I have not conceived the
world since I was created but instead was always afraid of You’.”[^16]

That believer is not aware of the world because his attention is only
focused on Allah and he is unaware of issues which are not related to
Allah.

We too can attain those levels if we strive hard to strengthen our
determination and embark upon edification of character and purification
of the soul. We ought not to content ourselves with the outward aspect
of our deeds or become proud with what we have achieved and done so far
but instead try to look into our hearts and souls.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 42, p. 247.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 194.

[^3]: Ibid., vol. 1, p. 204.

[^4]: Surat Ibrahim 14:28.

[^5]: Surat Al ‘Imran 3:103.

[^6]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 166.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 186.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 189, hadith 18.

[^9]: Surat al-Furqan 25:28-29.

[^10]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 451.

[^11]: Surat al-Muzzammil 73:6-7.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 451.

[^13]: Surat Qaf 50:17-18.

[^14]: Surat al-Infitar 82:9-11.

[^15]: Asecnt of the Holy Prophet (S) to heaven.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 27.


