Lesson 31: The Tongue, A Means of Guidance or Misdirection
==========================================================

This section of the sayings of the Noble Prophet (S) is related to the
tongue and its control. Of course, in the previous lesson there was
discussion regarding the need to control the tongue, but the present
saying points out that man ought to take extra caution with regard to
what he says. With regard to this point, it is important that we look in
our books of *hadith* at sections especially dedicated to the manners of
talking and the etiquettes of the effects of utterance.

Speech that is necessary and speech that is unadvisable and must be
avoided have been mentioned. Before our presentation and examination of
the advice of the Noble Prophet (S), it is appropriate to explain some
issues in this regard. First, we will point out that the tongue is a
blessing among the many blessings of Allah and then we will enumerate
some of the weaknesses and blights of the tongue.

Deriving Benefit from the Tongue and Other Members of the Body for the Purpose of Spiritual Ascension and Growth
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

All the gifts which Allah, the Exalted, has granted to man—whether they
are physical and outward members, like the ears, eyes, hands and legs,
or internal parts and whether they are immaterial qualities such as
psychological and spiritual faculties, like the power of thought and
imagination, which are related to the brain or the feelings and
sensations of the soul; in short, that which is related to the soul and
body of man—are all ways and means of attaining perfection and not goals
in and of themselves. Not even their results and effects are the
ultimate goal of man.

We should use the eyes to look at things which draw us closer to
ultimate perfection and to Allah. In the same way, we have to listen
with our ears to things which bring about human perfection and, in
addition, use the rest of the members of the body—one of which is the
tongue—in the same way.

We have to say things which bring about our spiritual ascension and are
pleasing to Allah. We should use all the gifts of Allah with the purpose
of gaining proximity to Him and to attain human perfection and we have
to know that they are not just means of sporting and games such that we
can use our faculties in whatever way we fancy.

Man should not conceive the results and desires of members of the body
like the tongue as his ultimate goals because the original aim is
something much higher than these and speech is by far not the principal
goal in man’s life. It is for this reason that the tongue has to be
employed in the way of good and perfection. In a *hadith*, Imam al-Sadiq
(*‘a*) states:

“The charity of the tongue is giving advice to the Muslims and awakening
the negligent as well as glorifying and invoking Allah much.”[^1]

Talking is a means and because Allah’s goal in creating man is that he
ought to attain human perfection and proximity to Him, he has to use the
tongue to derive the best benefit, not to use it as a means of procuring
misfortune. He has to speak with wisdom and refrain from words which
result in social and spiritual decline because a person’s words are
symbols of his personality and status. Therefore, if man speaks without
deliberation and does not take the fruits of his words into
consideration, he reveals the inner essence of his self. As Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*) states:

“Speak so that you may be known, since man is hidden under his
tongue.”[^2]

Elsewhere, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) enumerates the ill effects of vain speech
and the lack of thought in regard to the fruits of the words of the
hypocrites:

“The hypocrite speaks whatever comes to his tongue, without knowing what
is in his favor and what goes against him.”[^3]

In contrast to a believer who:

“When a believer intends to say something, he thinks it over in his
mind. If it is good he discloses it, but if it is bad he lets it remain
concealed.”[^4]

Although we may generally know that we have to gain proximity to Allah
by means of the tongue, the subject of discussion revolves around the
manner of gaining this proximity. In this regard, it has to be explained
that words and speech sometimes fall in the category of worship of
Allah, such as the words man utters at the time of supplication and
ritual prayer where the words are considered to be either obligatory or
recommended acts of worship.

However, in other uses of the tongue are means of making others know
what he has concealed within his heart and make them know his desires
and intentions. In making others know his desires, man should have
divine intentions. He has to know what issues and what speech is
pleasing to Allah and this can result in him becoming closer to Allah
and can be a cause of gaining His reward in the hereafter. It is in this
case that a person attains divine wishes by means of using his tongue
and speaking.

In some instances, the advisability and desirability of words has to be
distinguished by the help of the divine law of Islam, otherwise a person
himself does not know the bounds and characteristics of desirable talk.

In a lot of instances one can discern the goodness of his speech by
means of the intellect and comprehend whether what he says is desirable,
incumbent or recommended. In case man has the intention of pleasing none
but Allah, his words are considered to be worship. An example is when
one wants to defend an oppressed man by means of his speech or exact
justice on behalf of an oppressed person by taking an oppressor to task.

This instance is a case of “intellectual independence” wherein the
intellect is not dependent on the dictates of divine law. If no divine
law had ever been inspired to mankind, man would still have comprehended
that defending the weak and oppressed was incumbent and if one were able
to defend the oppressed by means of speaking, then that would be
pleasing and gratifying to Allah. Even if one were not able to fully
comprehend the obligation of speaking out in defense of the weak and
oppressed, he would at least conceive its goodness and desirability.

We all know that it is very good and desirable to stroke the head of an
orphan and make him happy and that abating the sorrow and sadness of a
believing brother is good. In such circumstances, man’s deeds are
considered to be worship if he makes the intention to please Allah. In
contrast with these situations, in other instances we may not realize
the limits and cannot distinguish the realm of the permissibility of
certain actions and, like divine injunctions, the lawmaker has to
explain them to us. Even though the intellect may conceive the
generalities, the characteristics, conditions and limits of those
instances are determined by divine law and they are placed at our
disposal by means of inference from the sources of Islamic
jurisprudence.

Therefore, in such instances we must follow divine injunctions. There
are also instances which we know are not pleasing to Allah. Acting upon
such deeds is not correct, man sins if he does these forbidden actions,
he will be punished and because these deeds are not pleasing to Allah,
they cannot be discharged with the intention of worship.

The wisdom of these instances is independently distinguished by the
intellect and there is no need to receive the injunctions from the
divine legislator. Examples are vexing other people by means of the
tongue, lying, false accusation, and spoiling relationships between two
believers by means of what one says all of which are detestable and
hated by the intellect.

We conclude that we ourselves clearly conceive the goodness and badness
of some of our words and in other instances divine law explains the
limits and requirements of correct and proper speech.

Method of Deriving Benefit from the Tongue and Avoiding Troubles It Causes
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have to bear in mind that the tongue is one of the greatest gifts of
Allah and one of His most delicate of creations. Even though its size is
small, its devotion or evil can be great because disbelief and faith are
made apparent by means of it and these two are the utmost limits of
obedience and disobedience. It is for this reason that effort has to be
made to control the tongue because leaving it free can result in a lot
of harm.

A person remains safe from the calamities of the tongue once he controls
it by means of divine injunctions and laws. He must never leave it free
to utter whatever the heart desires but only that which is necessary for
the worldly life and hereafter, and he must try to hold his tongue in
instances where he senses worldly danger or danger in regard to the
hereafter. The tongue is the biggest means of the devil for deceiving
and misleading man; it is for this reason that silence has been praised
in *hadith*s. As the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Every person who keeps silent attains redemption.”[^5]

In another *hadith*, he states:

“The faith of man does not become firm until his heart becomes resolute
and his heart does not become resolute until his tongue becomes
unwavering.”[^6]

The tongue has to be controlled against defects such as lies, false
accusation, gossiping and other such things and made to utter decent and
acceptable words so that harm does not arise from it. Words have to be
spoken where befitting and problems resolved by means of speech, so that
man might build a palace for himself in paradise. Still, if a person,
who is able to amass invaluable treasures, amasses straw instead, he has
made regrettable losses. This is the similitude of a person who quits
invocation of Allah and embarks upon deeds that do not earn him any
benefit. Even though his words do not constitute sin, because he has
lost that which is procured by invocation of Allah, he has incurred
losses. Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) quotes the Noble Prophet (S) in regard to
the attributes of the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah:

“The saints [awliya’] of Allah enjoined silence upon themselves and
their silence was invocation of Allah, they looked and their looking was
taking lesson, they spoke and their words were wisdom, they associated
with the people and their socialization was a blessing.”[^7]

It is in view of the role of the tongue in bringing about either
prosperity or everlasting misfortune and even more important its
function in edifying the community or ravaging the ethical foundations
of a society that Allah and His saints [*awliya’*] have made a great
deal of recommendations that people must endeavor to control their
tongues and, through awareness of correct social etiquettes and Islamic
conduct and by making the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah and their speech
and behavioral manners their role models, use their tongues to build
themselves and the society. It is for this reason that the best way to
control the tongue and use it is observing the speech etiquettes of the
prophets and the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah (*‘a*).

The prophets (*‘a*) used to show the best way of socializing with the
people, an example of which are the logical proofs and demonstrative
arguments which they used to have with the unbelievers that are recorded
in the Gracious Qur’an; likewise, discussions they had with the
believers and the detailed ways of life narrated from them.

If we delve deeply in the discussions the prophets (*‘a*) had with the
polytheists and the defiant, we cannot find anything insulting,
offensive or humiliating that they said to the infidels. Indeed, in
spite of all the opposition, insults, mockery, derision and ridicule
that the unbelievers used to heap upon them, they always responded with
the best and most well-intentioned counsels and advice and always took
their leave with peace.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِبَادُ الرَّحْمَنِ الَّذِينَ يَمْشُونَ عَلَى الأَرْضِ هَوْنًا
وَإِذَا خَاطَبَهُمُ الْجَاهِلُونَ قَالُوا سَلاَمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The servants of the All-beneficent are those who walk humbly on the
earth, and when the ignorant address them, say, ‘Peace!’”***[^8]

In spite of all the hurtful words, false accusations and derisions which
the polytheists would utter to the prophets (*‘a*), and the Qur’an has
narrated them, it has not been recorded anywhere that the prophets
(*‘a*) ever responded in kind. On the contrary, they used to respond
with decent talk, articulate logic and good manners.

Truly, these great people conformed to the method of education that
taught them the best manner of speech and behavior and of these
teachings is the following, which Allah, the Exalted, ordered upon Moses
and Aaron:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذْهَبَا إِلَى فِرْعَوْنَ إِنَّهُ طَغَى \* فَقُولاَ لَهُ قَوْلاً
لَيِّنًا لَعَلَّهُ يَتَذَكَّرُ أَوْ يَخْشَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Let the two of you go to Pharaoh. Indeed he has rebelled. Speak to
him in a soft manner; maybe he will take admonition or fear.”***[^9]

One of the manners of speech of the prophets (*‘a*) is that they always
considered themselves as part and parcel of the people and used to talk
with everyone according to their own level of understanding, and this
truth can be deduced from the conversations which they had with
different people as has been recorded in history. A *hadith* has been
narrated by both the Shi‘ahs and Sunnis that the Noble Prophet (S)
stated:

“

The basis of our work as prophets is to talk to people according to
their intellects

.

”

[^10]

Abstaining from Talkativeness and Excess in Humor and Joking
------------------------------------------------------------

Our discussion concerns the defects and detriments of the tongue and
there are numerous *hadith*s recorded in this regard. Religious
jurisprudents have assigned certain topics of Islamic jurisprudence
[*fiqh*] to the inviolable things [*muharramat*] in regard to speech,
including lies, gossiping, ridicule, tormenting a believer, as well as
vain and extravagant talk which has become known as *lahw
al-hadith*—talk which separates man from Allah and diminishes the
spirituality and divine light of human nature (in books of ethics there
are detailed discussions explaining this matter).

The thing is that in some instances, the condemnation and unlawfulness
of certain deeds is clear to man; therefore, man harbors no doubts with
regard to their religious decrees in speech and deeds. However,
sometimes certain words appear to be permissible and man even imagines
that they are advisable when they are in reality forbidden or
unadvisable. In such circumstances, the devil deceives us and we fall
into error, whether knowingly or unknowingly, and as a result say those
dubious and erroneous words. Sometimes, also man himself lacks enough
attention and deceives himself.

If man reflects upon doubtful things in regard to what is good, he
usually perceives the truth of the matter, but he unfortunately does not
often pay careful attention to these things because he acts out of whims
and does not take care in his deeds. He even makes excuses for himself
and even calls his deeds good and justifies them as well.

For example, a joking jester who wants to liven up a gathering and make
other people laugh makes excuses for himself that tonight is a festival
and he only intends to make people happy! On this pretext he embarks
upon frivolous talk which has no spiritual or worldly benefits
whatsoever, and does not have any other effects save wasting time and
even hurting other people.

The word ‘*lahw*’ (frivolousness) denotes everything which prevents man
from important and necessary work and ‘*lahw al-hadith*’ (vain and
frivolous talk) is vain and extravagant talk which causes man to deviate
from what is right and makes him preoccupied—like old superstitious
tales and stories which tempt man to do indecent and obscene
deeds—melodies and music can also be instances of *lahw al-hadith*.

The Qur’an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَمِعُوا اللَّغْوَ أَعْرَضُوا عَنْهُ وَقَالُوا لَنَا
أَعْمَالُنَا وَلَكُمْ أَعْمَالُكُمْ سَلاَمٌ عَلَيْكُمْ لاَ نَبْتَغِي
الْجَاهِلِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when they hear vain talk, they avoid it and say, ‘Our deeds
belong to us, and your deeds belong to you. Peace be upon you, we do not
court the ignorant’.”***[^11]

It has been recorded in “*Majma‘ al-Bayan*” that this verse was revealed
in regard to Nasr ibn Harith. He was a businessman who used to travel to
Iran where he would learn the old tales of the Iranians and later relate
them to the Quraysh. He used to say, “Muhammad narrates to you stories
about ‘Ad and Thamud and I narrate to you stories about Rostam,
Esfandiyar and Kasra.” The people too would listen to his tales and not
to the verses of the Qur’an.

We have to bear in mind that it is not only vain and comical talk which
makes an unhappy believer cheerful, but also relation of a suitable
*hadith* with the temperament of the heavy-hearted believer about the
graces of Allah can thus cheer him or her up and release them from
sorrow and sadness. We do not necessarily have to make a person happy by
means of vain or comical talk.

There is no person who denies the goodness of making other people happy
and joyous, and this is a point which has repeatedly been recommended in
Islamic sources. However, the point here is that a person’s words and
speech should have positive value and spiritual worthiness so as not to
waste other people’s time and not lose Allah’s graces, one of which is
the tongue itself, in vain and unrewarding pursuits.

Imam al-Baqir (*‘a*) narrates that the Noble Prophet (S) stated:

“Every person who makes a believer happy and joyous has made me happy
and joyous and verily every person who makes me happy has made Allah
happy.”[^12]

In another *hadith* Imam al-Sajjad (*‘a*) narrates that the Noble
Prophet (S) stated:

“The best of deeds in the eyes of Allah, the Exalted and Honorable, is
making the believers happy.”[^13]

Sometimes, a believer becomes sad because of worldly affairs and
sometimes on account of matters related to the hereafter. In any case,
that sorrow and sadness inhibits man from activities and work and brings
his faculties and powers to a halt. Therefore, he cannot make use of his
capabilities and capacities because he has no peace of mind and lacks
joy. If he studies, nothing is retained in his memory, and he lacks
presence of heart during prayer.

In any case, he cannot concentrate on anything and he does not embark on
doing anything. In this case, we have to try to redeem him from that
sorrow and sadness and gladden him so that he may perform his acts of
worship and other duties. Making him happy is both desirable and an act
of worship if done with the intention to please Allah.

Sometimes, man deceives himself that the only way to make a believer
happy and joyous is to narrate useless tales, speak vain and futile
words and tell funny jokes to him forgetting that in that regard he can
speak productive, logical and valuable words and he can bring the
believer out of sorrow and sadness by means of reasonable talk. He can
guide the believer and tell him that these sorrows and distresses do not
remedy problems and only harm the brain and inhibit him from his work
without benefiting him in any way.

A joker or jester starts telling funny jokes once he sees his friend
sad, imagining that he will make his friend happy, negligent of the fact
that only a bit of joking is advisable and excessive jesting is
reproachable and blameworthy. Excessive jokes cause man not to take
himself and other people seriously and to imagine that everything is for
play and sport. Also, a lot of laughing gives rise to the spiritual
death of the heart and blots out the seriousness and sombreness’ of man.
We notice that even the Noble Prophet (S) used to joke, as he himself
stated:

“I too joke, but I joke about what is right.”[^14]

And in regard to the need to refrain from excessive laughter, he states:

“I swear upon Allah, if you were aware of what I know, you would cry
more and laugh less.”[^15]

With regard to what has been mentioned, we have to try not to let joking
and jesting go beyond advisable limits. Most often excessive jokes and
funny stories made on the pretext of making people happy result in
hurting, derision and, Allah forbid, false accusation and gossip about
other human beings. Man is cheated and deceived by the devil that making
a believer happy is a recommendable act and thereby perpetrates a sin
like gossip. In addition to the fact that he himself becomes
contaminated by sin by committing indecent deeds, he impels his friend
to become tainted by sin by listening to gossip.

In any case, in a great number of situations the devil deceives man into
committing sin as a result of vainly imagining that he is doing good and
decent deeds. However, if man thinks well and uses caution, he conceives
his mistake.

Sometimes though, a person does not perceive his mistakes no matter how
carefully he thinks because a human being is not necessarily
perspicacious and foresighted. In such circumstances, it is the duty of
others to make him aware that his deeds are not appropriate and he can
do better deeds to make believers happy in another form that is more
appropriate and desirable.

The Diversity in Methods of Guidance
------------------------------------

In order to make people aware of their displeasing acts, we cannot
always derive benefit from the same methods. For people that do not have
much knowledge about incumbent and forbidden things of religion and are
not knowledgeable of religious sources such as the Qur’an and *hadith*,
the worldly and heavenly ill-effects of sins such as gossip, lying and
false accusation must be enumerated. They have to understand that gossip
is similar to eating the meat of a dead brother, and other facts.

However, for people who are always preoccupied with the Book and the
*sunnah* and sciences of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), there is no need to
enumerate the ill-effects of these sins because they themselves are
aware of them. However, they do have to be reminded about instances in
regard to which they have become negligent. They have to be awakened and
made aware that some talk, even if it is done with a good intention, is
unadvisable and not pleasing to Allah and can result in harm.

Indeed, in some instances, deeds are two-sided or ambivalent and it is a
person’s intention and motive which grants them the essence of decency
or indecency. Sometimes, a deed is considered to be good if it is done
with a good intention although the same deed can be considered to be a
bad deed if it is done with a bad intention because the value of every
deed in the Islamic point of view is the intention.

Often a person, unknowingly or out of negligence, does a bad deed with
good intentions and in this regard he receives a reward due to his good
intention or at least if he is not rewarded he is exempt from
punishment. On the other hand, if he carries out a good deed with a
ignoble intention, he does not gain any reward and he has not performed
any worship and would most probably be punished for that act because his
deed was not done out of good intentions. Such instances can be found in
a lot of sayings.

Sometimes, discussion arises in a group in regard to a certain person
and someone from the group intends to talk about the good traits of that
individual and, in order to please that individual, he embarks upon
flattering and improperly complimenting that person. If the others ask
why the person is flattering so and so, he responds that he intends to
be endowed with humility as a result of praising other people.

Of course, one of the excellent qualities of man is that he should
enumerate the good qualities of other human beings and try to mention
the virtues of other people—this point has been recommended in the
*hadith*s. By doing so, we increase the repute and prestige of a
believer and we also encourage others to do good deeds and acquire good
traits, but we have to observe the intention we employ when we praise
other people. Is our praise for the sake of honoring a believer,
pleasing Allah and bidding the good in the society or do we praise
others in their presence and absence so as to earn their pleasure and
subsequent favors?

If we compliment a person with the intention of earning his pleasure and
favors, he may praise us in return and grant us favors in times of our
need. In such circumstances, we have done nothing but become deceived by
the devil—we have praised our friend in his absence so that he may
praise us in our absence. It is in these circumstances that
knowledgeable and informed people are deceived by the devil.

The devil impels ordinary and unlearned people who are not aware about
divine injunctions and laws to tell lies and gossip openly and commit
well-known and defined sins, but he deceives the scholars in another
form. He makes them imagine that if they embark upon reciprocal praise
of one another, they have done something good. This in reality is the
result of the trickeries and deceptions of the carnal soul.

Therefore, man has to be cautious and examine his heart whenever he
wants to do any deed in order to see what motive he has for doing that
action. He has to reflect a bit before doing anything and again after
doing it. He should not let his tongue loose and free to utter whatever
he wishes without any reflection and thought, because this is a quality
of fools who do not control their tongues and say whatever they desire.

In regard to the difference between a wise and foolish person, Imam ‘Ali
(*‘a*) states:

“The tongue of the wise man is behind his heart, and the heart of the
fool is behind his tongue.”[^16]

In explanation of this prominent saying, the late Sayyid Radi states:

“This is one of the most prominent and honorable sayings, and the
intention of Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is that the wise do not leave their tongues
free to speak before they reflect and meditate in their hearts. In
contrast, the ignorant gives precedence to saying whatever he wishes
before thinking and contemplating. Therefore, it is as though the tongue
of a wise man is behind his heart and the heart of an ignorant man is
behind his tongue.”

Therefore, it is befitting that when talking, we have to initially
ponder about why we want to talk and what our motive is so that by the
grace of Allah, we may remain safe from the defects of the tongue, the
deceptions of the carnal soul and the devil. However, if we do not think
or take precaution in our deeds and we talk without reflecting and
calculating, we will gradually fall into the devil’s traps and
unwillingly fall prey to his deceptions and trickery.

Of course, these errors which result from negligence, haste, lack of
thought and reflection and not having the correct intention in doing
deeds are not confined to words and speech. Man also falls into these
errors with regard to deriving benefit from the other parts and limbs of
the body but at present our discussion concerns the defects and faults
which arise from the tongue and are directed at man and surely the
deviations and errors of the tongue are numerous and the dangers which
arise from the tongue are more than those which result from the other
parts of the body. We must remember to seek the pleasure of Allah when
we speak, and not our own low and defiled motives.

In the first place, our speech must be pleasing to Allah and, in the
second place, we have to have the right incentive when speaking; that is
to say, there has to be both virtue in the deed and virtue in the doer.
Both the mould and the framework of our talk must be correct and the
contents and the aim of that talk have to be correct. In other words,
the form as well as the meaning and purport have to be right.

Many times over Imam Khomeini, may Allah be pleased with him, and other
eminent scholars used to say: never does the devil tempt a religious
scholar to liquor drinking or any ugly deed which is unsuitable to his
status because in that case no repute remains for that religious scholar
and he is never prepared to tolerate such danger and loss for himself.
However, the devil compels religious scholars and the people of
knowledge to deviations and slips which in their inner essence are even
worse than beer drinking.

He obliges the scholar to do deeds which do not have an ugly outward
appearance and no one reproaches him for doing that, but the damage and
sin of that deed is great and most often man himself does not even
conceive the greatness of the sin he has committed and to what level he
has [spiritually] fallen!

For this reason, there is need to be cautious and embark upon
controlling carnal desires and restraining our tongues so that we do not
utter whatever word we desire and we must observe limits in our talk. We
must not talk when there is no need to speak.

A Perspective on the Effects of Speech and Other Deeds
------------------------------------------------------

We have to bear in mind that once we get engrossed in talking,
controlling the tongue becomes difficult. For this reason, we have to
reflect about what we want to say before talking so as not to go beyond
limits. If we do not control our tongues, when talk about a particular
subject arises in a gathering and others laugh as a result and thus
encourage more, it is very hard for a person to stop.

Therefore, he jokes and jests in his frivolous talk and tries in every
way, even by means of gossip, to make the others laugh. In reality, an
uncontrolled tongue is like an unruly horse which is very difficult to
control once its reins have been released. For this reason, people have
to try to first control their tongues and ponder upon every sentence
that they want to say. They must reflect upon whether what they want to
say is proper or improper and refrain from excessiveness and extremism.

The Noble Prophet (S) and the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah (*‘a*), in
order to edify and train people, used to warn them to be accountable for
their deeds and not imagine that they would not have to answer for them.
We must not imagine that nothing at all has taken place one hour after
talking about whatever we fancy!

On the contrary, every word that is released from our mouths is
recorded, and every person will be held accountable as to why he says
what he says and why he had a particular intention. Paying heed to this
issue helps a person control his tongue; otherwise, the carnal soul is
strong and does not easily surrender.

One of the ways by which the soul of a believer can be controlled is by
making it realize that Allah, the Exalted, is present everywhere, He
listens to whatever we say and He will question every one of us in
regard to what we have said. The Noble Prophet (S) has explained this in
this way:

“O Abu Dharr! Allah, the Honored and Glorified, is next to the tongue of
every speaker. Therefore, the speaker has to fear Allah and be cautious
about what he says.”

If man pays heed to the fact that Allah is present whenever he talks and
his words do not remain hidden from Allah, he becomes cautious and does
not utter anything he wishes. In addition to that, piety brings about
fear of Allah, helps man control his conduct and does not allow his
tongue to produce words without great caution.

Likewise, one of the ways the saints [*awliya’*] of Allah (*‘a*) would
employ to train their followers was to control their carnal desires
through careful attentiveness to their surroundings and in this way
encourage their followers to refrain from excessive or out of place talk
so that they talk only according to need and necessity.

They used to encourage them to speak less and if they could let the
listener know what they meant in two sentences, they should refrain from
speaking a third sentence. Even if they wanted to explain an incumbent
duty, such as ‘enjoining good and forbidding evil’ [*amr bi’l-ma‘ruf wa
nahy ‘an al-munkar*], they should try to speak just enough to fulfill
this aim and refrain from additional words; in this regard, the Noble
Prophet (S) states:

‘O Abu Dharr! Refrain from speaking unnecessary words. It is sufficient
that you speak only to fulfill your goal.”

Sometimes when a person is busy talking in a gathering, he utters
superfluous or pointless words without attention—words which have no
benefit either for this world or for the hereafter. He loses the
irreplaceable capital of his life! Therefore, it is necessary for man to
speak according to need and abstain from useless or superfluous words.
In one *hadith* the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“Blessed is he whose morals are good, whose attributes are pure, whose
inner self is decent, whose appearance is good, who spends his extra
wealth in the way of Allah and who swallows his extra words.”[^17]

One eminent religious scholar says, “A believer is a person who first
reflects before talking, and he speaks if he determines it to be
advisable; otherwise, he keeps silent. However, the immoral and
perverted one sets his tongue at complete liberty.”

Indeed, excess in speech is one of the defects of the tongue which
lowers the personality and social status of man and can become a cause
of regret for him in the hereafter because once a person speaks without
any control, whether he likes it or not, in addition to wasting time in
talkativeness and vanity, he also commits sins of the tongue; therefore,
he has wasted both the great capital of time and invited the wrath and
anger of Allah.

The Need to Relate True Speech and Abstain from Spreading Rumors and Hearsay
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In continuation, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“O Abu Dharr! In order to lie, it is sufficient for a person to narrate
whatever he hears.”

One of the flaws of the tongue is that it should instantly narrate
whatever it hears without investigation and research in regard to its
correctness. Even if a person has no intention of telling a lie and only
narrates what he hears without any additions or subtractions, his speech
is nonetheless considered to be a lie because he has no certainty that
what he says is correct or incorrect. For this reason, we have to
refrain from outright intentional lies, because they are offensive, and
also abstain from saying things we do not have certainty about.

We have to first of all inquire about what we hear and then only relate
it once we are sure about its truthfulness.

The Noble Prophet (S) states that if a person narrates everything he
hears, he will be considered a liar. In addition, sometimes we are not
cautious in relating what we hear and often add or subtract to what we
have heard when relating it to other people. We must be cautious not to
recount everything we have heard when we talk because everything should
not be repeated, and even worse is that we exaggerate and embellish what
we hear when recounting it to the others!

With regard to the purport of falsehood which the Noble Prophet (S) has
presented, spreading rumors and gossip is beyond the shadow of doubt a
clear manifestation of lying. Gossip has been one of the weapons of the
devil’s forces against the leaders of religion.

Whenever they rose up to guide mankind and to establish a sound and
divine society, the enemies of Allah’s religion would stand up against
them with all the satanic means including lies, gossip and false
accusation in order to disperse the people from the reformers and the
divine leaders and consequently attain their evil objectives and gains.

By carefully studying history, we realize that in the early days of
Islam too the enemies, in order to restrain the Muslims from supporting
the Noble Prophet (S) and frustrate their endurance in the way of
religion, used to make use of false rumors and gossip with the intention
of creating fear and anxiety in their hearts. In this regard Allah, the
Exalted, states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا جَاءَهُمْ أَمْرٌ مِن الأَمْنِ أَو الْخَوْفِ أَذَاعُوا بِهِ
وَلَوْ رَدُّوهُ إِلَى الرَّسُولِ وَإِلَى أُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْهُمْ
لَعَلِمَهُ الَّذِينَ يَسْتَنبِطُونَهُ مِنْهُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When a report of safety or alarm comes to them, they immediately
broadcast it, but had they referred it to the Apostle or to those vested
with authority among them, those of them who investigate would have
ascertained it…”***[^18]

This blessed verse narrates the story of the minor [*sughra*] battle of
Badr in which, after the war of Uhud and the insubordination of the
Muslims to the Prophet’s (S) orders, the Muslims were losing the battle
and consequently Allah aided the Noble Prophet (S) so much so that he
triumphed over the polytheists in spite of having very few forces. Islam
was saved from definite extermination.

The hypocrites, by enumerating the capacities of the enemy and
recounting their victory at the battle of Uhud, wanted to incite doubts
and uncertainty in the hearts of the Muslims and the companions of the
Noble Prophet (S) and mislead the believers by means of their rumor
mongering. Their aim was nothing but opposition with the Noble Prophet
(S).

It can be understood from this verse that when a report of safety or
alarm comes to them, they immediately broadcast it that the hypocrites
used to propagate fear and the Muslims would spread their rumors. It was
nothing but nonsense which was being created by the infidels and their
accomplices in order to create division and hypocrisy among the
believers, but the people of weak faith used to spread those false
rumors and did not understand that spreading such rumors would result in
weakness and vulnerability among the Muslims.

After the Muslims sustained losses during the battle of Uhud, the Noble
Prophet (S) constantly used to invite the people to take part in *jihad*
against the infidels but some people were working to prevent the
believers from *jihad* and from helping the Noble Prophet (S) and so
they were spreading false rumors that the infidels had gathered very
large forces and great armies; Allah warned them that all the false
rumors and frightening of the Muslims were the work of the devil and the
talk of Satan which was being produced on the tongues of his friends.
After that Allah made it incumbent upon the believers not to fear such
machinations and only to fear Allah, the Exalted, if they had faith in
Him.[^19]

In today’s world and especially in revolutionary countries and
particularly in our country which has stood alone against all the
hegemonic powers and is trying to protect its independence and guard
Islamic and revolutionary values with all its being, there is a lot of
rumor mongering and word-of-mouth relation of false stories. In order to
create a split in the unity of the people and to make them pessimistic
in regard to the goals and advances of the revolution, the hypocrites
and counterrevolutionaries create and spread false rumors.

Unfortunately, once ignorant people hear these false rumors, they
recount them with various motives. Perhaps they may not even have bad
intentions in recounting those rumors, but when they sit next to their
friends after long conversations, they have in any case narrated a
number of false rumors.

Even if a person does not have any bad motives in narrating rumors, he
has to observe whether recounting them has any benefit or not; in
addition, he has to reflect as to whether that rumor has any basis or
not. One should accept that it is likely that the person that has
narrated that story is mistaken or that someone else has fed him with
lies and false stories.

Therefore, before narrating any news, we have to carefully inquire
whether it is right or not and speak with such caution and thought that
once someone else hears our words, he becomes certain of its truth and
says that there is no doubt in the words of so and so and whatever he
says is true and he never speaks without deliberation.

A person should speak correctly and with deliberation so as to win the
confidence of others and attain a high and prominent reputation in the
society as a result of telling the truth. If a person aims at attaining
a good reputation, he has to try to earn the people’s trust and
confidence such that the people are impelled to say that so and so does
not talk without contemplation and his words are correct and truthful.

Such a position grants him both worldly and heavenly reward. In the
worldly point of view, the benefits of honesty and telling the truth are
clear and in the heavenly point of view it results in the pleasure of
Allah and man being granted lofty positions in heaven.

Therefore, we should not relate whatever we hear on the slightest
pretext. If we disregard narrations that people often make about what
they hear, in which they add or subtract something from it making
uncalled-for changes, it is not even acceptable to explain every correct
and true topic. Often it is not in a person’s best interests to narrate
what is right, because we might put the repute of a believer in danger
and this is forbidden [*haram*] and a cause of Allah’s wrath. In
addition to that, some rumors cause people of weak faith to lose hope
and become pessimistic about the Islamic system or the authorities.

Therefore, we have to bear in mind some of the expediencies when
narrating some stories. We have to observe whether recounting some news
has benefits or not. One must ask whether the listener has the capacity
to bear and take in the news or not. Furthermore, one must ask whether
he will take caution when narrating news to other people. Does he
recount news without additions and subtractions or does he add to it
much more than that which is true and narrate it to every person and as
a result of spreading that news the system weakens and the people’s
confidence and trust in the system and the leaders lessens?

In continuation of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) sates:

“O Abu Dharr! There is nothing more worthy of being imprisoned than the
tongue.”

This is another instructional explanation from the Noble Prophet (S)
which compels man to be more cautious of his words and to try to
imprison the tongue in order not to utter words without deliberation.
Some of the scholars of ethics used to state that Allah, the Exalted,
has placed teeth in front of the tongue and he has placed lips in front
of the teeth in order to imprison the tongue behind them.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 96, p. 7.

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 432, pithy aphorisms 392, trans. Shahidi.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 184, sermon [khutbah] 176.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 90, hadith 2.

[^6]: Ibid., vol. 71, p. 286.

[^7]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 333, hadith 25.

[^8]: Surat al-Furqan 25:63.

[^9]: Surat Ta Ha 20:43-44.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 1, p. 85, hadith 7.

[^11]: Surat Qasas 28:55.

[^12]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 3, p. 271.

[^13]: Ibid., p. 272.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 298.

[^15]: Ibid., vol. 58, p. 107.

[^16]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p, 367, pithy aphorisms 40, trans. Shahidi.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 400.

[^18]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:83.

[^19]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 5, p. 18, third ed., Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyyah Publications.


