Lesson 32: The Manifestations of Venerating and Glorifying Allah
================================================================

“O Abu Dharr! Venerating and honoring Allah the Blessed and High denotes
revering elderly Muslims, respecting the bearers of the Qur’an and those
who fulfill its teachings and holding the just ruler in high esteem. O
Abu Dharr! Every person that is bad-tempered is continuously becoming
farther from Allah.”

In this section of the *hadith*, the Noble Prophet (S) reminds us that
honoring some of the servants of Allah is tantamount to venerating
Allah. On the basis of their rational aptitude and to achieve certain
goals, the wise sometimes liken something to something else or a certain
action to another deed or they introduce an individual as similar to
some other human being; in the same way that it is also said in
conventional conversation that this deed is similar to that deed or that
this person is like that other human being. This act of likening and
juxtaposing is based on the similarity as well as joint aspect which
exists between ‘the subject of comparison’ [*mishabbah*] and ‘the object
of comparison’ [*mushabbah bih*].

The reason for this comparison and likening is that qualities and
characteristics in one individual and/or deed may be concealed and
covered up while that same attribute and feature may be apparent in the
other individual and/or deed and, in order for that concealed and
covered up quality to be recognized or distinguished as well as for the
attention of other people to become concentrated upon it, it is
introduced as similar to another thing and/or individual which has a
more obvious feature and attribute.

In conventional metaphors we see that a brave human being is likened to
a lion, regardless that the level of bravery which is found in a lion is
not found in man, but they liken that man to a lion for the reason that
the lion is well-known for its courage. They do so with the intention of
making that individual’s concealed bravery known so that his courage
will become completely apparent for other people and so that people’s
attention will be concentrated on him. This very attraction and
concentration of people’s attention on him can have its own objectives
and goals.

In the verses of the Qur’an and the *hadith*s we come across a lot of
expressions where individuals have been introduced as similar to Allah,
the Exalted, and/or a deed which is done for people has been presented
as a work done for Allah. For example, giving a loan to the needy has
been likened to giving a loan to Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ ذَا الَّذِي يُقْرِضُ اللَّهَ قَرْضًا حَسَنًا فَيُضَاعِفَهُ لَهُ
وَلَهُ أَجْرٌ كَرِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who is it that will lend Allah a good loan, that He may multiply it
for him and [that] there may be a noble reward for him?”***[^1]

This likening is done in spite of the fact that Allah, the Exalted, not
only has infinite perfection, but, according to the accurate expression
of some of the prominent religious scholars, has super-infinite
perfection. A person who knows Allah and has faith in Him understands
that Allah, the Exalted, has all the perfections in the highest
imaginable form.

The Uncomprehended Status of the Prophet (S) and the Pure Imams (‘a)
--------------------------------------------------------------------

Not taking Allah, the Exalted, into account, there are amongst created
beings those having completion although this completion is limited;
however, at times some of these perfections and their standards are
disguised and not completely understood by other people.

Examples are the greatest and most perfect of human beings and creatures
of Allah, namely the Fourteen Infallibles (*‘a*), whose worthy
prominence and extent of perfection is not completely known to others.
It is for this reason that ordinary and common people perceive them as
similar to other human beings.

Even some of the people who believe in the Noble Prophet (S) imagine
that he was a person similar to other human beings, with the difference
that he received divine inspiration, but they cannot conceive how much
higher his standing and importance are to that of other human beings!

For people who know the loftiness of the Noble Prophet’s (S) status,
there remains no doubt that of all the prophets (*‘a*) of Allah, he is
the most superior, pre-eminent and perfect Prophet (S) and the divine
legal code is his. Allah, the Exalted, raised him to the prophetic
mission and inspired the Book to him so that he may judge on the basis
of justice and equity and rise up upon the order of Allah and guide
mankind upon the right path.

By means of logic and words appropriate to the people’s intellect, he
was charged with acquainting people with Allah, their interests in this
world and the next, and completing their religion. In this regard, he
presented manifest proof and demonstrative reasoning and would talk to
every person to the extent of their intellect and understanding. In
order for the community to become aware of the truth, he used to provide
logical proof and reason:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... لِيَهْلِكَ مَنْ هَلَكَ عَنْ بَيِّنَةٍ وَيَحْيَى مَنْ حَيَّ عَنْ
بَيِّنَةٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So that he who perishes might perish by a manifest proof, and he who
lives may live on by a manifest proof…”***[^2]

In regard to the status of the Noble Prophet (S), Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*)
states:

“Allah chose him from the family tree of prophets [the family of
Abraham], from the flame of light [the light of guidance and
deliverance], from the forehead of greatness [from a family
distinguished above others], from the land of al-Batha’ [a noble and
respected place], from the lamps for darkness [the ancestors of the
Prophet were all like lamps of guidance for the lost] and from the
sources of wisdom [the members of this family were believers and holders
of the Book and others learned wisdom from them].”[^3]

Elsewhere, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“His place of stay is the best of all places and his origin is the
noblest of all origins in the depositories of honor and the sanctuaries
of safety. Hearts of the virtuous are captivated by him and the gazes
are fixed upon him. Through him Allah buried mutual rancor, put out the
flames of revolt, gave them affection like brothers and brought
separation among some [like Hamzah and Abu Lahab]. Through his
prophethood, He transformed the lowliness and suffering of the faithful
to honor and eminence and degraded the infidels from greatness to
lowliness and misfortune.”[^4]

On the basis of Allah’s words and the sayings which have reached us from
the Noble Prophet (S) and the Pure Imams (*‘a*), we generally understand
that those fourteen pure and divine lights have such high stations that
even if all human beings were to put their intellects together, they
would still not be able to comprehend their great stations, let alone
attain any one of them.

This knowledge and awareness has been granted to us on account of the
grace and favor of Allah and by the grace of the verses of the Gracious
Qur’an and the *hadith*s. It is because the Noble Prophet (S) possesses
that high position and superior level that he is the best guide of Allah
and after him also he has left two great heritages and legacies, the
Book of Allah and his Pure Progeny [*‘itrah*] (*‘a*), and has advised
his people to take refuge in them in order not to deviate. He, the Noble
Prophet (S), stated:

“I leave behind for you two precious items, the Book of Allah and my Ahl
al-Bayt (household). If you hold fast to them, you will never go astray
and those two will never be separated from each other until they meet me
at the Pool [hawd] of Kawthar.”[^5]

(The meaning of the two not being separated is that the Pure Progeny of
the Noble Prophet (S) will never ever do anything opposed to the book of
Allah due to their infallibility.)

The Relationship between Obedience to Allah and Obedience to the Prophet (S) and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

One of the verses which introduces the high station of the Noble Prophet
(S) is:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ يُطِع الرَّسُولَ فَقَدْ أَطَاعَ اللّهَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever obeys the Apostle certainly has obeyed Allah…”***[^6]

In this verse there is no limit set for obeying the Noble Prophet (S),
it is for this reason that we understand that if a person obeys the
Noble Prophet (S), he has in fact obeyed Allah, the Exalted. This verse
is considered to be one of the verses denoting the infallibility of the
Noble Prophet (S) because it and other verses of this kind impel us to
obey the Noble Prophet (S) absolutely.

It shows that he does not order us to do anything that is opposed to the
orders and wishes of Allah; otherwise, if Allah were to order us to obey
Him on the one hand and then on the other hand order us to obey someone
that tells us to oppose His own orders, contradiction would arise.

This same highness and superiority which has been proven for the Noble
Prophet (S) has also been ascertained for the Infallible Imams (*‘a*)
and it is because of their station and status that Allah, the Exalted,
has allotted them the title ‘*those vested with authority*’
[*uli’l-amr*]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا أَطِيعُوا اللّهَ وَأَطِيعُوا الرَّسُولَ
وَأُوْلِي الأَمْرِ مِنْكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those
vested with authority among you…”***[^7]

Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah Ansari says, “After this verse was inspired upon
the Noble Prophet (S), I asked the Noble Prophet, ‘O Prophet of Allah!
We know Allah and His Prophet (S), but who are those vested with
authority whose obedience Allah has mentioned next to His own
obedience?’”

In response, the Noble Prophet (S) said:

“O Jabir! Those are my successors and the leaders of the Muslims after
me.”

Then, the Noble Prophet (S) enumerated every one of the Imams (*‘a*) by
name until he came to the name of the Twelfth Imam, may Allah hasten his
reappearance; then, he stated:

“The twelfth of them has both my name and my pseudonym. He is the proof
of Allah on the earth, His remaining one and mercy among His servants,
and the son of al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali. He is the very person through whom
Allah, the Exalted, will conquer the East and the West.”[^8]

The similitude of obedience to the Noble Prophet (S) and obedience to
Allah also exists in relation to obedience to the Pure Imams (*‘a*) and
Fatimah al-Zahra’ (*‘a*), because in the same way that the Noble Prophet
(S) has the highest possible perfection a creature can ever have, they
too have the same perfection.

In order to better conceive this similitude of obedience to Allah and
obedience to the Pure and Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), it is
befitting to reflect a bit on the supplication of *Ziyarat* *Jami‘ah
al-Kabirah* in order to understand what has been stated in regard to
their lofty station and the need to obey and follow them. In this
supplication we read:

“Whoever has obeyed you has in fact obeyed Allah and whoever has
disobeyed you has in fact disobeyed Allah and whoever has loved you has
indeed loved Allah and whoever has enmity and hatred towards you truly
has enmity and hatred towards Allah…”

This purport has been recorded in a more complete manner in the
supplication of the days of the month of Rajab:

“O Allah! I request from you all that which those vested with your
authority request from you.”

Elsewhere, it states:

“There is no difference between You and them except that they are your
servants and creatures.”

The exemplification of divine perfection is within them but the
difference lies in the fact that their perfections emanate from Allah
and Allah has attached these perfections to them and of course this
difference is more than infinite—even though the Pure and Infallible
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) have all the perfections and superiorities, still
those perfections originally emanate from Allah and they are not
anything in and of themselves.

When they are compared with other creatures though, all creatures are in
need of them and not only is no one equal with them, there is an utmost
difference and contrast between them and others; however, when they are
compared with Allah, the Exalted, we notice that there is no correlation
between them and Allah because they are absolutely in need and Allah is
the Absolute Self-sufficient for the reason that whatever every
individual has emanates from Allah.

Even so, comparing the station of the Noble Prophet (S) and the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) with that of Allah is completely proper and we are
incapable of comprehending their positions and obedience to them is
tantamount to obedience to Allah, love of them is tantamount to love of
Allah and enmity and disobedience to them is tantamount to enmity and
disobedience to Allah.

In regard to the rank of Fatimah al-Zahra’ (*‘a*), the Noble Prophet (S)
has said:

“Fatimah is a part of me; whoever gladdens her has gladdened me and
whoever saddens her has saddened me. Fatimah is the most beloved person
to me.”[^9]

It has been said that the stations of the Noble Prophet (S) and the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) have been introduced as similar to the eminence of
Allah, just as some of the actions that are done in connection with some
people have been introduced as similar to the deeds which are done in
connection with another being. In the same way, remembering and invoking
the Pure and Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) has been introduced as
remembering and invoking Allah. Allah, the Exalted, states in the
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Remember Me, and I will remember you.”***[^10]

There is no doubt that Allah, the Exalted, remembers all creatures and
He is not negligent of anything or person, but the purport of
remembering in the blessed verse is attentive and present remembrance as
well as existence of grace and reward. If an individual wants Allah to
remember him and not to omit the granting of His blessings, he must
remember Him. We observe in the *hadith*s that remembrance of the *Ahl
al-Bayt* (*‘a*) has been compared with remembrance of Allah. Imam
al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states:

“Remembrance of us is remembrance of Allah and remembrance of our enemy
is remembrance of the devil.”[^11]

Comparing remembrance of the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) with remembrance of
Allah, the Exalted, is for the reason that they are the proxies of Allah
and they do not conceive for themselves a station and rank other than
servitude of Allah. When one brings to mind the name of the Noble
Prophet (S) or an *imam*, does anything other than their being
representatives of Allah occur to the mind? Because it does not, hearing
their names concentrates one’s attention on Allah—that is why
remembrance of them is remembrance of Allah.

In exemplifying the station and sovereignty of Allah, the Exalted, the
*Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) and the Noble Prophet (S) occupy a high level and
they are perfect examples and in every aspect are the complete mirrors
and exponents of the Almighty. There is no doubt that a mirror does not
show off anything of itself and is only a means for showing the face
which looks into the mirror to be seen with clarity. The Noble Prophet
(S) and the Pure and Infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*) too do not emanate
anything from themselves and whatever they have is from Allah and they
manifest Him well.

In view of the fact that the Pure Imams (*‘a*) are the perfect mirrors
of Allah, the Exalted, and they are absorbed in the Divine Beauty, to
the extent that they manifest the Attributes of Allah, the Exalted, with
all their being, Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) stated while pointing at his home:

“Every kind of knowledge that does not come out of this house is null
and void.” Then he also stated to one of his companions, “If you are in
pursuit of correct knowledge, acquire it from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).
Verily, we have explained every kind of knowledge and interpreted all
kinds of wisdom concealed in the divine verses. The knowledge of
equitable judgment and arbitration has been entrusted to us. Allah chose
us and has not given to anyone that which He has given to us.”[^12]

The Need to Respect and Honor the Believers
-------------------------------------------

If we consider those who are humble, whoever is more similar to them,
that is to say, whoever is more unwavering in servitude of Allah and has
distanced himself from egotism and the spirit of narcissism in his
worship of Allah, the Exalted—in short, to whatever extent a man rids
himself of egotism and becomes a servant of Allah and stops conceiving
himself as independent, he acquires the merit of being similar to Allah.
In regard to visiting the believer, Imam al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states:

“To whoever visits his believing brother for the sake of Allah, Allah,
the Exalted, has stated, ‘You have visited Me, your reward is with Me
and I will not be pleased with granting you a reward less than
paradise’.”[^13]

It has been recorded in a *hadith* that if a believer visits a believing
brother for the pleasure of Allah and without having any other intention
and earthly demand, Allah, the Exalted, sends an angel to ask him, “Why
have you come here and what is your intention?” That believer responds,
“I have come to the house of one of Allah’s slaves and my brother in
faith so as to meet and see him.”

The angel again asks, “Have you placed any trust in his hands and you
have any demands on him?” He replies, “No.” The angel further asks,
“What then do you have to do with him and why have you come here?” That
believer responds again, “I love him for the sake of Allah and that is
why I have come to visit him.” Finally, that angel gives him a message
from Allah that, “O my servant! You have come to see Me and you are My
guest and your reception is my responsibility.”

Indeed, once a believer has made up his mind to be devoted to Allah and
eliminate his egoism and self-worship, he attains a station that
visiting him becomes tantamount to visiting Allah. By means of closely
observing and examining the verses of the Qur’an and the *hadith*s, we
find a lot of varying themes in which visiting a believer and respecting
him has been introduced as visiting and respecting Allah, the Exalted.

One of those instances is this very *hadith* in which the Noble Prophet
(S), with the intention of advising and guiding Abu Dharr, has mentioned
respecting three kinds of the servants of Allah as tantamount to
respecting Allah. We have to realize that if it were possible (Allah
save us) for man to see Allah and thus revere Him, he would have
attained great status. Of course, as devoted servants of Allah, we have
to see Allah with the eyes of the heart, and then worship Him. As Imam
‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“I have never worshipped a God whom I have not seen.”[^14]

At the time of devotion and worship of Allah, sometimes a man who
sincerely worships attains the position of venerating and honoring
Allah. This level can also be achieved by a person who respects three
groups of Allah’s servants:

### a) Honoring Elderly Muslims

*The first group* of people are the elderly who have spent their lives
faithfully committed to Islam as well as its lofty divine laws and their
beards have turned white upon the course of the religion. Respecting and
having a high regard for this group of people is tantamount to
venerating Allah. For this reason, if we see an elderly Muslim and
respect him on account of his being a Muslim and his having lived his
life on the path of Islam, we have respected Allah.

It is necessary that we understand what qualities this group of faithful
servants and the worthy of Allah have that they have attained this
nobility that respecting them is tantamount to venerating Allah.

Perhaps in respect to an elderly Muslim whose beard is white, an example
has been made of him because when a person looks at him, he sees a
lifetime of servitude and devotion to Allah in his face. His luminous
face and white beard, especially when the effects of prostration are
also apparent on his forehead, are all indicative of a lifetime of
devotion and servitude to Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... سِيمَاهُمْ فِي وُجُوهِهِمْ مِنْ أَثَرِ السُّجُودِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…Their marks are [visible] on their faces because of the effect of
prostration…”***[^15]

Seeing one lifetime of devotion to Allah is seeing one divine lifetime
because servitude and divinity are correlated; that is to say, when we
see a devoted servant who has spent a lifetime worshiping Allah, we also
see a divine life, wise conduct, guidance and leadership. It is for this
reason that it has been said that servitude and lordship are two
correlated concepts, like other correlated notions such as father and
son, such that once one sees a man from the aspect of fatherhood, he
obviously thinks about the son as well.

In the same way, once you look at a man from the aspect of his being a
son, without doubt you think about his father. When man observes one
lifetime of the devotion of a sincere servant of Allah, he thinks about
one lifetime of praying to Allah and this is that same relationship and
connection that exists between divine lordship and divine servitude. It
is for this reason that such a comparison is proper that it should be
said that when you respect him, you have respected Allah; as if, within
his own limits, he manifests divine lordship on his face.

The criterion for comparison is the existence of a joint aspect. Now,
what joint aspect is better than that one should manifest the other like
a picture which reminds the first of the one in the picture? An elderly
Muslim embodies a lifetime of devotional service and worship in his face
and when you look at the effects of servitude on his face, you also see
Allah’s lordship. Therefore, on account of what has been mentioned, in
Islam respect towards the elderly is invaluable.

There is need to point out that some of the values that are valid and
reputable in Islamic societies are also respected and valid in
non-Islamic societies, but the criteria are different. Respect of the
elderly is a value which is more or less prevalent in all societies, but
it is considered a custom and manner in societies which do not have an
Islamic and divine point of view.

For this reason, they do not have correct and stable criteria for
respecting the elderly. In the Islamic ethical order, values have
logical criteria, strong roots as well as stable foundations although
they are considered only worthy of respect in other societies. The
elderly are respected in all societies, but in Islamic societies an
elderly person is a manifestation of a lifetime of devotional service to
Allah.

This criterion is not recognized in other societies at all, however.
Therefore, we should pay heed to this fact that if mention about certain
values which are also respected in other ethical orders is made in the
Qur’an and the *hadith*s, it does not mean that the value that is valid
and recognized in Islam is that same value respected and recognized in
other ethical orders nor that the criteria are the same; on the
contrary, it is possible that the criteria are very different from the
measure in the other ethical orders. Ethical criteria of Islam are in
fact quite superior and subtle.

With regard to what has been said, we understand that we ought to hold
the elderly in high esteem and every one younger must respect the one
who is older because he is a devoted servant of Allah and he has lived
more years than the younger one, but respect to an elderly Muslim enjoys
a special status and is similar to respecting Allah.

In respect to the benefits, in the hereafter, of respecting the elderly,
the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will grant safety to everyone who
honors and respects the elder Muslims.”[^16]

In regard to decent behavior with Muslims of different ages, Imam
al-Sadiq (*‘a*) states:

“I advise you that the younger Muslims should conceive the middle aged
as their elder brothers, consider the elderly Muslims as their fathers,
conduct yourselves with kindness towards the younger ones, be loyal to
your brothers in Islam and be good to your fathers in the faith.”[^17]

On account of Islam being a religion of love and affection, and being a
religion which breeds affinity and kindness among its followers by
inviting them to brotherhood and love and because it wants them, for the
purpose of creating unity and eradicating hatred and anger, to preserve
the shadow of Allah’s mercy upon themselves by speaking kindly with one
another, the Noble Prophet (S) states:

“A person who respects his Muslim brother and removes his sorrow by
means of speaking kind words to him will forever remain in the shadow of
Allah’s mercy for as long as this virtue and quality remains in
him.”[^18]

Therefore, it is befitting of us to respect the elderly who have spent
their lifetime on the course of Islam and their beards have become white
in this way even if their levels of literacy are not the same as ours
because we are not sure whether our ages will reach theirs or whether we
will preserve our religion until the time we reach their ages.

There have been youths who were deprived of the gift of divine guidance
in their middle ages and died in a state of disbelief and enmity with
Allah. Truly, these elderly people who soundly preserved their religion
during the entire course of their lives and guarded Islam within their
beings merit great respect, even though they may lack a certain series
of academic notions. This group of people had much grace that they were
honored with the merit to be able to spend the courses of their lives on
the path of Islam!

### b) Respecting the Teachers and Agents of the Qur’an

*The second group* is the scholars of the Qur’an and those who put it
into practice. First and foremost, respect towards people who are both
memorizers of the Qur’an and who act upon it is respect towards Allah
and secondarily, respect towards people who are not memorizers but are
both scholars of Qur’anic sciences and men of deeds is respect towards
Allah. Likewise, a scholar is still worthy of a level of respect even if
he is not a practitioner of the Qur’an but understand its sciences. It
has been recorded in a *hadith* that the Noble Prophet (S) stated:

“The nobles of my nation are the bearers of the Qur’an and those who
keep vigil at night.”[^19]

Special honor for the teachers of the Qur’an has been established in
this *hadith*, but in this section of the *hadith* of Abu Dharr, besides
mentioning nobility, it has been said that respect for these people is
respect towards Allah; of course on the condition that they also act in
accordance with the Qur’an. Characteristically, the bearers and
followers of the Qur’an manifest the will and word of Allah both
outwardly and inwardly as well as in words and in deeds. They have both
memorized the words of the Qur’an and their minds have understood the
concepts of the Qur’an.

In other words, their imagination has acquired the form of the words of
the Qur’an, their intellect has apprehended its concepts and in practice
they have manifested the Qur’anic truths; that is, their entire being
from head to toe has become Godly and Qur’anic. When you look at what
they have memorized, you perceive that they are memorizers of the
Qur’an. When you look at their knowledge, you see that they are bearers
of Qur’anic knowledge and they have understood its concepts.

When you look at their deeds, you perceive that they act according to
the dictates of the Qur’an. It is for this reason that their existence
is a mirror of the Qur’an; that is to say, their existence is a mirror
of the perfection of Allah and, by means of His Word, Allah is
manifested in their beings; for this reason respect towards them is
respect to Allah.

In regard to the lofty and high status of the Qur’an, the Noble Prophet
(S) states:

“The Qur’an is a guide away from misguidance and a light and liberator
from blindness. It is a cause of deliverance from error and a light and
brightness in the dark. It is a predictor of what is to come in the
future and a protector from perdition; a cause of growth and a guide for
finding the right way in misguidance. It is an explicator of every
sedition and deviation and takes man from the mean world to the bliss of
the hereafter and in it is the perfection of your religion and there is
no person who turns away from the Qur’an except that he is led to
hell.”[^20]

Also it has thus been recorded in a *hadith* in regard to the necessity
to pay heed to the Qur’an, know it and select it as the book of
prosperity and redemption:

“Every person who derives their religion from the Book of Allah and the
sunnah of the Prophet (S) is stronger [and firmer] than the mountains
and whoever acquires his religion from the people will be misled by
those very people.”[^21]

Elsewhere, in regard to the Qur’an and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*), the
Noble Prophet (S) states:

“I will be the first person on the Day of Resurrection to meet Allah,
the All-mighty and All-powerful, with the Qur’an and my Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a). Then after me will come my nation, from whom I will ask what they
did with the Book of Allah and my Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).”[^22]

That which has been mentioned was for the purpose that we appreciate
that the Qur’an has many blessings whether in its material or spiritual
aspect and man derives more virtue and benefit from the Qur’an the
nearer he is to it, the more affectionate he is with it and the more he
reflects upon it. The virtue and superiority of the Qur’an is so much
that a *hadith* in this regard has been recorded. It is narrated that an
individual asked one of the Infallibles, “What is the cause of your
superiority over others?” The Infallible responded, “The cause of our
superiority over others is that the knowledge of the Qur’an is with us.”

Therefore, it is befitting that we ought to always strive to honor and
venerate the Qur’an and never perceive the Gracious Qur’an in the same
light as we perceive other books. Conceiving the Qur’an as higher than
other books must not be confined to belief of the heart. Our conduct
with the Qur’an should not be the same as our conduct with other books.

In addition to respecting the Qur’an in our hearts, we also have to have
outward and apparent respect for the Qur’an; that is to say, our outward
and apparent respect of the Qur’an has to be like our inward respect
towards it. There is no doubt that this same respectful and cordial
conduct with the Qur’an increases our faith.

Some of the prominent Muslim scholars would never sleep in the room
where they kept the Gracious Qur’an. They never even used to sit with
their legs stretched out in the rooms where they kept the Qur’an. There
is a story narrated by both ‘Allamah Tabataba’i and Shahid Mutahhari in
regard to Shaykh Muhammad Taqi Amoli, may Allah be pleased with him,
that one night as a result of excessive tiredness the late Shaykh Amoli
leaned on a pillow and stretched while reciting the Gracious Qur’an. The
following day his mentor, the late Mirza ‘Ali Aqa Qadi, may Allah be
pleased with him, who was also the mentor of ‘Allamah Tabataba’i as well
as the mentor of other prominent Muslim scholars, promptly said to him,
“It is not good to stretch your legs while reciting the Qur’an.”

Indeed, on account of venerating the Qur’an and laying the foundation
for propagating Qur’anic culture in the society, we have to respect the
teachers of the Qur’an and if we ourselves are one of the bearers of the
Gracious Qur’an and we see other people respecting us, we should not
think that because we are one of the teachers of the Qur’an we are no
longer obliged to respect the other bearers of the Qur’an because there
is no contradiction in one teacher of the Qur’an respecting another,
just as respecting the *sayyid*s and the Progeny of the Noble Prophet
(S) is incumbent upon all including the *sayyid*s themselves. When man
sees a *sayyid*, he remembers the Noble Prophet (S) and it is for this
reason that he respects him, even if he himself is a *sayyid*.

In regard to one of the great scholars who was also a *sayyid*, it has
been narrated that one day as he was leaving a social gathering, his son
respectfully paired up his father’s shoes so as to make wearing them
easy. His father got very displeased with this and said, “Fatimah’s
progeny do not have to pair my shoes.” Therefore, if a person is a
*sayyid*, he ought to respect other *sayyid*s and if he is a Muslim
scholar, he ought to respect other scholars and there is no hindrance in
one respected scholar respecting the other scholars. One scholar must
respect other scholars on account of the fact that they are also
religious scholars and bearers of Qur’anic knowledge and in reality this
conduct is tantamount to venerating the Qur’an itself.

### c) Respecting a Just and Equitable Ruler

*The third group* of people whose respect is tantamount to veneration of
Allah is the group of just and equitable rulers, and before we embark
upon the need to respect the just ruler, we will initially explain the
need for a government and the law in a society and the qualifications of
a custodian of Muslim affairs.

The Need for a Government and Law in Society
--------------------------------------------

The late ‘Allamah Tabataba’i states: “Authority denotes sovereignty, and
is one of the necessary relative notions which man is in want of. In any
case, the thing which mankind initially has need of is creating a
society—in the sense of cohesion and connection of individuals of a
community with one another whose every individual has a goal and will
for themselves which is other than the goal and will of other
individuals—not a society from the aspect of individual persons without
cohesion and relationship; for the reason that every individual person
has wants and goals which are different from the wants and goals of
other individuals.

Every individual wants to destroy the successes of other people and to
overcome them and to violate the rights of other human beings and in the
end disorder and chaos arise and a society which is meant to be the
cause of prosperity for man becomes the cause of his misery and
perdition. In order to get rid of this problem, there is no other way
except that the society has to create an invincible and prevailing power
in order to bring under its influence the rest of the powers and forces.

This power has to bring all individuals under its control and
consequently bring to justice and equilibrium rebellious forces which
want to violate the rights of other individuals. This power also
emancipates and liberates weak individuals form their weak and
defenseless position and brings them into equilibrium until finally all
forces of the society become equal in regard to power and weakness and
that is when every one of those forces occupies its rightful place, and
everyone enjoys his rights.”[^23]

This makes it clear that man’s life has a social and communal existence.
Now some questions come up. Why is man’s life social? Is his communal
existence deterministic and one imposed on man or does man’s nature
necessitate a social life? Is there or is there not any logical and
volitional factor in choosing an effective social life?

All these are topics which are put forward for discussion, but our
opinion is that the logical and intellectual factor in choosing social
life is effective because man conceives his social benefits and observes
that his material and spiritual needs cannot or will not be secured in a
desirable manner without social life and for this reason he lives in a
community and accepts its conditions.

The other point is that social life entails clashes between the
interests of the people in a society. That is to say, when people intend
to have social life and live and work together and share and distribute
the fruits of joint efforts, disputes arise among their interests. There
are certain people who intend to derive a greater share and derive
unlimited benefit from natural bounties and would like to deal with
other human beings in whatever manner they please and this is not
desirable to others.

For this reason, a tug of war inevitably arises on the social scene
prevention of which calls for setting up bounds and limits and laws must
be devised. This also is a self-evident matter and its clarity lies in
the fact that if man were to reflect a little in regard to human
desires—whether material or spiritual—of course those related to the
social life of man, he would realize that it is not feasible to secure
all his wants in an unlimited manner and if people desire to live
communally, they must place limits on their desires and not act on
whatever their hearts crave.

For this reason, in order to eliminate or reduce conflict, we need
limits and laws. If we do not believe in limits and laws for individuals
in deriving benefit from social life and if individuals do not obey and
follow these limits the aim of social life, which is deriving more and
better benefit from natural bounties for the purpose of material and
spiritual perfection, will not be fulfilled. Therefore, social life must
be managed in such a way that it provides the background for the day to
day perfection of all individuals in a society. It is only in this case
that the goal of social life will properly be secured.

In the Islamic order which is based on the Islamic perspective and
foundations, it is necessary that the law must be divine. The reason for
this matter is the claim that Islam as a comprehensive school of thought
has all the laws for managing social affairs. We who are the followers
of Islam and believe that acting according to its dictates is a
guarantee for everyone’s prosperity must resist the different schools of
thought and religions and inclinations which are found more or less in
the majority of countries and defend our beliefs and ideals with sound
reason and invincible logic.

Qualifications of a Righteous and Competent Ruler
-------------------------------------------------

Up to this point, the need for government and law in society has been
explained and because the creation of a government and enforcement of
law without a ruler is not feasible, we will now mention some of the
qualifications of the custodian of the government.

**1. Knowledge of the law:** A person that wants to enforce the law,
whether that law is related to internal security, defense, international
relations, or other issues, has to have sufficient knowledge of the law,
jurisprudence and values on which that law is founded.

**2. Piety [*****taqwa*****]:** Piety is a general qualification in
Islamic culture and in common culture it is called ‘dutifulness’. A
person who is in charge of social affairs and is a custodian of people’s
interests has to think about securing their expediencies, not securing
his own personal interests and gratifying his worldly passions after
attaining power, in which case such an individual does not have the
competence to be a manager of people’s affairs and lives and also the
executor of the law for the reason that he interprets and defines or
abrogates the law oppositely and according to his own wishes and
sometimes explicitly opposes the law. For this reason, the second
qualification for being a custodian of government affairs is ethical
competence, or according to Qur’anic terminology, piety.

**3. Expertise:** Every person who takes charge of a duty has to have
the proficiency to perform it because merely having knowledge of law and
piety are not enough for correctly discharging one’s duties. Experience
and expertise are also necessary to be able to solve short-term and
long-term problems which are always presented to authorities.

There is no doubt that human societies need the law in order to solve
small clashes and large conflicts and create limits in making use of
personal and social amenities and finally creating equilibrium in
communal life and every society requires a ruler and administrator in
order to correctly enforce the law and prevent the rebellious and
disobedient from lawless behavior; however, the question that exists is
whether guardianship and custodianship belong to Allah and human beings
become guardians and custodians of other people by the will of Allah or
whether human beings are by principle competent to be guardians and
custodians of other human beings.

In response, it is said that no human being has the right of
guardianship and custodianship over other people because man ought to
obey only a person from whom he receives his graces and existential
blessings and no one’s opinion is obligatory to follow for the reason
that ordinary people neither grant man existence nor are they effective
in his immortality and continued existence.

That people are not forced to obey one another is the primary principle
in the lack of authority of human beings. Therefore, for the reason that
man receives all his existential gifts from Allah, the Exalted, he is
obliged to only obey and comply with His orders and following the orders
of other than Allah is contingent on the other person being appointed by
Allah.

With regard to what has previously been mentioned, when we read the
Qur’an we notice that it rejects invalid guardianship, that is to say
authority which has not been approved by Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لاَ تَتَّخِذُوا الْيَهُودَ
وَالنَّصَارَى أَوْلِيَاءَ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاءُ بَعْضٍ وَمَنْ
يَتَوَلَّهُمْ مِنكُمْ فَإِنَّهُ مِنْهُمْ إِنَّ اللّهَ لاَ يَهْدِي
الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who have faith! Do not take the Jews and Christians for
allies: they are allies for each other. Any of you who allies with them
is indeed one of them. Indeed Allah does not guide the wrongdoing
lot.”***[^24]

(The sentence ‘*Indeed Allah does not guide the wrongdoing lot*’ denotes
that those people were an unjust and wrongdoing group and that a
wrongdoing oppressor never derives benefit from guidance and never
attains his goal and always remains on his wrong path. Therefore, if you
too find yourselves in their category, you will never attain your aims
and goals.)

In another verse, the just ruler is thus introduced:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلاَةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your Guardian is only Allah, His Apostle and the faithful who
maintain the prayer and give zakat***[^25] ***while bowing
down.”***[^26]

(All Qur’anic commentators are unanimously agreed that the purport of
this verse regarding the phrase ‘*and the faithful who maintain the
prayer and give* *zakat* *while bowing down*’ is Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*).)

Therefore, due to the evidence which has been presented regarding the
need for a government in the society and also the qualifications which
have been mentioned for a just and competent ruler, it is clear that in
the era of an infallible man like the Noble Prophet (S) or the
Infallible Imams (*‘a*), they alone must occupy the position of head of
the government and it is natural that such a government is quite
desirable and ideal.

However, this state of affairs is not always feasible and, even in the
time of an Infallible Imam (*‘a*), he can only rule in the town and
province where he lives and only supervise the rest of the cities and
provinces by appointing officials and functionaries. In the age of the
Occultation of the Infallible Twelfth Imam, may Allah hasten his
reappearance, someone has to take charge of this position and lead the
Islamic society on the basis of Allah’s laws and the constituents of
Islam. He ought to have the following qualifications:

**1. Sufficient knowledge of Islam:** For the reason that in leadership
and government responsibilities, protecting the Islamic laws and values
is the responsibility of the ruler of the Muslims and he is the trustee
of the religion and the honor of the people and the divine laws, he has
to, more than anyone else, have the qualification of knowledge of the
law, piety and ethical competence and the power and expertise to manage
affairs. There is a *hadith* designating that if in a society a person
becomes a leader while there is someone else better qualified and worthy
than him, even only one man, the society is doomed to failure and
decadence until the Day of Resurrection.[^27]

**2. Piety [*****taqwa*****]:** In a *hadith* the Prophet of Allah (S)
has said that one of the qualifications of a competent leader is piety
and chastity in regard to observing divine injunctions.[^28]

Addressing the people of Kufah in regard to the issue of leadership in a
society, Imam al-Husayn (*‘a*) said:

“A person is not an imam and leader unless his government is based on
the Qur’an, he establishes justice, he is faithful to the religion of
truth and he is totally dedicated to the path of Allah.”[^29]

Addressing ‘Uthman, Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“You should know that among the creatures of Allah, the most
distinguished person before Allah is the just imam who has been guided
by Allah and he guides others. He stands by the recognized ways of the
Prophet’s (S) behavior and destroys unrecognized innovations. The
Prophet’s (S) ways are clear and they have signs, while innovations are
also clear and they too have signs. Certainly, the worst man before
Allah is the oppressive imam who has gone astray and through whom others
go astray. He destroys the accepted sunnah and revives abandoned
innovations.”[^30]

**3. Foresight and management:** The third qualification is expertise in
the administration of affairs and good management of social issues as
well as foresight.

The ability of the leader and his skill at management of social affairs
in the way of Islam is a necessary qualification for a Muslim ruler and
this qualification calls for many preliminary steps, experience and
awareness. If a man attains this level of political adeptness and
insight, it is possible to entrust the responsibility of Muslim affairs
to him.

Imam ‘Ali (*‘a*) states:

“O people! The one most worthy of leadership is the person that is more
capable and more aware about the commands of Allah in regard to
it.”[^31]

The Religious Jurisprudent [Wali al-Faqih]: the Most Righteous and Competent Person
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With regard to the criteria and attributes which have been mentioned for
the Muslim ruler, we notice that in our era the circumstances for the
government of the most competent individual have been provided. In the
past, the possibility of setting up a government with such individuals
was very difficult and sometimes seemed impossible, and such discussions
too were never held and only the issue of ‘religious authority’
[*marja‘iyyat-e taqlid*] would be discussed.

It is for this reason that prominent religious scholars who were
reformist thinkers and sympathetic to Islam would make an effort to find
a person in the form of a religious authority to introduce as the best
person to serve the Islamic society.

However, nowadays, thanks to Allah, the circumstances and means are
available for bringing governments to hand with competent and worthy
individuals in charge and by the grace of this great Islamic revolution
and the pure blood of the martyrs, conditions prevail such that the most
worthy and competent person can be at the head of government; this
blessing has to be greatly appreciated.

We thank Allah that in the Islamic order we enjoy the blessings of the
leadership of the ‘religious jurisprudent’ [*wali al-faqih*]. Now
expressing thanks for this blessing can sufficiently be done only by
obeying and following the religious jurisprudent—he is the guarantor of
Islamic honor and the unity of the Islamic community.

During the days of Imam Khomeini’s life, we enjoyed the benefits of this
blessing and today with a thousand sorrows we have been deprived of the
blessings of that great man. Allah, the Exalted, has continued to bless
us with the permanence of the shadow the religious jurisprudent.

We thank Allah that the Guardian Council and the well-informed people of
the nation chose the most competent and worthy individual among the
companions and helpers of the great Imam Khomeini, may Allah be pleased
with him, namely Ayatullah Khamene’i, may Allah prolong his life.

All the people too paid allegiance to him with complete willingness and
all the true companions of Imam Khomeini continued on his path with
perfect unity. Thanks to Allah that not the least weakness and harm has
affected the course of events. We ask Allah, the Exalted, that this
unity and solidarity of the authorities may last and become firmer day
by day so the great ship of the revolution with the leadership and
mastership of our great leader should take us to the shores of safety
and desirable goals.

The Noble Prophet (S) advises Abu Dharr that respecting and venerating
the just leader who rules in accordance with divine law and on the basis
of justice and equity is tantamount to respecting and venerating Allah.
For this reason, respect for the just leader is respect for Allah and
one of the attributes and honors of Allah is governance because some of
the divine names of Allah are the Ruler and the Sovereign and divine
government practically manifests itself in the just laws of Allah and
the just Muslim ruler is in charge of this vital matter.

The leadership of the just Muslim and the guardian of Muslim affairs who
rules in accordance with the laws of Allah and intends to practically
enforce the laws of Allah in the Islamic society has a level of the
guardianship of the Noble Prophet (S) and the *Ahl al-Bayt* (*‘a*)
because the custodianship of Allah has originally and principally been
handed over to the Noble Prophet (S) and the Pure Imams (*‘a*) and its
lower level has been handed over to the just leader and guardian of
Muslim affairs, and it is for this reason that respecting him is
tantamount to respecting Allah, the Exalted.

Therefore, in contrast to the impression of some people that respecting
the Muslim ruler is not of great importance, if a person respects the
great leader and custodian of Muslim affairs for the sake of Allah and
the Islamic order, without personal goals and material ambitions, and
his respect is because the custodian of Muslim affairs enforces the
divine laws of Islam and is the promoter of the Qur’an, he has attained
great virtue.

I deem it a personal duty to mention that one of the best and most
commendable practices which has been enlivened in our country after the
victory of the Islamic revolution by the efforts of the custodian of
Muslim affairs is the practice of reciting and memorizing the Qur’an to
the extent that we often see on television even very young girls and
boys who are memorizers of the Qur’an.

Sometimes, it is seen that a young girl who has not yet learnt how to
pronounce words correctly has memorized a third of the Qur’an with the
Arabic accent! If you remember well, before the victory of the
revolution we had to endure a lot of pains to teach people how to
correctly learn to recite the Opening Chapter [*Surat al-Fatihah*] and
one other *surah* (chapter). Even for the educated it was hard to learn
to recite *Surat al-Fatihah* correctly. Now, we observe that young girls
of six or seven years have memorized a third of the Qur’an and recite it
better than us! Is this not a cause of pride? Do we not have to respect
a person who has enlivened this practice?

Without the least doubt, respecting such a person is tantamount to
respecting Allah and tantamount to respecting the Qur’an. Therefore, we
ought not to be negligent of this matter. If we do not observe this
respect, the divine rites of Islam will be wiped out. The continued
existence of religion in the society is dependent on the continued
existence of the rites of Islam. If these divine essentials do not
become prevalent and are not common among the people, they will bit by
bit be forgotten and remain unappreciated.

For this reason, we who perceive this great blessing which Allah has
blessed us with must acknowledge its worth and respect the great leader
of the Islamic system. Of course, as mentioned, the value of this
respect is dependent on not having worldly desires and motivations but
by discharging our duties for the pleasure of Allah, and respecting the
leader of the Muslims is tantamount to respecting the Islamic order and
Allah, the Exalted. 

[^1]: Surat al-Hadid 57:11.

[^2]: Surat al-Anfal 8:42.

[^3]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 321, sermon [khutbah] 107, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^4]: Ibid., p. 283, sermon [khutbah] 94.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 23, p. 133.

[^6]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:80.

[^7]: Surat al-Nisa’ 4:59.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 26, p. 250.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 43, p. 23.

[^10]: Surat al-Baqarah 2:152.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 75, p. 468.

[^12]: Ibid., vol. 26, p. 158.

[^13]: Ibid., vol. 74, p. 345.

[^14]: Ibid., vol. 4, p. 27.

[^15]: Surat al-Fath 48:29.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 7, p. 202.

[^17]: Murtada Farid, Al-Hadith, vol. 1, p. 306.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 16, p. 84.

[^19]: Ibid., vol. 87, p. 138.

[^20]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 41.

[^21]: Usul al-Kafi, p. 7, introduction [muqaddamah].

[^22]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 400.

[^23]: Tafsir al-Mizan, vol. 3, p. 144.

[^24]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:51.

[^25]: Zakat: the tax levied on various categories of wealth and spent
on the purposes specified in Surat al-Tawbah (or, Bara’ah) 9:60. [ed.]

[^26]: Surat al-Ma’idah 5:55.

[^27]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 88, p. 88.

[^28]: Usul al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 266.

[^29]: Muhammad ibn al-Nu‘man (Shaykh al-Mufid), Irshad, p. 186.

[^30]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 526, sermon [khutbah] 163, trans. Fayd
al-Islam.

[^31]: Nahj al-Balaghah, p. 173, sermon [khutbah] 183, trans. Shahidi.


