Publisher’s Preface
===================

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
  </p>
</blockquote>

***In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate***

Many years ago, the Professors and Researchers asked us to translate and
compose books on the lives of our pure Imams, peace be on them. Of
course, these compilations and translations are mere summary of the
lives of this Holy Choice from among the Household of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family.

Mankind, irrespective of his scientific progress, can never discharge
the Imams’ rights against him, nor can he understand them completely.
You cannot drink the water in the sea, but whatever you drink will fill
you!

By Allah’s grace, and in cooperation with Mr. Jasim al-Rasheed, we have
translated and published several books in this respect. The following
titles are some of them:

1. Sulh al-Hasan (The Peace Treaty of al-Hasan) by Murtada Al Yasin.

2. Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq by Shaykh Muhammad Husayn al-Mudaffar.

3. The Life of Imam Muhammad al-Baqir by Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi.

Last but not least, we have issued a fourth book: Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin
by Baqir Sharif al- Qarashi.

A great Shi‘ite religious scholar narrated that a great Sunni religious
scholar asked ‘Allama al-Amini, author of al-Ghadir: “What is the book
or the activity which has made you adopt Zayn al-‘Abidin as an Imam?”

‘Allama al-Amini answered the religious scholar by sending him a copy of
al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya. Hence the Scholar answered ‘Allama al-Amini in
another letter in which he said: “None is capable of composing this book
(i.e., al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya) except a wise Imam.”

Anyhow, we thank Allah, the glorified, for giving success to ‘Allama
Baqir Sharif al-Qarashi in order to compose this remarkable book. We
thank him for giving success to Mr. Jasim al-Rasheed in order to
translate this precious book. Moreover, we thank Him for His favors and
bounty toward us in helping us print and publish this book. We hope that
the book will exalt Islam and Muslims in this world and give them mercy
and good pleasure in the next world, Allah willing!


