Chapter 8:  His Worship
=======================

The Muslims unanimously agreed that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, was the most worshipful of all the people, and the most obedient of
them to Allah, the Exalted. The people never saw a person like him in
great turn to Allah in repentance and worship. The pious and the
righteous admired him, and it is sufficient for him that only he was
given the nick-name of Zayn al-‘Abidin (the ornament of the worshippers)
and Sayyid al-Sajjidin (the lord of those who prostrate themselves in
prayer).

As for his worship, it was not traditional; rather it resulted from his
firm faith in Allah, the Most High, and his perfect knowledge of Him. He
worshipped Allah not due to desire of His garden, nor did he worshipped
him out of fear of His fire; rather he found Him worthy of worshipping,
Hence he worshipped Him. He was similar to his grandfather, Imam ‘Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, the Lord of the knowers, and the Imam of
the Allah-fearing, who worshipped Allah with the worship of the free,
Hence his grandson, Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, followed him when
he said: “I hate to worship Allah and I have no objective except His
reward; therefore I will be like the desirous servant, who works when he
is desirous; otherwise he does not work. I hate to worship Him because
of fear of His torment, Hence I will be like the bad servant, who works
when he is afraid.”

One of those who were sitting interrupted him and said to him: “How do
you worship Allah?”

The Imam answered him faithfully: “I worship Allah through his bounties
and blessings (toward me), Hence He is worthy of (worship).[^1]”

The Imam’s worship resulted from his knowledge which was void of doubts
and imaginations. It did come out of desire or fear; rather it issued
from firm faith (in Allah). He, peace be on him, talked about the kinds
of worship, saying: “If people worship Allah, the Great and Almighty,
because of fear (of Him), their worship is (similar to that) of slaves.
If they worship Him because of desire, their worship (similar to that)
of traders, and if they worship Him to show gratefulness toward him,
their worship is that of the free.[^2]” These are the kinds of worship
and obedience; the heaviest of them in scale and the most lovable of
them for Allah is the worship of the free, which is gratefulness to the
Almighty Benefactor, not because of craving for His reward nor because
of fear of His punishment. The Imam, peace be on him, underlined this in
another tradition of his, saying: “The worship of the free is
thankfulness to Allah, not because of fear and desire.[^3]”

The Imam’s love for Allah was firm in his heart and sentiments, Hence it
was among his qualities. The narrators said: “He (Zayn al-‘Abidin)
always worshipped Allah and obeyed him.” A slave girl of his was asked
about his worship and she answered: “Shall I elaborate (on it) or shall
I (talk about it) briefly?”

“Briefly,” was the answer.

“I did not bring him food by day nor did I spread for him bed by night,”
the slave girl answered.[^4]

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, spent most his lifetime fasting
by day and praying by night. He was busy praying or giving charity in
secret. It is certain that there is no person in the history of the
ascetics and worshippers like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn in loyalty and obedience
to Allah. Now, we will mention some acts of his worship:

His Ritual Ablution
-------------------

As for ablution, it is light and purity from sins and is the first act
for prayer. The Imam, peace be on him, always performed the ritual
ablution. The narrators talked about his humility to Allah during his
ablution, saying: “When he used to perform ritual ablutions, his skin
would turn yellow. Hence his family asked him: ‘What is it that has
afflicted you?’”

He answered them with fear of Allah, saying: “Don’t you know Whom I am
preparing to stand before?[^5]”

He took great care of his ablution to the extent that no one helped him
with it. He himself brought water for his ritual ablutions and prepared
it before he slept. When he got up at night, he started with tooth
cleanser *(siwak),* and then he performed his ablution. Having finished
it, he began praying.[^6]

His Prayer
----------

As for prayer, it is the journey of every believer (to the seven
heavens) and is the sacrifice of every pious one, as it is in the
tradition. Prayer was among the most important desires of the Imam,
peace be on him. Through it he communicate with Allah, the Creator of
the universe and Giver of life. He shook all over when he wanted to
pray, Hence he was asked about that, and he replied: “Don’t you know
Whom I am preparing to stand before and to Whom I am going to whisper
(in prayer)?[^7]” We will mention some of his affairs during his prayers
and perfuming himself:

### Perfuming his Garments

When the Imam wanted to pray, he perfumed himself from a bottle which he
put in the room of his prayers[^8], which was full of musk.

### His Garments during his Prayer

When the Imam wanted to pray, he wore coarse woolen garments[^9] in
order to behave humbly before the Almighty Creator.

### His Humbleness during his Prayer

As for the prayer of the Imam, peace be on him, it represented full
devotion to Allah, the Exalted, and freedom from the material world. He
did not feel the things around him; rather he did not feel even himself,
for his heart clung to Allah. The narrators described him during the
time of his prayer, saying: “When he stood to perform the ritual prayer,
his skin would turn yellow, and he shook all over because of fear of
Allah. He stood during his prayer as the abased slave who stood before a
great king. He prayed with the prayer of the one who would leave (the
world). He thought that he would never pray again.” Imam al-Baqir talked
about the humbleness of his father during his prayer, saying: “When ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn stood to perform his ritual prayers, he was like the trunk
of a tree. Nothing of him moved except that which the wind moved.[^10]”

Aban b. Taghlub related to Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, the prayer of
his grandfather, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, saying: “When
‘Ali b. al-Husayn stood to perform the ritual prayers, his skin would
turn yellow.” Hence Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, admired his
grandfather and said: “By Allah, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn knew Him before Whom
he stood.[^11]” Yes, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin completely knew the mightiness
of the Wise Creator, Hence he worshipped Him due to knowledge and obeyed
Him because of faith.

Among the aspects of his humbleness during his prayer was that when he
prostrated, he did not raise his head until he oozed sweat[^12] as if he
sank in water, for he wept abundantly.[^13] The narrators reported on
the authority of Abu’ Hamza al-Thumali, who said: “I saw the Imam
praying and his clock falling off one of his shoulders. He did not set
it right, Hence I asked him, and he answered me: ‘Woe unto you! Didn’t
you know before Whom I had been? (Allah) does not accept the servant’s
prayer unless his heart clings to Him.[^14]”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin clung to Allah to the extent that one of his sons
fell into a well, and the people of Medina hurried to him and saved him
from the well, while the Imam was standing in prayer in his mihrab and
did not know that. When he had finished his prayer, he was told about
that, and he said: “I did not feel that, for I was whispering to the
Almighty Lord.[^15]

A fire occurred in the Imam’s house, but he paid no attention to the
fire, for he was busy praying. When he had finished his prayer, he was
asked about that, and he replied: “The greatest fire (in the hereafter)
distracted me from this fire![^16]” ‘Abd al-Karim al-Qushayri explained
this wonderful aspect, which accompanied the Imam during his prayer,
saying: “The heart sometimes becomes heedless of knowing the affairs of
creatures, for it is busy pondering that which comes to it. It becomes
inattentive of feeling itself or other than it when it remembers a
reward or a punishment.[^17]”

### A one thousand Ruk‘a Prayer

The biographers unanimously agreed that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be
on him, prayed one thousand Ruk‘as by day and night[^18], and that he
had five hundred date-palms, Hence he said two ruk‘as by each
date-palm.[^19] As he prayed abundantly, he had calluses like those of
the camel on the places of his prostration. Some calluses fell off every
year, and he put them into a bag. When he passed away, they were buried
with him.[^20]

### His Performing the Superfluous Prayer (nawafil)

No superfluous prayer escaped the Imam throughout his life. He performed
at night the prayers that escaped him by day. He advised his children to
perform such prayers and said to them: “My children, these (prayers) are
not obligatory for you, but I want you to habituate yourselves to
them.[^21]”

### His Abundant Prostration (in prayer)

The servant is close to his Lord when he is in the state of prostration,
as it is in the tradition. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
prostrated himself abundantly for his Lord to show submission to Him and
lowliness before Him. The narrators said: “One day, he (Zayn al-‘Abidin)
went to the desert, and a retainer of his followed him. The retainer
found him prostrating on a coarse stone and heard him saying one
thousand times: There is no god but Allah in all certainty! There is no
god but Allah in worship and slavery! There is no god but Allah in faith
and truth![^22]” He performed the prostration of thanks and said during
it one hundred times: “Praise belongs to Allah, thanks (be to Allah) !”
After that he said: “O Possessor of favor which never ceases, and which
none other than Him can count! O Possessor of kindness which never comes
to an end! O Generous! O Generous!” Then he prayed humbly (to Allah) and
mentioned his need.[^23]

### His Abundant Glorification

The Imam was always busy mentioning, glorifying, and praising Allah. He
glorified Allah with these brilliant words: “Glory be to Him whose light
illumines every darkness. Glory be to Him Who predetermines every power
through His power. Glory be to Him Who has concealed Himself from the
servants through the ways of their souls, Hence there is nothing to
conceal Him. Glory and praise belong to Allah.[^24]”

### His Performing the Night Prayer frequently

Among the superfluous prayers (nawafil) which Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin,
peace be on him, performed was the night prayer. He frequently performed
it during travel and at home[^25] until he met the Highest Comrade
(Allah).

### His Supplication after the Night Prayer

When he, peace be on him, had finished the night prayer, he supplicated
with this holy supplication, which is among the outstanding
supplications of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them. It is as follows:

“O Allah, O Possessor of kingdom perpetual in everlastingness, authority
invincible without armies or helpers, might abiding through aeons past,
years gone by, times and days elapsed! Your authority is mighty with a
might that knows no bound by being first nor utmost end by being last!
Your kingdom towers high with a towering before which all things fall
down without reaching its term; the least of it which You have kept to
Yourself is not reached by the furthest description of the descripers!

Attributes go astray in You, descriptions fall apart below You the
subtlest of imaginations are bewildered by Your magnificence! Hence are
You, Allah, the first in Your firstness, and Hence are You
everlastingly. You do not pass away. However, I am the slave feeble in
works, immense in hopes. Your tying links are outside my hand, except
what is tied by Your mercy; the bounds of hopes have been cut away from
me, except the pardon to which I hold fast. Little on my part is the
obedience toward You upon which I count, and great against me the
disobedience toward You to which I have reverted. However, pardoning
Your slave will not constrain You, even if he be bad, Hence pardon me!”

This paragraph of his supplication contains glorifying Allah, professing
belief in His unity, and mentioning some of His exalted attributes such
as kingdom perpetual in everlastingness and authority invincible without
armies or helpers, Hence attributes and descriptions are unable to
depict Allah, the Most High.

Then the Imam goes on showing absolute humility, submission, and slavery
to Allah, the Exalted, saying:

“O Allah, You commanded me, and I refrained, You prohibited me, and I
committed. Evil thoughts tempted me to offend, and I was negligent. I
cannot call upon daytime to witness my fasting, nor can I seek sanctuary
in night because of my vigil; no *sunna* praises me for keeping it
alive, only Your obligations, he who neglects which has perished. I
cannot seek access to You through the excellence of a supererogatory
work, given the many duties of Your obligations of which I have been
heedless and the stations of Your bounds which I have transgressed,
thereby violating sacred things and committing great sins, though You
have given my safety from their disgraces as a covering. This is the
station of him who is ashamed of himself before You, angry with himself,
and satisfied with You. He meets You with a humble soul, a neck bent
down, a back heavy with offenses, hesitating between longing for You and
fear of You. You are the most worthy of those in whom he might hope, the
most deserving for him to dread and fear. Hence give me, my Lord, what I
hope for, make me secure against what frightens me, and act kindly
toward me with the kindly act of mercy! Surely You are the most generous
of those from whom are asked!”

The Imam, the monk of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be
on them, showed his humility and submission before Allah. He thought
that all his good deeds such as spending night in prayer, day in
fasting, performing all the superfluous prayer *(nawafil),* desirable
deeds *(mustahabbat),* enlivening the Islamic laws, and other countless
good deeds were insufficient for performing the rights of Allah against
him. Hence which turn to Allah in repentance better than this turn?
Which devotion to Him is better than this devotion? Indeed, this Imam
was a unique example in the world of the pious and the righteous.

Now, let’s listen to another part of this supplication: “O Allah, since
You have covered me with Your pardon and shielded me with Your bounty in
the abode of annihilation and the presence of equals, grant me sanctuary
from the disgraces of the Abode of Subsistence at the standing places of
the Witnesses (the angels brought nigh, the messengers honored, the
martyrs, the righteous) before the neighbor from whom I have hidden my
evil deeds and the womb relative before whom I feel ashamed in my secret
thoughts! I trust them not, my Lord, to cover me over, but I trust You,
my Lord, to forgive me!

“O Allah, Your knowledge watches over hidden works, every covered thing
is exposed before Your awareness, the intricacies of things are not
concealed from You, and unseen mysteries slip not away from You. But
over me Your enemy has gained mastery: He asked a delay from You to lead
me astray, and You gave him the delay! He asked a respite from You until
the Day of Doom to misguide me, and You gave him the respite! Hence he
threw me down, though I had fled to You from small, ruinous and great,
deadly works, until, when I had yielded to disobeying You and merited
Your anger through my bad efforts, he turned the bridle of his treachery
away from me, met me with the word of his ingratitude, undertook to be
quit of me, turned his back to flee from me, threw me to the desert of
Your wrath alone, and sent me as an outcast into the courtyard of Your
vengeance. There is no intercessor to intercede for me with You, no
protector to make me feel secure against You, no fortress to veil me
from You, no shelter in which to seek asylum apart from You! This is the
station of him who takes refuge with You, the place of the confessor to
You: Let not Your bounty be too narrow for me, let not Your pardon fall
short of me! Let me not be the most disappointed of Your repentant
servants, nor the most despairing of those who come to You with
expectations! Forgive me, surely You are the best of the forgivers!”

In these paragraphs the Imam, peace be on him, talks about the weakness
of man’s soul before desires and its inability to resist stoned Satan,
who employs it through wicked inclinations such as greediness and
haughtiness. Satan controls man’s feelings and sentiments, employs him
in the fields of sins and offenses, and drives him away from seeking
nearness to Allah.

The Imam continued supplicating: “I trust them not, my Lord, to cover me
over[^26], but I trust You my Lord, to forgive me! You are the most
worthy of those in whom confidence is had, the most giving of those who
are besought, and the most clement of those from whom mercy is asked.”

In this paragraph the Imam, peace be on him, expresses his great
confidence in Allah and his hope in Allah’s forgiveness and favors. He
asks Allah to forgive him and to be pleased with him in the hereafter.
He, peace be on him, mentions that Allah covers over His disobedient
servants. Moreover, he asks Allah to grant him sanctuary from the
disgraces of the Abode of Subsistence at the standing places of the
Witnesses, the angels brought nigh, the messengers honored, the martyrs,
and the righteous. In this manner, he, peace be on him, urges the
disobedient to turn to Allah in repentance and to do good deeds, that
they may attain Allah’s good pleasure and mercy, which embraces all
things. Now, let’s return to consider another part of this holy
supplication:

“O Allah, You caused me to descend as mean water from loins of narrow
bones and tight passages into a constricted womb which You had covered
with veils; You turned me about from state to state until You took me to
the completion of the form and fixed within me the bodily parts, as You
have described in Your Book[^27]: a drop, then a clot, then a tissue,
then bones, then You garmented the bones with flesh, then You produced
me as another creature as You willed. Then, when I needed Your
provision, and could not do without the aid of Your bounty, You
appointed for me a nourishment from the bounty of the food and drink
which You bestowed upon Your handmaid in whose belly You gave me to rest
and in lodging of whose womb You deposited me. Had You entrusted me in
those states, my Lord, to my own force, or driven me to have recourse to
my own strength, force would have removed from me and strength taken far
away. Hence You have fed me through Your bounty with the food of the
Good, the Gentle; You have done that for me in graciousness toward me up
to this present point. I do not lack Your goodness, nor does Your
benefaction keep me waiting. Yet with all that, my trust has not become
firm enough that I might free myself for that which is more favored by
You. Satan has taken possession of my reins through my distrust and
frail certainty. I complain of his evil neighborhood with me and my
soul’s obedience toward him! I ask You to preserve me against his
domination, and I plead with You to turn his trickery away from me! I
ask You to make the path to my provision easy, since to You belongs
praise for Your beginning with immense favors and Your inspiring
gratitude for beneficence and bestowing favor! Bless Muhammad and his
Household, and make the way to my provision easy for me! (I ask You) to
make me content with your ordainment for me, to make me satisfied with
me lot in that which You have apportioned for me and to place what has
gone of my body and my life-span into the path of Your obedience! Surely
You are the Best of providers!”

In this paragraph there are some reliable proofs of the existence of the
Great Creator. They are as follows: Allah, the Most High, created man
from mean water, put him into a narrow womb, turned him from state to
state until he took him to the completion of the form. Man is the
greatest creature of Allah. He has wonderful organs such as brain, eye,
ear, and they all indicate the existence of the Wise Creator. The Imam,
peace be on him, derived his views from the Holy Qur’an, which talked in
detail about the creation of man. It is worth mentioning that the Qur’an
has accurately showed how the embryo is formed, Hence it supplies man
with this wonderful reality. Sayyid Qutub said: “Man stands astonished
before the reality which the Qur’an has displayed concerning the form of
fetus. (This reality) was discovered when embryology developed. This is
because the cells of bones are different from those of flesh. It has
been established that the cells of bones are formed in embryo before
those of flesh. None of the cells of flesh is seen unless those of bones
appear, and the skeleton of fetus is complete. The Qur’anic text has
mentioned this reality.[^28]”

Anyhow, when the Imam, peace be on him, had mentioned the greatest
blessings of Allah, he asked Allah to save him from the trickery and
delusions of Satan, who is the first enemy of man. Now, let’s read on
the last paragraphs of this supplication:

“O Allah, I seek refuge in You from the Fire through which You are harsh
toward him who disobeys You and by which You have threatened him who
turns away from Your good pleasure; from the Fire whose light is
darkness, whose ease is pain, and whose far is near; from the Fire parts
of which devour parts and parts of which leap upon parts; from the Fire
which leaves bones decayed and lets its people drink boiling water; from
the Fire which does not spare him who pleads to it, has no mercy on him
who seeks sympathy from it, and has no power to relieve him who humbles
himself before it and yields himself to it; it meets its inhabitants
with the hottest that it possesses: painful punishment and intense
noxiousness. I seek refuge in You from its gaping-jawed scorpions, its
scraping-toothed serpents and its drinks, which tear apart the
intestines and hearts of its inhabitants and root out their marrows. I
ask guidance from You to that which will keep far from it and make it
retreat!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, grant me sanctuary from it
through the bounty of Your mercy, release me from my stumbles through
Your good releasing, and abandon me not, O Best of the
sanctuary-granters. O Allah, You protect from the disliked, give the
good, do what You will, and *You are powerful over everything.*

“ O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household when the pious are mentioned
and bless Muhammad and his Household as long as night and day come and
go with a blessing whose replenishment is never cut off and whose number
cannot be counted, a blessing that will fill up the air and crowd the
earth and the heaven! Allah bless him until he is well pleased and Allah
bless him and his Household after good pleasure with a blessing that has
neither bound nor utmost limit! O Most Merciful of the merciful![^29]”

These paragraphs contain fearful descriptions of the Fire of Hell, which
Allah has prepared for the sinful and tyrannical ones from among his
creatures, who spread oppression and corruption in the earth, Hence they
will suffer various kinds of indescribable terrible torture in the Fire
of Hell, may Allah protect us from it.

With this we will end our talk about this holy supplication, which the
Imam used to recite after the night prayer, and which is among the
outstanding supplications of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),*
peace be on them.

His Frailty and Weakness
------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, became frail because of his many
prayers, for worship strained him very much, and he was Hence weak that
the wind would bend (his body) to left and right like an ear of
corn.[^30] This is because he had no power to stand. His son ‘Abd Allah
reported: “My father used to pray at night. When he had finished
(praying), he crept to his bed.[^31]” This means that he had no power to
stand because of tiredness, weakness and faintness.

His family and those who loved him felt pity for him because of the
intense weakness resulted from his many prayers. They feared that he
would die, Hence they talked with him about that, but he refused to
answer them, and he went on performing his prayers until he met his
fathers. The following is some of those who talked with him:

### 1. One of his Sons

One of his sons feared for his safety, Hence he asked him with regret
and fear: “Father, how long will you continue (praying)?”

The Imam answered him with kindness and affection: “Do you make me love
my Lord?[^32]”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, loved his Lord and drew near to
Him through all ways. There is no one in the world of the pious and the
righteous like him in turning to Allah in repentance and intense
clinging to Him.

### 2. Jabir al-Ansari

The great companion (of the Prophet), Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari,
felt pity for the Imam, peace be on him, and asked him to reduce his
prayers and not to strain himself. Imam al-Baqir, peace be on him,
reported his tradition, saying: [When Fatima, daughter of the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, saw that her nephew, ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn, strained himself with prayer, she went to Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah
al-Ansari and said to him:]

“O Companion of Allah’s Apostle, we have rights against you. Among our
rights against you is that when you see one of us strain himself (with
prayer), you must remind him of Allah and to ask him to spare his life.
This is ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, the surviving one of his father al-Husayn,
has carried out in worship (to the extent that) his nose has been
squashed; his forehead has been bruised; his legs and feet have been
swollen.”

Hence Jabir b. ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari went to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace
be on him, and found him in his mihrab exerted by worship and obedience
(to Allah). When the Imam saw Jabir, he received him and sat him beside
him and asked him very much about his conditions, Hence Jabir turned to
him and said to him: “O Son of Allah’s Apostle, didn’t you know that
Allah has created Heaven for you and for those who love you, and He has
created the Fire for those who hate you and show enmity toward you,
Hence why have you strained yourself (in worship)?”

The Imam kindly and gently answered him: “O Companion of Allah’s
Apostle, didn’t you know that Allah forgave my grandfather, Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, his previous and next sins?
Yet, he did not leave exertion (in worship), may my father and mother be
ransom for him, to the extent that his legs and feet were swollen, Hence
he was asked: ‘Do you do this, while Allah has forgiven you your
previous and next sins?’ Hence he replied: ‘Shall I not be a grateful
servant?’”

When Jabir knew that it was difficult for him to convince the Imam to
leave exertion in worship, he said to him: “O Son of Allah’s Apostle,
spare your life, for you are from among the family through whom
tribulation is driven away, through whom cures are discovered, and
through whom the sky is asked to rain.”

The Imam answered him with a faint voice: “I will continue the method of
my fathers until I meet them.”

Hence Jabir admired the Imam, turned to those who around him, and said
to them: “None of the sons of the prophets was like ‘Ali b. al-Husayn
except Yousif b. Ya‘qu’b. By Allah, the progeny of al-Husayn is better
than the progeny of Yousif b. Ya‘qu’b. Surely one of them will fill the
earth with justice and fairness as it was filled with oppression and
tyranny.[^33]”

Yes, by Allah, no one of the sons of the prophets was like ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn in piety, Allah-fearingness, and all other ideals that raised
him to the zenith which the great figures from among his fathers
reached. Jabir declared that the progeny of al-Husayn was better than
the progeny of Yousif b. Ya‘qu’b, for among them is the great reformer,
the Qa’im of the family of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family,
of whom the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, gave good news,
and who will fill the earth with justice and fairness as it was filled
with oppression and tyranny, that will occur during the days of his
government and authority.

### ‘Abd al-Malik

‘Abd al-Malik b. Marwan was among those who pitied for Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. That was when the Imam went to him to
intercede with him for some Muslims whom the authority had arrested.
When ‘Abd al-Malik saw him, he admired the marks of prostration between
his eyes, Hence he said to him: “The exertion (in worship) has appeared
on your face, while Allah has already promised you good, you are part of
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, your lineage is
close (to him), your relation (with him) is certain, you are the most
meritorious of the family of your House and the people of your time, you
have been given merits, knowledge, religion, piety of which none before
or after you has been given.”

‘Abd al-Malik flattered the Imam, reminded him of his merits and
laudable deeds. When he ended his talk, the Imam said to him: “All what
you have mentioned is attained through the bounty, support, and success
of Allah, the Glorified. Hence where is our gratefulness to Him for what
He has bestowed (upon us)? Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, stood in pray to the extent that his feet were swollen and
became thirsty during fast to the extent that his mouth became dried,
Hence he was asked: ‘O Allah’s Apostle, didn’t Allah forgive you your
past and next sins?’ Hence he, may Allah bless him and his family,
replied: ‘Shall I not be a grateful servant?’

“Praise belongs to Allah for what He has rendered and tested, and praise
belongs to Him for here and the hereafter. By Allah, even if my limbs
are severed, and my tears flow onto my chest, I will be unable to give
thanks to Allah, the Great and Almighty, for the tenth of the tenth of
one blessing of all His blessings which calculators cannot count, and no
one can attain a blessing of them through all the praise of the
praisers. No, by Allah, doesn’t Allah see that nothing distract me from
thanking Him and remembering Him by day and night, secretly and openly?
Were it not for that my family had right against me, and that people in
private and in general had rights against me, I would look at the sky
with my eye and at Allah with my heart, and then I would not prevent
them (from that), until Allah made me die, and He is the Best of
judges.”

The Imam bitterly wept. His words and his painful sight had a great
effect on ‘Abd al-Malik, the tyrannical caliph, who said with
admiration: “There is a great difference between a servant who seeks the
hereafter and a servant who seeks this world.”

Then ‘Abd al-Malik yielded to the Imam and released the persons for whom
he interceded.[^34]

These are some of those who felt pitied for the Imam because of his many
prayers and abundant worship and asked him frequently to decrease them
and to have a rest, but the Imam did not respond them for that, for he
found in prayers a unique, psychological rest.

His Fast

The Imam spent most his lifetime fasting. When his slave-girl was asked
about his worship, she said: “I never brought him food by day.” He loved
fast and urged (people) to fast. Hence he said: “Indeed, Allah, the
Exalted, entrusted the fasting to His angels.[^35]” He, peace be on him,
did not break his fast except on the day of the two ‘Īds and other than
them when he had an excuse. We will talk briefly about some of his
affairs in the blessed month of Ramadhan, which is the month of Allah
and of obedience (to Him).

In the Month of Ramadhan
------------------------

The Imam had special affairs in the blessed month of Ramadhan. In it he
did all things that drew him near to Allah. The narrators said: “He did
all kinds of charity and good. He never said any word except saying:
‘Glory belongs to Allah, I ask Allah’s forgiveness, and Allah is Great.’
When he broke his fast, he said: ‘O Allah, if You will do, You
do.’[^36]”

### His Supplication for seeing the Crescent of the Month Ramadhan

He, peace be on him, received the month of Ramadhan with eagerness and
desire, for it is the spring of the obedient. When he saw its crescent,
he supplicated with this holy supplication, which represents the
spirituality of Islam and the guidance of the members of the House (ahl
al-Bayt), peace be on them. This supplication is as follows:

“Praise belongs to Allah Who guided us to His praise and placed us among
the people of his praise, that we might be among the thankful for His
beneficence and that He might recompense us for that with the recompense
of the good-doers! And praise belongs to Allah Who showed favor to us
through His religion, singled us out for His creed, and directed us onto
the roads of His beneficence, in order that through His kindness we
might travel upon them to His good pleasure, a praise which He will
accept from us and through which He will be pleased with us! And praise
belongs to Allah Who appointed among those roads His month, the month of
Ramadhan, the month of fasting, the month of submission, the month of
purity[^37], the month of putting to test, the month of standing in
prayer, in which the Qur’an was sent down as guidance to the people, and
as clear signs of the Guidance and the Separator!

He clarified its excellence over other months by the many sacred things
and well-known excellencies which He placed therein, for He made
unlawful in it what He declared lawful in others to magnify it, He
prohibited foods and drinks in it to honor it, and He appointed for it a
clear time which He (majestic and mighty is He) allows not to be set
forward and accepts not to be placed behind. Then He made one of its
nights surpass the nights of a thousand months and named it the Night of
Decree; *in it the angels and the Spirit descend by the leave of their
Lord upon every command, a peace* constant in blessings until the rising
of the dawn upon whomever He will of His servants according to the
decision He has made firm.”‘

These brilliant words contain magnifying and honoring the month of
Ramadhan and depicting it with the best qualities of which is the
following:

1. It is the month of Islam, Hence whoever fasts in it enters the frame
of Islam; whoever does not fast in it with knowledge and deliberation
does not belong to Islam.

2. It is the month of purity, for therein is the purity of the soul from
sins and offenses.

3. It is the month of test; in it the Muslims are tested; in it the
obedient are distinguished from the disobedient.

4. It is the month of standing in prayer; this month is the spring of
the obedient and the good, for they spend its nights in worship and
obedience to Allah.

5. Among the characteristics of this month is that the Holy Qur’an was
sent down in it, for It was sent down on the Night of Decree, which is
the greatest of all its nights, and *in which* *the angels and the
Spirit descend by the leave of their Lord upon every command, a peace
until the rising of the dawn.*

6. Among the characteristics of this holy month is that Allah, the Most
High, makes it prohibited for the fasting to have foods and drinks to
magnify and honor it. Now, let’s listen to another part of this
supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, inspire us with knowledge of
its excellence, veneration of its inviolability, and caution against
what You have forbidden within it, and help us to fast in it by our
restraining our limbs from acts of disobedience toward You and our
employing them in that which pleases You, Hence that we lend not our
ears to idle talk and hurry not with our eyes to diversion, we stretch
not our hands toward the forbidden and stride not with our feet toward
the prohibited, our bellies hold only what You have made lawful and our
tongues speak only what You have exemplified, we undertake nothing but
what brings close to Your reward and pursue nothing but what protects
from Your punishment! Then rid all of that from the false show of the
false showers and the fame seeking of the fame seekers, lest we
associate therein anything with You or seek therein any object of desire
but You!”

The Imam, peace be on him, presented the precepts which the fasting
should follow in this great month. They are as follows: The fasting
should restrain their limbs from what Allah has made unlawful, such as
holding back their tongues from lying, backbiting, and slander; holding
back their ears from idle talk and falsehood; preventing their hands
from theft, aggression against people, and the prohibited. He, peace be
on him, also mentioned that the fasting should do good to please Allah,
and that their acts should be free from hypocrisy and seeking fame among
people, for such acts lead to nothing except the punishment of Allah.
After this, let’s listen to another part of this holy supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, in it make us attend to the
appointed moments of the five prayers within the bounds You have set,
the obligations You have decreed, the duties You have assigned, and the
times You have specified; and in the prayers make us alight in the
station of the keepers of their stations, the guardians of their
pillars, their performers in their times, as Your servant and Your
messenger set down in his *Sunna* (Your blessings be upon him and his
Household) in their bowings, their prostrations, and all their excellent
acts, with the most complete and ample ritual purity and the most
evident and intense humility! Give us success in this month to tighten
our bonds of kin with devotion and gifts, attend to our neighbors with
bestowal and giving, rid our possessions from claims, purify them
through paying the alms, go back to him who has gone far from us, treat
justly him who has wronged us, make peace with him who shows enmity
toward us (except him who is regarded as an enemy in You and for You,
for he is the enemy whom we will not befriend, the party whom we will
not hold dear), and seek nearness to You through blameless works which
will purify us from sins and preserve us from renewing faults, Hence
that none of Your angels will bring for You the kinds of obedience and
sorts of nearness-seeking unless they be less than what we bring!”

This paragraph presents important affairs which the fasting should
follow:

1. They should attend to the appointed moments of the five prayers,
which are the pillar of the religion, within the bounds Allah has set,
accompanied by what the greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, practiced such as manners, invocations of Allah in their bowing
and prostration; rather in all their affairs. In other word they should
perform the five prayers in complete manners such as humility and
submission to Allah, the Exalted, only.

2. They should tighten their bonds of kin with devotion and gifts, for
this is one the best acts of obedience to Allah.

3. They should attend to their neighbors with bestowal and giving.

4. They should purify their possessions through paying *Kums*
(one-fifth) and *Zakat* (the alms), which are obligatory.

5. They should go back to him who has gone far from them, from among
their friends and brothers.

6. They should treat justly him who has wronged them and should not
aggress against him with word or action, for this is among the noble
moral traits.

7. They should make peace with him who shows enmity toward them (except
him who is regarded as an enemy in Allah and for Him, for he is the
enemy whom they will not befriend, the party whom they will not hold
dear.

8. They should seek nearness to Allah through blameless works which are
certainly desirable in the blessed month of Ramadhan.

After this, let’s listen to the last paragraphs of this holy
supplication:

“O Allah, I ask You by the right of this month and by the right of him
who worships You within it from its beginning to the time of its
passing, whether angel You have brought nigh to You, prophet You have
sent, or righteous servant You have singled out, that You bless Muhammad
and his Household, make us worthy of the generosity You have promised
Your friends, make incumbent for us what You have made incumbent for
those who go to great lengths in obeying You, and place us in the ranks
of those who deserve through Your mercy the highest elevation!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, turn us aside from deviation
in professing Your Unity, falling short in magnifying You, in Your
religion, blindness toward Your path, heedlessness of Your
inviolability, and being deceived by Your enemy, the accursed Satan!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and when in every night of
this month’s nights You have necks which Your pardon will release and
Your forgiveness disregard, place our necks among those necks and place
us among the best folk and companions of this our month!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, efface our sins along with
the effacing of its crescent moon, and make us pass forth from the ill
effects of our acts with the passing of its days, until it leaves us
behind, while within it You have purified us of offenses and rid us of
evil deeds!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and should we go off to one
side in this month, set us aright; should we swerve, point us straight;
and should Your enemy Satan enwrap us, rescue us from him!

“O Allah, fill this month with our worship of You, adorn its time with
our obedience toward You, help us during its daytime with its fast, and
in its night with prayer and pleading toward You, humility toward You,
and lowliness before You, Hence that its daytime may not bear witness
against our heedlessness, nor its night against our neglect!

“O Allah, make us like this in the other months and days as long as You
give us life, and place us among Your righteous servants, *those who
shall inherit Paradise, therein dwelling forever, those who are given
what they give, while their hearts quake, that they are returning to
their Lord, those who vie in good works, outracing to them!*

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household in every time, in all
moments, and in every state, to the number that You have blessed
whomever You have blessed and to multiples of all that, through
multiples which none can count but You! Surely You are Accomplisher of
what You desire.[^38]”

Indeed, the supplications of the Imam are a school for religious
awareness, for they are full of faith in Allah and sincerity to Him.
These brilliant paragraphs of his supplication contain the following:

He asked Allah by the right of the month of Ramadhan and by the right of
him who worshipped within it from among His righteous servants:

1. To place him among those who were worthy of the high position with
Him.

2. To make his good deeds for the pleasure of Him, the Exalted; to make
them free from hypocrisy and others which corrupt works.

3. To turn him aside from doubt and corrupt imaginations in the affairs
of the religion.

4. To help him not to follow a way other than the way He has made lawful
and to help him not to be heedless of the things He has made unlawful.

5. To help him not to follow the way of the accursed Satan.

6. To do him a favor through placing him among those whom He released in
this great month.

7. To grant him a success in this month to worship Him and to show
obedience, pleading, humility, and lowliness toward Him, the Exalted.

These are some important matters which these words of his supplication
contain.

### His good Acts in the Month of Ramadhan

He, peace be on him, did many good acts in the Month of Ramadhan. The
following is some of them:

#### A. Giving Food

Islam urges (Muslims) to give food to the fasting and makes it desirable
for them. Every day in the Month of Ramadhan, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin
ordered a sheep to be slaughtered and cooked. When the food was ready,
he said: “Bring the bowls.” He ordered the food to be divided among the
poor, the widows, and the orphans to the extent that there was nothing
left for him, Hence he broke his fast with bread and dates.[^39]

#### B. His Freeing Salves

Among his good deeds in the blessed month of Ramadhan was that he freed
many of his slaves. It is worth mentioning that he respected his slaves,
treated them as he treated his children, and forgave them when they
misbehaved toward him. The narrators said: “‘Ali b. al-Husayn did not
punish a female slave nor did he punish a male salve when they committed
a sin; rather he recorded the day when they committed sins. When the
month of Ramadhan was about to end, he gathered them and brought the
book where he had written their sins and said to them: Raise your voices
and say: O ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, your Lord has counted against you all what
you have done, as you have counted against us all what we have done. He
has a book which speaks the truth and does not leave a small one nor a
great one of what you have done, but numbers them all, and you will find
present with Him all what you had done, as we have found present with
you all what we had done.

Hence pardon and forgive (us), as you want the most powerful King
(Allah) to pardon and forgive you. Hence forgive us, and He will forgive
you and have mercy on you, and Your Lord never wrongs anyone. As you
have a book which speaks the truth against us and does not leave a small
one nor a great one, but numbers them all against us, Hence ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn, remember the abasement of your standing place before your
Lord, the Just King, Who does not wrong (anyone) to the weight of a
grain of mustard seed, and Allah is sufficient to take account and to be
a witness. Hence pardon and forgive (us), and the most Powerful King
will pardon and forgive you, for He says: They should pardon and
forgive. Do you not love that Allah should forgive you? [^40]”

He (Zayn al-‘Abidin) dictated to them these words which represent his
absolute devotion and clinging to Allah. He stood, wept and said: “Our
Lord, You have commanded us to pardon him who wrongs us. We have
pardoned him who has wronged us, as You have commanded, Hence pardon us,
for You are worthier of that than us and the commanded ones. You have
commanded us not to dismiss any beggar from our doors. Now, we have come
to You as beggars and miserable. We have sat at Your courtyard and Your
door seeking bounty and favor and giving, Hence do us a favor through it
and disappoint us not, for You are more worthier of that than us and the
commanded ones.

“My Lord, I have entertained (Your servants), Hence entertain me if I am
of Your beggars. I have done (Your servants) a lot of good, Hence place
me among the people of Your giving, O Generous!”

Then he turned his holy face, which became wet with the tears of his
eyes, to his slaves and said to them with kindness and affection:

“I have forgiven you! Have you forgiven me my evil (acts)? I am full of
evil, meanness, and oppression! I am the slave of the One Who is
Powerful, Generous, Just, Beneficent, and Good-doer!”

What an angelic this soul is! Indeed, it represented the spirituality,
beauties, qualities, and morals of the prophets!

The slaves interrupted him, saying: “We have pardoned you, O Our
master!”

Hence he said to them: “Say: O Allah, pardon ‘Ali b. al-Husayn as he has
pardoned us! Release him from the Fire, as he has released our necks
from slavery!”

They said that, and he said after them: “Amen, O Allah, Lord of the
world’s inhabitants! Go, surely I have pardoned you and released your
necks, asking (Allah) to pardon me and release my neck!” When the day of
‘Īd al-Fitr came, he gave them excellent gifts to make them in no need
of what was in the people’s hands.[^41]

In the world of the pious there is no person like Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin,
peace be on him, in piety, loyalty, and obedience to Allah, for he
filled his holy heart with faith and knowledge of Allah.

Anyhow, in the month of Ramadhan, the Imam, peace be on him, did a lot
of good to the weak, entertained the miserable refreshed the deprived,
freed slaves, and other good deeds that brought him near to Allah.

### His Supplication in the Early Morning

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, whispered to his Lord and prayed
Him humbly and sincerely on every night in the Month of Ramadhan with
this great supplication, which is better known as the Supplication of
Abi Hamza al-Thumali, for it was he who reported it on the Imam’s
authority. The supplication is among the outstanding supplications of
the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. It represents
the absolute return and devotion to Allah. It contains exhortations that
prevent the soul from clinging to haughtiness and desires and, in
addition, it is distinguished by beautiful style, wonderful words, and
eloquent performance. Moreover, it displays lowliness, humility, and
submission to Allah, the Glorified. The other supplications do not
contain such matters. We will quote some brilliant paragraphs of it, for
it is well-known and widespread in supplication books

Before mentioning some paragraphs of this supplication, we’d like to say
that this supplication has occupied an important position in the hearts
of the good and the righteous from among the Muslims, Hence they recite
it in the early morning of every night in the month of Ramadhan, to the
extent that they have memorized it by heart. The following is some
paragraphs of it:

“My Allah, educate me not with Your punishment, and scheme not against
me with Your power! How can I find good, My Lord, and it cannot be found
but through You? How can I find salvation, and it cannot be found but
through You? Good-doers cannot do without Your help and Your mercy, nor
can evil-doers! Those who misbehave before You, show audaciousness
toward and, do not make You Pleased are unable to dissent from Your
power! O my Lord, through You I have recognized You. It was You who
guided me to Yourself and summoned me to Yourself! Were it not for You,
I would not know what You were.”

Have you noticed how the Monk of the members of the House *(ahl
al-Bayt),* peace be on them, whispered to his Lord, pleaded to Him, and
argued with Him in this manner full of faith and knowledge? Let’s listen
to another part of this holy supplication: “O Lover of him who loves
You, O Delight of the eye of him who seeks refuge in You and devotes
himself to You! You are the Benefactor, and we are the evil-doers!
Hence, my Lord, forgive us our ugly acts through the beautiful things
You have! Which ignorance, my Lord, Your magnificence does not embrace?
Which time is longer than Your slowness? What is the worth of our deeds
in comparison with Your favors? How can we regard our works as may and
compare them to Your generosity? How do the sinners regard Your ample
mercy as narrow? O All-forgiving! O All-merciful! Hence, by Your might,
if You rebuked me, I would not leave Your door, nor would I refrain from
praising You because I have knowledge of Your magnificence and
generosity!”

In this manner the Imam, peace be on him, continued praising and
pleading to the Great Creator, asking Him for forgiveness and good
pleasure. Listen how he whispers to Him:

“O Allah, whenever I say: I have prepared myself, worn the cloak, stood
in prayer before You, and whispered to You, You make me sleepy when I
pray, and deprive me of whispering to You when I whisper (to You) ! Why
whenever I say: I have set right my inner self and my assembly has come
close to the assembly of the repenters, a tribulation befalls me, slip
my foot, and prevents me from serving You? My Master, You may have
dismissed me from Your door and put me aside from serving You, or You
may have seen me disdaining Your Sacredness, Hence You have removed me,
or You may have seen me turning back on You, Hence You have detested me,
or You may have found me in the standing place of the liars, Hence You
have rejected me, or You may have seen that I am ungrateful (to You) for
Your favors, Hence You have deprived me (of them), or You may have
missed me among the assemblies, Hence You have deserted me, or You may
have seen me among the heedless, Hence You have disappointed me of Your
mercy, or You may have seen that I get along with the assemblies of the
unemployed, Hence You have placed me among them, or You may do not like
listening to my supplication, Hence You have driven me away from You, or
You may have punished me because of my sin and crime, or You may have
punished me on account of my little modesty! Hence if You pardon (me),
my Lord, You have often pardoned those sinners before me, for Your
generosity, my Lord, is far above punishing the neglectful!”

The Imam, peace be on him, presented those affairs which prevent man
from clinging to Allah during his prayers and whispered prayers. The
following is some of them:

1. Disdaining Allah’s rights, that is when man makes little of them.

2. Turning away from Allah.

3. Telling lies which is the junction of vices and grave sins.

4. Ungratefulness for graces which Allah bestows upon His servant.

5. Turning away from sitting with the true religious scholars who remind
men of the hereafter and urge them to do good deeds.

6. Forgetting the remembrance of Allah and of death lead man to misery
and ruin.

7. Sitting with the unemployed who spend their times in playing and lose
their life spans in trivial affairs, Hence sitting with them leads to
turning away from Allah.

These are some affairs which send man far from Allah and turn him away
from doing good, may Allah protect us from them. Now, let’s listen to
another paragraph of this supplication: “O My Allah and my Master! If
You demanded my sins, I would demand Your pardon! If You demanded my
meanness, I would demand Your generosity! If You made me enter the Fire,
I would tell the people of the Fire about my love for You! O My Allah
and my Master! If You forgive only Your friends and those who obey You,
then to whom shall the sinners go? If You show generosity only to those
who are sincere to You, then whom the evildoers seek for help! My Allah!
If You made me enter the Fire, then Your enemy (the accursed Satan)
would be pleased with this! If You made me enter the Garden, then this
would please Your Prophet! I, by Allah, know that the pleasure of Your
Prophet is more lovable for You than that of Your enemy![^42]”

The Master of the pious and Imam of the knowers (Zayn al-‘Abidin), peace
be on him, asked the sympathy of the Great Creator, whose mercy embraces
all things. He asked Him to pardon His disobedient servants and to show
good pleasure toward them, for His munificence is not confined to the
believers and the obedient. With these little paragraphs we will end our
speech about the supplication of the Imam in the early morning of the
blessed month of Ramadhan.

### His Supplication in Bidding Farewell to the Month of Ramadhan

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, felt pain when the days of the
Month of Ramadhan came to an end, for this month is the spring of the
obedient, and he used to recite this great supplication:

“O Allah, O He who desires no repayment! O He who shows no remorse at
bestowal! O He who rewards not His servant tit for tat! Your kindness is
a new beginning, Your pardon gratuitous bounty, Your punishment justice,
Your decree a choice for the best! If You bestow, You stain not Your
bestowal with obligation, and if you withhold, You withhold not in
transgression. You show gratitude to him who thanks You while You have
inspired him to thank You. You reward him who praises You while though
You have taught him Your praise. You cover him whom, if You willed, You
would expose, and You are generous toward him from whom, if You willed,
You would withhold. Both are worth of Your exposure and with holding,
but You have founded Your acts upon gratuitous bounty, channeled Your
power into forbearance, received him who disobeyed You with clemency,
and disregarded him who intended wrongdoing against himself. You await
their turning back without haste and refrain from rushing them toward
repentance, Hence that the perisher among them may not perish because of
You and the wretched may not wretched through Your favor, but only after
Your prolonged excusing him and successive arguments against him, as an
act of generosity through Your pardon, O Generous, and an act of
kindliness through Your tenderness, O Clement!”

It is necessary for us to considered carefully this brilliant paragraph
of the supplication of the Imam, peace be on him. It contains the
following:

#### 1. The Generosity of Allah

As for the generosity and munificence of Allah, toward servants, as the
Imam mentioned it, it is distinguished by the following:

A. Allah, the Most High, bestows on His creatures while He does not
desire any repayment, for He, the Exalted, is in no need of His
servants, who are in need of Him.

B. When He, the Exalted, bestows a grace upon a servant, He does not
show any remorse at his bestowal, as the creatures show remorse at their
bestowals when they get no benefit from them.

C. Allah does not stain his bestowal with obligation, for He, the Most
High, bestows gratuitously.

D. It is He, the Exalted, who starts His servants with kindness and
generosity.

#### 2. The Pardon and Punishment of Allah

As for the pardon of Allah toward the sinners is gratuitous bounty, and
as for His punishment toward them is justice, for He punishes them
according to their sins.

#### 3. The Decree of Allah

As for the decree of Allah and issuing the acts from Him, they are
choice for the best, and He is not forced to issue them, as some
philosophers said.

#### 4. His Gratitude to those who thank Him

Indeed, Allah, the Glorified, show gratitude to those who thank Him,
that is when He increases His favors and blessings to them. He, the Most
High reward those who praise Him and increases His favors and blessings
to them.

#### 5. His Covering the Servants

Among the favors of Allah for the servant is that He covers him when he
commits sins. If he willed, he would expose him and make the people
degrade him. Also among His favors for the sinner is that He is generous
toward him. If He willed, He would withhold him His livelihood and make
him die of hunger. However, He channeled His power and will into
forbearance, received those who disobeyed Him with clemency, and
disregarded those who intended wrongdoing against themselves. He awaits
their turning back without haste and refrain from rushing them toward
repentance, Hence that the perisher among them may not perish because of
Him and the wretched may not be wretched through His favor, but only
after His prolonged excusing them and successive arguments against them,
as an act of generosity through His pardon. Now, let’s listen to another
paragraph of this holy supplication:

“It is You who have opened for Your servants a door to Your pardon,
which You have named ‘repentance’. You have placed upon that door a
pointer from Your revelation, lest they stray from it: You have said
(blessed are Your names), *Repent toward Allah with unswerving
repentance! It may be that your Lord will acquit you of your evil deeds
and will admit you into gardens beneath which rivers flow, upon the day
when Allah will not degrade the Prophet and those who have faith along
with him, their light running before them and on their right hands, and
they say: ‘Our Lord, complete for us our light, and forgive us! Surely
You are powerful over everything.’*[^43] What is the excuse of him who
remain heedless of entering that house after the opening of the door and
the setting up of the pointer? It is You who have raised the price
against Yourself to the advantage of Your servants, desiring their
profit in their trade with You, their triumph through reaching You, and
their increase on account of You, for You have said (blessed is Your
Name and high are You exalted), *those brings a good deed shall have ten
the like of it, and whosoever brings an evil deed shall only be
recompensed the like of it.*[^44] You have said, *the likeness of those
who expend their wealth in the way of Allah is as the likeness of a
grain of corn that sprouts seven ears, in every ear a hundred grains;
Hence Allah multiplies unto whom He wills.*[^45]

You have said, *Who is he that will lend to Allah a good loan, and He
will multiply it for him manifold*[^46]*,* and You have send down in the
Qur’an similar verses on the multiplying of good deeds. It is You who
have pointed them through Your speech from Your unseen and Your
encouragement in which lies their good fortune toward that which -had
You cover it from them- their eyes would not have perceived, their ears
would not have heard, and their imaginations would not have grasped, for
You have said, *Remember me and I will remember you, be thankful to Me
and be you not thankless towards Me!*[^47] You have said, If you are
thankful, surely I will increase you, but if you are thankless, My
chastisement is surely terrible.[^48] And You have said, *Supplicate Me
and I will respond to you; surely those who wax too proud to worship Me
shall enter Gehennam utterly abject.*[^49]

Hence You have named supplicating You ‘worship’ and refraining from it
‘waxing proud’, and You have threatened that the refraining from it
would lead entrance into Gehannam in utter abjection. Hence they
remember You for Your kindness, they thank You for Your bounty, they
supplicate You by Your command, and they donate for You in order to seek
Your increase; in all this lies their deliverance from Your wrath and
their triumph through Your good pleasure. Were any creature himself to
direct another creature to the like of that to which You Yourself have
directed Your servants, he would be described by beneficence, qualified
by kindness, and praised by every tongue. Hence to You belong Praise as
long as there is found a way to praise You and as long as there remains
for praising words by which You may be praised and meanings which may be
spent in praise.

O He who shows Himself praiseworthy to His servants through beneficence
and bounty, flooding them with kindness and graciousness! How much Your
favor has been spread about among us, Your kindness lavished upon us,
and Your goodness singled out for us! You have guided us to Your
religion which You have chosen, Your creed with which You art pleased,
and Your path which You have made smooth, and You have shown us
proximity to You and arrival at Your generosity!”

In this paragraph the Imam talked about the great kindness of Allah to
the disobedient from among His creatures when He opened for them the
door of repentance and of asking forgiveness Hence that He may save them
from ruin and misery in the next world. Repentance erases sins and save
man from the awful situations provided that he should show remorse at
the sins he has committed, and that he should not commit a sin again.

The Imam, peace be on him, talked about one of Allah’s favors toward His
servants, that was when He (Allah) urged them to be kind to people, to
do good for them, and to give alms to the poor and the weak. In the
meantime He promised to reward them in the Abode of Subsistence and
Perpetuity, Hence that they would be successful and happy there. Hence
what ample are His blessings! What great is His bounty toward His
servants!

In his speech, the Imam, peace be on him, dealt with gratitude to Allah
for His graces, for such gratitude would lead to an increase in graces.
He also dealt with supplication to Allah and pleading to Him, for He has
named supplicating Him ‘worship’ and refraining from it ‘waxing proud’,
as the Holy Qur’an has stated. After this, let’s listen to another
paragraph of this supplication:

“O Allah, among the choicest of those duties and the most special of
those obligations You have appointed the month of Ramadhan, which You
have singled out from other months, chosen from among all periods and
eras, and preferred over all times of the year through the Qur’an and
the Light which You sent down within it, the faith which You multiplied
by means of it, the fasting which You obligated therein, the standing in
prayer which You encouraged at its time, and the Night of Decree which
You magnified therein, the night which is *better than a thousand
months*. Through it You have preferred us over the other communities and
through its excellence You have chosen us to the exclusion of the people
of the creeds. We fasted by Your command in its daylight, we stood in
prayer with Your help in its night, presenting ourselves by its fasting
and its standing to the mercy which You have held up before us, and we
found through it the means to Your reward. And You are full of what is
sought from You, munificent what is asked of Your bounty, and near to
him who strives for Your nearness. This month stood among us in a
standing place of praise, accompanied us with the companionship of one
approved, and profited us with the most excellent profit of the world’s
creatures. Then it parted from us at the completion of its time, the end
of its term, and the fulfillment of its number. Hence we bid farewell to
it with the farewell of one whose parting pains us, whose leaving fills
us with gloom and loneliness, and to whom we have come to owe a
safeguarded claim, an observed inviolability, and a discharged right.”

In these words, the Imam, peace be on him, praised the bounty of the
blessed month of Ramadhan, which Allah singled out from other months,
and endowed it with ample bounty when He obligated the fasting in it and
multiplied the reward of the good deeds in it. He also singled it out
with the Night of Decree, *which is better than a thousand months*.
Through it He preferred the Muslims over the other communities Hence
that they might attain the highest degrees and the most honorable
position with Him. Then the Imam, peace be on him, mentioned his grief
for leaving this great month when he gained rewards through doing a lot
of good deeds that brought him near to Allah. Now, let’s listen to
another part of this blessed month:

“Hence we say: Peace be upon you, O greatest month of Allah! O festival
of His friends! Peace be upon you, O most noble of accompanying times! O
best of months in days and hours! Peace be upon you, month in which
expectations come near and good works are scattered about! Peace be upon
you, comrade who is great in worth when found and who torments through
absence when lost, anticipated friend whose parting gives pain! Peace be
upon you, familiar who brought comfort in coming, thus making happy, who
left loneliness in going, thus giving anguish! Peace be upon you,
neighbor in whom hearts became tender and sins became few! Peace be upon
you, helper who aided against Satan, companion who made easy the paths
of good-doing! Peace be upon you-How many became freedmen of Allah
within you! How happy those who observed the respect due to you! Peace
be upon you-How many the sins you erased! How many the kinds of faults
you covered over! Peace be upon you-How drawn out were you for the
sinners! How awesome were you in the hearts of the faithful! Peace be
upon you, month with which no days compete! Peace be upon you, month
which is peace in all affairs! Peace be upon you, you whose
companionship is not disliked, you whose friendly mixing is not blamed!
Peace be upon you, just as you have entered upon us with blessings and
cleansed us of the defilement of offenses! Peace be upon you. You are
not bid farewell in annoyance nor is your fasting in weariness! Peace be
upon you, object of seeking before your time, object of sorrow before
your passing! Peace be upon you- How much evil was turned away from us
through you! How much good flowed upon us because of you! Peace be upon
you and upon the Night of Decree which is *better than a thousand
months!* Peace be upon you- How much we craved you yesterday! How
intensely we shall yearn for you tomorrow! Peace be upon you and upon
the bounty which has now been made unlawful to us and upon your
blessings gone by which have now been stripped away from us!”

The Imam, peace be on him, bid farewell to the blessed month of Ramadhan
with these warm greetings accompanied by bitterness and sorrow for
parting it, for it was a field for his good works that brought him near
to Allah, the Exalted. He, peace be on him, mentioned the qualities of
this great month and explained its excellencies over the other months.
Now, let’s listen to another part of this great supplication:

“O Allah, we are the people of this month. Through it You have ennobled
us and given us success because of Your kindness, while the wretched are
ignorant of its time. Made unlawful to them is its bounty because of
their wretchedness. You are the patron of the knowledge of it by which
You have preferred us, and its prescribed practices to which You have
guided us. We have undertaken, through Your giving success, its fasting
and its standing in prayer, but with shortcomings, and we have performed
little of much.

“O Allah, Hence to You belongs praise, in admission of evil doing and
confession of negligence,[^50] and to You belongs remorse firmly knitted
in our hearts and seeking of pardon sincerely uttered by our tongues.
Reward us, in spite of the neglect that befell us in this month, with a
reward through which we may reach the bounty desired from it and win the
varieties of its craved stores![^51] Make incumbent upon us Your pardon
for our falling short of Your right in this month and make our lives
which lie before us reach the coming month of Ramadhan! Once You have
made us reach it, help us perform the worship of which You are worth,
cause us to undertake the obedience which You deserve, and grant us
righteous works that we may fulfill Your right in these two months[^52]
of the months of time.

“O Allah, as for the small and large sins which we have committed in
this our month, the misdeeds into which we have fallen, and the offenses
which we have earned purposefully or in forgetfulness wronging ourselves
thereby or violating the respect due to others, bless Muhammad and his
Household, cover us over with Your covering, pardon us thorough Your
pardoning, place us not before the eyes of the gloaters because of that,
stretch not toward us the tongues of the defamers, and employ us in that
which will alleviate and expiate whatever You disapprove from us within
it through Your clemency which does not run out. O Allah, bless Muhammad
and his Household, redress our being afflicted by our moth, bless us in
this day of our festival and our fast - breaking, make it one of the
best of days that have passed over us, the greatest in attracting Your
pardon, and the most effacing toward sins, and forgive us our sins, both
the concealed and the public.”

Have you noticed this submission and humility before the Great Creator?
The Imam asked Allah for pardon and forgiveness. He confessed before Him
his falling short of performing worship and the acts of obedience in the
blessed month of Ramadhan. This is Zayn al-‘Abidin, who is the greatest
summoner to Allah! Now, let’s read on the last paragraphs of this
supplication:

“O Allah, with the passing of this month, make us pass forth from our
offenses, with its departure make us depart from our evil deeds, and
appoint us thereby among its most felicitous people, the most plentiful
of them in portion, and the fullest of them in share! O Allah, when any
person observes this month as it should be observed, safeguards its
inviolability as it should be safeguarded, attends to its bounds as they
should be attended to, fears its misdeeds as they should be feared, or
seeks nearness to You with any act of nearness-seeking which makes
incumbent upon him Your good pleasure and bends toward him Your mercy,
give to us the like (of that) from Your wealth and bestow it upon us in
multiples through Your bounty, for Your bounty does not diminish, Your
treasuries do not decrease but overflow, the mines of Your beneficence
are not exhausted, and Your bestowal is the bestowal full of delight.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and write for us the like of
the wages of him who fasted in it or worshipped You within it until the
Day of Resurrection! O Allah, we repent to You in our day of
fast-breaking, which You have appointed for the faithful a festival and
a joy and for the people of Your creed a time of assembly and gathering,
from every misdeed we did, ill work we sent ahead, or evil thought we
secretly conceived, the repentance of one who does not harbor a return
to sin and who afterwards will not go back to offense, an unswerving
repentance rid of doubt and wavering. Hence accept it from us, and fix
us within it!

“O Allah, provide us with fear of the threatened punishment and yearning
for the promised reward, Hence that we may find the pleasure of that for
which we supplicate You and the sorrow of that from which we seek
sanctuary in You! And place us with among the repenters, those upon whom
You have made Your love obligatory and from whom You have accepted the
return to obeying You! O Most Just of the just! O Allah, show
forbearance toward our fathers and our mothers and all the people of our
religion, those who have gone and those who will pass by, until the Day
of Resurrection! O Allah, bless our prophet Muhammad and his Household,
as You have blessed Your angels brought nigh, bless him and his
Household, as You have blessed Your prophets sent out, bless him and his
Household, as You have blessed Your righteous servants-and better than
that, O Lord of the worlds!- a blessing whose benediction will reach us,
whose benefit will attain to us, and through which our supplication may
be granted! You are the most generous of those who are beseeched, the
most sufficient of those in whom confidence is had, the most bestowing
of those from whom bounty is asked, and *You are powerful over
everything!*[^53]*”*

This holy supplication; rather all the supplications of the Imam, peace
be on him, urge man to cling to Allah-fearingness and faith in Him, they
also urge him to show remorse at his neglect before Allah in this month.

### On the Day of Fast-Breaking

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, received the Day of Fast-Breaking
with supplication to Allah, asking Him to accept his fast, his acts of
worship, and his good works in the month of Ramadhan, and to grant him
pardon and good pleasure. In the early morning, he gave on his behalf
and of his family the Zakat of al-Fitra (alms of fast-breaking). He also
performed the prayer of the ‘Id. When he had finished his prayer, he
faced the qibla (the direction of Kaaba) and supplicated Allah with this
great supplication:

“O He who has mercy upon him toward whom the servants show no mercy! O
He who accepts him whom the cities will not accept! O He who looks not
down upon those who have need of Him! O He who disappoints not those who
implore Him! O He who slaps not the brow of the people of boldness
toward Him with rejection! O He who collects the little that is given to
Him and He shows gratitude for the paltry that is done for Him! O He who
shows gratitude for the small and rewards with the great! O He who comes
close to him who comes close to Him! O He who invites to Himself him who
turns his back on Him! O He who changes not favor and rushes not to
vengeance! O He who causes the good deed to bear fruit Hence that he may
make it grow, and overlooks the evil deed Hence that he may efface it!
Hopes turn back with needs fulfilled short of the extent of Your
generosity, the cups of requests fill up with the overflow of Your
munificence, and attributes fall apart without reaching Your
description. For to You belongs the highest highness above everything
high, and the most glorious majesty beyond every majesty! Every majestic
before You is small everything eminent beside Your eminence vile! Those
who reach other than You are disappointed, those who present themselves
to other than You have lost, those who stay with other than You have
perished, and those who retreat -except those who retreat to Your
bounty- are desolate! Your door is open to the beseechers, Your
munificence free to the askers, Your help near to the help-seeker! The
expectant are not disappointed by You, those who present themselves
despair not of Your bestowal, the forgiveness-seekers become not
wretched through Your vengeance! Your provision is spread among those
who disobey You, Your clemency presents itself to those hostile toward
You, Your habit is beneficence toward the evildoers, and Your wont is to
spare the transgressors, Hence much Hence that Your lack of haste
deludes them from returning, and Your disregard bars them from
desisting! You act without haste toward them Hence that they will come
back to Your command and You disregard them confident in the permanence
of Your kingdom, Hence You seal him who is worthy of it with felicity,
and You abandon him who is worthy of it to wretchedness!”

The greatest Imam, peace be on him, presented in this masterpiece
Allah’s kindness to His servants, for He is Compassionate and Merciful
to him toward whom the servants show no mercy. His mercy also includes
him whom the governments chase and he escapes to unknown places because
of fear. An example of the kindness of Him, the Exalted, is that He does
not look down upon those who have need of Him. An example of the mercy
of Him, the Exalted, is that He does not disappoint those who implore
Him. An example of the great bounty and ample mercy of Him, the Most
High, is that He shows gratitude for the small and rewards with the
great. He shows affection to His servants, Hence He comes close to those
who come close to Him and invites to Himself those who turn back on Him
Hence that He may grant them the highest position in the next world and
save them from ruin. An example of the favor of Allah, the Glorified, to
His servants is that He does not change the blessing which He bestows
upon them until they change what is there in themselves. He, the
Exalted, also makes the good deed grow for its owner in the Next Abode.
Indeed the generosity and munificence of Allah cannot be limited.
Attributes fall short of describing Him, for to Him belongs the highest
highness above everything high, and the most glorious majesty beyond
every majesty.

The Imam, peace be on him, blamed in his supplication those who
presented themselves to other than Allah, Hence they lost good and
expectations, while those who presented themselves to Allah attained a
great success. Then the Imam, peace be on him, mentioned the clemency of
Allah, the Exalted, and His disregard toward the aggressors; He did not
hurry to punish them Hence that they would come back to His command and
understand the truth. These are some affairs which this part of the
supplication of the Imam, peace be on him, contains. Now, let’s read on
the last paragraphs of this supplication:

“All of them come home to Your decree, their affairs revert to Your
command; Your authority grows not feeble through their drawn out term,
Your proof is not refuted by the failure to hurry after them. Your
argument is established, never refuted, Your authority fixed, never
removed. Permanent woe belongs to him who inclines away from You,
forsaking disappointment to him who is disappointed by You, and the most
wretched wretchedness to him who is deluded about You! How much he will
move about in Your chastisement! How long he will frequent Your
punishment! How far his utmost end from relief! How he will despair of
an easy exit! (All of this) as justice from Your decree (You are not
unjust in it!), and equity from Your judgment (You do not act wrongfully
against him!). You supported the arguments, tested the excuses, began
with threats, showed gentleness with encouragement, struck similitudes,
made long the respite, delayed, while You are able to hurry, and acted
without haste, while You are full of quick accomplishment!

“Not because of incapacity is Your slowness, feebleness Your giving
respite, heedlessness Your showing restraint, dissemblance Your waiting!
But that Your argument be more conclusive, Your generosity more perfect,
Your beneficence more exhaustive, Your favor more complete! All of this
has been and always was, is and ever will be. Your argument is greater
than that its totality be described, Your glory more elevated than it be
limited in its core, Your favor more abundant than that its entirety be
counted, Your beneficence more abundant than that thanks be given for
its least amount! Speechlessness has made me fall short of praising You,
restraint has made me powerless to glorify You, and the most I can do is
admit to inability, not out of desire, my Allah, but out of incapacity.
Hence here I am: I repair to You by coming forward, and I ask from You
good support. Hence bless Muhammad and his Household, hear my whispered
words, grant my supplication, seal not my day with disappointment, slap
not my brow by rejecting my request, and make noble my coming from You
and going back to You! Surely You are not constrained by what You
desire, nor incapable of what You are asked! You are powerful over
everything, and there is no force and no strength save in Allah, the
All-high, the All-mighty![^54]”

In these words, the Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned all the
creatures, whether believers or sinners, monotheists or atheists; they
are all in the hand of Allah, the Most High, subjected to His decree,
coming home to His command. Only the disobedient are stubborn; they
continue aggression, mutiny, and disobedience. With this, they are
unable to make feeble the authority of Allah. Woe unto them from His
permanent punishment and His everlasting chastisement. Allah gives them
respite in this world and does not hurry to punish them because of His
mercy and gentleness toward them, Hence that they will come back to the
truth and turn to Allah in repentance. With this the generosity of
Allah, the Exalted, is ample and His favor for His servants is perfect.

With this we will end our speech about the fast of the Imam, peace be on
him, in the month of Ramadhan, which was full of all acts of worship,
good works, and acts of obedience.

His Hajj
--------

As for the hajj to the Sacred House of Allah, the Imam, peace be on him,
clung to it, for he found in its standing places refreshment for his
soul which was melted by the tragedies of Karbala’. He, peace be on him,
urged (the Muslims) to perform the hajj and the ‘Umra (a certain kind of
hajj to the Kaaba), for they would result in great benefits. Hence he
said: “(When) you perform the hajj and the ‘Umra, your bodies become
sound, your daily bread becomes ample, your faith becomes righteous, and
you are sufficient for the provisions of the people and of your
families.[^55]” He, peace be on him, said: “The hajji (pilgrim) is
forgiven, the Garden is surely for him, the work is resumed through him,
his family and his possessions are preserved.[^56]” He, peace be on him,
said: “The angels intercede for the one who runs between al-Safa and
al-Marwa (with Allah).[^57]” He also urged (the Muslims) to honor and
magnify the pilgrims when they returned from the Sacred House of Allah,
Hence he said: “Show happiness when the pilgrims return (from Mecca),
shake hands with them, and magnify them. (Hence), you take a share in
their reward before you mix with them in sin.[^58]” Now, we will briefly
present some affairs of his hajj.

### His Hajj on Foot

The Imam, peace be on him, performed the hajj on foot more than one
time, as his father and his uncle, al-Hasan, peace be on them, did. It
took him twenty days to perform the hajj to the House (of Allah).[^59]”

### His Hajj Riding

He, peace be on him, performed the hajj on the (back of) his she-camel
twenty times, and he took great care of it. The historians said: “He
never whipped it.[^60]” Ibrahim b. ‘Ali said: “I performed the hajj with
‘Ali b. al-Husayn. His she-camel was moving slowly, Hence he pointed to
it with the stick, and then he withdrew it and said: ‘Woe if there was
on retaliation (in the next world) !’ Again it moved slowly among the
Mountains of Radawa, Hence he showed it the stick and said (to it): ‘You
should walk; otherwise I will do!’ Then he mounted it, and it
walked.[^61]” His soul exalted to this level of mercy, pity, and
gentleness to animal, Hence he never whipped and frightened his
she-camel. He thought that aggression against animal would result in
punishment and reckoning in the Next Abode.

### The Reciters accompany Him

When he intended to perform the hajj to the Sacred House of Allah, the
reciters (of the Qur’an) and the religious scholars would accompany him,
for they acquired from him sciences, knowledge, wise sayings, and good
manners. Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab said: “The reciters (of the Qur’an) did
not go out of Mecca until ‘Ali b. al-Husayn went out, Hence he went out
and a thousand riders went out with him.[^62] They learnt from him the
problems of the hajj, the rules of the religion, and all the affairs of
Islamic law, for there was no one in his time, according to the
consensus of the historians and narrators, more knowledgeable than him
in the precepts of the Book and Sunna.”

### His Food for the Hajj

The Imam, peace be on him, took good and perfect preparations for
performing the hajj and the ‘Umra. He supplied himself with the best
food such as almonds, sugar, soured and sugared fine flour.[^63] His
pure sister, Sukayna, made him and excellent food on which she spent
thousands of dirhams, but when he arrived at al-Hurrah, he ordered the
food to be divided among the poor and the needy.[^64]

### His Disorder during Ritual Consecration

When the Imam arrived at one of the places appointed for the ritual
consecrationsuch as Masjid al-Shajara (the Mosque of the Tree), the
place appointed for the people of Medina and those who passed by ithe
began performing the rules of ritual consecration such as ablution. When
he wanted to say the talbiya (Here I am at your service), his skin would
turn yellow, and he disordered and was unable to say the talbiya. He was
asked: “Why don’t you say the talbiya?”

He trembled with fear of Allah and said: “I fear that I say: *labbayk*
(Here I am at Your service), and it will be said to me: ‘*la* *labbayk’*
(You are not at My service).

When he said the *talbiya,* he fainted because of his abundant fear of
Allah, and fell off his she-camel. This state attacked him several times
until he finished his hajj.[^65] Malik reported: “When Zayn al-‘Abidin
wanted to say the *talbiya,* he fainted, fell off his she-camel, and
broke (one of his bones).[^66]” The Imam thoroughly knew of Allah,
adored Him, was afraid of His punishment, and tended to Him with all his
feelings and sentiments, as his fathers, who were the lords of the
Allah-fearing and of those who turned to Allah in repentance, did.

### His Supplication by the Black Stone

When he finished his going around (the Kaaba) and arrived at the Black
Stone, he looked at the sky and said: “O Allah, make me enter Heaven
through Your mercy-while he was looking at the mizab (Spout) - grant me
sanctuary from the Fire through Your mercy, heal me of illness, allow me
to attain my provision through lawful means, and drive away from me the
wickedness of the sinners from among the jinn and men, and the
wickedness of the sinners from among the Arabs and non-Arabs.[^67]”

### His Prayer under the mizab

When the Imam, peace be on him, had finished his rituals (of hajj) such
as going around the Kaaba and running between al-Safa and al-Marwa, he
came to pray under the Spout of Mercy (mizab al-Rahma). Tawu’s al-Yamani
saw him at that Holy Place standing in prayer, supplicating Allah, and
weeping because of fear of Allah. When he finished his prayers, Tawus
interrupted him, saying: “I have seen you in this state of humility
while you have three qualities. I hope that they will make you safe from
fear. One of them is that you are the (grand) son of Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, the second is the intercession of
your grandfather, and the third is Allah’s mercy.”

The Imam gently answered Tawus: “O Tawus, as for that I am the (grand)
son of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, it will not
safe me (from fear), and you have heard Allah, the Exalted, say: *There
shall be no ties of relationship between them, nor shall they ask of
each other.*[^68] As for the intercession of my grandfather, it will not
safe me (from fear), for Allah, the Most High, says: *They do not
intercede except for him who He approves.*[^69] As for Allah’s mercy,
Allah says: *Allah’s mercy is close to the benefactors*, and I don’t
think that I am a benefactor.[^70]”

Have you noticed this humility and self-negation before Allah, the
Exalted? Indeed, this Imam was a unique copy among mankind except his
great fathers.

### With Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik

Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik, accompanied by the police, made the pilgrimage
to the Sacred House of Allah. The mercenaries and the prominent persons
from among the Syrians surrounded him. He did his best to catch the
Black Stone, but he could not, because the place was full of pilgrims
who pushed each other in order to kiss the Black Stone. Hence the
pilgrims paid no attention to Hisham and made no room to him, for there
were no differences in that Great House. A pulpit was installed for him
and he sat on it. He looked at the people who were going around the
Kaaba. In the meantime Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, came to
perform going around the Kaaba. A pilgrim saw him and recognized him,
Hence he called out at the top of his voice: “That is the remaining one
of Allah in His earth! That is the remaining one of Prophethood! That is
the Imam of the Allah-fearing and lord of the worshippers!”

The Imam’s solemnity, to which the faces and foreheads yielded, and
which was similar to that of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, overwhelmed the pilgrims. The pilgrims shouted
loudly everywhere in the Mosque: “There is no god but Allah! Allah is
Great!” Then they made room for the Imam. Blessed was the one who kissed
his hand or touched his garments of ritual consecration. The Mosque was
full of saying: “Allah is Great!” The Syrians were astonished at that
fearful sight, for they thought that there was no one worthy of honor
and magnification except the Umayyads who were, according to the Umayyad
mass media, the inheritors of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and close to him in lineage! Hence the Syrians hurried to Hisham
and asked him: “Who is that person whom the people has respected with
this respect?”

Hisham burst into anger, and his crossed eye appeared[^71], and he
shouted at them: “I don’t recognize him!”

Hisham denied recognizing the Imam, for he feared that the Syrians would
incline to him and desert the Umayyads. Al-Farazdaq, the Arab great
poet, was present there. He understood the truth, shook all over, rushed
toward the Syrians with enthusiasm and said to: “I know him!”

“Who is he, Abu’ Firas?” asked the Syrians.

Hisham became frightened and lost his mind, for he feared that
al-Farazdaq would introduce the Imam to the Syrians, Hence he shouted at
him: “I don’t know him!”

Condemning Hisham, al-Farazdaq said at the top of his voice: “Yes, you
know him!”

Then he turned to the Syrians and said to them: “Syrians, whoever wants
to recognize this man, let him come (here) !”

Hence the Syrians and others hurried to the Arab great poet and fully
listened. Al-Farazdaq was eager for supporting the truth. Hence he
improvised this poem called al-‘Asma’, which represents truthful words
and beautiful style, and in which he said:

*This is the descendant of Husayn and son of Fatim,*

*daughter of the Messenger through whom darkness*

*scattered.*

*This is he whose ability the valley (of Mecca), recognizes,*

*and whom the (Sacred) House recognizes (as do) the*

*sanctuary and the area outside the sanctuary (al-hill).*

*This is the son of the best of all Allah’s servants.*

*This is the pure pious man, the pure eminent man.*

*When Quraysh saw him, their spokesman said: Generosity*

*leads to the noble qualities of this (man).*

*He belongs to the zenith of glory which the Arabs of Islam*

*When he comes to touch the corner of the wall of the*

*Kaaba, it almost grasps the palm of his hand.*

*He lowers (his eyes) because of modesty and (eyes are)*

*lowered due to his solemnity. Hence (none) speaks with him*

*but when he smiles.*

*In his hand there is a cane whose smell is fragrant because*

*of the hand of the one who is wonderful and noble.*

*The prophets are indebted to the outstanding merits of his*

*grandfather, and the nations are indebted to the*

*excellencies of his nation.*

*The light of guidance comes out of the light of his forehead*

*(which) is like the sun whose rising scatters the dark.*

*His plant (origin) is derived from the Messenger of Allah.*

*Its elements, nature, and qualities are good.*

*This is the son of Fatima, if you do not recognize him, the*

*prophets of Allah were sealed through his grandfather.*

*Allah had already honored him, and his excellencies*

*occurred through that in the tablet of the pen.*

*Your words ‘who is this’ do not harm, the Arabs and non-*

*Arabs recognize him whom you deny.*

*Both his hands are relief; their profit is general; they are*

*equal hands; deprivation does not befall them.*

*He is the carrier of the burdens of the peoples when they*

*are overburdened. His merits are pretty; ‘yes’ is pleasant*

*with him.*

*He does not break promise; blessed is his soul; his*

*courtyard is ample; he is brilliant when he determines.*

*(He is) from the people whose love is religion; whose hate*

*is unbelief; nearness to them is refuge and protection.*

*If the Allah-fearing are numbered, they are their Imams, or*

*(if) it is said, who is the best of the world’s inhabitants?, it*

*is said, they are.*

*None of the generous can (access) their far-fetched*

*objectives, nor can people vie with them (in generosity)*

*even if they are generous.*

*They are rain when a crisis is intense and lions, the lions of*

*a forest, when war is violent.*

*Poverty does not decrease their munificence.*

*It is the same for them whether they are rich or poor.*

*Evil and tribulation are pushed away through love for*

*them, and through it kindness and blessings are regained.*

*Their remembrance is advanced in every affair after the*

*remembrance of Allah, and words are sealed through it.*

*(Their) noble natures and their hands full of liberality do*

*not allow abasement to occur in their courtyard.*

*Which creature is excluded from the priority and favors of*

*this (Imam)?*

*Whoever thanks Allah thanks the priority of this (Imam in*

*belief in Allah), for nations have attained religion from the*

*House of this (Imam).*[^72]

This poem, called al-‘Asma’, is distinguished from the rest of the Arab
poetry by immortality throughout history, for it was a revolt against
falsehood and support for the truth. It was mentioned in the time in
which mouths were muzzled and tongues were prevented from mentioning the
laudable deeds of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on
them. The Umayyad tyrannical authorities executed all those who
mentioned their laudable deeds or their outstanding merits. They
employed all their organs to efface the members of the House *(ahl
al-Bayt),* peace be on them, from the map of existence.

In his poem, al-Farazdaq lauded the great Imam, the Imam of the Syrians
and other than them from among all the pilgrims, Hence his praise was a
painful blow against the Umayyad policy. Commenting on this poem,
al-Bustani said: “They said: This poem is sufficient for al-Farazdaq to
enter the Garden.[^73]”

This poem contains wonderful truthfulness, support of the truth, and
pretty coherence of lines. Al-Sayyid ‘Ali al-Madani said: “As for the
coherence of this poem, it is an unattainable objective and
unpossessable mind. He (al-Farazdaq) avoided (mentioning) explanatory
remarks in it, and mentioned wonderful coherence in it. He who notices
the poetry of al-Farazdaq and notices this poem, he will admire it, for
there is no relation between this poem of al-Farazdaq and all his
sayings in cause, praise, and satire. This means that he composed it
spontaneously. Without doubt Allah, the Glorified, supported him when he
composed it, and pointed him the right way when he improvised it.[^74]”

### Abu’ al-Farajj doubts the Poem

Abu’ al-Farajj al-Asfahani doubted that this poem did not belong to
al-Farazdaq. He thought that al-Farazdaq’s style in poetry was different
from his style in this poem. He claimed that al-Farazdaq used difficult
styles, words, and imaginations.[^75] Commenting on this view of Abu’
al-Farajj, shaykh Muhammad, Abu’ Zahra, said:

“I do not think that this doubt is acceptable or agrees with the sound
method of studying narrations, for the following reasons:

“First, all the narrators have unanimously agreed that this poem is
ascribed to al-Farazdaq, but al-Asfahani tried to accuse them of lying.

“Second, al-Asfahani did not mention with proof the poet, from among the
poets of the Household (of the Prophet), to whom he attributed this
poem. Hence he has no right to abolish the ascription of a poem to its
poet, or to leave it in an unknown attribution, or to ascribe it (to
someone) without any proof.

“The poet sometimes uses difficult words and sometimes uses nice words
according to the situation in which he composes (his poem). If the poet
composes (his poem) according to his situation, if he describes desert
and what within it, he will use difficult (words). If he speaks about
morals and qualities, he will without doubt use soft (words). When the
poet is good, he chooses suitable (words) for every situation.

“Imru’ al-Quays, a pre-Islamic poet, composed soft poetry in the end of
his lifetime. This was when some misfortunes befell him. We do not
intend to give accounts about literature, that we may tell you about his
description of his illness and what befell him. Al-A‘sha and Ka‘ab b.
Zuhair also composed nice poems. When they praised the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, their poetry became soft to the extent
that it agreed with his qualities and miracles. Al-Farazdaq’s words in
this poem are soft, so there is no need to denying and doubt.

“Here, we must say that al-Farazdaq firmly inclined to the members of
the House *(Al al-Bayt),* though he did not compose abundant poetry
about them, for he did not want to expose himself to the persecutions of
the Umayyads.[^76]”

Al-Farazdaq was one of Imam ‘Ali’s followers, Hence he praised Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. Al-Sharif al-Murtada said: “Al-Farazdaq was
a Shi‘ite inclining to the Hashimites. In the end of his lifetime, he
gave up transgression and slander. He followed the way of the religion,
but he had not neglected the religion before, nor had he neglected its
affairs.[^77]” Anyhow, the attribution of this poem called al-‘Asma’ is
among the definite affairs, for all the narrators have unanimously
agreed on it.

### Al-Farazdaq is arrested

When Hisham b. ‘Abd al-Malik heard this poem, he became excited and
wished that the ground would have swallowed him. This is because the
poem included all the outstanding qualities of the great Imam and
introduced him to the Syrians who had no knowledge of him and his
grandfathers. Al-Farazdaq praised the position of the Imam. He indicated
that following the Imam was inseparable part of Islam, and that the Imam
was the best person in the world at that time.

Hisham ordered al-Farazdaq to be arrested. Hence, he was arrested and
imprisoned in the prison of ‘Asfan, a place between Mecca and Medina.
When Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, heard of this, he sent
al-Farazdaq twelve thousand dirhams, but the latter refused to accept
it, saying: “I composed (these words) concerning you to show my anger
for Allah and His Messenger only.” The Imam sent back the money to
al-Farazdaq, and he accepted it. Hence al-Farazdaq began satirizing
Hisham. Among the lines with which he satirized him is the following:

Will he imprison me between (‘Asfan) and Medina, to

which the hearts of the people incline?

He turns a head which is not the head of a chief, and he has

a cross eye with apparent defects.[^78]

### His Whispered Prayers in the Sacred House

Many whispered prayers in the Sacred House of Allah were related from
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. He used to recite them before his
Lord in the darkness. The following is some of them:

1. Muhammad b. Abi Hamza reported: [I saw ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on
him, praying in the courtyard of the Kaaba. He lengthened standing in
prayer to the extent that he sometimes leant on his right leg and
sometimes on his left leg. Then I heard him weeping loudly and
whispering to his Lord:]

“O my Master, will You chastise me (while) Your love is in my heart? By
Your might, You shall not gather me with the people toward whom I have
shown enmity for You![^79]”

In this short whispered prayer, the Imam, peace be on him, expressed his
absolute devotion and pleading to Allah, asking Him for pardon and good
pleasure.

2. Al-Asma‘i narrated: [While I was going around the Kaaba, I saw a
young man clinging to its curtains and saying sad words:]

“The eyes have slept, and the stars have become high, and You are the
King, the Living, the Self-subsistent. The kings have closed their
gates, and their guards have stood by them, but Your gate is still open
for the askers. I have come to You to, that You may look at me through
Your mercy, O Most Merciful of the merciful.”

[Then he composed:]

“O He who responds in the darkness to the supplication of

the distressed!

O He who removes affliction, tribulation, and illness!

All those have come to You have slept around the House,

and only You, O Self-subsistent, do not sleep!

I supplicate You, my Lord, with a supplication which You

have commanded!

Hence have mercy on my weeping, by the right of the House

and the Sanctuary!

If the immoderate do not expect Your pardon, then who

will bestows favor lavishly upon the disobedient!”

Al-Asma‘i said: “I followed his traces, suddenly he was Zayn
al-‘Abidin.[^80] I kissed him and said to him: You are ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn; your father is the martyr of Karbala’; your grandfather is
‘Ali al-Murtada; your (grand) mother is Fatima, the chaste; your
grandmother is Khadija al-Kubra (the greatest one); your great
grandfather is Muhammad al-Mustafa (the chosen one), Hence why do you
say such words?”

The Imam softly and kindly answered him: “Have you not read these words
of Him, the Exalted: *Hence when the trumpet is blown, there shall be no
ties of relationship between them on that day, nor shall they ask of
each other?*[^81] Have you not heard the words of my grandfather: The
Garden has been created for the obedient even if they are from Ethiopia;
the Fire has been created for the disobedient even if they are from
Quraysh?[^82]”

This great Imam clung to Allah, the Exalted, devoted himself to him,
obeyed him, and worshipped him because of knowledge, faith, and
sincerity.

3. Tawus al-Yamani narrated: [I passed by the (Black) Stone. Suddenly,
(I saw) a person bowing and prostrating. I carefully considered him, and
I could realized that he was ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, Hence I said to myself:
He is a righteous man from among the Household of the Prophet. By Allah,
I will wait until he finishes his prayers, that I may make use of his
supplication. Then he raised his hands and began addressing Allah,
saying:]

“O Allah, my Master, my Master! I have stretched out my hands full of
sins toward You and looked (at You) with hope. The right of him who
humbly supplicates you with regret is that You generously respond to
him!

“My Master, have you created me as one of the miserable, Hence I will
lengthen my weeping? Or have you created me as one of the happy, Hence I
will be happy with my hope?

“My Master, have you created my limbs to be hit with whips (of iron)? Or
have you created my bowels for drinking the boiling water (in the Fire)?

“My Master, if a servant was able to escape from his master, I would be
the first of those who escaped from their master, but I know that I
cannot escape from You!

“My Master, if I knew that my chastisement would increase Your kingdom,
I would ask You for patience against it, but I know that the obedience
of the obedient does not increase Your kingdom, nor does the
disobedience of the disobedient decrease it.

“My Master, Here I am! What is my importance? Pardon me through your
bounty! Cover me over with Your cover! Forgive me my scolding through
the generosity of Your face!

“My Allah and my Master, have mercy on me when I will be dead on my bed,
(and when) the hands of my lovers turn me! Have mercy on me when I will
be placed in the wash room, (and when) my righteous neighbors wash me!
Have mercy on me when I will be carried, (and when) my relatives carry
the ends of my coffin! Have mercy on my exile and my lonesomeness in
that dark house!”

When Tawus heard these sad whispered prayers, he burst into tears, Hence
the Imam turned to him and asked him:

“O Yamani, what makes you weep? Isn’t this the standing place of the
sinners?”

Tawus interrupted the Imam with submission and admiration, saying: “Your
right against Allah is that He should respond to you.[^83]”

The Imam, peace be on him, loved the world of angels, clung to it, and
devoted his life to it.

4. The narrators reported on the authority of al-Hasan al-Basri, who
said: “I saw ‘Ali b. al-Husayn in the Kaaba pleading to Allah and
supplicating Him in repentance, Hence I came nearer to him and heard him
reciting these soft lines:

O He who is expected for (fulfilling) every need!

I complained to You of affliction, Hence have mercy on my

complaint!

O He who is my hope! Your are the Remover of my

distress, Hence forgive me every sin I have committed and

fulfill my request!

To You belong aim in every request! You are the Helper of

the askers and my goal!

I have made ugly acts the like of which none of the

creatures has made!

My provision is little; I do not think that it is enough!

Shall I weep for my provision or for my distant road!

Will You muster me along with the oppressive in the

standing places?

Therefore, where is my circumambulation, then where are

my visitations?

Will you burn me with the Fire, O Goal of hopes?

Therefore, where is my expectation, then where is my fear?

My Master, oblige me with repentance, for You, my Lord,

know my words!

These lines had a great effect on the soul of al-Hasan al-Basri, Hence
he hurried to kiss the feet of the Imam and say:

“O grandson of the Prophet, why are you saying these whispered prayers
and weeping? Are you not from among the Prophet’s Household concerning
whom Allah said: ‘*To take away the uncleanness from you and to purify
thoroughly*.’?”

The Imam explained to al-Hasan al-Basri the true Islam, which adopted
good deeds and paid no attention to lineage, saying: “Leave this! The
Garden has been created for him who obeys Allah even if he is from
Ethiopia; the Fire has been created for him who disobeys Him even if he
is from Quraysh. The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, said:
‘Bring me your acts, not your lineage.’[^84]”

Some writers thought that this narration was incorrect. This is because
the narration contains weak lines of poetry. Besides it shows that
al-Husayn al-Basri kissed the Imam’s foot. They said that this action
did not agree with the position of al-Basri, and that the Imam did not
accepted it.[^85] This view is weak for the following reasons:

First, the Imam, peace be on him, recited these lines. None knows that
he composed them.

Second, we do not think that these lines are weak, for they are soft and
good.

Third, as for that al-Hasan al-Basri kissed the Imam, it was not an
insult; rather it was honor and pride for him. This is because the Imam
was the remaining one of Allah in His earth, the lord of the pure
Household (of the Prophet), and a piece of the liver of Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family. Al-Basri was the most knowledgeable
of these authors in the Imam’s position.

5. Tawus, the jurist, reported one of the Imam’s whispered prayers to
Allah in the Sacred House. He said: [I saw ‘Ali b. al-Husayn going
around (the Kaaba) from the evening to the early morning. As he was
alone, he looked at the sky and said:]

“My Allah, the stars of Your heavens have set! The eyes of Your
creatures have slept, but Your gates are open for the askers! I have
come to You in order to pardon me, to have mercy on me, and to show me
the face of my grandfather, Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his
family, on the Day of Resurrection.”

[Then he wept and addressed Allah, the Exalted, saying:]

“I (swear) by Your might and majesty, I do not want to disobey You
through my disobedience. I do not doubt You when I disobey You nor am I
ignorant of Your exemplary punishment nor do I want to subject myself to
Your punishment. However, my soul entices me and Your cover which is
over me helps me with this. Hence, now, who can save me from Your
chastisement? If You cut Your rope from me, then to which rope shall I
cling? How evil my standing before You will be tomorrow! If it is said
to those who have small (sins): ‘pass’, and to those who have great
(sins): ‘stop’, then shall I pass with those who have small (sins) or
stop with those who have great (sins)? Woe unto me! The long my span is,
the more my sins are! Still, I do not announce my repentance! Isn’t it a
time for me to feel shame of my Lord!”

[Then he burst into tears and recited:]

“Will you burn me with the Fire, O Goal of hopes? Therefore, where is my
expectation, then where is my fear?

“I have done ugly works the like of which none of the creatures has
done!

“Glory belongs to You! You are disobeyed as if You were not seen! You
are clement as if You were not disobeyed! You show love toward Your
creatures through (Your) kindness as if You were in need of them, while
You, my Master, are in no need of them!”

[Then he prostrated himself (in prayer), Hence I (Tawus) came nearer to
him, raised his head, put it on my lap, Hence a tear of mine fell onto
his holy cheek. Then he sat down and said with a faint voice:]

“Who has distracted me from praising my Lord?”

Hence Tawus answered him with submission and magnification: “It is I,
Tawus. Son of Allah’s Apostle, what is this impatience and fear? It is
we who should behave in this manner. We are disobedient and sinful,
while your father is al-Husayn b. ‘Ali, your (grand) mother is Fatima,
the chaste, and your grandfather is Allah’s Messenger.”

[However, the Imam paid no attention to the clear lineage with which he
was endowed, Hence he interrupted (me), saying:]

“How far! How far! Tawus, leave mentioning my father, my mother, and my
grandfather. Allah has created the Garden to him who obeys Him and does
good even if he is a Negro from Ethiopia, and He created the Fire for
him who disobeys Him even if he is a chief from Quraysh. Have you not
heard these words of Him, the Exalted: *Hence when the trumpet is blown,
there shall be no ties of relationship between them on that day, nor
shall they ask of each other.* I swear by Allah that nothing will profit
you tomorrow except your good acts.[^86]”

6. Tawus narrated another whispered prayers of the Imam’s in the Sacred
House. He said: [I entered the Stone (i.e., the Stone of Isma‘il) one
night and there was ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. He had come in and was standing
praying. He prayed as Allah had wished. Hence I said: He is a righteous
man, Hence I must listen to him, thus I heard him say:]

Your little servant is at Your courtyard;

Your miserable one is at Your courtyard:

Your poor one is at Your courtyard;

Your beggar is at Your courtyard.

Tawus memorized this short whispered prayer, which expressed self-denial
and absolute obedience to Allah. He supplicated Allah with it when in
need, and Allah removed his afflictions.[^87]

These are some whispered prayers of the Imam in the Sacred House of
Allah. They show his great turning to Allah in repentance and his
devotion to Him. The Imam has other whispered prayers. We will mention
them when we talk about his supplications and his whispered prayers.

### With a Man circumambulating the Kaaba

On circumambulating the Kaaba, the Imam heard a man asking Allah for
patience, Hence he turned to the man and said to him: “You are asking
(Allah) for tribulation. Say: O Allah, I ask You for well-being and
gratitude for it.[^88]” The Imam taught the man how to supplicate Allah.
He ordered him to ask Allah for well-being and gratitude for it. He
warned him against asking Allah for endurance, which he had to seek
during tribulation and poverty.

The Imam blamed those who begged on the Day of ‘Arafa

The Imam, peace be on him, saw some men asking the people to help them
on the Day of ‘Arafa. He rebuked them for this and said: “Woe unto you!
Why do you ask other than Allah on such a day? Those who are in the
wombs of the pregnant want to be happy on this day![^89]”

### His Freeing the Slaves on the Day of ‘Arafat

He, peace be on him, bought black slaves though he had no need of them.
He brought them to ‘Arafat. When he returned from ‘Arafat, he ordered
the slaves to be released and to be given money gifts.[^90]

### His Supplication on the Day of ‘Arafa

On the day of ‘Arafa, the Imam stood in prayer, recited the Holy Qur’an,
and supplicated Allah with this holy supplication, which is among the
outstanding supplications of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them. This is because it contains important affairs. The
following is its text:

“*Praise belongs to Allah, Lord of the worlds*! O Allah, to You belongs
praise! Originator of the heavens and the earth! Possessor of majesty
and munificence! Lord of Lords! Object of worship of every worshipper!
Creator of every creature! Inheritor of all things! *There is nothing
like Him*, knowledge of nothing escapes Him, He *encompasses
everything*, and He is *watchful over everything.* You are Allah, there
is no god but You, the Unique, the Alone, the Single, the Isolated. You
are Allah, there is no god but You, the Generous, the Generously
Bestowing, the All-mighty, the Mightily Exalted, the Magnificent, the
Magnificently Magnified. You are Allah, there is no god but You, the
All-high, the Sublimely High, the Strong in prowess. You are Allah,
there is no god but You, the All-merciful, the All-compassionate, the
All-knowing, the All-wise. You are Allah, there is no god but You, the
All-hearing, the All-Seeing, the Eternal, the All-aware. You are Allah,
there is no god but You, the Generous, the Most Generous, the
Everlasting, the Most Everlasting. You are Allah, there is no god but
You, the First before everyone, the Last after every number. You are
Allah, there is no god but You, the Close in His highness, the High in
His closeness. You are Allah, there is no god but You, Possessor of
radiance and glory, magnificence and praise. You are Allah, there is no
god but You. You have brought forth the things without root, formed what
You have formed without exemplar, and originated the originated things
without imitation. It is You who has ordained each thing with an
ordination, eased each thing with an easing, and governed everything
below Yourself with a governing. It is You whom no associate helps with
Your creation and no vizier aids in Your command. You have no witness
and no equal. It is You who willed, and what You willed was unfailing,
who decreed, and what You decreed was just, who decided, and what You
decided was fair. It is You whom place does not contain, before whose
authority no authority stands up, and whom no proof or explication can
thwart.”

In these brilliant words, the Imam magnified, lauded, and praised Allah.
He explained the most positive attributes of Him, the Exalted. He said:
“Allah, the Most High, has brought forth, found, and originated things
with His power and will, which firmly made everything.” Allah, the
Exalted, firmly created seen and unseen things. He ordained them with an
ordination and governed them with a governing through His great wisdom,
which perplexes intellects. Man is a possible being, limited in
knowledge, power, and will, Hence he is unable to know the Great
Creator, Who is far above imagination and perception. This is what the
Imam has stressed in the following paragraph of this holy supplication:

“It is You who have counted everything in numbers, appointed for
everything a term, and ordained everything with an ordination. It is You
before whose selfness imaginations fall short, before whose howness
understandings have no incapacity, and the place of whose whereness eyes
perceive not. It is You who have no bounds, lest You be bounded, who are
not exemplified, lest You be found, who do not beget, lest You be
begotten. It is You with whom there is no opposite, lest it contend with
You, who have no equal, lest it vie with You, who have no rival, lest it
resist You. It is You who are He who began, devised, brought forth,
originated, and made well all that He made. Glory be to You! How
majestic is Your station! How high Your place among the places! How
cleanly Your Separator cleaves with the truth!”

In this paragraph, the Imam of monotheists has mentioned the boundless
knowledge of Allah, the Exalted, of which is that He has counted in
numbers everything in the universe and knows everything in it, Hence no
weight of an atom is concealed from Him in the heavens and the earth.
The Imam has also mentioned that understandings fall short before the
selfness and howness of Him, the Exalted. This is because the possible
being is incapable of understanding the selfness and howness of the
Necessary Being, Who has neither kind nor genus nor family. Man- who is
incapable of understanding his selfness, his howness, and his wonderful
organs- is unable to understanding the selfness and howness of the
Almighty Creator, Who created time, place, the stars, and galaxies whose
stars none can count except Allah.

This paragraph contains important philosophical concepts such negating
bound, equal, and opposite. The books of philosophy and theology have
discussed them in detail. Now, listen to another part of this holy
supplication:

“Glory be to You! The Gentle - how gentle You are! The Clement - how
clement You are! The Wise - how knowing You! Glory be to You! The King -
how invincible You are! The Munificent - how full of plenty You are! The
Elevated - how elevated You are! Possessor of radiance and glory,
magnificence and praise! Glory be to You! You have stretched forth Your
hand with good things, and from You guidance has come to be known, Hence
he who begs from Your religion or this world will find You. Glory be to
You! Whatever passes in Your knowledge is subjected to You, all below
Your Throne are humbled before Your mightiness, and every one of Your
creatures follows You in submission. Glory be to You! You are not
sensed, nor touched, nor felt, nor beguiled, nor held back, nor
challenged, nor kept up with, nor resisted, nor deceived, nor
circumvented. Glory be to You! Your path is smooth ground, Your command
right guidance, and You are a living, eternal refuge. Glory be to You!
Your word is decisive, Your decree unfailing, Your will resolute. Glory
be to You! None can reject Your wish, none can change Your words. Glory
be to You! Outdazzling in signs, Creator of the heavens, Author of the
spirits!”

This part contains the most wonderful words with which the saints and
the pious glorify their Lord. How Great and Majestic was Allah in the
opinion of the Imam, peace be on him. This is because He, the Exalted,
is gentle and clement to his creatures, and is a Powerful King! Whoever
seeks refuge in Him seeks refuge in a stronghold and inaccessible cave.
The Imam, peace be on him, mentioned the mightiness of Allah, the Most
High, to which all that which in the universe is subjected, toward which
all that which in the existence is humble, before which all creatures
are submissive. Another quality of Allah’s mightiness is that He is free
from body, Hence He is not sensed through the five senses, for He is the
Light of the heavens and the earth. Another quality of His mightiness is
that none can beguile, circumvent, argue with, and challenge him; rather
all His creatures are in his grasp, His force, and His Command. Hence
His word is decisive, His decree is unfailing, and His will is resolute.
After this, let’s listen to another part of this holy tradition:

“To You belongs praise, a praise that will be permanent with Your
permanence! To You belongs praise, a praise everlasting through Your
favor! To You belongs praise, a praise that will parallel Your
benefaction! To You belongs praise, a praise that will increase Your
good pleasure! To You belongs praise, a praise along with the praise of
every praiser and a thanksgiving before which falls short the
thanksgiving of every thanksgiver; a praise which is suitable for none
but You and through which nearness is sought to none but You, a praise
which will make permanent the first (bounty) and call forth the
permanence of the last; a praise which will multiply through recurrence
of times and increase through successive doublings; a praise which the
guardians will not be able to number and which exceeds what the writers
number in Your Book; a praise which will counterbalance Your glorious
Throne and equal Your elevated Footstool; a praise whose reward with You
will be complete and whose recompense will comprise every recompense; a
praise whose outward conforms to its inward, and whose inward conforms
to its to correct intention; a praise with whose like no creature has
praised You and whose excellence none knows but You; a praise in which
he who strives to multiply Your praise will be helped and he who draws
the bow to the utmost in fulfilling it will be confirmed; a praise which
will gather all the praise which You have created and tie together all
which You will afterwards create; a praise than which no praise is near
to Your word and than which none is greater from any who praise You; a
praise whose fullness will obligate increase through Your generosity and
to which You will join increase after increase as graciousness from You;
a praise that will befit the generosity of Your face and meet the might
of Your majesty!”

The Imam, peace be on him, used all words to praise and laud his
Greatest Lover, the Almighty Creator. He praised Him with a boundless
praise for His great blessings and favors.

After this let’s listen to another part of this holy supplication:

“My Lord, bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad with a fruitful
blessing, more fruitful than which there is no blessing! Bless him with
a growing blessing more growing than which there is no blessing! And
bless him with a pleasing blessing, beyond which there is no blessing!
My Lord, bless Muhammad and his Household with a blessing which will
please him and increase his good pleasure! Bless him with a blessing
which will please You and increase Your good pleasure toward him! And
bless him with a blessing through other than which You will not be
pleased for him, and for which You see no one else worthy!

“My Lord, bless Muhammad and his Household with a blessing which will
pass beyond Your good pleasure, be continuous in its continuity through
Your subsistence, and never be spent, just as Your words will never be
spent! My Lord, bless Muhammad and his Household with a blessing which
will tie together the blessings of Your angels, Your prophets, Your
messengers, and those who obey You, comprise the blessings of Your
servants, jinn or mankind, and those worthy of Your response, and bring
together the blessings of the kinds of Your creatures which You have
sown and authored! My Lord, bless Muhammad and his Household with a
blessing which will encompass every blessing, bygone and new! Bless him
and his Household with a blessing which is pleasing to You and everyone
below You and will bring forth with all that a blessing with which You
will multiply those blessings and increase them through the recurrence
of days with an increasing in multiplies which none can count but You!”

In these words the Imam, peace be on him, praised his grandfather, the
greatest Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family. He asked Allah,
the Exalted, to bless him with a fruitful, growing, and pleasing
blessing which would remain throughout the recurrence of days and
nights, be continuous through the subsistence of Allah, Who has no
bound, and never be spent just as the words of Allah would never be
spent.

After this let’s listen to another part of this supplication:

“My Lord, bless the best of his Household, those whom You have chosen
for Your command appointed the treasures of Your knowledge, the
guardians of Your religion, Your vicegerents in Your earth, and Your
arguments against Your servants, purified from uncleanness and
defilement through a purification by Your desire, and made the mediation
to You and the road to Your Garden! My Lord, bless Muhammad and his
Household with a blessing which makes plentiful Your gifts and
generosity, perfects for them Your bestowals and awards, and fills out
their share of Your kindly acts and benefits! My Lord, bless Muhammad
and his Household with a blessing whose first has no term, whose term
has no limit, and whose last has no utmost end! My Lord, bless them to
the weight of Your Throne and all below it, the amount that fills the
heavens and all above them, the number of Your earths and all below and
between them, a blessing that will bring them near to You in proximity,
please You and them, and be joined to its likes forever!”

In these words the Imam, peace be on him, showed the high position of
the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, and their
excellencies, which are as follows:

Allah chose them to spread His religion and to deliver His message to
His servants.

He appointed them as the treasurers of His knowledge and centers of His
wisdom.

They guarded the religion of Allah from increase and decrease.

They were the vicegerents of Allah in His earth and His arguments
against His servants.

Allah purified them from uncleanness and defilement, as this holy verse
reads: *“Verily Allah intends to keep off from you every kind of
uncleanliness and to purify you, people of the House, with a through
purification.”*

Allah, the Exalted, made them the mediation to Him and the road to His
Garden, Hence whoever followed them was safe, and whoever disobeyed them
was drowning and straying.

These are some of their outstanding merits and laudable deeds about
which the Imam, peace be on him, talked. Now, let’s listen to another
part of this supplication:

“O Allah, surely You have confirmed Your religion in all times with an
Imam whom You have set up as a guidepost to Your servants and a
lighthouse in Your lands after his cord has been joined to Your cord!
You have appointed him the means to Your pleasure, made obeying him
obligatory, cautioned against disobeying him, and commanded following
his commands, abandoning his prohibitions, and that no forward-goer go
ahead of him or back-keeper keep back from him! Hence he is the
preservation of the shelter-seekers, the cave of the faithful, the
handhold of the adherents, and the radiance of the worlds! O Allah,
Hence inspire Your guardian to give thanks for that in which You have
favored him inspire us with the like concerning him, grant him an
authority from You to help him, open for him an easy opening, aid him
with Your mightiest pillar, brace back his back, strengthen his arm,
guard him with Your eye, defend him with Your safeguarding, help him
with Your angels, and assist him with Your most victorious troops!
Through him establish Your Book, Your bounds, Your laws, and the norms
of Your Messenger’s *Sunna* (Your blessings, O Allah, be upon him and
his Household), bring to life the guideposts of Your religion, deadened
by wrongdoers, burnish the rust of injustice from Your way, sift the
adversity from Your road, eliminate those who deviate from Your path,
and erase those who seek crookedness in Your straightness! Make his side
mild toward Your friends, stretch forth his hand over his enemies, give
us his clemency, his mercy, his tenderness, his sympathy, and make us
his hearers and obeyers, strivers toward his good pleasure, assistants
in helping him and defending him, and brought near through that to You
and Your Messenger (Your blessings be upon him and his Household).”

The Imam, peace be on him, talked about the high position of the
appointed Imam and his great importance in the world of Islam, for he is
the guardian of the religion of Allah, the one who guides (people) to
the way of the truth and guidance, and the means to Allah’s good
pleasure. Hence it is incumbent on (men) to obey the Imam, and it is
forbidden for them to disobey him, for he is the preservation of the
shelter-seekers, the cave of the faithful, the handhold of the
adherents, and the radiance of the worlds. Then the Imam asked Allah to
grant him victory and a clear conquest in order that he might establish
the *Sunna* of Islam, and bring to life the guideposts of Islamic law
and the precepts of the religion which were deadened by the wrongdoers.
Now, let’s listen to another part of this great supplication:

“O Allah, and bless the friends (of the Imams), the confessors of their
station, the keepers to their course, the pursuers of their tracks, the
clingers to their handhold, the adherents to their guardianship, the
followers of their Imamate, the submitters to their command, the
strivers to obey them, the awaiters of their days, the directors of
their eyes toward them, with blessings blessed, pure, growing, fresh,
and fragrant! Give them and their spirits peace, bring together their
affair in reverential fear, set right their situations, turn toward
them, *Surely Your are Ever-turning, All-compassionate* and the Best of
forgivers, and place us with them in the Abode of Peace, through Your
mercy, O Most Merciful of the merciful!”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Exalted, to bless the
Shi‘ites of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them,
who (the Shi‘ites) represent the ideological awareness in Islam, follow
the way of the pure Imams, pursue their tracks, adhere to their
guardianship, follow their Imamate, and strive to obey them, and await
their days. It is the Shi‘ites who cling to the true Islam and follow
the Prophet’s words and practices through obeying the Imams of the
members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, cleaving to
them, and putting into practice the Islamic precepts which have been
reported on their authority. Then the Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah
to bring together their affairs in reverential fear, to set rights their
situations, to turn toward them, and to place him with them in the Abode
of Peace. Let’s listen to another part of this supplication:

“O Allah, this is the Day of ‘Arafa, a day which You have made noble,
given honor, and magnified. Within it You have spread Your mercy, showed
kindness through Your pardon, and made plentiful Your giving, and by it
You have been bounteous toward Your servants. O Allah, I am Your
servants whom You favored before creating him and after creating him.
You made him one of those whom You guided to Your religion, gave success
in fulfilling Your right, preserved through Your cord, included within
Your party, and directed aright to befriend Your friends and show enmity
to Your enemies. Then You commanded him, but he did not follow Your
commands, You restricted him, but he did not heed Your restrictions, You
prohibited him from disobedience toward You, but he broke Your command
by doing what You had prohibited, not in contention with You, nor to
display pride toward You; on the contrary, his caprice called him to
that which You had set apart and cautioned against, and he was helped in
that by Your enemy and his enemy. Hence he went ahead with it knowing
Your threat, hoping for Your pardon, and relying upon Your forbearance,
though he was the most obligated of Your servants -given Your kindness
toward him- not to do Hence. Here I am, then, before You, despised,
lowly, humble, abject, fearful, confessing the dreadful with which I am
burdened and the great offenses that I have committed, seeking sanctuary
in Your forgiveness, asking shelter in Your mercy, and certain that no
sanctuary-giver will give me sanctuary from You and no withholder will
hold me back from You. Hence act kindly toward me, just as You act
kindly by shielding him who commits sins, be munificent toward me, just
as You are munificent by pardoning him who throws himself before You,
and show kindness to me just as it is nothing great for You to show
kindness by forgiving him who expectantly hopes in You! Appoint for me
in this day an allotment through which I may attain a share of Your good
pleasure, and send me not back destitute of that with which Your
worshippers return from among Your servants! Though I have not forwarded
the righteous deeds which they have forwarded, I have forwarded the
profession of Your Unity and the negation from You of opposites, rivals,
and likenesses, I have come to You by the gateways by which You have
commanded that people come, and I have sought nearness to You through
that without seeking nearness through which none gains nearness to You.
Then I followed all this with repeated turning toward You, lowliness and
abasement before You, opinion of You, and trust in what is with You; and
that I coupled hope in You, since the one who hopes in You is seldom
disappointed! I ask You with the asking of one vile, lowly, pitiful,
poor, fearful, seeking sanctuary; all that in fear and pleading seeking
refuge and asking shelter, not presumptuous through the pride of the
proud, nor exalting myself with the boldness of the obedient, nor
presumptuous of the intercession of the interceders. For I am still the
least of the least and the lowliest of the lowly, like a dust mote or
less!”

In this part of his supplication, the Imam, peace be on him, expressed
his magnification and glorification toward the Day of ‘Arafa, which is
among the most glorious days of Allah. This is because, Allah, the
Exalted, spreads therein His mercy, shows kindness toward the pilgrims
of His Sacred House through pardon and forgiveness. The Imam, peace be
on him, also showed his lowliness and absolute obedience to Allah
relying upon His gentleness, hoping for His pardon, forwarding the
profession of His Unity, and negating from Him opposites, rivals, and
likenesses, coming to Him by the gateways which He, the Exalted, had
commanded that people come, and which were the gateways of the pure
Imams. In this there is a lesson for the negligent and those who turn
away from Allah, the Exalted, to follow this way, that they might save
themselves from the chastisement of Allah in the Next Abode.

Now, let’s return to listen to another part of this holy supplication:
“O He who does not hurry the evildoers nor restrain those living in
ease! O He who shows kindness through releasing stumblers and gratuitous
bounty through respiting the offenders! I am the evildoer, the
confessor, the offender, the stumbler! I am he who was audacious toward
You as one insolent! I am he who disobeyed You with forethought! I am he
who hid myself from Your servants and blatantly showed myself to You! I
am he who was awed by Your servants and felt secure from You! I am he
who dreaded not Your penalty and feared not Your severity! I am the
offender against himself! I am the hostage to his own affliction! I am
short in shame! I am long in suffering! By the right of him whom You
have distinguished among Your creation and by him whom You have chosen
for Yourself! By the right of him whom You have selected from among Your
creatures and by him whom You have picked for Your task! By the right of
him whom the obeying of whom You have joined to obeying You, and by him
the disobeying of whom You have made like disobeying You! And by the
right of him whose friendship You have bound to Your friendship and by
him whose enmity You have linked to Your enmity! Shield me in this day
of mine by that through which You shield him prays fervently to you
while disavowing and him who seeks refuge in Your forgiveness while
repenting! Attend to me with that through which You attend to the people
of obedience toward You, proximity to You, and rank with You! Single me
out as You single him out who fulfills Your covenant, fatigues himself
for Your sake alone, and exerts himself in Your good pleasure! Take me
not to task for my neglect in respect to You, my transgressing the limit
in Your bounds, and stepping outside Your ordinances! Draw me not on
little by little by granting me a respite, like the drawing on little by
little of him who withholds from me the good he has by not sharing with
You in letting favor down upon me! Arouse me from the sleep of the
heedless, the slumber of the prodigal, and the dozing of the forsaken!
Take my heart to that in which You have employed the devout, enthralled
the worshippers, and rescued the remiss! Give me refuge from that which
will keep me far from You, come between me and my share from You, and
bar me from that which I strive for in You! Make easy for me the road of
good deeds toward You, racing to them from where You have commanded, and
covering them as You desire! Efface me not along with those whom You
efface for thinking lightly of what You have promised! Destroy me not
with those whom You destroy for exposing themselves to Your hate!
Annihilate me not among those whom You annihilate for deviating from
Your roads! Deliver me from the floods of trial, save me from the
gullets of affliction, and grant me sanctuary from being seized by
respite!”

In this paragraph, the Imam, peace be on him, talked about the favors of
Allah, the Exalted, toward His servants, which are: Allah did not hurry
to punish the evildoers and the disobedient; He granted them a respite
in order that they might return to the road of the truth and
righteousness. The Imam, peace be on him, also expressed his abasement
and lowliness before the Great Creator. He asked and pleaded to him to
grant him pardon and good pleasure, to arouse him from the sleep of the
heedless and the slumber of the prodigal, and to make him walk on the
road of the righteous. Let’s listen to another part of this holy
supplication:

“Come between me and the enemy who misguides me, the caprice which ruins
me, and the failing which overcomes me! Turn not away from me with the
turning away in wrath from one with whom You are not pleased! Let me not
lose heart in expecting from You lest I be overcome by despair of Your
mercy! Grant me not that which I cannot endure lest You weigh me down
with the surplus of Your love which You load upon me! Send me not from
Your hand, the sending of him who possesses no good, toward whom You
have no need, and who turns not back (to You) ! Cast me not with the
casting of him who has fallen from the eye of Your regard and been
wrapped in degradation from You! Rather take my hand (and save me) from
the falling of the stumblers, the disquiet of the deviators, the slip of
those deluded, and the plight of the perishers! Release me from that
with which You have afflicted the ranks of Your servants and handmaids
and make me reach the utmost degrees of him about whom You are
concerned, towards whom You show favor, and with whom You are pleased,
Hence that You let him live as one praiseworthy and take him to You as
one felicitous! Collar me with the collar of abstaining from that which
makes good deeds fail and takes away blessings! Impart to my heart
restraint before ugly works of evil and disgraceful misdeeds! Divert me
not by that which I cannot reach except through You from doing that
which alone makes You pleased with me! Root out from my heart the love
of this vile world, which keeps from everything which is with You, bars
from seeking the mediation to You, and distracts from striving for
nearness to You! Embellish for me solitude in prayer whispered to You by
night and by day! Give me a preservation which will bring me close to
dread of You cut me off from committing things made unlawful by You, and
spare me from captivation by dreadful sins! Give me purification from
the defilement of disobedience, take away from me the filth of offenses,
dress me in the dress of Your well-being, cloak me in the cloak of Your
release, wrap me in Your ample favors, and clothe me in Your bounty and
Your graciousness! Strengthen me with Your giving success and Your
pointing the right way, help me toward righteous intention, pleasing
words, and approved works, and entrust me not to my force and my
strength in place of Your force and Your strength! Degrade me not on the
day You raise me up to meet You, disgrace me not before Your friends,
make me not forget remembering You, take me not away from me thanking
You, but enjoin it upon me in states of inattention when the ignorant
are heedless of Your boons, and inspire me to laud what You have done
for me and confess to what You have conferred upon me! place my
beseeching You above the beseeching of the beseechers and my praise of
You above the praise of the praisers! Abandon me not with my neediness
for You, destroy me not for what I have done for You!”

Have you noticed this clinging to Allah, the Exalted, and sincere
obedience to Him? Have you noticed how the Imam, peace be on him, asked
his Lord with lowliness, submission, and flattery? He asked Him to
protect him from the trickery of the accursed Satan, the first enemy of
man. He asked Him to turn him aside from every caprice that took him to
a way other than the right way, to take care of him, to take his hand
(and save him) from the falling of the stumblers, the disquiet of the
divators, and the slip of those deluded, to root out from his heart the
love of this world, which is the root of every crime, and to embellish
for him worship and obedience to Him, that he would attain obedience,
worship, and nearness to Him. Now, let’s listen to another part of this
holy supplication:

“And slap not my brow with that with which You slap the brow of those
who contend with You, for I am submitted to You. I know that the
argument is Yours, that You are closest to bounty, most accustomed to
beneficence, *worthy of reverent fear, and worthy of forgiveness,* that
You are closer to pardoning than to punishing, and that You are nearer
to covering over than to making notorious! Hence let me live an
agreeable life that will tie together what I want and reach what I love
while I not bring what You dislike and not commit what You have
prohibited; and make me die the death of him whose light runs before him
and on his right hand! Abase me before Yourself and exalt me before Your
creatures, lower me when I am alone with You and raise me among Your
servants, free me from need for him has no need of You and increase me
in neediness and poverty toward You! Give me refuge from the gloating of
enemies, the arrival of affliction, lowliness and suffering! Shield me
in what You see from me, the shielding of him who would have power over
violence had he no clemency, and would seize for misdeeds had he no lack
of haste! When You desire for a people a trial or an evil, deliver me
from it, for I seek Your shelter; and since You have not stood me in the
station of disgrace in this world of Yours, stand me not in such a
station in the next world of Yours! Couple for me the beginnings of Your
kindness with their ends and the ancient of Your benefits with the
freshly risen! Prolong not my term with a prolonging through which my
heart will harden! Strike me not with a striking that will take my
radiance! Visit me not with a meanness that will diminish my worth or a
deficiency that will keep my rank unknown! Frighten me not with a fright
by which I will despair or a terror through which I will dread!

“However, make me stand in awe of Your threat, take precautions against
leaving no excuses and Your warning, and tremble at the recitation of
Your verses! Fill my night with life by keeping awake therein for
worshipping You, solitude with vigil for You, exclusive devotion to
reliance upon You, setting my needs before You, and imploring that You
will set my neck free from the Fire and grant me sanctuary from Your
chastisement, within which its inhabitants dwell! Leave me not blindly
wandering in my insolence or inattentive in my perplexity for a time,
make me not an admonition to him who takes admonishment, a punishment
exemplary for him who takes heed, a trial for him who observe, devise
not against me along with those against whom You devise, replace me not
with another, change not my name, transform not my body, appoint me not
a mockery for Your creatures, a laughing-stock for Yourself, a follower
of anything but Your goo-pleasure, a menial servant for anything but
avenging You!”

The Imam, peace be on him, presented his worries and requests before the
Great Creator asking Him to fulfill them and not to refuse to accept
answering him. He asked Him to let him live an agreeable life that would
tie together what he wanted, not to let him commit any sin, and to make
him die the death of one whose light ran before him and on his right
hand. He also asked Allah to abase him before Himself when he stood in
whispered prayers, and to make him find no entity of himself before Him.
He asked Him to exalt him before His creatures, to free him from need
for them, to give him refuge from the gloating of enemies, which is
among the greatest disasters against man, to save him from the arrival
of affliction, lowliness and suffering, to deliver him from a trial or
an evil when He desired it for a people, etc. Now, let’s listen to the
last paragraphs of this great supplication:

“Let me find the coolness of Your pardon and the sweetness of Your
mercy, Your repose, Your ease, and the garden of Your bliss! Let me
taste through some of Your boundless plenty, the favor of being free for
what You love and striving in what brings about proximity with You and
to You, and give me a gift from among Your gifts! Make my commerce
profitable and my return without loss, fill me with fear of Your
station, make me yearn for the meeting with, and allow me to repent with
an unswerving repentance along with which You let no sin remain, small
or large, and leave no wrongs, open or secret! Root out rancor toward
the faithful from my breast, bend my heart toward the humble, be toward
me as You are toward the righteous, adorn me with the adornment of the
Allah-fearing, appoint for me a goodly report among those yet to come
and a growing remembrance among the later folk, and take me to the plain
of those who came first! Complete the lavishness of Your favor upon me,
clothe me in its repeated generosities, fill my hands with Your
benefits, drive Your generous gifts to me, Make me the neighbor of the
best of Your friends in the Gardens which You have adorned for Your
chosen, and wrap me in Your noble presents in the stations prepared for
Your beloved ones! Appoint for me a resting place with You where I may
seek heaven in serenity, and a resort to which I may revert and rest my
eyes, weigh not against me my dreadful misdeeds, destroy me not on the
day the secrets are tried, eliminate from me every doubt and
uncertainty, appoint for me a way in the truth from every mercy, make
plentiful for me the portions of gifts from Your granting of awards, and
fill out for me the shares of beneficence from Your bestowal of bounty!
Make my heart trust in what is with You and my concern free for what is
Yours, employ me in that in which You employ Your pure friends, drench
my heart with Your obedience when intellects are distracted, and combine
with me independence, continence, ease, release, health, plenty,
tranquillity, and well-being! Make not fail my good deeds through my
disobedience that stains them or my private times of worship through the
instigations of Your trial! Safeguard my face from asking from anyone in
the world, and drive me far from begging for that which is with the
ungodly! Make me not an aid to the wrongdoers, nor their hand and helper
in erasing Your Book! Defend me whence I know not with a defense through
which You protect me! Open toward me the gates of Your repentance, Your
mercy, Your clemency, and Your boundless provision! Surely I am one of
those who beseech You! And complete Your favor toward me! Surely Your
are the best of those who show favor! Place the rest of my life in the
hajj and the *‘Umra* seeking Your face, O Lord of the worlds! And may
Allah bless Muhammad and his Household, the good, the pure, and peace be
on him and them always and forever![^91]”

With this we will end this holy supplication, which is among the
excellent supplications of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),*
peace be on them. It contains outstanding lessons on wisdom, knowledge,
and turning to Allah in repentance. Moreover it contains pure words and
beautiful styles.

### On the Day of ‘Id al-Adha’ (Sacrifice)

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, received the day of ‘Id al-Adha’
(Sacrifice) with prayer and pleading to Allah asking Him to do him a
favor through accepting his rites and all his works of worship and
obedience to Him, and to grant him pardon and good pleasure. He
supplicated Allah, the Exalted, with this glorious supplication, whose
text is as follows:

“O Allah, this is a blessed and fortunate day, within in which Muslims
are gathered in the quarters of Your earth. Among them are present the
asker, the seeker, the beseecher, the fearful, while You are looking
upon their deeds. Hence I ask You by Your munificence and generosity
and easy upon You is what I ask You! that You bless Muhammad and his
Household. And I ask You, O Allah, our Lord for Yours is the kingdom
and Yours is the praise; there is no god but You, the Clement, the
Generous, the All-loving, the All-kind, Possessor of majesty and
munificence, Originator of the heavens and the earth whenever You
apportion among Your faithful servants good, well-being, blessing,
guidance, works in obedience to You, or good through which You are kind
to them by guiding them to You, or raise them up a degree with You or
give them the good of this world or the next, that You give me amply my
share and allotment of it.

“And I ask You, O Allah for Yours is the kingdom and the praise; there
is no god but You that You bless Muhammad, Your servant and Your
messenger, Your beloved and Your selected friend, Your chosen from among
Your creation, and the Household of Muhammad, the pious, the pure, the
chosen, with a blessing no one has strength to count but You, that You
associate us with the most righteous of Your faithful servants who
supplicate You today O Lord of the worlds and that You forgive us and
them! *Surely You are powerful over everything.* O Allah, toward You I
aim with my need and before You I set my poverty, my neediness, my
misery, for I have more trust in Your forgiveness and Your mercy than in
my own works. Your forgiveness and Your mercy are vaster than my sins.
Hence bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad, and attend to the
accomplishment of every need of mine through Your power over it, its
easiness for You, my poverty toward You, and Your freedom from need for
me! I will come upon no good whatsoever unless through You, no one other
than You will turn any evil away from me, and I have hope in none but
You for my affair in the next world and in this world.

“O Allah, if anyone has ever arranged, made ready, prepared, and drawn
himself up to be received by a creature in hope of his support and
awards, then today toward You, my Master, is my arrangement, my making
ready, my preparations, and my drawing up, in hope of Your pardon and
support and in seeking to attain to You and Your prize. O Allah, Hence
bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad, and disappoint not my hope
in that today! O He who is not troubled by those who ask and diminished
by those who attain their desire! I come not before You trusting in a
righteous work I have sent ahead, nor in the intercession of any
creature in whom I have hope, except the intercession of Muhammad and
the Folk of his House (upon him and upon them be Your peace). I come to
You admitting sin and evildoing toward myself. I come to You hoping for
Your abounding pardon through which You have pardon the offenders, while
their long persistence in dreadful sin did not prevent You from
returning toward them with mercy and forgiveness! O He whose mercy is
wide and whose pardon is abounding! O All-mighty! O All-mighty! O
All-generous! O All-generous! Bless Muhammad the Household of Muhammad,
return toward me through Your mercy, be tender toward me through Your
bounty, and spread out Your forgiveness upon me!”

In the beginning of his supplication, the Imam, peace be on him, praised
‘Id al-Adha’ and its importance with the Muslims in the quarters of the
earth, whether they attend the rites of the hajj or not who raise their
requests to Allah, the Exalted, asking Him to accomplish them. The Imam
asked Allah to give him a share of good, health, and guidance which He
gave to His servants on this day. After that the Imam showed lowliness
and pleading before Allah in whose hand is giving and deprivation,
asking Him to be kind to him through forgiveness, mercy, and good
pleasure. After this, let’s listen to another part of this supplication:

“O Allah, this station[^92] belongs to Your vicegerents, Your chosen,
while the places of Your trusted ones in the elevated degree which You
have singled out for them have been forcibly stripped! But You are the
Ordainer of that Your command is not overcome, the inevitable in Your
governing is not overstepped! However You will and whenever You will! In
that which You know best, You are not accused for Your creation or Your
will! Then Your selected friends, Your vicegerents, were overcome,
vanquished, forcibly stripped; they see Your decree replaced, Your book
discarded, Your obligations distorted from the aims of Your laws, and
the *Sunna* of Your Prophet abandoned! O Allah, curse their enemies
among those of old and the later folk, and all those pleased with their
acts, and their adherents and followers! O Allah, bless Muhammad and the
Household of Muhammad (surely You are All-laudable, All-glorious) like
Your blessing, benedictions, and salutations upon Your chosen Abraham
and the people of Abraham! And hasten for them relief, ease, help,
strengthening, and confirmation!”

In this part of his supplication, the Imam, peace be on him, dealt with
the sensitive political affairs in his time, Hence he stated the
following:

1. The station of the ‘Id prayer and other general affairs belonged to
the Imams of guidance, who were the vicegerents of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family, and his trustees, and who treated the
people with justice and fairness.

2. The important organs of the state were forcibly stripped by the Imams
of tyranny and misguidance from among the Umayyad kings who spared no
effort to war against Islamic awareness and to remove the Islamic
message from society.

3. During the black government of the Umayyads, the Imam of guidance and
truth were overcome, vanquished, and forcibly stripped.

4. The Umayyads intended to replace the decrees of Allah, to discard the
Book, to distort the obligations, and to abandon the *Sunna* of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family.

After this let’s return to another part of this holy supplication:

“O Allah, and make me one of the people who profess Your Unity, have
faith in You, and attest to Your Messenger and the Imams toward whom You
have enjoined obedience, and one of those through whom and at whose
hands this takes place! Amen, Lord of the worlds! O Allah, nothing
repels Your wrath but Your clemency, nothing repels Your displeasure but
Your pardon, nothing grants sanctuary from Your punishment but Your
mercy, and nothing will deliver me from You except pleading to You
before You, Hence bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad, and give
us on Your part, my Allah, relief by means of the power through which
You bring the dead servants to life and revive the dead lands. Destroy
me not through gloom, my Allah, before You respond to me and give me the
knowledge of Your response to my supplication! Let me taste the flavor
of well-being to the end of my term! And let not my enemy gloat over me,
place not my neck in his power, and give him not authority over me!

“My Allah, if You rise me up, who is there to push me down? If You push
me down, who is there to raise me up? If You honor me, who is there to
humiliate me? If You humiliate me, who is there to honor me? If You
chastise me, who is there to have mercy upon me? If You destroy me, who
is there to stand up for Your servant against You or ask You about his
affair? But I know that there is no wrong in Your decree and no hurry in
Your vengeance. He alone hurries who fears to miss, and only the weak
needs to wrong. But You are exalted, My Allah, high indeed above all
that!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad, make me not the
target of affliction nor the object of Your vengeance, respite me,
comfort me, release me from my stumble, and afflict me not with an
affliction in the wake of an affliction, for You have seen my frailty,
the paucity of my stratagems, and my pleading to You! I seek refuge in
You today, my Allah, from Your wrath, Hence bless Muhammad and his
Household and give me refuge! I seek sanctuary in You today from Your
displeasure, Hence bless Muhammad and his Household and give me
sanctuary! I seek guidance from You, Hence bless Muhammad and his
Household and guide me! I seek help from You, Hence bless Muhammad and
his Household and help me! I ask You for mercy, Hence bless Muhammad and
his Household and have mercy upon me! I seek sufficiency from You, Hence
bless Muhammad and his Household and suffice me! I seek provision from
You, Hence bless Muhammad and his Household and provide for me! I seek
assistance from You, Hence bless Muhammad and his Household and assist
me! I pray forgiveness for my past sins, Hence bless Muhammad and his
Household and forgive me! I ask You to preserve me from sin, Hence bless
Muhammad and his Household and preserve me, for I will not return to
anything You dislike from me, if You will that! My Lord! My Lord! O
All-loving! O All-kind! O Possessor of majesty and munificence! Bless
Muhammad and his Household, and grant me everything that I ask from You,
seek from You, and beseech from You! Will it, ordain it, decree it, and
accomplish it! give me good in that of it which You decree! Bless me in
that, be gratuitously bountiful toward me through it, make me happy in
that of it which You give to me, and increase me in Your bounty and the
plenty of what is with You, for You are boundless, Generous! And link
that to the good and the bliss of the next world, O Most Merciful of the
Merciful.[^93]”

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, supplicated Allah with this
glorious supplication and called down blessings on Muhammad and his
Household one thousand times. With this we will end our talk about this
holy supplication full of lowliness and pleading to the Great Creator.
In it the Imam asked Allah for the good of this world and the next
world. He asked, the Exalted, to make him have faith in Him and to
attest to His Messenger and the great Imams, the trustees of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and his vicegerents over
his community. Without doubt, the Imam, peace be on him, had great faith
in Allah, attested to His Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family,
and knew of his trustees (of authority), for he was among them. He
supplicated with this supplication to guide the community to the sound,
ideological path.

[^1]: Al-‘Askari, Taffsir, p. 132.

[^2]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 1, p. 53. Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p.
105. Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 134. Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9,
p. 105. Durrar al-Abkar, p. 70.

[^3]: Al-Kawakib al-Durriya, vol. 2, p. 139.

[^4]: Al-Khisal, p. 488.

[^5]: Durrar al-Abkar, p. 70. Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21, p. 326. Siyar
A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 238. Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p. 49.
Akhbar al-Diwal, p. 109. Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 132. Al-‘Aqdd
al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 103.

[^6]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p. 52. Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4,
p. 38.

[^7]: Wasilat al-Mal, p. 207. Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 38.
Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p. 52.

[^8]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 58.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 108.

[^10]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 4, p. 685.

[^11]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 2, p. 286. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 46, p. 79.

[^12]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam, vol. 2, p. 286. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 46, p. 79.

[^13]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 108.

[^14]: ‘Ilal al-Sharai‘, p. 88. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p.
61. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 4, p. 688.

[^15]: Akhbar al-Diwal, p. 110. 3. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46,
p. 99.

[^16]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p. 52. Al-Muntazam, vol. 6, p. 141.
Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21, p. 325. Siyar ‘Alam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p.
238.

[^17]: Al-Risala al-Qushayriya, vol. 1, p. 214.

[^18]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 7, p. 306. Nu\`r al-Abbsar, p. 136.
Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p. 49. Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 1, p. 71.
Shadharat al-Dhahab, vol. 1, p. 141. Al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p. 188.
Akhbar al-Diwal, p. 110. Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p. 151. Al-Sirat
al-Sawi, p. 193. Iqamat al-Hujja, p. 171. Al-‘Ibar fi Khabar men Ghabar,
vol. 1, p. 111. Al-Bustani, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol. 9, p. 355.
Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 45. Al-Muntazam, vol. 6, p. 143.
Al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam. Al-Kawakib al-Durriya, vol. 2, p. 131.
Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, p. 105.

[^19]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 61. Al-Khisal, p. 487.

[^20]: Al-Khisal, p. 487.

[^21]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p. 53.

[^22]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 4, p. 981.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 1079.

[^24]: Al-Quttb al-Rawandi, Da‘awat, p. 34.

[^25]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p. 53. Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 2, p.
263.

[^26]: He, peace be on him, meant that he did not trust those whom he
knew, for they disclosed the secret when they knew it.

[^27]: He, peace be on him, referred to the holy verse: “And certainly
We created man of an extract of clay, then We made him a small life-germ
in a firm resting-place, then We made the life-germ a clot, then We made
the clot a lump of flesh, then We made (in) the lump of flesh bones,
then We clothed the bones with flesh, then We caused it to grow into
another creation, Hence blessed be Allah, the best of the creators.”

[^28]: Fi Zilal al-Qur’an, vol. 17, p. 16.

[^29]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 32.

[^30]: Al-Mufeed, al-Irshad, p. 272. Roudat al-Wa‘izin, vol. 1, p. 237.

[^31]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 99.

[^32]: Ibid., p. 91.

[^33]: Ibn Shahrashu\`b, al-Manaqib. Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir.

[^34]: AL-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 65.

[^35]: Al-Rawandi, Da‘awat, p. 4.

[^36]: Furu\`‘ al-Kafi, vol. 4, p. 88.

[^37]: By the month of purity he, peace be on him, meant that the
fasting one is pure from sins in this blessed month.

[^38]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 44.

[^39]: Al-Mahasin, p. 396. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 72.

[^40]: Qur’an, 24, 22.

[^41]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, pp. 103-104.

[^42]: Al-Tu\`si, al-Misbah. Al-Kaf‘ami, al-Misbah.

[^43]: Qur’an, 66, 8.

[^44]: Ibid., 6, 110.

[^45]: Ibid., 2, 261

[^46]: Ibid., 57, 11.

[^47]: Ibid., 2, 152.

[^48]: Ibid., 14, 7.

[^49]: Ibid., 40, 60.

[^50]: He, peace be on him, meant that he neglected this month because
he did not take care of works therein.

[^51]: By the varieties of its craved stores, he meant the reward which
Allah has stored for His believing servants.

[^52]: By the these two months, he meant the past and the next months of
Ramadhan.

[^53]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 45.

[^54]: Ibid., Supplication no. 46.

[^55]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 8, p. 5.

[^56]: Men la Yahdarahu\` al-Faqih, p. 156. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 8, p.
5.

[^57]: Men la Yahdarahu\` al-Faqih, p. 159.

[^58]: Ibid., p. 155.

[^59]: Al-Bihar. In al-‘Aqdd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 103, it has been
mentioned: “He performed the hajj on foot twenty-five times.”

[^60]: Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 133.

[^61]: Al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p. 189.

[^62]: Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, vol. 1, p. 138.

[^63]: Al-Bihar, vol. 46, p. 71.

[^64]: Saffwat al-Saffwa, vol. 2, p. 54.

[^65]: Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21, p. 326. Khulasat Tahdhib al-Kamal, p.
131. Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 7, 306.

[^66]: Tahdhib al-Tahdhib, vol. 7, 306.

[^67]: Furu\`‘ al-Kafi, vol. 4, 407.

[^68]: Qur’an, 23, 101.

[^69]: Ibid., 21, 28.

[^70]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 101.

[^71]: In his book al-Rasa’il, p. 89, al-Jahiz mentioned that Hisham b.
‘Abd al-Malik was called al-Ahwal al-Sarraq (the cross-eyed one, the one
who steals very much). Abu\` al-Najam al-‘Ajali recited him his poem in
which he said: “Praise belongs to Allah, the All-giving....” Hence he
(Hisham) clapped his hands as a sign of approval of the poem. When he
(Abu\` al-Najam al-‘Ajali) came to mentioning the sun, he said: “And the
sun in the earth is like the eye of the cross-eyed one.” Hence Hisham
ordered him to be taken out. Commenting on that, al-Jahiz said: “This is
an intense weakness and great ignorance.”

[^72]: Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21, pp. 331. Some or all this poem has been
mentioned in many books of literature, history, and biographies. The
following is some of them: Zahr al-Adab, vol. 1, p. 103. Ibn Nabbata,
Sarah al-‘Uyyu\`n, p. 390. Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p.
193. Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p. 51. Al-Qirmani, Akhbar al-Diwal, p.
110. Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36. p. 161. Roudat al-Wa‘izin, vol. 1, p. 239.
Al-Bustani, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol. 9, p. 356. Anwar al-Rabi‘, vol. 4,
p. 35. It is worth mentioning that the order of the lines of this poem
is different in these books.

[^73]: Al-Bustani, Da’irat al-Ma‘arif, vol. 9, p. 356.

[^74]: Anwar al-Rabi‘, vol. 4, p. 35.

[^75]: Al-Aghani.

[^76]: Imam Zayd, pp. 28-29.

[^77]: Sarh al-‘Uyyu\`n, p. 390.

[^78]: Nihayat al-Irab, vol. 21, p. 331.

[^79]: Al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 579.

[^80]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 80. Kashf al-Ghumma,
vol. 4, pp. 150-151.

[^81]: Qur’an, 23, p. 101.

[^82]: Roudat al-Jannat, vol. 5, p. 161. He (the author of this book)
commented on these words of al-Asma‘i, saying: “This is the whole of the
tradition which is strange, for it contradicts the class of al-Asma‘i,
the mentioned, the famous one, whose birth occurred many (years) after
the death of al-Sajjad (Zayn al-‘Abidin) except that al-Asma‘i was
another man from among the old people who belonged to his ancestor Asma‘

[^83]: Roudat al-Wa‘izin, vol. 1, p. 237.

[^84]: Roudat al-Jannat, vol. 3, p. 29.

[^85]: Al-Sila bayna al-Tasawuf wa al-Tashayya‘, vol. 1, p. 161.

[^86]: Kashf al-Ghumma, vol. 1, p. 151. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 46, p. 81. Tha‘lab, al-Majjlis, vol. 2, p. 462.

[^87]: Nu\`r al-Abbsar, p. 127. Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 6, p. 192.

[^88]: Quttub al-Rawandi, Da‘awat, p. 43.

[^89]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 105.

[^90]: Ibid., p. 62.

[^91]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 47.

[^92]: The station of the servant’s prayer.

[^93]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 48.


