Chapter 9: Some Sciences Of The Imam
====================================

As for the sciences of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, they were
an automatic extension to the sciences of his fathers, who inherited
them from the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. The
historians unanimously agreed that the Imam was the most knowledgeable
of the people in all sciences and arts. The proof of this is that the
religious scholars and reporters narrated countless sciences on his
authority.[^1] We will briefly present some of his knowledge and
sciences as follows:

The Hadith (Tradition)
----------------------

As for the holy hadith, it is of great importance in Islamic sciences,
for it explains objectively and comprehensively all the religious
precepts which Allah has mentioned in the Holy Qur’an. It mentions their
kinds, which are: obligatory (wajib), forbidden (muharram), desirable,
(mustahab) reprehensible (makkru’h), and permissible (mubah). It
mentions their parts, their conditions, their legal impediments, and all
necessary things concerning them. It specifies and limits the general
(verses) of the Book. It mentions the manners of behavior and rules of
morals. Moreover it gives methods that make man happy and set right his
character.

Anyhow, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the greatest and most
important narrator in Islam, and his narration is of great importance
with the traditionalists, especially as it concerns those traditions
reported by al-Zuhri on his authority. Abu’ Bakr b. Abi Shayba said:
“The most authentic chain of authorities is al-Zuhri on the authority of
‘Ali b. al-Husayn on the authority of his father on the authority of
‘Ali.[^2]” The Imam, peace be on him, reported a large group of
traditions on the authority of his grandfather, the greatest Prophet,
may Allah bless him and his family, of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, of his father Imam al-Husayn, peace be on
him, and of others. We will mention some of his narrations:

### His Narrations on the Authority of the Prophet

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, narrated a brilliant group of
traditions on the authority of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may
Allah bless him and his family. The following are some of them:

1. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Allah’s Apostle,
may Allah bless him and his family, who said: “Waiting for relief is
worship. Whoever is satisfied with a little provision, Allah is
satisfied with his little work.[^3]” This holy tradition urges the
Muslim person in a wise manner to avoid despair of Allah’s mercy; rather
he/she must be patient and wait for ease, for all affairs are only in
the hand of Allah, the Exalted, Who manages the affairs of His servants.
This tradition also prevents man from fatiguing himself for attaining
material things, for Allah divides provisions among His servants.

2. The Imam, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: “By Him in whose
hand is my soul, nothing is better than adding clemency to
knowledge.[^4]” The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, urged
man to adopt knowledge and clemency which are among the original
qualities through which man’s character prospers, and through which his
life and behavior develop.

3. The Imam, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his father
Imam, Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, on the authority of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: “Showing love to
men is the head of intellect, after faith in Allah, the Great and
Almighty.[^5]” Indeed, showing love to men and attaining their
sentiments are among the most manifest qualities of man’s character.
They are a proof of the completion of his intellect and the abundance of
his perfection and excellence, and are among the greatest earnings in
his life.

4. The Imam, peace be on him, reported on the authority of Allah’s
Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: “Faith is words
and actions.[^6]” Faith is not mere words that vanish in space; rather
it is action and striving in life.

5. He, peace be on him, related from the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, who said: “Faith is confession with the tongue,
knowledge through the heart, and action with the limbs.[^7]”

Faith depends on three affairs:

First, it depends on confessing with the tongue which shows what has
been impressed in the inner self.

Second, the heart should know in detail the thing in which it has
believed. Hence, if there is no knowledge through the heart, there is no
faith.

Third, faith should be accompanied by action with the limbs.

6. Al-Zuhri reported on the authority of Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, peace
be on him, on the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, who said: “The people of two creeds do not inherit each other,
nor does a Muslim inherit an unbeliever, nor does an unbeliever inherit
a Muslim.” Then he, may Allah bless him and his family, recited: “Those
who disbelieve are friends of each other.”[^8] The Muslim jurists
unanimously agreed that unbelief cut off inheritance.

7. The Imam, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his father,
on the authority of the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, on
the authority of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family,
who said: “The foot of a servant will not disappear on the Day of
Judgment until he is questioned about four (things): about his span, in
what he spent it, about his youth, in what he spent it, about his
possessions, where he earned them and in what he had spent them, and
about the love toward us, the Household (of the Prophet).[^9]”

This holy Prophetic tradition shows the following affairs:

A. On the Day of Resurrection, Allah will question man: “Did you spend
the days of your life in obedience to Me and in good pleasure of Mine,
that I may repay you for them? Or did you spend them in disobedience to
Me, that I may punish you with justice?”

B. Allah will question man: “Did you spend the days of your youth, which
was the bloom of your life, in disobedience to Me, that I may punish you
for them? Or did you spend them in obedience to Me, that I may repay you
for them?”

C. Allah will question man: “Did you earn your possessions legally? Did
you spend them in the good pleasure of Mine, that I may repay you for
them? Did you earn them through illegal ways such as usury and falsehood
and spent them in disobedience to Me, that I may punish you for them?”

D. Allah will question man about the love for the members of the House
*(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, who are life-boats and security for
mankind. Hence whoever loves them, his road will surely lead to the
Garden, and whoever hates them, his road will certainly lead to the
Fire, as the narrators have unanimously agreed on this.

8. He peace be on him, reported on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, who said: “The most lovable act for Allah is making the
believer pleased.[^10]” Islam take great care of the unity and
solidarity of Muslims. Hence it urges believers to delight each other in
order to spread love and friendship among them.

9. He, peace be on him, said: [The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless
him and his family, said:]

“Nothing better than good manners will be placed in the person’s scales
on the Day of Resurrection.[^11]”

Clinging to noble moral traits is among the most valuable things which
man possesses in his life and among the best works which he stores for
his life in the next world. Hence Islam has summoned man to adopt them.

10 He, peace be on him, said: [ Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, would say in the end of his sermon:]

“Blessed is he whose morals are good, whose nature is pure, whose inner
self is righteous, his open behavior is good, who spends the surplus of
his possessions (in the way of Allah), withholds the surplus of his
words, and treats people with justice.[^12]”

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, urged the Muslim person
to follow outstanding qualities and to cling to the following:

1. Good manners.

2. The purification and righteousness of conscience.

3. Virtues and the rules of conduct

4. Spending the surplus of possessions in the way of Allah such as
helping the poor and the weak.

5. Restraining the surplus of words and refraining from entering dull
affairs.

6. Treating people with justice, that is through clinging to the truth
even if it is against yourself.

11. He, peace be on him, said: [ Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, say:]

“Whoever wants Allah to prolong his lifetime and increase his provision,
let him join his womb relatives, for womb relatives will have fluent
tongues on the Day of Resurrection. They will say: O Lord, join him who
had joined us, and cut him off who had cut us off.[^13]”

Indeed, joining womb relatives strengthens the links of the family which
is the first foundation in building society. When love and friendship
prevail family, society becomes righteous and united. Hence, Islam takes
great care of unity and solidarity of society through summoning its
followers to join each other.

12. He, peace be on him, said: [ Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him
and his family, say:]

“The most lovable ways for Allah, the Great and Almighty, are two:
Repelling rage with clemency and misfortune with forbearance.[^14]” The
greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, did his best to
build the Muslim’s character on clemency and forbearance, which are
among the most prominent qualities of man. Hence, whoever has such
qualities will have a perfect character.

13. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his fathers, on
the authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, who
said: “Indeed, Allah, the Great and Almighty, created reason from
stored, hidden light through His previous knowledge with which He
acquainted neither the prophets, the envoys, nor the angels brought
nigh. Hence, He made knowledge its breath, understanding its soul,
asceticism its head, modesty its eye, wisdom its tongue, clemency its
concern, and mercy its heart. Then He strengthened and filled it
(reason) with ten things: certainty, faith, truthfulness, tranquillity,
sincerity, gentleness, giving, content, submission, and thanksgiving.
Then He, the Great and Almighty, said to reason: Turn back, and it
turned back. Then He said to it: Come, and it came. Then He said to it:
Speak, and it said: Praise belongs to Allah who has neither support, nor
rival, nor likeness, nor match, nor equal, toward whose mightiness all
things are humble. Hence, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, said: (I
swear) by My might and majesty, I have never created a creature better
than you, more obedient to me than you, higher than you, nobler than
you, dearer than you. Through you I will blame. Through you I will give.
Through you My Unity is confessed. Through you I am worshipped. Through
you I am supplicated. Through you I am hoped. Through you I am sought.
Through you I am feared. Through you I am watched out. Through you I
will reward, and through you I will punish.[^15]”

This holy tradition glorifies and magnifies reason, shows its importance
and the qualities to which Allah has given. Hence reason is the best of
all beings which Allah created. Allah has granted man reason and
distinguished him by it from other creatures and beings. Reason is a
condition for the rightness of the Islamic obligations. Hence whoever
loses his reason is like an animal, and thus it is not incumbent on him
to perform the obligations.

14. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his fathers that a
Muslim said to Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family: “O
Allah’s Apostle, if you force those men, over whom you have power, our
number will increase and we will be more forceful than our enemy. Hence
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘I do not
want to meet Allah with an innovation through which nothing has happened
to me, and I am not among those who oppress (people).’ Hence Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, revealed: O Muhammad, ‘*And if your Lord had
pleased, surely all those who are in the earth would have believed, all
of them*,’ by force as they believe (in Me) when they will see
chastisement in the hereafter.

If I did that against them, they would not be worthy of my reward and
praise. However, I want them to believe (in Me) willingly, and not by
force, that they may be worthy of My proximity, dignity, and immortality
in the Immortal Garden, ‘*Will you then force men till they become
believers*?’ As for these words of Him, the Great and Almighty: ‘*And it
is not for a soul to believe except by Allah’s permission*,’ they do not
mean that it is forbidden for the soul to believe (in Allah); rather
they mean that it does not believe (in Him) except with His own
permission, which means that He commands it to believe (in Him) without
any force.[^16]”

The greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, refuted the
suspicion of compulsion and all the imaginations concerning it. When
Allah, the Exalted, created men, he gave them the freedom of choice,
guided them to good deeds, and prevented them from (doing) evil deeds.
Hence they do whatever they want and choose whatever they want according
to their own will. They are not forced to do any deed. The narrators
said: “Imam al-Rida recited this tradition to al-Ma’mu’n, the Abbaside,
who admired it and said: ‘O Aba al-Hasan, you have relieved me, may
Allah relieve you!’[^17]”

15. He, peace be on him, said: [My father al-Husayn, Lord of the youths
of Heaven related to me. He said: My father ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, peace be
on him, reported to me. He said: I heard the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, say:]

“Allah, the Great and Almighty, said: *Surely, I am Allah, there is no
god but I, Hence serve me.* He who sincerely bears witness that there is
no god but Allah will enter My fort, and he who enters My fort will be
safe from My chastisement.[^18]”

Indeed, whoever sincerely confesses the Unity of Allah and admits it
because of awareness and faith will cling to Allah and enter His safe
fort. Accordingly, he will be safe from the chastisement and punishment
of Allah.

16. He, peace be on him, said: [Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said:]

“A defect is sufficient for person that he sees men’s defects but does
not see his own defects, and that he harms his friend with that which
does not concern him.[^19]”

It is a defect that person looks for the defects of men and turns away
from his own defects. Such a person has to educate himself, set right
his own defects, and leave looking for the defects of men. It is also a
defect that he harms his friend with that which does not concern him,
for, with this, he shows enmity toward his friend, while he is in no
need of this.

17. He, peace be on him, said: [Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said:]

“It is an act of the good Islam of person is that he leaves that which
does not concern him.[^20]” This is one of the most prominent qualities
of the Muslim person, for his leaving that which does not concern him is
a proof of his abundant, perfect reason. As for entering into that which
does not concern him, it is a proof of his shallow reason, causes to him
difficulties and hardships, and throws him into great wickedness.

18. He, peace be on him, said: [Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said:]

“(There are) three degrees in the Garden and three degrees in the
hereafter: The highest degree of the Garden is for him who loves us
through his heart and supports us with his tongue and his hand. The
second degree is for him who loves us through his heart and supports us
with his tongue. The third degree is for him who loves us through his
heart. He who hates us through his heart and helps (against us) with his
tongue is in the lowest level of the Fire. He who hates us through his
heart is in the third level of the Fire.[^21]”

Love for the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, is
salvation from ruin, and it makes man attain the highest level of
Paradise. As for showing hate toward them, it is among the reasons for
facing ruin and entering the lowest level of the Fire.

19. He, peace be on him, said: [Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said:]

“Love for me and my household is useful in seven situations whose
terrors are great: during death, in grave, during Resurrection, during
the Book, during the reckoning, during the scales, and during the
Path.[^22]” These are the most critical situations which man will not
pass but through love for the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and his pure Household.

20. He, peace be on him, said: [Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, said:]

“Allah and every prophet responded have cursed seven (persons): The one
who increases Allah’s Book. The one who accuses Allah’s predetermination
of laying. The one who abandons my *Sunna* (practices). The one who
regards as lawful what Allah has forbidden concerning my Household. The
one who gains power (over my community) through invincibility to make
lowly those whom Allah supports and supports those whom Allah has made
lowly. And the one who takes hold of the war booty gained by Muslims
(without fighting) and regards it as lawful.[^23]”

Such kinds of people, whom Allah and every prophet cursed, have deviated
from the truth and abandoned all the laws of Allah. Such people were the
Umayyad monarchs, who destroyed Islam, showed an enmity toward the pure
family (of the Prophet), and spread corruption and tyranny in the earth.

21. He, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his grandfather,
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, who said: “Allah,
the Great and Almighty, said: ‘Ali b. Abi Talib is my proof over My
creatures, My light in My earth, and entrusted by Me with My
knowledge.[^24]”

This Holy Tradition displays the importance of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him, and his high position with Allah, for
he is the greatest argument of Allah over His servants, His bright light
in the earth, and entrusted by Him with His knowledge.

22. He, peace be on him, said: [My father al-Husayn told me. He said:
al-Hasan b. ‘Ali told me. He said: My father ‘Ali b. Abi Talib told me.
He said: Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:]

“I and ‘Ali were created from one light.[^25]”

Allah, the Exalted, created the Prophet and the Trustee (of authority)
from one light. Through them He enlightened intellects, made clear the
path, and guided the straying.

23. He, peace be on him, reported that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless
him and his family, said: “O ‘Ali, the first thing about which the
servant will be questioned after his death is that he should confess
that there is no god but Allah, that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,
and that you are the Commander of the faithful because of what Allah and
I have determined for you. Hence whoever confess this and believes in it
will enter Paradise.[^26]”

All the traditions have mentioned the meaning of this tradition, which
is as follows: When man leaves the life in this world, he will be
questioned about these three affairs, which are the first beginning
about which he will be questioned and according to which he will be
punished.

24. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, who said: “Gabriel came down to me and said: ‘Surely Allah
recites you greetings and says: ‘The Fire is forbidden for the backbone
which caused you to descend, the womb which carried you, and the lap
which took care of you.’[^27]”

Commenting on this tradition, al-Siyu’ti said: “As for the loins from
which Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, was caused to
descend, they were (the loins of) ‘Abd Allah. As for the womb (which
carried him), it was (the womb of) Amina. As for the lap (which took
care of him), it was the lap of his uncle Abu’ Talib and of Fatima,
daughter of Asad.[^28]”

25. He, peace be on him, said: [Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and
his family, came to a group of his family and said:]

“Shall I tell you about that which will be good for you in this world
and the next world and with which you supplicate Allah, the Great and
Almighty, and He relieves you when you become distressed and worried?
They replied: ‘Yes, O Allah’s Apostle.’ He said: ‘Say: Allah, Allah,
Allah is our Lord, Who has no associate! Then, supplicate (Him) with
whatever you want.’[^29]”

26. He, peace be on him, said: “A man came to Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, and asked him: ‘I have done all evil things,
hence is there any repentance?’ He (Allah’s Apostle), may Allah bless
him and his family, answered: ‘Is any of your parents remaining
(alive)?’ ‘Yes,’ answered the man. He (Allah’s Apostle), may Allah bless
him and his family, said: ‘Do good for him, may Allah pardon you.’ When
the man went away, He (Allah’s Apostle), may Allah bless him and his
family, said: ‘If only it would his mother.’[^30]” This tradition shows
that doing good for parents is among the things that make mercy
obligatory and lead to forgiving sins, especially as it concerns mother.

27. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father, Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him, that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him
and his family, said to Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him: “The Garden yearns for you, ‘Ammar, Salman, Abi Dharr, and
al-Muqqdad.[^31]”

Indeed, the Garden yearns for this believing group of people, for they
did their best for Allah, and established His religion through their
efforts and striving. Hence, indeed, the Garden yearns for them!

28. He, peace be on him, said: [My father related to me that his
grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said:]

“The most obedient of the people is he who performs the religious
duties. The most generous of the people is he who pays *Zakat* (alms).
The most ascetic of the people is he who refrains from (doing) forbidden
things. The most pious of the people is he who believes in the truth
concerning what is for him and what is against him. The most just of the
people is he who accepts for the people what he accepts for himself and
hates for them what he hates for himself. The most courteous of the
people is he who always mentions death. The happiest of the people is he
who is safe from punishment (when) he is under the earth and hopes for
reward. The wisest of the people is he who learns a lesson when the
world changes from state to state. The most important of the people in
the world is he who does not regard the world as important. The most
valuable of the people is he who is the most knowledgeable of them. The
least of the people in pleasure is the envier. The least of the people
in rest is the miser. The most miserly of the people is he who is
miserly in that which Allah has made obligatory on him. The worthiest of
the people in the truth is the most knowledgeable of them. The least of
the people in sacredness is the sinner. The least of the people in
sincerity are the kings. The least of the people in friendship are the
kings. The poorest of the people is the greedy one. The richest of the
people is he who is not the captive of stinginess. The best of the
people in faith is the best of them in temper. The (wisest) of the
people is the most pious of them. The greatest of the people in wariness
is he who leaves that which does not concern him. The most pious of the
people is he who leaves argument, even if he is right. The least of the
people in generosity is the liar. The most miserable of the people are
the kings. The most abominable of the people is the haughty one. The
best of the people in exertion is he who refrains from sins. The most
clement of the people is he who turns aside from the ignorant men. The
happiest of the people is he who keeps close to generous men. The wisest
of the people is he who strongly humors men. The worthiest of the people
of accusation is he who sits with the people of accusation. The most
tyrannical of the people is he who kills other than his killer and hits
other than his hitter. The worthiest of the people of forgiveness is he
who is the most capable of them of punishment. The worthiest of the
people of sin is the fool, the backbiter. The lowliest of the people is
he who abuses men. The most resolute of the people is he who is the best
of them in restraining anger. The most righteous of the people is he who
is the best of them in setting men right, and the best of the people is
he whom men avail themselves of him.[^32]” This holy tradition sheds
light on men’s natures, trends, and inclinations. It shows the important
methods of the inclusive reform of many educational and psychological
affairs. Indeed, this Prophetic tradition is a treasure of science,
wisdom, and knowledge.

29. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father that
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: “I and the
prophets before me have been afflicted by him who harms us. If the
believer is on the top of a mountain, Allah, the Great and Almighty,
will sends him who harms him (the believer) to repay him (the believer)
for that.[^33]”

The greatest Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and all the
prophets before him were persecuted by the tyrannical governments which
opposed social reformers. The law of life follows this state, for evil
forces always war against good forces; rather if a believer isolated
himself from men on the top of a mountain, a wicked person would go
there to harm him, that Allah might repay the believer for this.

30. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father that
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: “‘Ali b. Abi
Talib is the vicegerent of Allah and is my vicegerent. He is the proof
of Allah and is my proof. He is the chosen one of Allah and is my chosen
one. He is the lover of Allah and is my lover. He is the friend of Allah
and is my friend. He is the sword of Allah and is my sword. He is my
brother, my friend, and my helper. He who loves him loves me. He who
hates him hates me. He who follows him follows me. His enemy is my
enemy. His wife is my daughter. His sons are my sons. His war is my war.
His words are my words. His command is my command. He is the Lord of the
trustees (of authority), and the best one of my community.[^34]”

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, praised on many
occasions the outstanding qualities of his brother and his trustee (of
authority), the pioneer of the truth and social justice, Imam ‘Ali, the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. It was natural for the
Prophet to praise and laud Imam ‘Ali to indicate that he was his
successor after him, and that he was the general leader of the Islamic
movement after his death, may Allah bless him and his family.

31. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his fathers that
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said to his
companions: “Surely, Allah has imposed on you obedience to me. He has
prevented you from disobeying me. He has imposed on you obedience to
‘Ali after me. He has prevented you from disobeying him. ‘Ali is my
trustee (of authority), and my inheritor. He belongs to me, and I belong
to him. Love for him is belief, and hatred of him is unbelief.[^35]”

Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, did not impose on
his companions obedience to Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him; rather Allah imposed it on all the Muslims. This is
clearly indicated by the Tradition of al-Ghadir, *Hadith* *al- Ghadir*,
on which all the Muslims have unanimously agreed. Without doubt, this
resulted from Imam ‘Ali’s talents and great devotion to Allah, the
Exalted, for there was no Muslim similar to him in outstanding qualities
and laudable deeds. Al-Jahiz said: “When priority and precedence in
Islam are mentioned, when help and protection to Islam are mentioned,
when knowledge of the religion is mentioned, when renouncing possessions
(for which men fight each other) is mentioned, when the giving on the
plate is mentioned, none is well-known for all these qualities except
‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with him.[^36]”

32. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father, on the
authority of his grandfather Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, that Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: “The sick can perform the prayers standing. If they cannot
(perform the prayers standing), they can perform them sitting. If they
cannot prostrate, they can point to the (prostration place) and make
their prostration lower than their bowing. If they cannot perform the
prayers sitting, they can perform them (lying) on their right side
facing the *qibla.* If they cannot (perform them in this manner), they
can pray laying down and their legs facing the *qibla.*[^37]”

This holy tradition and other traditions narrated on the authority of
the Imams of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them,
concerning this matter are among the traditions on which the jurists
depend and conclude religious precepts. They say that it is not
incumbent on the sick to perform the prayers standing when he/she finds
difficulty in (performing) them; rather it is incumbent on him to
perform them sitting, for Islam has not legislated any difficult
precept.

33. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father that
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: “If the
believer is full (of food) and thanks Allah (for this), Allah will repay
him as He repays the one who fasts and stands (in prayer). *Surely,
Allah loves those who thank (Him).*[^38]”

These are some traditions which Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
reported on the authority of his grandfather, Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family. He also reported some traditions on the
authority of his father, on the authority of his grandfather Imam ‘Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, on the authority of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Moreover, he reported some
traditions without any chain of authorities. Anyhow, all the traditions
reported on his authority are very authentic if the chain of authorities
is authentic.

### His Narrations on the Authority of the Commander of the Faithful

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, reported a brilliant group of the
wise sayings of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. In these wise sayings Imam ‘Ali treated many social affairs. Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin also reported a group of his sermons of which is the
following:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “The immoderate person has three marks: He
eats that which does not belong to him, wears that which does not belong
to him, and buys that which does not belong to him.[^39]”

The immoderate are deviated from economical conduct. ‘Ali, the wise
Imam, has limited this deviation in their conduct when he says that they
eat, wear, and buy things which do not agree with their conditions and
incomes.

2. He, peace be on him, said: [My father al-Husayn, peace be on him,
related to me, he said: I heard my father, ‘Ali, say:]

“Acts are three categories: Obligations, excellencies, and acts of
disobedience. As for obligations, they (occur) in accordance with
command, pleasure, decree, predetermination, will, and knowledge of
Allah, the Great and Almighty. As for acts of disobedience, they do not
(occur) according to Allah’s command, but they (occur) according to
Allah’s decree, predetermination, will, and knowledge, then He punish
(men) for them.[^40]”

Imam ‘Ali shed light on man’s deeds and their relationship with Allah’s
decree and predetermination. Hence all man’s acts are known by Allah,
Who knows the weight of an atom in the earth and the heavens, but man is
not forced to practice both good and evil acts; rather that is up to his
will and choice, which theologians have established in their books of
theology.

3. He, peace be on him, narrated on the authority of his father that
Imam ‘Ali, Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, said: “Surely,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has concealed four (things) in four
(things): He has concealed His pleasure in His obedience, hence make not
little of any act of obedience to Him, for it may agree with His
pleasure, while you do not know. He has hidden His wrath in disobeying
Him, hence make not light of any act of disobeying Him, for it may agree
with His wrath, while you do not know. He has concealed His answer in
supplicating Him, hence make not little of supplicating Him, for it may
match His answer, will you do not know. He has hidden His friends among
His servants, hence make not light of any of His servants, for he may be
His friend, while you do not know.[^41]”

Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, urged men not to make little of any of the
foregoing affairs, for disdaining them would result in corrupt acts.

4. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander of the faithful would say:]

“Surely, time is three days, and your are among them: Yesterday and what
was on it passed, hence it will never return. If you did good on it, you
would not grieve for its passing and would be happy with what you
received on it. If you neglected (your works) on it, you would intensely
grieve for its passing. You were negligent on it and you are negligent
on your next day which you do not know, perhaps you will not reach it.
If you reached it, perhaps your share of negligence on it would be like
your share on your past day. Hence one of the three days passed, while
you were negligent on it. Then the day for which you wait, while you are
not sure of leaving negligence on it; it is your day which you have
entered. Hence, it is necessary for you to think about the good deeds
which you neglected on your past day and the evil deeds from which you
did not refrain on it. Yet, you will receive your next day, while you
are not sure of reaching it, not certain of attaining good deeds or
refraining from evil deeds. Therefore, your day which you have reached
is like your past day. Hence act as the one who expects none of the days
except his day and night upon which he has entered. Therefore, do (good)
and leave (evil), and it is Allah Who helps (you) with this.[^42]” The
Lord of the knowers and Imam of the Allah-fearing urged men to seize the
opportunity through doing good and refraining from doing evil, for man’s
days pass quickly, and Allah will repay him for his good deeds and
punish him for his evil deeds.

5. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander of the faithful would say:]

“O Allah, be kind to me through trusting in You, entrusting (my affairs)
to You, satisfying with Your predetermination, and submitting to Your
command, that I may not love hastening what You have delayed nor
delaying what You have hastened, O Lord of the worlds![^43]” In these
words the Commander of the faithful summoned men to trust in Allah, the
Exalted, to entrust their affairs to Him, to satisfy with His
predetermination, and to submit to His command, for only He, the Most
High, can arrange the affairs of all men, and none other than Him is
able to arrange them.

6. He, peace be on him, said: [While the Commander of the faithful,
peace be on him, was mobilizing his companions, an old man came to him,
greeted him, and said to him: “I have come to you from Syria. I am an
old man. I have heard about your countless outstanding merits. I think
that you will be assassinated, hence teach me of what Allah, the
Exalted, has taught you.” The Commander of the faithful said to him:]

“Yes, O old man, he whose two days are equal is wronged. He whose
worries are many in the world, his grief will be greater on leaving it.
He whose next day is more wicked than his day is deprived. He who does
not pay attention to what he sees in his next world, if this world of
him is faultless for him, is ruined. He who does not take care of his
own defect, caprice will overcome him. He who has defect, death is
better for him (than life). O old man, this world is insignificant and
it has people. The next world also has people whose souls are free from
supporting the people of the world. They do not compete with each other
for the world, nor are they happy with its ease, nor do they grieve for
its misery. O old man, whoever is afraid of spending night, his sleep is
little. How quick nights and days are in the span of a servant! Hence
store your words, count your days, and say nothing except good. O old
man, accept for men what you accept for yourself, and do for men as you
want them to do for you.”

Having given the old man these brilliant commandments and sermons, Imam
‘Ali turned to his companions and said to them: “O men, do you not see
that the people of the world enter into evening and rise in the morning
in various states? They are: One who is afflicted with epilepsy, another
is a returner, another is returned, another sacrifices his own self,
another hopes for (nothing), another is shrouded, another seeks the
world and death seeks him, another is heedless, but (Allah) is not
heedless of him, and the remaining ones walk on the path of the bygone
ones.”

The wise Imam (‘Ali) talked about the general life which people lead
throughout history; he spoke about people’s affairs and states that will
never change till Allah inherits the earth and what is on it.

Zayd b. Sohan al-‘Abdi was a companion and student of Imam ‘Ali. He was
the best of the companions, the most mindful of them, and the most
knowledgeable of them in the sciences of Iman ‘Ali, hence he questioned
the Imam as follows: “O Commander of the faithful, Which authority is
the most overcoming and strongest?”

Iman ‘Ali, peace be on him, replied: “Caprice.”

Zayd: “Which lowliness is the most lowly?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Clinging to the world.”

Zayd: “Which poverty is the most intense?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Unbelief after belief.”

Zayd: “Which creed is the most devious?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Unreal creed.”

Zayd: “Which act is the best?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Allah-fearingness.”

Zayd: “Which act is the most successful?

Iman ‘Ali: “Requesting that which is with Allah.”

Zayd: “Which friend is the most wicked?”

Iman ‘Ali: “The friend who beautifies for you the disobedience to
Allah.”

Zayd: “Which creature is the most miserable?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who sells his world for the world of other than
him.”

Zayd: “Which creature is the strongest?”

Iman ‘Ali: “The clement one.”

Zayd: “Which creature is the most miserly?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who takes (something) from other than his lawful
(possessions) and places it in other than its right (place).”

Zayd: “Which of men is the wisest?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who can distinguish guidance from misguidnace.”

Zayd: “Which of men is the most clement?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who does not become angry.”

Zayd: “Which of men is the firmest in opinion?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he whose self the people cannot change nor can the
world change it through its distress.”

Zayd: “Which of men is the most foolish?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who is deceived by the world, while he sees its
changeable conditions.”

Zayd: “Which of men is the most intense in grief?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who is deprived of this world and the next world;
that is the clearest loss.”

Zayd: “Which creature is the blindest?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who works for other than Allah and asks Allah to
repay him for his work.”

Zayd: “Which content is the best?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is the content with what Allah gives.”

Zayd: “ Which catastrophe is the most intense?”

Iman ‘Ali: “The catastrophe in the religion.”

Zayd: “Which work is the most lovable with Allah?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Waiting for relief.”

Zayd: “Which of men is the best in the view of Allah?”

Iman ‘Ali: “The most fearful of them of Allah, the most devout of them,
and the most indifferent of them to the world.”

Zayd: “Which words are the best in the view of Allah?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Praising Allah very much, pleading (to him), and
supplicating Him.”

Zayd: “Which words are the most truthful?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Confessing that there is no god but Allah.”

Zayd: “Which works are the best in the view of Allah?”

Iman ‘Ali: “Submission (to Allah) and piety.”

Zayd: “Which of men is the most generous?”

Iman ‘Ali: “It is he who is truthful in all situations.”

Zayd’s questions were over. After Imam ‘Ali had fully answered them, he
turned to the old man and said to him:

“Surely, Allah, the Great and Almighty, created some creatures. He made
the world narrow against them in order to test them. He increased for
them the world’s vanities, but they wished for the Abode of Peace to
which He summoned them. They showed forbearance toward difficult
livelihood and ordeal. They earned for the dignity with Allah. They
sacrificed themselves for seeking Allah’s good pleasure. Hence their
final result was martyrdom. They met Allah, Who was pleased with them.
They knew that death was the way of those who were before and after
them. Hence they supplied themselves for their next world with
(provisions) other than silver and gold. They showed forbearance toward
minimum nourishment and offered the surplus (of it). They loved (men)
for Allah and hated (them) for Him, the Great and Almighty. It is they
who are lamps, and they will be the people of Paradise in the next
world.”

This sermon made a strong impression on the old man, hence he turned to
Imam ‘Ali and said to him: “I will not leave the Garden, for I see its
people (standing) beside you. Supply me with a weapon to be able (to
fight) against your enemy.”

Imam ‘Ali supplied the old man with a breastplate. Hence, the old man
was among the most prominent fighters. He showed extreme courage at the
battle until he was martyred before him. Hence Imam ‘Ali prayed over him
and asked Allah to have mercy on him.[^44]

7. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, narrated one of the sermons of
his grandfather, Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him. The following is its text:

“Surely, praise belongs to Allah. I praise Him and ask Him for help and
guidance. I seek refuge in Allah from misguidance. Whomever Allah
guides, none misguides him. Whomever Allah misguides, none guides him. I
bear witness that there is no god but Allah, the One Who has no
associate, and that Muhammad is His servant and His messenger, He chose
him for His command and singled him out for prophecy, the noblest of His
creatures and the most lovable with Him, hence he delivered the message
of his Lord, counseled his community, and delivered that with which he
was charged. I advise you to fear Allah. Indeed the fear of Allah is the
best (thing) for which the servants of Allah advised each other, the
nearest (thing) to Allah’s good pleasure, and the best (thing) in the
final results of the affairs with Allah. You were commanded to fear
Allah. You were created for kindness and obedience. Hence be wary of
Allah to the extent that He warned you against Himself, for He warned
(you) against a severe torment. Fear Allah with a fear which is not a
mere excuse. Act without dissimulation and reputation, for he who acts
for other than Allah, Allah entrusts him to him for whom he acts.

Whoever sincerely acts for Allah, Allah undertakes repaying him. Fear
Allah’s torment, for He did not create you in vain nor will vainly He
leave any of your affairs. He named your traces, knew your works, and
wrote down your fixed terms. Hence let not the world delude you, for it
beguiles its people, and those who admire it are deceived. This world
will perish, but the next world is the abode of life, if only they knew.
I ask Allah for the abodes of the martyrs, accompanying the prophets,
and the life of the happy. Indeed, we belong to Allah and turn to Him
(for help).[^45]”

In this holy sermon, Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him, summoned the men to
cling to reverential fear, which is the best thing for which the pious
servants of Allah advised each other. He also urged them to purify their
works from dissimulation, for he who works for those other than Allah
corrupts his work, his effort is straying, and his hope is disappointed.

8. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander of the faithful said:]

“O men, do you know who will follow the man after his death? They kept
silent. Hence he said: ‘His son will follow him, supplicate (Allah) for
him, and ask (Allah) to forgive him.[^46] The reward of alms which he
gives during his lifetime will follow him after his death. The reward of
his good conduct and of those who practice it, though their reward will
not be decreased, will follow him.”

9. He, peace be on him, said: [The Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, performed (the morning) prayer. Then he remained (praying) in
his place until the sun rose. Then he turned his face to the men and
said (to them):]

“By Allah, it happened that we lived until we met groups of people who
spent night in prostrating and standing (in prayer) for their Lord, and
who marked time between their foreheads and their knees as if they heard
the roaring of the Fire with their own ears. When the name of Allah was
mentioned before them, they bent as the trees did as if they spent night
heedless.” Then he, peace be on him, went away, and none saw him laugh
until he passed away.[^47]”

In the Fields of the Qur’an
---------------------------

Before we mention some examples of the commentaries of Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, on some verses of the Holy Qur’an, we would
like to explain what has been narrated on his authority in the fields of
this Great Book.

### His Fondness of the Qur’an

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the ally of the Holy Qur’an
and was fond of reciting it, for he found in it a matchless pleasure.
Hence he, peace be on him, said: “If those who are between the east and
the west died, I would not feel lonely, for the Qur’an is with me.[^48]”

### His Reciting the Qur’an

The Imam was the best of the people in voice when he recited the Holy
Qur’an. He had a strong impression on those who heard his voice. The
narrators said: “The water carriers who passed by the door of his house
stopped to listen to his voice.[^49]”

### His Reflecting on the Qur’an

The Imam, peace be on him, did not recite the Holy Qur’an with a passing
recitation; rather he recited its verses with reflection and scrutiny.
He carefully considered the treasures of wisdom and knowledge therein.
Hence he said: “The verses of the Qur’an are treasures. Whenever you
open a treasure of them, you must consider it carefully.[^50]” The
narrators said: “When he recited ‘Master of the Day of Judgment,’ he
repeated it to the extent that he was about to die.[^51]” The reason for
this is that he carefully considered the meaning of this Holy Verse.

### His Supplication upon Completing a Reading of the Qur’an

When the Imam completed reciting the Holy Qur’an, he would supplicate
Allah with this holy supplication:

“O Allah, You have helped complete Your Book, which You sent down as a
light and appointed as a guardian over every book You have sent down,
preferring it over every narrative which You have recounted, a
separator, through which You separated Your lawful from Your unlawful, a
Qur’an through which You have made plain the approaches to Your
ordinances, a book, which You have distinguished very distinctly for
Your servants, a revelation, which You have sent down, a sending down,
upon Your prophet Muhammad (Your blessings be upon him and his
Household). You appointed it a light through following which we may be
guided from the shadows of error and ignorance, a healing for him who
turns ear toward hearing it with the understanding of attestation, a
just balance whose tongue does not incline from truth, a light of
guidance whose proof is not extinguished before the witnesses, and a
guidepost of deliverance, Hence that he who repairs straightway to its
prescription will not go astray and he will clings to its preservation’s
handhold will not be touched by the hands of disasters.

“O Allah, since You have given us help to recite it and made smooth the
roughness of our tongues through the beauty of its expression, place us
among those who observe it as it should be observed, serve You by
adhering in submission to the firm text of its verses, and seek refuge
in admitting both its ambiguous parts and the elucidations of its clear
signs! O Allah, You sent it down upon Your prophet Muhammad (Allah bless
him and his Household) in summary form, You inspired him with the
science of its wonders to complement it, You made us the heirs of its
knowledge as interpreters, You made us to surpass him who is ignorant of
its knowledge, and You gave strength over it to raise up above those not
able to carry it.

“O Allah, just as You have appointed our hearts as its carriers and made
known to us through Your mercy its nobility and excellence, Hence bless
Muhammad, its preacher, and his Household, its guardians, and place us
among those who confess that it has come from You, lest doubt about
attesting to it assail us, or deviation from its straightforward path
shake us!”

As for the Holy Qur’an, it is the greatest miracle of Islam. In these
paragraphs of his supplication, the Prophet’s grandson, Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, talked about some aspects and lights of the Holy Qur’an,
which are as follows:

1. Allah, the Exalted, sent down the Holy Qur’an as light through which
He guided to the straight way those who went astray and the perplexed.

2. Allah, the Exalted, appointed the Holy Qur’an as a guardian over all
His books which He sent down upon His prophets, hence it (the Qur’an)
shows all acts of change, alteration, and distortion done by the devious
and the summoners to misguidance.

3. Allah, the Exalted, preferred His Holy Book over every narrative in
which He mentioned the stories and affairs of the prophets, for He
objectively and inclusively mentioned in the Holy Qur’an all their
conditions, affairs, and stories.

4. The Holy Qur’an is a life, general law; it separates the lawful from
the unlawful, makes plain the approaches to the ordinances, and
distinguishes very distinctly all the needs of men.

5. Allah, the Exalted, appointed His Holy Book a light through following
which men may be guided from the shadows of error and ignorance. He also
appointed it a healing for the diseases and psychological defects of
those who believed in it.

7. The Holy Qur’an is the balance of justice and fairness. In it there
is no deviation from truth nor is there in it following caprice. Whoever
clings and holds fast to it will follow the straight way and be safe
from disasters.

8. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, asked Allah to be kind to him
through making him observe His Book, submit to the elucidations of its
clear signs, and admit its ambiguous parts.

9. Allah, the Exalted, inspired His great prophet with the wonders of
the Holy Qur’an and taught him how to interpret them. Moreover, the Imam
praised the Imams of guidance from among the Household of the Prophet
(Allah’s blessings be upon him and his Household), whose rank Allah made
high, whom He made guardians over His knowledge, and guides to His Book.

After this, let’s listen to another part of this holy supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and make us one of those who
hold fast to its cord, seek haven from its ambiguities in its fortified
stronghold, rest in the shadow of its wing, find guidance in the
brightness of its morning, follow the shining of its disclosure, acquire
light from its lamp, and beg not guidance from any other! O Allah, just
as through it You have set up Muhammad as a guidepost to point to You
and through his Household You have made clear Your good pleasure’s roads
to You, Hence also bless Muhammad and his Household and make the Qur’an
our mediation to the noblest stations of Your honor, a ladder by which
we may climb to the place of safety, a cause for our being repaid with
deliverance at the Plain of Resurrection, and a means whereby we may
reach the bliss of the House of Permanence! O Allah, bless Muhammad and
his Household, lessen for us through the Qur’an the weight of heavy
sins, give us the excellent qualities of the pious, and make us follow
the tracks of those who stood before You in the watches of the night and
the ends of the day, such that You purify us from every defilement
through its purification and make us follow the tracks of those who have
taken illumination from its light and whom expectation has not
distracted from works, cutting them off through its delusions’
deceptions! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and appoint the
Qur’an for us an intimate in the shadows of nights and a guardian
against the instigations of Satan and confusing thoughts, for our feet
an obstruction from passing to acts of disobedience for our tongues a
silencer without blight preventing a plunge into falsehood, for our
limbs a restrainer from committing sins, and for the scrutiny of
heedfulness rolled up in heedlessness an unroller, such that You attach
to our hearts the understanding of the Koran’s wonders and its
restraining similitudes which immovable mountains in all their solidity
were too weak to carry! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and
through the Qur’an make permanent the rightness of our outward selves,
veil the ideas of confusing thoughts from the soundness of our innermost
minds, wash away the dirt of our hearts and the ties of our heavy sins,
gather our scattered affairs, quench the thirst of our burning heat in
the standing place of the presentation to You, and clothe us in the
ropes of security on the Day of the Greatest Terror at our uprising!”

In this wonderful part the Imam pleaded to Allah, the Exalted, and asked
Him to place him among those who held fast to the cord of the Qur’an, to
refer to Him concerning its ambiguities, to make him acquire light from
its lamp, and not to beg guidance from any other. Also he asked Him to
make the Qur’an a mediation through which he would reach the highest
ranks of those brought nigh, a ladder by which he might climb to the
places of safety, a cause for his being repaid with deliverance on the
Day of Resurrection, to lessen for him through the Qur’an the weight of
heavy sins, to make the recitation and reflection of the Qur’an an
intimate for him in the shadows of nights, and to guard him with it
against the instigations of the accursed Satan. These are some contents
of this part. Now, let’s listen to the last paragraphs of this holy
supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and through the Qur’an
redress our lackour destitution in povertydrive toward us the comforts
of life and an abundance of plentiful provisions, turn aside blameworthy
character traits and base moral qualities, and preserve us from the pit
of unbelief and the motives for hypocrisy, such that the Qur’an may be
for us at the resurrection a leader to Your good pleasure and Your
gardens, for us in this world a protector against Your displeasure and
transgressing Your bounds, and for what is with You a witness by its
declaring lawful the lawful and its declaring unlawful the lawful!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and through the Qur’an make
easy for our souls at death, the distress of the driving, the effort of
the moaning, and the succession of the rattling, when *souls reach the
throats and it is said, ‘Where is the enchanter?* ’; when the angel of
death discloses himself to seize them from behind the veils of unseen
things, letting loose at them from the bow of destinies the arrows of
the terror of lonesome separation, and mixing for them from sudden death
a cup poisoned to the taste; and when departure and release for the
hereafter come close to us, works become collars around the necks, and
the graves become the haven until the appointed time of the Day of
Encounter!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, make blessed for us the
arrival at the house of decay and the drawn out residence between the
layers of the earth, appoint the graves, after separation from this
world, the best of our way stations, make room for us through Your mercy
the narrowness of our tombs, and disgrace us not among those present at
the Resurrection through our ruinous sins! Through the Qur’an have mercy
upon the lowliness of our station at the standing place of presentation
to You, make firm the slips of our feet during the shaking of the bridge
across hell on the day of passage over it, illuminate the darkness of
our graves before the Uprising, and deliver us from every distress on
the Day of Resurrection and from the hardships of terrors on the Day of
Disaster! Whiten our faces on the day when the faces of wrongdoers are
blackened during the Day of Regret and Remorse, appoint love for us in
the breasts of the faithful, and make not life for us troublesome!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad, Your servant and Your messenger, just as he
delivered Your message, executed Your command, and counseled Your
servants! O Allah, on the Day of Resurrection make our Prophet (Your
blessings be upon him and his Household) the nearest of the prophets in
seat, the ablest of them before You with intercession, the greatest of
them with You in measure, and the most eminent of them with You in rank.
O Allah, bless Muhammad the Household of Muhammad, ennoble his edifice,
magnify his proof, make weighty his balance, accept his intercession,
bring near his mediation, whiten his face, complete his light, and raise
his degree! Make us live according to his *Sunna,* make us die in his
creed, take us on his road, make us travel his path, place us among the
people who obey him, muster us in his band, lead us to up his pool, and
give us to drink of his cup! And bless Muhammad and his Household with a
blessing through which You will take him to the most excellent of Your
good, Your bounty, and Your generosity for which he hopes! You are
Possessor of boundless mercy and generous bounty.

“O Allah, repay him for Your message which he delivered, Your signs
which he passed on, the good counsel he gave to Your servants, and the
struggle he undertook in Your way, with the best You have repaid any of
Your angels brought nigh and Your prophets sent out and chosen! And upon
him and his Household, the good, the pure, be peace, Allah’s mercy, and
His blessings![^52]”

With this we will end our talk about this holy supplication, which is
among the excellent supplications of the Imams of the members of the
House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them. In these paragraphs, Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, magnified the Holy Qur’an and depicted it
with the greatest descriptions and the most high attributes, for none
knows the importance and interpretation of this Great Book except the
Imams of the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them, who
were the treasurers of the knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and the narrators of his wisdom. In these paragraphs, he
asked Allah, the Exalted, to be bounteous to him through the good of
this world and of the next world and to bestow upon him forgiveness and
good pleasure when he met him and was in His neighborhood. Also he
magnified the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household, who spread
thought and knowledge on earth, and asked Allah, the Exalted, to repay
him for his efforts and struggle for freeing and saving man from
unbelief.

Examples of his Interpretations
-------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was among the most eminent
interpreters of the Holy Qur’an. The interpreters quoted many of his
wonderful interpretations. The historians said: “He had a school for
interpreting the Qur’an.” His martyr son, Zayd, learned from him the
interpretation of the Qur’an.[^53] Also his son Imam Abu’ Ja‘far,
Muhammad al-Baqir, peace be on him, learned from him some
interpretations narrated by Ziyad b. al-Mundhir, the spiritual leader of
the Jaru’di sect.[^54] Anyhow, we will mention some brief examples of
his interpretations on the Holy Book of Allah. They are as follows:

1. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, peace be on him, reported on the authority of
his father the interpretation of this Holy verse: *“Who made the earth a
resting-place for you,*[^55]*”* that he said: “Allah, the Glorified and
Exalted, made the earth appropriate for your natures and agreeable with
your bodies. He did not make it very hot lest it should burn your, nor
cold lest it should freeze you, nor intense in sweet-smelling wind lest
it should make you suffer headaches, nor very bad-smelling, lest it
should ruin you, nor very soft like water lest it should drown you, nor
very solid lest it should be difficult for you to build your houses and
the graves of your dead, but He, the Great and Almighty, created in it
solid, high lands, that you may avail yourselves of them, you hold fast
to them, your bodies and your houses cling to them, and He made in it
(the earth) that which yields to your houses, your graves, and your
numerous profits, hence He *made the earth a resting-place for you.*
Then He, the Great and Almighty, said: ‘*and the heaven a canopy’*,
meaning a preserved ceiling over you, where He turns for your benefits
the sun, the moon, and the stars. Then He, the Great and Almighty, said:
‘*and (Who) sends down water from the heaven*,’ meaning the rain which
He sends down from above, that it may reach the tops of your mountains,
your hills, your plateaus, and your lowlands, then He divided rain into
drizzle, heavy, weak, and continuous, that your lands may absorb it. He
does not send down rain upon you all at once lest it should spoil your
lands, your trees, your plants, and your fruits. Then He, the Great and
Almighty, said: ‘*then brings forth with it subsistence for you of the
fruits,*’ meaning what He brings forth from the earth is your
subsistence. ‘*Therefore, do not set up rivals to Allah*,’ meaning the
likenesses of the idols that neither understand nor hear nor see nor
able (to do) anything. ‘*While you know*,’ that they (the idols) are not
able (to create) any of these great boons which your Lord, the Blessed
and Exalted, bestows upon you.[^56]” This valuable part of the speech of
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, is full of wonderful and
trustworthy proofs for the Unity of Allah. It gives a brilliant, perfect
picture of how Allah, the Exalted, created the earth, for He created it
in a wonderful quality which is neither very solid nor very soft in
order to enable man to live on it and avails himself of its countless
boons and fruits. The wonders on the earth such as mountains, valleys,
minerals, seas, rivers are great and most reliable proofs for the
existence of the Creator, the Great, the Wise.

Besides, the Imam, peace be on him, produced evidence in support of the
might of Allah, the Exalted, through His creating the heaven and what is
within it such as the sun, the moon, and all the stars which supply the
earth with their rays. This is because the sun’s rays play an important
role in forming plant life, the moon’s rays have a great effect on the
tide and ebb of the seas, and the stars’ rays give life to animal and
plant beings on the earth. These cosmic phenomena were not discovered
but in these modern times, but the Imam, peace be on him, mentioned them
in his speech, hence, indeed, he and his infallible fathers and children
were the first to raise the banner of knowledge and to contribute in
forming human civilization.

The Imam, peace be on him, gave a distinguished picture of rain when he
showed that rain fell in a routine manner and during certain times to
enliven the earth and to bring forth its fruits. If rain continued and
fell all at one, it would ruin plants and men.

After the Imam had given material proofs for the existence of the Wise
Creator, he summoned (men) to worship Him, to confess His Unity, and to
abandon idols and rivals that caused the degradation of thinking and the
inactivity of awareness, for they neither harmed nor profited them, nor
had they any ability to arrange the affairs of this universe.

2. It is reported on his authority that he interpreted this Holy Verse:
‘*and recite the Qur’an as it ought to be recited*’[^57] with these
words of him: “Explain it (i.e. the Qur’an) completely when you recite
it. Scatter it not as you scatter seeds and recite it not as you recite
poetry. Consider carefully its wonders in order to move your hearts with
them. Let not your aim be completing the Su’ra.[^58]”

3. He interpreted this Holy Verse: ‘*Enter into peace one and all*’[^59]
with these words of him: “Peace means the authority of Imam (‘Ali), the
Commander of the faithful, peace be on him.[^60]” Without doubt, the
authority of Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, the Gate of the
city of knowledge of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, is
the true peace through which men find security, welfare, and
tranquillity. If the Muslims had adopted it after the death of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, crisis would not have
attacked their social and political life.

4. A person asked Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, about the
interpretation of this Holy Verse: ‘*Lest a soul should say: O woe to me
for what I fell short of my duty to Allah*.[^61]” Hence he, peace be on
him, said: “The Duty to Allah is ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, who is the proof of
Allah over the creatures. On the Day of Judgment, Allah will command the
gatekeepers of Hell to give its keys to ‘Ali, peace be on him, hence he
will cause to enter whom he wants and save whomever he wants. Surely,
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, said: ‘O ‘Ali,
whoever loves you loves me, and whoever hates you hates me. O ‘Ali, you
are my brother, and I am your brother. O ‘Ali, you will (raise) the
banner of praise on the Day of Judgment and be ahead of my community and
the callers be on your right hand and your left hand.’[^62]”

Allah endowed Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him,
with every noble position with Him, of which is that he is the partner
in the Garden and the Fire, as the traditions have unanimously mentioned
this. Allah granted ‘Ali this great position because of his great
struggle for Islam, his strong pity, and his firm clinging to the
religion.

5. Thuwayr b. Fakhta asked Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, about
the interpretation of this Holy Verse: “*And the earth shall beam with
the light of its Lord, and the Book shall be laid down, and the prophets
and the witnesses shall be brought up*.[^63]” Hence the Imam gave him a
long answer about the terrors on the Day of Judgment. We will mention
some of it. He, peace be on him, said: “On the Day of Judgment, Allah
will resurrect men naked from their graves on one level. The Light will
drive them and the Darkness will gather them until they stop at the
threshold of the place of gathering. Hence they will crowd at it and
will be prevented from going away. Their breaths will be intense, their
sweat will be abundant, their affairs will be narrow, their noise will
be intense, and their voices will raise up. This will be the first one
of the terrors of the Resurrection. Then the Almighty (Allah), the
Blessed and Exalted, will look down upon (them) from the Throne and say:
‘O creatures, listen and hear the Caller of the Almighty (Allah).’ The
first and the last of them will hear. Their hearts will be humble. They
will shake all over and look at the direction of the Voice and hurry to
the Caller. Hence the unbelievers will say: ‘*This is a difficult day*!’
The Call will come from the Almighty (Allah): ‘I am Allah, there is no
god but I. I am the Judge who does not wrong. Today, I will judge among
you with My justice and fairness. None shall be wronged before Me. I
will take the weak one’s (right) from the strong one through (taking
his) good deeds (and adding them to the weak one’s good deeds or taking
his evil deeds and adding them to the strong one’s) evil deeds. I will
repay you. No wrongdoer will pass this difficulty. If any one was
subjected to a certain injustice and forgives its doer, I will repay him
for it and punish its doer on the Day of Judgment. Request your
injustices from those who had wronged you in the world. I am as a
witness for you, and I am a sufficient witness.[^64]”

6. Imam al-Sadiq narrated on the authority of his grandfather Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, the interpretation of this Holy Verse: “*He
accepts repentance from His servants and takes alms*.[^65]” He, peace be
on him, said concerning the interpretation of: “*and takes alms*. I
guarantee (you) before my Lord, the Exalted, that the alms falls into
the Hand of the Lord, the Exalted before it falls into the hand of the
servant.” He would say: “Every thing is entrusted to an angel except the
alms, for it falls into the Hand of Allah, the Exalted.”[^66]

7. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, interpreted: “*And they sold
him for a small price, a few dirhams*,[^67] that the small price for
which they sold Yousif was twenty dirhams.[^68]”

8. Thuwayr b. Fakhta reported that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, interpreted the Holy Verse: “*And relate to them the story of the
two sons of Adam with truth when they both offered an offering* [^69]”
with his words: “Abel sought nearness to Allah through (sacrificing) the
fattest ram which he had, and Cain sought nearness (to Him) through
(offering) a handful of ears (of corn). Hence Allah, the Exalted,
accepted (it) from Abel but did not accept (it) from Cain. Hence Satan
instigated to Cain that Abel’s children would boast of this against your
children and say: ‘We are the children of him whose offering Allah had
accepted.’ This imagination controlled him to the extent that he envied
his brother Abel and decided to kill him lest he should have children.
He did not know what to do. Satan taught him to place his (brother’s)
head between two stones and kill him, and he did this. He did not know
how to bury him until two crows came and one of them killed the another.
Then it dug (the ground) and buried the other. Cain was looking at
(them), hence he stood, dug (a grave) for Abel and buried him, and
became among the remorseful. This has become the law of burying the
dead.

“When Adam asked Cain about his brother Abel, he said to him: ‘Did you
appoint me as a shepherd for him?’ Then he brought him to the place of
offering. Adam knew that Cain had killed his brother, so he cursed him
and ordered him to be cursed. Then he wept for his son (Abel) for forty
years until Allah revealed to him: ‘I will give you a male to success
Abel.’ Eve born him a pure, blessed boy. On the seventh day, Allah
revealed to him to name him Hibat Allah (the Gift of Allah), and he
named him so.[^70]”

9. Sa‘id b. Jubayr said: [I questioned Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, about the relations in this Holy Verse: *Say I demand not, of you
any reward for it (the toils of preaching) except the love of my
relation,*[^71] and he, peace be on him, answered:] “The relations of
ours, the members of the House *(ahl al-Bayt).*[^72]”

10. A man questioned Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, about the
fixed portion in these words of Him: [*And those in whose wealth there
is a fixed portion,*[^73] and he, peace be on him, replied:] “The fixed
portion is the thing which you bring forth from your wealth and is not
of the obligatory Zakat and alms.” The man asked the Imam: “What shall I
do with it?” He, peace be on him, answered: “Give it to your womb
relations, strengthen a weak person with it, give it to your brother in
Allah, and (spend) it on the disaster which afflicts you.” The man
admired the knowledge of the Imam and said: “Allah knows better where to
place His message.[^74]”

11. Interpreting this Holy Verse: “*Hence turn away with kindly
forgiveness*,[^75]” Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, said: “It is
the forgiveness without blame.”[^76]

These are some Holy Verses whose interpretations have been narrated on
the authority of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. Whoever reads
the books of interpretation will find numerous views and words of the
Imam on this subject.

Jurisprudence
-------------

As for Jurisprudence, it is among the greatest and most important
Islamic sciences, for takes care of the acts of Muslims in the light of
what has been codified in the Islamic Law. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace
be on him, took great care of Jurisprudence when he spread and
proclaimed it among men. He was the only specialist in this science in
his time. The historians said: “He was similar to his grandfather Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, in his capability
of encompassing all the jurisprudential problems and their
branches.[^77]”

He was the only authority to whom all the religious scholars and
scientists referred concerning the most important religious problems.
The historians narrated that al-Zhuri, who was among the most famous and
greatest jurists of Medina, referred to the Imam concerning the most
important religious precepts.

The narrators said: “Al-Zuhri saw in his sleep that his hand was covered
with blood. His vision was interpreted for him that he would be
afflicted by manslaughter. In that time he was the governor of the
Umayyads. He tortured a man to the extent that the man died of torture.
He was afraid of Allah, hence he escaped and entered a cave to serve
Allah in it. The Imam went to the Sacred House of Allah to perform the
hajj. He passed by the cave where al-Zuhri was. He was asked: ‘Have you
any need with al-Zuhri?’ He responded to them and went to meet him in
the cave. He found him frightened and hopeless of Allah’s mercy. Hence
he said to him: ‘I fear for your despair more than I fear for your
crime. Send blood money to his family and go to your family and your
religion.’ Accordingly, al-Zuhri became happy and said to him: ‘You have
relieved me, my master. Allah knows better where to place his
message.’[^78]” Now, we will mention some religious precepts which the
Imam stated.

### The Parts of Fast

Al-Zuhri and a group of jurists came to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be
on him. The Imam questioned al-Zuhri about what he discussed and he
replied: “I and my companions discussed fast, and we have unanimously
agreed that no part of fast is obligatory.”

The Imam blamed them for having no knowledge of the religious affairs,
and then he explained to them the parts of fast, saying: “(The answer)
is not as you say. Fast is forty parts: Ten parts of them is as
obligatory as the (fast in) the month of Ramadhan. Ten parts of them is
prohibited. Fourteen parts is optional; you are free to fast or to
breakfast. Three parts of fast needs permission. (There are other parts
of fast such as) the fast of education, the lawful fast, the fast of
journey, and the fast of illness.”

Al-Zuhri and the jurists admired the Imam’s abundant knowledge and his
inclusive capability of the religious precepts. Then al-Zuhri asked the
Imam to explain to him those parts of fast and he, peace be on him,
answered: “As for the obligatory (parts of fast), they are: the fast of
the month of Ramadhan, the fast of two successive months when one
intentionally breaks fast in the month of Ramadhan, the fast of two
successive months when one kills someone by mistake and is unable to
release ( a slave), for Allah, the Exalted, said: ***and whoever kills a
believer by mistake, he should free a believing slave and blood-money
should be paid to his family... but he who cannot find (a slave) should
fast successively for two months***.[^79]), the fast of two successive
months as an expiatory gift for an injurious assimilation of wife to
mother, *al-zahar*, when one cannot find (a slave), for Allah, the
Exalted, said: ***And (as for) those who put away their wives by
likening their backs to the backs of their mothers then would recall
what they said, they should free a slave before they touch each other;
to that you are admonished (to conform); and Allah is Aware of what you
do. But whoever cannot find (a slave), let him fast two successive
months before they touch each other***[^80], the fast of three days as
an expiatory gift for making an obligatory oath when one cannot find
food, for Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, said: ***Whosoever cannot find
(food) then fasting for three days; this is the expiation of your oaths
when you swear*** [^81] all these parts of fast are successive and not
separated the fast of ailment of shaving (the shaving of head), for
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted said: ***But whoever of you is sick or
has an ailment of the head, he*** ***(should effect) a compensation by
fasting or alms or sacrificing***[^82] the doer is to choose between
fasting for three days or alms or a sacrifice the fast of blood of
*al-mut‘a* when one cannot find an offering, for Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted said: ***Whoever profits by combining the visit with the
pilgrimage (should take) what offering is easy to obtain; but he who
cannot find (any offering) should fast for three days during the
pilgrimage and for seven days when you returns; these (make) ten (days)
complete*** [^83], the fast of the punishment of hunting, for Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted said: ***O you who believe, do not kill game while
you are on pilgrimage, and whoever of you shall kill it intentionally,
the compensation (of it) is the like of that he killed, from the cattle,
as two just persons of you shall judge, as an offering to be brought to
the Kaaba or the expiation (of it) is the feeding of the poor or the
equivalent of it in fasting*****.**[^84]”

Then the Imam, peace be on him, asked al-Zuhri: “O Zuhri, do know how
this is equivalent in fasting?” “I do not know,” replied al-Zuhri. Hence
the Imam, peace be on him, explained: “Evaluate the game completely.
This evaluation should be equivalent to wheat. Then this wheat should be
measured. Hence you should fast a day for each half of a measure.” Then
the Imam continued: “the fast of a vow, and the fast of *al-i‘tikaf*
(prayer in seclusion).”

Then the Imam continued: “As for the prohibited parts of fast, they are:
the fast on the day of ‘Id al-Fitr, the day of ‘Id al-Adha’, three of
the days of *al-Tashriq*[^85], the fast on the day of doubt[^86], we are
commanded (to fast on it) and prevented from it: We are commanded to
fast on it as a day of the month of Sha‘ban, and we are prohibited from
fasting on the day which men doubt.” Al-Zuhri turned to the Imam and
asked him: “May I be your ransom, if he did not fast any of Sha‘ban,
what would he do?”

Al-Zuhri had a doubt in the answer of the Imam, hence he asked him: “How
does voluntary fast replaces a religious duty?”

The Imam, replied him: “If a person voluntarily fasted a day of Ramadhan
while he did not know that the day was not of it and knew that
afterwards, it would suffice him, for the religious duty occurred on the
day itself.”

Then the Imam continued his talk about the parts of fast, saying: “The
continuous fast is prohibited.[^87] The fast of silence is
prohibited.[^88] The fast of a vow for an act of disobedience is
prohibited, and the fast of time is prohibited.

“As for the fast whose doer is free, it is the fast in the days: Monday,
Thursday, and Friday, the fast in the white days[^89], the fast in the
six days in (the month of) Shawwal after the month of Ramadhan, on the
day of ‘Arafa, and on the day of ‘Ashura’. In all these parts of fast,
the doer is to choose between fasting and breaking fasting.

“As for the fast which needs permission, it is that the wife does not
perform a voluntary fast except with the permission of her husband, the
slave does not perform a voluntary fast except with the permission of
his master, and the guest does not perform a voluntary fast except with
the permission of his host. Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his
family, said: ‘Whoever stops at people should not perform a voluntary
fast except with their permission.’

“As for the fast for education, it concerns the boy when he becomes a
teenager, the one who breaks his fast for a certain illness at the
beginning of daytime and gets well afterwardshe is ordered to fast for
the rest of his day, and the passenger who eats at the beginning of
daytime and returns to his family he is ordered to fast for the rest of
his day. Such a fast is for education, not a religious duty.

“As for the lawful fast, it concerns the one who unintentionally eats,
drinks, and vomits; yet Allah makes it lawful, and it is sufficient.

“As for the fast of journey and illness, the non-Shi‘a are different
over it: Some of them say that he should fast; some of them say that
should not fast; some of them say that he is free to fast or to break
fasting. As for us, we say that he should break fasting in both states.
If he fasts during a journey or an illness, he should repeat fasting,
for Allah, the Great and Almighty says: *but whoever of you is sick or
on a journey, then (he shall fast) a (like) number of other days*.[^90]”

With this we will end this jusrisprudential research which the Imam
delivered before the religious scholars and jurists, and which shows
that the Imam’s knowledge embraced the precepts of Islamic Law and the
branches of Islamic jurisprudence. This is because the Imam divided fast
into these important parts of which the religious scholars were
heedless. It is worth mentioning that the Imami jurists depend on this
narration when they give religious opinions concerning fast.

### Bringing together Sunset and Night Prayers

As for bringing together sunset and night prayers, it is permissible. As
for separating them is not obligatory, though it is better. The proof
for this is this tradition of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him:
“Youths had better bring together sunset and night prayers than sleep
and leave them.” Some connected traditions on the authority of the pure
Imams, peace be on them, show that is permissible to bringing together
sunset and night prayers. According to these traditions the Imami
jurists said that it was permissible to bring them together. This
narration indicates that it is permissible to bring them together, but
concerning the evening and night prayers for youths only. It is sure
that the act of bringing together is not confined to the evening and
night prayers nor is it confined to youths, namely the Imam mentioned
them as an example, for the question was about them.

### Intention Obligatory in the Acts of Worship

Intention is obligatory in all the acts of worship, and the acts of
worship are not right without intention. The proof for this is what was
reported on the authority of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, who
said: “No act (of worship is accepted) except with intention.[^91]”

### Crossing Arms in Prayer Impermissible

The Shi‘ites believe that it is impermissible to cross arms or to put
one arm on the another during standing in prayer, for they depend on a
group of traditions among which narrated on the authority of Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, who said: “The man’s putting one of his
hand on the other in prayer is an act but is not an act of prayer.[^92]”

### Purchasing Slave Girl as Singer

It is prohibited to buy a slave girl as singer, but it is not prohibited
when she is bought as reciter of the Holy Qur’an. The jurists depended
on a tradition reported on the authority of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace
be on him, when a man questioned him about purchasing a slave girl as
singer and he answered: “It is not prohibited for you to buy her to
remind you of the Garden.” He meant that it was not prohibited for the
man to buy a slave girl to remind him of reciting the Qur’an, renouncing
this world, and clinging to virtues which had no act of singing. As for
singing, it is prohibited.[^93]

### Punishment for Committing Fornication with Sister

As for committing fornication with sister, it is among the most unlawful
acts. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was questioned about the
penalty for him who commits fornication with his sister and he, peace be
on him, replied: “He is struck a heavy blow with sword. If he remains
alive, he is imprisoned for death.[^94]”

With this we will end our speech about the juristic problems which the
Imam, peace be on him, answered. Whoever studies the books on deductive
jurisprudence and encyclopedias on *ahadith* (traditions) will find a
large group of the Imam’s juristic verdicts. The Imam’s verdicts have
included all the juristic affairs such as acts of worship, religious
precepts, contracts, and unilateral obligations. The Imami jurists
depend on his verdicts in giving religious opinions.

Theological Researches
----------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was the only authority to whom
the religious scholars referred concerning complicated theological
problems. The following is some of the theological researches about
which he was asked:

### Allah’s Decree and Determination

As for research on Allah’s decree and determination, it is among the
most vague and complicated theological problems. A man questioned the
Imam, peace be on him, about them: “May Allah make me ransom for you, do
misfortunes befall people according to Allah’s decree and determination
or according to their own acts?”

The Imam answered the man with an answer in which he analyzed the
dimensions and realities of misfortunes in the light of the Islamic
thought, saying: “Indeed, determination and act are like the soul and
body. The soul can perceive (nothing) without the body, and the body
without the soul is a motionless form, but when they come together, they
become strong and righteous. Such is determination and act. If
determination does not befall act, the Creator is not distinguished from
creature, and if act (takes place) without approval from determination,
it is not accomplished and is not perfect. When they come together,
(they become strong and righteous), and Allah (repays) His righteous
servants through determination.”

The Imam added, saying: “However, the most unjust one of the people is
he who regards his injustice as justice and the justice of the rightly
guided ones as injustice. Indeed, every servant has four eyes: two eyes
through which he sees the affairs of his life in the next world, and two
eyes through which he sees the affairs of his life in this world. Hence
if Allah, the Great and Almighty, wants to do good for His servant, He
opens for him the two eyes which are in his heart and he sees through
them the unseen things. If He wants other than this, He leaves the heart
with what is in it.” Then the Imam, peace be on him, turned to the man
and said to him: “This is from Him. This is from Him.” The Imam, peace
be on him, analyzed and explained the realities of Allah’s decree and
determination.

### Allah is Light

The Imam, peace be on him, entered the mosque of his grandfather,
Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family, and saw some people
disputing with each other. Hence he asked them: “What are you disputing
about?”

They all replied: “About the Unity of Allah.”

The Imam blamed them for discussing such a matter, for they had no
knowledge of it, and said to them: “Refrain from these words of yours.”

Yet, one of them said: “Indeed Allah is recognized through creating His
heavens and His earth, and He is everywhere.”

The Imam guided them to the right words, saying: “Allah whom nothing is
like, and Who is All-hearing and All-seeing, His description is not like
the description of anything, so He such.[^95]”

### His Wonder at the Doubters in Allah

The Imam, peace be on him wondered at those who doubted Allah, the
Creator of the heavens and earth, and those who denied the latter
creation. He, peace be on him, said: “I wonder very much at him who
doubts Allah while he sees his creatures, and I wonder very much at him
who denies the latter creation while he sees the former creation.[^96]”

Indeed one wonders at him who denies the existence of the Great Creator
for Whom all beings are proofs. It is impossible for all these beings to
exist without a creator. If man carefully considers Allah’s creatures,
he will conclude that they are proofs for His existence. The poet said:

*There are signs in the earth, so be not a denier,*

*Wonderful things are some of His signs.*

One wonders at him who denies the latter creation while he sees the
former creation, for the act of creation and existence is more important
than the act of repetition. Allah, the Exalted, said: “***He says: Who
will give life to the bones when they are rotten? Say: He will give life
to them Who brought them into existence at first, and He is Cognizant of
all creation***.”[^97]

### It is Impossible to define Allah by any Finite Thing

It is impossible to define Allah, the Exalted, by any finite thing,
hence the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Verily, Allah cannot be defined
by any finite thing. Our Lord is too far above such an attribute. How
can the infinite be defined by the finite. The eyes attain Him not, but
He attains the eyes. He is the all-subtle, the All-aware.”[^98]

Man’s reason cannot encompass Allah, the Exalted, as well He cannot be
attained by the eyes whose sight is finite. How can the perishable,
possible man encompass the Powerful One who originated these worlds
before whose existence and creation intellects are perplexed? How can he
recognize the Great Creator?

With this we will end our speech about Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s
ideological, scientific wealth, which he inherited from his fathers.

[^1]: Khulasat Tahdhib al-Kamal, p. 23.

[^2]: Ibid.,

[^3]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p. 188.

[^4]: Al-Khisal, p. 5.

[^5]: Al-Huliya, vol. 3, p. 203. Al-Khisal, p. 17.

[^6]: Al-Khisal, p. 53.

[^7]: Tarikh Baghdad, vol. 1, p. 255. Al-Khisal, p.165.

[^8]: Ibn al-Sa‘i, al-Jami‘ al-Mukhtasar, vol. 9, p. 87.

[^9]: Al-Khisal, p. 231.

[^10]: Musadaqat al-Ikhwan.

[^11]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 99.

[^12]: Ibid., p. 156.

[^13]: Ibid.,

[^14]: Ibid., p. 99. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 523.

[^15]: Al-Khisal, pp. 396-397.

[^16]: Al-Tawhid, p. 342.

[^17]: Ibid.,

[^18]: Ibid.,, p. 25.

[^19]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 46.

[^20]: Al-Durriya al-Tahira, p. 27. Al-Ma‘rifa wa al-Tarikh, vol. 1, p.
360.

[^21]: Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin, vol. 1, p. 360.

[^22]: Al-Khisal, p. 330.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 308.

[^24]: Al-Musallsalat.

[^25]: Al-Khisal, p. 31.

[^26]: Al-Sayyid al-Muqaddam, al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 283.

[^27]: Al-Ta‘zim wa al-Minna fi anna Abawai Rasu\`l Allah fi al-Janna,
p. 32.

[^28]: Ibid., p. 32.

[^29]: Al-Quttb al-Rawandi, Da‘awat, p. 20.

[^30]: Ibid., p. 47.

[^31]: Al-Khisal, p. 275.

[^32]: Ibn Babawayh al-Qummi, al-Ghayat.

[^33]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 486.

[^34]: Roudat al-Jinan, vol. 6, pp. 183-184. Quoted from the book
‘Manaqib al-Imam Amir al-Mu’minin’ by bin Shadhan al-Qummi.

[^35]: Yanabi‘ al-Mawadda, Chapter 41.

[^36]: Al-Tha‘alibi, Thimar al-Qulu\`b, p. 67.

[^37]: Mizan al-I‘tidal, vol. 1, pp. 484-485.

[^38]: Rabi‘ al-Abbrar, vol. 4, p. 328.

[^39]: Al-Khisal, p. 94.

[^40]: Ibid., p. 156.

[^41]: Ibid., 191.

[^42]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 453.

[^43]: Ibid., p. 580. Nasikh al-Tawarikh, vol. 1, p. 142.

[^44]: Al-Tu\`si, al-Amali, p. 277.

[^45]: Waqi‘at Siffin, p. 13.

[^46]: The pious, righteous son is the one who supplicates to Allah for
his father and ask Him to forgive him.

[^47]: Al-Tubrisi, Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 57.

[^48]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 107.

[^49]: Sharh Shafiyat Abi Firas, vol. 2, p. 198. Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2,
p. 616.

[^50]: Al-Wafi.

[^51]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 602.

[^52]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 42.

[^53]: There is a copy of it in the Library of the American Congress, as
an Iraqi newspaper said.

[^54]: Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, vol. 1, p. 11, quoted from
al-Fihrast of al-Shaykh al-Tu\`si, p. 98.

[^55]: Qur’an, 2, 22.

[^56]: ‘Uyyu\`n Akhbar al-Rida, vol. 1, pp. 137-138.

[^57]: Qur’an, 73, 4.

[^58]: Al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 279.

[^59]: Qur’an, 2, 208.

[^60]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 129.

[^61]: Qur’an, 39, 56.

[^62]: Tafsir Furat, p. 3.

[^63]: Qur’an, 39, p. 69.

[^64]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 2, p. 95.

[^65]: Qur’an, 9, 104.

[^66]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 441. Tafsir al-Safi, p. 223.

[^67]: Qur’an, 12, 20.

[^68]: Majjma‘‘ al-Bayan, vol. 5, p. 221.

[^69]: Qur’an, 5, p. 27.

[^70]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 280.

[^71]: Qur’an, 42, 42.

[^72]: Al-Jassas, Ahkam al-Our’an, vol. 3, p. 475.

[^73]: Qur’an, 70, 24.

[^74]: La’ali’ al-Akhbar, vol. 3, p. 3. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 6, p. 69.

[^75]: Qur’an, 15, 85.

[^76]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 5, p. 519.

[^77]: Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 33.

[^78]: Tarikh Dimashq, vol. 36, p. 16. Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol.
46, p. 7.

[^79]: Qur’an, 4, 92.

[^80]: Ibid., 58, 3-4.

[^81]: Ibid., 5, 89.

[^82]: Ibid., 2, 196.

[^83]: Ibid.,

[^84]: Ibid., 5, 95.

[^85]: The days of al-Tashriq are the days of Mina, which are the
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteen after the day of al-Nahr.

[^86]: The fasting of the day of doubt is prohibited when it is intended
as one of the month of Ramadhan.

[^87]: The continuos fasting means that the person fasts by day and
night, Hence it is religiously prohibited.

[^88]: The fasting of silence means that the person refrains from
speaking. In the bygone religions it was prohibited for the fasting to
speak, as the Qur’an mentioned in the story of Maryam. He, the Exalted,
said: “Surely I have vowed a fast to the Beneficent Allah, Hence I shall
not speak to any man today.” But the Holy Islamic Religion has abrogated
this part of fasting.

[^89]: The white days are the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth of
every lunar month. They are called Hence because the moon remains
shining from beginning to end. This has been mentioned in Majjma‘
al-Bahrayn, item Bid.

[^90]: Al-Khisal, pp. 501-504. Furu\`‘ al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 185.
al-Maqqna‘a, p. 58. al-Qummi, Tafsir, pp. 172- 175. Al-Tahdhib, vol. 1,
p. 435.

[^91]: Wasa‘il al-Shi‘a, vol. 4, p. 711.

[^92]: Ibid., p. 1264.

[^93]: Ibid., vol. 12, p. 86.

[^94]: Men La Yahdarahu al-Faqih, p. 244.

[^95]: Al-Tawhid, pp. 366-367.

[^96]: Balaghat al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 5.

[^97]: Saffwat al-Safwa, vol. 2, p. 3.

[^98]: Al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 219.


