Chapter 10:  Some Of His Sermons And Wise Sayings
=================================================

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, took great care of preaching to
the people. Many sermons were narrated on his authority. With them he
preached to his companions and the people of his time. They are still
alive, give lessons to people, warn them against arrogance and
recklessness, and summon them to the path of truth and rightness.
Besides some immortal wise sayings were reported on his authority. They
summon man to balance his conduct and to set right his character. In
this respect we will mention some of his sermons and wise sayings.

His Sermons
-----------

Before we speak about the sermons of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, we’d like to explain the objectives of his sermons and those of all
the pure Imams, peace be on them. They aim at:

A. Educating souls, setting them right, and planting noble inclinations
in them.

B. Removing psychological complexes from man’s soul, and destroying all
wicked, corrupt natures, selfishness, envy, and aggression against men.

C. Putting before men all historical lessons such as destroying the
tyrannical, that they may enlighten the way to man and explain to him
the aim of his social and individual life.

D. Directing man to Allah, the Exalted, the Noblest Objective in this
world, to save him from all evil things and offenses.

E. Urging man to do good for the hereafter, which his real, eternal
abode.

These are some brilliant objectives in the sermons of the Imams of
guidance, peace be on them. Now, we will mention the sermons of Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him.

1. Dispraising the world and warning men against its evil things and
delusions, the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Verily, the world has
departed and turned the back, and the next world has come. Each of them
has children. Hence be among the children of the next world and be not
among the world’s children who turn away from the hereafter. Indeed,
those who renounce the world use the ground as rug, the earth as bed,
water as perfume, and take a very little thing of the world. Surely, he
who yearns for the Garden forgets passions; he who fears the Fire
refrains from prohibited things; he who renounces the world, misfortunes
are easy for him. Truly, Allah has servants who regard the people of the
Garden as immortal in the Garden and the people of the Fire as chastised
in the Fire. Their evil things are safe, their hearts are sorrowful,
their souls are chaste, and their requests are light. They are patient
for a few days, and then they will attain a long rest. As for night,
they align their legs, plead to their Lord, and strive to release their
necks. As for daytime, they are clement, knowledgeable, obedient, and
pious. They are like the arrows without heads and blades. Fear of
worship has thinned them out. When a beholder sees them, he asks: ‘Are
the people sick or have become mentally disordered?’ The people are not
sick, but a great affair has mixed with them because of the remembrance
of the Fire and what therein.[^1]”

The Imam, peace be on him, warned men against love for the world, which
is the origin of every sin. He summoned them to follow the ascetics from
among the righteous who worshipped Allah and understood the reality of
life in this world, which is perishable and transitory. Only a few days
man spends in this world, and then he will meet his Lord. Allah will
question him about his acts in the world to repay him according to them.
If man did good, Allah would repay him good. If he did evil, Allah would
repay him evil. Hence the righteous turned to Allah through their hearts
and sentiments. They sincerely worshipped and obeyed Him.

2. He, peace be on him, said: “O son of Adam, you are still in good as
long as you preach to yourself, reckon it, fear is your underwear, and
grief is your outer garment. O son of Adam, you will die, be raised from
the dead, be stood before Allah, the Great and Almighty, be questioned,
hence prepare an answer.[^2]”

The Imam summons man to set up a preacher in his inner self to preach to
it and a reckoner to reckon it for its slips and mistakes, for man will
be raised from the dead on the Day of Judgment and reckoned for his sins
and offenses.

3. Al-Zuhri reported: [I heard ‘Ali b. al-Husayn say:] “He who does not
follow Allah’s laws will be sorrowful for the world. By Allah, this
world and the next world are like the two scales of a balance, whichever
tilts takes away the other. Then he recited these words of Him, the
Exalted: When the great event comes to pass (i.e., resurrection), there
is no belying its cominglowering (the enemies of Allah to the Fire),
exalting (the friends of Allah to the Garden).”

Then the Imam, peace be on him, preached to a man: “Fear Allah, be
moderate in request, seek not that which is not created, for he who
seeks that which is not created is out of breath, but does not attain
what he seeks. How can he attain that which is not created?”

The man hurried to say: “How can he attain that which is not created?”

The Imam, peace be on him, answered: “By seeking riches, possessions,
and ease in the world in order to take rest therein. Rest has not been
created in the world, nor has it been created for its inhabitants.
Rather rest has been created in the Garden. Tiredness and toil have been
created in the world and for its inhabitants. When one is given a
handful of it (the world), he is given a similar (handful) of
greediness. Whoever earns a greater (share) of the world is still in
need of it, for he is need of the people to keep his possessions and is
in need of every mediation of the world. Hence there is no rest in the
riches of the world, but it is Satan who whispers to the son of Adam
that there is rest in collecting possessions hence he drives him to
tiredness in the world and reckoning will be against him in the next
world.”

The Imam added: “The friends of Allah do not tire themselves in the
world for the world; rather they tire themselves in the world for the
next world. Truly, he who takes care of his livelihood, it is written
against him that he must preserve it. Such Jesus Christ, peace be on
him, said to his disciples: ‘The world is a mere bridge, hence pass over
it and do not build it.’[^3]”

In this sermon there is a summons to renouncing this world and
moderation in seeking it, for attaining rest is the reason for striving
for material things, but there is no rest in the world. This is because
there are many cares and a lot of pain in it. Rest has been created in
the Garden which Allah has prepared for His pious servants. Therefore,
one must seek the next world, not this world.

4. A person asked Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him: “What about
you, son of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah bless him and his family?”

He, peace be on him, replied: “Eight demands me: Allah demands my
religious duties. The Prophet demands me (to follow) the *Sunna*. The
family demands me (to prepare) nourishment. The soul demands me (to
fallow) passions. Satan demands me to follow him. The two keepers demand
me to act sincerely. The Angel of Death demands my soul, and the grave
demands my body. Hence I am indebted (to them) for these qualities.[^4]”

The Imam carefully considered the dimensions of the world and concluded
that they were surrounded by these eight demanders, hence he decided to
renounce the world and its vanities.

5. A beggar came to the Imam, peace be on him, and complained to him of
his condition, and he (the Imam) blamed him for this, saying: “Son of
Adam is miserable. He faces three misfortunes every day, but he does not
learn a lesson from them. If he learns a lesson from, misfortunes will
be easy for him. As for the first misfortune, it is the day when his
span decreases. When his possessions decrease, he becomes grieved. He
can return the dirham but cannot return his span. The second misfortune
is that he earns his daily bread. If it (his daily bread) is lawful, he
will be reckoned for it, and if it is unlawful, he will be punished for
it. The third (misfortune) is the greatest.” The Imam was questioned
about the greatest (misfortune): “What is it?” He replied: “When a day
passes, his (man’s) departure to the next world approaches. He does not
know whether he will (enter) the Garden or the Fire.[^5]”

The Imam, peace be on him, urges man to learn a lesson from these three
misfortunes which surrounds him. If man carefully considers them, they
will hold him back from working for this world and make him work for the
next world, which is the abode of mortality and subsistence.

6. He, peace be on him, said: “If men completely knew the virtue of
turning to Allah in repentance and norms of *sunna*, they would express
all that which came to their minds, and find the coolness of certainty
which would free them from need to dispute in all states except their
state. Moreover, understanding this would not escape them in the days
few in number and thought short in period. However, ignorance has
covered them; self-admiration has afflicted them; caprice has turned
them away from the door to certitude; and bad customs have distracted
them from the bounty of knowledge.[^6]”

If man carefully considered the affairs of this universe, he would
certainly believe that there was Creator to whose will and decree all
things were yielding, that other than Him had neither force nor
strength. If man believed in this, he would find the coolness of
certainty in himself, and be free from hardships and difficulties that
attacked him during his short term. However, he would not do this, for
ignorance has covered him; self-admiration has afflicted him; caprice
has diverted him from the bounty of knowledge and reaching the truth.

7. The following is among the valuable sermons which the Imam taught to
his companions and Shi‘ites:

“O men, fear Allah, and know that you will return to Him *on the day
that every soul shall find present what it has done of good and what it
has done of evil, it shall wish that between it and that (evil) there
were a long duration of time; and Allah makes you to be cautious of*
*(retribution from) Himself*.[^7] Woe unto you, O heedless son of Adam,
while (Allah) is not heedless of you! Your death is the quickest thing
toward you. It has swiftly come toward you seeking you, and it is about
to reach you as if you finished your fixed term, the angel made you die,
you alone went to your grave, your soul returned to you, the two angels
Munkar and Nakir broke into (your grave) to question you and to examine
you severely.

Truly, they will first question you about your Lord Whom you
worshippedyour Prophetwho was sent to youyour religion which you
professedyour Bookwhich you recitedyour Imamwhom you followedyour
spanin what did you pass it?and your propertyWhere did you earn it?
On what did you spend it? Hence be careful, consider yourself, and
prepare the answer before the examination, the question, and the test.
If you were a believer having knowledge of your religion, following the
truthful, supporting the friends of Allah, Allah would dictated to you
your proof and make your tongue say rightness, hence you would answer
well, you would be given good news of the Garden and the good pleasure
of Allah, the angels would receive you with happiness and bounty. If you
were not such (a believer), your tongue would stammer, your proof would
be refuted, you would be unable to give an answer, you would be given
news of the Fire, the angels of chastisement would receive you with
entertainment of boiling water and burning in the Fire.

“Know, son of Adam, that after this (i.e. the examination in the grave)
there will be something greater and more horrible and ache the hearts in
a much more painful manner. This is the Day of Resurrection. This is the
day when men will be mustered. This is the day which will be witnessed,
in which Allah will gather the former and the latter, in which the
trumpet shall be blown, and the graves shall be scattered; this is the
day of the event when (men’s) hearts will rise up to the throats, and
they will be silent. This is the day in which no stumble will be
released, nor will a ransom be taken from anyone, nor will an excuse be
accepted from anyone, nor will anyone show repentance, except repayment
through good deeds and evil deeds. If the believer does an atom’s weight
of good, he shall find it, and if he does an atom’s weight of evil, he
shall find it.

“Hence, men, guard against sins and acts of disobedience which (Allah)
has prohibited in the Truthful Book and the Uttering Explanation. Feel
not secure of the planning and destruction of Allah when the accursed
Satan summons you to the immediate passions and pleasures of this world,
for Allah says:

***Surely those who guard (against evil), when a visitation from the
Shaitan afflicts them, they become mindful, then Lo! they
see*****.**[^8]

Let your hearts fear Allah, remember the good reward Allah has promised
to give in your return, and the severe punishment with which He has
frightened you. He who is afraid of a thing is careful of it, and he who
is a careful of a thing leaves it. Be not among the heedless who incline
to the pleasures of this world’s life and do evil deeds, for Allah, the
Exalted says**:**

***Do they then who plan evil deeds feel secure (of this) that Allah
will not cause the earth to swallow them or that punishment may overtake
them from whence they do not perceive? Or that He may seize them in the
course of their journeys, then they shall not escape; or*** ***that He
may seize them by causing them suffer gradual loss?*** [^9]

Hence guard against what Allah did for the wrongdoers whom He has
mentioned in His Book. Beware of that through which He threatened the
oppressive people, and which He has mentioned in His Book. He has made
those other than you a lesson for you, so the happy are those who learn
a lesson form other than them. He has made you hear in His Book what he
did toward the unjust people from among the people of the towns before
you when He said:

***And how many a town which was iniquitous did we demolish, and we
raised up after it another people. Hence when they felt our punishment,
Lo! they began to fly from it. Do not fly (now) and come back to what
you were made to lead easy lives in and to your dwellings, haply you
will be questioned*****.**[^10]

When the punishment came to them, *they said:* ***O woe unto us! Surely
we were unjust***.[^11]

O men, if you say that Allah meant the polytheists in this (verse), then
what do you think about these words of Him:

***And We will set up a just balance on the day of resurrection, Hence
no soul shall be dealt with unjustly in the least; and though there be
the weight of a grain of mustard seed, (yet) We will bring it, and We
are sufficient to take an account*****.**[^12]

“Know, Allah’s servants, that the balances are not set up for the
polytheists, nor are the books spread for them; rather they will be
mustered to the Fire in groups. The balances are set up for the Muslims,
and the books are spread for them. Hence Allah’s servants, fear Allah,
and know that Allah does not make His friends love the world’s
embellishment, nor does He make them desire for it and its immediate
embellishment and its manifest beauty. He created men in the world to
try which of them would do good deeds for his (life in) the hereafter. B

y Allah, examples have been given to you in the Qur’an, and the verses
haven been given as examples to those who understand, hence, O
believers, be of those who understand, and there is no strength save in
Allah. Renounce the world, may Allah make you renounce the immediate
things of the life in the world, for Allah saysand His words are true:

***The likeness of this world’s life is only as which We send down from
the cloud, then the herbage of the earth of which men and cattle eat
grows luxuriantly thereby; until when the earth puts on its golden
raiment and it becomes garnished, and its people think that they have
power over it, Our command comes to it, by night or by day, Hence We
render it as reaped seed-produce, as though it had not been in existence
yesterday; thus do We make clear the communications for a people who
reflect*****.**[^13]

Incline not to the world, for Allah said to Muhammad:

***And incline not to those who are unjust, lest the fire touches
you*****.**[^14]

Incline not to the world and what is therein the inclination of him who
takes it as stability and as an abode of settlement, for it is the abode
of departure, end, and deeds. Hence supply (yourselves) with good deeds,
before its (the world’s) days scatter, and before the permission from
Allah (is taken) to destroying it, hence He Who originated it will
destroy it and inherit it. I ask Allah to help you and me to supply
(ourselves) with fear (of Him) and to renounce this world. May Allah
place you and me among those who renounce the life in this world. Peace
and Allah’s mercy and blessings be upon you.[^15]”

This sermon is full of fearful descriptions about the sights of the Day
of Resurrection when no stumble will be released nor a ransom will be
taken from anyone; rather men will be repaid according to their deeds,
good for good (deeds) and evil for evil (deeds). On this day nothing
will save man from the terrible chastisement except his good deeds.

The Imam, peace be on him, warned men against committing offenses and
sins and following passions which resulted in great evil. Also he, peace
be on him, warned them against following the way of the unjust whom
Allah punished severely, and whose houses He destroyed.

There is another important thing in this sermon; it is that the balances
of justice and fairness will be set up for Muslims and the books spread
for them only. As for the unbelievers, they will be driven to the Fire
in groups.

8. The following is another example of the Imam’s valuable sermons:

“May Allah protect you and us from the wrongdoers, the aggression of the
envious, and the oppression of the tyrannical. O believers, let not the
tyrants and their followers deceive you, for they desire for the world,
admire it, cling to it and its vanities. Guard against the world as long
as Allah has warned you against it. Renounce it as Allah want you to
renounce it. Incline not to it the inclination of those who have
regarded it as an abode and station. By Allah, the world’s embellishment
and changes are proofs for you. It raises the lowly up and pushes the
noble down, and will make groups of people enter the Fire tomorrow. In
this there is a lesson, a test, and a restraint for the mindful. The
affairs which come to you by day and night such as, dark discords, new
events, unjust laws, the calamities of time, the terrors of the
sovereign, the evil thoughts of Satan hold back hearts from their
intentions, make them forget the Being of guidance and the people of the
Truthexcept few from among those whom Allah has protected, and who
follow the way of reason and moderation.

Hence seek the help of asceticism against all of this, make use of the
lessons and refrain from them, renounce the immediate delight of the
world, turn away from its pleasures, wish for the permanent bliss of the
next world and strive for it, beware of death, and hate life with the
oppressive people. In this manner you are able to look at what is in the
world through the brilliant eye whose sight is sharp and to understand
new discords, misleading innovations, and the tyranny of the oppressive
kings. By my life, in the bygone days you turned the back to the past
affairs from among the heaped up afflictions and absorbed in them. You
can produce them as evidence of turning away from the errant and the men
of innovations, aggression, and corruption in the earth without truth.
Therefore, seek the help of Allah, return to obeying Him and those who
are worthy of obedience.

“Be very weary of (the world) before remorse, regret, meeting Allah and
standing before Him. By Allah, when people disobey Allah, they expose
themselves to His punishment, and when they prefer this world to the
next world, their outcome and fate will be evil. Recognizing Allah and
acting according to obedience to Him are two harmonious companions. He
who knows Allah fears Him, and fear urges him to act according to
obedience to Allah. (Religious) scholars and their followers know Allah
and wish for Him, hence Allah said: *Those of His servants only who are
possessed of knowledge fear Allah*.[^16] Accordingly, seek nothing of
this world through disobeying Allah; work in this world through
obedience to Allah, make us of the world’s days, strive for that which
delivers you tomorrow from Allah’s chastisement, for this is the least
in outcome, the nearest to excuse, and the most hopeful for deliverance.
Prefer Allah’s command, obedience to him, and those whose obedience He
has made obligatory to all things. Prefer not the affairs which come to
you through obeying the tyrannical and admiring this world to Allah’s
command, obedience to Him and to the rulers from among you. Know that
you are Allah’s servants, and we are part of you. The Dominant Lord will
judge between you and us tomorrow; He will make you stand and question
you; therefore prepare an answer before questioning and standing before
the Lord of the worlds, on the day when none will speak except with a
permission from Him.

Know that Allah will not believe a liar, nor will He accuse the truthful
of lying, nor will He refuse the excuse of the meritorious, nor will He
pardon those who have no excuse. Rather Allah has arguments over His
creatures; they the prophets and the trustees (of authority) after them.
Hence fear Allah, and set right yourselves. Obey Allah and those whom
you follow, that a person may remorse for neglecting Allah’s rights. Ask
Allah for forgiveness and turn to Him in repentance, for He accepts
repentance, forgive evil deeds, and knows what you do. Beware of making
friends with the disobedient, helping the unjust, and neighboring the
dissolute. Be weary of their temptations and go far away from their
courtyard. Know that he who disobeys Allah’s friends, professes a
religion other than Allah’s religion and obeys a command other than the
command of Allah’s friend will enter a burning fire which will destroy
the bodies whose souls are absent from them and which are controlled by
wickedness. There for, learn a lesson (from this), O you who have
intellects, thank Allah for guiding you, and know that you cannot leave
Allah’s power to that of those other then Him. Allah will see your acts,
and you will be mustered before Him. As a result, take advantage of this
sermon and follow the noble moral traits of the righteous.[^17]”

This sermon is one of the Imam’s excellent sermons. It is not confined
to summoning people to renounce the world and to act for the next world;
rather it includes political and social affairs, such as:

Warning men from following the tyrannical and their followers, who
admire the world’s embellishment and delight. This is because these
people always oppose social reform, spread oppression and corruption in
the earth.

Dispraising the world and criticizing its qualities of which is the
following:

A. It raises the lowly up.

B. It pushes the free and the noble down.

C. It drives groups of people to the Fire, for it deviates them from the
truth.

As the world leads men to vices and prevents them from good deeds, they
should renounce it, turn away from its pleasures, and strive for
attaining the bliss of the next world.

3. Showing grief for the community who faced in his time various kinds
of black afflictions, new innovations, unjust laws made by the Umayyads,
who drowned the country in oppression, discords, and tyranny. Those
events had strong influence on the community, for they held back the
hearts from their intentions and deviated them from the path of truth
and reason.

4. Summoning men to obey Allah and the Imams of truth and guidance, who
make them walk on the road of deliverance, and guide them to the
straight path, who represent the will and awareness of the community and
accomplish to it its mightiness and dignity. He, peace be on him, also
summoned men to disobey the tyrannical leaders and not to help them.

5. Urging men to fear Allah and to obey Him, for man’s life is
prosperous through these two deeds, and his conduct is righteous through
them.

These are some contents of this sermon full of religious and political
affairs.

9. The following is another example of the Imam’s sermons. In it he
spoke about the qualities of the ascetics:

“One of the qualities of those who renounce the world and wish for the
hereafter is that they oppose every friend who does not want what they
want. Truly he who works for the reward of the next word renounces the
immediate embellishment of the world, urges (himself) to do good deeds,
prepares himself for death, for Allah, the Great and Almighty, says:
*Until when death overtake one of them, he says: Send me back, my Lord,
that I may do good in that which I have left.*[^18]

“Live in this world the life of him who will be returned to it, and
remorse for the good deeds which he neglected therein, and which he will
need on the day of his neediness. Know, Allah’s servants, that he who
fears the sudden attack of the authority of the people of the earth by
night will turn away from pillow, refrain from sleeping, and abstain
from eating and drinking. Woe unto you, son of Adam! Do you not fear the
Almighty Lord’s sudden punishment coming by night? One finds neither
sanctuary nor refuge nor escape from this sudden punishment. Hence,
believers, fear Allah’s sudden punishment coming by night with the fear
of the pious, for Allah says:

***And most certainly We will settle you in the land after then; this is
for him who fears standing in My presence and who fears My
threat*****.**[^19]

Therefore, guard against the embellishment, deception, and evil of the
life in this world. Remember the ill consequence of the inclination to
it, for its embellishment is a trial, and love for it is sin.

“Woe unto you, son of Adam! Know that the severity of indigestion, the
nature of inclination (to the world), intoxication of fullness, and the
mightiness of supreme power hold back (men) from working, make them
forget the remembrance (of Allah), and distract them from the approach
of death, hence the one who is afflicted by love for the world behave
madly because of the intoxication of drink. He who knows Allah and fears
Him trains himself and accustoms it to hunger, lest it should not yearn
for fullness, in such a manner horses are made thin to gain bet.

“Hence, Allah’s servants, fear Allah with the fear of him who hopes for
His reward. Fear His punishment, for Allah, the Exalted, has excused
you, warned you (against His punishment), filled you with desire (for
His reward), and frightened you (with punishment), yet you do not yearn
for his generous reward nor do you fear His severe punishment, while He
has told you about this in His Book:

***Therefore whoever shall do of good deeds and he is a believer, there
shall be no denying of his exertion, and surely We shall write (it) down
for him.***[^20]

Then He has given you examples of verses in His Book, that you may guard
against the embellishment of the life in this world. He said:

***Your possessions and your children are only a trial, and Allah it is
with Whom is a great reward*****.**[^21]

Therefore, fear Allah as far as possible, listen and obey. Fear Allah
and learn a lesson from Allah’s admonitions. I know that the outcomes of
sins have exhausted many of you, yet they do not guard against them, and
harmed their bodies, but they do not hate them. Do you not hear Allah’s
call concerning belittling the world:

***Know that this world’s life is only sport and play and gaiety and
boasting among yourselves, and a vying in the multiplication of wealth
and children, like the rain, whose causing the vegetation to grow,
pleases husbandmen; then it withers away Hence that you will see it
become yellow, then it becomes dried up and broken down; and in the
hereafter is a severe punishment and (also) forgiveness from Allah and
(His) pleasure; and this world’s life is naught but means of deception.
Hasten to forgiveness from your Lord and to a garden whose extensiveness
is as the extensiveness of the heaven and the earth; it is prepared for
those who believe in Allah and His messengers; that is the bounty of
Allah: He gives it to whom He pleases, and Allah is the Possessor of the
great bounty*****.**[^22]

And He said:

***O you who believe, fear Allah, and let every soul consider what it
has sent on for the morrow, and fear Allah; surely Allah is Aware of
what you do. And be not like those who forgot Allah, Hence He made them
forget their own souls: it is these who are the
transgressors*****.**[^23]

As a result fear Allah, servants of Allah. Consider carefully (Allah’s
creatures) and work for that which you were created for, for Allah did
not create you vainly nor will he leave you in vain. He has made you
recognize Him, sent for you His messengers, and sent down upon you His
Book in which there are His lawful and unlawful things, His arguments
and His exemplars. Fear Allah, for your Lord has an argument over you
when He said:

***Have We not given him two eyes, and a tongue and two lips, and guided
him to the two ways.***[^24]

Fear Allah as far as possible, for there is no strength save in Him, put
trust in none except in Him, may Allah bless Muhammad and his
Household.[^25]”

This valuable sermon contains the qualities and inclinations of those
who renounced the world. Truly they were among the chosen creatures of
Allah. The world did not deceive them with its embellishment and
pleasures, for they turned toward the next world and sought nearness to
Allah. Because of their behavior, their good deeds, and their sweet
conversations, they became a good example for those who followed them.

10. The following is one of the Imam’s sermons in which he preached to
his companions:

“The most lovable of you with Allah is the best of you in work. The
greatest of you in work with Allah is the greatest of you in desire for
that which is with Him. The safest of you from the chastisement of Allah
is the most intense of you in fear of Him. The nearest of you to Allah
is the amplest of you in noble moral traits. The most pleasing of you to
Allah is the best of you in spending lavishly upon his family; the most
honorable of you with Allah is the most fearful of you before Him, the
Exalted.[^26]”

The Imam, peace be on him, ordered his companions to cling to the noble
moral qualities and stored deeds. He guided them to that which delivered
them from the chastisement of Allah in the next world. He urged them to:

A. Wish for that which is with Allah, which is among the greatest stored
things. As for wish for that which is with other than Allah, it leads to
disappointment and loss.

B. Fear Allah, for fear of Allah prevents man from committing sins and
crimes, plants in his soul virtue and dignity, and make him honorable
among the members of society. It has been mentioned in the tradition:
“The most honorable of you with Allah is the most fearful of you (before
Him).[^27]”

C. Adopt noble moral traits, for man is distinguished from other than
him by them. If he loses them, he loses his humanity.

11. The following is another example of the Imam’s sermons. In it he
preached to his companions, saying:

“There is a garden between night and day. Those who obey Allah and fear
him enjoy the garden. May Allah have mercy upon you, reciting the Qur’an
at the beginning of night, plead (to Allah) and ask (Him) for
forgiveness at the end of it. When daytime comes, do good within it
through refraining from committing degrading sins. May Allah place you
and us among those who are happy when they understand the Qur’an and
avail themselves of its knowledge.[^28]”

The Imam, peace be on him, urged his companions to obey Allah and to
worship Him by the darkness of night and the brightness of day. He
warned them against committing sins and offenses which lead man to the
places of destruction when he will quickly separate from this world and
meet Allah, Who will repay him for his deeds, namely good for good
(deeds) and evil for evil (deeds).

12. The following is another example of the Imam’s sermons. When man
reads it, he will shake with fear. In it the Imam addresses himself,
saying:

“O my soul, how long will you trust in the world and incline to its
embellishment? Have you not learned a lesson from your bygone ancestors,
your intimate friendswhom the earth has concealedyour brothersof whom
you are bereavedand your companions who have been transferred to the
earth? They are now inside the earth while they were on it. Their
beauties therein have become decayed and effaced.

“Their abodes have become empty of them, their courtyards have become
deserted of them, and the decrees (of Allah) drove them toward death.

“They left the world and their gathering for it; the pits (graves) and
earth have hidden them.

“The hands of death have perished many generations! The earth changed,
through its decay, and concealed many of your associates. You carried
them to their graves and returned to the work of those who are void of
every good.

“You are engaged in the world competing (with others) for it; therein
you are craving and vying with others for many possessions. You walk in
danger and rise in the morning for amusement. Do you know, if you
understand, what you expose to danger? He who always strives for this
world and forgets the next is a loser without doubt.

“How long will you cling to the world and be engaged in its pleasures?
White hair and the warner have come to you, while you are inattentive of
what is wanted from you, and your are engaged in your present and future
pleasures. You have seen the people who followed passions when they
changed and calamities befell them.

“Remembering the terror of death, the grave, and decay holds back one
from amusement and pleasures. Will you look for (pleasures) after the
approach of the forty (of age) and be obstinate, while white hair is a
warner? It seems that you intentionally take care of that which harms
you and that you are deviated from rightness.

“Consider carefully how the succession of days abducted bygone
communities and perished kings and how death surprised them, hence their
traces have become effaced from the world, their stories have remained
therein, and they have become decayed (bones) in the earth until the Day
of Resurrection and Return.

“They have become decayed (bones) in the earth, their assemblies have
become void of them, as if they were gamblers who departed (from the
world). They have inhabited an abode in which they cannot visit each
other, and how can the inhabitants of the graves visit each other? You
see nothing except that they have dwelled in flat graves over which the
wind raises and scatters (the dust).

“Many were those who possessed mightiness, authority, soldiers, helpers,
were powerful in their world. Therein they attained what they desired,
built palaces and places for drinks and amusement, collected
possessions, stored things, (had) beautiful slave girls, and noble
women.

“The stored things do not turn away death from them when it suddenly
comes upon them. The strongholds which they build and surround by
rivers, amusement and drink places do not repel (it) from them, nor do
stratagems fight against it for them, nor do the armies beseech
defending them.

“Allah sends down upon them what nothing can repel. His decree, which
nothing can keep back, befalls them, hence Exalted is Allah, the King,
the All-compeller, the All-sublime, the Almighty, the Subduer, the
Breaker of the tyrannical, the Destroyer of the arrogant, before whose
force all things are lowly, and Who annihilates the subduers.

“The King, the Almighty, whose decree nothing can repel, the All-wise,
the All-knowing, whose command is in force, the Subduer, toward whose
mightiness of face all the almighty are humble. How many an almighty one
is lowly before the All-dominating! The tyrannical kings are lowly and
humble toward the mightiness of the Possessor of the Throne.

“Hence be quick! Be quick! Be wary, be wary of the world, its
stratagems, the traps which it has set up for you, the ornament with
which it has adorned itself for you, the beauty which it has shown for
you, the pleasures which it has displayed for you, the destruction and
catastrophes which it has concealed from you!

“(My soul), summon (men) to repulse the world’s other disasters and
enjoin (them) to renounce (the world). Act seriously! Be not heedless!
Be careful, for the inhabitant will soon leave the abode! Be ready (for
the hereafter) ! Flag not, for your span will remove, and you will go to
the Abode of Permanence. Seek not the world, for its blissthough you
have obtained some of itis a harmful outcome for you.

“Therefore, do the intelligent crave for the world? Will they be pleased
with it, while they are sure that it will perish? Will they sleep at
night, while death is sudden? Will they incline (to the world) while
they expect death at any moment?

“Except to Allah (one’s soul inclines), but we deceive our souls, and
pleasures distract us from what He has warned us. How does one enjoy
this life, while he will be ordered to stand in the standing-place of
justice on the day when the secrets will be tried? It seems that we
think that there will be no resurrection, that we are in vain, and that
we will not return after death.

“What does one attain from the world’s pleasures, beauties and various
wonders, while he suffers sudden tragedies, maladies, troubles, and
pain?

“Do we not see the world’s changes come and go by day and night? The
world lends us nothing but blights and worries. How long does the
borrower stay therein? He is not happy and safe in his world, nor does
he prevents himself from its demands.

“How many a person inclines to the world, but it deceives him. It knocks
down him who devotes himself to it, but it not releases him from his
stumble, nor does it save him from being knocked down, nor does it heal
him from his pain and malady, nor does it save him form his disgrace.

“Rather it leads him, after honor and strength, to evil outcomes which
none can repel. When he sees that there is no salvation, and that his
carefulness will not rescue him from death, he shows remorse, but it
does not profit him, and weeps for his great sins.

“He weeps for his bygone sins, and regrets for what has escaped him in
this world. He asks Allah’s forgiveness, but forgiveness does not profit
him, nor does apology rescue him from the terror of death and the coming
of the trial.

“Grieves and worries encompass him, and he is sad when his strength is
feeble. None will relieve him from death, nor does anyone support him
against it. His soul becomes agitated out of fear of death, but the
uvula and the throat return it to him.

“Hence his visitors and his family decrease, and they leave him alone
(with death). They despair of this invalid one. They close his eyes with
their own hands, and stretch out his legs when his soul takes leave.
Then the affectionate friends leave him.

“How many a painful, distressed one weeps for him, seeking patience, but
he is not patient, saying: To Allah we belong and to Him is our return,
supplicating Allah for him sincerely, numbering for him all what he
remembers. How many a person gloats over his death, but he will die
shortly after his death.

“Hence his womenfolk tear their garments; his slave girls strike their
cheeks; his neighbor lament for losing him; and his brothers feel pain
for his disaster. Then they undertake preparing him for burial, and set
out to bring him out, as if he was not among them dear and ransomed, nor
was he the preferable, beloved one.

“His loving people and relatives send someone to wash him and shroud him
in two garments. Meanwhile they send someone to dig a grave for him.
Then his brothers and his clans come together to escort him to his final
resting place.

“If you see the youngest of his childrenwhen sadness controls his
heart, (men) fear for him out of impatience, tears make his eyes red, he
laments over his father and says: Woe! Alas!you will see an ugly sight
of death, of which a beholder is afraid and terrified. When the youngest
children forget him, the oldest ones become agitated. His womenfolk are
impatient for him, and tears run down their faces.

“Then he is carried from his wide palace to his narrow grave. When he
rests in his grave, his acts terrify him, his offenses encompass him,
and he is unable to stand before what he sees. Then they power down sand
on him with their own hands, weep and lament over him very much. Then
they stand beside him for an hour. When they despair of looking at him,
they leave him as hostage to his deeds.

“They turn the back (to him), lamenting over him, and all of them are
careful of death. They are like the sheep which graze safely, (and then)
they become frightened and stop pasturing when someone bare-armed
suddenly appears before them (holding) his knife.

“When fear turns away from them, they return to their pasture, and
forget this. Do we follow the acts of cattle and put their customs into
effect? Return to the remembrance of him who is carried to the Abode of
Trial. Learn a lesson from his place under the earth. (Learn a lesson
from) him who is pushed to the terror of what you see.

“Only he has rested in his grave; his children and sons-in-law have
distributed his inheritance (among themselves). They have divided his
properties (among themselves), but none of them have thanked or praised
him.

“O you who lives in the world and strives for it, O you who feels safety
from the changes of time, how do you feel security from this state, and
certainly you will reach it? How do you satisfy yourself of food, while
you wait for your death? How do you enjoy your desires, while they are
the mount of blights?

“You have not prepared yourself for the departure which has approached,
and you are about to travel. Alas! How long will I delay my repentance,
while my span will come to an end, and death awaits me? My deeds have
been written on the pages, and the OneWho is Just and Powerful in
judgment will repay (me) for them.

“How long will you patch your life in this world with your life in the
next, mount your seduction and caprice? I think that you are weak, O you
who prefers this world to the religion! Has the Compassionate (Allah)
commanded you to do this? Has the Qur’an been sent down for this? Do you
not think that there will be a severe reckoning awaiting you? Do you not
consider the state of those who collected (money) and invested (it),
raised buildings up and decorated (them), and lived long? Have they not
become waste, and their graves become their abode?

“You destroy that which will subsist, and build that which will perish,
though it is neither ample nor inhabited. Have you an excuse before
Allah when death surprises you, and you have earned no good deed? Are
you content that your span comes to an end, while your religion is
deficient and your property is abundant?[^29]”

This sermon is over. It describes the reality of this world’s life and
man’s departure from it. It shows that man craves for this world, adorns
it, and clings to its pleasures, while he knows that he will leave it
for a narrow, dark grave where his organs cut off, and his stories die
down. Nothing will stay with him except his deeds. If they are good, he
will be intimate with nothing except with them. If they are evil, he
will fear nothing save them.

I (the author) do not doubt the meanings of this sermon, but I doubt
some weak words therein, especially as it concerns the lines of poetry.
This is because such words do not agree with the eloquence of Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, who was the most eloquent in the Arab and
Islamic world, and who composed al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, which is the
purest and most eloquent book in Arabic literature.

13. The following is another example of the Imam’s valuable sermons. In
it he warns (mankind) against the world. He, peace be on him, said:
“Beware of the world and what therein, for it is the abode of vanishing
and change. It changes its inhabitants from state to another. It
perished the past generations and bygone nations, who had properties
more than you (have), lived longer than you, and had houses more than
you (have). The world annihilated them as if they were not its
inhabitants. The earth has absorbed their flesh, removed their beauties,
scattered their organs, and changed their colors. The hands of time have
milled them. Then will you crave for subsistence after them? Far be it!
Far be it! Surely, you will meet (Allah). You wasted your past span.
Hence do good deeds in the remaining part of your span, before your
fixed terms terminate, and your expectations cut off. You are about to
be taken from the palaces to the graves, sad not happy. By Allah, how
many a sinner who shows perfect remorse. How many a powerful person who
falls into the paths destruction. Remorse will not profit him, nor will
anyone help him against wrongdoing. He will find his past deeds and take
what he has supplied himself with. *They found what they did present,
and your Lord does not wrong anyone*. They are in the abodes of death,
and are silent in the camp of the dead, awaiting the cry of the
Resurrection and coming of the Day of the Calamity, *that Allah may
repay those who do evil with what they have done, and repay those who do
good with goodness*.[^30]”

With this we will end our speech about the sermons of Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. They are indeed some of the greatest
spiritual sources and the most successful medicine for curing
psychological diseases that abase man and throw him into total ignorance
in this life.

His Wise Sayings and Teachings
------------------------------

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, stated many valuable wise sayings
and noble teachings that resulted from his full experience in the
reality of life, his deep understanding of social affairs, and his
knowledge of the conditions and affairs of men. The following is part of
what it has been narrated on his authority.

### Dispraising Haughtiness

The Imam, peace be on him, dispraised haughtiness. He blamed the haughty
for their evil qualities, which are the door to all evil deeds and
vices. The haughty think that other than them do not deserve life, hence
they wrong men and show enmity toward them. The Imam, peace be on him,
said: “I wonder at him who shows haughtiness and vainglory, while was as
a sperm yesterday and will be a carrion tomorrow.[^31]”

If the haughty carefully consider their beginning and their end, they
will not show haughtiness and vainglory toward men, nor will they boast
of their children and properties.

From their Safe Place, the Careful are surprised.[^32]

An example of his immortal wise sayings is these golden wonderful words.
He, peace be on him, said: “From their safe place, the careful are
surprised. The intelligent are content with the inspiration of speech.
Explanation turns away from the ignorant one’s heart. He does not avail
himself of words, though eloquent, when he badly listens (to
them).[^33]” As for the meanings of these pure words, they are as
follows:

1. ‘From his safe place, the careful are surprised,’ means that kings
and rules employ guards in order to protect them; nevertheless the
guards themselves sometimes kill them.

2. It is the intelligent who understand affairs through the inspiration
of speech and the contexts of states. In other words, they are in no
need of wordiness.

3. Explanation turns away from the ignorant one’s mind, for ignorance
has covered it and turned it away from understanding affairs.

4. He who badly listens does not avail himself of pure, wise words, but
he who carefully listens makes use of them.

### Warning against Disputes

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (the Muslims) against the dispute
which leads them to overcoming and haughtiness, and not to the truth.
He, peace be on him, said: “Dispute corrupts past friendship and unties
strong knots, for it leads to overcoming which is among the strongest
reasons for estrangement.[^34]” Dispute is a key to evil deeds, moves
enmity and hatred among men, and causes to them many hardships and
difficulties.

### Rejoicing over Sins

Rejoicing over sins indicates that the person goes to extremes in crime,
hence the Imam, peace be on him, said: “Beware of rejoicing over sins,
for rejoicing over sins is greater than committing them.[^35]”

### Kinds of Sin

The Imam speaks about the kinds of sin which bring about Allah’s wrath
and chastisement. He warns man against them, that he may lead sound
religion and world. He, peace be on him, said:

“The sins which alter blessings are: aggression against men, turning
away from good habits, affected charity, showing ingratitude toward
blessings, and leaving thanksgiving. Allah, the Exalted, said:
*‘**Surely, Allah does not change the condition of a people until they
change their own condition.’***

“The sins which bring about remorse are: murdering the soul which Allah
has made unlawful (When Cain killed his brother Abel and was unable to
bury him, Allah said: ***Hence he became among the remorseful*****.**),
leaving tightening bonds of kin until they are free from need, leaving
the prayers until their times pass, leaving will and complaints,
refraining from giving *zakat* until death comes and the tongue stops.

“The sins which draw down diversities are: disobeying the knowledgeable,
showing insolence toward men, and ridiculing them.

“The sins which repel blessings are: displaying poverty, sleep during
noon and evening prayers’ times, disdaining blessings, and complaints
against Allah.

“The sins which tear apart safeguards are: drinking wine, playing
gamble, chatter and joking which make men laugh, mentioning the defects
of men, and sitting with the people of doubt.

“The sins which draw down tribulations are: leaving relieving the
grieved, leaving helping the wronged, refraining from enjoining the good
and forbidding the evil.

“The sins which empower the enemies are: declaring oppression and
dissoluteness publicly, making the prohibited permissible, showing
disobedience toward the good, and following the evil.

“The sins which hasten annihilation are: cutting the ties of the womb,
sinful oath, false words, fornication, obstructing the path of the
Muslims, and claiming the Imamate without right.

“The sins which cut off expectations are: despair of Allah’s repose,
desperation of Allah’s mercy, trust in other than Allah, and denying
Allah’s promise.

“The sins which make air black are: magic, soothsaying, faith in the
stars, denying (Allah’s) decree, and showing disobedience to parents.

“The sins which remove the covering are: borrowing a loan without
intention to repay it, spending lavishly on falsehood, showing
stinginess toward family, children, and the blood relations, misconduct,
the paucity of patience, employing boredom, and disdaining the people of
religion.

“The sins which hold back supplication are: evil intention, wicked inner
self, showing hypocrisy toward brothers, leaving giving truthful answer,
delaying the obligatory prayers until their times pass, leaving nearness
to Allah through charity and alms, employing obscene words, untruth,
concealing witness, refraining from giving zakat, loan, and food,
displaying curliness toward the poor and the needy, oppressing orphans
and widows, scolding and repelling the beggar at night.[^36]”

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (men) against committing these sins
and crimes, which deviate man’s behavior from the right path and make
him far from his Creator. He has mentioned their mean results in this
world and the next. This is indeed one of the traditions of the pure
Imams, peace be on them, who spared no effort to educate man’s soul.

### The Reality of Death

The Imam, peace be on him, described the reality of death of believers
and unbelievers with these words of him: “The death of a believer is
like taking off dirty garments and replacing them with excellent ones.
It is like riding the lowest mounts and untying heavy fetters. The death
of an unbeliever is like taking off excellent garments and replacing
them with the dirtiest and most coarse ones. It is like moving from
intimate houses to lonely ones.[^37]”

Many traditions have been narrated on the authority of the Imams of
guidance. They say: “The world is the prison of a believer and garden of
an unbeliever.” When the believer is about to die, he finds no
difficulty in death. He finds the greatest comfort; for he will soon
move to Paradise. When the unbeliever faces death, he finds it
unhappiness and tribulation. He faces it with regret and pain; for he
will move from a garden to a lasting chastisement in a prison.

### The Most Important Degrees of Asceticism

A person questioned Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, about
asceticism, and he replied: “Asceticism is of ten degrees: The highest
degree of asceticism is the lowest degree of piety. The highest degree
of piety is the lowest degree of certainty. The highest degree of
certainty is the lowest degree of satisfaction.[^38] Asceticism is in
one verse of Allah’s Book: Hence that you may not grieve for what has
escaped you, nor be exultant at what He has given you.[^39]”

This tradition contains some gnostic realities. They are as follows:

A. The highest degree of asceticism does not equal the lowest degree of
abstaining from the things which Allah has made unlawful. Abstaining
from such things results from setting right soul and controlling it.

B. Piety is the highest degree of faith (in Allah), yet the highest
degree of it is the lowest degree of certainty of Allah, the Exalted.

C. Certitude is the essence of faith, yet the highest degree of it is
lowest degree of satisfaction with what Allah has apportioned.

D. The Holy Verse includes the reality of asceticism. It warns man
against grief and sorrow for the interests which escape him in this
world. Besides it warns him against rejoicing over the pleasures he
earns.

### The Best Deeds in the View of Allah

The Imam, peace be on him, was asked about the best deeds in the view of
Allah, and he answered: “After recognizing Allah and His Messenger, the
best deed in Allah’s eyes is detesting the world. This has many
branches. Disobedience has also many branches. Self-admiration was the
first act of disobedience. It made Satan refuse to (prostrate himself
for Adam), show haughtiness, and unbeliever. Envy was the sin of Adam’s
son. It made him kill his brother. From this branched love for women,
the world, presidency, ease, words, superiority, and wealth. They have
become seven qualities and come together in love for the world. After
recognizing these qualities, the prophets and the scholars said: “Love
for the world is the root of every sin, and the world is an abode of
tribulation.[^40]”

Surely, love for the world is the foundation of tribulation, source of
discords and dangers which befall man. It leads man to sins and offenses
and throws him into great evil. The Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned
the blights which result from love for the world. Some of them are as
follows:

1. Self-admiration.

2. Envy.

3. Love for men and presidency.

4. Love for ease.

5. Love for words (which do not concern and mean the person).

6. Love for superiority over the others.

7. Love for wealth.

These blights deviate man from the right path, and throw him into sins.

### Recognizing Justice

The following tradition is one of the Imam’s wise sayings. In it the
Imam defines man’s justice and reliability. He, peace be on him, said:
“If you see a man show good appearance and guidance, goes too far in his
words, and pretends obedience through his movements, then be slow, let
him not deceive you. Many are those who are incapable of obtaining the
world and committing the unlawful therein. As he is frail in body,
abased, and fainthearted, he sets up religion as snare for himself. He
is still deceiving men through his appearance. When he is capable of an
unlawful thing, he plunges into it. If you see him show chastity toward
unlawful property, then be slow, let him not deceive you. For the
desires of the creatures are various.

Many are those who affect refusal toward the unlawful, though be it
much. He carries himself on an ugly, ill-omened horse, and commits an
unlawful thing through it. If you see him in such a state, then be slow,
let him not deceive you, until you see the firmness of his intellect.
Many are those who leave all of this, then they do not return to firm
intellect, hence what they corrupt through their ignorance is more than
what they set right through their intellects. If you find his intellect
firm, then be slow, let him not deceive you, until you see whether his
caprice overcomes his intellect or his intellect overcomes his caprice,
whether he loves false presidency or abstains from it.

For some people leave the world for the world. They think that the
pleasure of false presidency is better than that of lawful properties
and blessings, hence they leave all of this and seek presidency. When it
is said to him, fear Allah; pride carries him off to sin; therefore hell
is sufficient for him; and certainly it is an evil resting-place. He
behaves at random. His first falsehood leads him to the utmost loss. His
farfetched demand take him to what he cannot accomplish through his
tyranny. Hence he makes lawful what Allah has made unlawful. He makes
unlawful what Allah has made lawful. He pays no attention to his
religion when it escapes him, as long as he assumes presidency, for
which he has tired himself. Then, it is those with whom Allah has become
angry, whom He has cursed, and for whom He has prepared a painful
chastisement.

“However, the best man is he who makes his caprice follow Allah’s
command, uses his abilities according to Allah’s decree, regards
abasement during the truth as nearer to immortal glory than false glory,
and knows that its little ordeal, which he bears, leads to permanent
bliss in an abode which does not perish nor does it run out, whose
plentiful joy will follow him. When he follows his caprice, it leads him
to a chastisement which does not cease nor does it remove. Hence cling
to this man, follow his *sunna* (practices), and seek access through him
to Allah, for his supplication is not refused nor does his demand
fail.[^41]”

This tradition of the Imam, peace be on him, aims at recognizing
justice, which is among the greatest psychological talents, for through
it man becomes sublime, and gets free from material things and pleasures
to the extent that evil inclinations will have no power over him. Some
jurists depend on this tradition when the say that the general authority
should be the most generous one.[^42]

The tradition clearly indicates that recognizing the just man, perfect
in piety and Allah-fearingness, should stands on an exact test and full
experience, not on a quick glance of which is the following:

A. Good appearance, for it is not proof for justice and
Allah-fearingness.

B. Displaying righteousness, it also is not proof for justice, for he
may be a deceiver and hypocrite, using the religion as means to obtain
his objectives, his ambitions, and his desires after he has become
unable to obtain them through other means.

C. Abstaining from unlawful properties, this also is not proof for
Allah-fearingness, for he may force himself to prevent from this in
order to accomplish his objectives and purposes, which have no
relationship with the religion.

As for the qualities through which perfect piety and reliability are
recognized, they are as follows:

A. Man should overcome his caprice and desires through his intellect.

B. He does not show love for false presidency; he should renounce it,
for this is among the most reliable proofs for justice and
Allah-fearingness.

C. He should follow Allah’s commandments and yield completely to Him,
the exalted, to the extent that he employs all his abilities to attain
Allah’s good pleasure and nearness to Him. This is indeed a just man,
whose justice results from thanksgiving, contemplation, and faith.

### The Qualities of Hypocrites and Believers

The Imam, peace be on him, stated the following tradition, explaining
some qualities of hypocrites and believers. He said: “The hypocrite
prohibits (men from doing evil deeds), but he does not (refrain from
them). He enjoins (men to do good deeds), but he does not do (them).
When he stands for prayers, he objects (its legislation). When he bows
down (in prayer), he shows laziness. When he prostrates himself (in
prayer), he pecks (i.e. he performs prostration as quick as bird peck at
the corn). When he enters into evening, his concern is dinner. He does
not fast. When he rises in the morning, his concern is sleep. He does
not stay awake at night.

“As for the believer, he mixes his knowledge with his clemency. He sits
in order to learn and listens in order to be free (from faults). He does
not tell anyone about trust even his friends. He does not conceal
witness for those far. He does not do any of the truth for dissimulation
nor does he leave it out of modesty. When men praise him, he is afraid
of their words. He asks Allah’s forgiveness for what they do not know.
Those who ignore him do not harm him.[^43]” This tradition of the Imam,
peace be on him, includes the most prominent qualities of hypocrites and
believers. As for the qualities of hypocrites, they are as follows:

A. The hypocrite forbids (men) from doing evil deeds, but he does not
abstain from doing them. He enjoins (men) to do good deeds, but he
himself does not do them. This is because he does not believe in such
deeds. He forbids (men) from the evil and enjoins (them) to do the good
in order to deceive and mislead them and in order to show himself as a
good person.

B. When he stands for prayers, he opposes its legislation. Besides, when
he bows down in prayer, he kneels down as sheep do. When he prostrates
himself in prayer, he is restless. He is like bird when it pecks at the
corn.

C. He is like the cattle whose concern is fodder. In this manner he
rises in the morning and enters into evening, and has no concern except
food.

As for the qualities of the believer, they are as follows:

A. His character is composed of two elements: knowledge and clemency.
Hence he is scholar and clement. He who has these two qualities reaches
the highest degree of perfection.

B. He does not sit with any person except those from whom he takes
knowledge and wisdom. He never joins useless amusement and unemployment
assemblies.

C. He listens to men in order to save himself from their wickedness and
enmity.[^44]

D. He conceals deposits; he does not tell anyone about them even his
friends.

E. He gives witness; he never conceals it.

F. When he does any of the truth, he does not do it for dissimulation or
reputation; rather he does it for the sake of Allah, the Most High.

G. When men praise or describe him with some noble qualities, he is
afraid of being void of such qualities. Hence he asks Allah to forgive
them.

H. He pays no attention to those who ignore him and regards them as not
important. These qualities indicate that the believer has an exalted
soul and perfect character.

### Some excellent Pieces of Advice

The Imam, peace be on him, gave his companions these excellent pieces of
advice: “You have no right to sit with whomever you like, for Allah (the
Blessed, the Exalted) says: And when you see those who enter into false
discourses about Our communications, withdraw from them until they enter
into some other discourse, and if Satan causes you to forget, then do
not sit after recollection with the unjust people.[^45] You have no
right to say whatever you like, for Allah, the Exalted, says: And follow
not what you have no knowledge of. [^46] And for Allah’s messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, says: ‘May Allah have mercy on a servant
who says good (words) and wins (them) or he keeps silent and is safe.’
You have no right to listen to whatever you like, for Allah, the Most
High, says: Surely the hearing and the sight and the heart, all of
these, shall be questioned about that.[^47]”

If Muslims put into effect these excellent pieces of advice, they will
earn immense good and be safe from evil.

### Help and Beneficence

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, urged his companions and
followers (Shi‘ites) to aid each other and to show beneficence toward
one another, for such an act is the best guarantee for their unity. Many
traditions in this respect have been handed down from him. The following
is some of them:

1. “The highest of you in degree, and the best of you in palaces and
buildings (i.e. in the Garden) are those who respond to the believers
and help their poor ones. Allah brings near those who say good words to
their poor brothers, though they are from among those who will be
chastised in the Fire. Therefore, disdain not beneficence to your
brothers, for it will profit you when nothing replaces it.[^48]” The
Imam, peace be on him, urged (Muslims) to aid the poor and to show
beneficence toward them. He mentioned the ample reward Allah prepared
for good-doers. He regarded good words as beneficence, for they spread
love and brotherhood among the Muslims.

2. He, peace be on him, said: “He who passes night full and there is in
his presence a hungry believer, Allah, the Exalted, says to His angels:
Bear witness against this servant. I ordered him, but he disobeyed Me
and obeyed other than Me, hence I charged him with his work. By My
mightiness and majesty, I will never forgive him.[^49]”

This tradition and others which have been handed down from the members
of the House *(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on themregarded as among the
basic elements of social solidarity, which Islam has established, and
which certainly put an end to poverty and deprivation.

3. He, peace be on him, said: “He who has an extra garment, knows that
there is in his presence a believer who needs it, and does not give it
to him, Allah will throw him down in the Fire.[^50]”

Islam regards poverty as a destructive social disaster, hence it urges
Muslims to spare no effort to save society from it.

4. He, peace be on him, said: “I feel shame of my Lord when I ask Him
for the Garden, while I do not give a dirham or a dinar to one of my
brothers. It will be said to me on the Day of Resurrection: ‘If the
Garden belonged to you, you would be stingier with it.’[^51]”

This tradition shows that the Imam, peace be on him, took great care of
the affairs of charity and beneficence, that he urged the Muslims to
take care of them.

5. He, peace be on him, said: “He who gives food to a believer until he
becomes full, he will get a wage of which neither an angel brought nigh
nor a prophet sent out know except the Lord of the worlds.” He added:
“Among the things which make forgiveness obligatory is giving food to a
hungry Muslim.” Then he read these words of Him, the Exalted: “*Or the
giving of food in a day of hunger to an orphan, having relationship, or
to the poor lying in the dust*.[^52]”

In this tradition there is summons to giving food to a hungry person and
to save him from hunger. Islam urges Muslims to give food to the poor
and regards giving food as a necessary act. It indicates that a Muslim
will be questioned about it, especially when the poor person is in
urgent need of food.

6. He, peace be on him, said: “He who accomplishes his brother’s need,
Allah will grant him a hundred needs. He who relieves his brother’s
sorrow, Allah will relieve his sorrow on the Day of Resurrection,
whatever it may be. He who helps his brother against a wrongdoer, Allah
will help him pass *al-Sirat* when legs shake. He who strives to fulfill
his brother’s need and pleases him with fulfilling it, he pleases
Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family. He who gives
water to his brother to quench his thirst, Allah will let him drink of a
pure drink which is sealed (to others). He who gives food to his hungry
brother, Allah will let him eat from the fruits of the Garden. He who
clothes his naked brother, Allah will make him wear silk and brocade. He
who clothes his unnaked brother, Allah will guarantee him as long as
there is a thread of the garment on (the body of) the clothed one. He
who removes his brother’s worries, Allah will make youths serve him. He
who carries his brother on a she-camel, Allah will raise him from the
dead on one of the she-camels of the Garden for which he will vie with
the angels. He who shrouds his brother when he dies, Allah will clothe
him from the day when his mother borne him until he dies. He who marries
his brother to an intimate wife, Allah will make him intimate in his
grave with the most beloved of his family. He who visits his sick
brother, the angels will surround him and supplicate for him until he
leaves, and they say: ‘*You are agreeable, and the Garden is agreeable
for you*.’ By Allah, accomplishing a need is more lovable with Allah
than fasting successive months in the Sacred Months.’[^53]”

These excellent teachings of the Imam, peace be on him, bring about the
solidarity of the Muslims, spread affection, mercy, and sympathy among
them.

7. He, peace be on him, said: “Men will be resurrected naked, hungry,
and thirsty. Hence he who clothes a believer in this world, Allah will
clothe him in the garments of the Garden. He who gives food to a
believer, Allah will give him food of the fruits of the Garden. He who
gives a believer a drink of water in this world, Allah will let him
drink of a pure drink that is sealed (to others).[^54]”

Islam spares no effort to put an end to poverty and deprivation, hence
it guarantees to give ample repayment to those who aid their Muslim
brother ands show beneficence toward them.

8. He, peace be on him, said: “He who gives food to a hungry believer,
Allah will give him food of the fruits of the Garden. He who gives water
to a thirsty believer, Allah will let him drink of a pure drink that is
sealed (to others). He who clothes a naked believer, Allah will cover
him over and protect him as long as there is a rag of the garment (on
the body of the clothed one).[^55]”

These principles of the Imam, peace be on him, represent the essence and
reality of Islam. If Muslims put them into practice, they will be the
masters of nations and peoples.

### Tightening the Bonds of Kin

The Imam, peace be on him, urged the Muslims to tighten the bonds of kin
and warned them against cutting them off. He, peace be on him, said: “He
who wants Allah to prolong his span and give him a plentiful provision,
let him tighten the bonds of kin, for the womb relatives will say with
eloquent tongues on the Day of Resurrection: ‘O Lord, tighten him who
tightened us, and cut him off who cut us off.’ One will be seen on the
good path. If the womb relatives, whom he cut off, come to him, they
will descend him to the bottom of the Fire.[^56]”

Many authentic traditions have been handed down from the Imam of
guidance, peace be on them, about tightening the bonds of kin. They
indicate that such bonds prolong man’s span, increase his provision,
double his reward in the hereafter, strengthen society, and spread
affection among the Muslims.

### Love for the Sake of Allah

The Imam, peace be on him, summoned the Muslims to love each other and
to show affection toward one another for the sake of Allah, not for this
material perishing world. He, peace be on him, said: “When Allah bring
together those first and last, men will hear a caller ask: ‘Where are
those who loved each other for the sake of Allah?’ Some people will
stand. It will be said to them: ‘Go to the Garden without reckoning.’
The angels will receive them and ask them about the work through which
they enter the Garden. They will answer: ‘It is we who loved one another
for the sake of Allah.’ The angels will ask them: ‘What was your act?’
They will reply: ‘We loved those who loved Allah, and hated those who
hated Him.’ Hence the angels will say to them: ‘Excellent is the reward
of the workers!’[^57]”

Love for the sake of Allah unifies Muslims; it does not divide them. It
brings them together and does not scatter them, for it results from firm
faith in Allah.

### Supplication for Believers

The Imam, peace be on him, urged the believers to supplicate for their
Muslim brothers when absent, and to praise them. He, peace be on him,
said: “When the angels hear a believer supplicating for his absent
brother, they say: ‘What an excellent brother for your brother you are!
You supplicate for him with good when he is absent, and remember him
with goodness. Allah has given you two likes of what you supplicated for
him, and praised you two likes of what you praised him. You did him a
favor.’ When they hear him mention his brother with evil and supplicate
against him, they say to him: ‘What a bad brother for your brother you
are! Refrain from this, O you whose sins and defects have been covered!
Take care of yourself! Praise Allah who has covered you over! Know that
Allah knows His servant more than you![^58]

These noble moral traits strengthen the unity and solidarity of Muslims,
spread affection and brotherhood among them.

### Repayment of the Virtuous

The Imam, peace be on him, urged his companions to show virtue toward
men as well as he summoned them to be patient and to help each other.
He, peace be on him, said: “A caller will call on the Day of
Resurrection: ‘Let the virtuous stand!’ Some people will stand before
reckoning. It will be said to them: ‘Go to the Garden!’ The angels
receive them and ask them where they go. They reply: ‘To the Garden.’
When the angels ask them about the work through which they deserve the
Garden, they answer: ‘When men showed ignorance toward us, we showed
forbearance toward them. When they wronged us, were patient. When they
mistreated us, we pardoned them.’ Hence it will be said to them: ‘Enter
the Garden! Excellent is the reward of the workers.’

Then a caller will call: ‘Let the patient stand.’ Some people will
stand. It will be said to them: ‘Go to the Garden!’ The angels receive
them and ask them as they ask the first group, and they reply: ‘We
habituated ourselves to obey Allah, and we habituated them to refrain
from disobeying Him.’ Hence the angels will say to them: ‘Enter the
Garden! Excellent is the reward of the workers.’ Then a caller will
call: ‘Let the neighbors of Allah, the Great and Almighty, stand!’ Some
people will stand. It will be said to them: ‘Go to the Garden!’ The
angels will ask them about the work through which they deserve the
Garden and about their neighborhood to Allah, the Great and Almighty.
They will reply: ‘We visited each other for the sake of Allah. We sat
with one another for the sake of Allah. We exchanged (gifts) with each
other for the sake of Allah.’ Hence the angels will say: ‘Enter the
Garden! Excellent is the reward of the workers.’[^59]”

In this tradition the Imam, peace be on him, summons Muslims to have
noble moral traits and the most excellent qualities which lead them to
honor and perfection.

### Summons to Religion

A man came to the Imam, peace be on him, and asked him about the summons
to the religion, and he, peace be on him, answered: “Summon (men) to
Allah, the Most High, and His religion through two ways: Make them
recognize Allah, and work for the sake of His good pleasure. As for the
recognition of Allah, it is that you make (them) know that Allah is One,
Compassionate, Merciful, knowledgeable, Powerful over all things, eyes
attain Him not, and He attains eyes, and He is the All-subtle, the
Expert, that Muhammad is His servant and messenger, what he brought was
the truth from Allah, the Exalted, and that other than them is
falsehood. If they accept this, they will have rights just as those of
the Muslims, and there will be rights against them just as those against
the Muslims.[^60]”

The summons to the religion and embracing it depend on recognizing
Allah, the Most High, faith in His Unity, and confessing the prophecy of
the greatest Messenger, may Allah bless him and his Household. He who
follows these two affairs will be treated according to the Islamic
rules, such as refraining from shedding his blood, safeguarding his
properties, and treating him in the same manner in which Muslims are
treated.

### Warning against some Unlawful Things

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (the Muslims) against committing some
unlawful things, for they send man away from his Lord and throw him into
great evil. He, peace be on him, said: “Guard against all the unlawful
things. Know that backbiting your believing brotherwho is among the
Shi’ites of the House of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his
Householdis more unlawful than eating (meat) of the dead (animals).
Allah, the Most High, said: ‘...nor let some of you backbite others.
Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But you abhor
it.[^61]’ Drinking blood is less unlawful for you than informing an
unjust sovereign of your believing brother, who is among the Shi’ites of
the House of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his Household.

For you perish yourselves, you believing brother, and the sovereign.
Eating the flesh of a pig is less unlawful for you than your honoring
those whom Allah has belittled, naming them with our names, the Ahl
al-Bayt, and giving them our nick-names, while Allah has named them the
sinners, and given them the nick-name of the licentious. (The animal)
over which any other (name) than (that of) Allah is invoked is less
unlawful for you than making a marriage contract or performing a
congregational prayer with our enemies, who have usurped our rights,
unless you practice precautionary dissimulation. Allah, the Most High,
says:

***‘...but whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring, nor exceeding
the limit, no sin shall be on him.***[^62]***”***

***If someone is obedient to Allah, but necessity forces him to practice
one of these unlawful things, no sin shall be on him.***[^63]

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (the Muslims) against committing all
the unlawful things, and he especially stressed refraining from the
following unlawful things:

A. Backbiting, for it divides Muslims, spreads hatred and enmity among
them. It is certain that he who has firm faith in Allah turns away from
it. In many of his pieces of advice, the Imam, peace be on him, warned
(the Muslims) against it. A man said to him: “Someone accuses you of
misguidance and innovation.” The Imam blamed the man for this and said
to him: “You did not conform to the right of sitting with the man when
you informed us of his words, nor did you conform to my right when you
told me about my brother what I had not known. Death includes all of us.
Resurrection will be the place of our gathering. The Day of Judgment
will be our appointment, and Allah will decide among us. Beware of
backbiting, for it is the food of the dogs of the people of the
Fire.[^64]”

B. Informing an unjust sovereign against a believer: It is a serious
offense, for it leads to an inclusive destruction.

C. Giving the noble nick-names of the Ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, to
those unjust who spread tyranny and corruption in that time.

D. Communicating and working with the unjust: They strengthen their
position and raise up their importance. These are some contents of the
words of the Imam, peace be on him.

### Warning against Craving

The Imam, peace be on him, summoned to freedom from the abasement of
craving. He, peace be on him, said: “I have seen all good come together
in cutting off craving for what is in men’s hands. He who beseeches not
men for a thing, and entrust all his affairs to Allah, Allah will
respond to him in all things.[^65]”

Dangerous blights result from craving. They lead man to destruction and
throw him into great evil. The Imam summoned man to free himself from
craving, that he might be perfected and sublime.

### Showing Gratitude toward Good-doer

The Imam, peace be on him, underlined the necessity for showing
gratitude toward good-doers, that good deeds may not be lost. He, peace
be on him, said: “Allah, the Most High, loves every sad heart and every
grateful servant. On the Day of Judgment, He will say to His servant:
‘Did you thank so-and-so?’ The servant will say: ‘I thanked You, my
Lord.’ Allah, the Glorified, will say to him: ‘You did not thank me
because you did not thank him.’”

After this the Imam added: “The most grateful of you (to Allah) is he
who thanks the people.[^66]”

Giving thanks to a benefactor or a good-doer is a pressing Islamic
necessity, that people may continue kind acts.

### Enjoining the Good

Enjoining the good and forbidding the evil are two of the most prominent
Islamic principles. Islam has positively adopted them, that social
justice may spread among men, that no evil deed, no aggression, and no
oppression may stay in the general life of people. In this connection
many authentic traditions have been handed down from the Imams of
guidance, peace be on them. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, said:
“He who leaves enjoining the good and forbidding the evil is like him
who leaves Allah’s Book behind him, unless he shows precautionary
dissimulation.” The Imam was asked about precautionary dissimulation,
and he answered: “(He practices it) when he is afraid of a tyrannical
ruler.[^67]”

Fear of a tyrannical ruler makes it not incumbent on person to enjoin
the good and forbid the evil. The jurists have mentioned in their
practical treatises the conditions of performing this Islamic, important
obligation.

### Speech is better than Silence

A person asked the Imam, peace be on him: “Which is better- speech or
silence?” “Each has blights,” answered the Imam, “when they are sound of
blights, speech is better.”

Another person asked him: “How is this, son of Allah’s Apostle?”

The Imam, peace be on him, replied: “Allah, the Glorified, sent the
prophets and the trustees (of authority) to speak, not to keep silent.
(They did not) deserve the Garden through silence; rather through
speech. I cannot equate the sun with the moon.[^68]”

### The Happiness of Man

The Imam, peace be on him, talked about the things which made man happy
in the world. He said: “One is happy when his daily bread is in his
homeland, his friends are righteous, and has a son through whom he seeks
help.[^69]”

Indeed, he who has these things wins all the good of the world, and is
therein among the happy.

### Mutual Teachings among Religions

A man asked the Imam, peace be on him: “What are the common teachings
among religions?” “Saying the truth, ruling with justice, and fulfilling
promise,” replied the Imam. Heavenly religions share these three items,
which are the foundation of social life, and for which all the prophets
and messenger sacrificed their lives.

### Noble Traits

The Imam, peace be on him, spoke about some noble qualities by which the
Muslim should be distinguished, and through which his Islam is perfect.
He, peace be on him, said: “He who has four (traits), his Islam is
perfect, his sins are forgiven, and he will meet his Lord, the Great and
almighty, and He is satisfied with him: sincerity to Allah, the Great
and almighty, through fulfilling men’s rights against him, telling men
the truth, shame of everything ugly in the view of Allah and of men, and
showing good manners toward his family.[^70]” He who has these
outstanding traits is indeed a believer, has perfect faith, meets Allah,
and He is satisfied with him.

### The Qualities of a Believer

The Imam, peace be on him, said: “The qualities of a believer are five.”
Tawus al-Yamani asked him: “What are they, son of Allah’s Apostle?” He
replied: “Piety in privacy, alms during paucity, patience toward
misfortune, clemency during anger, and truthfulness during fear.[^71]”
These five qualities display the faith of a believer.

### Good Words

The Imam, peace be on him, urged his companions to say good words to
men, and mentioned the profits which resulted from them. He said: “Good
words increase property, develop provision, delay death, make men love
each other, and lead to the Garden.”

This tradition of the Imam, peace be on him, contains the outcomes of
good words, of which is the following:

A. Property is developed, and provision is plentiful. This can clearly
be seen through manufacturers, workmen, and traders. Men deal with those
who treat them with good words, and such a treatment increases one’s
income. They hate those who treat them with obscene words, hence this
treatment brings about business stagnancy and narrow provision.

B. Death is deferred. This is when one saves a believer from wrongdoing
or does him a favor. In this state Allah repays him through prolonging
his span in this world and increasing his wage in the next.

C. One is beloved and dear with his family and his relatives, for souls
incline to the owner of good words and perfect moral traits.

D. Attaining the Garden. This is when good words are employed to settle
enmity, to enjoin the good, and to forbid the evil.

### The Classes of Men

The Imam, peace be on him, told Zarara b. Awfa about the classes of men.
He said to him: “O Zarara, the men in our time are six classes: Lions,
wolves, foxes, dogs, pigs, and ewes. As for the lions, they are the
kings of the world; they like to overcome each other. As for the wolves,
they are your traders, who dispraise (commodities) when they buy them,
and praise (them) when they sell (them). As for the foxes, they are
those who eat through their religions, and describes through their
tongues what is not in their hearts. As for the dogs, they are those who
shout at people through their tongues, and men honor them out of fear of
their evil tongues. As for the pigs, they are the womanlike, who respond
to every atrocity when they are invited to it. As for the ewes, they are
the believers whose hair is cut, whose flesh is eaten, whose bones are
broken. What do the ewes do toward the lions, the wolves, the foxes, the
dogs, and the pigs?[^72]”

The Imam, peace be on him, carefully considered the society in which he
lived, classified it into six classes, and mentioned the appropriate
characteristics of each class.

### Humbleness

As for humbleness, it is among the noble moral traits through which man
becomes exalted. The Imam, peace be on him, urged (the Muslims) to
follow this trait. He said: “A Qarashi or an Arab has no lineage save
through humbleness. There is no nobility but through Allah-fearingness.
There is no act except through an intention. The most detestable of men
in the view of Allah, the Great and Almighty, is he who follows an
Imam’s sunna (words), but does not follow his practices.[^73]”

### Quoting Wisdom

The Imam, peace be on him, summoned (the Muslims) to quote wisdom even
from hypocrites, for it is among the sources of thought and awareness
which Islam develops. He, peace be on him, said: “Disdain not the
precious pearl which you bring out of mean sweepings, for my father
related to me, he said: ‘The wise word frequents in the hypocrite’s
chest, disputing (with him for going) to those who understand it, until
he says it. When a believer hears it, he takes it, and hence is worthier
of it.’[^74]”

### The Clay of Believer and Unbeliever

In a tradition of his, the Imam, peace be on him, spoke about the clay
of a believer and an unbeliever. He said: “Allah, the Great and
Almighty, created the prophets’ hearts and bodies from the clay of
‘Illin (the highest place). He created the hearts of believers from this
clay, and created their bodies from clay other than this. He created the
bodies and hearts of unbelievers from sijjin. Then He mixed the two
(kinds of) clay. Hence the unbeliever (woman) bears a believer; the
believer (woman) bears an unbeliever. From here the unbeliever may do a
good deed. The hearts of believers and of unbelievers yearn for the clay
from which they were created.[^75]”

There are many traditions concerning that Allah, the Most High, created
man from clay. Allah, the Exalted, said: “*It is He who created you from
clay*.[^76]” He, the Exalted, said: “*And He began the creation of man
from clay*.[^77]” He created the prophets and believers from the most
sacred clay, hence they saved and freed man. He created the unbelievers
from the meanest and dirtiest clay, hence they hindered the progress and
development of man’s social life. Through His wisdom, Allah, the Most
High, decreed to mix these two kinds of clay with each other, and they
produced opposites. The (wives of) the prophets and believers borne some
wicked and unbelieving children. An example of is Noah, Allah’s Prophet,
whose wife gave birth to a son who deviated from the right path and
disbelieved in his father’s message. Allah drowned him along with the
unbelievers. Noah felt pity for him and whispered to his Lord, and He,
the Exalted, answered him: “*Surely he is not of your family; surely he
is (the doer of) other than good deeds*.” (The wives of) the unbelievers
may give birth to believing, righteous children. This is among the
outcomes of the mixture of the two kinds of clay, as the Imam, peace be
on him, said.

### Patience

The Imam, peace be on him, urged (the Muslims) to be patient. He said:
“(The position of) patience in faith is like that of the head in the
body, and he who has no patience has no faith.[^78]”

The greatest thing which man uses as weapon against events and
misfortunes is patience, entrusting affairs to Allah, the Most High, and
pleasure with what He decrees, for this is the essence of faith.

### Some Morals of Believer

The Imam, peace be on him, spoke about the noble moral traits through
which a believer is exalted. He said: “Some of a believer’s morals are:
He spends (on his family) according to (his) narrow provision, gives
(them) generously according to (his) plentiful provision, treats men
with justice, and is the first to greet them.[^79]”

Some of a believer’s morals are that he is economicalhe does not spend
when in narrow provision and spends generously when in plentiful
onetreats men with justice even against himself, for this is a proof
for his piety, and is the first to greet them, for this shows his good
manners.

### Fanaticism

The Imam, peace be on him, was asked about fanaticism, which was among
the manners of those who lived before Islam, and he replied: “The
fanaticism through which one commits sin is that one regards the wicked
from among his people as better than the good of other people. It is not
an act of fanaticism that one loves his people, but it is an act of
fanaticism is that one helps his people do wrong.[^80]” The Imam, peace
be on him, has wonderfully defined foolish fanaticism through which one
commits sin. It is that one considers the wicked and criminal from among
his people better than the good and righteous, that he helps them do
wrong and show aggression and enmity toward others. In this manner one
denies the truth and destroys values. As for one’s love for his people,
it is not fanaticism.

### Guarding against Telling Lies

The Imam, peace be on him, warned his children against telling lies, and
said to them: “Guard against telling lies, whether small or great,
during seriousness or joking, for if one tells a lie about small things,
he is ready to tell a lie about great ones. Did you not know that
Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, say: ‘As long as
the servant tells the truth, Allah writes him truthful, and as long as
he tells lies, Allah writes him untruthful.[^81]”

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (the Muslims) against telling lies
about all things, for lying is among the ugliest and most detestable
crime in the view of Allah. He also ordered them to tell the truth, for
it is the source of all virtues which lead to honor and dignity.

### Certainty of Words

The Imam summoned his companions to be sure of their words and have
knowledge of what they said, whether good or evil. He said: “One should
not say good or evil words concerning another unless he has knowledge of
him.[^82]”

### Chastity

The Imam, peace be on him, urged his companions to be chaste, and
regarded chastity as the best of all the acts of worship. He said: “The
best act of worship is the chastity of stomach and private parts.[^83]”

### Content

As for content, it is one of the excellent qualities. If man follows it,
he will be free from worries. The Imam, peace be on him, said: “He who
is content with Allah’s apportionment is the richest of all the
people.[^84]”

Content is a treasure which never comes to an end. He who is satisfied
with Allah’s apportionment is the richest of all the people, the
greatest of them in rest, and the least of them in worry.

### Some Qualities deliver the Believer

The Imam, peace be on him, mentioned some qualities which saved the
believer. He said: “Three (qualities) deliver the believer: He should
withhold his tongue from backbiting men, busy himself with that which
profit him in this world and the next, and weep very much over his
sin.[^85]

### Some of the Prophets’ Norms and Wise Sayings

The Imam, peace be on him, told his companions about some of the
prophets’ norms, wise sayings, and affairs, that they might follow them
and enlighten themselves with their behavior. The following is some of
what has been handed down from him:

### Al-Khidr’s Commandments to Mu’sa

Al-Zuhri reported that Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, said: “At
last al-Khidr commanded Mu’sa, saying: ‘Blame not any person for sin.
The most beloved affairs with Allah, the Great and Almighty are three:
moderation when rich, pardon when powerful, and gentleness toward Allah’
servants. When one is kind to others in this world, Allah, the Great and
Almighty, will be kind to him on the Day of Judgment. The head of wisdom
is reverential fear of Allah.[^86]”

How wonderful the meanings of this wisdom are! How wonderful its
objectives are! It contains all the commandments which make man
felicitous and sublime.

### Some of Allah’s Revelations to Mu’sa

The Imam, peace be on him, related to his companions some of Allah’s
revelations to His prophet Mu’sa, peace be on him. He said: “Allah
revealed to Mu’sa: ‘Make My creatures love me, and make me love my
creatures.’ Mu’sa asked: ‘O My Lord, how shall I do (this)?’ Allah
replied: ‘Remind them of My boons and favors, that they may love me.
Repel not any fugitive from my gate or a straying one from my courtyard.
This is better for you than a hundred year’s worship, when one fasts by
day and stands in prayer by night.’ Mu’sa asked: ‘Who escapes from You?’
Allah answered: ‘The disobedient one.’ Mu’sa asked: ‘Who is straying
from Your courtyard?’ Allah replied: ‘It is he who is ignorant of the
Imam of his time, absent from him after he has recognized him, and
ignorant of the laws of his religion. Teach him the laws (of his
religion), through which he worships his Lord and reaches His good
pleasure.[^87]”

In this tradition the Imam, peace be on him, urged those who summoned
(men) to Allah to spare no effort to save them from the acts of
disobedient to Allah, to make them beseech obeying Him, and not to repel
them from this. He told them that their work in this way was the most
beloved worship and act of obedience to Allah.

### A Wisdom in the Bible

The Imam, peace be on him, reported to his companions a brilliant wisdom
from the Bible. He said: “It has been written in the Bible: ‘Seek not
the knowledge of what you do not do until you do what you come to know.
If knowledge is not put into practice, it increases its possessor
nothing except unbelief and remoteness from Allah.[^88]”

The Imam, peace be on him, summoned (his companions) to put knowledge
into effect. It is not an act of truth that man gets knowledge and does
not put it into practice, for this increases him nothing save remoteness
from Allah.

### Mu’sa and a Worshipper

The Imam, peace be on him, related to his companions the story of Mu’sa
with a worshipper. He said: “Mu’sa passed by a worshipper. The
worshipper was raising his hands toward the heaven and supplicating
Allah, the Most High. Mu’sa spent seven days, and then he returned to
the worshipper. He saw him raising his hands toward the heaven. Hence he
said: ‘O Lord, this is Your servant, who has raised his hands toward You
and asked You for forgiveness for seven days, while You have not
responded to him.’ Allah revealed to Mu’sa: ‘O Mu’sa, if he supplicates
me until his hands fall down and his tongue is cut off, I will not
respond to him, unless he comes to me through the gate which I have
commanded him to.[^89]”

As for this tradition, it summons man to turn his face toward Allah, and
to seek nearness to Him through the doors which He has assigned.

### Mu’sa with Allah

The Imam, peace be on him, said: “Mu’sa bin ‘Umran asked his Lord: ‘Who
are Your people whom You will shade with the shade of Your Throne on the
day when there is no shade save Your shade?’ Allah, the Glorified and
Exalted, revealed to him: ‘Those whose hearts are pure, and whose hands
are covered with earth, who remember My majesty, are content with
obeying Me as the little (baby) who is content with milk, go to My
mosques (masajid) as birds go to their nests, and become as angry as the
tiger when (men) make lawful what I have made unlawful.’[^90]”

These people, who have faith in their lord, are the best of creatures in
the purity of hearts, the soundness of minds and intentions. They turn
their hearts and feelings toward Allah; they see nothing except Him, and
believe in nothing save Him. Hence Allah will recompense them for this
when he shades them with His shade, includes them in His gentleness, and
single them out for His bounty.

### The Death of the Prophet

The Imam, peace be on him, narrated the death of his grandfather,
Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, and the events
which accompanied it. The text of his narration is as follows: Imam
Ja‘far al-Sadiq, peace be on him, reported on the authority of his
father Abi Ja‘far, who said: “Two men from Quraysh came to my father
‘Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him, and he asked them: ‘Shall I tell you
about Allah’s Messenger?’ ‘Yes,’ they replied. He said: [I heard my
father saying:] ‘Gabriel came down to the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, three days before his death, and said to him: ‘O Ahmed,
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has sent me to you in (showing)
preference and specialty toward you. He is asking you about what He
knows better than you: ‘How do you find yourself?’ ‘I find it grieved, O
Gabriel!’ replied Allah’s Messenger. On the third day, Gabriel, the
Angel of Death, and seventy thousand angels came down (to the Prophet).
Gabriel was ahead of them and said: ‘O Muhammad, Allah, the Blessed and
Exalted, has sent me to you in (showing) honor, preference and specialty
toward you. He is asking you about what He knows better than you: ‘How
do you find yourself?’ ‘I find it grieved, O Gabriel!’ replied Allah’s
Messenger.

“At the door the Angel of Death asked for permission, hence Gabriel
said: ‘O Ahmed, the Angel of Death is asking you for permission. He had
never asked any person for permission before you, and will never ask
anyone for permission after you.’ The Prophet said: ‘Give him
permission.’ Gabriel permitted the Angel of Death, and he walked toward
the Prophet, stopped before him, and said to him: ‘O Ahmed, Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, has sent me to you, and commanded me to obey you in
what you command me. If you command me to seize your soul, I will do. If
you hate this, I will leave.’ The Prophet asked: ‘Will you do this, O
Angel of Death?’ ‘Yes,’ answered the Angel of Death, ‘I have been
commanded to obey you.’ Hence Gabriel said: ‘O Ahmed, Allah has yearned
for meeting you.’ The Prophet said: ‘O Angel of Death, carry out
(Allah’s) command.’ ‘O Ahmed, this is the last time for me to come down
to the earth,’ answered Gabriel, ‘You were my objective in this world.’

“When the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, passed away, a
consoler came to his family. They heard his words, but did not see his
person. He said to them: ‘Peace, Allah’s mercy and blessings be on you,
*every soul shall taste of death, and you shall only be paid fully your
reward on the Day of Resurrection.*[^91] Allah, the Blessed and Exalted,
is comfort against every affliction, and replacement of perishable
things. Hence, trust Allah, hope for Him! The one suffering an
affliction is he who is deprived from reward, peace, Allah’s mercy and
blessings be on you.’ Ja‘far said: [My father said: Ali said: ‘Do you
know who is this? This is al-Khidr.’[^92]” With this we will end our
speech bout the prophets’ norms, and wise sayings, which Imam Zayn
al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, related to his companions and students.

### Friendship toward Ahl al-Bayt

The Imam, peace be on him, emphasized the necessity of showing
friendship toward the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them. He regarded this friendship as one of the elements of Islam. He,
peace be on him, asked Abu’ Hamza al-Thumali: “Which place is the best?”

Abu’ Hamza was perplexed, not knowing what to answer, hence he said:
“Allah and His Messenger better know.”

Then the Imam, peace be on him, answered: “The best place is that which
is between the corner of the Kaaba and the standing place of Ibrahim.
Noah lived among his people for 950 years. If a man lived as long as
Noah did, fasted by day, stood in prayer by night in this place, and met
Allah without showing friendship toward us, he would not avail himself
of these things.[^93]”

In this connection many authentic traditions have been handed down from
the Greatest Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, and his
trustees (of authority), peace be on them. They indicate that showing
friendship toward the Imams is an Islamic obligation about which the
Muslim will be questioned on the Day of Resurrection. Some scholars
think that showing friendship to them is one of the conditions of a
correct act, not of its acceptance. It is not one of the conditions of
the correctness of the obligations.[^94]

Anyhow, in another tradition, the Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned
the plentiful reward which those who love the *ahl al-Bayt* attain in
this world and the next. Some Shi‘ites visited the Imam and asked him:

“How are you, son of Allah’s Apostle?”

The Imam answered them with gentleness:

“I am well. I praise Allah for this. What about you all?”

“We love you, the *ahl al-Bayt*.”

He gave them good news of that Allah would plentifully repay them,
saying:

“He who loves us for the sake of Allah, Allah will make him enter a very
shady place on the day when there is no shade except His shade. He who
loves us for reward, Allah will cause him enter the garden. He who love
us for this world, Allah will provides him from where he thinks
not.[^95]”

### The Prophet’s and ‘Ali’s Rights against the Muslims

In a tradition of his, the Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned the
great rights of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and of
his trustee (to authority), the gate of the city of his knowledge, Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, against this
community. He, peace be on him, said: “Though parents’ have great rights
against their children because of their kindness to them, the kindness
of Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family, and of ‘Ali to this
community is greater, hence they are worthy of being its two
fathers.[^96]”

The Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and his trustee (of
authority) have rights against this community greater than those of
parents against their children, for they have freed the will of this
community, saved it from bondage and the darkness of ignorance, and
granted it a free, noble life. Unfortunately, this community did not
show gratitude toward them for their favors. Rather it removed the pure
family (of the Prophet) from the offices of government and leadership.
Besides its ruler intentionally destroyed this family at the Battle of
Karbala’. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him: “Allah’s Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family, was kind to Quraysh, the Arabs, and
non-Arabs. Who was kinder than him (to them)? Yet they were ingratitude
to him. Besides they are ingratitude to us, the *ahl al-Bayt*.[^97]”

### The Mastership of the Ahl al-Bayt over Men

A man asked the Imam, peace be on him: “What is the excellence which has
made you the masters of the people?”

The Imam replied: “Know that all the people are one of three: Either a
man became a Muslim through us, hence he is our friend. His friendship
belongs to us, therefore we are his master, or a man whom we fought
against and killed, hence he went to the Fire and his property has
remained as booty for us, or a man from whom we have taken poll tax, and
he is lowly. There is no fourth (man). Therefor, which merit and honor
have we not won?[^98]”

I (the author) think that the Imam mentioned the tradition for a man who
did not confess the outstanding merits of the members of the House *(ahl
al-Bayt),* peace be on them, nor did he believe in their absolute
mastership over this community. It is worth mentioning that the *ahl
al-Bayt* have countless outstanding merits and talents. It is sufficient
for them that Allah took away uncleanliness from them and purified them
thoroughly, made it incumbent on the community to show friendship toward
them, that the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, united
them with the Firm Revelation (the Qur’an), appointed them as ships of
deliverance and security for mankind.

Short, wonderful and Wise Sayings
---------------------------------

As for the short, wise sayings of the Imam, they represent creation, the
development of thought, and the originality of opinion. They show the
summary of the experiences the Imam got during his lifetime. They are
not confined to a certain side of life; rather they include all its
sides. The wise Imam carefully and inclusively considered all the
affairs of man and gave decisive solution to them. The following is some
of his outstanding, wise sayings:

1. He, peace be on him, said: “He whose soul is noble, the world is easy
for him.[^99]” How wonderful these words are! They show the reality of
those free who regarded the world as insignificant. They were noble and
exalted, hence they did not yield to abasement and disgrace. At the head
of these people was (Imam al-Husayn), the Father of the free and Lord of
the martyrs. He felt that his soul was noble, hence he disdain the
world. He did not flatter the unjust, nor did he yield to their tyranny.
He carried the banner of dignity until he was martyred.

2. He, peace be on him, said: “All good is in man’s safeguarding his
soul (against sins).[^100]”

If man safeguards his soul against acts of disobedience, sins, and
offenses, he will get good throughout his life.

3. He, peace be on him, said: “I never like the believer who is well in
the world, in his soul, and in his property, while no affliction befalls
him.[^101]” When afflictions befall a believer in this world, they
decrease his sins and increase his good deeds. If the believer is not
befallen by afflictions in this world, he will be deprived of these good
deeds in this world.

4. He, peace be on him, said: “He who has no clement one to guide him
gets straying, and he who has no impudent one to help him gets
lowly.[^102]” If man has no clement one to guide him during his
important affairs, he does not behave well toward the obscurities of
this life, and if he has no impudent one to help and defend him, he will
expose himself to abasement and disgrace.

5. He, peace be on him, said: “Woe unto him whose units surpass his
tens.” Hisham b. Salim asked Imam al-Sadiq, peace be on him, about the
meaning of this tradition, and he replied: “Have you not heard that
Allah, the Great and Almighty, saying: ‘*Whoever brings a good deed, he
shall have ten like it, and whoever brings an evil deed, he shall be
recompensed only with the like of it*.[^103]’ If he does a good deeds,
ten good deeds shall be written for him, and if he does one evil deed,
one evil deed shall be written for him. We seek refuge in Allah from him
who does ten evil deeds on one day, and does no good deed, hence his
evil deeds surpass his good deeds.[^104]”

6. He, peace be on him, said: “The enemies take the properties of the
ignoble one, *and that which is evil produces nothing but evil*.[^105]”

The ignoble withhold from spending their properties on the poor and the
needy. Hence Allah, the Exalted, empowers their enemies over them to
enjoy their properties and to deprive them of them.

7. He, peace be on him, said: “If the body does not become ill, it
becomes ungrateful, there is no good in the body which become
ungrateful.[^106]”

If man always enjoys good health, and diseases do not attack him, he
shows ingratitude (toward Allah’s favors), and there is no good in such
a body.

8. He, peace be on him, said: “You should return the things deposited
with you (to their owners). By Him who sent Muhammad a prophet with the
truth, if the killer of my father al-Husayn deposited with me the sword
with which he killed him, I would return it to him.[^107]” Returning
things deposited is among the most prominent Islamic obligations, hence
he who does not return things deposited is not a Muslim.

9. He, peace be on him, said: “The best worker in Allah’s eyes is he who
puts the Prophet’s sunna into practice.[^108]”

He who puts the Prophet’s sunna into effect applies Islam in his life,
and the method of his conduct. It is normal that such a work is among
the best works in Allah’s view and the most beloved one with Him

10. He, peace be on him, said: “He who is the first to thank you
enslaves you through affection.[^109]” He who is the first to thank for
a good deed enslaves the heart of the good-doer through friendship and
love.

11. He, peace be on him, said: “The friend is not a friend unless he
cuts off a piece of his religion for his believing brother, and patches
it with asking Allah to forgive him.[^110]”

The honest friendship in Islam depends on affection and brotherhood for
the sake of Allah. Among its necessities, according to this tradition,
is that the friend asks Allah to forgive his friend.

12. He, peace be on him, said: “I assure (you) before my Lord that he
who begs with out neediness will some day begs out of neediness.[^111]”

Begging without poverty is evidence for the poor, weak soul. Allah, the
Exalted, will afflict such a beggar with depravation and poverty, and he
is forced to beg others.

13. He, peace be on him, said: “Beware of that for which you
apologize.[^112]”

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (the Muslims) against doing any work
which forces them to apologize to others. It is normal that such a work
is ugly.

14. He, peace be on him, said: “Allah, Great be His Majesty, says: ‘By
My might, My tremendousness, My beauty, My radiance, My exaltedness, and
the loftiness of My place, if a servant prefers My desire to his desire,
I will make him take care of his life in the next world, his riches in
his heart, protect him from loss, make the heavens and the earth
guarantee his provision, and make the world come to him.[^113]”

Allah, the Exalted, loves the believing servant who prefers His
obedience to all things, and does not yield to his caprice and
psychological wishes. He, the Exalted, shows him gentleness and favor in
this world and the next.

15. He, peace be on him, said: “There may be one conceited and
fascinated (by the world). He rises in the morning for playing,
laughing, eating, and drinking. He does not know that he may expose
himself to Allah’s displeasure through which he shall be burnt in the
Fire.[^114]”

The Imam, peace be on him, warned (the Muslims) against vainglory,
playing, and indifference to disobeying Allah. Allah, the Exalted, is
displeased with the person who has such qualities and writes him as one
of the people of the Fire, which is a miserable, permanent life.

16. He, peace be on him, said: “Glory be to Him who has made gratitude
toward His favors praise; glory be to Him who has made confessing
incapability of thanking Him thanksgiving.[^115]”

Acknowledging Allah’s favors and gentleness is the reality of praise as
well as confessing incapability of thanking Him is the reality of
thanksgiving.

17. He, peace be on him, said: “Seeking needs from men degrades life,
takes away modesty and respect, and is the present poverty. The lack of
seeking needs from men is the present riches.”

It is certain that yielding to men and seeking what is in their hands
bring about abasement and disgrace, and take away modesty. They is
evidence for the poor, week soul. The noble person is he who safeguards
himself and his dignity, and seeks need from none except his Lord.

18. He, peace be on him, said: “He who admonishes time, his admonition
lengthens.”

Indeed, he who admonishes time, his admonition lengthens. That is
because many misfortunes, disasters, and tragedies occur in time, and
they successively befall the free and rudely treat them.

19. He, peace be on him, said: “If one is free from need to men, men
will be in need of him.” He who is free from need toward men through his
property or knowledge, men will be in need of him.

20. He, peace be on him, said: “The noble one rejoices at his
excellence, and the ignoble one boasts of his possessions.” These words
show the reality of both noble and ignoble ones. As for the noble one,
he rejoices at and boasts of his excellence and kindness toward men. As
for the ignoble one, he boasts of his perishing properties, for he has
no noble quality or inclination to boast of.

21. He, peace be on him, said: “Feel shame before Allah because of your
nearness to Him.” The Imam, peace be on him, summoned (men) to fear
Allah, the Most High, for He, the Exalted, has power over His servants,
all beings and creatures are yielding to His will, and are in his grasp.
He moves about in them according to His desire.

22. He, peace be on him, said: “Show not enmity toward anyone, though
you think that he will harm you.” It is not an act of wisdom or logic
that man shows enmity toward someone, even though he thinks that he will
harm him. The wise one is he who inclines hearts toward him, and never
makes anybody harbor malice against him.

23. He, peace be on him, said: “Abstain not from making friends with
anyone, though you think that he will not profit you, for you know not
when you will hope for your friend.”

It is an act of wisdom and perfect reason is that man must not refrain
from making friends with anybody, for he will someday be in need of his
support and help.

24. He, peace be on him, said: “He who relies on the best

which Allah chooses never desires other than the state He chooses for
him.”

It is an act of true faith is that one trusts in the best which Allah
chooses and is satisfied with His decree. He who believes in this and
puts it into effect is the happiest of people and the most of them in
rest and tranquillity in his psychological worlds.

25. He, peace be on him, said: “You must accept the apology of those who
apologize to you, even though you know that they are liars.” Among the
noble moral traits is that you accept the apology of the evildoers,
treat them not tit for tat, for, through this, you unite (the Muslims)
and save them from disunity.

26. He, peace be on him, said: “The defects of men should be few on your
tongue.” Among the highest Islamic morals is that you should purify your
tongue from mentioning the defects of men; you should mention nothing
expect their good deeds.

27. He, peace be on him, said: “Seek help against speech through
silence, for speech has harmful states.”

The wise Imam counseled (the Muslims) to keep silent, and not to speak
about anything except the affairs of their religion and world. This is
because speech sometimes leads to destructive, harmful states.

28. He, peace be on him, said: “He who accuses men of what they have,
they will accuse him of what he does not have.” He who mentions the evil
deeds of men, though they have them, they will charge him with evil
deeds, though he does not have them.

29. He, peace be on him, said: “The best beginning of affairs is
truthfulness, and their best end is faithfulness.” The Imam, peace be on
him, underlined the importance of both truthfulness and faithfulness,
for they are two of the qualities through which man is exalted.

30. He, peace be on him, said: “To bear witness that there is no god
save Allah is the nature *(fitra).*” To believe in Allah and to confess
His Unity are two natural qualities in man, but man swerves from them
through misguiding education and corrupt environment.

31. He, peace be on him, said: “Performing the obligatory prayers is the
creed.” Performing the obligatory prayers is confessing and adopting the
creed of Islam, and is the identifying mark between Muslims and
unbelievers.

32. He, peace be on him, said: “To obey Allah is preservation.”

To obey Allah, the Most High, and to refrain from acts of disobedience
to Him are preservation from Satan and purity from defilement and sins.

33. He, peace be on him, said: “The believer does not perish out of
three qualities: Bearing witness that there is no god but Allah, the
Alone, who has no associate; His ample mercy, and the intercession of
Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his family.”

These three qualities bring the believer, when he adopts them, near to
Allah and take him to His plentiful mercy and good pleasure. As for
confessing the Unity of Allah, it takes him out of the dark shadows of
unbelief. As for His ample mercy, it embraces all things, to the extent
that the disobedient (to Him) hope for it on the Day of
Resurrection.[^116] As for the intercession of the Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his Household, it saves the believer from the Fire.

34. He, peace be on him, said: “If you affect toil for men, you are the
most seducing of them.”

He who pretends to work for men and accomplishing their needs, not for
seeking nearness to Allah, is the most seductive of men and the most
ignorant of them.

35. He, peace be on him, said: “I wonder at him who protects himself
from harmful foods, but does not protect himself from harmful sins.”

Protection from sins and offenses is better than protection from harmful
foods, for sins lead to chastisement and misery in the next world, which
is the abode of immortality and subsistence.

36. He, peace be on him, said: “When you perform the prayers, perform
the prayers of one who bids farewell (to this world).”

The Imam, peace be on him, summoned (the Muslims) to perform the prayers
sincerely as if they bid farewell to this life.

37. He, peace be on him, said: “Everything has fruit, and the fruit of
hearing is good words.”

Good words are the most valuable thing of hearing. They are its fruit;
rather they also are the fruit of life.

38. He, peace be on him, said: “Insistence is accompanied by ignorance.”
Insistence in affairs results from ignorance toward the realities of
affairs which are in Allah’s grasp.

39. He, peace be on him, said: “Humbleness is the means to exaltedness.”
If man is humble and gentle, his standing is high, and through this he
is the master of those other than him.

40. He, peace be on him, said: “All of you will become story, hence he
who is able to be a good (story), let him do (this).

Ibn Durayd composed poetry about these golden words, saying:

*One will be the account of those who will come after him,*

*hence be good account for those who understand.*

41. He, peace be on him, said: “The envier attains no honor, and the
malicious one dies of grief.”

Envy is an evil malady, and throws men into great evil. He who is
afflicted by it loses the highest moral traits, and parts from all noble
qualities. Besides he dies of sadness and rage when he sees Allah
bestowing favors upon men.

42. He, peace be on him, said: “Losing the beloved is loneliness.”
Losing the beloved is among the most painful disasters which attack man
and make him lonely among pain and worries.

43. He, peace be on him, said: “Satisfaction with the detested things
caused be (Allah’s) decree is the highest degree of certainty.”

He who is satisfied with what Allah has apportioned for him is patient,
brave, and calm. He is among the Allah-fearing who entrust their affairs
to Him, the Exalted, and are content with His decree.

44. He, peace be on him, said: “It is an act of worship that the
believer looks at the face of his believing brother for love and
affection.”

Islam has urged the Muslims to show love and affection toward each
other. It has made difference and division unlawful. If the believer
looks at the face of his believing brother with love and affection, he
strengthens the ties among the Muslims. Hence such an act is among the
best kinds of worship in Islam.

45. He, peace be on him, said: “If the two merchants are truthful and
kind (to men), (Allah) will bless (their work). If they are untruthful
and disloyal (to men), (Allah) will not bless (their work).”

Truthful dealings and kindness to men are among the things that make
commerce grow. If the merchant has such qualities, Allah will bless his
work and increase his provision. If he swerves from them and follows
crooked ways, he will have nothing except loss.

46. It was said to the Imam, peace be on him: [Al-Hasan al-Basri said:]
“I do not wonder at him who perishes and how he perishes; rather I
wonder at him who escapes danger.” The Imam replied: “I do not wonder at
him who escapes danger and how he escapes danger; rather I wonder at him
who perishes and how he perishes, while Allah’s mercy embraces (all
things).”

Allah’s mercy embraces all things to the extent that Satan craves for
it. The Imam knew and understood this better than al-Hasan al-Basri and
other than him.

47. He, peace be on him, said: “If the servant is sincere to Allah in
secret, Allah shows him his evil works, and he busies himself with his
own sins and (leaves) men’s defects.”

If man fears Allah in secret and turns aside from acts of disobedience
to Him, Allah bestows upon him His favors, of which is that He shows him
his evil works and distracts him from men’s defects, that he may save
himself from the ill outcomes of backbiting, which is among the ugliest
sins.

48. He, peace be on him, said: “If the servant becomes angry, he draws
himself nearer to Allah’s wrath.”

Anger destroys man and throws him into great evil. For example, it makes
him commit crimes, hence he exposes himself to Allah’s wrath and detest.

49. He, peace be on him, said: “The pack-animal has six rights against
its owner: He should give fodder to it when he dismounts it. He should
lead it to water when he passes by it. He should not lash it but in
right. He should not load it more than its ability. He should make it
walk freely. He should not ride it at the time between two times of
milking.”

In this tradition, the Imam peace be on him, has declared the rights of
an animal against its owner. These rights are full of mercy, pity, and
care of animals. The organizations which have been founded to treat
animals kindly have not legislated such rights yet.

50. He, peace be on him, said: “When you are powerful over your enemy,
then regard pardon as thanksgiving for power over him, for pardon out of
power is a kind of generosity.”

Pardon due to power is evidence for the honor of soul and its ample
clemency. It is a kind of generosity and munificence. As for revenge, it
results from ignobility, meanness, and the narrowness of soul.

51. He, peace be on him, said: “Beware of making friends with the
disobedient (to Allah), and helping the unjust.”

The Imam, peace be on him, has warned (the Muslims) against making
friends with the disobedient (to Allah), for it has bad effects on their
behavior, and deviate them from the right path. The sociologists said:
“The members of society affect each other.” Besides the Imam has warned
them against helping the unjust, for such help spreads tyranny and
oppression.

52. The Imam, peace be on him, was asked about the most important
person, and he replied: “It is he who does not regard the world as
important for him.”

The most right of all men in opinion and the best of them in
determination and awareness is he who regards his soul greater than the
world. He does not sell his life in the next world for this world;
rather he turns his face toward Allah. He works for his life in the
hereafter and prepares good deeds for it.

53. He, peace be on him, said: “The lawful provision is the nourishment
of the chosen.”

The lawful provision is the nourishment of the good and chosen who are
very careful of their earnings, eat nothing except the good, lawful
things, and refrain from what Allah has made unlawful.

54. He, peace be on him, said: “Men have taken three (qualities) from
three (persons): They have taken patience from Ayyu’b (Job),
thanksgiving from Nu’h (Noah), and envy from the children of Ya‘qu’b
(Jacob).”

Men has quoted these traits from these persons, who have established
their principles, and built their foundations in life.

55. He, peace be on him, said: “You have no right to say whatever you
like, for Allah, the Exalted, says: *And follow not what you have no
knowledge of*. You have no right to listen to whatever you like, for
Allah, the Great and Almighty, says: *Surely the hearing and the sight
and the heart, all of these, shall be questioned about that*.”

Islam has limited the permissible words which man uses to manage his
affairs. As for the words which man uses to spread falsehood and to
speak the untruth, they are unlawful. If man uses such words, he will be
questioned about them (on the Day of Judgment). Islam has also limited
the words which man hears. It has ordered him to listen to good words
and prevented him from listening to backbiting and obscene words. It has
ordered him to question himself about his evil thoughts.

56. He, peace be on him, said: “I admire the man who is clement during
his anger.” The Imam, peace be on him, summoned (the Muslims) to adorn
themselves with clemency, that they might get rid of hardships and
misfortunes.

57. A man said to the Imam: “O Son of Allah’s Messenger, I love you very
much for the sake of Allah.” Hence he, peace be on him, said: “O Allah,
I seek refuge in you from that I love (men) for Your sake, while You
detest me.”

The Imam, peace be on him, sought refuge in Allah, the Exalted, from
that he loved (men) for Him, while He detested him. This indicates that
the Imam denied himself, sought protection in Allah, devoted himself to
Him, and hoped for His pardon and good pleasure.

58. He, peace be on him, said: “The act (that results) from
Allah-fearingness is not little. How can be little that which is
accepted?”

If work results from Allah-fearingness, it is not little. How can it be
little, while Allah, the Exalted, accepts it?

59. He, peace be on him, said: “If the people of the heavens and the
earth came together to describe Allah’s mightiness, they would not be
able to.”

All those who are in the world of existence are unable to describe the
mightiness of Allah, the Exalted. How can the possible being, limited in
mind and abilities, describe the Necessary Being, Who originated all
things, and Whom no understanding can encompass?

60. He, peace be on him, said: “Courage is undertaking war, patience
toward affliction, and defending brothers.”

Courage is among the most prominent qualities of men. Some

aspects of courage are undertaking war, patience toward affliction, and
defending brothers.

61. He, peace be on him, said: “The eloquent make no use of words during
bad listening.”

One’s eloquence is in vain when men do not listen to him or turn away
from him.

62. He, peace be on him, said: “Man should moderately spend (his money),
and give the surpass (to the poor) for the sake of his life in the next
world. This safeguards his blessing, brings him nearer to Allah (the
Exalted), and makes his final result useful.”

The Imam, peace be on him, advised (the Muslims) to spend their money
moderately and to spend the surpass of it on the poor and the general
serves of the country. This results in the subsistence of blessing,
nearness to Allah, the Most High, and winning an honorable final result.

63. He, peace be on him, said: “Beware of wronging him who finds no
helper against you except Allah.”

These valuable words have been handed down from the members of the House
*(ahl al-Bayt),* peace be on them. They show that the Imams were
merciful and affectionate, so that they detested all kinds of injustice
and aggression against men, especially as it concerns the weak who find
no helper save Allah, hence aggression against them is one of the worst
kinds of oppression.

64. He, peace be on him, said: “How bad is the brother (friend) who
takes care of you when rich and abandons you when poor!”

The Imam, peace be on him, dispraised the person who flattered his
friend during riches and deserted him during poverty. This shows that
such a person is opportunist, and has neither honor nor dignity.

65. He, peace be on him, said: “Know the affection (toward you) in your
brother’s heart through the affection toward him in your heart.”

If you want to test your friend’s love, you must look for his love for
you in your heart, for you love him as much as he loves you.

66. He, peace be on him, said: “He whose concern is the next world,
Allah spares him the concern of this world.”

He who works for the next world and fears Allah, Allah spares him the
affairs of this world and its difficulties.

67. He, peace be on him, said: “The generous are the masters of men in
this world, and the Allah-fearing will be their masters in the next.”

Without doubt, the generous are the masters of men in this world.
However, the master of men in the hereafter will be the Allah-fearing
and the righteous.

68. He, peace be on him, said: “ If Allah, the Great and Almighty, sent
down a book in order to chastise a man, I would expect that the man was
I, or in order to have mercy on a man, I would hope that the man was I,
or in order to chastise me certainly, I would increase (myself) nothing
but diligence, lest I should return my soul with blame.”

The Imam, peace be on him, expressed his reverential fear of Allah, the
Most High, and his hope for Him. If Allah decided to chastise him, he
would increase his soul nothing but diligence in obeying and worshipping
Him, lest he should cause blame to himself.

With this we will end our speech about some of the Imam’s short,
wonderful, wise sayings.

[^1]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 132. Al-Nu\`ri, Ma‘alim al-‘Ibar.

[^2]: Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 137. Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 46.

[^3]: Al-Khisal, pp. 64-65.

[^4]: Ibn al-Shaykh, al-Amali, p. 410.

[^5]: Al-Ikhtisas, p. 338.

[^6]: Al-Bayan wa al-Tabyyin, vol. 1, p. 84. Zahr al-Adab, vol. 1, p.
102.

[^7]: Qur’an, 3, 29.

[^8]: Ibid., 7, 200.

[^9]: Ibid., 16, 45-47.

[^10]: Ibid., 21, 11-13.

[^11]: Ibid., 21, 14.

[^12]: Ibid., 21, 47.

[^13]: Ibid., 10, 24.

[^14]: Ibid., 11, 113.

[^15]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, pp. 249-252. Al-Am\`li, al-Tu\`si, p. 301.
Roudat al-Kafi, p. 160. Al-Sadu\`q, al-Amali, p. 356. Ibn Waram, Tanbih
al-Khawatir, p. 225. Al-Bihar, vol. 17, p. 17, first edition.

[^16]: Qur’an, 35, 28.

[^17]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, pp. 252-255. Al-Mufid, al-Amali, p. 117. Roudat
al-Kafi, p. 138.

[^18]: Qur’an, 23, 100.

[^19]: Ibid., 52, 14.

[^20]: Ibid., 21, 94.

[^21]: Ibid., 64, 15.

[^22]: Ibid., 57, 20-21.

[^23]: Ibid., 59, 18-19.

[^24]: Ibid., 90, 8-10.

[^25]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, pp. 272-274. Al-Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 17, p.
312, first edition.

[^26]: Roudat al-Kafi, p. 158.

[^27]: Ibid.,

[^28]: Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 137.

[^29]: Al-Bidaya wa al-Nihaya, vol. 9, pp. 109-113. Ibn ‘Asakir, Tarikh.

[^30]: Qur’an, 53, 30.

[^31]: Balaghat al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 27, quoted from Nasikh
al-Tawarikh, vol. 1, p. 484.

[^32]: The pre-Islamic people knew this proverb.

[^33]: Ibn Hammdu\`n, Tadhkira, p. 26.

[^34]: Zahr al-Adab, vol. 1, p. 102.

[^35]: Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 173.

[^36]: Al-Sadu\`q, Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, p. 78.

[^37]: Ibid., p. 136.

[^38]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, Chapter on Dispraising the World.

[^39]: Qur’an, 29, 23.

[^40]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, Chapter on Dispraising the World.

[^41]: Tafsir al-Imam al-‘Askari, p. 19. Tanbih al-Khawatir, p. 316.
Al-Ihtijajj, vol. 2, p. 175.

[^42]: Safinat al-Najat.

[^43]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, p. 280. Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 17, p. 315, first
edition. Some of this tradition has been mentioned in Wasa’il al-Shi‘a,
vol. 11, p. 272.

[^44]: This means that he keeps his tongue, refrains from entering all
conversations, refrains from the situations of suspicions, and turns
aside from sitting with corrupt people.

[^45]: Qur’an, 6, 68.

[^46]: Ibid., 17, 36.

[^47]: Ibid.,

[^48]: Tafsir al-Burhan, vol. 1, p. 44.

[^49]: ‘Iqab al-A‘mal, p. 30.

[^50]: Al-Barqi, al-Mahasin, vol. 1, p. 97.

[^51]: Musadaqat al-Ikhwan, p. 34. Siyar A‘lam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p.
239. Tahdhib al-Kamal, M7/Q2, p. 338.

[^52]: Qur’an, 90, 14.

[^53]: Thawab al-A‘mal, p. 81.

[^54]: Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 194.

[^55]: Al-Husayn b. Sa‘id al-Ahwazi, al-Mu’min, p. 19, one of the
manuscripts of the Library of al-Sayyid al-Hakim, serial, 196. The
School of al-Imam al-Mehdi checked and published the book in Qum, in the
year 1404 A. H. It also checked and published the book al-Tamhis by
Shaykh Abi ‘Ali Mohammed b. Hammam al-Iskafi, died 336 A. H. This
tradition has been mentioned on page 159. no. 63.

[^56]: Al-Bihar.

[^57]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 11, p. 432.

[^58]: Usu\`l al-Kafi.

[^59]: Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 159. Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3,
p. 46.

[^60]: Al-Tu\`si, Tahdhib, vol. 2, p. 47.

[^61]: Qur’an, 49, 12.

[^62]: Ibid., 2, 173.

[^63]: Bihar al-Anwar (first edition), vol. 7, p. 331.

[^64]: Mishkat al-Anwar, p. 291. Al-Tubrisi, al-Ihtijajj, p. 172.

[^65]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, Chapter on Freedom from Need to People.

[^66]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, Chapter on Thanksgiving.

[^67]: Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 140. Ibn Sa‘d, al-Tabaqat, p. 2135.

[^68]: Al-Tubrisi, al-Ihtijajj (first edition), p. 172

[^69]: Al-Khisal, p. 245.

[^70]: Ibid., 203.

[^71]: Ibid., p. 245.

[^72]: Al-Khisal, p. 308.

[^73]: Ibid., p. 19.

[^74]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar (first edition), vol. 1, p. 95.

[^75]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 2.

[^76]: Qur’an, 6, p. 2.

[^77]: Ibid., 32, 7.

[^78]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 89.

[^79]: Ibid., p. 241. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 11, p. 149.

[^80]: Usu\`l al-Kafi, vol. 2, p. 308.

[^81]: Ibid., 223.

[^82]: Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyyu\`n al-Akhbar, vol. 1, p. 275.

[^83]: Al-Ikhtisas, p. 223.

[^84]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p. 187. Jamharat
al-Awliya’, vol. 2, p. 74. Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 11, p. 304.

[^85]: Al-Durr al-Nazim, p. 174.

[^86]: Al-Khisal, p. 106. Al-Ghayat (manuscript), p. 19.

[^87]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar (first edition), vol. 1, p. 71.

[^88]: Usu\`l al-Kafi.

[^89]: Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 202.

[^90]: Ibid.

[^91]: Qur’an, 3, 185.

[^92]: Yousif al-Tali, al-Tashawiq ila Rijal al-Tasawuf, pp. 31-32.

[^93]: Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 202.

[^94]: Shaykh Akhwand, Kifayat al-Usu\`l.

[^95]: Ibn al-Sabbagh, al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma, p. 192. Al-Sirat al-Sawi,
p. 193.

[^96]: Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 202, quoted from al-Mahasin by al-Barqi.

[^97]: Al-Wafi, vol. 3, p. 133.

[^98]: Al-Daylami, Ghurar al-Athar wa Durrar al-Athar (manuscript), p.
80, al-Sayyid al-Hakim Library, serial 549.

[^99]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, p. 278.

[^100]: Ibid.

[^101]: Abi ‘Ali Mohammed b. Hammam al-Iskafi, al-Tamhis.

[^102]: Al-Ithaf bi Hub al-Ashraf, p. 75.

[^103]: Qur’an, 6, 161.

[^104]: Al-Shaykh al-Sadu\`q, Ma‘ani al-Akhbar (Manuscript), al-Sayyid
al-Hakim Library.

[^105]: Al-Husayn Mohammed al-Halawani, Nazhat al-Nazir, p. 32.

[^106]: Hulyat al-Awliya’, vol. 3, p. 134. Tadhkirat al-Huffaz, vol. 1,
p. 71.

[^107]: Al-Nu\`ri, Dar al-Salam, vol. 2, p. 140.

[^108]: Al-Wafi, vol. 1, p. 67. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 219.

[^109]: Nihayat al-Irab fi Funu\`n al-Adab, vol. 21, p. 331.

[^110]: Bahjat al-Majalis wa Uns al-Majalis, vol. 1, p. 685.

[^111]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 6, p. 305.

[^112]: Kashf al-Ghumma.

[^113]: Wasa’il al-Shi‘a, vol. 11, p. 222.

[^114]: Tuhaf al-‘Uqu\`l, p. 282.

[^115]: Ibid., p. 283.

[^116]: In this connection, it has been mentioned in the Holy Tradition:
“On the Day of Resurrection Allah will have mercy toward which Iblis
will crane his neck.” We have mentioned that when we have commented on
the tradition no. 46.


