Chapter 11: His Works
=====================

It is certain that the Imams of the members of the House ***(ahl
al-Bayt),*** peace be on them, and the great religious scholars from
among their Shi‘ites were the first to write books on Islam.[^1] They
were the first to plan the cultural movement of the community and to
split open in the earth the fountains of knowledge and wisdom.

It is worth mentioning that their works were not confined to a certain
science. Rather they included all sciences such as jurisprudence,
interpretation of the Qur’an, hadith, the principles of jurisprudence,
grammar, theology, philosophy, ethics, the manners of behavior, the
principles of education, and so on. Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the
faithful, peace be on him, was the first to split open all doors to
sciences.

Al-‘Qqad said: “Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on
him, was the first to split open doors to thirty-two sciences, he put
their rules and established their principles.[^2]” Ibn Sharashu’b said:
“It is correct that Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be
on him, was the first to compose (sciences). Then Salman, Abu’ Dharr,
al-Asbagh b. Nabbata, and ‘Abd Allah b. Rafi‘, followed him. Then
al-Sajjadiya composed al-Sahifa.[^3]

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, was among the Imams who wrote
books on Islam. His works were excellent examples for developing Islamic
thought and cultural, scientific movement. His valuable works are as
follows:

[^1]: Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr, Ta’sis al-Shi‘a li ‘Ulu\`m al-Islam.

[^2]: ‘Abqariyat al-Imam ‘Ali.

[^3]: Ma‘alim al-‘Ulama’.


