1. Al-Sahifa Al-Sajjadiya
=========================

Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya is one of the sources of the Islamic inheritance,
and among the important books of eloquence, education, ethics, and
literature in Islam. As it is of great importance, the great thinkers
and scholars called it ‘the Sister of the Qur’an’, ‘the Gospel of the
Folk of the House’, and ‘the Psalms of the Household of Muhammad’.[^1]

Al-Sahifa was very important because it was composed in a time full of
terrible events and political problems which affected the life of the
Muslims and turned it into black clouds in which there was no gleam of
light, guidance, and vividness of Islam. In that time the Muslims were
busy forming political parties to achieve their interests and ambitions,
hence there was no Islamic spirituality, teachings, manners, and rules.

Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya opened new doors to the religious awareness which
the Muslims had not known before. It urged the Muslims to devote their
lives to Allah, to purify themselves from evil inclinations such as
selfishness and greediness. It also urged them to cling to Allah, the
Exalted, the Creator of the world, and the Giver of life, Who is the
Source of all favors and good for all mankind, so it is necessary for us
to shed light on this great book, namely Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya.

The Chain of Authorities of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya
--------------------------------------------------

As for the chain of authorities of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, it goes back
to the greatest Imam, Abu’ Ja‘far al-Baqir, peace be on him, and to the
immortal martyr Zayd b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, peace be on him. The Chain of
Authorities has been mentioned in the introduction of al-Sahifa
al-Sajjadiya and is confirmed by over fifty-six thousand authorities.
The religious scholars received al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya from successive
authorities.[^2]

Sayyid Muhsin al-Amin al-‘Amily said: “The strongest proof for the
authenticity of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya is that it contains pure words,
matchless eloquence, excellent meanings, different kinds of humbleness
to Allah and praising Him, wonderful ways for seeking His pardon and
generosity, and imploring Him. Hence this pearl belongs to that sea,
this jewel belongs to that metal, and this fruit belongs to that tree.
Besides it is very famous and its chain of authorities is numerous and
goes back to its author, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, may Allah bless him and
his pure fathers and his pure children.

The trustworthy narrators reported it through their numerous, successive
chain of authorities on the authority of Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him. Zayd, the martyr, had copies of it, and he handed them over to his
children, who handed them over to the children of ‘Abd Allah b. al-Hasan
al-Muthnna, as it has been mentioned in the introduction of al-Sahifa,
as well as al-Baqir, peace be on him, had copies of it. The people took
great care of narrating it, verifying its words and copies, and they
went on reciting its supplications by night and day.[^3]

As the chain of authority of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya is definite and its
eloquence is excellent, therefore it issued from none except this great
Imam.

The Characteristics of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya
---------------------------------------------

Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, like all supplication books, has very important
characteristics of which are the following:

1. It represents the most perfect freedom from the material world, full
devotion and fleeing to Allah, the Most High. Such qualities are the
most valuable in this world. In this respect let’s listen to the Imam’s
words:

“O Allah, I showed sincerity by cutting myself off from everything but
You. I approached You with my whole self. I averted my face from
everyone who needs Your support. I ceased to ask from any who cannot do
without Your bounty. I saw that the needy who seeks from the needy is
foolish in his opinion, and misguided in his intellect. How many people
have I seen, my God, who sought exaltation through other than You and
were abased, who wanted wealth from someone else and became poor, who
tried to rise high and fell down low! Observing the likes of them
corrects a prudent man; his taking heed gives him success; his choosing
the best guides him to the path of right.

“So You, my Master, are the object of my asking to the exclusion of all
those who are asked and the patron of my need to the exclusion of all
those from who requests are made. You are singled out for my call before
all who are called; none is associated with You in my hope, none comes
along with You in my supplication, nor does any join with You within it,
for to You is my appeal.

“To You, my God, belong the Unity of number, the property of eternal
power, the excellence of force and strength, the degree of sublimity and
elevation. Everyone other than You is the object of his compassion in
his lifetime, overcome in his affair, overwhelmed in his situation,
diverse in states, constantly changing in attributes. So You are high
exalted above likenesses and opposites, proudly magnified beyond
similitudes and rivals! Glory be to You! There is no god but You![^4]”

These paragraphs represent the Imam’s devotion to Allah, the Exalted,
his clinging to Him, his turning away from other than Him, and his
renouncing those other than Him. The Imam, peace be on him, justified
this as follows:

A. It is an act of foolishness and vanity that man hopes those other
than his Creator, for those other than Allah, despite their great
importance, are weak and in need of support and gift. So how does man
hope them and hopes for good from them?

B. The experiences taught the Imam, peace be on him, that some people
sought honor, might, and exaltation through a way other than that of
Allah, but their hopes came to nothing, and they completely lost their
way, and that some people sought wealth from other than Allah, so,
suddenly, they became poor and deprived. This matter increased the
Imam’s insight and certainty and made him think that clinging to other
than Allah was foolishness and vanity.

C. Might and power are only in the hand of Allah, the Glorified. As for
those other than Allah, they are the object of there compassion in there
lifetime, overcome in there affair, overwhelmed in there situation,
diverse in states, constantly changing in attributes. All these matters
made the Imam, peace be on him, turn away from those other than Allah.

2. It shows that the Imam, peace be on him, had perfect knowledge of
Allah, the Exalted, and had firm faith in Him. Such knowledge and faith
did not result from sentiment or tradition, rather they resulted from
deep thinking and pure mind. In his book, al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, the
Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned many theological views on which the
Muslim theologians and philosophers depended in writing about the
Necessary Being (Allah). Now, let’s listen to another paragraph of his
supplication wherein he has mentioned the tremendousness of the Wise
Creator. He, peace be on him, said:

“Praise belongs to Allah, the First, without a first before Him, the
Last, without a last behind him. Beholders’ eyes fall short of seeing
Him, describers’ imaginations are not able to depict Him. He originated
the creatures through His power with an origination. He devised them in
accordance with His will with a devising.[^5]” In this paragraph, the
Imam, peace be on him, has mentioned some attributes of the Almighty
Creator. These attributes are the most important matters in theology.
They are as follows:

A. Allah is, the First, without a first before Him.

B. He is the Last, without a last behind Him. These two attributes have
been established in theology.

C. Beholders’ eyes fall short of seeing Him. How can beholders see and
perceive the Almighty Being, Who created and originated the universe?

D. Describers’ imaginations are not able to depict Him, the Exalted, for
all the words cannot contain some of His attributes.

E. He originated the creatures through His power with an origination and
devised them in accordance with His will with a devising, while no
associate shared Him in creating the creatures, and there was none like
Him in mightiness.

Now, let’s listen to another part of his supplication concerning
describing the mightiness of the Almighty Creator. He, peace be on him,
said:

“Praise belongs to Allah, who created night and day through His
strength, set them apart through His power, and appointed for each a
determined limit and a drawn-out period. He makes each of the two enter
into its companion, and makes its companion enter into it, as an
ordainment from Him for His servants in that through which He feeds them
and with which He makes them grow. He created for them the night, *that
they might rest in it,* from tiring movements and wearisome exertions
and He made it a garment for them that they might be clothed in its ease
and its sleep, that it might be for them refreshment and strength, that
they might reach therein pleasure and passion. He created for them *the
daytime, giving sight*, *that they might seek* within it of His
*bounty*, find the means to His provision, and roam freely in His
earth.[^6]”

The wise Imam proved the mightiness of Allah, the Exalted, through His
creating night and day and making them enter into each other, through a
light movement which none can stop, control, divide, and limit. Night
enters into day and day enters into night in a gradual manner in which
moments and changes cannot be set apart. The darkness of night gradually
enters into the brightness of day, and morning gradually enters into the
utter darkness, and they both are a repeated sight.[^7] Also the Imam
mentioned the wisdom in creating night and day; Allah, the Most High,
created night, that man might rest in it, from tiring movements and
wearisome exertions, and man can regain in sleeping all the strength he
consumes through his work by day; He, the Exalted created the daytime,
giving sight, that man might seek within it of His bounty, find the
means to His provision, and work to maintain himself and his family.

The Imam’s supplications contain a group of proofs for the Unity of
Allah. They show that the Imam was among those who recognized Allah and
turned to Him in repentance.

3. It contains absolute humbleness and lowliness before Allah, the
Exalted, and with this it has been distinguished from the other
supplications of the pure Imams, peace be on them. In the preface of his
Sahifa, al-Fadil al-Asfahani said: “Though the supplications of our
master, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, are numerous, they are
distinguished from those of the infallible Imam, peace be on him, by
showing pleading, lowliness, and neediness to Allah, the Most High.” He
added: “Allah, the Exalted, singled out each of the Imams with a quality
which does not exist in other than him, such as bravery in Imam ‘Ali,
the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him, and his son al-Husayn,
peace be on him, gentleness and lament in Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin’s
supplications, especially as it concerns the supplications of al-Sahifa
al-Kamila, which our companions sometimes call the ‘Psalms of the
Household of Muhammad’ and sometimes they call it the ‘Gospel of the
Folk of the House’”[^8]

Let’s listen to another part of his supplications in which he pled to
Allah. He, peace be on him, said:

“My Lord, my sins have silenced me, and my words have been cut off. I
have no argument, for I am the prisoner of my own affliction, the
hostage to my works, the frequenter of my own offense, the confused in
my intended way, the thwarted. I have brought myself to a halt in the
halting place of the abased sinners, the halting place of the wretched
and insolent, those who think lightly of Your promise. Glory be to You!
What insolence I have insolently shown toward You! What delusion with
which I have deluded myself! My master, have mercy on my falling flat on
my face, the slipping of my foot, grant me my ignorance through Your
clemency, and my evildoing through Your beneficence, for I admit my sin
and confess my offense: Here are my hand and my forelock! I am resigned
to retaliation again st my soul! Have mercy on my white hair, the
depletion of my days, the nearing of my term, my frailty, my misery, and
the paucity of my stratagems! My Master, and have mercy upon me when my
trace is cut off from this world, my mention is effaced among the
creatures, and I join the forgotten, like the forgotten ones! My Master,
and have mercy upon me at the change of my form and state when my body
decays, my limbs are scattered, and my joints are dismembered! O my
heedlessness toward what was wanted from me! My Master, have mercy upon
at my mustering and uprising and on that day, appoint my standing place
with Your friends, my place of emergence with Your beloved ones, and my
dwelling in Your neighborhood! O Lord of the worlds![^9]”

This supplication is full of fear of Allah and devotion to Him, for this
great Imam melted before the Wise Creator and showed love for him and
did all things that brought him nigh to Him, asking Him for forgiveness
and good pleasure.

4. It has opened doors to hope and expectation through Allah’s mercy,
which embraces all things, for whatever sins and crimes man commits, he
should not despair of Allah’s mercy, forgiveness, and munificence. In
one of his supplications, Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, said:

“O my Allah, by Your mightiness and majesty, if You demand my sins, I
will demand Your pardon, and if You demand my ignobility, I will demand
Your munificence.”

Most of the Imam’s supplications are full of hope which fills the souls
with radiance, ambitions, and trust in Allah’s pardon and forgiveness.

5. It has opened doors to wonderful debates with Allah, the Exalted.
Such debates are full of firm proofs for asking Him, the Exalted, for
pardon. Let’s listen to some of them. He, peace be on him, says:

“My Allah, if You do not forgive save Your friends and those who obey
You, then where shall the sinners go? If You do not show generosity save
to those who are sincere to You, then whom shall the evildoers ask for
help? My Allah, You have revealed pardon in Your Book, and You have
commanded us to pardon him who wrongs us. We have wronged ourselves, so
pardon us, for You are worthier of that than us. We have commanded us
not to repel a beggar from our doors. I have come to beg You; therefore
repel me not from Your door! You have commanded us to do good. We are
your slaves; therefore release our necks from the Fire!”

In another supplication, he, peace be on him, said:

“So have mercy upon me, O Allah, for I am a vile man and my worth is
little. Chastising me will not add the weight of a dust mote to Your
kingdom. Were chastising me something that would add to Your kingdom, I
would ask You for patience to bear it and would love for it to belong to
You; but Your authority, my Allah, is mightier, and Your kingdom more
lasting, than that the obedience of the sinners diminish it!”

Commenting on this part of supplication, Allama, the late Shaykh,
Muhammad Jawad Mughniya said: “Have you ever seen a defense stronger
than this defense or a proof more conclusive than this proof? What does
Allah make through punishing men as long as punishing (them) does not
decrease His kingdom nor does it increase His authority? The Imam
protested through the same law Allah has written against Himself and
against all mankind, for He, the Great and Almighty, said: *‘Your Lord
has written mercy against Himself: O My servants who have been prodigal
against yourselves, do not despair of Allah’s mercy, surely Allah
forgives all sins. Surely, He is All-forgiving, All-merciful.’* Imam
Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, talked in a right manner and submitted
figures with sanctification to the Great Judge. As Allah’s words are
true, the Imam protested according to them.[^10]”

6. Most supplications of the Sahifa contain moral programs which purify
man’s soul. The following is one of them:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, cause my faith to reach the
most perfect faith, make my certainty the most excellent certainty, and
take my intention to the best of intentions and my works to the best of
works! O Allah, complete my intention through Your gentleness, rectify
my certainty through what is with You, and set right what is corrupt in
me through Your power!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, spare me the concerns which
distract me, employ me in that about which You will ask me tomorrow, and
let me pass my days in that for which You have created me! Free me from
need, expand Your provision toward me and tempt me not with ingratitude!
Exalt me and afflict me not with pride! Make me worship You and corrupt
not my worship with self-admiration! Let good flow out from my hands
upon the people and efface it not by my making them feel obliged! Give
me the highest moral traits and preserve me from vainglory!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, raise me not a single degree
before the people without lowering me its like in myself and bring about
no outward exaltation for me without inward abasement in myself to the
same measure! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, give me to
enjoy a sound guidance which I seek not to replace, a path of truth from
which I swerve not, and an intention of right conduct in which I have no
doubts! Let me live as long as my life is a free gift in obeying You,
but if my life should become a pasture for Satan, size me to Yourself
before Your hatred overtakes me or Your wrath against me becomes firm!

“O Allah, deposit in me no quality for which I will be faulted unless
You set it right, no flaw for which I will be blamed, unless You make it
beautiful, no deficient noble trait, unless You complete it!”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked the Great Creator to give him all
excellencies through which man becomes sublime. He asked Him, the
Exalted, to give him perfect faith and the most excellent certainty, to
make his works the best of works, to employ him in obeying Him and acts
that please Him, to expand His provision toward him, not to tempt him
with poverty, deprivation, might, and self-admiration, to make him an
obedient servant, submissive to Him, to let good flow out from his hands
upon the people, not to efface it by making them feel obliged, to give
him the highest moral traits and the best qualities, and not to raise
him a degree before the people without lowering him its like in himself,
lest he should see his soul had an excellence over Allah’s servants. The
Imam, peace be on him, added:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and point me straight to
resist him who is dishonest toward me with good counsel, repay him who
separates from me with gentle devotion, reward him who deprives me with
free giving, recompense him who cuts me off with joining, oppose him who
slanders me with excellent mention, give thanks for good, and shut my
eyes to evil.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, adorn me with the adornment
of the righteous, and clothe me in the ornaments of the Allah-fearing,
through spreading justice, restraining range, quenching the flame of
hate, bringing together the people of separation, correcting discord,
spreading about good behavior, covering faults, mildness of temper,
lowering the wing, beauty of conduct, gravity of bearing, agreeableness
in comportment, precedence in reaching excellence, preferring
bounteousness, refraining from condemnation, bestowing bounty on the
undeserving, speaking the truth, though it be painful, making little of
the good in my words and deeds, though it be much, and making much of
the evil in my words and deeds, though it be little! Perfect this for me
through lasting obedience, holding fast to the community, and rejecting
the people of innovation and those who act in accordance with originated
opinions![^11]”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Exalted, to be kind to him
through giving him the most excellent qualities, the highest moral
traits and all that which would bring him near to Him, that he might
live in abundant dignity, guide the people, and show them the way to the
truth and rightness.

7. It contains the scientific realities which none had discovered before
him, for example, he, peace be on him, in invoked Allah against the
enemies of the Muslims, saying: “O Allah, mix their waters with
pestilence and their food with maladies.[^12]”

The Imam, peace be on him, mentioned the scientific reality which was
discovered in the last century; and which is that the germs of the
pestilence called Cholera live in water and food, hence whoever drinks
or eats such water and food will carry them.

Another example of the scientific realities the Imam mentioned in his
Sahifa is these words of him, peace be on him: “Praise belongs to Allah,
who has placed within us the organs of expansion, and assigned for us
the agents of contraction.[^13]”

The Imam, peace be on him, talked about the hands and the legs, which
are among the wonderful organs in man’s body, for they contract and
expand according to the oscillation of the brain. The English Science
Magazine said: “Man’s hand is among the unique, natural wonders. It is
very difficult; rather it is impossible to make a tool like human hand
in simplicity, capability, and speedy adaptation. When you want to read
a book, you take it with your hand and fix it in a situation appropriate
for reading. It is the hand which sets right its situation
automatically. When you want to turn over one of its pages, you put your
fingers under the page and press it to the degree through which you turn
it over, then the pressure removes when you have turned the page over.
The hand catches the pencil and writes with it; it uses all tools
necessary for man such as spoon, knife, and typewriter; it opens windows
and shut them, and carries all what man wants. The two hands have
twenty-seven bones, and each has nineteen groups of muscles.[^14]”
Modern medicine objectively and inclusively searched for the wonderful
qualities of the hand, which proves the existence of the Great Creator.

8. It is among the spiritual and moral sources in Islamic thought;
therefore it is a remedy for the perplexed souls, and fresh fountain
from which the Allah-fearing and those who turn to him in repentance
drink. It represents the philosophy of supplication, which the believer
uses as a ladder to climb to Allah, and which makes him reach the
highest degree of perfection, for there is nothing in this world’s life
higher than communicating with Allah, the Exalted, the Creator of the
universe and Giver of life. Surely perplexed souls find their objectives
in supplication, for they feel tranquillity after anxiety, and hope
after despair. Sincere supplication takes man to the Kingdom and frees
him from material pleasures. The immortal Sahifa of al-Sajjad has
clearly contained this brilliant philosophy of supplication.

9. Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya was a revolt against the Umayyads, who spread
corruption among the Muslims and froze their abilities

10. It has reached the highest degree of eloquence and purity. I (the
author) firmly believe that no Arab words are more eloquent and purer
than the supplications of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, except
those of the Holy Qur’an and of ‘Ali’s Nahjj al-Balagha. The most
prominent qualities of the Sahifa are the beauty of style and the
mildness of words. The Imam used only the words which have brought
together all the measures of beauty.

None knows the rhetorical and literary qualities of al-Sahifa
al-Sajjadiya except the rhetoricians. Commenting on it and all the
supplications of the Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them, Dr. Husayn ‘Ali Mahfu’z said: “The Imams’
supplications are wonderful art prose plain in style, expression, and
eloquence. Surely, this genuine, miraculous method is of the pure
(words) of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household, and his
family, peace be on them.

“Supplication is beautiful literature, blessed conversation, rich
language, valuable religion, genuine eloquence, divine trace, and
prophetic scent.[^15]”

Among the aspects of splendor and eloquence in the supplications of the
Imam, peace be on him, is that he elaborated on describing the bliss,
luxury, and beautiful palaces of the Garden, for he wanted men to wish
for it through doing good deeds. Also he elaborated on frightening men
with the Fire and severe punishment to make them refrain from committing
sins. In this he followed the Holy Qur’an, which elaborated on
describing the Garden and the Fire in many of its verses, for the same
reasons which we have mentioned. The rhetoricians have mentioned that
the elaboration on such matters is among the highest and the most
wonderful degrees of eloquence.

Taking Care of the Sahifa of al-Sajjad
--------------------------------------

Muslim and non-Muslim circles have taken great care of al-Sahifa
al-Sajjadia, the following are some aspects of the taking care of it:

A. The Muslim scholars and the righteous recite it by night and day
pleading to Allah through it to pardon them and to save them from the
Fire.

B. It has been translated from Arabic into numerous languages such as
English, Persian, Germany, Urdu, French. It is worth mentioning that the
Sahifa has been translated into Persian many times, for example, it has
been translated by al-Hajj ‘Imad al-Did al-Asfahani, Shaykh Jawad Fadil,
and al-Sayyid ‘Ali Naqi Fayd al-Islam, hence they made their nation make
use of al-Sahifa, which is one of treasures of thought, knowledge, and
wisdom.

C. The calligraphers always write and decorate it with wonderful scripts
and decorations, hence the cases of the Islamic manuscripts are full of
it.

Interpretations (shuru’h) of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya
---------------------------------------------------

The scholars devoted themselves to interpreting al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya
and wrote in this respect a group of valuable books which Shaykh Agha
Buzurg al-Tahrani, the Shaykh of the researchers, has mentioned. The
following is the text of what he has mentioned:

1. Sharh al-Sahifa (the Interpretation of al-Sahifa) by Mirza Ibrahim b.
Muhammad ‘Ali al-Sabzwari, surnamed Wathraq al-Hukama’, died in 1358 A.
H. He interpreted the vague words and difficult sentences. This sharh
(interpretation) is Persian and gnostic. It was printed in the year 1342
A. H.

2. Sharh al-Sahifa by Mirza Ibrahim b. Mir Muhammad Ma‘su’m b. Mir Fasih
b. Mir al-Husayn al-Tabrizi, al-Qazwini, died in the year 1149 A. H. His
son al-Sayyid Hasan has mentioned it (Sharh al-Sahifa), in ‘Khatimat
al-Ma‘arijj’ and said: “He interpreted some supplications of al-Sahifa.”

3. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh Taqi al-Din Ibrahim b. ‘Ali b. al-Husayn b.
Muhammad b. Salih b. Isma‘il al-Kaf‘ami, the author of al-Musbah, died
in the year 1195 A. H. He called it (Sharh al-Sahifa) ‘al-Fawa’id
al-Tarifa’.

4. Sharh al-Sahifa by Mawla Sharif Abi al-Hasan b. Muhammad Tahir b.
‘Abd al-Hamid al-Fatu’ni, al-‘Amili, al-Asfahani, al-Gharawi, who died
about the year 1140 A. H.

5. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by some companions.

6. Sharh al-Sahifa by some companions; it is in al-Radawiya Library.

7. Sharh al-Sahifa by some companions; it is in al-Radawiya Library, its
time is unknown.

8. Sharh al-Sahifa by the greatest Sayyid Mirza Muhammad Baqir al-Husayn
al-Farisi.

9. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by ‘Allama Muhammad Baqir al-Majjlisi. He
confined it to the most important and difficult matters.

10. Sharh al-Sahifa, Arabic, by ‘Allama Muhammad Baqir al-Majjlisi. He
called it al-Fawa’id al-Tarifa, but did not complete it.

11. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by Badi‘ al-Harnadi. He called it ‘Riyad
al-‘Abidin’.

12. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad Taqi b. Maqsu’d.

13. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by an unknown author.

14. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Jamal al-Din al-Kawkabani al-Yamani,
from India, died in Baghdad, in the year 1339 A. H.

15. Sharh al-Sahifa by one of the companions, his name is unknown, for
there are missing pages in the beginning and end of the copy.

16. Sharh al-Sahifa by Habib Allah b. ‘Ali Madad al-Kashani, a copy of
it is with his grandsons in Kashan.

17. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh ‘Abbas b. Muhammad ‘Ali al-Balaghi
al-Najafi, author of Tanqih al-Maqal. He wrote it in Khurasan (Mashhad)
when he went to visit al-Rida, peace be on him. He began writing it in
the beginning of (the month) Jamadi al-Ula, in the Year 1105 and
finished it in Rajab in the same year. He made a fair copy of it after a
while when he returned to Asfahan.

18. Sharh al-Sahifa by Mirza Hasan b. al-Mawla ‘Abd al-Razzaq al-Lahiji,
author of Shams al-Yaqin. This interpretation is in three volumes, but
it is incomplete.

19. Sharh al-Sahifa by Tajj al-Din Hasan b. Muhammad al-Asfahani, the
father of al-Fadil al-Hindi. It is in the Library of Abi al-Huda
al-Kalbasi, in Asfahan.

20. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by the Researcher, Agha Husayn
al-Khansari, died in the year 1099 A. H.

21. Sharh al-Sahifa by Husayn b. Mawla Hasan al-Jilani al-Asfahani, died
1129 A. H.

22. Sharh al-Sahifa, just like commentary, by al-Sayyid Husayn b.
al-Hasan b. Abi Ja‘far Muhammad al-Mu’sawi al-Karki.

23. Sharh al-Sahifa, just like commentary, by Shaykh ‘Izz al-Din
al-Husayn b. ‘Abd al-Samad al-Harithi, al- ‘Amili, the father of Shaykh
al-Baha’i, died in the year 984 A. H.

24. Sharh al-Sahifa by Khalil b. al-Ghazi al-Qazwini, a copy of it was
in the Library of al-Asfahani, the Shaykh of al-Shari‘a, in Najaf.

25. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Muhammad Rida al-‘Araji.

26. Sharh al-Sahifa by Rida ‘Ali al-Taliqani.

27. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad Salim al-Razi.

28. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by Muhammad Salih b. Muhammad Baqir
al-Roghani al-Qazwini.

29. Sharh al-Sahifa, Arabic, by Muhammad Salih b. Muhammad Baqir
al-Roghani al-Qazwini.

30. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh ‘Abbas b. Muhammad ‘Ali b. Muhammad
al-Balaghi al-Najafi.

31. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Sadr al-Din b. Mir Muhammad Salih
al-Tabataba’i, the grandfather of the Sayyids who have been given the
nick-name of al-Mudarrisi in Yazid.

32. Sharh al-Sahifa by Mufti Mir ‘Abbas al-Lakinhu’ri; it is in the
Library of al-Sayyid Nasir Husayn al-Kantu’ri, in Lakinhu’r.

33. Sharh al-Sahifa by Jamal al-Salikin ‘Abd al-Baqi al-Khattat
al-Tabrizi; it is easy and detailed, according to the Sufi method, in
this manner it has been mentioned in al-Riyad.

34. Sharh al-Sahifa by ‘Abd al-Ghaffar al-Rashti, who belonged to the
time of Shah ‘Abbas.

35. Sharh al-Sahifa by Ibn Miftah Abi al-Hasan ‘Abd Allah b. Abi
al-Qasim b. Miftah al-Zaydi al-Yamani.

36. Sharh al-Sahifa by ‘Abd Allah Afandi, the author of ‘Riyad
al-‘Ulama’’.

37. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad Tahir b. al-Husayn al-Shirazi, lived in
Qum.

38. Sharh al-Sahifa by Sadr al-Din ‘Ali b. Nizam al-Din Ahmed al-Ashtaki
al-Shirazi, better known as al-Medani, died 1120 A. H. He called it
‘Riyad al-Salikin’.

39. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Sharaf al-Din ‘Ali b. Hujjat Allah
al-Sholistani al-Husayni al-Tabataba’i.

40. Sharh al-Sahifa by Nu’r al-Din Abi al-Hasan b. ‘Abd al-‘Al al-Karki,
died 940 A. H.

41. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by Abi al-Hasan ‘Ali b. al-Hasan
al-Zawari.

42. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh ‘Ali b. Shaykh Zayn al-‘Abidin, one of the
grandsons of the second martyr. It is an easy interpretation, just like
the Interpretation of Majjma’ al-Bayan, for he first mentioned the
supplication, then language, then parsing, and then meaning.

43. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh ‘Ali b. Shaykh Abi Ja’far, who was also
one of the grandsons of the Second Martyr, Zayn al-Din. A copy of this
interpretation (sharh) is in the Library of al-Sayyid Muhammad
al-Mashkat, in Tehran.

44. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad ‘Ali b. Nusayr al-Jahar dahi al-Rashti
al-Najafi, died in the year 1334 A. H. This interpretation, written in
Persian, is in a big volume, titled ‘al-Hashiya’.

45. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad ‘Ali b. al-Hajj Sulayman al-Jashi
al-Bahrani al-Khatti. He interpreted the words and vague sentences, but
he did not complete it.

46. Sharh al-Sahifa by Fatih Allah al-Khattat al-Su’fi. In it he
discussed the method of the Sufis.

47. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh Fakhr al-Din al-Turayhi al-Najafi, died in
the year 1085. A. H. He called it ‘al-Nukta al-Latifa’.

48. Sharh al-Sahifa by Mirza Qadi. He interpreted four supplications of
al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, and called this interpretation ‘al-Tuhfa
al-Radawiya’.

49. Sharh al-Sahifa by an unknown author, for some pages in the
beginning and end of this interpretation are missing. Shaykh Mehdi
Sharaf al-Din, in Tustar, had a copy of it.

50. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Muhsin b. Qasim b. Ishaq al-Daghani
al-Zaydi, lived in the 13th century.

51. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Muhsin b. Ahmed al-Shami al-Husayni
al-Yamani al-Zaydi, died in the year 1251 A. H. Ibn Ziyada mentioned
this interpretation in his manuscript called ‘Nashir al-‘Urf’.

52. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad b. Muhammad Rida al-Mashhadi, the author
of ‘Kanz al-Daqa’iq. The interpretation is in four volumes. Al-Sayyid
Shahab al-Din al-Tabrizi, who lived in Qum, had a copy of this
interpretation.

53. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Afsah al-Din Muhammad al-Shirazi, the
author of ‘al-Mawahib al-Ilahiya’ on the Interpretation of ‘Ali’s Nahjj
al-Balagha. Al-Sayyid Shahab al-Din mentioned this Sharh
(interpretation) in the introduction he wrote to the printed Sahifa (of
al-Sajjad).

54. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad, better known as ‘Abd al-Baqi. In it he
mentioned the words of al-Sahifa.

55. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh Abi Ja‘far Muhammad b. Jamal al-Din Abi
Mansu’r al-Hasan, son of the second martyr, may Allah have mercy on him,
died in the year 1030 A. H.

56. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Abd al-Samad al-Harithi
al-‘Amili, died 1030. A. H. He called this sharh ‘Hada’iq al-Salihin’;
it is other than his other interpretation, which is just like
commentary.

57. Sharh al-Sahifa, a brief Persian interpretation, by Qutub al-Din
Muhammad b. ‘Ali al-Lahiji al-Daylami. A copy of this sharh is in the
Library of al-Sayyid Jalal al-Din al-Muhaddith, in Tehran.

58. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Muhammad b. Haydar al-Husayni
al-Tabataba’i al-Najafi, died in the year 1099 A. H. He was among the
scholars of the time of Shah Safi, and one of the students of Shaykh
al-Baha’i, and the teacher of ‘Allama al-Majjlisi.

59. Sharh al-Sahifa by Muhammad by Muhammad, better known as Shah
Muhammad al-Istihbanati, al-Shirazi. He called this sharh ‘Riyad
al-‘Arifin’.

60. Sharh al-Sahifa or commentary on it by al-Muhaddith (traditionalist)
Muhammad b. Shah Murtada al-Kashani, better known as al-Mawla Muhsin
al-Fayd, died in the year 1091 A. H. This Sharh has been printed.

61. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh Abi Ja‘far Muhammad b. Mansu’r b. Ahmed,
son of the second martyr.

62. Sharh al-Sahifa by the Shaykh of Islam and Muslims, the splendor of
the creed and religion, Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Abd al-Samad
al-Harithi, al-‘Amili, died in the year 1030 A. H. He called this sharh
‘Hada’iq al-Salhin’.[^16]

63. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Muhaddith (traditionalist) al-Sayyid Ni‘mat
Allah b. ‘Abd Allah al-Musawi, al-Tustari, al-Jaza’ri, died in the year
1112. He called this sharh ‘Nu’r al-Anwar’, and it was printed in the
year 1316. A. H.

64. Sharh al-Sahifa by al-Sayyid Ni‘mat Allah Jaza’ri; it is other than
‘Nu’r al-Anwar’; rather it is bigger and older than it.

65. Sharh al-Sahifa, Persian, by al-Fadil Hadi b. al-Mawla Muhammad
Salih b. Ahmed al-Mazindarani.

66. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh Ya‘qu’b b. Ibrahim al-Bakhtiyari al-Hawzi,
died in the year 1050 A. H. Al-Sayyid Hasan al-Sadr said: “I have seen
it (the interpretation) written in his holy script.”

With this we will end what the great researcher, Shaykh Agha Bu’zurg
al-Tahrani, has mentioned concerning the interpretation (sharh) of
al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya.[^17] After this two interpretations of al-Sahifa
al-Sajjadiya were printed. They are:

67. Sharh al-Sahifa by Shaykh Muhammad Jawad Mughniya, printed in
Beirut.

68. Sharh al-Sahifa by His Eminence al-Hujja al-Sayyid al-Shirazi,
printed in the Sacred City of Karbala’. These are some interpretations
of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya. These interpretations show that the religious
scholars take care of it throughout times, for they find therein
treasures of knowledge, wisdom, Gnosticism, and they regard it as part
of the ideological wealth after the Holy Qur’an, and ‘Ali’s Nahjj
al-Balagha.

Supplementary Versions
----------------------

Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, which was narrated on the authority of Imam Abi
Ja‘far (peace be on him) and his brother the great martyr Zayd b. ‘Ali
(peace be on him), includes fifty-three supplications, but if some of
these supplications are omitted, the Sahifa will be incomplete, as it
has been mentioned in its introduction, hence the scholars devoted
themselves to looking for the rest of the supplications, and they have
found a group of them and added them to Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya. The
following is the name of the supplementary versions along with the names
of their authors:

Al-Sahifa <al-U@la> (the First Sahifa of al-Sajjad): It was collected by
al-Muhaddith (the traditionalist) al-Hurr al-‘Amily, author of Wasa’il
al-Shi‘a, died in the year 1104 A. H. He brought it forth from the
reliable sources and wrote in the end of it: “The servant (of Allah),
Muhammad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Hurr al-‘Amili, may Allah
pardon him, said: ‘This is what I have concluded concerning al-Sahifa
al-Kamila.’”[^18] The Sahifa contains sixty-three supplications.

Al-Sahifa al-Thaniya (the Second Sahifa of al-Sajjad): It was collected
by al-Fadil ‘Abd Allah b. Mirza ‘Isa b. Muhammad b. Salih al-Asfahani,
known as Afandi, author of ‘Riyad al-‘Ulama’’. In it he mentioned what
escaped al-Hurr al-‘Amili. It was engraved on stone.[^19]

Al-Sahifa al-Thalitha (the Third Sahifa of al-Sajjad): It was gathered
by Mirza Husayn al-Nu’ri. He mentioned what escaped Mirza ‘Abd Allah,
the one who collected al-Sahifa al-Thaniya. He collected therein
seventy-seven supplications, which has not been mentioned in the other
versions.[^20]

Al-Sahifa al-Rabi‘a (the Fourth Sahifa of al-Sajjad): It was collected
by the great researcher al-Sayyid Muhsin al-‘Amili. He mentioned what
escaped (the authors) of the previous versions. The total number of its
supplications is 182, hence he added only 52 supplications.[^21]

Al-Sahifa al-Khamisa (the Fifth Sahifa of al-Sajjad): It was gathered by
Shaykh Muhammad Salih b. Mirza Fadl Allah al-Mazindarani al-Ha’iri.[^22]

Supplementary Supplications
---------------------------

I (the author) have found some supplications which have not been written
in the original Sahifa of al-Sajjad, and these supplications are as
follows:

### His Supplication for Good Mindedness

One of his holy supplications is this: “O Allah, we seek refuge in You
from that You make good my outward conduct in the flashing eyes and make
ill my mindedness. O Allah, just as I did evil and You were kind to me.
If I return, You return to me.[^23]”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Exalted, to make good his
inner self. He sought refuge in Him from that He might make good his
outward conduct before the people without making good his inner self.
Also he asked Him to show forgiveness and good pleasure toward him if he
returned to one of his psychological desires.

### His Supplication when Afflicted by Neediness

The Imam, peace be on him, would supplicate with this holy supplication
when neediness befell him or he was afraid of a certain affair. He
advised his children to supplicate Allah with it after a four-ruk‘a or
two-ruk‘a prayer. The following is its text:

“O Place of every complaint! O Hearer of every secret conversation! O
Healer of every affliction! O He who knows all hidden thinks! O He who
removes every tribulation! I ask You with the supplication of one whose
indigence is extreme, whose strength has become weak, whose force has
decreased; the asking of the stranger, the drowned one, and the poor one
whose neediness none removes except You, O Most Merciful of the
merciful! There is no god but You! I was among the wrongful!”

He would say: “Allah relieves all those who supplicate Him with this
supplication.[^24]” This supplication represents the Imam’s clinging and
devotion to Allah, for he was sure that only Allah had the power to
remove poverty and neediness; there was none had power to change man’s
misery and unhappiness except Allah, the most High.

### His Supplication when Cleaved to Allah

This is one of his holy supplications which were narrated on his
authority by Zayd b. Aslam. It is as follows: “O Allah, entrust me not
to my own self, for I am incapable of it! Entrust me not to the
creatures, for they will disparage me![^25]”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Most High not to entrust him
to his own soul, for soul commands man to do evil, nor to the creatures,
for they would disparage and disdain him. As for entrusting to Allah, it
brings about success in this world and the next.

### His Supplication for Forgiveness and Repentance

He, peace be on him, would supplicate Allah to forgive him and to accept
his repentance, saying: “O He remembering whom brings honor to those who
remember! O He thanking whom brings triumph to those who give thanks! O
He obeying whom brings deliverance to those who obey! Bless Muhammad and
his Household, and divert our hearts through remembering You from every
act of remembrance, our tongues through thanking You from every act of
thanksgiving, our limbs through obeying You from every act of obedience!
If You have ordained for us idleness from these occupation, make it an
idleness of safety, within which no ill consequence visits us or
weariness overtakes us!

Then the writers of evil deeds may depart from us with a page empty of
the mention of our evil deeds, and the writers of good deeds may turn
away from us happy with the good deeds of ours which they have written.
And when the days of our life have passed by, the terms of our lifetimes
have elapsed, and Your call, which must come and be answered, summons us
forth, then bless Muhammad and his Household and make the outcome of
what the writers of our works count against us an accepted repentance,
which afterwards gave us no rest in a sin we committed or an act of
disobeying that we performed! Remove not from us any covering with which
You have covered over the heads of the witnesses on the day when the
records of Your servants are tried! Verily You are Merciful to him who
calls upon You![^26]”

The Imam, peace be on him, pled to Allah, the Exalted, asking Him to
employ his heart, his tongue, and all his limbs in remembering and
worshipping Him and to make the outcome of his life an accepted
repentance.

### His Supplication in calling down blessings upon the Prophet

This is one of his holy supplications. He would supplicate with it to
call down blessings upon his grandfather, the Greatest Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his Household. The following is its text:

“O Lasting! O Everlasting! O Living! O Self-subsistent! O Reliever of
worry! O Remover of grief! O He who sent the messengers! O He who keeps
His word! Bless Muhammad and Muhammad’s Household, and do with me what
is worthy of You![^27]”

### His Supplication when his Supplication accepted

The Imam, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication when
his supplication was accepted: “O Allah, the request has come to
nothing, the force has failed except with You, the ways have become
narrow, the requests have stopped, the desires have become difficult,
the paths are cut off except (those lead) to You, hopes passed,
expectations are cut off except (those) from You, trust has become
unsuccessful and opinions have become disappointed except in You.

“O Allah, I find the ways of requests lead to You, and the fountains of
hope are open for You! I know that You respond to him who supplicates
You, help him who calls upon You, he who seeks You is close to You, the
whispered prayer of a servant is not veiled from Your hearing, that
longing for Your munificence, satisfaction with Your promise, and
pleasure with Your guarantee are a recompense for the deprivation of the
misers, an alternative to what is in the hands of the alone possessors,
and avoidance of the deception of the deceitful. There is no god but
You, so forgive me my past sins, safeguard me during my remaining span,
and open for me the doors to Your mercy and munificence, which You do
not shut (in the faces of) Your friends and Your chosen ones, O Most
Merciful of the merciful![^28]”

The Imam, peace be on him, clung to Allah, sought protection in Him, and
devoted himself to Him. He set his desires, hopes and expectations on
Him, for he, peace be on him, thought that relying on other than Allah
was part of feebleness and weakness, for such relying was adopting
imaginations and looking for mirage.

### His Supplication when Food placed and taken

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication when food
was placed before him: “O Allah, this is of Your kindness and bounty and
giving. So make it blessed for us, make us swallow it easily, and
provide us with another (food) when we have eaten it. There may be
someone who is in need of it. You have provided (us with food), so You
have done well. O Allah, place us among the thankful.”

When the food was taken from him, he would supplicate with this
supplication: “Praise belongs to Allah who carries us on land and in
see, provides us with agreeable things, and makes us surpass many of His
creatures with a surpass.[^29]”

The Imam, peace be on him, always occupied himself with remembering
Allah. He never flagged (in glorifying Him), nor did he abandon Him.

### His Supplication in Entrusting his Affairs to Allah

This is one of his great supplications: “In the name of Allah, by Allah,
in the way of Allah, by Allah, from Allah, to Allah, in the creed of
Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his Household. O Allah, I
have submitted my own soul to You, entrusted my affairs to You, turned
my face toward You, leant my back against You. O Allah, safeguard me
with the safeguarding of faith from before me and behind me, from my
right hand and my left hand, from above me and below me. Repel from me
(the evil) through Your force and Your strength. There is neither force
nor strength save in Allah, the Most High, the Great![^30]”

The Imam, peace be on him, submitted his own self to Allah, entrusted
his affairs to Him, sought protection in Him, clung to His cord, and was
sure that neither force nor strength save in Him.

### His Supplication in Seeking Refuge from Allah’s Wrath

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication in seeking
refuge from the wrath of Allah, the Exalted: “O Allah, what am I and You
become angry with me? By Your mightiness, my good deeds do not adorn
Your kingdom, nor do my evil deeds make it ugly! My riches does not
decrease Your treasures, nor does my poverty increase them![^31]”

### His Supplication when went to Bed

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication when he
went to bed: “O Allah, You are the First without anything before You,
You are the Outward without anything above You, You are the Inward
without anything below You, and You are the Last without anything after
You. O Allah! O Lord of the seven heavens and seven earths! O Lord of
the Torah, the Bible, the Zabu’r (David’s Psalms), and the Holy Qur’an!
I seek refuge in You from every beast whose forelock is in Your hand!
Verily, You are on a straight path![^32]”

### His Supplication in Repelling Fearful Things

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication to drive
fearful things away: “O Allah, nothing repels Your wrath but Your
clemency, nothing repels Your displeasure but Your pardon, nothing
grants sanctuary from Your punishment but Your mercy, and nothing will
deliver me from You except pleading to You before You. So give me, my
Allah, relief by means of the power through which You revive the dead
lands and bring the souls of servants to life. Destroy me not, my Allah,
and give me the knowledge of Your response (to my supplication) ! Raise
me up, push me not down, help me, provide me with (provision), and make
me well from blights.

“My Allah, if You rise me up, who is there to push me down? If You push
me down, who is there to raise me up? But I know that there is no wrong
in Your decree and no hurry in Your vengeance. He alone hurries who
fears to miss, and only the weak needs to wrong. But You are exalted, My
Allah, high indeed above all that!

“Make me not the target of affliction nor the object of Your vengeance,
respite me, comfort me, release me from my stumble, and afflict me not
with an affliction in the wake of an affliction, for You have seen my
frailty, the paucity of my stratagems. So, my lord, make me patient, for
I am weak, pleading to You! I seek refuge in You form You! I seek
sanctuary in You from every affliction, so give me sanctuary! I cover
myself over with You, so cover me over, my Lord, of what I am afraid and
careful! You are the Great One, the Greatest of the great! O Allah, I
cover myself with You, so bless Muhammad and his pure Household![^33]”

These are some supplementary of al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya. Whoever wants
more on them, let him see the five supplementary supplications in the
Sahifa, al-Kaf‘mi’s Musbah, al-Tu’si’s Musbah, Muhajj al-Da‘awat, and
other supplication books.

Wonderful Examples of the Sahifa
--------------------------------

As long as we are busy speaking about the Sahifa of al-Sajjad, we will
mention some of its valuable supplications, which have surpassed art
thoughts. They are as follows:

### His Supplication in Calling down Blessings upon the Prophet

The Imam, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication. He
has mentioned therein the efforts of his grandfather, the Greatest
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his Household, and the persecutions
he faced in the way of the Islamic Message and raising Allah’s Word in
the earth. The following is its text:

“Praise belongs to Allah, who was kind to us through Muhammad (Allah
bless him and his Household) to the exclusion of past communities and
bygone generations, displaying thereby His power, which nothing can
render incapable, though it be great, and nothing can escape, though it
be subtle. He sealed through us all He created, appointed us witnesses
over those who deny, and increased us by His kindness over those who are
few.

O Allah, bless Muhammad, entrusted by You with Your revelation,
distinguished by You among Your creatures, devoted to You among Your
servants, the Imam of mercy, the leader of good, the key to blessing,
who wearied his soul for Your affairs, exposed his body to detested
things for Your sake, showed open enmity toward his next of kin by
summoning to You, fought against his family for Your good pleasure, cut
the ties of the womb in giving life to Your religion, sent far those
close because of their denial, brought near those far because of their
response to You, showed friendship to the most distant for Your sake,
displayed enmity toward the nearest for Your sake, made his soul
persevere in delivering Your message, tired it in summoning to Your
creed, busied it in counseling those worthy of Your summons, migrated to
the land of exile and the place of remoteness from home of his
saddlebags, the walkway of his feet, the ground of his birth, and the
intimate abode of his soul, desiring to exalt Your religion and seeking
help against those who disbelieved in You until what he attempted
against Your enemies went well with him and what he arranged for Your
friends was accomplished.

He rose up against them seeking victory through Your aid, becoming
strong in spite of his weakness with Your help. He fought against them
in the center of their cities and attacked them in the midst of their
dwellings, until Your command prevailed, and Your word rose up, though
the idolaters were averse. O Allah, so raise him, because of his labors
for Your sake, to the highest degree of Your Garden, that none may equal
him in station, none may match him in level, and no angel brought nigh
or prophet sent out may parallel him in Your sight. And inform him
concerning his Household the pure and his community the faithful of an
excellent intercession, greater than what You have promised him! O
Keeper of promises! O Faithful to Your word! O He who changes evil deeds
into manifold good deeds! You are of bounty abounding![^34]”

The Imam, peace be on him, presented what his grandfather, the Greatest
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household suffered, such as
hardships, difficulties in the way of spreading Islam and raising up the
Word of the Unity of Allah. An example of these hardships is that the
idolaters from among his blood relations and people unanimously agreed
on fighting against him, crushing his message, and declaring war against
him, hence the Messenger, may Allah bless him and his Household,
abandoned them and brought near those far like ‘Ammar b. Yasir, Salman
al-Farisi, Abi Dharrwho were the best of all the people in clinging to
him and sacrificing their lives for him.

Another example of the hardships the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his Household, faced was his emigration to al-Ta’if and Medina
(Yathrib). There he faced various kinds of difficulties and hardships,
but Allah, the Exalted helped and supported him, when He manifested his
affair and exalted his importance. Hence the Messenger was able to fight
against the unbelievers in the center of their cities and spread Islam
among them.

### His Supplication in Calling down Blessings upon the Followers of the Messengers

In this supplication, the Imam, peace be on him, mentioned the followers
of the messengers and those who attested to them, and then he mentioned
the Companions of his grandfather, the Greatest Messenger, may Allah
bless him and his Household, who supported Islam during its early days.
He, peace be on him, said:

“O Allah, as for the followers of the messengers and those of the people
of the earth who attested to them unseen (while the obstinate resisted
them through crying lies)  they yearned for the emissaries through the
realities of faith, in every era and time in which You did send a
messenger and set up for the people a director from the period of Adam
down to Muhammad (Allah bless him and his Household) from among the
Imams of guidance and the leaders of Allahfearing (upon them all be
peace)  remember them with forgiveness and good pleasure!”

The Imam, peace be on him, praised the followers of the messengers and
those who attested to them from the period of Adam down to the last of
the prophets and their Lord, Muhammad, may Allah bless him and his
Household. This is because they represented the true faith when they
believed in Allah and attested to His messenger when he told them about
the unseen creatures. They did not pay attention to the rumors of their
enemies; rather they rejected them and waged war against them. Now,
let’s listen to another part of this holy supplication. He, peace be on
him, said:

“O Allah, as for the companions of Muhammad specially, those who did
well in companionship, who stood the good test in helping him when he
made them hear his messages’ argument, separated from mates and children
in manifesting his word, fought against fathers and sons in
strengthening his prophecy, and through him gained victory; those who
were wrapped in affection for him, **hoping for a commerce that comes
not to naught** in love for him; those who were left by their clans when
they clung to his handhold and denied by their kinsfolk when they rested
in the shadow of his kinship; forget not, O Allah what they abandoned
for You and in You, and make them pleased with Your good pleasure for
the sake of the creatures they drove to You while they were with Your
Messenger, summoners to You for You. Show gratitude to them for leaving
the abodes of their people for Your sake and going out from a plentiful
livelihood to a narrow one, and (show gratitude to) those of them who
became objects of wrongdoing and whom You multiplied in exalting Your
religion.”

In this part, the Imam, peace be on him, lauded the Companions of his
grandfather, the Greatest Messenger, may Allah bless him and his
Household, who did well in companionship and stood the good test in
supporting Islam and protecting its principles. They firmly believed in
Islam, hence they suffered for it bitter difficulties and hardships of
which are the following:

1. They abandoned their wives and their children who did not believe in
Islam.

2. They fought their fathers and their sons who opposed Islam.

3. Their tribes abandoned them, for they embraced Islam and supported
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household.

4. They faced economic hardships because of their support to Islam.
These are some affairs from which the Companions of the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his Household, suffered. Let’s listen to another
part of this supplication.

“O Allah, and give to those who have done well in following the
Companions, who say, **Our Lord forgive us and our brothers who went
before us in faith**, Your best reward; those who went straight to the
Companions’ road, sought out their course, and proceeded in their
manners. No doubt concerning their sure insight diverted them and no
uncertainty shook them from following in their tracks and being led by
the guidance of their light. As their assistants and supporters, they
professed their religion, gained guidance through their guidance, came
to agreement with them, and never accused them in what they passed on to
them.”

“O Allah, and bless the Followers, from this day of ours to the Day of
Doom, their wives, their offspring, and those among them who obey You,
with a blessing through which You will preserve them from disobeying
You, make room for them in the plots of Your Garden, defend them from
the trickery of Satan, help them in the piety in which they seek help
from You, protect them from sudden events that come by night and
dayexcept the events which come with good and incite them to tie
firmly the knot of good hope in You, what is with You, and refrain from
ill thoughts (toward You) because of what the hands of Your servants’
hold. Thus You may restore them to beseeching You and fearing You,
induce them to renounce the plenty of the immediate, make them love to
work for the sake of the deferred and prepare for what comes after
death, make easy for them every distress that comes to them on the day
when souls take leave from bodies, release them from that which brings
about the perils of temptation and being thrown down in the Fire and
staying forever within it, and take them to security, the resting place
of the Allah-fearing.[^35]”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Exalted to bless those who
followed the Companions of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
Household, while they did not see the Prophet, but they believed in him
in their inner selves and followed the way of his Companions. No doubt
prevented them from following them and their guidance, hence they raised
up the Banner of the Unity of Allah, and spread among the people the
principles and values of this religion, so the Imam asked Allah:

1. To preserve them from committing acts of disobedience.

2. To defend them from the trickery of Satan.

3. To help them to do good and to adhere to piety.

4. To Protect them from sudden events that come by night and day.

5. To tie firmly the knot of good hope in Him, that they might be free
from need to the people.

6. To make them renounce the world and make them love to work for the
sake of the next world. These are some contents of his supplication for
the followers of the Companions of his grandfather, the Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family.

### His Supplication for himself and the People under his Guardianship

The following is one of the excellent supplications of the Imam, peace
be on him. He would supplicate with it for himself and the people under
his guardianship:

“O He the wonders of whose mightiness will never end! Bless Muhammad and
his Household and prevent us from deviation concerning Your mightiness!
O He the term of whose kingdom will never cease! Bless Muhammad and his
Household and release our necks from Your vengeance! O He the treasuries
of whose mercy will never be exhausted! Bless Muhammad and his Household
and appoint for us a portion of Your mercy! O He whom eyes fall short of
seeing! Bless Muhammad and his Household and bring us close to Your
nearness! O He before whose greatness all great things are small! Bless
Muhammad and his Household and give us honor with You! O He to whom all
hidden tidings are manifest! Bless Muhammad and his Household and expose
us not before You! O Allah, remove our need for the gifts of the givers
through Your gift, spare us the loneliness of those who break off
through Your joining, that we may beseech no one along with Your free
giving, that we may feel lonely at no one’s absence along with Your
bounty! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, scheme for us, not
against us, device to our benefit, not to our loss, give the turn to
prevail to us, not to others! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household,
protect us from Yourself! He whom You protect stays safe, he whom You
guide knows, and he whom You bring near Yourself takes the spoils. O
Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and spare us the cutting edge of
time’s turning changes, the evil of Satan’s snares, and the bitterness
of the sovereign’s aggression!”

In this part of his supplication, the Imam, peace be on him, started
with praising the Great Creator, and then he asked Him to protect him
from unbelief which makes man leave his humanity. After this he
mentioned the mightiness of Allah. He asked Allah to bestow upon him His
favors and boons, to remove his need for the gifts of the givers through
His gift, to spare him the loneliness of those who break off through His
joining, to spare him from the misfortunes of time, and save him from
the evil of Satan’s snares and the bitterness of the sovereign’s
aggression. This part is full of wonderful words and good style and is
among the most beautiful rhetorical parts in Arabic literature. Now,
let’s listen to another part of this supplication:

“O Allah, the spared are spared only through the bounty of Your
strength, so bless Muhammad and his Household and spare us! The givers
give only through the bounty of Your wealth, so bless Muhammad and his
Household and give to us! The guided are guided only by the light of
Your face, so bless Muhammad and his Household and guide us! O Allah, he
whom You befriend will not be injured by the abandonment of the
abandoners, he to whom You give will not be diminished by the
withholding of the withholders, he who You guide will not be misled by
the misguidance of the misguiders. So bless Muhammad and his Household,
defend us from Your servants through Your might, free us from need for
other than You through Your support, and make us travel the path of the
Truth through the right guidance! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his
Household and put the soundness of our hearts into remembrance of Your
mightiness, the idleness of our bodies into giving thanks for Your
favor, and the flow of our tongues into the description of Your
kindness! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and make us one of
Your summoners who summon to You, Your guiders who direct to You, and
You special friends whom You have singled out! O Most Merciful of the
merciful![^36]”

How wonderful this faith is! How great this love for Allah is! Have you
seen how this Imam displayed love for Allah and sincerity to Him? He
believed that Allah had power over all things, that those other than Him
had neither force nor strength, hence he set his hope and expectation on
Him, not on other than Him.

### His Supplication in Morning and Evening

This is one of the greatest supplications of the Imam, peace be on him.
He would supplicate with it in morning and evening. It is full of
reliable proofs for the existence of the Almighty Creator and His
tremendous power. The following is its text:

“Praise belongs to Allah, who created night and day, through His
strength, set them apart through His power, and appointed for each a
determined limit and a drawn-out period. He makes each of the two enter
into its companion, and makes its companions enter into it, as an
ordainment from Him for His servants in that through which He makes them
grow. He created for them the night, **that they might rest in it** from
tiring movements and wearisome exertions and He made it a garment for
them that they might be clothed in its ease and its sleep, that it might
be for them refreshment and strength, that they might reach therein
pleasure and passion. He created for them the daytime, giving sight,
that they might seek within it of His bounty, find the means to His
provision, and roam freely in His earth, searching for that through
which to attain the immediate in their life in this world and to achieve
the deferred in their life to come. Through all of this He sets their
situation, tries their records, and watches their state in the times for
obeying Him, the way stations of His obligations, **that He may repay
those who do evil with that they have done and repay those who do good
with goodness**.”

As for this part, it is one of the proofs for the Islamic Unity based on
thinking and sense, for faith in Allah, according to the Islamic
viewpoint, is a mere traditional phenomenon or an emotional inclination;
rather it is based on the most reliable proofs and the best of them in
awareness and originality.

In this part the Imam, peace be on him, considered carefully the
universe and life and based on this his deep faith in Allah. He
considered carefully night and day and concluded that they followed a
wonderful, orderly movement, concerning which the Holy Qur’an said:
“**Neither it is allowable to the sun that it should overtake the moon,
nor can the night outstrip the day; and all float on in a sphere**.” Who
ordered this movement, created it, and ordained it with this accurate
ordination? Without doubt, it is Allah, the Giver of life, who did this!

The Imam, peace be on him, mentioned the profits which man gain during
his life from the march of night and day. Allah, the Most High, created
for man the night, that he might rest in it from tiring movements and
wearisome exertions and He made it a garment for His servants that they
might be clothed in its ease and its sleep. As for the daytime, Allah,
the Exalted, made it giving sight and light, that man might seek within
it of His bounty and provision through agriculture, work, trade, and
other works which help him earn his livelihood, that his life might
continue on this earth on which he lives. Now, let’s listen to another
part of this supplication:

“O Allah, to You belongs praise for the sky You have split into dawn for
us, giving us to enjoy thereby the brightness of daytime, showing us
sought-after nourishment, and protecting us from the striking of
blights. In the morning we and all things, every one rise for You, the
heaven and the earth and what You have scattered in each, the still and
the moving, the resident and the journeying, what towers up in the air
and what hides under the ground. We rise in the morning in Your grasp:
Your kingdom and authority contain us and Your will embrace us. We move
about by Your command and turn this way and that way through Your
governing. We own nothing of the affair except what You have decreed and
nothing of the good except what You have given. This is a fresh, new
day, over us a ready witness. If we do good, it will take leave from us
with praise, and if we do evil, it will part from us in blame.”

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, provide us with the day’s
good companionship and preserve us against parting from it badly by
doing a misdeed or committing a sin, whether small or great! Make our
good deeds within it plentiful empty us therein of evil deeds, and fill
what lies between its two sides for us with praise and thanks giving,
wages and stores, bounty and beneficence! O Allah, ease our burden on
the Noble Writers, fill our pages for us with our good deeds, and
degrade us not before them with our evil works! O Allah, appoint for us
in each of the day’s hours a share from Your servants, a portion of
giving thanks to You and a truthful witness among Your angels! O Allah,
bless Muhammad and his Household, and safeguard us from before us and
behind us, from our right hands and our left hands and from all our
directions, a safeguarding that will preserve from disobeying You, guide
to obeying You, and be employed for Your love!”

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and give us success in this
day of ours, this night of ours, and in all our days, to employ the
good, stay away from the evil, give thanks for favor, follows the
**Sunna**’s norms, avoid innovations, enjoin good behavior, forbid the
disapproved, defend Islam, diminish falsehood and abase it, help the
truth and exalt it, guide the misguided, assist the weak, and reach out
to the troubled!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and make this the most
fortunate day we have known, the most excellent companion we have
accompanied, and the best time in which we have lingered! Place us among
the most satisfied of all Your creatures whom night and day have passed
by, the most thankful of them for the favors You have done, the firmest
of them in the laws You have set down in the **Shari‘a** and the most
unyielding of them toward the prohibited acts against which You have
cautioned! O Allah, I call You to witness and You are sufficient
witness and I call Your heaven and Your earth to witness and Your
angels and Your other creatures who inhabit them, in this my day, this
my hour, this my night, and this my resting place, that I bear witness
that You are Allah, other than whom there is no god, Upholding justice,
Equitable in judgment, **clement to the servants, Master of the
Kingdom,** Compassionate to the creatures, and that Muhammad is Your
servant and Your messenger, Your chosen from among Your creatures. You
did charge him with Your message and he delivered it; You did command
him to counsel his community and he counseled it.

“O Allah, so bless Muhammad and his Household, more than You blessed any
of Your creatures! Give him for our sake the best You have given any of
Your servants, and repay him on our behalf better and more generously
than You have any of Your prophets on behalf of his community! You are
All-kind with immensity, the Forgiver of the great, and You are more
merciful than every possessor of mercy! So bless Muhammad and his
Household, the good, the pure, the chosen, the most distinguished![^37]”

The Imam, peace be on him, spoke in this part about the submission of
all things to Allah’s power and will, for it is He who makes them walk
on the path of His desire. After this the Imam asked Allah to give him
success to in order to employ the good, stay away from the evil, give
thanks for favors, follow the **Sunna**’s norms, avoid innovations,
enjoin good behavior, forbid the disapproved, defend Islam, diminish
falsehood and abase it, help the truth and exalt it, guide the
misguided, assist the weak, and reach out to the troubled, and other
good works and noble moral traits through man become sublime. In this
supplication, the Imam has chosen the most beautiful words and the
purest of them. It is certain that there are no Arab words more eloquent
and purer than this supplication except those of the Holy Qur’an and of
‘Ali’s Nahjj al-Balagha.

### His Supplication for Good Outcomes

This is one of the Imam’s holy supplications. He supplicated Allah with
it to be kind to him through good outcomes. This is its text:

“O He remembering whom brings honor to those who remember! O He thanking
whom brings triumph to those who give thanks! O He obeying whom brings
deliverance to those who obey! Bless Muhammad and his Household, and
divert our hearts through remembering You from every act of remembrance,
our tongues through thanking You from every act of thanksgiving, our
limbs through obeying You from every act of obedience! If You have
ordained for us idleness from these occupations, make it an idleness of
safety, within which no ill consequence visits us or weariness overtakes
us! Then the writers of evil deeds may depart from us with a page empty
of the mention of our evil deeds, and the writers of good deeds may turn
away from us happy with the good deeds of ours which they have written.
And when the days of our life have passed by, the terms of our lifetimes
have elapsed, and Your call, which must come and be answered, summons us
forth, then bless Muhammad and his Household, and make the outcome of
what the writers of our works count against us an accepted repentance,
which afterwards gave us no rest in a sin that we committed or an act of
disobedience that we performed! Remove not from us any covering with
which You have covered over the heads of the witnesses on the day when
records of Your servants are tried! Verily You are compassionate to him
who supplicates You, the responder to him who calls upon You![^38]”

Have you seen this sincerity to Allah and love for Him? The Imam asked
Allah, the Exalted, to make his outcome an accepted repentance, that he
might be safe from the terrors of the hereafter and chastisement of the
Day of Resurrection, and delight at Paradise.

### His Supplication in Seeking Repentance

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication asking
Allah, the Exalted, to be kind to him through repentance and
forgiveness:

“O Allah, three traits have prevented me from asking You and one trait
has urged me on: I am prevented by a command You have commanded in which
I have been slow, a prohibition You have prohibited toward which I have
hurried, and a favor through which You have favored for which I have not
given sufficient thanks. I am urged to ask You by Your gratuitous bounty
upon him who turns his face toward You and comes to You with a good
opinion, since all Your beneficence is gratuitous bounty and every one
of Your favors a new beginning! So here I am, my Allah, standing at the
gate of Your might, the standing of the lowly, the surrendered, asking
You in my shame, the asking of the destitute, the pitiful, admitting to
You that at the time of Your beneficence I surrendered not save through
abstaining from disobedience toward You and in none of my states was I
ever without Your Kindness. Will it profit me, my Allah, to admit to You
the evil of what I have earned? Will it save me from You to confess the
ugliness of what I have done? Or will You impose upon me in this my
station Your displeasure?

Will You hate hold fast to me in the time of my supplication? Glory be
to You! I do not despair of You, for You have opened the door of
repentance toward Yourself. Rather, I say, the words of a lowly servant,
having wronged himself and made light of his Lord’s inviolability, and
whose sins are dreadful, great, whose days have parted, fled, until,
when he sees the term of his works expired and the limit of his lifetime
reached and knows with certainty that he has no escape from You, no
place to flee from You, he turns his face toward You in repeated
turning, makes his repentance toward You sincere, stands before You with
a pure and purified heart, then supplicates You with a feeble, quiet
voice. He is bowed before You, bent, his head lowered, thrown down, his
legs shaking in fear, his tears flooding his cheeks.

He supplicates You: O Most Merciful of the merciful! O Most Merciful of
those toward whom seekers of mercy keep on turning! O Tenderest of those
around whom run seekers of forgiveness! O He whose pardon is greater
than His vengeance! O He whose good pleasure is more abundant than His
anger! O He who seeks His creatures’ praise with excellent forbearance!
O He who has accustomed His servants to the acceptance of their repeated
turning! O He who seeks to heal their corruption through repentance! O
He who is pleased with the easy of their acts! O He who recompenses with
the much their little! O He who made himself accountable to them to
respond to supplication!

O He who pledged Himself by His gratuitous bounty to give them excellent
repayment! I am not the most disobedient of those who have disobeyed You
and whom You have forgiven, nor am I the most blameworthy to offer
excuses which You have accepted, nor am I the most wrongdoing of those
who have repented to You and to whom You have returned. I repent to You
in this my station, the repentance of one remorseful over what preceded
from him hastily, apprehensive of what has gathered around him, pure in
shame for that into which he has fallen, knowing that pardoning great
sins is nothing for You, overlooking enormous misdeeds is not difficult
for You, putting up with indecent crimes does not trouble You, and the
most beloved of Your servants to You is he who refrains from arrogance
before You, pulls aside from persistence, and holds fast to praying
forgiveness! I seek refuge in You from persistence, I pray forgiveness
from You for shortcomings, I seek help from You in incapacity!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, dispense with what is
incumbent upon me toward You, release me from what I merit from You, and
grant me sanctuary from what the evildoers fear! For You are full of
pardon, the hoped-for source of forgiveness, well known for Your
forbearance. My need has no object but You, my sin has no forgiver other
than Youcould that be possible? I have no fear for myself except from
You; You are **worthy of reverential fear, and worthy to forgive!**
Bless Muhammad and his Household, grant my need, answer my request
favorably, forgive my sin, and give me security from fear for myself!
**You are powerful over everything**, and that is easy for You. Amen,
Lord of the worlds![^39]”

In this supplication the Imam, peace be on him, has opened a new door to
conversation with Allah, the Exalted. I (the author) think that none
knew or used such a door to conversation in the Arab words except the
supplication which have been handed down from Imam ‘Ali, the Commander
of the faithful, peace be on him. The Imam (Zayn al-‘Abidin) displayed
before Allah the factors which prevented him from asking Him as well as
he presented what urged him to ask him. He mentioned this in a detailed
exiting manner, asking Him, the Exalted, for repentance, pardon, and
mercy. He asked him with the words of one fearful, lowly, and miserable.
He bent, lowered his head, shook (in fear), and burst into tears. He
pled to Allah, asked Him to forgive him for falling short of fulfilling
His rights against him, and showed remorse over His affairs which he
neglected. He, peace be on him, addressed Allah, the Exalted in such a
manner, while he, peace be on him, was Sayyid al-Sajidin (the Lords of
those who prostrate themselves in prayer), Imam of the Allah-fearing,
and Leader of the monotheists. What an angelic soul this is! It became
small and melted out of honoring and magnifying the Great Creator!

### His Supplication when Sick

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this great supplication when
he was sick or visited by distress or an affliction. The following is
its text:

“O Allah, to You belongs praise for the good health of my body which
lets me move about, and to You belongs praise for the ailments which You
cause to arise in my flesh! For I know not, my Allah, which of the two
states deserves more my thanking You and which of the two times is more
worthy for my praise of You: the time of health, within which You make
me delight in the agreeable things of Your provision, through which You
give me the joy to seek the means to Your good pleasure and bounty, and
by which You strengthen me for the acts of obedience which You have me
success to accomplish; or the time of illness through which You put me
to the test and bestow upon me favor: lightening of the offenses that
weigh down my back, purification of the evil deeds into which I have
plunged, incitement to reach for repentance, reminder of the erasure of
misdeeds through ancient favor; and, through all that, what the two
writers write for me: blameless acts, which no heart had thought, no
tongue had uttered, and no limb had undertaken, rather, as Your bestowal
of bounty upon me and the beneficence of Your benefaction toward me.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, make me love what You have
approved for me, make easy for me what You have sent down upon me,
purify me of the defilement of what I have sent ahead, erase the evil of
what I have done beforehand, let me find the sweetness of well-being,
let me taste the coolness of safety, and appoint for me a way out from
my illness to Your pardon, transformation of my infirmity into Your
forbearance, escape from my distress to Your refreshment, and safety
from this hardship in Your relief! You are gratuitous bountiful in
beneficence, ever gracious in kindness, the Generous, the Giver,
Possessor of majesty and munificence![^40]”

The Imam, peace be on him, firmly believed that Allah, the Exalted, had
power over health, safety, and maladies. He thought that it was Allah
who gave well-being and tried with malady whomever He wished of His
servants, yet the Imam, peace be on him, thanked his Lord for both
states: He thanked Him for well-being, the agreeable things of
provision, activity to seeking His good pleasure, and strength to
obeying Him. Also he thanked for malady, for he thought that illness
would decrease one’s sins and crimes, meanwhile he wanted to draw the
attention of people to repentance. After this he asked Him to give him
well-being and safety, to save him from hardships, and to relieve him.

### His Supplication when he asked Release from his Sins

This is one of the Imam’s outstanding supplications. He supplicated with
it when he asked release from his sins or pleaded in seeking pardon for
his defects, as it has been mentioned in al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya. The
following is its text:

“O Allah, O He through whose Mercy sinners seek aid! O He to the
remembrance of whose beneficence the distressed flee! O He in fear of
whom the offenders weep! O Comfort of every lonely stranger! O Relief of
all who are downcast and distresses! O Aid of everyone abandoned and
alone! O Support of every needy outcast! You are He who embrace
everything in mercy and knowledge! You are He who has appointed for each
creature a share of Your favors! You are He whose pardon is higher than
his punishment! You are He whose mercy runs before His wrath! You are He
whose bestowal is greater than His withholding! You are He who by whose
mercy all creatures are embraced! You are He who desires no repayment by
him upon whom He bestows! You are He who does not overdo the punishment
of him whom disobeys You! And I, my Allah, am Your servants whom You
commanded to supplicate and who said: I am at Your service and disposal!
Here am I, my Lord, thrown down before You. I am he whose back offenses
have weighed down! I am he whose lifetime sins have consumed! I am he
who was disobedient in his ignorance, while You did not deserve that
from him! Will You, my Allah, be merciful toward him who supplicates
You, that I should bring my supplication before You? Will You forgive
him who weeps to You that I should hurry to weep? Will You show
forbearance toward him whom puts who puts his face in the dust before
You in lowliness? Will You free from need him who complains to You of
his indigent need with confidence? My Allah, disappoint not him who
finds no bestower other than You, and abandon not him who cannot be
freed from his need for You through less than You! My Allah, so bless
Muhammad and his Household, turn not away from me when I have turned my
face toward You, deprive me not when I have besought You, and slap not
my brow with rejection when I have stood before You! You are he who has
described Himself by mercy so bless Muhammad and his Household, and have
mercy upon me! You are he who has named Himself by pardon, so pardon me!
You have seen, my Allah, the flow of my tears in fear of You, the
throbbing of my heart in dread of You, and the infirmity of my limbs in
awe of You. All this from my shame before You because of my evil works!
So my voice has become silent, no longer crying to You, and my tongue
has gone dumb, no longer whispering in prayer.”

This part of supplication shows the Imam’s firm faith in Allah and his
strong devotion to Him. He entrusted all his affairs to Him, clung to
Him during all his worries, and asked Him for pardon, repentance, and
good pleasure. Now, let’s listen to another part of this supplication.

“My Allah, so to You belongs praise! How many of my flaws You have
covered over without exposing me! How many of my sins You have cloaked
without making me notorious! How many faults I have committed, yet You
did not tear away from me their covering, collar me with their detested
disgrace, or make their dishonor plain to those of my neighbors who
search for my defects and to those who envy Your favor toward me! But
that did not prevent me from passing on to the evil that You know from
me! So who is more ignorant than I, my Allah, of his own right conduct?
Who is more heedless than I of his own good fortune? Who is further than
I from seeking to set himself right? For I spend the provision You
deliver to me in the disobedience You have prohibited to me! Who sinks
more deeply into falsehood and is more intensely audacious in evil than
I? For I hesitate between Your call and the call of Satan and then
follow his call without being blind in my knowledge of him or forgetful
in my memory of him, while I am certain that Your call takes to the
Garden and his call takes to the Fire! Glory be to You! How marvelous
the witness I bear against my own soul and the enumeration of my hidden
affairs! And more marvelous than that is Your lack of haste with me,
Your slowness in attending to me! That is not because I possess honor
with You, but because You wait patiently for me and are bountiful toward
me that I may refrain from disobedience displeasing to You and abstain
from evil deeds that disgrace me, and because You love to pardon me more
than to punish! But I, my Allah, am more numerous in sins, uglier in
footsteps, more repulsive in acts, more reckless in rushing into
falsehood, weaker in awakening to Your obedience, and less attentive and
heedful toward Your threats, than that I could number for You my faults
or have the power to recount my sins. I only scold my own soul, craving
Your gentleness, through which the affairs of sinners are set right, and
hoping for Your mercy, through which the necks of the offenders are
freed.”

The Imam, peace be on him, never committed sin throughout his life;
rather he devoted himself to his religion, taking great care of his
conduct. As he was very fearful of Allah, turned to Him in repentance,
and dedicated himself to Him, he placed himself in the station of the
sinners, hoping for pardon, salvation, and deliverance. Now, let’s
listen to the last part of this supplication.

“O Allah, this is my neck, enslaved by sins, so bless Muhammad and his
Household and release it through Your pardon! This is my back, weighed
down by offenses, so bless Muhammad and his Household and lighten it
through Your kindness! My Allah, were I to weep to You until my eyelids
drop off, wail until my voice wears out, stand before You until my
backbone is thrown out of joint, prostrate to You until my eyeballs fall
out, eat the dirt of the earth for my whole life, drink the water of
ashes till the end of my days, mention You through all of that my tongue
fails, and not lift my glance to the sky’s horizons in shame before You,
yet would I not merit through all of that the erasing of a single one of
my evil deeds! Though You forgive me when I merit Your forgiveness and
pardon me when I merit Your pardon, yet I have no title to that through
what I deserve, nor I am worthy of it through merit, since my repayment
from You from the first that I disobeyed You is the Fire! So if You
punish me, You do me no wrong.

“My Allah, since You have shielded me with Your covering and not exposed
me, waited patiently for me through Your generosity, and not hurried me
to punishment, and shown me clemency through Your bounty, and not
changed Your favor upon me or muddied Your kindly acts toward me, have
mercy on my drawn out pleading, my intense misery, and my evil
situation! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, protect me from
acts of disobedience, employ me in obedience, provide me with excellent
turning back (to You), purify me through repentance, strengthen me
through preservation from sin, set me right through well-being, let me
taste the sweetness of forgiveness, make me the freeman of Your pardon
and the slave released by Your mercy, and write for me a security from
Your displeasure! Give me the good news of that in the immediate, not
the deferreda good news I recognizeand make me known to me therein a
sign which I may clearly see! That will not constrain You in Your
plenty, distress You in Your power, ascend beyond Your lack of haste, or
tire You in Your great gifts, which are pointed to by Your signs. Verily
You do what You will, You decree what You desire. **You are powerful
over everything.**[^41]”

The Imam, peace be on him, did his best to seek nearness to Allah and
prepared for his life in the next world a marvelous station: In the
field of worship, he performed all the superfluous and desirable
prayers, and in the field of good deeds, he helped the miserable and the
deprived, yet he thought that he fell short of obeying Allah, following
the prophets and their trustees (of authority) who were very sincere in
obeying and worshipping Allah, still they felt that their worship and
obedience to Him was not important.

### His Supplication in Seeking Refuge from the Instigations of Satan

He would supplicate with this great supplication when he mentioned Satan
and sought refuge in Allah from him and from his enmity and trickery.

“O Allah, we seek refuge in You from the instigations of the accursed
Satan, his trickery, and his traps, from trust in his false hopes, his
promises, his delusions, and his snares, and lest he should make himself
crave to lead us away from Your obedience and to degrade us through our
disobeying You, and lest what he has shown us as beautiful be beautiful
for us and what he has shown us as detestable weigh down upon us. O
Allah, drive him away from us through Your worship, throw him down
through our perseverance in Your love, and place between us a covering
that he cannot tear away and a solid barrier that he cannot cut through!
O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, distract Satan from us with
some of Your enemies, preserve us from him through Your good guarding,
spare us his treachery, turn his back toward us, and cut from us his
trace!

O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, give us to enjoy guidance the
like of his misguidance, increase us in piety against his seduction, and
make us walk in reverential fear contrary to his path of ruin! O Allah,
assign him no place of entrance into our hearts and do not allow him to
make his home in that which is with us! O Allah, cause us to recognize
the falsehood with which he tempts us, and once You have caused us to
recognize it, protect us from it! Make us see what will allow us to
outwit him, inspire us with all that we can make ready for him, awaken
us from the heedless slumber of relying upon him, and help us well,
through Your giving success, against him! O Allah, saturate our hearts
with the rejection of his works and be gentle to us by destroying his
stratagems! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, turn his
authority away from us, cut his hope from us, and keep him from craving
us!”

The accursed Satan is the first enemy of man. He makes him follow evil
inclinations and thoughts, turns him away from the straight path, adorns
for him the acts of disobedience, and makes him love crimes and sins,
hence the Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah to save him from Satan, his
trickery, his traps, from trust in his false hopes, his promises, his
delusions, and his snares through which he deludes men, throw them into
ruin, and send them far from Allah’s favors and mercy. Now, let’s listen
to the rest of the supplication:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and place our fathers, our
mothers, our children, our wives, our siblings, our relatives, and the
faithful among our neighbors, male and female, in a sanctuary
impregnable to him, a guarding fortress, a defending cave! Clothe them
in shields protective against him and give them arms that will cut him
down! O Allah, include in that everyone who witnesses to You as Lord,
devotes himself sincerely to Your Unity, shows enmity toward him through
the reality of servanthood, and seeks help from You against him through
knowledge of the divine sciences!

“O Allah, undo what he ties, unstitch what he sews up, dislocate what he
devises, frustrate him when he makes up his mind, and destroy what he
establishes! O Allah, rout his troops, nullify his trickery, make his
cave collapse, and rub his nose in the ground! O Allah, place us in the
ranks of his enemies and remove us from the numbers of his friends, that
we obey him not when he entices us and answer him not when he calls to
us! We command everyone who obeys our command to be his enemy and we
admonish everyone who follows our prohibition not to follow him! O
Allah, bless Muhammad, the Seal of the Prophets and Lord of the
emissaries, and the folk of his house, the good, the pure! Give refuge
to us, our families, our brothers, and all the faithful, male and
female, from that from which we seek refuge, and grant us sanctuary from
that through fear of which we seek sanctuary in You! Hear our
supplication to You, bestow upon us that of which we have been heedless,
and safeguard for us what we have forgotten! Through all this bring us
into the ranks of the righteous and the degrees of the faithful! Amen,
Lord of the worlds![^42]”

The Imam, peace be on him, asked the Great Creator to be kind to him
through placing his father, his mother, his children, his wife, his
siblings, his relatives, and the faithful among his neighbors, male and
female, in a sanctuary impregnable to Satan, a guarding fortress, a
defending cave. He asked Allah to include in that everyone who witnesses
to Him as Lord and devotes himself sincerely to His Unity. Moreover he
asked Allah to undo what Satan ties, unstitch what he sews up, dislocate
what he devises, frustrate him when he makes up his mind, and destroy
what he establishes.

### His Supplication in Asking for Water during a Drought

During a drought, he, peace be on him, would supplicate with this
outstanding supplication.

“O Allah, water us with rain, unfold us Your mercy through Your copious
rain from the driven clouds, so that Your goodly earth may grow on all
horizons! Show kindness to Your servants through ripening of the fruit,
revive Your land through the blossoming of the flowers, and let Your
angelsthe noble scribersbe witness to a beneficial watering from You,
lasting in its abundance, plenty in its flow, heavy, quick, soon,
through which You revive what has vanished, bring forth what is coming,
and provide plentiful foods, through heaped up, wholesome, productive
clouds, in reverberating layers, the rain’s downpour not without ease,
the lightning’s flashes not without fruit! O Allah, give us water
through rain, helping, productive, fertilizing, widespread, plentiful,
abundant, bringing back the risen, restoring the broken! O Allah, give
us water with a watering through which You will make the stone hills
pour, fill the cisterns, flood the rivers, make the trees grow, bring
down prices in all the lands, invigorate the beasts and the creatures,
perfect for us the agreeable things of provision, make grow for us the
fields, let flow for us the teats, and add for us strength to our
strength!

“O Allah, make not the cloud’s shadow over us a burning wind, allow not
its coldness to be cutting, let not its pouring down upon us be a
stoning, and make not its water for us bitter! O Allah, bless Muhammad
and his Household, and provide us with the blessings of the heavens and
the earth! **You are powerful over everything!**[^43]”

I (the author) think that there are no Arab words more wonderful and
eloquent than this description in the supplication of Imam, peace be on
him. He descried the reality of clouds with the most accurate qualities.
He showed that clouds gave life to the earth, made inclusive changes in
the laws of nature, and hence they profited both man and animal. This
great Imam, like his fathers, was given inclusive words and sound
judgment.

### His Supplication when something Made him Sorrow

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this great supplication when
some thing made him sorrow and offenses made him worry. The following is
its text:

“O Allah, O Sufficer of the isolated and weak and Protector against
terrifying affairs! Offenses have isolated me, so there is no one to be
my companion. I am too weak for Your wrath and there is no one to
strengthen me. I have approached the terror of meeting You and there is
no one to still my fear. Who can make me secure from when You have
filled me with terror? Who can come to aid me when You have isolated me?
Who can strengthen me when You have weakened me? None can grant
sanctuary to a vassal, my Allah, but a lord, none can give security to
one dominated but a dominator, none can aid him from whom demands are
made but a demander. In Your hand, my Allah, is the tread of all that,
in You the place of escape and flight, so bless Muhammad and his
Household, give sanctuary to me in my flight, and grant my request!

“O Allah, if You should turn Your generous face away from me, withhold
from me Your immense bounty, forbid me Your provision, or cut off from
me Your thread, I will find no way to anything of my hope other than You
nor be given power over what is with You through another’s aid, for I am
Your servant and in Your grasp; my forelock is in Your hand! I have no
command along with Your command. Accomplished is Your judgment of me,
just Your decree for me! I have not the strength to emerge from Your
authority nor am I able to step outside Your power. I cannot win Your
inclination, arrive at Your good pleasure, or attain what is with You
except through obeying You and through the bounty of Your mercy. My
Allah, I rise in the morning and enter into evening as Your lowly slave.
I own no profit and loss for myself. except through You. I witness to
that over myself and I confess to the frailty of my strength and the
paucity of my stratagems. So accomplish what You have promised me and
complete for me what You have given me, for I am Your slave, miserable,
abased, frail, distressed, vile, despised, poor, fearful, and seeking
sanctuary!

The great Imam believed in the absolute power of Allah, the Exalted, and
thought that all things were in the grasp of Him, the Most High, for He
is the Possessor, the All-dominating, the All-overcoming, whose command
none repels. The Imam emptied himself from all his outstanding merits
and confessed obedience to Allah showing his feebleness, weakness,
misery, and inability to do anything except through the help of Him, the
Exalted. Now, let’s listen to the last parts of this supplication.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and let me not forget to
remember You in what You have done for me, be heedless of Your
beneficence in Your trying me, or despair of Your response to me, though
it keep me waiting whether I be in prosperity or adversity, hardship or
ease, well-being or affliction, misery or comfort, wealth or distress,
poverty or riches!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, make me laud You, extol You,
and praise You in all my states so that I rejoice not over what You give
me of this world nor sorrow over that of it which You withhold from me!
Impart reverential fear of You to my heart, employ my body in that which
You accept from me, and divert my soul through obedience to You from all
that enters upon me so that I love nothing that displeases You and
become displeased at nothing that pleases You! O Allah, bless Muhammad
and his Household, empty my heart for Your love, occupy it with
remembering You, animate it with fear of You and quaking before You,
strengthen it with beseeching You, incline it to Your obedience, set it
running in the path most beloved to You, and subdue it through desire
for what is with You all the days of my life! Let my provision in this
world be reverential fear of You, my mercy be toward Your mercy, and my
entrance be in Your good pleasure! Appoint for me a lodging in Your
Garden, give me strength to bear everything that pleases You, make me
flee to You and desire what is with You, clothe my heart in estrangement
from the evil among Your creature, and give me intimacy with You, Your
friends, and those who obey You! Assign to no wicked person or
unbeliever a kindness toward me or a hand that obliges me, nor to me a
need for one of them! Rather make the stillness of my heart, the comfort
of my soul, my independence and my sufficiency lie in You and the best
of Your creatures! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, make me
their comrade, make me their helper, and oblige with yearning for You
and doing for You what You love and approve! **You are powerful over
everything** and that is easy for You.[^44]”

In these parts, the Imam, peace be on him, expressed his great trust and
faith in Allah, asking Him not to let him forget to remember Him in what
He had done for him, be heedless of His beneficence in His trying him,
or despair of His response. He asked Him to make his laud and praise for
His pleasure in all states. He asked him to empty his heart for His
love, occupy it with remembering Him, animate it with fear of Him, set
it running in the path most beloved to Him, let his provision in this
perishing world be reverential fear of Him, and make Paradise his abode
and final station.

The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Most Exalted, to clothe his
heart in estrangement from the evil among His creature, and give him
intimacy with Him, His friends, and those who obeyed Him, and to assign
to no wicked person or unbeliever a kindness toward him or a hand that
obliged him, nor to him a need for one of them! The Imam entrusted all
his affairs to Allah, the Most High, for He freed him from need to all
His creatures.

### His Supplication in Hardship

The Imam, peace be on him, would supplicate with this holy supplication
in hardship, effort, and difficult affairs.

“O Allah, You have charged me concerning myself with that which belongs
more to You than to me. Your power over it and over me is greater than
my power, so give me in myself what will make You pleased with me and
take for Yourself Your good pleasure in my self’s well-being! O Allah, I
have endurance for effort, no patience in affliction, no strength to
bear poverty. So forbid me not my provision and entrust me not to Your
creatures, but take care of my need alone and Yourself attend to
sufficing me! Look upon me and look after me in all my affairs, for if
You entrust me to Your creatures, they will frown upon me, and if You
make me resort to my kinsfolk, they will refuse to give me; if they give
me, they will give me little and in bad temper, making me feel long
obliged and blaming me much. So through Your bounty, O Allah, free me
from need, through Your mightiness, lift me up through Your boundless
plenty, open my hand, and with that which is with You, suffice me!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, rid me of enemy, encircle me
against sins, make me abstain from things unlawful, give me not the
boldness of disobedient acts, assign me love for that which is with You
and satisfaction with that which comes to me from You, bless me in that
which You provide me, that which You confer upon me, and that through
which You favor me, and make me in all my states safeguarded, watched,
covered, defended, given refuge, and granted sanctuary!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and let me accomplish
everything which You have enjoined upon me or made obligatory for me
toward You, in one of the ways of Your obedience, or toward one of Your
creatures, though my body be too frail for that, my strength too feeble,
my power not able to reach it, and my possessions and what my hand owns
not encompass it, and whether I have remembered it or forgotten it. It,
my Lord, is among that which You have counted against me while I have
been heedless of it in myself. Let me perform it through Your plentiful
giving and the abundance which is with Youfor You are Boundless,
Generousso that nothing of it may remain against me, lest You would
wish to settle accounts for it from my good deeds or to compound my evil
deeds on the day I meet You, my Lord!”

Consider carefully these paragraphs of this supplication and you will
find deep faith in Allah, perfect sincerity to Him, and absolute freedom
from all material inclinations. The Imam asked Allah, the Exalted, to
include him in His care and favors and to be kind to him through:

1. Not trying him with that toward which he had neither force nor
strength.

2. Not afflicting him with poverty and neediness, for they were the
hardest of all the disasters in this world’s life.

3. Not entrusting him to His creatures, whether near or far, for they
disdained him who was in need of them.

4. Ridding him from envy, which was one of the most evil inclinations.

5. Preventing him from committing sins and acts of disobedience.

6. Making him cling to piety and Allah-fearingness.

7. Making him desire for that which was with Him.

8. Making blessed his property and children

9. Safeguarding him in all his states and affairs, covering him over,
and protecting him from the evil.

10. Granting him success for performing his past duties and obligations.
These are some of the Imam’s requests. Now, let’s listen to the rest of
this supplication.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and provide me with desire
to serve You for the sake of my state in the hereafter, such that I know
the truthfulness of that (desire) in my heart, be dominated by
renunciation while in this world, do good deeds with yearning, and
remain secure from evil in fright and fear! And give **a light whereby I
may walk among the people!**, be guided in the shadows, and seek
illumination in doubt and uncertainty! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his
Household, and provide me with fear of the threatened gloom and yearning
for the promised reward, such that I may find the pleasure of that for
which I supplicate You and the sorrow of that from which I seek
sanctuary in You!

“O Allah, You know what will set my affairs right in this world and the
next, so be ever gracious toward my deeds! O Allah, bless Muhammad and
Muhammad’s Household and provide me with what is Your right when I fall
short in thanking You for that through which You have favored me in ease
and difficulty, health and sickness, such that I may come to know in
myself repose in satisfaction and serenity of soul in that which You
have made incumbent upon me in whatever states may occur: fear and
security, satisfaction and displeasure, loss and gain!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and provide me with a breast
safe from envy, such that I envy none of Your creatures in anything of
Your bounty and such that I see none of Your favors toward any of Your
creatures in religion or this world, well-being or reverential fear,
plenty or ease, without hoping for myself better than it through and
from You alone, who has no associate! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his
Household, and provide me in this world and the next with caution
against offenses and wariness against slips in the state of satisfaction
and wrath, such that I may remain indifferent toward that which enters
upon me from the two states, work toward Your obedience, and prefer it
and Your good pleasure over all else in both friends and enemies. Then
my enemy may stay secure from my wrongdoing and injustice and my friend
may despair of my inclination and the bent of my affection. Make me one
of those who supplicate You with sincerity in ease with the supplication
of those who supplicate You with sincerity in distress! Verily You are
Praiseworthy, Glorious.[^45]”

These paragraphs contain some of the Imam’s psychological desires when
he asked Allah:

1. To serve Him for the sake of his state in the hereafter.

2. To make him renounce this world.

3. To help him in doing good deeds.

4. To giving him a light whereby he might walk among the people, be
guided in the shadows, and seek illumination in doubt and uncertainty.

5. To make him fear the terrors on the Day of Resurrection and yearn for
the abundant repayment He (Allah) had prepared for His pious, righteous
servants.

6. To save him from envy, which was among the most dangerous
psychological blights.

7. To provide him with guarding against sins and slips. These are some
contents of this part of the supplication.

### His Supplication when he asked Allah for Well-Being

The Imam, peace be on him, would supplicate with this holy supplication
when he asked Allah for well-being and thanked Him for it:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and clothe me in Your
well-being, wrap me in Your well-being, fortify me through Your
well-being, honor me with Your well-being, free me from need through
Your well-being, donate to me Your well-being, bestow upon me Your
well-being, spread out for me Your well-being in this world and the
next! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, and make me well with a
well-being sufficient, healing, sublime, growing, a well-being that will
give birth to well-being in my body, a well-being in this world and the
next! Oblige me through health, security and safety in my religion and
body, insight in my heart, penetration in my affairs, dread of You, fear
of You, strength for the obedience which You have commanded for me, and
avoidance of the disobedience which You have prohibited for me!

“O Allah, oblige me through the **hajj**, the **‘umra**, and visiting
the grave of Your Messenger (Your blessings, mercy, and benedictions
upon him and upon his Household, upon them be peace) for as long as You
caused me to live, in this year of mine and in every year, and make that
accepted, thanked, and mentioned before You and stored away with You!
Make my tongue utter Your praise, Your thanksgiving, Your remembrance,
and Your excellent laudation, and expand my heart toward the right goals
of Your religion! Give and my progeny refuge from the accursed Satan,
the evil of venomous vermin, threatening pests, swarming crowds, and
evil eyes, the evil of **every rebel satan**, the evil of every
refractory sovereign, the evil of every living in ease and served, the
evil of every weak or strong, the evil of every born high or low, the
evil of every small or great, the evil of every near or far, the evil of
every, jinn or man, who declares war on Your Messenger and his
Household, the evil of every **crawling creature** that You have **taken
by the forelock**! **Surely** You are **on a straight path**.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and if some one desires ill
for me turn him away from me, drive away from me his deception, avert
from me his evil, send his trickery back to his own throat, and place
before him a barricade, so that You may bind his eyes toward me, deafen
his ears toward my mention, lock his heart toward recalling me, silence
his tongue against me, restrain his head, abase his exaltation, break
his arrogance, abase his neck, disjoint his pride, and make me secure
from all his injury, his evil, his slander, his backbiting, his
faultfinding, his envy, his enmity, his snares, his traps, his foot
soldiers, and his cavalry! Surely You are Mighty, Powerful![^46]”

The most valuable thing in this world’s life is well-being and soundness
from maladies, hence the Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Most
High, to give him to enjoy this favor to be strong enough to serve Him,
to perform His obligations, and to refrain from prohibited things and
acts of disobedience. He asked Him to oblige him through the **hajj**,
the **‘umra**, and visiting the grave of the Greatest Messenger (may
Allah bless him and his Household) and the graves of his grandsons, the
pure Imams, who were the ships of deliverance and security for mankind.
He sought protection in Him from the evil of men and **jinn.**

### His Supplication when his Provision was Stinted

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication when his
provision was stinted and the means of his daily bread was difficult.

“O Allah, You have tried us with distrust in our provisions and the
expectation of long lives, until we begged for provisions from those who
are provided and craved in our expectations the life-spans of the
long-lived! So bless Muhammad and his Household, give us a true
certainty that will suffice us the burden of seeking, and inspire us
with a sincere trust that will release us from the hardship of exertion!
Let Your clear promise in Your Revelation which You have followed in
Your Book with Your oath cut off our worry about the provisions for
which You have made Yourself responsible and sever our occupation with
everything whose sufficiency You have guaranteed! For You have saidand
Your word is the most truthful truthand You have swornand Your oath is
the most kept and fulfilled**In the heaven are your provision and
everything you are promised!** And then You have said: **So by the Lord
of heaven and earth, it is as surely true as that you have
promised!**[^47]”

In this supplication the Imam talked about two psychological aspects.
They are:

1. When man faces stinted provision and narrow paths, he accuses Allah
of this and attributes it to Him.

2. Man has been afflicted by long expectation and subsistence in this
world, hence he foolishly considers the life-spans of the long-lived and
thinks that he will live as they did. This opinion has bad results of
which is that man neglects the affairs of his life in the next world and
devotes himself to this world’s life, hence the Imam, peace be on him,
asked Allah, the Exalted, to give him a true certainty that would
suffice him the burden of seeking, and inspire him with a sincere trust
that would release him from the hardship of exertion.

### His Supplication for Help in Repaying Debts

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication for help in
repaying debts.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household and release me from a debt
which make me lose face, confuses my mind, disrupts my thinking, and
prolongs my occupation with attending to it! I seek refuge in You, my
Lord, from worry and thought about debt, from the distraction and
sleeplessness of debt; so bless Muhammad and his Household and give me
refuge from it! I seek sanctuary in You, my Lord, from debt’s abasement
in life and its ill effects after death, so bless Muhammad and his
Household and give sanctuary from it through a bountiful plenty or a
continually arriving sufficiency!

O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, prevent me from extravagance
and excess, put me on the course of generous spending and moderation,
teach me excellent distribution, hold me back through Your gentleness
from squandering, allow me to attain my provisions through lawful means,
direct my spending toward the gateways of devotion, and take away from
me any possession which will bring forth pride in me, lead to insolence,
or drag me in its heels to rebellion! O Allah, make me love the
companionship of the poor and help me be their companion with excellent
patience! Whenever You take away from me the goods of this perishing
world, store them for me in Your abiding treasuries! Make this world’s
broken pieces which You have conferred upon me and its goods which You
have quickly granted to me a way to reach Your neighborhood, a link to
Your nearness, and a means to Your Garden! Verily You are Possessor of
bounty abounding, and You are the Munificent, the Generous.[^48]”

This holy supplication includes the following points:

1. The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah and pleaded to Him to release
him from debt, which results in harm and pain of which are the
following:

A. It makes one lose face, especially when he is unable to repay it.

B. It confuses mind and disrupts thinking, for the indebted always think
about how to repay it and get rid of it.

C. It forces the indebted to practice many works to repay it and get rid
of it.

D. It abases the indebted in life, for they show lowliness before the
creditors.

E. It continues after the death of the indebted until it is repaid,
hence the Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Most High, to give him
sanctuary from it through a bountiful plenty or a continually arriving
sufficiency, that he might get rid of the pain and harm of debt.

2. The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah, the Exalted, to prevent him
from extravagance and excess which ruined and wasted possessions.

3. He, peace be on him, asked Allah to teach him to distribute his
possessions in an excellent manner.

4. He asked Allah, the Most High, to provide him with legal provision.

5. He asked Allah, the Most High, to make his spending toward the
gateways of devotion and what pleased Him, the Exalted.

6. He asked Allah, the Exalted, not to try him with riches which would
bring forth pride in him, lead to insolence, or drag him in its heels to
rebellion.

7. The Imam asked Allah to make him love the companionship of the poor
and help him be their companion with excellent patience. These are some
contents of this great supplication.

### His Supplication in Mentioning and Asking for Repentance

The following is among his supplications in mentioning and asking for
repentance:

“O Allah, O He whom the depiction of the describers fails to describe! O
He beyond whom passes not the hope of the hopers! O He with whom is not
lost the wage of the good-doers! O He who is the ultimate object of the
fear of the worshippers! O He who is the utmost limit of the dread of
the Allahfearing! This is the station of him whom sins have passed from
hand to hand. Offenses’ reins led him on, and Satan has gained mastery
over him. He fell short of what You have commanded through neglect and
he pursued what You have prohibited in delusion, like on ignorant of
Your power over him or one who denies the bounty of Your beneficence
toward him, until, when the eye of guidance was opened for him and the
clouds of blindness were dispelled, he reckoned that through which he
had wronged himself and reflected upon that in which he had opposed his
Lord. He saw his vast disobedience as vast and his great opposition as
great. So he turned to You, hoping in You and ashamed before You, and he
directed his beseeching toward You, having trust in You. He repaired to
You in his longing with certitude and he went straight to You in fear
with sincerity. His longing was devoid of every object of longing but
You, and his fright departed from every object of fear but You. So he
stood before You pleading, his eyes turned toward the ground in
humbleness, his head bowed before Your might in lowliness; he revealed
to You in meekness those secrets of his which You counted better than
he; he sought help from You before the dreadful into which he has fallen
in Your knowledge and the ugly which has disgraced him in Your judgment:
the sins whose pleasures have turned their backs and gone and whose evil
consequences have stayed and stuck fast. He will not deny Your justice,
my Allah, if You punish him, nor will he consider Your pardon great if
You pardon him and have mercy upon him, for You are the Generous Lord
for whom the forgiveness of great sins is nothing great!”

As for this part, it contains confessing the Unity of Allah and praising
Him as One whom the depiction of the describers fails to describe. How
can the possible being limited in existence, senses, knowledge,
ability, and activitiesencompass the Necessary Being, whose knowledge
and power has no bound?

The Imam, peace be on him, shed light upon the sinners from among
Allah’s servants. He humbly regarded himself as one of them. He
indicated that pleasures plunged them into disobeying the Commands of
Allah, the Exalted, that when they came to their consciousness, bitter
thoughts would attack them, and felt remorse, and that they would flee
to Him asking Him for pardon, forgiveness, and good pleasure. Now, let’s
listen to another part of this great supplication.

“O Allah, so here I am: I have come to You obeying Your command (for You
have commanded supplication and asking the fulfillment of Your promise,
for You have promised to respond): You have said: **Supplicate Me and I
will respond to you.** O Allah, so bless Muhammad and his Household,
meet me with Your forgiveness just as I have met You with confession,
lift me up from the fatal infirmities of sins just as I have let myself
down before You, and cover me with Your covering just as You have shown
no haste to take vengeance on me! O Allah, make firm my intention to
obey You, strengthen my insight in worshipping You, give me the success
of works which will wash away the defilement of offenses, and take me
when Your prophet Muhammad (upon him be peace).

“O Allah, I repent to You in this my station from my sins, great and
small, my evil deeds, inward and outward, my lapses, past and recent,
with the repentance of one who does not tell himself that he might
disobey or secretly think that he might return to an offense. You have
said, my Lord, in the firm text of Your Book, that You accept repentance
from Your servants, pardon evil deeds, and love the repenters, so accept
my repentance as You have promised, pardon my evil deeds as You have
guaranteed, and make obligatory toward me Your love as You have
stipulated! To You, my Lord, belongs my stipulation that I will not
return to that is disliked by You, my guarantee that I will not go back
to what You blame, and my covenant that I will stay away from acts of
disobedience to You.

“O Allah, You know better what I have done, so forgive me what You know
and turn me through Your power to what You love. O Allah, counted
against me are claims that stay in my memory and claims I have
forgotten, while all of them remain in Your eye that does not sleep and
Your knowledge that does not forget! So compensate their owners, lighten
their load upon me, lift up their weight from me, and preserve me from
approaching their like!

“O Allah, but I cannot be faithful to my repentance without Your
preservation, nor can I refrain from offenses without Your strength. So
strengthen me with a sufficient strength and attained to me with a
defending preservation! O Allah, if any servant repents to You while in
Your knowledge of the unseen he will break his repentance and return to
his sin and offense, I seek refuge in You lest I be like that! So make
this my repentance a repentance after which I will need no repentance
and a repentance which will obligate the erasing of what has gone by and
safety in what remains!”

In this part the Imam stood humble, lowly, and broken-hearted before the
Great Creator, hoping that He would response to him, give him
forgiveness and good pleasure, lift him up from the fatal infirmities of
sins, and cover him over with His beautiful covering, for he had
repented to Him sincerely, returned to Him, been sincere in obeying Him,
decided not to return to any detested and dispraised thing, and to
follow the path that would lead him to His good pleasure. The Imam
insisted on asking Allah to accept his repentance, to safeguard him from
all sins, and to erase all his sins. Now, let’s listen to the rest of
this great supplication.

“O Allah, I seek pardon from You for my ignorance, and I ask You to
disregard my evil acts! So join me to the shelter of Your mercy through
graciousness and cover me with the covering of Your well-being through
bounteousness! O Allah, I repent to You from everything opposed to Your
will or far from Your lovethe thoughts of my hearts, the glances of my
eye, the tales of my tonguewith a repentance through which each bodily
part will by itself stay safe from ill consequences with You and remain
secure from Your painful penalties feared by transgressors! O Allah, so
have mercy on my being alone before You, the pounding of my heart in
dread of You, the trembling of my limbs in awe of You! My sins, my
Allah, have stood me in the station of degradation in Your courtyard. If
I remain silent, none will speak for me; if I seek an intercessor, I am
not worthy for intercession.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, make Your generosity
intercede for my offenses, follow up my evil deeds with Your pardon,
repay me not with the punishment that is my proper repayment, spread
over me Your graciousness, wrap me in Your covering, and do with me what
is done by a mighty man, when a lowly slave pleads to him and he shows
him mercy, or a rich man when a poor slave submits himself and he raises
him to wealth! O Allah, I have no protector against You, so let Your
might be my protector! I have no intercessor with You, so let Your
bounty be my intercessor! My offenses have set me quaking, so let Your
pardon give me security! Not all that I have said rises up from my
ignorance of my evil footsteps or forgetfulness of my blameworthy acts
in the past, but in order that Your heaven and those within it and Your
earth and those upon it may hear the remorse which I have professed to
You and the repentance through which I have sought asylum with You. Then
perhaps one of them, through Your mercy, may show mercy upon my evil
situation or be seized by tenderness for my evil state. There may come
from him for my sake a supplication to which You give ear more than to
my supplication or an intercession surer with You than my intercession
through which I may be delivered from Your wrath and attain to Your good
pleasure!

“O Allah, if remorse is a repentance toward You, them I am the most
remorseful of the remorseful! If refraining from disobedience is a
turning back to You, then I am the first of those who turn back! If
praying for forgiveness alleviates sins, surely I am one of those who
pray for Your forgiveness! O Allah, as You have commanded repentance and
guaranteed acceptance, as You have urged supplication and promised to
respond, so bless Muhammad and his Household, accept my repentance, and
return me not to the returning place of disappointment in Your mercy!
**Surely You are Ever-turning** toward the sinners,
**All-compassionate** toward the offenders who turn back!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household just as You have guided us by
him! Bless Muhammad and his Household just as You have rescued through
him! Bless Muhammad and his Household, with a blessing that will
intercede for us on the Day of Resurrection, the day of neediness toward
You! **You are powerful over everything**, and that is easy for
You![^49]”

Have you seen this pleading and devotion to Allah? The Imam melted out
of fear of Allah, while he was the Lord of the Allah-fearing, Imam of
those who turned to Allah in repentance, and Leader of the monotheists.

It is certain that the Imam, peace be on him, did not commit any sin
throughout his lifetime. His life shone with the light of piety and
faith, but he wanted to teach the community brilliant lessons about the
true Islamic principles, which summoned the people to Allah through
opening a door to repentance. Hence one who has irregular conduct and
has turned away from the straight path should not despair of Allah’s
mercy, for the door to repentance is open when he repents to Allah,
turns to him in repentance, and uproots from his own soul the
inclination to sin and disobedience.

### His Supplication in Asking for the Best

The following is his supplication in asking for the best:

“O Allah, I ask You the best in Your knowledge, so bless Muhammad and
his Household and decree for me the best! Inspire us with knowledge to
choose the best and make that a means to being pleased with what You
have decreed for us and submitting to what You have decided! Banish from
us the doubt of misgiving and confirm us with the certainty of the
sincere! Visit us not with incapacity to know what You have chosen, lest
we despise Your measuring out, dislike the place of Your good pleasure,
and incline toward that which is further from good outcome and nearer to
the opposite of well-being! Make us love what we dislike in Your decree
and make easy for us what we find difficult in Your decision! Inspire us
to yield to that which You bring upon us by Your will, lest we love the
delay of what You have hastened and the hastening of what You have
delayed, dislike what You love, and choose what You dislike! Seal us
with that which is most praised in outcome and most generous in issue!
Surely You give generous gain, bestow the immense, do what You will, and
**You are powerful over everything**.[^50]”

This supplication indicates that the Imam, peace be on him, entrusted
all his affairs to Allah. He asked Him for the best in all his important
matters and asked Him for guidance. If Allah decreed for him the best,
he would do them; otherwise he would leave them.

### His Supplication when he was Afflicted

The following is his supplication when he was afflicted or saw someone
afflicted with the disgrace of sin:

“O Allah, to You belong praise for Your covering after Your knowledge
and Your pardon after Your awareness! Each of us has committed faults,
but You have not made him notorious, done indecencies, but You have not
disgraced him, and covered over evil deeds, but You have not pointed to
him. How many are Your prohibited acts which we have performed, Your
commandments of which You have told us which we have transgressed, the
evil deeds which we have earned, the offenses which we have committed!
You see them to the exclusion of all observers; You have the power to
make them public above all the powerful! By giving us safety You have
veiled their eyes and stopped their ears. So make the shameful things
You have covered over and the inward reality You have concealed our
admonisher, a restrainer upon bad character traits and committing
offenses, and a striving toward the repentance that erases (sins) and
the praiseworthy path! Bring the time of striving near! and visit us not
with heedlessness of You! Surely we are the beseechers, the repenters of
sins. And bless, Your chosen, O Allah, from Your creation, Muhammad and
his descendants, the friends selected from among Your creatures, the
pure, and make us listeners to them and obeyers, as You have
commanded![^51]”

In this supplication the Imam, peace be on him, spoke about Allah’s
favors toward the sinners from among His servants, for He did not expose
them when they committed sins nor did He make them known among the
people, lest their social position should decline; rather He covered
them with His great covering, that they might return to the path of the
truth and refrain from disobedience.

### His Supplication in Satisfaction when he Looked upon the Companions of this world

The following is among his supplications in satisfaction when he looked
upon the companions of the world:

“Praise belongs to Allah in satisfaction with Allah’s decision! I bear
witness that Allah has apportioned the livelihoods of His creatures with
justice and undertaken bounty for all His creatures. O Allah, bless
Muhammad and his Household, tempt me not with what You have given to
Your creatures and tempt them not with what You have withheld from me,
lest I envy Your creatures and despise Your decision! O Allah, bless
Muhammad and his Household, delight my soul through Your decree, expand
my breast through the instances of Your decision, give me a trust
through which I may admit that Your decree runs only to the best, and
let my gratitude to You for what You have taken away from me be more
abundant than my gratitude to You for what You have conferred upon me!
Preserve me from any imagining any meanness in someone who is destitute
or imagining any superiority in someone who possesses wealth, for the
noble is he whom obedience to You has ennobled and the exalted is he
whom worship of You has exalted! So bless Muhammad and his Household,
give us to enjoy a wealth which does not run out, confirm us with an
exaltation which will never be lost, and let us roam freely in the
kingdom of everlastingness! Surely You are the One, **the Unique, the
Eternal Refuge;** You have **not begotten**, **and equal** to You **is
not any one!**[^52]”

We will briefly talk about some wonderful contents of this great
supplication.

1. The Imam, peace be on him, mentioned that Allah, the Exalted,
apportioned the livelihoods of His creatures with justice and made them
surpass each other in livelihood in accordance with His wisdom, for If
they were equal in livelihood, they all would perish, as it is in the
tradition.

2. The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah not to tempt him with what He
had given to His creatures and tempt them not with what He had withheld
from him, lest he (the Imam) should envy His creatures.

3. The Imam, peace be on him, asked Allah to preserve him from imagining
any meanness in someone who was destitute or imagining any superiority
in someone who possessed wealth, for the noble was he whom obedience to
Allah had ennobled.

### His Supplication when he Looked upon Clouds

The following is one of his supplications when he looked upon clouds and
lightening and heard the sound of thunder:

“O Allah, these are two of Your signs and these are two of Your helpers.
They rush to obey You with beneficial mercy or injurious vengeance, so
rain not down upon us from them the evil rain and clothe us not through
them in the garment of affliction! O Allah, bless Muhammad and his
Household, send down upon us the benefit of these clouds and their
blessing, turn away from us their harm and their injury, strike us not
through them with blight, and loose not upon us our livelihood any bane!

“O Allah, if You have incited them as vengeance and loosed them in
anger, we seek sanctuary with You from Your wrath and implore You in
asking Your pardon! So incline with wrath toward the idolaters and set
millstone of Your vengeance turning upon the heretics! O Allah, take
away the barrenness of our lands with Your watering, dislodge the malice
from our breasts with Your providing, distract us not from You through
other than You, and cut none of us off from the stuff of Your goodness,
for the rich is he to whom You have given riches, and the safe he whom
You have protected! No one has any defense against You, nor any means to
bar Your penalty. You decide what You will for whom You will and You
decree what You desire for any whom You desire! So to You belong praise
for protecting us from affliction and to You belongs thanks for
conferring upon us blessings, a praise which will leave behind the
praise of the praisers, a praise which will fill the earth and the
heaven! Surely You are the All-kind through immense kindnesses, the
Giver of abounding favors, the Acceptor of small praise, the Grateful
for little gratitude, the Beneficent, the Benevolent, Possessor of
graciousness! There is no god but You; **unto You is the
homecoming**.[^53]”

In this supplication the Imam, peace be on him, talked about clouds and
lightning, which were two of Allah’s signs and two of His helpers. Allah
sends them to His creatures as a blessing through which He gives life to
the land after it has died or as a vengeance through which He demolishes
their houses and destroys their plants as well as He sends down upon
them thunderbolts, hence the Imam pled to Allah to send down the evil
rain upon His enemies from the idolaters, the unbelievers, and those who
deviated from the Truth, and to single out the believers and the Muslims
for the good rain.

### His Supplication when Confessing his Shortcomings

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with the following supplication
when he confessed his shortcomings in giving thanks to Allah, the
Exalted:

“O Allah, no one reaches a limit in thanking You without acquiring that
of Your beneficence which enjoins upon him thanksgiving, nor does anyone
reach a decree in obeying You even if he strives, without falling short
of what You deserve because of Your bounty. The most thankful of Your
servants has not the capacity to thank You, and the most worshipful of
them falls short of obeying You. To none of them is due Your forgiveness
through what he himself deserves or Your good pleasure for his own
merit. When You forgive someone, it is through Your graciousness, and
when You pleased with someone, it is through Your bounty. You show
gratitude for the paltry for which You show gratitude and You reward the
small act in which You are obeyed, so that it seems as if Your servant’s
thanksgiving for which You have made incumbent their reward and made
great their repayment is an affair from which they could have held back
without You, and hence You will recompense them, and whose cause is not
in Your hand, and hence You will repay them. Nay, my Allah, You had
power over their affair before they had power to worship You, and You
had prepared their reward before they began to obey You; and that
because Your wont is bestowal of bounty, Your custom beneficence, Your
way pardon. So all creatures confess that You wrong not him whom You
punish and bear witness that You bestow bounty upon him whom You pardon.
Each admit that he has fallen short of what You merit. Had Satan not
misled them from Your obedience, no disobeyer would have disobeyed You,
and had he not shown falsehood to them in the likeness of truth, no
strayer would have gone astray from Your path.

“So glory be to You! How manifest is Your generosity in dealing with him
who obeys or disobeys You! You show gratitude to the obedient for that
which You undertake for him, and You grant a respite to the disobedient
in that within which You are able to hurry him. You give to each of them
that which is not his due, and You bestow bounty upon each in that
wherein his works fall short. Were You to counterbalance for the
obedient servant that which You Yourself had undertaken, he would be on
the point of losing Your reward and seeing the end of Your favor, but
through Your generosity You have repaid him for a short, perishing term,
and for a near, vanishing limit with an extended, abiding limit. Then
You do not visit him with a settling of accounts for Your provision
through which he gained strength to obey You, nor do You force him to
make reckonings for the organs he employed to find the means to Your
forgiveness. Were You to do that to him, it would take him away
everything for which he had labored and all wherein he had exerted
himself as repayment for the smallest of Your benefits and kindness, and
he would remain hostage before You for Your other favors. So how can he
deserve something of Your reward? Indeed, how?

“This, my Allah, is the state of him who obeys You and the path of him
who worships You. But as for him who disobeys Your command and goes
against Your prohibition, You do not hurry him to Your vengeance, so
that he may seek to replace his state in disobeying You with the state
of turning back to obey You, though he deserved from the time he set out
to disobey You every punishment which You have prepared for all Your
creatures. Through each chastisement which You have kept back from him
and each penalty of Your vengeance and Your punishment which You have
delayed from him, You have refrained from Your right and show good
pleasure in place of what You have made obligatory. So who is more
generous, my Allah, than You? And who is more wretched than he who
perishes in spite of You? Indeed, who? You too blessed to be described
by any but beneficence and too generous for any but justice to be feared
from You! There is no dread that You will be unjust toward him who
disobeys You, nor any fear of Your neglecting to reward him who
satisfies You. So bless Muhammad and his Household, give me my hope, and
increase me in that of Your guidance through which I may be successful
in my works! Surely You are All-kind, Generous.[^54]”

It is necessary for us to shed light on the contents of this
supplication, which are as follows:

1. The favors of Allah, the Exalted, toward His servants cannot be
counted, so one cannot thank Him for them, whatever he thanks Him, for
the organs through which he thanks Him have been created by Him, and
they deserve giving thanks.

2. Though man worships and obeys Allah, he falls short of worshipping
and obeying Him because of His (Allah’s) boundless favors to His
creatures.

3. Allah bestows bounty upon the believers from among His servants
through forgiving them and repays them Paradise for their works. This
does not mean that they have rights against Him; rather it is He, the
Exalted, who bestows favors upon them. This has objectively been
established in theology.

4. It is Satan who turns men away from obeying Allah and incites them to
disobeying Him. Had he not misled them from obeying Allah, no disobeyer
would have disobeyed Him, and had he not shown falsehood to them in the
likeness of truth, no strayer would have gone astray from His path.

5. Allah shows gratitude to His obedient servants and grants a respite
to the disobedient from among them. He does not hasten punishing them.
Had he hastened punishing them, He would not have left any of them on
the earth.

6. Allah, the Exalted, will repay His righteous servants in the Abode of
Subsistence; He will cause them to enter Paradise. These are some
contents of this great supplication.

### His Supplication when Someone’s Death was announced to him

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with this supplication when
someone’s death was announced to him or when he remembered death.

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, spare us drawn out
expectations and cut them short in us through sincerity of works, that
we may not hope expectantly for completing an hour after an hour,
closing a day after a day, joining a breath to a breath, or overtaking a
step with a step! Keep us safe from the delusions of expectations, make
us secure from their evils, set up death before us in display and let
not our remembering of it come and go! Appoint for us from among the
righteous works a work through which we will feel the homecoming to You
as slow and crave a quick joining with You, so that death may be our
intimate abode with which we are intimate, our familiar place toward
which we yearn, and our next of kin whose coming we love! When You bring
it to us and send it down upon us, make us happy with it as a visitor,
comfort us with its arrival, make us not wretched through entertaining
it, degrade us not through its visit, and appoint it one of the gates to
Your forgiveness and the key to Your mercy! Make us die guided, not
astray, obedient, not averse, repentant, not disobedient or persisting,
O He who guarantees the repayment of the good-doers and seeks to set
right the work of the corrupt![^55]”

Long expectations withhold man from doing good deeds and make him forget
the next world, hence the Imam, peace be on him, sought refuge in Allah
from them. He pleaded to Allah to set up death before him in display and
let not his remembering of it come and go, that he might work for the
Abode of Subsistence and be intimate with death when it came to him.

### His Supplication in Asking for Covering

The following is his supplication in asking for covering and protection:

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, spread for me the bed of
Your honor, bring me to the watering holes of Your mercy, set me down in
the midst of Your Garden, stamp me not with rejection by You, deprive me
not through disappointment by You, settle not accounts with me for what
I have committed, make no reckoning with me for what I have earned,
display not what I have hidden, expose not what I have covered over,
weigh not my works on the scales of fairness, and make not my tidings
known to the eyes of the crowd! Conceal from them everything whose
unfolding would shame me and roll up before them all which would join me
to disgrace with You! Ennoble my degree through Your good pleasure,
perfect my honor through Your forgiveness, rank me among the companions
of the right hand, direct me to the roads of the secure, place me in the
throng of the triumphant, and through me let the sessions of the
righteous thrive! Amen, lord of the world![^56]”

In this supplication the Imam pleaded to Allah and humbly asked Him to
spread for him the bed of His honor, to bring him to the watering holes
of His mercy, and to set him down in the midst of His Garden, not to
stamp him with rejection and deprive him through disappointment. Besides
he asked Him to cover him over in the hereafter, to ennoble his degree
through His good pleasure, and to perfect his honor through His
forgiveness.

Depiction falls short of encompassing this great Imam’s real fear of
Allah, and words are not able to embrace his piety, his perfection, and
his intense turning to Allah in repentance.

### His Supplication when he Looked at the New Crescent Moon

The following is his supplication when he looked at the new crescent
moon:

“O obedient creature, speedy and untiring, frequenter of the mansions of
determination, moving about in the sphere of governance! I have faith in
Him who lights up darkness through you, illuminates jet-black shadows by
You, appointed You one of the signs of His kingdom and one of the marks
of His authority, and humbled You through increase and decrease, rising
and setting, illumination and eclipse. In all of this You are obedient
to Him, prompt toward His will. Glory be to Him! How wonderful is what
He has arranged in your situation! How subtle what He has made for your
task! He has made You the key to a new month for a new situation. So I
ask Allah, my Lord and your Lord, my Creator and your Creator, my
Determiner and your Determiner, my Form-giver and your Form-giver, that
He bless Muhammad and his Household and appoint you a crescent of
blessings not effaced by days and of purity not defiled by sins; a
crescent of security from blights and of safety from evil deeds; a
crescent of auspiciousness containing no misfortune, of prosperity
accompanied by no adversity, of ease not mixed with difficulty, of good
unstained by evil; a crescent of security and faith, favor and
good-doing, safety and submission!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Household, place us among the most
satisfied of those over whom the crescent has risen, the purest of those
who have looked upon it, the most fortunate of those who have worshipped
You under it; give us the success during (the new month) to repent,
preserve us within it from misdeeds, guard us therein from pursuing
disobedience to You, allot to us within it thanksgiving for Your favor,
clothe us during it in the shields of well-being, and complete for us
Your kindness by perfecting therein obedience to You! Surely You are
All-kind, Praiseworthy. And bless Muhammad and his Household, the good,
the pure.[^57]”

In this supplication the Imam, peace be on him, talked about one of
Allah’s signs; it is the moon the beautiful, wonderful bodywith which
Allah has adorned the heaven of this world, for which He has created the
mansions of determination, that it may move within them regularly and
accurately. Hence its rising, its setting, its illumination and its
eclipse are proofs for the existence of the Almighty Creator and His
great determination. The Imam asked Allah to appoint it a crescent of
blessings, security from blights, safety from evil deeds, and
auspiciousness containing no misfortune, etc.

### His Supplication in Repelling the Trickery of Enemies

An example of his supplications in repelling the trickery of enemies and
diving away their severity is this great supplication, which is also
called al-Jawshan al-Saghir. It is worth mentioning that this
supplication is other than al-Jawshan al-Saghir narrated on the
authority of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his Household. The
supplication is as follows:

“O Allah, You guided me but I diverted myself, You admonished me but my
heart became hardened, You tried me graciously but I disobeyed. Then,
when You caused me to know it, I came to know that from which You had
turned (me) away, so I prayed forgiveness and You released, and I
returned and You covered over. So Yours, my Allah, is the praise! I
plunged into the valleys of destruction and settled in the ravines of
ruin, exposing myself to Your chastisements and the descent of Your
punishments! My mediation with You is the profession of Unity, my way of
coming to You that I associate nothing with You, nor do I take along
with You a god; I have fled to You with my soulin You is the place of
flight for the evildoer, the place of escape for him who has squandered
the share of his soul and seeks asylum. How many an enemy has unsheathed
the sword of his enmity toward me, honed the cutting edge of his knife
for me, sharpened the tip of his blade for me, mixed his killing potions
for me, pointed toward me his straight-flying arrows, not allowed the
eye of his watchfulness to sleep toward me, and secretly thought of
visiting me with something hateful and making me gulp down the bitter
water of his bile! So You looked, my Allah, at my weakness in bearing
oppressive burdens, my inability to gain victory over him who aims to
war against me, and my being alone before the great numbers of him who
is hostile toward me and lies in wait for me with affliction about which
I have not thought. You set out at once to help me and You braced up my
back!

You blunted for me his blade, made him, after a great multitude,
solitary, raised up my heel over him, and turned back upon him what he
had pointed straight. So You sent him back, his rage not calm, his
burning thirst not quenched! Biting his fingers, he turned his back in
flight, his columns have been of no use. How many an oppressor has
oppressed me with his tricks, set up for me the net of his snares,
appointed over me the inspection of his regard, and lay in ambush for
me, the lying in ambush of a predator for its game, waiting to take
advantage of its prey, while he showed me the smile of the flatterer and
looked at me with intensity of fury! So when You saw, my Allah (blessed
are You and high exalted) the depravity of his secret thoughts and the
ugliness of what he harbored, You threw him on his head into his own
pitfall and dumped him into the hole of his own digging. So he was
brought down low, after his overbearing, by the nooses of his own snare,
wherein he had thought he would see me; and what came down upon his
courtyardhad it not been for Your mercywas on the point of coming down
upon me!

How many an envier has choked upon me in his agony, fumed over me in his
rage, cut me with the edge of his tongue, showed malice toward me by
accusing me of his own faults, made my good repute the target of his
shots, collared me with his own constant defects, showed malice toward
me with his trickery, and aimed at me with his tricks! So I called upon
You, my Allah, seeking aid from You, trusting in the speed of Your
response, knowing that he who seeks haven in the shadow of Your wing
will not be mistreated, and he who seeks asylum in the stronghold of
Your victory will not be frightened. So You fortified me against his
severity through Your power. How many a cloud of detested things You
have dispelled from, a cloud of favor You have made rain down upon me, a
stream of mercy You have let flow, a well-being in which You have
clothed me, an eye of mishap You have blinded, and a wrap of distress
You have removed!

How many a good opinion You have verified, a destitution You have
redressed, an infirmity You have restored to health, and a misery You
have transformed! All of that was favor and graciousness from You, and
in all of it I was occupied with acts of disobeying You. My evildoing
did not hinder You from completing Your beneficence, nor I was stopped
from committing acts displeasing to You. You are not questioned as to
what You do! You were asked, and You bestowed. You were not asked, and
You began. Your bounty was requested, and You did not skip. You refused,
my Master, everything but beneficence, kindness, graciousness, and
favor, and I refused everything but plunging into what You have made
unlawful, transgressing Your bounds, and paying no heed to Your threat!
So Yours is the praise, my Allah, the All-powerful who is not overcome,
and the Possessor of patient waiting who does not hurry! This is the
station of one who confesses to lavishness of favors, counters them with
shortcomings, and bear witness to his own negligence.

“O Allah, so I seek nearness to You through the elevated rank of
Muhammad and the radiant degree of ‘Ali, and I turn to You through them
so that You will give me refuge from the evil of (so and so), for that
will not constrain You in wealth, nor trouble You in power, and You are
powerful over everything! So give me, my Allah, by Your mercy and Your
lasting bestowal of success, that which I may take as a ladder with
which to climb to Your good pleasure and be secure from Your punishment,
O Most merciful of the merciful![^58]”

This documentary supplication gives an account of the political enemies
who persecuted the Imam and their plots against him by day and night,
for they harbored malice against him, yet Allah, through His bounty,
saved him from their evil plans, and punished them severely.

### His Supplication in Fear

He, peace be on him, would supplicate with great supplication in fear:

“O Allah, You created me without fault, nurtured me when small, and
provided me with sufficiency. O Allah, I found in the Book which You
sent down and through which You gave good news to Your servants, that
You said, **O My servants who have been prodigal against yourselves, do
not despair of Allah’s mercy, surely Allah forgives all sins**, but
there has gone ahead from me what You know (and of which You know more
than I) ! O the shame of what Your Book has counted against me! Were it
not for the places where I expectantly hope for Your pardon, which
enfolds all things, I would have thrown myself down (in despair) ! Were
anyone able to flee from his Lord, I would be the most obligated to flee
from You! But not a secret in earth and heaven is concealed from You,
except that You bring it. You suffice as a recompenser! You suffice as a
reckoner! O Allah, surely You would seek me if I flee and catch me if I
run. So here I am before You, abject, lowly, abased. If You chastise me,
I am worthy of that, and it would be, my Lord, an act of justice from
You.

But if You pardon me, anciently has Your pardon enfolded me and Your
well-being garmented me! So I ask You, O Allah, by the names stored in
Your treasury and Your splendor masked by the veils! If You have no
mercy upon this anxious soul and these uneasy, decaying boneshe cannot
endure the heat of Your sun, so how can he endure the heat of Your Fire?
He cannot endure the sound of Your thunder, so how can he endure the
sound of Your wrath? So have mercy upon me, O Allah, for I am a vile man
and my worth is little. Chastising me will not add the weight of a dust
mote of Your kingdom. Were chastising me something that would add to
Your kingdom, I would ask You for patience to bear it and would love for
it to belong to You; but Your authority, my Allah, is mightier, and Your
kingdom more lasting, than that the obedience of the obeyers should
increase it or the disobedience of the sinners diminish it! So have
mercy upon me, O Most Merciful of the merciful! Show me forbearance, O
Possessor of majesty and munificence! And turn toward me, **surely You
are Ever-turning, All-compassionate!** [^59]”

In this great supplication the Imam, peace be on him, pleaded to Allah,
the Exalted, and asked Him to have mercy on him and to forgive him. He
also showed his fright and fear of Allah’s chastisement. This soul
cannot resist the sun’s heat, so how can it resist and endure the fire
and terrors of Hell?

### His Supplication in Pleading to Allah

“My Allah, I praise Youand You are worth of praisefor Your benefaction
toward me, the lavishness of Your favor toward me, and Your plentiful
bestowal upon me, and for showing bounty toward me through Your mercy
and lavishing Your favor upon me. You have done well toward me and I am
incapable of thanking You. Were it not for Your beneficence toward me,
and the lavishness of Your favors upon me, I would not have the taking
of my share nor would my soul have been set right, but You began with
beneficence toward me, provided me sufficiency in all my affairs, turned
away from me the toil of affliction, and held back from me the feared
decree.

“ My Allah how many a toilsome affliction which You have turned away
from me! How many a lavish favor with which You have gladdened my eye!
How many a generous benefaction of Yours which is present with me! It is
You who responded to my supplication at the time of distress, released
me from my slip in stumbling, and took my enemies to task for doing
wrong to me. My Allah, I did not find You a miser when I asked of You
nor a withholder when I desired from You. No, I found You a hearer of my
supplication and a bestower of my requests; I found Your favors toward
me lavish in my every situation and in my every time. So You are praised
by me and Your benefaction honored. My soul, my tongue, and my
intelligence praise You, a praise that reaches fulfillment and the
reality of thanksgiving, a praise that attains to Your good pleasureso
deliver me from Your displeasure! O my cave when the ways thwart me! O
He who releases me from my stumble! Were it not for Your covering my
shameful defects, I would be one of the disgraced. O my confirmer
through help! Were it not for Your helping me, I would be one of the
overcome! O He before whom kings place the yoke of lowliness around
their necks, fearing his penalties!

O worthy of reverent fear! **O He to whom belong names most beautiful!**
I ask You to pardon me and to forgive me, for I am not innocent that I
should offer excuses, nor a possessor of strength that I should gain
victory, nor have I any place of flight that I should flee! I ask You to
release me from my stumbles, and before You I disavow my sins, which
have laid my waste, encompassed me, and destroyed me! I flee from them
to You, my Lord, turning repentantly, so turn toward me, seeking refuge,
so grant me refuge, asking sanctuary, so abandon me not, requesting, so
deprive me not, holding fast, so leave me not, supplicating, so send me
not back disappointed! I have supplicated You, my Lord, as one
miserable, abased, apprehensive, fearful, quaking, poor, driven to have
recourse to You. I complain to You, my Lord, of my soulwhich is too
weak to hurry to that which You have promised Your friends or to avoid
that against which have cautioned Your enemiesand of the multitude of
my concerns, and of my soul’s confusing thoughts.

“My Allah, You have not disgraced me through secret thoughts or
destroyed me because of my misdeeds! I call upon me, and You respond,
even if I am slow when You call upon me. I ask You everything I want of
my need, and I deposit with You my secret wherever I may be. I
supplicate no one besides You, and hope for no one other than You. At
Your service! At Your service! You hear him who complains to You! You
receive him who has confidence in You! You save him who holds fast to
You! You give relief to him who seeks shelter in You! My Allah, so
deprive me not of the good of the last world and the first because of
the paucity of my thanksgiving and forgive me the sins of mine which You
know! If You chastise, I am the wrongdoer, the neglecter, the negligent,
the sinner, the derelict, the sluggard, the heedless of the share of my
soul! And if You forgive meYou are the Most Merciful of the
merciful![^60]”

This holy supplication contains the Imam’s pleading to the Almighty
Creator and his submission to Him confessing His great favors and lavish
boons, and asking Him for pardon, forgiveness, and repentance.

### His Supplication in Imploring Allah

He, peace be on him, used to implore Allah with this supplication:

“O Allah, from whom nothing is concealed in earth or heaven! How should
what You have created, my Allah, be concealed from You? How should You
not number what You have made? How should what You govern be absent from
You? How should one who has no life except through Your provision have
the ability to flee from You? How should one who has no road except in
Your kingdom escape from You? Glory be to You! He among Your creatures
who fears You most knows You best, he among them most bent in humility
is most active in obeying You, and he among them whom You provide while
he worships another is most contemptible before You! Glory be to You! He
who associates others with You and denies Your messengers diminishes not
Your authority.

He who dislikes Your decree cannot reject Your command. He who denies
Your power keeps himself not away from You. He who worships other than
You escapes You not. He who dislikes meeting You will not be given
endless life in this world. Glory be to You! How mighty is Your station,
overpowering is Your authority, intense Your strength, penetrating Your
command! Glory be to You! You have decreed death for all creatures, both
him who professes Your Unity and him who disbelieves in You; each one
will taste death, each one will come home to You. Blessed are You and
high exalted! There is no god but You, You alone, who have no associate.
I have faith in You, I attest to Your messengers, I accept Your Book, I
disbelieved in every object of worship other than You, I am quiet of
anyone who worships another!

“O Allah, I rise in the morning and enter the evening making little of
my good works, confessing my sins, admitting my offenses; I am abased
because of my prodigality against myself. My works have destroyed me, my
caprice has ruined me, my passions have deprived me. So I ask You, my
Master, the asking of him whose soul is diverted by his drawn out
expectations, whose body is heedless because of the stillness of his
veins, whose heart is entranced by the multitude of favors done for him,
whose reflection is little concerning that to which is coming home; the
asking of him whom false expectation has overcome, caprice has
entranced, and this world has mastered, and over whom death has cast its
shadow; the asking of him who makes much of his sins and confesses his
offense; the asking of him who has no Lord but You, no friend besides
You, no one to deliver him from You, and no asylum from You except You.

“My Allah, I ask You by Your right incumbent upon all Your creatures, by
Your mighty name with which You commanded Your messengers to glorify
You, and by the majesty of Your generous face, which ages not, nor
changes, nor alters, nor passes away, that You bless Muhammad and the
Household of Muhammad, that You free me from need for all things through
worshipping You, that You distract my soul from this world through fear
of You, and that You turn back toward Your abundant generosity through
Your mercy! To You I flee, You I fear, from You I seek aid, in You I
hope, You I supplicate, in You I seek asylum, in You I trust, from You I
ask help, in You I have faith, in You I have placed my confidence, and
upon Your munificence and Your generosity I rely.[^61]”

This supplication gives an account of the perfect knowledge of the Imam,
peace be on him, his great faith in Allah. The following are some of its
contents:

1. The knowledge of Allah, the Most High, is boundless; it encompasses
all things, and no weight of a dust mote in the earth or the heaven
escapes it.

2. All the creatures are in need of Allah, the Exalted; they cannot be
free from need to Him for a moment, for they are in His Kingdom, His
grasp, and His authority.

3. Those who know Allah, especially the scholars, fear Him, the Most
High, obey Him, worship Him more than the other creatures, hence Allah,
the Exalted, said: “**The scholars from among His servants fear
Allah**.”

4. Those who serve other than Allah, associate others with Him, and deny
His messengers are the lowliest of all the people, most of them in loss,
and least of them in understanding and awareness.

5 Allah, the Exalted, has decreed death for all creatures, each one will
come home to Him, that He may repay those who do good with goodness, and
repay the unbelievers with what their hands have done.

6. In this supplication the Imam has declared his absolute faith in
Allah, the Most High, attest to His messengers and prophets, and
renunciation from any god other than Allah.

7. The Imam expressed his absolute submission to Allah, the Exalted, and
his humbleness before Him, asking Him for dignity and pardon.

### His Supplication in Abasing himself before Allah

The following is his supplication in abasing himself before Allah, the
Great and Almighty:

“My Lord, my sins have silenced me, and my words have been cut off. I
have no argument, for I am the prisoner of my own affliction, the
hostage to my works, the frequenter of my own offense, the confused in
my intended way, the thwarted. I have brought myself to a halt in the
halting place of the abased sinners, the halting place of the wretched
and insolent, those who think lightly of Your promise. Glory be to You!
What insolence I have insolently shown toward You! What delusion with
which I have deluded myself! My master, have mercy on my falling flat on
my face, the slipping of my foot, grant me my ignorance through Your
clemency, and my evildoing through Your beneficence, for I admit my sin
and confess my offense: Here are my hand and my forelock! I am resigned
to retaliation against my soul! Have mercy on my white hair, the
depletion of my days, the nearing of my term, my frailty, my misery, and
the paucity of my stratagems!

My Master, and have mercy upon me when my trace is cut off from this
world, my mention is effaced among the creatures, and I join the
forgotten, like the forgotten ones! My Master, and have mercy upon me at
the change of my form and state when my body decays, my limbs are
scattered, and my joints are dismembered! O my heedlessness toward what
was wanted from me! My Master, have mercy upon at my mustering and
uprising and on that day, appoint my standing place with Your friends,
my place of emergence with Your beloved ones, and my dwelling in Your
neighborhood! O Lord of the worlds![^62]” In this supplication the Imam,
peace be on him, has announced his turning, devotion, and clinging to
Allah. He asked Him for mercy and forgiveness when he left this world
for the next.

### His Supplication for the Removal of Worries

His great supplication for the removal of worries is as follows:

“O Reliever of worry! O Remover of grief! O Merciful in this world and
the next and Compassionate in both! Bless Muhammad and his Household,
relieve my worry, and remove my grief! O One, O **Unique**, O **Eternal
Refuge**! O He **who has not begotten, nor has been begotten, and equal
to Him is not any one!** Preserve me, and take away my affliction!”

Here you should recite the Throne Verse (2: 255), the two Suras of
Taking Refuge (113-114), and Unity (112). Then say:

“O Allah, I ask You with the asking of him whose neediness is intense,
whose strength is frail, whose sins are many, the asking of one who
finds no helper in his neediness, no strengthener in his frailty, no
forgiver of his sin other than You, O Possessor of majesty and
munificence! I ask of You a work through which You will love him who
works it and a certainty by which You will profit him who is certain
with the truth of certainty concerning the execution of Your command!

“O Allah, bless Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad, take my soul
while it is firm in sincerity, cut off my need for this world, make my
desire for what is with You become a yearning to meet You, and give me
true confidence in You! I ask of You the good of the writ that has been
made and I seek refuge with You from the evil of the writ that has been
made. I ask of You the fear of the worshippers, the worship of those
humbly fearful of You, the certainty of those who have confidence in
You, and the confidence of those who have faith in You. O Allah, make my
desire in my asking like the desire of Your friends in their asking, and
my fear like the fear of Your friends! Employ me in Your good pleasure
through works in which I will not leave aside anything of Your religion
fearing any of Your creatures!

“O Allah, this is my need, so make my desire for it great, within it
make manifest my excuse, through it instill me with my argument, and by
means of it make well my body! O Allah, some rise in the morning having
trust or hope in other than You. I rise in the morning and You are my
trust and hope in all affairs, so decree for me those which are best in
outcome and deliver me from misguiding trials, O Most Merciful of the
merciful! And Allah bless our chief, Muhammad the Messenger of Allah,
the chosen, and his Household, the pure![^63]”

With this we will end our speech about al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, which is
one of the most important sources in Islam.

[^1]: Al-Dhari‘a fi Tasanif al-Shi‘a, vol. 15, p.18.

[^2]: Al-Balagh Magazine, no. 7, first year, p.54, an essay by Dr.
Husayn ‘Ali Mahfu\`z.

[^3]: Al-Balagh Magazine, no. 7, the first year, p. 54, an essay by Dr.
Husayn ‘Ali Mahfu\`z.

[^4]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 28.

[^5]: Ibid., Supplication no. 1.

[^6]: Ibid., Supplication no. 6.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Al-Sahifa al-Khamisa al-Sajjadiya, pp. 13-14.

[^9]: Ibid, Supplication no. 53.

[^10]: Ma‘alim al-Falsafa al-Islamiya, pp. 190-191.

[^11]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 20.

[^12]: Ibid., Supplication no. 27.

[^13]: Ibid., Supplication no. 1.

[^14]: God and Modern Science.

[^15]: Al-Balagh Magazine, no. 6, 1st year, p. 56.

[^16]: See Sharh al-Sahifa no. 56.

[^17]: Al-Dhari‘a fi Tasanif al-Shi‘a, vol. 13, pp. 354-359.

[^18]: Ibid., vol. 15, p. 18. Roudat al-Jinan, vol. 7, p. 97.

[^19]: A‘yan al-Shi‘a, 4/Q1/500.

[^20]: Al-Dhari‘a fi Tasanif al-Shi‘a, vol. 15, p. 19.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Ibid.

[^23]: Safwat al-Safwa, vol. 2, p. 52. Durrar al-Abkar, p. 70. Siyar
‘Alam al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 237. Al-‘Aqd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 155. He
increased it: “And provide me with helping those whom provision You have
decreased through the plentiful (provision You have provided) me with.”

[^24]: Akhbar al-Diwal, p. 109. Ibn al-Sabbagh, Al-Fusu\`l al-Muhimma,
p. 192.

[^25]: Al-Dhahabi, Tarikh al-Islam, vol. 2, p. 266. Siyar ‘Alam
al-Nubala’, vol. 4, p. 23. Tarikh Dimashaq, vol. 36, p. 152.

[^26]: Al-Qutb al-Rawandi, Da‘wat (manuscript), p. 49.

[^27]: Al-Kaf‘ami, al-Junnah al-Waqiya and al-Janna al-Baqiya (two
manuscripts) al-Sayyid al-Hakim’s Library, no. 1272.

[^28]: Al-Qutb al-Rawandi, Da‘wat, p. 27.

[^29]: Furu\`’ al-Kafi, vol. 6, p. 294.

[^30]: Al-Himyari, Qurb al-Isnad, p. 3.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 46, p. 101.

[^32]: Ibn Tawus, Falah al-Sa’il.

[^33]: Al-Hurr al-‘Amili, Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, pp. 159-160.

[^34]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 2.

[^35]: Ibid., Supplication no. 4.

[^36]: Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, Supplication no. 5.

[^37]: Ibid, Supplication no. 6.

[^38]: Ibid, Supplication no. 11.

[^39]: Ibid, Supplication no. 12.

[^40]: Ibid, Supplication no. 15.

[^41]: Ibid, Supplication no. 16.

[^42]: Ibid, Supplication no. 17.

[^43]: Ibid, Supplication no. 19.

[^44]: Ibid, Supplication no. 21.

[^45]: Ibid, Supplication no. 22.

[^46]: Ibid, Supplication no. 23.

[^47]: Ibid, Supplication no. 29.

[^48]: Ibid, Supplication no. 30.

[^49]: Ibid, Supplication no. 31.

[^50]: Ibid, Supplication no. 33.

[^51]: Ibid, Supplication no. 34.

[^52]: Ibid, Supplication no. 35.

[^53]: Ibid, Supplication no. 36.

[^54]: Ibid, Supplication no. 37.

[^55]: Ibid, Supplication no. 41.

[^56]: Ibid, Supplication no. 42.

[^57]: Ibid, Supplication no. 43.

[^58]: Ibid, Supplication no. 49.

[^59]: Ibid, Supplication no. 50.

[^60]: Ibid, Supplication no. 51.

[^61]: Ibid, Supplication no. 52.

[^62]: Ibid, Supplication no. 53.

[^63]: Ibid, Supplication no. 54.


