Chapter 14: The Time Of The Imam
================================

I (the author) think that there was no Islamic period like that when
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, lived. This period was full of
political, social, and economic disorders. In it all the members of the
society led a life of worries and grieves. They lost hope in a noble
life. This is because the Umayyads spread wrongdoing and persecution and
forced the people to follow what they hated.

We will briefly speak about the general aspects of the time when the
Imam, peace be on him, lived, the political events and problems which
attacked the Muslims and led to discords and misfortunes. We will also
speak about the features of the economic and social life, etc. This is
because the research on such matters will complete the research on the
life of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him. They are as follows:

The Political Life
------------------

As for the political life in the time when the Imam, peace be on him,
lived, it was filled with disorders and discords. In it fear and terror
spread over the people, and they lost all kinds of security and
stability. This divided the society and resulted in critical, political
crises. I (the author) firmly believe that such crises resulted from the
Umayyad, corrupt regime, which employed all its organs to war against
social reform and to spread corruption in the earth. We will objectively
present this in the following researches:

The Nature of the Umayyad Government
------------------------------------

As for the Umayyad government, it caused many troubles and afflictions
to the Muslims, made them lead a life of discords and hardships, and
threw them into great evil. As for the nature of this government and its
prominent aspects, they are as follows:

### Despotism

The Umayyads dictatorially ruled the Islamic nations. Their government
did not follow any law; rather it followed the sentiments of the kings,
the desires of the ministers, and the wishes of their retinues.
Al-‘Alaili said: “The government of the Umayyad kings is similar to what
we call nowadays martial law, which sheds blood, suspends ordinary law,
and threatens every person’s existence. In this time such a law is taken
during exceptional conditions and for especial states to return security
through terrorism. However, this regime lasted throughout the Umayyad
period. In fact we cannot call this (regime) as judicial power. Rather
we strongly deny that there was no judicial power, in the full sense of
the world, in the Umayyad time, except in some periods, and then the
difference was prevailing. The greatest proof for this is that the
Caliph or his government did what they desired with out taking, at
least, lawful formalities in order to respect the authorities.[^1]”

The political despotism was the prominent aspect of the Umayyad
government, for the Umayyads adopted a special method for their
government, which destroyed the rules of social and political justice.

### Arrogance

Another prominent aspect of the Umayyad government was that the rulers
showed arrogance and vainglory toward their subjects. They disdained the
weak and made little of the poor. They thought that only they were the
sources of power in the country, not the people, that they pushed down
and raised up whomever they willed. Mu‘awiya said: “We are the time! We
push down and raise up whomever we will!” This means that the social and
national services which the free and the reformers rendered for their
own homeland were not important for raising their social position.
Rather the only thing which could push down and raise up was government,
as the Umayyads thought.

Al-Walid b. Yazid has described the arrogance and tyranny of the
Umayyads through these lines of poetry:

*Leave your remembering the family of Sa‘di, for it is*

*we who are more (than them) in number and property.*

*It is we who have governed the people by force;*

*we have imposed upon them abasement and punishment.*

*We lead them to the places of humiliation in order to abase them,*

*and we do not fall short of destroying them.*

Al-Walid boasted of himself and his family, and showed arrogance toward
the people as follows:

Firstly, they were more than the people in properties which they took
from the Muslims’ Public Treasury.

Secondly, he talked about their corrupt policy through which they ruled
the people as follows:

A. They exposed the people to abasement and humiliation, depriving them
of their dignity, freedom, and choosing their affairs.

B. They led the people to the places of abasement and humiliation, not
to the places of honor and dignity.

C. They governed the nations by force. Then which tyranny is greater
than this tyranny? Which arrogance is greater than this arrogance?

### Abolishing Public Freedoms

The Muslim communities were deprived of their public freedoms,
especially as it concerns the freedom of opinion. None was able to
express his opinion or his belief, especially as it concerns showing
friendship toward the Imams of the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them. Hence the people preferred the accusation of unbelief
to the accusation of showing friendship to them. Some Muslim thinkers
were crucified in the public squares in Kufa because of their love for
Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. Examples of
them were Maytham al-Tammar, and Rashid al-Hijri.

### Denying Islam

The Umayyads denied Islam. They removed all its regulations and
principles from the Muslim countries. Hence there were no Islamic laws
in their offices and organs. Nikelson said: “The Umayyads were
dictatorial tyrants, for they violated the laws of Islam. They despised
its ideals and set foot on them.[^2]” The Umayyads buried the Islamic
regulations and principles. Most their kings displayed unbelief and
disparaged the great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. Among
them was Yazid b. Mu‘awiya, who said:

The Hashimites played with the kingdom, for

no news came, nor did a revelation come down![^3]

### Spreading Oppression

The Umayyads spread all over the Islamic countries oppression, tyranny,
terrorism, and persecution. Hence, in the days of Ziyad b. Abih, the
people said to each other: “Sa‘d, save yourself, for Sa‘id has
perished!” This is part of the Umayyad policy, which did not conform to
any international law.

### The Policy of Division and Difference

The Umayyads adopted a certain policy in order to divide the society, to
create conflicts and quarrels. That was through finding tribal and
racial fanaticism among the Islamic nations. For example, they created
conflicts between the Yemenis and the Nazaris, who were the strongest
Arab families in equipment and number. They also created conflicts
between the Arabs and the non-Arabs. Through this, the Umayyads turned
away from Islam, which underlined the unity of the Muslims, and
spreading love and friendship among them.

With this brief presentation we will end our speech about the nature of
the Umayyad government, which denied the interests and rights of the
Islamic countries.

The Local Revolts
-----------------

The Umayyad policy caused oppression and tyranny to the Muslim
community, and shook its stability and prosperity. Hence the righteous
led successive revolts against the Umayyads. They demanded them to
conform to the rights of the society, and summoned them to accomplish
social justice among the people. These revolts are as follows:

### The Revolt of Imam al-Husayn

It is one of the most important world revolts which have changed the
course of history. It is still alive, and urges all the nations of the
world to attain their freedom, dignity, and independence. It has moved
the feelings of the free and the reformers, taught them lessons on
defending the dignity of the community, accomplishing its goals and
affairs.

This great immortal revolt has moved the feelings of men. This is
because its leader, Imam al-Husayn ( peace be on him), was very sincere
to the Truth. He did not seek any material interest or goal. Rather he
spared no effort to defend man’s dignity, and to save the society from
that black regime, which turned the life into unbearable inferno.

In the previous researches we talked about this great revolt, the
unbearable afflictions and misfortunes Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on
him, suffered.

### The Revolt of Medina

It is one of the important revolts which moved the Muslims’ feelings and
sentiments. It is regarded as important as the tragedy of Karbala’. It
is necessary for us speak briefly about it.

### The Causes of the Revolt

As for the causes of this violent revolt, they are as follows:

1. The overwhelming majority of the people of Medina (Yathrib) harbored
malice against the Umayyads and opposed their government. The Ansar
showed enmity toward the Umayyads. It was they who attacked ‘Uthman and
killed him. Then they pledged allegiance to Imam ‘Ali and supported him.
They thought that the Prophet’s family was worthy of leading the
community. Abu’ Ayyu’b al-Ansari, a great struggler, headed them. He and
seventy of the Ansar took part in the Battle of Siffin headed by Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. The Umayyads knew
that the Ansar detested them. Yazid b. Mu‘awiya sent for Ka‘b b. Ju‘ayl,
a well-known poet, and ordered him to satirize the Ansar. However, Ka‘b
refused to respond to Yazid, and said to him: “Do you want to return me
to polytheism after faith?” I will not satirize the people who supported
Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family! Anyhow, I will
lead you to a Christian boy, who belongs to us.” He led him to
al-Akhtal, who satirized the Ansar and ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Hassan through
a poem in which he said:

*Quraysh have all the noble traits, while ignobility*

*is under the turbans of the Ansar.*[^4]

Besides the following families harbored malice against the Umayyads:

A. The Prophet’s family, who thought that they were worthier than the
Umayyads of the Caliphate.

B. Al-Zubayr’s family.

C. Abi Bakr’s family.

D. ‘Umar’s family.

These families harbored malice against the Umayyads, and plotted against
them. They spared no effort by day and night to overthrow the Umayyad
government.

2. The family of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, were
liable to murder, sever punishments, and captivity. This moved the
people to revolt against the Umayyads. The Hashimite ladies wept and
lamented for Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, hence they inflamed the
feelings and emotions of the people. One of the ladies addressed the
Muslims and recited:

*What would you say if the Prophet asked you: What have*

*you, the last of the (religious) communities, done with my*

*offspring and my family after my departure from them?*

*They are prisoners and slain and have been stained with*

*their own blood.*

*What sort of reward is this for my advice to you, that you*

*should oppose me by doing evil to my blood relations?*

The lamentation for the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on
them, stirred up the people in Medina (Yathrib), and they mutinied
against the Umayyad government.

3. Yazid openly practiced dissoluteness, committed offenses and acts of
disobedience (to Allah). Hence the good and Allah-fearing thought that
it was incumbent on them to revolt against the government of Yazid. ‘Abd
Allah b. Hanzala, a leader of the revolt, said: “We revolted against
Yazid because we were afraid that stones would be thrown at us from the
heaven. Yazid married mothers and (their) daughters, drank wine, and
left the prayers. By Allah, if there was none of the people with me, I
would stand the good test in fighting against him for the sake of
Allah![^5]” Al-Mundhir b. al-Zubayr, a great leader of the revolt, said:
“Yazid has given me one hundred thousand (dinars). His benefaction
toward me does not prevent me from telling you about him: By Allah, he
drinks wine and becomes drunk to the extent that he leaves the
prayers![^6]”

I (the author) think that these are the most important factors which
moved the people in Medina to revolt against the government of Yazid.

### Dismissing the Governor of Medina

The revolutionists decided to dismiss the governor of Medina (Yathrib)
and all the Umayyads. They formed and managed a temporary government.
The governor was ‘Uthman b. Muhammad b. Abi Sufyan. He was a
self-conceited young man. Experiences did not harden him, nor did the
days educate him. The people threw stones at him and the Umayyads.[^7]”

### Marwan seeks Refuge in the Imam

Marwan was very afraid of the revolt, for he was a destructive, corrupt
person. He feared that the revolutionists would attack his womenfolk.
Hence he went to ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar and asked him to protect them.
However, Abd Allah b. ‘Umar refused to respond to him. Marwan burnt with
grief and said: “May Allah make ugly such an affair![^8]” Then he
hurried to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, who was the source of
mercy and clemency. Marwan presented the affair in the presence of the
Imam, and he, peace be on him, responded to him. The Imam added Marwan’s
womenfolk to his womenfolk and took them to Yanbu‘.

Then ‘A’isha, daughter of ‘Uthman and Marwan’s wife, went to al-Ta’if.
She passed by Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and he feared for
her. Hence he sent with her his son ‘Abd Allah to protect her. ‘Abd
Allah stayed with ‘A’isha until the event was over. The historians said:
“The Imam, peace be on him, guaranteed four hundred women along with
their children, protected them, and added them to his family until
Muslim b. ‘Aqaba left Medina. One of the women swore by Allah that she
had never witnessed rest and ease in her father’s house as she witnessed
in the house of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him.[^9]”

### Muslim bin ‘Aqaba entrusted with War

The people of Medina (Yathrib) broke their pledge of allegiance to
Yazid. They decided to overthrow his government, so they dismissed his
governor. These news reached Damascus, and Yazid, the tyrannical, was
anxious. He feared that the revolt would include the rest of the Islamic
countries. Hence he appointed Muslim bin ‘Aqaba, the most dangerous
criminal and terrorist, to war against the people of Medina (the City of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family). Al-Fakir said: “Muslim
bin ‘Aqaba was one of the Arab tyrants. He was an old man when Yazid
entrusted the Battle to him.” The author of al-‘Aqdd al-Farid has
mentioned Muslim’s characteristics as follows: “Muslim bin ‘Aqaba was
one-eyed, wide-mouthed, and white-haired. He walked as if he drew his
legs from mud.” Dozey, an orientalist, said: “Muslim bin ‘Aqaba did not
believe in Allah, nor did he believe in Islam. He was ill. When Yazid
entrusted the leadership of the army to him, delight seduced him.” Yazid
said to him: “If you want, I will release you, for I see that you are
ill and exhausted.” However Muslim bin ‘Aqaba, the wicked one, said to
him: “I swear by Allah that you should not deprive me of the wage which
Allah has driven (to me) ![^10]”

Then Yazid supplied Muslim bin ‘Aqaba with these evil commands: “When
you go to Medina and they hinder you, kill them with the sword, leave
none of them, plunder their properties therein for three days, put their
wounded to death, and kill those who turn their back in flight.[^11]”

In these commands, Yazid has expressed his wicked inclinations, for he
harbored malice against man and was happy with mistreating him.

### The Troops advanced toward Medina

The troops of error headed by Muslim bin ‘Aqaba, the terrorist, advanced
toward Medina to occupy it. They passed by Yazid, who stood on a hill to
greet them. The senior officials and the commanders of his army
surrounded, and he recited:

Tell Aba Bakr when the event occurs

and the banners are hoisted in Wadi al-Qura (the Valley of

the Villages).

I wonder: Have these people gathered by drunk

or wakeful?[^12]

The leaders of the opposition said that Yazid drank wine heavily. Hence,
in this poetry, he asks them: “Have these troops been dispatched by
drunk or wakeful?”

### Besieging Medina

Yazid’s troops covered the desert quickly, reached Medina, and besieged
it. The people of Medina dug a trench similar that which dug by Allah’s
Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, at the Battle of the
Allies. Addressing Yazid, their poet said:

*Surly in the trench crowned with glory, there is striking*

*which has resulted from happiness.*

*You do not belong to us, nor does your uncle belong to*

*us, O you who have lost the prayers out of pleasures.*

*If you slay us, then be a Christian, drink wine, and leave*

*Friday prayers!*[^13]

### Occupying Medina

Yazid’s troops were unable to occupy Medina. However, according to his
father’s orders, ‘Abd al-Malik b. Marwan hastened to Muslim b. ‘Aqaba
and told him about the defects of Medina. Hence Muslim was able to make
his troops enter Medina. Then the two armies met each other at a bloody
battle. ‘Abd Allah b. Hanzala (a Muslim hero), his sons, a chose of the
sons of the Muhajirin and the Ansar were martyred at this Battle.
Moreover Medina lost eight Companions of the Prophet (may Allah bless
him and his family), to the extent that there was no Badri (those who
took part at the Battle of Badr) in it. It also lost seven hundred
people from Quraysh and the Ansar, ten thousand people from the rest of
the people.[^14]”

### Tragedies and Atrocities

Muslim b. ‘Aqaba, the terrorist, committed all kinds of serious offenses
and crimes. He violated the sacredness of Medina (the City of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family). He named it Fitna[^15],
while the Messenger called it Tiba. He permitted his army to violate it,
and it killed innocent children, old men, women, dishonored them, and
forced the rest of the people to pledge allegiance to Yazid as
slaves.[^16] Al-Sayyid Amir ‘Ali al-Hindi described the event and
commented on it saying: “This Battle caused evil results to Islam. At it
the choice of the people of Medina, from among the heroes and the
special Companions of Allah’s Apostle ( may Allah bless him and his
family), were martyred. In this manner the Umayyads violated Median and
defiled it. Such was Medina, which sheltered the Messenger throughout
his lifetime, and was the shelter of his Message. Besides its
inhabitants, who granted sanctuary to the Messenger and sacrificed their
lives for him at the hour of hardship, suffered the severest kind of
torture and atrocity of which there is no like in history, except those
committed by Constable, the French, and the Lutherans (supporters of
George) when they besieged Rome.

“No wonder! Yazid’s troops turned the Mosque into stable for their
horses. They demolished the Sacred Places and looted their furniture.
Hence paganism won a victory over Islam even for a time. This paganism
took revenge on Islam this time, as a European historian said. In this
manner they treated Islam, which treated them with mercy and clemency
when it triumphed over them.

“As for the chose from among the people of Medina: some of them were
martyred; some of them fled to the remote countries in order to save
their souls. As for the rest of them who remained in Medina, they
accepted to be treated as prisoners and slaves of Yazid b. Mu‘awiya. As
for those who refused (to accept this state), they were disgracefully
branded on the neck![^17]”

### The Imam and Muslim b. ‘Aqaba

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, felt fear of Muslim b. ‘Aqaba,
for he saw that the sacredness of Medina was violated, the blood of the
Muslims was shed without any right. Hence he, peace be on him,
supplicated with this supplication: “My Lord, how many a favor you have
bestowed upon me, but my thanksgiving to You for it is little! How many
an affliction through which You have tested me, but me patience toward
it is little! So abandon me not! O Possessor of kindness which never
cuts off! O Possessor of favors which cannot be counted in number! Bless
Muhammad and his Household, and repel his evil from! For I ask You to
turn him away from me, and seek refuge in You from his evil![^18]”

When this wicked criminal, Muslim b. ‘Aqaba, invaded Medina (the City of
the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family), the Imam, peace be on
him, hurried to the grave of his grandfather, Allah’s Messenger, may
Allah bless him and his family. He sought sanctuary with it. He was
captured and brought to Muslim b. ‘Aqaba, the tyrannical. When Muslim
saw him, he shook with fear. He stood in honor for him and said to him:
“Ask me for your needs.” Accordingly, the Imam interceded with him for
those who were sentenced to death, and he responded to him. When Muslim
went away, the Imam was asked: “We saw you moving your lips, what did
you say?” The Imam replied: [I said:] “O Allah! Lord of the seven
heavens and what they shade! (Lord of) the seven earths and what they
carry! Lord of the Great Throne! Lord of Muhammad and his pure
Household! I seek refuge in You from him, and ask you to turn him away
from me! I ask You to give me his good, and spare me of his evil!”

It was said to Muslim b. ‘Aqaba: “We heard you cursing this boy and his
fathers. Why did you magnify him when he came to you?” “This was not my
opinion,” answered Muslim, “but he filled my heart with fear.”[^19] The
Imam did not pledge allegiance to Yazid, neither did ‘Ali b. ‘Abd Allah
b. al-‘Abbas. Hence al-Husayn b. Numayr said: “Our nephew shall not
pledge allegiance (to anyone) except him to whom ‘Ali b. al-Husayn
Pledge allegiance, for he is the cousin of the Commander of the faithful
(Yazid); otherwise war (will break out) among us. Hence ‘Ali b. ‘Abd
Allah was released from pledging allegiance to Yazid. He boasted of his
uncles, who protected him from Muslim b. ‘Aqaba, and recited:

*My father al-‘Abbas, the children of Qusay, and my uncles*

*(who are the kings from among the children of Wali‘a),*

*defended me on the day when the phalanxes of Musrif*

*(Muslim b. ‘Aqaba) and the children of al-Laki‘a (the*

*ignoble woman) came.*

*He wanted to do for me that in which there was no glory,*

*but the strong hands prevented him from this.*[^20]

### The Heads before Yazid

Muslim b. ‘Aqaba, the criminal, ordered the heads of the martyrs from
among the children of Medina (Yathrib) to be cut off. They were cut off
and sent as gifts to Yazid. When they were placed before him, he became
overjoyed and recited:

*Had my chiefs at the (Battle of) Badr witnessed the*

*impatience of the Khazrajj of the stabbing of the spears,*

*they would feel happiness and say: O Yazid, may (your*

*hand) not be paralyzed!*[^21]

He had recited these lines of poetry when the head of al-Husaynthe
plant of sweet basil of Allah’s Messenger, Lord of the youths of the
heavenwas placed before him. He wanted his fathers, whose heads were
cut off by the swords of the Muslims, to be present. He wanted them to
see that he took revenge on the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family, and the Muslims.

This battle was one of the most dangerous disasters in the world of
Islam. As for Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, he was very sad to
see Yazid’s Army destroying Medina (the City of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family), filling its houses with bereavement and
mourning.

With this we will end our speech about this Battle, which is better
known as the Battle of al-Hurra.

The Revolt of the Tawwabin
--------------------------

The Shi‘ites in Kufa showed great remorse for their abandoning Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him. It was they who wrote to him, and pleaded to
him in order to save them from the tyranny and oppression of the
Umayyads. When he responded to them, they left him alone before the
swords and spears of the Umayyads. They did not help him nor did they
defend him.

The Shi‘ites blamed each other, for they felt the terror of the heavy
tragedy. Hence they thought about a practical way to expiate their sins.
They found no means to efface their sins except announcing a revolt
(against the Umayyads) and avenging the blood of al-Husayn. Then they
announced their well-known motto: “Come on to avenge the blood of
al-Husayn!”

This motto moved the Shi‘ites and those who were displeased with the
Umayyads. Now we will briefly present this revolt which holds the mark
of Shiism, for it was the first revolt the Shi‘ites led on the external
level.

### The First Conference of the Tawwabin

The Tawwabin or the repenters held their first conference in the house
of Sulayman b. Sart al-Khuza’i, a great Companion (of the Prophet) and
leader of the Shi‘ites. The leaders of the movement delivered many
speeches in this conference. In them they showed their remorse and
regret for deserting Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him. They declared that
they would deserve Allah’s displeasure if they did not avenge the blood
of al-Husayn. The number of those who attended the conference was over a
hundred men, from among the knights of the Shi‘ites and their great
figures.[^22] That was in the year sixty-one A. H.[^23] It was the year
when Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, was martyred.

### The Decisions of the Conference

The Conference took decisions of great importance, which showed their
ripen political awareness. They are as follows:

1. Sulayman b. Sarat al-Khuza’i was elected as the leader of the
movement, and commander-in-chief of the revolt. He was charged with
designing political and military plans, corresponding with the regions
which included the Shi‘ites in Iraq and outside it.

2. Keeping the movement a secret lest the authorities should be informed
of it.

3. Collecting money and donations from the Shi‘ites to buy weapons and
war equipment. Khalid b. Sa‘d donated all his possessions, and made the
revolutionists move about in them freely.[^24] Abu’ al-Mu‘tamar
al-Kinani donated a sum similar to this.[^25] They appointed ‘Abd Allah
b. Wal al-Tamimi to collect money and buy weapons.[^26]

4. Appointing al-Nukhayla as the place of their meeting and their revolt
against the Umayyads.

### Announcing the Revolt

When the fixed time came, the Tawwabin went out of Kufa. They were about
four thousands.[^27] They met at al-Nukhayla and had complete (war)
equipment. That was in the year sixty-five A. H. It was the year when
Yazid, the sinner, perished. The troops headed for the grave of Imam
al-Husayn. They stayed by it for a day and night. They asked Allah to
bless the great Imam and asked Him to forgive them. They wept before
Allah and pleaded to Him. They showed their repentance and remorse
before Him for deserting the grandson of the Prophet, may Allah bless
him and his family, and his plant of sweet basil. Then they left the
Holy Grave and swore by Allah to avenge the blood of al-Husayn. ‘Abd
Allah b. ‘Awf al-Ahmar raised the spirits of the troops through his
revolutionary poetry. He addressed them and recited:

*I have become attentive, abandoned yearning for the*

*beautiful women, and said to my companions: Respond*

*to the caller, and say to him-before and after he summons you to*

*guidance- here we are! Here we are, O summoner!*

The poet went on striking this right note, which moved the
determinations of the souls. He spoke about the martyrdom of the great
Imam (al-Husayn) reciting:

*Al-Husayn was the target of spears, left*

*deprived (of his garments), and stayed at al-Taf.*

*I wish I had witnessed him and defended him against*

*the spiteful enemies!*

*May Allah water with copious rain the grave at al-Taf,*

*the western, which has included glory and reverential*

*fear!*

*Then the poet addressed the community saying:*

*O Community, who has gone astray in foolishness, turn (to Allah in*

*repentance) and please the One, the Most Exalted!*

This poetry moved the feelings of the Tawwabin (repenters) and urged
them to fight against the troops of wrongdoing and error.

### At ‘Ayn al-Warda

The phalanxes of the Tawwabin covered the desert. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Awf
headed them and recited:

*They (the phalanxes) have become frowning, and gone out*

*in ranks shining through us, and containing heroes!*

*Through them we want to meet the heads, the unjust, the*

*treacherous, the straying!*

*We have left children, possessions, and women, that*

*we may please the Possessor of the bounteous favors!*[^28]

This poetry moved the Tawwabin and urged them to please Allah, the
Exalted, through fighting against the unjust.

The phalanxes of the Tawwabin reached ‘Ayn al-Warda and stopped at it.
Meanwhile ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad, the criminal, headed his troops and
advanced against them. The two armies met, and a violent battled
occurred between them. The Tawwabin stood the good test in fighting,
which none can describe. Their leaders were martyred at this Battle.
Some of them were Sulayman b. Sarat, al-Musayyab b. Nujayya, and ‘Abd
Allah b. Sa‘d. The Tawwabin thought that they had no ability to continue
fighting against the Syrians, hence they left the battle-field and
returned to Kufa at night. However, the Syrian troops did not follow
them. The Shi‘ites were very sad to hear of the martyrdom of the leaders
of the Tawwabin. A‘sha Hamadan, a great poet, elegized these leaders in
a poem. In it he mentioned their bravery and resistance before the
Syrian troops. This poem is as follows:

*Through the mountain pass, the phalanxes advanced in*

*ranks against Ibn Ziyad.*

*Some of them sought Allah-fearingness; some of them*

*sought repentance of what they committed in the past.*

*They met huge troops at ‘Ayn al-Warda and greeted them*

*with sharp swords.*

*A troop followed by troops like the waves of the sea came*

*from Syria (and besieged) the phalanxes from all directions.*

*Shortly after this, the phalanxes were destroyed. None of*

*them was safe except some bands.*

*The patient (the phalanxes) were left thrown down, hence*

*east and south winds blew over them.*

*Al-Khuza‘i, the chief, was thrown down as if he did not fight,*

*along with him were the chief of the children of Shamkh*

*(the hero of his people), al-Taymi (the guide of the phalanxes),*

*‘Amru’’ b. ‘Amru’, Ibn Bishr, Khalid, Bakr, Zayd, and*

*al-Hulays b. Ghalib.*

*They refused everything except hitting (with the sword)*

*which split open the tops of the heads at the battle, and*

*faultless stabbing with the spears.*

*O you who are the best troops for Iraq and its people, you*

*have made the mounts drink flowing blood.*

*(May Allah) not send you far, for you are the defenders of*

*the homeland.*

*You have been killed; slaying is the noblest death,*

*and everyone will face a misfortune someday.*

*You were killed, but you were as strong as the lions in*

*destroying the bands (of those troops).*

In this poem ‘Asha Hamadan has drawn a wonderful picture of the
Tawwabin. He has classified them into two categories: one category
sought Allah-fearingness through its struggle; the other wanted to
expiate its sins and turn to Allah, the Exalted, in repentance. They all
showed bravery and resistance beyond description. East and south wind
blew over the graves of those who were martyred in the battle-field and
greeted them.

A‘sha Hamadan talked with admiration about the leaders of the revolt who
were martyred in the battle-field. He praised and lauded them. At the
end he asked Allah not to send them far, for they were the defenders of
the city. This is one of the most wonderful poems composed on the Revolt
of the Tawwabin.

Anyhow, the revolt of the Tawwabin filled the murderers of Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him, with fear and terror, and prepared the
Shi‘ites for struggle against the Umayyads. Dr. Yousif Khulayf said:
“Regardless of its results, the revolt of the Tawwabin was the most
violent of the revolts which the Shi‘ites announced after the murder of
‘Ali. It helped the Shi‘ites overthrow the Umayyad government. Moreover,
it paved the way to another Shi‘ite revolt, which was the Revolt of
al-Mukhtar.[^29]”

The Revolt of al-Mukhtar
------------------------

Al-Mukhtar b. Yousif al-Thaqafi was among the Arab and Muslim brilliant
figures in history. He was the Arab hero who could overcome the events
and lead the greatest social revolt. He adopted political and social
justice, and accomplished equal opportunities among the people,
regardless of their nations and religions. We will briefly speak about
his qualities and the achievements of his revolt.

### His Qualities

As for the prominent qualities of this great figure, they are as
follows:

#### 1. Sharp Cleverness

Al-Mukhtar was very clever. An example of his sharp cleverness was that
he could understand inner selves and address the feelings of the people.
Through his cleverness he was able to lead his great revolt and make the
hearts and feelings of the people incline to him. He grasped the events
from their beginnings. The biographers have mentioned many examples of
his cleverness.

Al-Mukhtar was among the most brilliant persons of the Arab world. An
examples of his brilliancy is that he succeeded in executing his
political plans aiming at destroying the forces which showed enmity
toward the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. Though
these forces represented the capitalist and aristocratic classes in
Kufa, al-Mukhtar could destroy their influence, brought them down their
thrones, and sent them to prisons and cemeteries.

#### 2. Inspired Leadership

Among the qualities of al-Mukhtar was that he was a military inspired
commander. He was the most brilliant of the army commanders in designing
war plans and appointing military methods to overcome the events. It was
he who schemed the successful plans of the military coup. He led this
coup against the government of Kufa. Hence his plans were then unique in
the Islamic world.

#### 3. Allah-fearingness and Piety

Al-Mukhtar was Allah-fearing and pious. He devoted his life to his
religion. He built the foundations of his government on inclusive
justice among the people. In spite of his many works, he sat among the
people and gave them legal decisions. He followed the policy of Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on him. The narrators
mentioned that al-Mukhtar fasted by daytime during his short-termed
Caliphate, and always mentioned Allah, the Most High.

#### 4. Friendship toward Ahl al-Bayt

As for the friendship toward the members of the House (ahl al-Bayt),
peace be on them, it was among the qualities of al-Mukhtar. He showed
sincere friendship toward them and adored them. A proof for this is that
Muslim b. ‘Aqil, al-Husayn’s emissary to Kufa, stopped at his house,
told him of his secrets, negotiated with him about the affairs of the
revolt, and informed him of those who pledged allegiance to Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him. Yazid, the tyrannical, appointed ‘Ubayd
Allah b. Ziyad governor over Kufa, and he arrested the followers of Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on him. Al-Mukhtar was one of those arrested. He
remained in prison until Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, was martyred.
Then ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Umar, his brother -in- law, interceded for him with
Yazid, and he accepted his intercession. When al-Mukhtar left prison, he
struggled for holding the reins of authority to avenge the blood of
al-Husayn. When Allah granted him victory over his enemies, he killed
the murderers of Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, and demolished their
houses. We will mention this when we speak about his exalted position
with the Imams.

### His Exalted Position with the Imams

It was normal for al-Mukhtar to occupy an exalted position with the
Imams of ahl al-Bayt, peace be on him, and attain their good pleasure.
He pleased them when he avenged their blood, destroyed those who shed
their blood. There are many traditions concerning lauding him,
respecting him, and admiring his benefits toward the Household of the
Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family. The following is some of
them:

1. Imam Abu’ ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq, peace be on him, said: “No Hashimite
woman combed (her hair) nor did she dye (it) wit henna until al-Mukhtar
sent us the heads of those who killed al-Husayn, peace be on him.[^30]”

Al-Mukhtar gladdened the Household of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, who were sad for Imam al-Husayn, Lord of the youths of
heaven, peace be on him. For he avenged his blood.

2. Imam Abu’ Ja‘far (al-Baqir), peace be on him, said: “Curse not
al-Mukhtar, for he killed those who killed us, demanded vengeance for
us, made our widows join in marriage, and divided properties among us in
the strained circumstances.”

3. ‘Abd Allah b. Shurayk narrated: “We visited Abu’ Ja‘far (al-Baqir),
peace be on him, on the Day of al-Nahr. He was resting. He had sent for
the barber. I sat before him. Then a Kufan came. The Kufan took Abu’
Ja‘far’s hand to kiss it, but he prevented him from this and asked him:
‘Who are you?’ ‘(I am) Abu’ Muhammad al-Hakam b. al-Mukhtar b. Abi
‘Ubayda al-Thaqafi,’ replied the Kufan. He sat far from Abu’ Ja‘far.
Hence Abu’ Ja‘far reached out his hand to him, and was about to seat him
on his lap, after he had withheld his hand from him. Then Abu’ Muhammad
al-Hakam b. al-Mukhtar said to Abu’ Ja‘far: ‘May Allah set you right,
the people have said many words concerning my father. By Allah, I want
your opinion of him.’

“Abu’ Ja‘far asked: ‘What did they say?’ ‘They say that he was a liar,’
answered Abu’ Muhammad al-Hakam b. al-Mukhtar, ‘I accept your orders.’
Abu’ Ja‘far, peace be on him, said: ‘Glory belongs to Allah! By Allah,
my father told me that al-Mukhtar had sent the dower of my mother. Did
he not build our houses, kill those who killed us, and avenge our blood?
May Allah have mercy on him!’[^31]” In this tradition there is a clear
proof for the exalted position of al-Mukhtar with Imam Abu’ Ja‘far
(al-Baqir), peace be on him. Besides the tradition shows that he did the
ahl al-Bayt, peace be on them, many favors. For example, he demanded
vengeance for them, helped them with properties of which were the dowers
of their womenfolk, and built their houses demolished by the Umayyad
authorities.

4. Al-Mukhtar sent the heads of ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad and ‘Umar b. Sa‘d
to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and he prostrated himself in
prayer for Allah, and said: “Praise belongs to Allah who has taken my
revenged on my enemies! May Allah repay al-Mukhtar good![^32]”

The Alids were satisfied with al-Mukhtar, just as the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them, were satisfied with him. They
thanked him for his benefits toward them. The narrators reported on the
authority of Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya, who said: “When al-Mukhtar sent me
the heads of ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad and ‘Umar b. Sa‘d, I prostrated
myself in prayer for Allah, raised my hands in supplication for
al-Mukhtar, and said: ‘O Allah, forget not this day for al-Mukhtar, and
repay him the best repayment on behalf of the Household of Your Prophet,
Muhammad. By Allah, none can blame al-Mukhtar for this![^33]’”

### Insignificant Accusations

The enemies and opponents accused this great figure (al-Mukhtar) of:

1. Revelation. They said that Gabriel came down to him and told him
about unseen things.

2. Angels. They said that the angels came down in the form of white
pigeons and warred against his enemies.

3. The Garden. They said that he guaranteed men the Garden, and wrote to
them letters like Christian indulgences.[^34]

They accused al-Mukhtar of these things because he avenged the blood of
Imam al-Husayn, (father of the free, peace be on him), ruined the
Umayyad government through his great revolt, treated the Arabs and
non-Arabs equally, and adopted the policy of Imam ‘Ali, peace be on him.

Being an experienced leader, al-Mukhtar occupied the highest position in
the society of his time, became one of the historical heroes, who
adopted the truth, raised the banner of the revolt against backwardness,
and dullness. Hence it was normal for his enemies to envy him and accuse
him of false things. As for the accusation that al-Mukhtar told (men)
about unseen things, it is certain that he told them about the
occurrence of some events, and they occurred. He took this knowledge
from Maytham al-Tammarthe most brilliant disciple and student of Imam
‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace be on himwhen he was with
him in prison during the days of ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad. Does foretelling
such events mean prophecy?

### His Great Revolt

Al-Mukhtar announced his great revolt, which aimed at accomplishing
social justice among men and demanding vengeance for al-Husayn, father
of the free, peace be on him. He adopted this and appointed as motto for
his revolt. Hence his people shouted in the lanes and streets of Kufa
with this motto: “Come on to demand vengeance for al-Husayn!”

This effective call echoed in the heaven of Kufa. It was a thunder-bolt
against the traitors and criminals who committed the most atrocious
crime in human history. The righteous, deprived people responded to him.
Let’s listen to the wonderful poem of ‘Abd Allah b. Humam al-Salu’li,
the poet of the revolt. In the poem he tells us about the people who
supported al-Mukhtar eagerly. He says:

*The night of al-Mukhtar astonished the youths and*

*distracted them from their heyday of youth.*

*He (al-Mukhtar) called out: “Come on to demand vengeance*

*for al-Husayn!”*

*Hence phalanxes came from Hamadan after part of night,*

*from Madhhajj came Ibn Malik, the chief, leading a troop*

*followed by troops,*

*from Asad came Yazid along with all the young defenders*

*Na‘im, the best and strongest of all the Shayban came*

*to the battle.*

*As for Ibn Shumayt, he moved his people there, and they*

*did not abandon him, nor did they lose him.*

*Qays part of Nahd and Ibn Hawzan came. They all were*

*humble (before Allah).*[^35]

In this poem ‘Abd Allah talks about the motto al-Mukhtar raised for his
revolt, and which is: “Come on to demand vengeance for al-Husayn!” This
motto had great impression on the Shi‘ites, and they responded to it.
Besides he talks about the tribes who took part in this revolt.

Anyhow the revolt was successful and all things went well with it. As
for al-Mukhtar, he undertook the affairs of the country. Then he formed
a government including the members of his revolt and the leaders of his
party.

### The Objectives of his Revolt

As for the objectives al-Mukhtar sought through his revolt, they are as
follows:

#### 1. Equality between the Arabs and non-Arabs

Al-Mukhtar accomplished equality between the Arabs and non-Arabs in all
the rights and duties. He demolished the barriers the Umayyad government
established to prefer the Arabs to non-Arabs and singled them out for
distinctions. Some orientalists thought that the equality adopted by
al-Mukhtar served Islam and spread it among the non-Arabs nations.[^36]
Filhawzin said: “Al-Mukhtar is worthy of praise, for he preceded others
in understanding the states standing then. He thought that such states
had not to be as they were. Only the Arab elements enjoyed the full
civil rights in the State. If al-Mukhtar had accomplished his original
objective, he would have been the savior of the Arab State.[^37]”

Al-Khartu’bi said: “It was al-Mukhtar who strengthened and activated the
party of the non-Arabs. He raised the importance of the non-Arabs,
treated them with justice, and defended them. He moved their hopes and
ambitions. Moreover, he improved their political, social, and economic
conditions. The non-Arabs craved for these rights throughout the time of
the Umayyads and the ‘Abbasidis.[^38]” It is worth mentioning that the
non-Arabs were the backbone of al-Mukhtar’s government. Hence al-Mukhtar
entrusted the important offices to them, and appointed them as
commanders -in-chief of his army. He was sure of their sincerity to him.

#### 2. Demanding Vengeance for al-Husayn

Al-Mukhtar was not craving for kingdom when he announced his great
revolt, as those who envied him said. Rather, he wanted to demand
vengeance for Imam Abu’ ‘Abd Allah al-Husayn, the martyr, peace be on
him. He was indignant with those who killed him, peace be on him. When
the power went well with him, he ordered them to be pursued everywhere
and arrested. Then he ordered them to be killed, their properties to be
confiscated, and their house to be demolished. Now we will briefly
present some of his measures against them.

### Spreading Fear and Terror

Al-Mukhtar spread fear and terror among those who warred against Allah
and His Messenger, killed Imam al-Husayn, the plant of sweet basil of
Allah’s Messenger, may Allah bless him and his family, and master of the
youths of Paradise. Some murderers fled Iraq and went to ‘Abd al-Malik
b. Marwan in order to seek protection in him. One of them addressed him
saying:

*I have come to you, that you may have mercy on me*

*and protect me, but I see that you repel me, hence where is*

*the defender?*[^39]

‘Abd al-Malik b. al-Hajjaj al-Taghlubi turned his back in flight. He was
among those who took part in fighting against al-Husayn, peace be on
him. He sought refuge in ‘Abd al-Malik b. Marwan and said to him: “I
have fled Iraq for you.”

‘Abd al-Malik shouted at him saying: “You have told a lie! You have not
fled Iraq for us! You have fled it because you are afraid of those who
demand vengeance for the blood of al-Husayn! You have feared for your
life, hence you have sought refuge in us![^40]”

Asma’ b. Kharija was one of those whom al-Mukhtar terrified, for he was
one of those who warred against Imam al-Husayn. Concerning him
al-Mukhtar said: “A deep-black fire will come down from the heaven and
burn the house of Asma’.” When Asma’ heard of these words of al-Mukhtar,
he was frightened and said: “By Allah, al-Mukhtar will burn my house!”
Then he fled Kufa.[^41]

### General Annihilation

Al-Mukhtar quickly order his followers to kill all those who took part
in murdering Imam al-Husayn, master of the youths of heaven, peace be on
him. He ordered them to kill two hundred and forty-eighty people at one
time. Shimr b. Dhi al-Jawshanwho harbored malice against Imam
al-Husayn, peace be on himescaped. However, the men of al-Mukhtar
pursued and killed him. Al-Mukhtar said: “It is not an act of our
religion to leave the murderers of al-Husayn alive! If I do not kill
those who killed the males from among the family of Muhammad, peace be
on him, then I am a liar in this world. I ask all to help me against
them. Food and drink are not permissible for me until I purify the earth
from them.[^42]” A group of those who took part in war against al-Husayn
was brought to al-Mukhtar. They were ‘Abd Allah b. Usayd al-Jahni, Malik
b. Bashir al-Baddi, and Haml b. Malik al-Muharibi. Al-Mukhtar said to
them: “O enemies of Allah and His Messenger, where is al-Husayn b. ‘Ali?
Bring me al-Husayn! You killed him upon whom you were ordered to call
down blessings!”

They said to him: “We were sent (to war against him) by force. Hence be
kind to us, and leave us alive.” Al-Mukhtar shouted at them saying:
“Were you kind to al-Husayn, son of your Prophet’s daughter? Did you
leave him alive and give him water?”[^43] Then he ordered the hands and
legs of Malik b. Bashir al-Baddi to be cut off. He left him in this
state until he died. This is because it was he who deprived al-Husayn of
his cap. Then al-Mukhtar ordered the two men to be killed.[^44] Then the
police arrested Ziyad b. Malik al-Dab‘i, ‘Umran b. Khalid al-Qushayri,
‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Khushara al-Bajali, and ‘Abd Allah b. Qays
al-Khawlani. When they brought them before al-Mukhtar, he shouted at
them with anger: “O You who killed the righteous! O You who killed the
Lord of the youths of heaven! Allah has punished you on this unlucky day
for your depriving (al-Husayn) of his garments!”

It was they who deprived al-Husayn, peace be on him, of his garments.
Hence al-Mukhtar ordered them to be executed.[^45]

‘Umar b. Sa‘d was very afraid of al-Mukhtar. He sent him (a letter) and
asked him to write him security. Al-Mukhtar did this. Then he announced
before his companions that he would kill a man with great foot, hollow
eyes, prominent eyebrows, and whose murder would gladden the believers
and the angels brought nigh. Al-Haythem b. al-Aswad al-Nakha‘i
understood that al-Mukhtar meant his friend ‘Umar b. Sa‘d. He sent his
son to him, and he told him. Hence ‘Umar b. Sa‘d, the wicked, became
terrified. He mounted his she-camel and fled Kufa. Al-Mukhtar was told
about this, and he said: “There is a chain around his (‘Umar’s) neck,
and it will bring him back.” ‘Umar b. Sa‘d passed all the night (riding)
his she camel, but he felt nothing. The she-camel took him through Kufa
and brought him to his house in the morning. He came into his house.
Al-Mukhtar sent Abu’ ‘Umra and a group of the police, and they attacked
‘Umar b. Sa‘d’s house. ‘Umar b. Sa‘d stood to take his sword, but he
stumbled over his jubbah. Abu’ ‘Umra hurried to him, cut off his head
and brought it to al-Mukhtar. Hafs b. ‘Umar b. Sa‘d was sitting beside
al-Mukhtar. His father had sent him to seek for him security from
al-Mukhtar. Al-Mukhtar said to him: “Do you know this?” “Yes, and there
is no good after him!” replied Hafs. Hence al-Mukhtar ordered him to be
killed in order to follow his father. Then he said: “This, pointing at
‘Umar’s head, in stead of al-Husayn’s (head), and this, pointing at
Hafs’s (head), in stead of (the head of) ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. However,
they do not equal al-Husayn. By Allah, if I killed three fourths of
Quraysh, they would not equal one of his fingers.[^46]” With this the
life of this wicked traitor, ‘Umar b. Sa‘d, ended. This is because he
warred against Allah and His Messenger, and spared no effort to spread
corrupt in the earth. He thought that he would through murdering
al-Husayn enjoy the power over al-Ray, live in ease, plenty, and
kingdom. However, Allah disappointed his expectations. That was when Ibn
Ziyad broke his covenant concerning appointing him as governor over
al-Ray. Hence he stayed in Kufa and was liable to curses until
al-Mukhtar killed him and sent him to the Fire!

Among those who were punished justly was Harmala b. Kahil, the criminal,
who killed ‘Abd Allah, baby of Imam al-Husayn. This wicked person,
Harmala, saddened the Alids through this crime of his. Al-Minhal b.
‘Umar narrated: “When I wanted to leave Mecca, I visited ‘Ali b.
al-Husayn, and he said to me: ‘O Minhal, what did Harmala b. Kahil
al-Asadi do?’

“I have left him alive in Kufa,” I (al-Minhal) replied.

The Imam raised his hands toward the heaven and supplicated warmly
saying: “O Allah, let him (Harmala) taste the heat of iron! O Allah, let
him taste the heat of the Fire!”

Al-Minhal said: “When I returned to Kufa, I visited al-Mukhtar, who was
my friend. I greeted him, but he was busy thinking and waiting for a
certain affair. Moments ago, then Harmala b. Kahil was brought.
Al-Mukhtar ordered a fire to be prepared, Harmala’s limbs to be cut off
and thrown into the fire.[^47] Hence I exclaimed: ‘Allah is Great!’
Al-Mukhtar turned to me and said: ‘Exclaiming Allah is Great is good.
Why have you exclaimed?’ I (al-Minhal) told him about the supplication
of Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn. This was great with al-Mukhtar. He fasted his
daytime to show thanksgiving to Allah for responding to the supplication
of ‘Ali b. al-Husayn at his hand.” Al-Mukhtar killed those who killed
Imam al-Husayn, peace be on him, filled their houses with bereavement,
sadness and mourning.

### The Murder of Ibn Ziyad, the Tyrannical

Al-Mukhtar knew that ‘Abd al-Malik b. Marwan had appointed ‘Ubayd Allah
b. Ziyad as commander over a huge army and sent him to conquer Kufa,
that he commanded him to permit his soldiers to violate it for three
days, as Yazid b. Mu‘awiya did in Medina, (the city of) the Prophet, may
Allah bless him and his family. Hence al-Mukhtar prepared a strong
believing army from among those who showed friendship toward the
Household of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, and
harbored malice against the Umayyads. Then he appointed Ibrahim b. Malik
al-Ashter as commander over the army. The Army of Ibn Ziyad surpassed
Al-Mukhtar’s Army in number and equipment. However, it suffered low
spirits and faith in war. The two armies met at a terrible battle, but
Allah granted victory to the troops of Islam and faith. Accordingly the
Syrian Army was defeated and suffered heavy casualties. As for Ibrahim,
he killed ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad with his own sword. He also killed
al-Husayn b. Numayr and other Syrian commanders. Then he ordered their
heads to be brought to al-Mukhtar, who became very pleased with seeing
them.

The historians said: “A snake came into the mouth of the head of Ibn
Marjana (‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad) and went out of its nostril, an then it
did this several times.[^48]” Then al-Mukhtar sent the head to Imam ‘Ali
b. al-Husayn and ordered the messenger to put it before the Imam at the
time when food was placed on the table-clothe after finishing the noon
prayers. The messenger came to the door of the Imam at the time when the
people went to have food, and then he called out: “O Household of the
Prophet, Origin of the Message, Place of descent of the angels, the
House of Revelation, I am the messenger of al-Mukhtar b. Abu’ ‘Ubayda,
and the head of ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad is with me!” Hence all the Alid
womenfolk in the houses of the Hashimites cried.[^49] They remembered
the crimes Ibn Marjana (‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad) committed against the
Prophet’s womenfolk.

When the Imam saw the head of ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad, he prostrated
himself in prayer, thanked Allah for this, and said: “Praise belongs to
Allah who has not made me die until he has fulfill what he had promised
and punished my enemy!”[^50] Then the Imam turned to those who were
present and said to them: “Glory be to Allah! None is deceived by the
world except him who shows ingratitude toward Allah’s favors! The head
of Abi ‘Abd Allah (al-Husayn) was sent to Ibn Ziyad at the time when he
was having lunch![^51]”

The historians said: “None saw Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him,
smiling from the day when his father was martyred, except on the day
when he saw the head of b. Marjana (‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad). He had
camels, and they carried fruit for him from Syrian. Hence, peace be on
him, ordered the fruit to be divided among the people of Medina.[^52]”

All the Muslims were delighted when they heard of the death of ‘Ubayd
Allah b. Ziyad. All the people cursed him. The poets satirized him and
gloated over his death. Yazid b. al-Mufarragh said:

*When death visits a tyrant, it tears apart the curtains of*

*chamberlains and gatekeepers.*

*I say at his death: Away with the son of the lowly, wicked*

*woman!*

*You were not jostled for power, and you defended it,*

*nor did you belong to the people.*

*You do not belong to Nazar and Jadhim Dhi Yumn;*

*you are a mere rock when you are thrown into the flame!*

*The earth refuse to accept their dead. How does it accept*

*a dirty one in garments?*[^53]

*The poet added: Allah killed at al-Zab him who lived*

*trickier and died slave!*[^54]

*Suraqa al-Bariqi praised Ibrahim al-Ashtar saying:*

*A young man from among the chiefs of Madhhajj has*

*come to you. He is bold against the enemies and does not*

*recoil (from fighting).*

*Hence, Ibn Ziyad, draw on yourself the greatest death, and*

*taste the sharp sword!*

*May Allah reward the Troops of Allah, for they have*

*quenched my thirst upon ‘Ubayd Allah.*[^55]

*‘Umayr b. al-Habbab al-Salmi satirized the Army of ‘Ubayd Allah b.
Ziyad saying:*

*The army which brings together wine and fornication does*

*not triumph when its meets an enemy.*[^56]

The army which hurried along with ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad was composed of
a criminal band which did not believe in Allah and the hereafter. Rather
it hurried with him to look for its interests and purposes. Anyhow,
al-Mukhtar gladdened the Alids when he killed ‘Ubayd Allah b. Ziyad and
his criminal friends, who took part in murdering Imam al-Husayn, Lord of
the youths of Heaven. He did not confine himself to this great act
toward the Alids, rather he gave them a lot of money. He sent twenty
thousand dinars to Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, and he accepted it and built
the houses of the children of ‘Aqil, which were destroyed by the
Umayyads.[^57] He give as gift a lot of money to the Imam, Muhammad b.
al-Hanafiya, and the rest of the Alids.

Al-Mukhtar was one of the good things of the world, object of pride of
the Arab and Islamic communities, and hero of history. He revolted
against the Umayyads to support the truth and to adopt the fatal affairs
of the community. Through his immortal revolt Allah gladdened the hearts
of the believers. For he destroyed that traitorous band and made it
taste the outcomes of its evil deeds. With this we will end our speech
about the revolt of al-Mukhtar.

The Revolt of Ibn al-Zubayr
---------------------------

The people of al-Hijaz harbored malice against the Umayyads. This is
because the Umayyads attacked during the days of Yazid Medina (the City
of the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family), and the Holy Kaaba,
which are the object of pride of Muslims. When Ibn al-Zubayr summoned
the people of al-Hijaz to pledge allegiance to him, the overwhelming
majority of them responded to him. Al-Hijaz and other Islamic countries
were ready to support Ibn al-Zubayr. However, Ibn al-Zubayr was not
worthy of this important office. He did not take care of saving the
community from the wrongdoing of the Umayyads, nor did he take care of
its interests. Rather he wanted kingdom and authorities. ‘Abd Allah b.
‘Umar recognized the qualities and inclinations of Ibn al-Zubayr. His
wife asked him to pledge allegiance to Ibn al-Zubayr, and he said to
her: “Have you not seen the date-palms which Mu‘awiya visited? Surely,
Ibn al-Zubayr wants nothing except them![^58]”

Ibn al-Zubayr showed worship. He clung to the Sacred House. He sometimes
circled it, and sometimes prayed in it. He did all this to deceive the
simple. Concerning him, Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the faithful, peace
be on him, said: “Ibn al-Zubayr will set up the snare of the religion to
choose the world!”[^59] Ibn al-Zubayr had black past, for it was he who
warred against Imam ‘Ali, the trustee of Allah’s Apostle, may Allah
bless him and his family, and the gate of the city of his knowledge. It
was he who urged his father al-Zubayr to wage war against him. Through
this he encouraged the Umayyads to announce an armed mutiny against the
legal authority of Imam ‘Ali, and then they held the reins of the
government.

The people disliked Ibn al-Zubayr and hated his government. This is
because he was a miser. It was said that he gave money to the poor from
the Public Treasury as if he gave to them from his father’s
inheritance![^60] Al-Fakhri said: “His miserliness was abundant, hence
power did not go well with him.[^61]” Abu’ Hurra criticized him for
miserliness saying:

The non-Arabs have admonished the Caliph and

complained to him of hunger and poverty.

What is against us? What has befallen us? Which a king

has overcome that which is all around us?[^62]

Ibn al-Zubayr wanted to conceal his miserliness from the people saying:
“My stomach is a span of the hand, hence it holds nothing of the world!
It is I who seek refuge in the House and seek sanctuary in the
Lord!”[^63] These words of him made the people laugh at him. This is
because the people knew that he was like a wolf, that he did not abstain
from plundering their possessions, and that he bit the properties of
Allah as the camels bit spring plants!

Al-Dahhak b. Fayru’z ridiculed him saying:

You have told us that a handful (of food) satisfies you,

that your stomach is a span of the hand or less than it.

However, when you attain a thing, you burn it as the shiny

fire burns the nabk wood.

If you repay a relative or do (him) a favor, then affection

will return you to ‘Amru’.[^64]

The political analysts ascribed the overthrowing of his government to
his miserliness and psychological weakness. They said that if the
government went well with him, he would spread miserliness and poverty
among the people.

### His Detesting the Alids

Ibn al-Zubayr detested the Household of the Prophet, may Allah bless him
and his family, and harbored malice against them to the extent that he
left calling down blessings upon the Prophet, may Allah bless him and
his family, in his sermons. He was asked about this and he replied: “For
he (the Prophet) has evil family who crane their neck when they hear his
name![^65]”

Ibn al-Zubayr said to Ibn ‘Abbas: “I have concealed detest toward you,
the members of this House, for forty years![^66]” This rude person (Ibn
al-Zubayr) denied the Household of the Messenger who were the source of
awareness and thought in Islam. Moreover, he forget the bounty of the
great Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, toward his people
when he saved them from the poor life in the desert, built for them
glory and kingdom, made them the masters of nations and peoples.

### His Arresting the Alids

Ibn al-Zubayr asked the Alids to pledge allegiance to him, but they
refused to accept this and said: “We will not pledge allegiance (to you)
until the members of the community come together.” Hence he ordered his
policemen to arrest them, and they arrested them at Zamzam, threatened
them with death and burning. Then Ibn al-Zubayr appointed for them a
fixed time. Some followers of b. al-Hanafiya advised him to ask help
from al-Mukhtar, the ruler of Iraq. Accordingly, Ibn al-Hanafiya wrote
to al-Mukhtar and told him about the conditions of the Alids in
al-Hijaz. At once, al-Mukhtar responded to him. He appointed ‘Abd Allah
al-Jadali as commander over some military troops and commanded him to
hurry to al-Hijaz. ‘Abd Allah took his troops and hurried to Mecca. When
they reached it, they raised their banners and called out: “Come on to
demand vengeance for al-Husayn!” Then they arrived at the Holy Mosque
(in Mecca). As for Ibn al-Zubayr, he ordered wood to be prepared at the
gate of the prison where the Alids were. He intended to burn them.
However, the troops broke into the prison and took the Alids out of it.
Then they asked Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya to permit them to war against
Ibn al-Zubayr, but he refused their request and said to them: “I do not
regard (fighting) in Mecca as lawful!” Concerning the salvation of
Muhammad b. al-Hanafiya from the prisons of Ibn al-Zubayr, Ibn ‘Abd
al-Rahman, a great poet, said:

*If the people see this chief at al-Khif, part of Mina, they will*

*recognize that he is not a wrongdoer.*

*He is named by the name of the Prophet (the chosen),*

*and is his cousin. He releases those who are in shackles*

*and profits the doubters.*

*He is lofty. He does not buy error for the right direction,*

*nor does he fear the blame of a blamer for the sake of*

*Allah.*

*We have recited Allah’s Book through praising Him at this*

*Khif of the unlawful, where pigeons are safe, and the*

*enemy is like the peaceful friend.*

*Happiness will not subsist for the people of the world, nor*

*will intense affliction last.*

*You tell him whom you meet that you are a seeker of*

*refuge (in Allah); rather the seeker of refuge (in Him)*

*is he who is oppressed in a terrible prison!*[^67]

I (the author) firmly believe that Ibn al-Zubayr would have killed all
the Alids if the affairs had gone well with him. However, Allah, the
Exalted, ruined Ibn al-Zubayr’s power through His kindness!

### The Overthrowing of his Government

It was normal for the people to overthrow the government of Ibn
al-Zubayr, for he was afflicted by miserliness, dictatorship, and vain
glory, as Abd al-Malik b. Marwan said.[^68] Anyhow, the Umayyad troops
headed by al-Hajjaj b. Yousif al-Thaqafi advanced against Ibn al-Zubayr
and occupied Mecca. Ibn al-Zubayr sought protection with the Sacred
House. He expected safety and salvation. He imagined that his seeking
protection with the Sacred House would profit him, that the Umayyads
would not aggress against him. However, he made a mistake in this
because the Umayyads did not respect Allah, nor did they respect His
House. Anyhow, the Umayyads began throwing fire at Ibn al-Zubayr. Hence
his companions abandoned him and asked al-Hajjaj for security, and he
granted them this. Only few persons stayed with Ibn al-Zubayr, hence the
Umayyad troops attacked Ibn al-Zubayr, and then al-Hajjaj ordered him to
be crucified beside the Holy Mosque. He remained crucified. Al-Hajjaj
did not allow anyone to bury him until ‘Abd al-Malik ordered him to be
buried. With this we will end our speech about the revolt of Ibn
al-Zubayr, who aimed through his revolt at accomplishing his personal
desires, paying no attention to the interests of the community and its
achievements.

These are some of the revolts which broke out in that time. They
resulted from the political pressure of the Umayyads against the
community. The revolts aimed at accomplishing tranquillity, security,
preventing the authorities from pursuing the free and the Muslim
thinkers.

The Economic Life

As for the economic life in the time of Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be
on him, it was paralyzed and extremely disordered. Agriculture, which
was the backbone of the general economy in that time, declined. This is
because of the discords, local disorders, the State’s neglecting
irrigation projects and land reform. These bad conditions resulted in
general famine, high prices, and paucity of life necessities such as
clothing. An Asadi poet[^69] described his bad economic life in a poem
in which he praised some Kufan nobles asking kindness from them. Listen
to his words:

O Aba Talha, the munificent! Relieve me with some of

your abundant bestowal!

Give life to my soul, may my soul be your ransom! You

have already known that I have no money!

Lend us some flour whose repayment, if you do it, is great!

You have known, neglect me not, what Allah has decreed

concerning the food of the orphan!

I have nothing except a jar and a half, a book decorated

like tattoo, a garment I patched with leather and sold for

a loaf (of bread), a saddle, and a quilt.

This is a miserable poet whom poverty and deprivation attacks. He is
about to die because of hunger. Then he mentions his poor, simple
furniture. Hence he flatters this generous man to help him with food to
refresh his soul.

All the Muslim communities led a miserable life. The did not know plenty
nor did they know ease. This is because the Umayyads and their hirelings
dominated the Public Treasury.

### The Luxury of the Umayyads

The Umayyads indulged in pleasures. Their children wore silk garments
and looked like the Hercules Dinars.[^70] ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz bought
a garment for four hundred dinars, wore it and said: “How coarse this
garment is!”[^71] Haru’n b. Salih reported on the authority of his
father, who said: “We gave many dirhams to the washerman to wash our
garments with the suds of the garments of ‘Umar b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, for it
was full of perfume (i.e. musk).[^72]” Marwan b. Aban b. ‘Uthman wore
seven shirts of different length, and they looked like a ladder, and on
them he wore a ‘Adani garment which he bought for one thousand
dirhams.[^73] The historians have mentioned many examples of the Umayyad
luxury and their playing with the economy and wealth of the community.

### Their Gifts to the Poets

The Umayyads went too far in offering gifts to the poets. They bestowed
lavishly upon their poet al-Ahwas. They one time gave him one hundred
thousand dirhams[^74], and another time they gave him ten thousand
dinars.[^75] In his poetry al-Ahwas has mentioned that he did not earn
his plentiful wealth from commerce or inheritance; rather he earned it
from the Umayyads’ gifts and bestowals. He says:

*My new possessions have not resulted from commerce,*

*nor had my old possessions rustled from inheritance.*

*However, the are the gifts of the blessed Imam, who has*

*filled the earth with kindness, munificence, and rightness.*[^76]

*Praising al-Walid b. ‘Abd al-Malik, al-Ahwas said:*

*Power spontaneously came to the Imam, and he wasted*

*for his power neither unlawful property nor blood.*

*The Lord of mankind has chosen him ruler over His*

*creatures. And Allah knows men better.*

*When Allah was pleased with him, he (al-Walid)*

*summoned the Muslims to pledge allegiance to him, and*

*they responded and submitted to him.*

*He who attains his affection attains riches and glory.*

*He who is the object of his evil omen fears sudden death.*

*In his hands are keys to mercy, and life rain, through which*

*men remain alive, and which is a medicine (for them).*[^77]

These lines of poetry mean that he who made friends with al-Walid and
was among his hirelings obtained plentiful wealth and riches. As for
those who turned away from him, they obtained nothing except sudden
death. Of course, these are the qualities of the dictatorial regime
which follows caprice and desires, and does not conform to the law.

### Their Gifts to the Singers

The Umayyads lavishly spent money on the singers. Al-Walid b. Yazid gave
Mi‘bid, the singer, twelve thousand dinars.[^78] He ordered all the
singers of al-Hijaz to be brought, and he gave them many gifts.[^79]
Mi’bid, Malik b. Abi al-Samh, and Ibn ‘A’isha visited Yazid b. ‘Abd
al-Malik, and he gave each of them one thousand dinars.[^80] Al-Walid
sent for Younis al-Katib, and he went to him and sang before him.
Al-Walid admired Younis’s songs and gave him three thousand dinars.[^81]

In this manner the wealth of the community was divided among the singers
and the dissolute. In the meantime the community suffered poverty and
miserliness, and Islamic economy disappeared from life.

### The Life of Amusement

The life of amusement, vanity, and impudence prevailed most the Islamic
countries, and especially as it concerned the holy places such as Medina
and Mecca. The Umayyad government intentionally spread amusement places
in these two sacred cities, that the Muslims might abandon them. We will
briefly present the amusement and impudence in Medina.

#### Singing

Singing spread in Medina to the extent that it became its center.
Concerning the people of Medina, Abu’ al-Farajj said: “Their scholar did
not deny singing, nor did their worshipper repel it![^82]” Abu’ Yousif
said to one of the people of Medina: “How wonderful your affair in these
songs is, O people of Medina! Why do your noble and ignoble not abstain
from singing?”[^83] When the singers sang, all young men, young women,
old men, and old women came to listen to their songs.[^84] Dahman, the
famous singer, came to ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Makhzu’mi, the judge of Medina,
to bear witness against an Iraqi. The judge accepted Dahman’s witness
and justice. Hence the Iraqi said to him: “Dahman is a singer, and he
teaches the slave-girls singing!” However, the judge said: “May Allah
forgive me and you! Where is he who does not sing? (i.e., all the people
sing.) ”[^85]

Malik b. Anas, the Jurist of Medina, had perfect knowledge of singing.
Husayn b. Dahman al-Ashqar reported: “I was in Medina. The street was
void (of people) at midday, and I began singing the following: What’s
the matter with your family, O Rabab? They look askance (at me) as if
they were angry! Suddenly, a door was opened, and a man with a red beard
appeared. Then the said: ‘O Dissolute, you have performed (the song) in
a bad manner, prevented songstress, and proclaimed atrocity.’ Then he
began singing. Hence I asked him: ‘May Allah set you right, where have
brought this song?’ ‘When I was young, I would follow the singers to
learn (songs) from them,’ he replied, ‘but my mother said to me: If the
singer has an ugly face, none listens to his songs. Hence leave singing
and study jurisprudence, for the ugliness of face does not injure it.
Accordingly, I abandoned the singers and followed the jurists.’ Then I
said to him: ‘Repeat (the song), may I be your ransom!’ ‘No,’ he said,
‘do you want to say that you have learnt singing from Malik b. Anas?’
Suddenly, he was Malik b. Anas, but I did not recognized him.[^86]”
Whether this narration is true or fabricated against Imam Malik in order
to degrade his importance, it is sure that Medina in that time was one
of the singing centers in the Islamic world, and a special institute for
teaching slave girls singing.

#### Singing and Dancing Parties

Singing and dancing parties were held in Medina. Perhaps men and women
attended them, and there were no curtains between them.[^87] Abu’
al-Farajj reported: “A beautiful woman sat and wore a long burnoose.
There was a Yemeni cloak on her shoulder. She made those who were with
her were shorter burnooses. Then she stood, sang, and plaid on the lute.
Then Ibn Surayjj, Mi‘bid, Ibn ‘A’isha, and Malik stood and danced with
her. They had lutes in their hands and played on them as she did. Then
she requested colored garments for her and the people, and they wore
them. Then she walked, and the people walked behind her. She sang, and
they repeated her song, as chorus.[^88] ‘A’isha, daughter of Talha, held
mixed parties, and ‘Azzah al-Mayla’ sang at them.[^89]”

#### Singing spreads among the People of Medina

Singing spread among the People of Medina to the extent that it
controlled their feelings and emotions. The narrators reported:
“Muhammad b. ‘Umran al-Tamimi, the judge of Medina, heard a slave girl
singing. Her song moved him, and he unconsciously went to his sandal and
hung it in his ear owing to intense glee. Then he crept and said: ‘Guide
me, I am a camel! Guide me, I am a camel![^90]’”

Ibn Abi Rabi’a heard a beautiful woman singing, and he unconsciously
tore his shirt, and it became like a cloak.[^91] The people of Medina
were so fond of singing that they went out to see off Salama al-Qas, a
songstress ‘Abd al-Malik bought from her master for twenty thousand
dinars. They crowded in the yard of the palace, and she stood among them
and sang them:

*They separated themselves from me, and I firmly believe that*

*those who die will never return.*

She repeated these words, and they people wept and wailed.[^92] Yazid b.
‘Abd al-Malik bought Habbaba, a songstress. She began singing before
him. Her previous master, who was from Medina, sat beside Yazid. He
unconsciously exposed his beard to a candle, and it burnt out of intense
glee.[^93] The historians have mentioned many examples of the singing in
Medina.

#### The Songstresses in Medina

Many songstresses were in Medina (Yathrib). They played an active role
in teaching the youths singing. They spread singing, impudence, and
corruption. Unfortunately, Medina (the City of the Prophet, may Allah
bless him and his family) became the center of a corrupt life in the
time of the Umayyads. The people expected that Medina would be an
institute for religious culture, a source for intellectual,
civilizational radiance in the Arab and Islamic world. However, the
Umayyads deprived it of these aspects and made it lose its political and
religious leadership.

### The Dissoluteness of the Umayyads

The Umayyad kings led a life of amusement, vanity, dissoluteness, and
impudence. Their red nights witnessed wine, singing, and dancing. Yazid
b. Mu‘awiya was the first Umayyad to adopt singing and shelter the
singers. He brought them from Medina.[^94] He openly practiced
dissoluteness and drank wine.

Al-Walid b. Yazid was one of the dissolute Umayyads. He summoned Ibn
‘A’isha, the singer, to sing him a song, and he sang him. Al-Walid
became gleeful and said to Ibn ‘A’sha: “By Allah, you have done well, my
emir!” Then al-Walid took off his clothes and gave them to Ibn ‘A’isha.
He remained naked until similar clothes were brought to him. Then he
gave Ibn ‘A’isha one thousand dinars, make him mount a mule, and said to
him: “May my father and mother be your ransom, mount the mule and go
away! You have left me yearning for your songs!”[^95]

Al-Walid sent for ‘Attrad, the singer. When he heard one of his songs,
he lost consciousness, tore his embellished garment, and threw himself
into a pool of wine. He was still in the pool until he was brought out
of it. He was drunk as if he was dead. When he became conscious, he said
to ‘Attrad: “I imagine that you will go to Medina, that you will stand,
sit in its assemblies, and say: ‘The Commander of the faithful
(al-Walid) summoned me, and I paid him a visit. He asked me to sing, and
I sang him. I made him gleeful, and he tore his garments.’ By Allah, if
you told the people of this event, and I heard of it, I would cut off
your neck!” Then al-Walid gave ‘Attrad one thousand dinars, and he took
them and went away.[^96]

Yazid b. ‘Abd al-Malik is another example of the dissolute Umayyads. He
sent for Ibn ‘A’isha, and he came to him. He asked him to sing, and he
sang beautifully. Accordingly, he became gleeful and said to his butler:
“Give us wine to drink in the fourth heaven![^97]”

These kings spread dissoluteness and corruption all over the Islamic
world, and especially as it concerns Medina (Yathrib). This is because
they wanted to defile the holiness of this city and its remarkable
position with the Muslims.

The Attitude of the Imam
------------------------

As for Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, he adopted a solid
attitude toward these corrupt trends, which destroyed all moral traits.
He shed on them light of his holy spirit which appears in al-Sahifa
al-Sajjadiya, which shakes inner selves. This is because the Sahifa
contains, preaching, guidance, moral lessons, and Islamic values.

Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiya, the Gospel of the Household of Muhammad (may
Allah bless him and his Household), protected Islam against the Umayyad
corrupt methods. It warned the Muslims against intellectual and social
decline and urged them to obey Allah, the Creator of the world and Giver
of life.

Moreover Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, followed the behavior of
his grandfather, the greatest prophet, may Allah bless him and his
family. Hence he was able to guide the straying to the right path.

### The Scientific Life

As for the scientific life in the time of the Imam, peace be on him, it
was paralyzed in the full sense of the world. This is because the
Umayyad government turned away from knowledge, sent far cultural
awareness, and spared no effort to make the Muslims ignorant. The
Umayyads firmly believed that their interests would be destroyed through
knowledge and public awareness, hence they established their kingdom on
ignorance. Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, realized this
destructive problem, so he, peace be on him, raised the banner of
knowledge and summoned the youths of the community to release themselves
from the shackles of ignorance.

Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, opened brilliant horizons to
knowledge which men had not recognized before. He presented the Islamic
sciences such as hadith, jurisprudence, interpretation (of the Qur’an),
theology, philosophy, etc. The biographers said: “The religious scholars
narrated countless science (traditions) from ‘Ali b. al-Husayn.”

### The School of the Next Generation

The School of the Next Generation was established in the time of the
Imam, peace be on him. It was the first Islamic school to be established
in Medina after the School of the Imams from among the members of the
House (ahl al-Bayt), peace be on them. This school took care of the
Islamic sciences. As for its members, they were Sa‘id b. al-Musayyab,
‘Urwa b. al-Zubayr, al-Qasim b. Muhammad b. Abi Bakr, Abu’ Bakr b. ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. al-Harith b. Hisham, Sulayman b. Yasar, ‘Ubayd Allah b.
‘Uttba b. Mas‘u’d, and Kharija b. Zayd. Concerning them, the poet said:

*If it is said that who are the seven great ones in knowledge,*

*whose narration is not outside knowledge?*

*Say: They are ‘Abd Allah, ‘Urwa, Qasim, Sa‘id, Abu’ Bakr,*

*Sulayman, and Kharija.*

*Another poet said:*

*He who does not follow the Imams, his division is unjust*

*and is outside knowledge.*

*They are Abd Allah, ‘Urwa, Qasim, Sa‘id, Sulayman, Abu’*

*Bakr, and Kharija.*[^98]

It is worth mentioning that some of these religious scholars studied
under Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him, and reported hadith and
jurisprudence on his authority, especially as it concerns Sa‘id b.
al-Musayyab.[^99] Anyhow, the scientific life in the time of the Imam,
peace be on him, was very weak, for the people busied themselves with
forming parties in order to hold the reins of the government and control
the wealth of the Islamic countries.

### The Literary Life

The poets have shown in their poetry the literary life during the
Umayyad government. Unfortunately, this poetry does not represent the
social problems in this time. Besides it does not represent the
intellectual and literary life. Rather it represents their tribal
beliefs. The poets spoke about their tribal qualities such as
generosity, bravery, immense wealth and number. They employed poetry as
means to satirize each other and to call one another by nicknames. Hence
poetry became a destructive tool. You can clearly see this quality in
al-Farazdaq’s and Jarrir’s poetry. Most their poetry is on satire,
cursing, and slander. They satirized each other to the extent that they
used all the words in the dictionary of cursing and slander. This
indicates that the pre-Islamic opinions returned in an ugly manner
during the days of the Umayyad government.

Al-Kumayt al-Asadi, a Muslim great poet, seized the opportunity to laud
the good traits of his people, the Madaris. He preferred them to the
Qahtanis. With this he was able to move discords among the tribes. This
act of him is regarded as one of the original factors which resulted in
overthrowing the Umayyad government. Listen to his words concerning
praising his people and satirizing the Qahtanis:

*To us belong the moon of the sky and every star to which*

*the hands of those who follow them point.*

*I have known that Allah named Nazar and lodged them in*

*Mecca as inhabitants.*

*He has appointed the noble traits for us only.*

*(He has appointed) back for men, and forehead for us.*

*The womenfolk of Nazar did not give birth to hybrids, for*

*they did not marry non-Arab males.*

*(The children of Nazar) did not make the asses copulate*

*with the good mares, and they gave birth to mules.*

*The daughters of Nazar did not give birth to black and red*

*children.*

*We married our daughters to our cousins and called the*

*children by their fathers’ names.*[^100]

In these lines of poetry, al-Kumayt prefers the good traits of his
people to those of the Qahtanis. He ascribes to his people the moon of
the heaven and the brilliant stars from among men. He singles them out
for noble qualities and laudable deeds. He reviles their opponents, the
Qahtanis. This is because the Qahtanis married their daughters to the
Abyssinians and the Persians, and they gave birth to black and red
children. Al-Kumayt says that this marriage results in an offspring like
mules. Hence this satire made the Qahtanis angry, moved discords and
detest between them and the Madaris. In the meantime, Di‘bil al-Khuza’i,
the poet of the doctrine, answered al-Kumayt and praised his people in a
poem composed of six hundred lines of which is the following:

*Pay attention to your blame, O spouse. The passing of the*

*forty (days) is sufficient for you.*

*Have the events of the nights, which have turned the*

*tresses white, not grieved you?*

*I am greeting the famous chiefs from among my*

*people! We have greeted you, O Medina!*

*If the family of Isra’il belong to you, and you boast of the*

*non-Arabs, then forget not the pigs which were*

*transformed along with apes despised and hated.*

*At Ilah and the Gulf, they have ruins which have not been*

*effaced yet.*

*Al-Kumayt has satirized us for our helping (the prophet),*

*not for wronging him.*

*(The children of) Nazar know that my people boast of their*

*supporting the Prophet.*

The historians said: “The Nazaris went on preferring themselves to the
Yemenis, and the Yemenis went on preferring themselves to the Nazaris
until they destroyed the country and moved tribalism in the deserts and
the cities.[^101]”

Anyhow, the purposes of poetry were confined to boasting and calling by
nicknames. This kind of poetry has no sense of an intellectual life nor
has it a summons to good and virtue. Rather it has a summon to decline
and backwardness. With this we will end our speech about the time of
Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, peace be on him.

[^1]: Al-Imam al-Husayn, p. 339.

[^2]: Ibid., p. 64.

[^3]: Part of a poem by Ibn al-Zuba‘ra.

[^4]: Al-‘Aqdd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 140.

[^5]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat.

[^6]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 4, p. 368.

[^7]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 5, p. 47.

[^8]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 1, p. 24.

[^9]: Ahmed Fahmi, al-Imam Zayn al-‘Abidin, p. 64.

[^10]: ‘Umar Abu\` al-Nasr, Mu‘awiya bin Abi Sufyan, p. 266.

[^11]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, al-Tanbih wa al-Ashraf, p. 263.

[^12]: Al-Tanbih wa al-Ishraf, p. 263.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh, vol. 7, pp. 5-12.

[^15]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, Muru\`jj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 17.

[^16]: Abu\` al-Fida’, vol. 1, p. 206.

[^17]: Mu‘awiya b. Abi Sufyan, pp. 265-266.

[^18]: Al-Qani, Bahjat al-Abrar.

[^19]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, Muru\`jj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 18.

[^20]: Al-Mubarrad, al-Kamil, vol. 1, p. 222. Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil.

[^21]: Ibn Hisham, Sira, vol. 3, p. 143. Ibn Salam, p. 89.

[^22]: Al-Tabari, vol. 2/1, p. 499.

[^23]: Ibid., p. 506.

[^24]: Ibn al-Athir, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 333.

[^25]: Ibid.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Al-Tanbih wa al-Ishraf, p. 311.

[^28]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, Muru\`jj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 380.

[^29]: Hayat al-Shi‘r fi al-Ku\`fa, vol. 73.

[^30]: Al-Kashi.

[^31]: Ibid.

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Al-Majjlisi, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 45, Chapter on the Conditions
of al-Mukhtar.

[^34]: Al-Farq bayna al-Furaq, pp. 33-34.

[^35]: Al-Tabari, Tarikh, 2/2/637.

[^36]: Da’irat al-Ma‘arif al-Islamiya (French Edition), vol. 3, p. 765.

[^37]: Al-Mukhtar, p. 6.

[^38]: Ibid.

[^39]: Ibn Qutayba, ‘Uyyu\`n al-Akhbar.

[^40]: Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, vol. 2, p. 176.

[^41]: Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 368.

[^42]: Ibid., p. 369.

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Ibid.

[^46]: Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 37.

[^47]: Ithbat al-Hudat, vol. 5, p. 214.

[^48]: Ibn al-Athir, al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 381.

[^49]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 6.

[^50]: Ghayat al-Ikhtisar, p. 156. Quttb al-Rawandi, Da‘awat, p. 59.

[^51]: Al-’Aqdd al-Farid, vol. 5, p. 143.

[^52]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 6.

[^53]: Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 381.

[^54]: Al-‘Aqdd al-Farid, vol. 5, p. 143.

[^55]: Al-Kamil, vol. 3, p. 381.

[^56]: Ibid., p. 382.

[^57]: Safinat al-Bihar, vol. 1, p. 435.

[^58]: Hayat al-Imam al-Husayn, vol. 2, p. 310.

[^59]: Sharh Nahjj al-Balagha, vol. 7, p. 24.

[^60]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 9.

[^61]: Al-Fakhri, p. 105.

[^62]: Hayat al-Imam al-Baqir, vol. 2, p. 180.

[^63]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 1, p. 22.

[^64]: Hayat al-Imam al-Baqir, vol. 2, p. 180.

[^65]: Al-Ya‘qu\`bi, Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 8.

[^66]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, Muru\`jj al-Dhahab, vol. 3, p. 26.

[^67]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 8, p. 31.

[^68]: Hayat al-Imam al-Baqir, vol. 2, p. 183.

[^69]: He was Ibn ‘Abdal. He composed the poem on a mouse and a cat. The
poem is weak in composition.

[^70]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani (Printed by Dar al-Kutub), vol. 1, p.
310.

[^71]: Ibn Sa‘d, Tabaqat, vol. 5, p. 246.

[^72]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 9, p. 246.

[^73]: Ibid., vol. 17, p. 89.

[^74]: Ibid., vol. 9, p. 172.

[^75]: Ibid.

[^76]: Ibid.

[^77]: Ibid., vol. 1, p. 29.

[^78]: Ibid., vol., 55, p. 1.

[^79]: Ibid., p. 111.

[^80]: Ibid., vol. 4.

[^81]: Ibid., vol. 4, p. 400.

[^82]: Ibid., vol. 8, p. 224.

[^83]: Al-‘Aqdd al-Farid, vol. 3, p. 233.

[^84]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 245.

[^85]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 6, p. 21.

[^86]: Ibid., vol. 4, p. 222.

[^87]: Al-Shi‘r wa al-Ghina’ fi al-Medina wa Mecca, p. 250.

[^88]: Abu\` al-Farajj al-Asfahani, al-Aghani, vol. 8, p. 227.

[^89]: Ibid, vol. 10, p. 57.

[^90]: Ibid., vol. 7, p. 331.

[^91]: Ibid., vol. 8, p. 206.

[^92]: Ibid., p. 343.

[^93]: Ibid., vol. 6, p. 316.

[^94]: Ibid.

[^95]: Ibid., 8, p. 324.

[^96]: Ibid., vol. 2, p. 226.

[^97]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 307.

[^98]: Abu\` al-Fida’.

[^99]: Hayat al-Imam Mohammed al-Baqir, vol. 2, p. 130.

[^100]: Al-Mas‘u\`di, Muru\`jj al-Dhahab, vol. 2, p. 196.

[^101]: Ibid., 197.


